pmcGlobal Spine JGlobal Spine J2276gsj101596156GSJGlobal Spine Journal2192-56822192-5690SAGE PublicationsPMC8558822PMC8558822.18558822855882210.1177/2192568221104796810.1177_219256822110479681Oral PresentationsOral Presentations
26102021102021112 Suppl3928394S213S261020210303202214042026© The Author(s) 20212021AO Spine, unless otherwise noted. Manuscript
content on this site is licensed under Creative Commons
Licenseshttps://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/This article is distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons
Attribution-NonCommercial-NoDerivs 4.0 License (https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/) which
permits non-commercial use, reproduction and distribution of the work as
published without adaptation or alteration, without further permission
provided the original work is attributed as specified on the SAGE and Open
Access pages (https://us.sagepub.com/en-us/nam/open-access-at-sage).pmc-status-qastatus0pmc-status-liveyespmc-status-embargonopmc-status-releasedyespmc-prop-open-accessyespmc-prop-olfnopmc-prop-manuscriptnopmc-prop-legally-suppressednopmc-prop-has-pdfyespmc-prop-has-supplementnopmc-prop-pdf-onlynopmc-prop-suppress-copyrightnopmc-prop-is-real-versionnopmc-prop-is-scanned-articlenopmc-prop-preprintnopmc-prop-in-epmcyespmc-license-refCC BY-NC-NDtypesetterts10

## OP01: Surgical Complications 1

## 1176

## A001: The PAD (Post-operative Airway Distress) Score - First Steps to
Develop a Post-Surgery Tool for the Assessment of Upper Airway-Related
Complications Following Anterior Cervical Spina Surgery

Alexander von Glinski

1,2,3

, Christopher Elias

1

, Basem Ishak

1,2,4

, Sven Frieler

, 3

, Ronen Blecher

1

, Clifford Pierre

1,2

, Jospeh Detorri

5

, Steven Deem

6

, Blake Golden

7

, Thomas Schildhauer

3

, Rod Oskouian

1

, and Jens Chapman

1

1

Swedish Neuroscience Institute, Swedish Medical Center, Seattle,
Seattle, USA

2

Seattle Science Foundation, Swedish Medical Center, Seattle,
Seattle, USA

3

BG University Hospital Bergmannsheil, Ruhr University Bochum,
Department of General and Trauma Surgery, Seattle, USA

4

Heidelberg University Hospital, Department of Neurosurgery,
Heidelberg, Germany

5

Spectrum Research, Inc., Steilacoom, Steilacoom, USA

6

Neurocritical Care, Swedish Neuroscience Institute, Swedish Medical
Center, Seattle, Seattle, USA

7

Division of Head and Neck Surgery, Swedish Cancer Institute,
Seattle, USA

Background Context: Anterior cervical discectomy and fusion
(ACDF) is a commonly performed cervical spine surgery. While the
complication profile is relatively low, a rare and potentially catastrophic
complication is acute upper respiratory tract compromise secondary to mass
effects created by post-operative hematoma, infection, angiodema,
cerebrospinal fluid leaks, and dislodged grafts or hardware. We defined such
events as post-operative airway distress (PAD). The aim of this present
study was to develop a post-operative airway distress score to identify
patients at risk for acute PAD. Materials and Methods: This is
an expert consensus (modified Delphi process) and retrospective analysis,
single-institution clinical study. All adult patients who received elective
anterior cervical discectomy and fusion for degenerative spine disorders
(1,466 patients) at a single institution between July 1, 2014 and May 31,
2019 were studied. Outcome Measures: Acute upper airway compromise during
hospitalization from primary ACDF operation due to an identifiable
structural cause related to surgery requiring readmission to intensive care
unit, reintubation, or revision surgery. A list of potential risk factors
for acute PAD was created based on our comprehensive literature review and
supplemented through a modified Delphi process by a multidisciplinary expert
panel. We identified patients with acute respiratory distress affecting the
upper airways from the total sample who met inclusion criteria. All
non-surgical site related causes were excluded creating our acute PAD-Group.
To establish a comparison group for validation of our score we selected
patients without acute respiratory failure by a randomized selection process
(Non-PAD group). Ultimately, we compared presence or absence of our
previously selected risk factors for our PAD and No-PAD group using
bivariate analysis retaining factors that showed a P-value
≤ .20. Results: We identified 18 potential risk factors from
our Delphi process, of which 9 factors demonstrated a significant
association with airway compromise: age >65 years, current smoking
status, ASA >2, BMI <18.9 or >25.0, history of a bleeding disorder,
intra-operative blood loss >300 ml, surgery including the upper cervical
spine (C4 or above), multilevel (≥3 levels) or corpectomy, and duration of
surgery >179 min. These nine factors formed the PAD-Score (PADS) which
had a range of scores from 0 to 9 giving one point to each factor suggesting
a cutoff score of 6 for PADS to balance sensitivity (90.0%) and specificity
(90.6%). The mean PADS score comparing those with and without post-operative
airway distress was 6.6 ± 1.2 vs 3.0 ± 2.1, respectively (P
= .000). Conclusions: Based on our findings, we introduce a
tool termed the acute Post-operative Airway Distress Scoring system (PADS)
to help identify postoperative patients at risk for heightened awareness
towards intensive care admission, reintubation and urgent revision surgery
as a result of upper airway compromise caused by surgical site
abnormalities.

## 942

## A002: Analysis of Effectiveness of Gelatin Sponge Preperfusion in
Vertebral Augmentation: Is It Conductive to Preventing Bone Cement
Leakage?

Baoliang Zhang

1

, Zhongqiang Chen

1

, and Guanghui Chen

1

1

Peking University Third Hospital, Beijing, China

Introduction: Bone cement leakage is considered as the most
common complication of vertebral augmentation. Emerging researches have
reported the application of gelatin sponge for preventing cement leakage,
but those results showed inconsistency. Thus, we conducted a meta-analysis
to determine whether gelatin sponge preperfusion could effectively reduce
the cement leakage rate in the treatment of osteoporotic vertebral
compression fractures. Material and Methods: Pubmed, Embase,
Cochrane Library, Web of Science, CNKI and Wanfang databases were searched
for clinical comparative studies on the effectiveness of vertebral
augmentation with or without gelatin sponge preperfusion for thoracolumbar
compression fractures. The search time was from inception to August 2020.
According to the preestablished criteria, two investigators independently
screened the eligible literature, evaluated the methodological quality and
extracted the data. The Japanese Orthopaedic Association scores (JOA),
Oswestry Disability Index (ODI), visual analogue scale (VAS), anterior
height of injured vertebra, Cobb angle and cement leakage rate were
compared. Meta-analysis and subgroup analysis were performed by Stata 14.
Results: Twelve eligible studies involving 1023 patients
were included, including 503 patients in the gelatin sponge group (GS group)
and 520 in the conventional surgery group (CS group). Pooled analysis found
that there was no difference in postoperative JOA [SMD = .20, 95% CI (-.85,
1.26), P = .707] and ODI at the final follow-up [SMD = .38,
95% CI (-.47, 1.24), P = .381]; Gs group was associated
with better improvement of postoperative VAS [SMD = .19, 95% CI (.06, .32),
P = .004], but no difference in long-term VAS
improvement was observed between two groups[SMD = .10, 95% CI (-.06, 1.26),
P = .229]; Regrading radiological outcomes, GS group
presented better correction of Cobb angle [SMD = .26, 95% CI (.10, .42),
P = .002] while two groups showed similar effectiveness
in restoration of the height of injured vertebra [SMD = .04, 95% CI (-.10,
.18), P = .579]; Importantly, lower cement leakage rate
occurred in GS group than CS group [OR = .41, 95% CI (.29, .59),
P = .0001], while the rate of vertebral refracture was
similar between the two groups [SMD = .80, 95% CI (.34,
1.88),P = .579]. In addition, there was no significant
difference in operation time [SMD = .16, 95% CI (-.23, .55),
P = .415] and cement injection volume [SMD = -.1, 95%
CI (-.17, .15), P = .884] between the two groups. When
stratified by surgical procedures (PKP or PVP), most results were consistent
with the aforementioned overall findings, except for no difference in
postoperative VAS improvement of patients undergoing PKP and in
postoperative Cobb angle recovery of those undergoing PVP.
Conclusion: Application of gelatin sponge preperfusion
could effectively reduce the rate of cement leakage in vertebral
augmentation (PVP and PKP) as well as relieve the early postoperative pain
and correct the spinal kyphosis. The operation time, bone cement injection
volume, postoperative vertebral height and long-term clinical efficacy were
equivalent to those of conventional surgery. Large-sample, multicenter,
high-quality randomized controlled trials should be performed to further
confirm this conclusion in future.

## 526

## A003: The Use of Table Mounted Retraction Does Not Lead to Higher
Incidence of Postoperative Dysphagia After Anterior Cervical Spine
Surgery

Athan Zavras

1

, Ali Piracha

1

, Zakariah Siyaji

1

, Talha Qadri

1

, Arash Sayari

1

, Nicholas Shepard

1

, Daniel Caicedo

1

, Mubashir Ahmed

1

, Joana Dhivra

1

, and Matthew Colman

1

1

Rush University Medical Center, Orthopedic Surgery, Chicago,
USA

Introduction: Anterior cervical spine surgeries (ACSS),
including anterior cervical discectomy and fusion (ACDF), total disc
replacement (TDR), and corpectomy, are commonly performedproceduresfor the
treatment of numerous pathologies of the cervical spine. Retraction of
prevertebral cervical structures is necessary for an anterior approach to
the cervical spine, resulting in increased pressure along the pharyngeal and
esophageal tissue and potentially leading to dysphagia and damage of local
neurovascular structures. Modes of retraction commonly used include
non-fixed self-retaining retraction devices or fixed table-mounted retractor
arms. However, many surgeons opt against using table-mounted retraction
because they believe the fixed construct confers poorer control and may lead
to a higher incidence of postoperative dysphagia. Given the scarcity of
literature to substantiate this opinion, this study is the first to describe
postoperative dysphagia rates in patients after ACSS using table-mounted
versus self-retaining retraction. Methods: We retrospectively
evaluated all patients who underwent ACSS with a single surgeon between the
years of 2014 and 2020. Patients with a minimum follow-up of 6 months were
stratified into two cohorts depending on the type of retractor used.
Patients in the first group underwent ACSS with self-retaining retraction,
whereas a table-mounted retractor arm was used for the second group. Patient
outcomes were quantified via retrospective collection of patient-reported
outcome (PROs) and the Patient-Reported Outcomes Measurement Information
System (PROMIS) questionnaires, including the SWAL-QOL survey for dysphagia,
Neck Disability Index (NDI), Visual Analog Scale (VAS) Arm, VAS Neck, Short
Form 12-Item Health Survey (SF12), and Veteran’s Rand 12-Item Health Survey
(VR12). T-test and chi-square for continuous and categorical variables were
performed to compare baseline characteristics. Multivariable regression
controlled for baseline characteristics and assessed differences in clinical
outcomes associated with the procedure methods. The threshold for
statistical significance was set toP< .05.
Results: A total of 74 (31 female, 43 male) and 114 (55
female, 59 male) patients receiving either table mounted, or self-retaining
retraction were assessed with mean follow-up of 7.897 ± 7.01 and 10.46 ±
8.91 months (p= .074), respectively. Table-mounted
retraction patients were significantly younger with a mean age of 62.78 ±
10.3 compared to 58.05 ± 13.1 years in the self-retaining cohort
(P= .025). No observed differences in postoperative
dysphagia were noted via the SWAL-QOL assessment tool (table-mounted: 83.00
± 19.0, self-retaining: 81.70 ± 21.0,P= .819). No
differences were noted between groups in postoperative PRO or PROMIS
surveys. There were no differences in mean time of retraction per operated
level (P= .243) or intraoperative blood loss
(P= .985). However, mean operative time was
significantly shorter with table-mounted retraction compared to
self-retaining retraction (table-mounted: 116.6 ± 44.82 minutes,
self-retaining: 129.1 ± 49.38 minutes,P= .015).
Conclusion: There was no significant difference observed in
rates and severity of dysphagia or patient-reported outcomes for neck or arm
pain between patients who underwent ACSS with self-retaining and
table-mounted retractors. Furthermore, operative time was significantly
shortened with the use of a table-mounted retractor arm. These findings
indicate that, with proper application, the use of a table-mounted retractor
can improve operative efficiency without leading to inferior outcomes. 

## 418

## A004: Drivers for Unplanned Readmissions Following Adult Spinal
Surgery

Sarthak Mohanty

1

, Sachin Gupta

1

, and Comron Saifi

1

1

University of Pennsyvlania, Department of Orthopaedic Surgery,
Philadelphia, USA

Introduction: Unplanned readmissions are not associated with
poor patient outcomes but also costly to healthcare systems. The costs of
such readmissions has been estimated as high as $17.4 billion 1.
Discovering independent predictors of hospital readmission has remained
crucial in light of the penalties that hospitals can face 2.
Readmission rates have been reported as high as 25% of all hospitalized
patients. Therefore, identifying risk factors for readmission within 1 year
post-operatively is critical. The goal of this study was to utilize a large,
single institution database to assess the incidence of unplanned readmission
at 30 day, 90 day, 180 day, and 1 year intervals and risk factors for
readmission. Material and Methods: Patients included were those
who underwent a spinal procedure as a principal or secondary procedure. They
were then compared using baseline characteristics, intraoperative details,
and postoperative outcomes. Baseline characteristics consisted of
demographics, comorbidities, smoking status, diagnosis, procedures performed
and post-operative outcomes. Readmission rates were measured at 30, 90, and
180 days post-operatively. Multivariable logistic regression was performed
to establish independent associations with unplanned readmission within
one-year post-operatively. Statistical significance was defined as
P <.05 (two-sided test). Analyses were conducted
with SPSS (IBM Inc., Chicago, IL). Results: 3,079 patients met
the inclusion criteria. 22.34% were readmitted within one year. 10.49% of
patients were readmitted by 30 days post-op, 3.77% between 30 and 90 days
post-op, 3.25% 90 and 180 days, and 4.77% 180 days and one-year
post-operatively (Table 1). Those who underwent thoracic procedures
(P = .0304) had a higher likelihood of being
readmitted. Smokers (P =.0342) had increased odds of being
re-admitted compared to non-smokers. Each additional day spent in the
hospital during the operative stay resulted in 1.071 higher odds
(P < .0001) of readmission. Also, increasing age
resulted in 1.021 higher odds (P < .0001) of readmission
by one year. Notably, infection was the most common reason for re-admission
and was found to correlate with increased rate for readmission within
30 days post-operatively (P = .002).
Conclusion: This study was able to successfully identify
and analyze risk factors for re-admission across a 1 year time period
post-operatively. Older patients and smokers had higher rates for
re-admission given their higher risk profile pre-operatively. Thoracic cases
had increased readmission rates due to the relative morbidity associated
with such procedures. In addition, cases complicated by infection were more
likely to be re-admitted in the acute post-operative period most likely in
order to treat and eradicate the infection. Surgeons should counsel those
high-risk individuals, especially elderly patients and smokers, and patients
undergoing thoracic surgery regarding the risks for complications,
readmission, and subsequent procedures in addition to increased healthcare
costs.

## References
1. Jencks, S. F., Williams, M. V & Coleman, E. A. Rehospitalizations
among patients in the Medicare fee-for-service program. N. Engl. J.
Med.
360, 1418–1428 (2009).
2. Boozary, A. S., Manchin, J. 3rd & Wicker, R. F. The Medicare Hospital
Readmissions Reduction Program: Time for Reform. JAMA
314, 347–348 (2015).

## 1581

## A005: Outcomes After Lumbar Disk Herniation Surgery in the Dutch
Population

Maike Schepens

1

, Miranda van Hooff

2

, Judith Erkelens, van

3

, Ronald Bartels

4

, Eric Hoebink

5

, Margot Smits

6

, Hans Kuijpens

7

, and Jacques Limbeek, van

6

1

Zorgverzekeraars Nederland, Strategy and quality of care, Zeist, The
Netherlands

2

Maartenskliniek, Orthopedics, Ubbergen, The Netherlands

3

Vektis, Research, Zeist, The Netherlands

4

Radboud University Medical Center, Neurosurgery, Nijmegen, The
Netherlands

5

Amphia hospital, Orthopedics, Breda, The Netherlands

6

Zilveren Kruis Health Insurance Company, Medical Advisory, Leusden,
The Netherlands

7

VGZ Health Insurance Company, Medical Advisory, Eindhoven, The
Netherlands

Introduction: Outcomes after surgery for lumbar disk herniation
are defined in the International Consortium for Healthcare Outcomes (ICHOM)
and include complications, re-operations, mortality, pain, quality of life.
For shared-decision making before choosing surgery or conservative treatment
patients and doctors need information on the incidence of complications and
undesirable outcomes. So far, only limited data is available on the outcomes
after primary surgery of this condition in Dutch patients. The objective of
this nationwide study is to determine the occurrence of undesirable outcomes
after primary surgery, in terms of reoperations, use of opioids and nerve
root block treatment. Material and Methods: The Dutch National
Claims Database (Vektis) was searched for lumbar hernia disk operations
performed in the period between 01-07-2015 and 30-06-2016. Vektis has a
nationwide, nearly full (>99%) coverage of all medical care claims that
are reimbursed by insurance companies. For all lumbar surgery patients, we
examined whether reoperation took place within 18 months. In addition, we
investigated whether opioids were prescribed 6 to 12 months after surgery
and whether nerve root block was given within one year after surgery. A
combined outcome measure was composed of these three outcome measures. 95%
confidence intervals (95%CI’s) were calculated with the Agresti-Coull
method. Group comparisons between a low-volume hospital group and a
high-volume hospital group were done using the Student’s t-test (2-sided).
Results: In total 6,895 persons underwent primary lumbar
disk herniation surgery during the study period. Lumbar disk herniation
surgery was performed in 70 hospitals of which 30 hospitals performed less
than 50 operations and 47 less than 100. 23 hospitals performed more than
100 operations per year (range 110 to 690). The reoperations’ weighted mean
was 7.3 %, with wide confidence intervals (CI’s) in low-volume hospitals.
The percentage of patients with nerve root block within 12 months after
surgery was 6.7% and the opioid using patients percentage 6-12 months after
surgery was 15.6%. The combined outcome measure showed that 23.0% of
patients had one or more undesirable outcomes after surgery. For 14 out of
the 30 low-volume hospitals (i.e., less than 50 surgical procedures per
year) the 95% CI upper limit exceeded the 50% level for the combined outcome
measure. Although the data suggested a volume effect on undesirable
outcomes, the t-tests at the volume thresholds 50, 100, 150 and 200
interventions per year did not support this (P-values .07,
.08, .13, .11). Conclusion: This unique nationwide study on
claims data provides insight into patient-relevant undesirable outcomes such
as reoperation, nerve root block and opioid use after lumbar disk herniation
surgery. We found that almost one out of four patients had an undesirable
outcome within 18 months after surgery that prompted further medical
treatment. A wide variation in complication rates is shown between hospitals
with a trend that supports a possible effect of volume in lumbar disk
herniation care. Additional studies on factors that predict postoperative
complications and on factors that prevent these undesirable outcomes are
needed.

## 339

## A006: 10k Spinal Cord Stimulation Improves Back and Leg Pain for Patients
With Failed Back Syndrome: A Prospective Cohort Analysis With 2y
Follow-Up

Simon Weidert

1 2

, Suero Eduardo

2

, Diana Hab

2

, Becker Christopher

2

, Greiner Axel

2

, Böcker Wolfgang

2

, and Ibrahim Richard

1

1

DGS Regional Pain Center Munich - East, München, Germany

2

Ludwig Maximilians Universität Munich, Dpt. for General, Trauma and
Reconstructive Surgery, München, Germany

Introduction: Chronic pain as a result of failed back surgery is
a difficult to treat condition. Despite advances in surgical techniques and
medication strategies, a long-term reduction in pain after failed back
surgery may be difficult to achieve, leading to a decrease in quality of
life and to permanent disability. Spinal cord stimulation (SCS) implants
have been designed to modulate pain signals before they reach the brain,
potentially helping patients in which spine surgery has failed to improve
pain. In the current study, we prospectively followed 82 patients who
received a spinal cord stimulator (Nevro HF10) for chronic pain associated
with failed back surgery syndrome. We aimed to determine whether the device
would provide significant short- and long-term pain relief for localized
back pain and leg pain alike. Material and Methods: This was a
prospective series of patients with chronic pain due to failed back surgery
syndrome who were operated on by a single surgeon to implant a spinal cord
stimulation device. The device (Nevro HF10) consists of two leads placed
posteriorly inside the spinal canal at around The attached to a generator
that produces an electric constant stimulus at 10kHz frequency. Patients
were surveyed pre-implantation and at 6, 12 and 24 months after implantation
of the SCS. Using a Visual Analog Scale (VAS), we aimed to quantify pain
pre- and post-implantation in the lower back (LB) and both legs (LL &
RL) individually. In addition, patients were asked about their
pre-implantation functional status, as well as their perception of pain
relief. Statistical analyses were conducted using R. Generalized linear
models of VAS score as a function of time post-implantation were used to
estimate the effect of the SCS on pain. A P-value < .05
was deemed to be statistically significant for all analyses.
Results: 82 patients (28 men and 54 women) received a
permanent SCS implantation. The mean VAS score pre-implantation was: Lower
Back = 8.0, Left Leg = 7.8, Right Leg = 7.6. We found a significant
reduction in pain 6 months post-implantation: LB = 3.7, LL = 3.3, RL = 3.3
(P < .05). The reduction in pain persisted until the
end of the follow-up at two years after implantation of the SCS.
Conclusion: The Nevro HF10 spinal cord stimulator
demonstrated to significantly improve pain in patients with failed back
surgery syndrome at short- and long-term intervals. With a safe, minimally
invasive implantation technique, the spinal cord stimulator may is an
additional tool in the management of hard-to-treat chronic pain
patients.

## 587

## A007: Hyperlordotic ALIF Cages for the Treatment of Adult Spine
Deformity: Incidence of Peri-Operative Radicular Pain and its Correlation
with Radiological Outcomes

Domenico Compagnone

1

, Pedro Berjano

1

, Marco Damilano

1

, Riccardo Cecchinato

1

, Andrea Redaelli

1

, Francesco Langella

1

, Daniele Vanni

1

, Carmelo Messina

1

, Giuseppe Peretti

1 2

, and Claudio Lamartina

1

1

IRCCS Istituto Ortopedico Galeazzi, Milan, Italy

2

University of Milan, Department of Biomedical Sciences for Health,
Milan, Italy

Introduction: In Adult Spine Deformity cases, the restoration of
the ideal lumbar lordosis has positive effects on the clinical outcomes and
decreases the risk of adjacent segmental failure. Several surgical
strategies are available to reach the ideal spinal alignment. The anterior
retroperitoneal approach for interbody fusion (ALIF) offers the possibility
to achieve a high degree correction, thanks to cages with 20° and 30°, and
to address lordosis restoration in the lower lumbar spine. This study aims
to evaluate the incidence of radicular pain and its correlation with
radiographic outcomes in patients undergoing hyperlordotic cages to treat
Adult Spinal Deformity. Material and Methods: An analysis of a
prospective consecutive single-center database was performed to analyze
patients who underwent Hyperlordotic ALIF with or without posterior fusion
to correct spinal deformity on the coronal and/or sagittal plane. Clinical
outcomes were evaluated by the Visual Analog Scale (VAS) back and leg and
Oswestry Disability Index (ODI) preoperatively and postoperatively and at 3,
6, and 12 months follow-up. Spinopelvic parameters [Pelvic Incidence (PI),
Pelvic Tilt (PT) and Lumbar Lordosis (LL)] and Posterior Disc Height (PDH)
and Anterior Disc Height (ADH) were assessed preoperatively and
postoperatively on standardized full-standing EOS X-rays. The foraminal area
(FA) were measured pre- and postoperatively on CT scan or MRI.
Results: Thirty-seven patients (n = 37), with a mean age of
63.2 y/o (SD 8.6 y/o), underwent Hyperlordotic ALIF in our center from
January 2016 to December 2019. Seven subjects developed perioperative
neurological issues (3 right and 4 left) (Group A), while Thirty did not
(Group B). The L5 radicular pain was statistically significant
(Pvalue < .05) influenced by the segmental
correction magnitude; an average of 26° (SD 11.05) instead of 15.11° (SD
9.93) was obtained with the hyperlordotic cage respectively in Group A and
Group B: the higher the correction degrees, the higher the incidence of the
symptom. Besides, the average of post-operative L5-S1 PDHs seems to be
associated with the occurrence of radicular pain: post-operative PDH in
Group A was 5.99 mm (SD 2.68) while in Group B was 8.25 mm (SD 2.62)
(Pvalue < .05). Conclusion: The open
retroperitoneal approach with hyperlordotic cages allows a good correction
of sagittal and coronal imbalance. The radicular pain is a potential
perioperative complication of this procedure. A high segmental correction
and low post-operative PDH seem to be associated with the occurrence of the
symptom; In the larger part of the cases, the radicular pain resolves
without other surgical revision in an average time of 3 months.

## 1364

## A008: Association of Duration of Preoperative Opioid Use with Reoperation
After One-Level ACDF in Non-Myelopathic Patients

Andre Samuel

1

, Catherine Himo Gang

1

, and Sheeraz Qureshi

1

1

Hospital for Special Surgery, New York, USA

Introduction: Preoperative opioid use before cervical spine
surgery has been linked to worse postoperative outcomes. However, no studies
have determined the association of duration and type of opioid used with
reoperations after anterior discectomy and fusion (ACDF).
Methods: Patients undergoing single-level ACDF without
myelopathy between 2007 and 2016 with at least 5 year follow up were
identified in one private insurance administrative database. Preoperative
opiate use was divided into acute (within 3 months), subacute (acute use and
use between 3-6 months), and chronic (subacute use and use prior to
6 months) and by the opiate medication prescribed (tramadol, oxycodone, and
hydrocodone). Postoperative rates of additional cervical spine surgery were
determined at 5 years and multivariate logistic regression was used to
determine the association of preoperative opiates with additional surgery.
Results: Of 445 patients undergoing single-level ACDF
without myelopathy, 66.3% were taking opioid medications prior to surgery.
The most commonly used preoperative opioid was hydrocodone (50.3% acute use,
24.7% chronic use). Opioid naïve patients had a 5 year reoperation rate of
4.7%, compared to 25.0%, 15.5%, and 23.3% with chronic preoperative use of
tramadol, hydrocodone, and oxycodone. In multivariate analysis, controlling
for age, gender, and Charlson Comorbidity Index, chronic use of hydrocodone
(odds ratio [OR] = 2.08, P = .05), oxycodone (OR = 4.46,
P < .01), and tramadol (OR = 4.01,
P = .01) were all associated with increased
reoperations. However, acute use of hydrocodone, oxycodone, and tramadol
were not associated with reoperations (P > .05).
Conclusions: Both subacute and chronic use of common
lower-dose opioid medications are associated with increased reoperations
after single-level ACDF in non-myelopathic patients. This information is
critical when counseling patients preoperatively and developing preoperative
opioid cessation programs.

## 450

## A009: Does Minimally Invasive Spine Approach Reduces the Incidence of
Dural Tear in Degenerative Lumbar Pathology?

Ayush Sharma

1

, Vijay Singh

1

, Priyank Deepak

1

, Nilesh Mangale

1

, and Ajay Jaiswal

1

1

central railway hospital, department of Orthopaedic and spine
surgery, Mumbai, India

Aims and Objectives: To compare the incidence of dural tear (DT)
in open vs Minimally invasive spine surgery (MIS) in patients with
degenerative lumbar pathologies. Methods: 420 operated cases of
degenerative lumbar pathology with prospective follow up of minimum 6 months
duration were included in the study. Cases were divided into open and MIS
groups. Incidence of DT and various demographic and operative factors were
compared across the two groups. Results: 156 patients underwent
MIS surgery while open surgery was done in 264 patients. Majority of the
study participants were in the age group of 41-60 years (48.0% among MIS
patients and 64.4% among open cases). Incidental durotomy was documented in
52(12%) cases. On comparing the two groups, incidence of DT was
significantly less in the MIS group (6.4%) compared to (15.7 %) in the open
group (p < .05). On further analysis, depending on type
of surgery, while the incidence of DT was comparable between the two groups
for decompression and fusion surgeries, the MIS group had less incidence of
DT for discectomy and in revision surgeries. In the open group, four
patients underwent revision for persistent dural leak or pseudo-meningocele
but none of the cases in the MIS group had revision surgery due to
complications related to dural tear. The distribution of age, gender and
risk factors was comparable between the two groups. Incidence of DT was
significantly high for patients having high Body Mass Index (BMI) and
diabetes mellitus and those undergoing revision surgery (P
< .05) irrespective of the approach to surgery. Conclusion:
Minimally invasive approach can result in significantly lower incidence of
dural tear and complications related to dural tear when compared to open
surgery in patients of degenerative lumbar pathology.

## OP02: Deformity-Thoracolumbar (Adolescent) 1

## 943

## A010: Is There Evidence of Latent Iron Deficiency in Adolescents
Undergoing Spinal Corrective Surgery? An Audit and Quality Improvement
Project

Thomas Barker

1

, andrew cook

1

, and Paul Barker

2

1

Norfolk and Norwich University Hospital, Trauma and Orthopaedics,
Norwich, United Kingdom

2

Norfolk and Norwich University Hospital, Anaesthetics, Norwich,
United Kingdom

Introduction: Spinal corrective surgery can be associated with
significant blood loss, which, despite advances in blood loss techniques,
can result in significant anaemia post operatively. Latent Iron Deficiency
(LID) is a relatively new concept whereby otherwise well individuals have
low iron stores but are not anaemic. LID can compound blood loss in surgery
by reducing a person’s ability to generate new red blood cells, and has been
linked to poor outcomes for other surgical procedures. It is well known that
adolescents is a time of increased demand for iron particularly in young
females who are common in this cohort. Methods: This audit and
quality improvement project reviewed routine pre-operative hemoglobin
concentrations and indices to see if there was evidence of latent iron
deficiency. Included were patients under 30 presenting to Norfolk and
Norwich Hospital for elective correction of adolescent idiopathic scoliosis
or Scheuermann’s Kyphosis between January 2017 and March 2020. In addition
to preoperative blood tests, we reviewed post-op haemaglobin, need for
transfusion, complications, and time to discharge. Patients were excluded if
they were undergoing scoliosis correction for other causes (neuromuscular,
congenital, degenerative). Results: In our sample of 64
patients, the mean preoperative hemoglobin concentration was normal;
155.1g/L in males and 134.9 g/L in females (p < .005),
however the Mean Corpuscular Hemoglobin (MCH) and Mean Cell Volume (MCV)
tended to cluster towards and below the lower limits of the normal ranges,
and were significantly lower than the population means (MCH
p <.05 and MCV p < .01). We have
also shown that those with a low MCV preoperatively were statistically more
likely to be moderately to severely anemic post operatively, however there
was no correlation with length of post-op stay or complications.
Conclusion: We believe this data shows a prevalence of
latent iron deficiency in this cohort, which may contribute to post
operative anaemia. While we accept that ferritin and transferrin saturation
are more accurate at identifying iron deficiency, they are not routine tests
for otherwise well patients. Our next steps will be to measure the serum
ferritin at decision to list for surgery, and if serum ferritin is <
100 mcg/L supplement with oral iron replacement therapy for at least a month
prior to surgery.

## 816

## A011: Three Dimensional Correction is Related to Brace Effectiveness in
Patients with Adolescent Idiopathic Scoliosis

Kenny Yat Hong Kwan

1

, Amy Cheung

1

, Hui Yu Koh

1

, and Kenneth Man Chee Cheung

1

1

The University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong, Hong Kong

Introduction: Although scoliosis is a three-dimensional (3D)
deformity, research in factors determining brace efficacy has not focused on
the effects of 3D in-brace curve correction. The purpose of this study was
to determine the effect of axial plane parameters on the outcomes of bracing
with a thoracolumbosacral orthosis (TLSO) for AIS. Material and
Methods: A prospective longitudinal cohort study of AIS patients
who fulfilled the Scoliosis Research Society (SRS) criteria for bracing was
performed from brace wear initiation and followed through minimum two-year
follow-up or surgery. Radiographs using EOS Imaging System were used to
reconstruct 3D images of the spine at pre-brace, immediate in-brace, 1 year
in-brace and minimum 2 year out-of-brace. Univariate and multiple linear
regressions were performed to determine the association between axial
rotation correction and curve progression at final follow-up. Logistic
regressions were performed to model the probability of risk of progression.
Results: Fifty-three patients were enrolled and 46 patients
were included in the analysis. At final follow-up, 30 patients did not have
curve progression and 16 patients had curve progression. There was no
difference in baseline characteristics between the groups. For the
transverse plane parameters, significant difference was found between
non-progressive and progressive groups in pre-brace apical vertebral
rotation (AVR) (4.5 ± 11.2o vs - 2.4 ± 9.8o,
p = .044) and 1 year in-brace AVR correction velocity
(2.0 ± 5.0o/year vs - 1.7 ± 4.4o/year,
p = .016). Logistic regression analysis showed that
pre-brace AVR (OR = 1.063; 95% CI:1.000-1.131; p = .050)
and AVR CV at 1 year (OR = 1.19; CI: 1.021-1.38; p = .026)
were associated with an increased risk of curve progression. There was no
difference in SRS-22 scores between patients who experienced curve
progression and those who did not. Conclusion: We demonstrate
that axial plane parameters and their correction during bracing are related
to brace success in this prospective study.

## 601

## A012: Is Fresh Leucodepleted Whole Blood Transfusion Superior to Blood
Component Transfusion in Pediatric Patients Undergoing Spine Deformity
Surgeries? A Prospective Randomized Study Analyzing Post-Operative
Serological Parameters and Clinical Recovery

Keerthivasan J

1

, Shanmuganathan Rajasekaran

1

, Dilip Chand Raja Soundararajan

1

, Ajoy P Shetty

1

, and Rishi Kanna

1

1

Ganga Medical Centre and Hospitals Pvt Ltd, Spine Surgery,
Coimbatore, India

Introduction: Major spine surgeries have elevated risks of
peri-operative blood loss with significant need for multiple blood
transfusions. Many controversies exist on whether fresh whole blood or
components transfusion is superior in reducing coagulopathy and inflammatory
response. Randomized studies have been done in cardiothoracic and
onco-surgeries but can be biased as the primary pathology itself in those
studies can confound the coagulation and inflammatory markers. Elective
spine surgery is devoid of these confounding factors and study in this
condition is an urgent necessity. The primary aim of the study was to
compare the effectiveness of fresh whole blood (FWB) and blood component
transfusion in improving clinical outcome and serological parameters in
early post-operative period following major spine surgery.
Methods: A prospective randomized study conducted in
tertiary spine deformity centre on patients undergoing spine surgery from
September 2017 to August 2018 which involved more than 6 levels of fusion
and where expected blood loss was more than 750 ml in two groups. FWB group
received fresh whole blood whereas CG group received components transfusion.
Outcome measures: Pre-operatively demographics, diagnosis and facial
measurements to assess puffiness; intra-operatively level of fusion, type of
graft, duration of procedure, volume of transfusion and blood loss; and
post-operatively drain collection, vitals, duration of oxygen support and
ICU stay, volume of transfusion, complications including facial puffiness
and well-being score. In addition, bio-chemical parameters such as PT, ABG,
calcium, electrolytes, lactate and interleukin-6 were also compared between
the two groups. Results: A total of 65 patients with spinal
deformities of different etiologies were included. The mean age was 14.0 and
14.9 years in FWB and CG, respectively. All other pre-operative parameters
were comparable. The mean fusion levels and surgical time were 11.1 and
221.20 minutes in FWB, as compared with 10.70 and 208.74 minutes in CG,
respectively. Intra-operative blood losses were 929 ml (FWBG) and 847 ml
(CG), and the mean volumes of transfusion were 1.90 (FWBG) and 1.65 units
(CG). FWBG was significantly superior to CG in the following clinical and
laboratory parameters: duration of oxygen dependence [36.43 (FWBG) vs
43.45 hours (CG); P = .0256], mean arterial pH [7.442
(FWBG) vs 7.394 (CG); p < .001], interleukin-6 [30.04
(FWBG) vs 35.10 (CG); p < .019], mean duration of HDU
stay [40.6 hours (FWBG) vs 46.51hours (CG); p = .0234] and
postoperative facial puffiness [7/30 in FWBG vs 18/35 (CG)
(P < .02)]. Conclusion: FWB transfusion
can potentially improve the immediate post-operative outcome in patients
undergoing major spinal deformity surgeries by reducing the duration of
intensive care unit stay and oxygen dependence. The other potential benefits
of this practice, based on our study, include a reduced inflammatory
response (reduced lactate and IL-6) and post-operative facial puffiness.
However, further large-scale validation studies in future are necessary to
precisely determine the role of FWB in spine surgeries.

## 1126

## A013: Myelopathic Patients with Severe Pediatric Spinal Deformity can
Improve Neurologic Function Close to Non-Myelopathic Patients by 1 year
After Surgery

Meghan Cerpa

1

, Scott Zuckerman

1

, Zeeshan Sardar

1

, Lawrence Lenke

1

, Brenda Sides

2

, Michael Kelly

2

, Oheneba Boachie-Adjei

3

, Sumeet Garg

4

, David Bumpass

5

, Paul Sponseller

6

, Suken Shah

7

, Daniel Succato

8

, Burt Yaszay

9

, Peter Newton

9

, Rick McCarthy

5

, Harry Shufflebarger

10

, and Munish Gupta

2

1

Columbia University Medical Center, New York, USA

2

Washington University, St. Louis, USA

3

FOCOS Orthopedic Hospital, Patang West, Ghana

4

Children's Hospital Colorado Aurora, Aurora, USA

5

UAMS Dept. of Orthopaedic Surgery Arkansas Children’s Hospital,
Little Rock, USA

6

Johns Hopkins, Baltimore, USA

7

Nemours/Alfred I duPont Hospital for Children, Wilmington,
USA

8

Texas Scottish Rite Hospital for Children, Dallas, USA

9

Rady Children's Hospital, San Diego, USA

10

Nicklaus Children's Hospital, Miami, USA

Summary: Severe pediatric spinal deformity patients with
myelopathy can expect significant improvement in neurologic function close
to neurologic function of non-myelopathic patients by 1 year postoperative.
Mean lower extremity motor scores (LEMS) in myelopathic patients increased
significantly compared to baseline at every postoperative visit up to
2 years. While non-myelopathic patients had significantly higher
postoperative outcomes in SRS mental health, function, and total score, both
groups had significantly superior outcomes in every SRS domain compared to
baseline. Hypothesis: In severe pediatric spinal deformity, we
sought to compare short- and long-term neurologic outcomes in myelopathic
versus non-myelopathic patients. Study Design: Prospective
multicenter cohort. Introduction: In severe pediatric spinal
deformity, ambulatory myelopathic patients are a high-risk population for
intraoperative and postoperative neurologic complications. Given the
decreased neurologic function before surgery, perioperative and long-term
neurologic outcomes in a large series of these patients are unknown.
Methods:311 patients with severe pediatric deformity were
enrolled in a prospective, multicenter, observational study. Patients were
split into two groups: myelopathic and non-myelopathic. Preoperative,
perioperative, and postoperative variables and neurologic outcomes were
compared. Results: Of the 311 patients, 29 (9.3%) were
myelopathic preoperative while 282/311 (90.7%) were non-myelopathic. Both
groups were similar in age (P = .18), gender
(P = .09), and Risser Stage (P = .06),
while more patients in the non-myelopathic group had previous surgery (50 vs
12; P = .03). There were no significant differences in
length of surgery (7.4 ± 2.4 vs 6.4 ± 3.6; P = .14), levels
fused (12.7 ± 11.9 vs 12.3 ± 12.0; p = .41), or EBL (1209 ±
1041 vs 1307 ± 940; p = .60), however the myelopathic
patients had a significantly longer postoperative length of stay (13.0 ±
10.0 vs. 8.6 ± 5.0; P < .01). Mean LEMS in myelopathic
patients increased significantly compared to baseline (40.7 ± 9.9) at every
postoperative visit (First Erect: 46.0 ± 7.1, P = .02;
1 year: 48.2 ± 3.7, P < .01; 2 year: 47.2 ± 7.7,
P < .01), while the non-myelopathic group did not
experience any significant postoperative changes. Both groups had
significant increases in every SRS domain compared to preoperative, while
the non-myelopathic patients had significantly higher outcomes in mental
health (P < .01), function (P = .02),
and total score (p = .01) compared to the myelopathic
group. Conclusion: Severe pediatric spinal deformity patients
with myelopathy can expect significant improvement in neurologic motor
(LEMS) function postoperative, close to neurologic function of
non-myelopathic patients by 1 year follow-up, while both groups had
significantly superior outcomes in every SRS domain 2 years postop compared
to preoperative scores. Take Home Message: Myelopathic patients
with severe pediatric-deformity can expect significant improvement in
neurologic motor function postoperatively, close to that of patients without
myelopathy. Both groups had superior postoperative outcomes compared to
baseline.

## 927

## A014: Can We Stop Distally at LSTV-1 for Adolescent Idiopathic Scoliosis
with Lenke 1A/2A Curves?

Yong Qiu

1

, Xiaodong Qin

1

, Zhong He

1

, Zhen Liu

1

, Rui Yin

1

, and Zezhang Zhu

1

1

Nanjing University Medical School, Najing, China

Introduction: Posterior thoracic fusion to save more lumbar
mobile segments has become the mainstay of operative treatment for
adolescent idiopathic scoliosis (AIS) with Lenke 1A/2A curves. Although
previous studies have recommended selecting the last substantially touching
vertebra (LSTV-1) as lowest instrumented vertebra (LIV), good outcomes could
still be achieved in some cases when LSTV-1 was selected as LIV. We aim to
determine in which case one level proximal to LSTV-1 could be a valid LIV,
in which case distal fusion should extend to last substantially touching
vertebra (LSTV), and to identify risk factors for distal adding-on.
Materials and Methods: Ninety-four patients were included
in the study with a minimum of 2 year follow-up after posterior thoracic
instrumentation, in which LSTV-1 was selected as LIV. Patients were
identified with distal adding-on between first erect radiographs and 2 year
follow-up based on previously defined parameters. Factors associated with
the incidence of adding-on were analyzed. Results: The mean
follow-up duration was 37.7 ± 15.8 months. Forty patients (42.6%) with
LSTV-1 selected as LIV achieved good outcomes at the last follow-up. Several
preoperative risk factors significantly associated with distal adding-on
were identified, including lower Risser (P = .001), longer
thoracic curve length (P = .005), larger rotation and
deviation of LSTV-1 (P < .001) and preoperative coronal
imbalance (P = .013). Conclusions: Skeletally
immature patients with long thoracic curve, preoperative coronal imbalance,
large rotation and deviation of LSTV-1 are at increased risk of distal
adding-on when selecting LSTV-1 as LIV. Under this condition, distal fusion
level should extend to LSTV; While in other case, LSTV-1 could be a valid
LIV.

## 1589

## A015: Selective vs. Non-Selective Thoracic Fusion for Lenke Type 1-4C
Curves: Which has More Complications at 5 year Follow-Up?

Jay Reidler

1

, Scott Zuckerman

1

, Meghan Cerpa

1

, Joseph Lombardi

1

, Peter Newton

2

, and Lawrence Lenke

1

1

Columbia University Medical Center, New York, USA

2

Rady's Children's Hospital, San Diego, USA

Hypothesis: Selective thoracic fusion is associated with lower
rates of complications compared to non-selective fusion. Study
Design: Retrospective analysis of prospectively-collected,
multicenter data. Introduction: Selective thoracic fusion (STF)
is a less invasive option compared to non-selective fusion (NSF) for
adolescent idiopathic scoliosis Lenke Type 1-4C curves with significant
lumbar deformity. Differences in perioperative and long-term complications
between STF vs. NSF remain unknown. Methods: A multicenter,
prospective database was queried for Lenke 1-4C curves with minimum 5 year
follow-up. Patients were grouped as STF (fusion to L1 or above) vs. NSF
(fusion below L1). Perioperative events and complications were compared.
Results: In 219 patients (102 STF vs. 117 NSF), NSF had
longer surgery (332.3 minutes vs. 231.8 minutes, P <
.001), more blood loss ( = 639.9cc, P <.001), and more levels
fused (12.1 vs 8.5; P < .001), though no differences
were seen in POD1 pain score, days to oral pain meds, or length of stay. NSF
had higher complication rates (24.1% vs. 12.7%, P = .032)
and a non-significantly higher reoperation rate (8.5% vs 3.9%,
P = .164). The most common non-reoperative
complications in the NSF group were transient paresthesias (5/18, 27.8%) and
pulmonary issues (5/18, 27.8%) within 0-90 days, indicating morbidity
associated with longer surgeries. Implant-related reoperations in the STF
group included 1 repositioned thoracic pedicle screw causing radiculopathy,
and in the NSF group included 3 prominent implants requiring
removal/shortening and 1 broken screw requiring replacement. There were 3
cases of residual deformity (1 STF vs. 2 NSF), treated with a heel lift
(STF), bracing (NSF), and thoracoplasty (NSF). Infections requiring
reoperations occurred in 2 STF cases vs. 5 NSF cases.
Conclusion: Selective thoracic fusion for Lenke 1-4C curves
is associated with less blood loss, shorter surgery, and a lower overall
complication rate at minimum 5 year follow-up than Non Selective Fusion.
There were no cases of reoperation for residual deformity in the selective
thoracic fusion group. Summary: In this multi-center study with
minimum 5 year follow-up, we compared rates of complications following
selective vs. non-selective thoracic fusion in Lenke Type 1-4C curves. We
found that selective thoracic fusion is associated with less blood loss,
shorter surgery, and a lower complication rate. It did not lead to any cases
of residual deformity requiring reoperation.

## 981

## A016: Learning Curve in Minimally Invasive Surgery of Adolescent
Idiopathic Scoliosis

Ayrat Syundyukov

1

1

Federal State Budgetary Institution Federal Center of Traumatology,
Orthopedics and endoprosthesis replacement of Ministry of Health of the
Russian Federation (Cheboksary), pediatric orthopedic, cheboksary,
Russian Federation

Introduction: Dorsal minimally invasive AIS surgery has an equal
degree of correction compared to standard surgical procedure and positive
aspects such as low blood loss and fast recovery. The main disadvantage of
the technique is the long time of the surgery. The purpose of the study is
to assess the dynamics of changes in the magnitude of correction, the amount
of blood loss and surgery time over a 4 year period, 2016-2019.
Material and Methods: The study provides a retrospective
analysis of prospectively collected experience data from one surgeon. Over
4 years, 49 patients were operated using MIS: 2016-12, 2017-10, 2018-16,
2019 - 11. The operation was performed from three skin incisions, with
intermuscular approach alternately to the convex and concave sides of the
spine, implantation of screws using the hands free technique, correction
using minimally invasive devices and with the creation of conditions for
fusion. The amount of the time of surgery (min.), the volume of blood loss
(ml) and correction (in percent) in dynamics over the years and between the
start and end points of study (2016 and 2019) were estimated, determined the
Learning Curve. Results: A statistically significant annual
decrease in surgery time was revealed (min.), starting from 3 years of
observation (P < .05). The differences between the start
and end points of observation are statistically significant (356.4; 95% CI:
240-540, P < .0001). Differences in the volume of blood
loss (ml) are statistically unreliable in dynamics over the years and
significant at the start and end points (221; 95% CI: 50-600;
P < .05). The correction value (in percent) for the
start and end points of observation did not have statistical differences
(79.2; 95% CI: 55-98.3; P > .05).
Conclusion: With an equivalent correction of deformations
over 4 years, with an increase in the experience of the surgeon, the volume
of blood loss and the time of the surgery are reduced. The Learning Curve
comprised 38 operations to reduce the duration of surgery by an average of
13.5% annually.

## 506

## A017: Serratus Plane Catheter for Pain Relief in Anterior Spinal Surgery
for Idiopathic Scoliosis

Emily Tsang

1

, Alvina Lone

1

, Bisola Ajayi

1

, Jason Bernard

1

, Timothy Bishop

1

, and Darren Lui

1

1

St George's University Hospital NHS Trust, London, United
Kingdom

Introduction: Patients having anterior thoracic or thoracolumbar
scoliosis surgery may have severe pain postoperatively and require
specialised analgesia both intra and post operatively. Intravenous opioid
sparing techniques such as intrathecal diamorphine is inconsistent in their
results. Morphine and other opioid-based drugs have the disadvantage of
nausea, vomiting, constipation, dysphoria and immunosuppression. There is a
paucity of data on epidural catheters for muscular blocks in the literature
and none for anterior surgery. Various analgesic regimens are used by
different anaesthetists including drugs such as morphine, ketamine,
gabapentin, paracetamol and non-steroidal anti-inflammatories. The authors
believe this is the first study of Serratus Anterior Blockade with Epidural
catheR (SABER). Methods: This is a retrospective review of all
anterior spinal surgery for adolescent idiopathic scoliosis performed at St
Georges’ Hospital NHS Trust from January 2017 to December 2018. An epidural
catheter placed in the serratus anterior muscular plane with infusion of
0.125% chirocane in addition to other analgesia was analysed. Analysis
included: Demographics, dose and length of anaesthesia (epidural,
intravenous, Patient controlled anaesthesia (PCA), oral) peri and
postoperatively, transition to oral medication analysis, pain scores at
different time point and associated factors or complications.
Results: Over this time period, there was a total of 44
patients who underwent anterior spinal surgery, in which 26 patients
had thoracic scoliosis surgery, 17 patients had thoracolumbar scoliosis
surgery, 1 patient had both. The mean age was 16.4 (11-30 years old), 70%
were female, with 100% receiving SABER. There were no early failures of
catheter nor catheter site infections. Pain scores reported by the patients
steadily reduce from 12 hours to 48 hours post-operatively. Pain scores
between Thoracic versus Thoracolumbar scoliosis surgery were not
significantly different (P > .05). Significant decrease
in Intravenous morphine in both groups occurred on day 1. PCA was
discontinued at a mean of 24 hours (20-34 hours). Transition to oral
morphine started by mean of day 2.4 (day 2-day 3). Chest drain was removed
at mean day 2.4 (day 2-day 4). Average hospital length of stay was 6.1 days.
Conclusion: SABER is a novel technique for pain management
with the avoidance of intravenous morphine and its well-recognized
complications. There is no significant difference regarding the number of
levels instrumented or magnitude of correction or anatomical location
(thoracic vs thoracolumbar) or presence of costoplasty. There is reduction
in PCA in all groups by 12 hours with average transition to oral morphine
use by day 2. The use of local anaesthetic infusions in patients having
anterior spinal surgery is a safe and effective method of pain relief.
Further studies should be conducted to compare its efficacy.

## 1117

## A018: Readmission and Unplanned Surgery After Surgical Scoliosis
Correction in Children. A Multivariate Chort Study of 613 Cases

Jorge Nuñez Camarena

1

, Francisco Javier Alonzo González

2

, Caribay Vargas Reverón

3

, Sergio Antonio Castillo Rivera

4

, Jose Luis Do Santos

2

, and Pedro Fernández

5

1

Hospital Mútua Terrassa, Barcelona, Spain

2

Hospital "Ceibal" Accidentes I.G.S.S., Guatemala, Guatemala

3

Hospital Clínic i Provincial, Barcelona, Spain

4

Hospital Dr. Sótero del Rio, Santiago, Chile

5

Hospital La Fe, Valencia, Spain

Introduction: Scoliosis correction procedures in children are
technically demanding and complex surgeries that can lead to several
complications. Failure of these procedures is reflected in the overall rates
of postoperative unplanned readmissions and reinterventions. The purpose of
the study was to determine the main factors related to the failure of
scoliosis correction surgery that caused unplanned readmissions and surgical
reinterventions. Material and Methods: We revised 628
consecutive patients that underwent surgical correction of scoliosis in our
center between the years of 2009 and 2017, with complete clinical and
radiological records. 613 scoliosis correction surgeries in patients below
18 years of age were analyzed. 15 patients were excluded for having
incomplete radiological records. The relevant result taken into
consideration was readmission and unplanned reintervention after the primary
procedure for scoliosis correction. The primary surgery was considered the
initial procedure and patients were followed for a minimum of 12 months. Two
orthopaedic spine surgeons were in charge of performing the retrospective
revision of the clinical and radiological records. Causes of readmission
were categorized as 1. Local complications of surgical wound 2. Implant
related complications 3. Medical complications. A descriptive and
multivariate logistic regression risk adjustment analysis was performed with
the Stata 13 statistical package. Results: 613 patients met
inclusion criteria. Middle age was of 13.4 years (Standard deviation 4.0),
66.1% of the patients were female. The most common diagnosis was idiopathic
scoliosis (297 patients(P): 54.8%) and neuromuscular scoliosis (171 P:
27.3%). 477 instrumented fusions were performed, 71 surgeries of scoliosis
correction with growing rods, 62 VEPTR and 3 other procedures. Global
readmission rate per episode was of 18.8% (115/613 P). According to the days
of readmission after initial hospital discharge the distribution was:
between 0-30 days 4.2%, 30-90 days: 2.0% and 12.6% after the first 90 days
from discharge. The main cause of readmission was implant related
complications (44.3%). 79.1% of the patients that had an unplanned hospital
readmissions were treated with a subsequent surgery. The adjusted model
evidenced that the presence of comorbidity was the determining factor for
unplanned readmission and surgery with significantly higher odds ratio (OR).
Patients with syndromic scoliosis (OR 4.35%, 95% IC: 2.27-8.33) and
neuromuscular scoliosis (OR 3.76, 95% CI: 2.13-6.61) presented with higher
OR when compared with patients with idiopathic scoliosis. Age was also a
significant risk factor. Conclusion: Patients with
neuromuscular or syndromic scoliosis presented higher levels of
complications and failure. 80% of patients that were readmited to the
hospital after their initial discharge were treated with a second surgical
intervention. The main cause of readmission was implant related
complications.

## OP03: Clinical Topics

## 1890

## A019: Comparing Routine Elective Inpatient Spine Surgery to Orthopedic
and Non-Orthopedic Surgery Trends

Mustfa Manzur

1

, Andre Samuel

2

, and Sheeraz Qureshi

2

1

Sidney Kimmel Medical College at Thomas Jefferson University,
Philadelphia, USA

2

Hospital for Special Surgery, New York, USA

Introduction: Comparison of relative volume, quality, and
facility cost trends across the domains of inpatient elective spine surgery
in the USA relative to other routine inpatient elective orthopedic and
non-orthopedic surgical procedures have not been previously described in the
literature. Material and Methods: Data was extracted from the
USA (US) Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services (CMS) National
Inpatient Sample (NIS) using the Healthcare Utilization Project (HCUP)
database. The following elements were extracted at the Medicare-severity
diagnostic related group (MS-DRG) level: discharges, age, length-of-stay,
facility charge, facility cost, mortality rate, and sex. MS-DRG codes were
stratified into surgery focus areas. Reported means are all pooled.
Threshold for significant difference was P < .05.
Results: High volume routine inpatient elective orthopedic
procedures included spine fusion and joint replacement. Routine inpatient
elective procedure types available for comparison included bariatric
surgery, coronary artery bypass graft (CABG) surgery, hernia repair, and
extremity-focused vascular surgery. Volumes significantly increased for
spine fusion (+1.2% annually, up to 436,745), hip/knee joint replacement
(+3.4% annually, up to 1,359,889), and bariatric surgery (+4.4% annually, up
to 182,915) [P < .05]. Volumes significantly declined
for CABG (-2.3% annually, down to 157,005), hernia repair (-3.8% annually,
down to 22,170), and extremity-focused vascular surgery (-4.2% annually,
down to 154,600). For spine surgery, LOS increased +0.2 days to 3.7 days and
mortality rate decreased 0.40% to 2.36% without significance
[P > .05]. For hip/knee joint replacement, length of
stay (LOS) decreased -1.3 days to 3.4 days and mortality rate decreased
-0.19% to 0.16% without significance [P > .05]. Among
comparison elective surgeries, bariatrics LOS decreased the most (-0.4 days
to 1.8 days) with a reduction in mortality rate from 0.07% to 0.00% while
vascular surgery LOS increased the most (+0.6 days to 6.0 days) along with
the highest increase in mortality +0.39% up to 1.90% [p
< .05]. In terms of cost, spine fusion procedures facility cost grew
+$7,115 to $31,946; however, this cost grew 2.8% annually on average – a
rate lower than the US healthcare consumer price index (CPI) over the same
period (3.2%). Relative to spine fusion, hip/knee joint replacement surgery
facility cost grew slower at 0.9% annually. Among comparable elective
surgeries, costs grew the fastest for hernia repair (4.9% annually) and
slowest for bariatrics (0.5%). Net change in total cost was greatest for
CABG which increased by +$9,819 to $43,854. Conclusion: From
2008 through 2017, inpatient routine elective spine surgery volumes
significantly increased. In contrast, only bariatrics net volume grew during
the period (+47.2%) while other routine elective procedure net volume
declined: CABG (-18.8%), hernia repair (-29.6), and (-32.0%). In contrast,
LOS generally increased for comparable elective surgery procedures and with
mortality rate significantly increasing for vascular surgery. Despite cost
to provide routine inpatient spine surgery consistently increasing yearly,
the overall annualized growth rate of this facility cost was both less than
(a) the average US CPI growth rate for healthcare expenditure during this
period and (b) the average annual growth rate for facility costs of
comparable routine elective procedures.

## 387

## A020: Post-Operative Readmission Following Spine Surgery: What Role Do
Socioeconomic and Community Factors Play?

Sarthak Mohanty

1 2

, Meeki Lad

3

, David Casper

1

, and Comron Saifi

1

1

University of Pennsylvania, Department of Orthopaedics,
Philadelphia, USA

2

Perelman School of Medicine at the University of Pennsylvania,
Philadelphia, USA

3

Rutgers New Jersey Medical School, Department of Neurological
Surgery, Newark, NJ, USA

Introduction: Since its inception in 2012, the CMS Hospital
Readmissions Reduction Program (HRRP) has espoused cost-effective healthcare
delivery by financially penalizing hospitals with 30 day readmission rates
in excess of what would be considered acceptable based on a patient’s age,
sex, diagnosis at discharge, and diagnoses prior to admission. However,
recent studies corroborating the role of social, economic, behavioral, and
environmental factors in a patient’s post-discharge outcomes suggest that
this methodology could unduly fault hospitals that serve disadvantaged
communities. Given the high cost of spinal surgeries, this present inquiry
into the effects of socioeconomic and community factors in spine patient
readmission is paramount. Methods: 2830 patients undergoing
spinal surgery between 2012-2018 (except for trauma, malignancy, infection,
or revision) were identified retrospectively from our institutional
database, with readmission status (post-operative day [POD] 0-30, 30-90) as
the outcome of interest. Pre-operative health (spinal pathology),
demographic data (age, sex, smoking status, race), and neighborhood
characteristics (neighborhood income inequality described by the GINI index,
personal income, % of families under the federal poverty line, median
household value, residents per primary care provider [PCP], prevalence of
obesity and diabetes) were abstracted. Income was estimated per patient at
the Public Use Micro Area level based on US Census Bureau American Community
Survey data, accounting for patient age, race, sex, employment status,
insurance status, and educational level. Variance inflation factors were
calculated to eliminate collinear variables, followed by univariate and
multivariate stepwise regression analyses (using upper quartiles for all
continuous variables as reference). Significance was defined as
P < .05, with Bonferroni corrections as appropriate
for multivariate models. Results: On multivariate stepwise
regression, patients under 48 years of age were found to be 0.45 [95% CI:
.28-.71] times as likely to be readmitted by POD 30 than patients above
69 years of age. Increased neighborhood obesity prevalence (OR = 1.18
[1.05-1.30]), lower access to healthcare as measured by residents per PCP
(OR = 4.24 [2.43-7.40]), population density of the lowest quartile or
second-lowest quartile (OR = 9.46 [4.20-21.30], OR = 10.73 [5.07-22.72]),
neighborhood median household value of the lowest quartile or second-lowest
quartile (OR = 2.13 [1.02-3.24], OR = 2.159 [1.31-3.57]), and income of the
lowest quartile or second-lowest quartile (OR = 12.55 [6.75-23.33], OR =
3.68 [1.88-7.23]) were also associated with higher rates of readmission by
POD 30. Conversely, patients in neighborhoods with GINI indices ranking in
the lower 3 quartiles had reduced odds of readmission by
POD 30 (OR1 = .02 [.01-.03], OR2 = .03 [.01-0.06],
OR3 = .19 [.10-.27]). Readmission between POD 30-90 was less
likely in cervical deformity patients (OR = 0.46 [0.21-0.99]), with
socioeconomic factors not demonstrating significant predictive value.
Conclusions: Overall, our findings support the notion that
surgical centers serving socioeconomically disadvantaged patients are at
risk of increased readmissions following spine surgery. Moreover, serving
healthier, more socially advantaged patients may not correlate to better
surgical care but rather may reflect better access to care, greater
financial capital, and less economic inequality within the patient’s
neighborhood. Nevertheless, properly identifying at risk populations
provides an opportunity to support these patients through better discharge
planning and more expansive clinical care pathways.

## 1551

## A021: The Epidemiology of Vertebral Osteomyelitis Requiring Surgical
Intervention in the USA From 1998 to 2013

Michael Faloon

1

, Jennifer Kurowicki

1

, Stuart Changoor

1

, Kumar Sinha

1

, Ki Hwang

1

, and Arash Emami

1

1

St. Joseph's University Medical Center, Paterson, NJ, USA

Introduction: Cases of vertebral osteomyelitis (VO) that are
refractory to conservative treatment are treated surgically to debride
infected segments, decompress and ultimately stabilize affected vertebral
segments. There is limited data on the epidemiology of surgical management
in VO in the USA (US), and no study to date has evaluated the impact of
patient characteristics on surgical outcomes on a large scale. The purpose
of this study is to assess the characteristics of patients with VO who
underwent surgical intervention. Material and Methods: From the
Nationwide Inpatient Sample (NIS) database an estimated 228,044 patients
were admitted for VO in the US between 1998 and 2013. Of these, 44,401
underwent surgical intervention. Data were extracted on patient
demographics, comorbidities, inpatient mortality, length-of-stay (LOS), and
inflation-adjusted hospitalization charges. Sub-analysis included
comparisons of length of stay, hospital charges, & mortality rate
between operative & non-operative VO cases. Results: The
incidence of surgical intervention for patients with VO significantly
increased from 0.6 per 100,000 in 1998 to 1.1 per 100,000 admissions in
2013, and is estimated to reach to 1.4 per 100,000 in 2020 based on
regression model between calendar year and incidence of VO (R² = 0.9).
Majority of patients were white (76%), male (54.5%), had a mean age of
56 years, and 38% carried Medicare insurance. Approximately 22.6% of
patients has at least 1 complication during the immediate perioperative
time. The comorbidities that significantly (P < .001)
increased inpatient mortality were congestive heart failure (CHF) (OR: 6.1),
liver disease (OR: 2.9), & renal disease (OR: 1.9). The most common
postoperative complications were anemia (6.7%), sepsis (5.6%), superficial
infections (4.1%), instrumentation complications (2.8%), pulmonary
insufficiency (1.6%), deep venous thrombosis (1.2%), & hematoma (1.1%).
The most commonly performed procedures were 2-3 level fusion/instrumentation
of lumbar spine (58%), cervical spine (54%), and 4-8 level fusion of
thoracic spine (43%). The most common factors that significantly
(P < .001) increased length-of-stay were
thoracolumbar fusion (OR: 19.9), combined anterior and posterior fusions
(OR: 7.5), vertebral resection (OR: 4.4), and fusion of > 9 levels (OR:
3.7). The most common comorbidities that significantly (p
< .001) increased length-of-stay were CHF (OR: 8.3), renal disease (OR
8.3), hepatitis C (OR:6.1), & history of drug abuse (OR: 3.2). The most
common comorbidities that significantly (P < .001)
increased total hospital costs were renal disease (OR: 7.4), liver disease
(OR:2.2), CHF (OR: 2.1), psychological illness (OR: 1.6). The mean inflation
adjusted total hospital costs increased from $20,355 per patient in 2001 to
$39,991 in 2013. Conclusion: VO is an understudied condition
with a steady increase in its incidence in the US. It appears that the rate
and the need for invasive procedures to salvage this condition is also
increasing. We identified certain patient demographics and comorbidities to
be associated with higher complications, mortality rate and overall costs.
VO is associated with lengthy and expensive hospital stays resulting in a
significant burden to patients and the healthcare system.

## 1279

## A022: Sagittal Spinal Alignment Varies with an Individual's Race: Results
of the Multi-Ethnic Alignment Normative Study (MEANS)

Zeeshan Sardar

1

, Meghan Cerpa

1

, Jean Charles Le Huec

2

, Stephane Bourret

2

, Kazuhiro Hasegawa

3

, Wong Hee Kit

4

, Gabriel Liu

4

, Denni Hey

4

, Hend Riahi

5

, Michael Kelly

6

, and Lawrence Lenke

1

1

Columbia University Medical Center, New York, USA

2

CHU, Bordeaux, France

3

Nigata Spine Surgery Center, Nigata, Japan

4

NUH University Spine Center, Singapore, Singapore

5

Kassab Institute, Tunis, Tunisia

6

Washington University, St. Louis, USA

Summary: Volunteers from 5 countries were enrolled in this
radiographic study to provide a global evaluation of spinal alignment in the
largest reported Multi-Ethnic cohort of asymptomatic adults. To study the
variation of spinal alignment based on race the patients were divided into 3
categories: Asian, Black, and White. Pelvic incidence, sacral slope, pelvic
tilt, SVA, and TPA did not differ significantly between the 3 races.
However, significant differences in Thoracic Kyphosis and Lumbar Lordosis
between the 3 races were found. Hypothesis: We hypothesize that
the spinopelvic parameters will vary across the different races. Study
Design: Retrospective review of prospectively collected data.
Introduction: While we do understand the basics of spinal
deformity correction in terms of attaining a globally balanced spine and
matching the lumbar lordosis to the pelvic incidence, we still don’t
understand the ideal shape an individual’s spine should have based on their
unique morphology, age, and race. This study attempts to highlight
differences in the spinal alignment of volunteers from 3 main races; Asian,
Black, and White. Methods: Radiographic evaluation of full-body
low dose stereoradiography in a multiethnic cohort of 488 asymptomatic adult
volunteers (Mean age: 40.8; Range: 18-7 years). Patients from 5
countries were included; France, Japan, Singapore, Tunisia, and the USA.
Volunteers were grouped into 3 main races; Asian, Black, and White. 3D
measurements were performed using a commercially available 2D/3D modeling
software. ANOVA and Tukey’s HSD for post-hoc analysis were used to determine
the differences between groups. Results: Pelvic parameters
including pelvic incidence (P = .38), pelvic tilt
(P = .36), and sacral slope (P = .53)
were similar amongst the 3 groups (P = .73). Lumbar
lordosis (LL) was similar between the Black (60.7 ± 10.7) and White (59.2 ±
11.3; P > .05) races, whereas Asian volunteers (54.4 ±
10.8; P < .001) had lower LL. Thoracic Kyphosis (TK) was
similar between the Black (46.5 ± 11.3) and White (47.3 ± 12.1;
P > .05) races, but lower in Asians (40.1 ± 9.7;
P < .001). The spine length was similar between the
Black (565.4 ± 38.2) and Asian (569.7 ± 31.4) races, while it was longer in
the White (578.4±31.6) volunteers (P = .0035). Parameters
assessing sagittal alignment were similar between the 3 groups; SVA
(P = .08), TPA (P = .71). However, T1
tilt was different between White (5.5 ± 2.9) and Asian (4.5 ± 2.3)
(P = .0015). Conclusion: Volunteers in the
Asian group had lower lumbar lordosis and thoracic kyphosis when compared to
the Black and White groups while all groups had similar pelvic morphology.
This difference in spinal alignment could possibly be related to different
lifestyles. Take Home Message: Pelvic parameters, SVA, and TPA
did not differ between the Asian, Black, and White races. However, lumbar
lordosis and thoracic kyphosis were lower in the Asian group.

## 1892

## A023: Intraoperative ketamine Use on Intermediate and Long-Term Opioid
Utilization Following Spine Surgery

Carol Wang

1

, Ivan Zapolsky

2

, Chelsea Hendow

2

, and Comron Saifi

2

1

University of Pennsylvania, Perelman School of Medicine,
Philadelphia, USA

2

University of Pennsylvania, Department of Orthopedic Surgery,
Philadelphia, USA

Introduction: Reducing the need for postoperative narcotics may
play a key role in curbing the opioid epidemic in the US. Ketamine, an NMDA
receptor antagonist, has come to attention as an intraoperative analgesic
that has shown promise in decreasing opioid consumption in the immediate
post-operative period. However, there have been no objective studies
evaluating its potential opioid-sparing effects over longer timeframes, a
question arguably more relevant to public health. The purpose of this study
is to determine whether intraoperative ketamine reduces long-term outpatient
opioid use in patients after spine surgery. Material and
Methods: A retrospective review was performed of patients who
underwent spine surgery at our institution between August 2016 and June
2018. Opioid prescriptions filled between January 2013 and August 2019 were
recorded from the Prescription Drug Monitoring Programs (PDMPs), and
cumulative morphine milligram equivalents (MMEs) summed over a given period
was used as a metric for comparing opioid consumption. Propensity score
analysis was used to evaluate the association between intraoperative
ketamine administration and outpatient opioid consumption at 1, 3, 6, and
12 months postoperatively. Patients were further stratified
into subgroups based on their exposure to opioids pre-operatively (naïve vs
episodic vs chronic use), as well as the magnitude of their pre-operative
usage (40-60th percentile, 60-80th percentile,
80th + percentile, <90 MME/day, >90 MME/day).
Results: A total of 434 patients were included in this
study (118 who received intraoperative ketamine and 316 who did not). There
was no statistically significant difference in mean postoperative outpatient
opioid consumption between patients who did vs did not receive ketamine at 1
month (ketamine = 2442 MME, 95% CI = [1036-3848], control = 2081
MME, 95% CI = [378-3785]), 3 months (ketamine = 4219
MME, 95% CI = [2505-5933], control = 2548 MME, 95% CI =
[-114-5210]), 6months (ketamine = 6337 MME, 95% CI =
[3468-9205], control = 3191, 95% CI = [-1614-7997]), or
1 year (ketamine = 10352 MME, 95% CI =
[4912-15791], control = 5002 MME, 95% CI = [-4007-14011]).
Exposure to intraoperative ketamine was not associated with lower incidence
of long-term postoperative opioid use (OR = 1.06, 95% CI = [.964 to
1.16]). Subgroup analysis failed to reveal differences in
opioid consumption or incidence of long-term opioid use in any patient
subgroup at any time point. Notably, ketamine exposure was not associated
with reduced mean opioid consumption in patients with long-term preoperative
opioid use (ketamine = 4552 MME, 95% CI = [3362-5742], control =
6011 MME, 95% CI = [5001-7021] at 3 months),
despite this being the population theorized to benefit most from
intraoperative ketamine. Conclusion: Administration of
intraoperative ketamine is not associated with reduced outpatient opioid
consumption or decreased incidence of long-term opioid use following spine
surgery. Notably, though ketamine exposure has been theorized to have
greater opioid-sparing benefits in patients with long-term or high-dose
pre-operative opioid use, this was not observed in any subgroup in this
study at any time point. Pain management and post-operative opioid
consumption in spine surgery patients remain challenging topics that deserve
further study.

## 1877

## A024: The Use of Telemedicine for Orthopedic Pathology During the
COVID-19 Pandemic

Karen Weissmann

1 2

, Marcelo Perez

1

, and Francoise Descazeaux

1

1

MEDS, Santiago, Chile

2

Universidad de Valencia, Valencia, Spain

Introduction: The use of audiovisual and communication
technologies has increased health coverage access in remote areas. During
the COVID-19 pandemic an explosive development of this technologies were
implemented for orthopedic surgeons. Material and Methods: We
analyzed telemedicine benefits at a single medical institution during the
COVID-19 Pandemic. Health providers were trained beforehand to use digital
platforms and electronic medical records. Health providers were sensed
regarding usefulness and outreach. Users were analyzed according to their
age, health insurance, geographic distribution and type of service needed.
Two quality indicators were analyzed: Net Promoter Score (NPS) which is a
fidelization index (promoters minus detractors) and Customer Satisfaction
Index (CSI): (Service quality index: % of satisfied customers - % of
unsatisfied customers). Both groups were analyzed for interface problems.
Results: 1771 synchronous telemedicine episodes were done
between April and June 2020: April (242), May (489) and June (840). 59% of
the patients were male with a mean age of 41 years (women 40; men 43 years),
73% had private health insurance. 79% of the patients were from the
Metropolitan areas. Overall most requested specialists were: Orthopedics
(48%), Nutriologist (15%) and Dietician (14%). By gender, women represented
100% of the psychology consultations, 85% of the nutriology and 80% of the
endocrinology attention. Men did 67% of the dietician request and 51% of the
orthopedic ones. The NPS was 71.70% and ISN 85.71%. Regarding quality of the
service, 96.7% of the patients considered their needs and expectations
fulfilled and 87.62% reviewed the video-call quality as adequate. 100% of
health care providers considered this tool as useful and will continue to do
it post-pandemic. The orthopedic surgeons considered that 39.28% of the
patients would have benefited from a face to face attention but concluded
that 67.72% of the appointments met the requirements to be managed remotely.
The most frequently encountered problems were digital literacy of the
patients, audio interface problems (19,05%) and video issues (12.29%). 9.52%
of patients were dissatisfied with the digital platform.
Conclusion: Telemedicine allows remote access to
specialists from all over the country and during emergency situations,
managing to solve 67% of the orthopedics surgery requests. Patient
fidelization with the system is 71.7% and customer satisfaction is
85.71%.

## 1914

## A025: Incidence of Vertebral Fractures by Bone Fragility in Patients with
Fractures of the Appendicular Skeleton

Rafael Cabral

1 2

, Rogerio Savoy

1

, Ewerton Galdeano

1

, and Marcelo Munhoz

1

1

University of Jundiai, Orthopedics, Jundiai, Brazil

2

Instituto da Coluna, Orthopedics, Campinas, Brazil

Introduction: Osteoporosis is characterized by decreased bone
mineral density and impaired tissue microarchitecture, increasing the risk
of fractures due to bone fragility. Some risk factors may be associated,
such as: menopause, aging, past history of fracture, smoking, reduced body
mass index, reduced bone mineral density, vitamin D deficiency, high blood
pressure, diabetes, chronic kidney disease and dysfunction of the thyroid.
Osteoporotic fractures represent a public health problem: the Brazilian
elderly population is estimated at 23% by the year 2050. Vertebral fracture
(VF) are typically related to osteoporosis and represent the first clinical
manifestations of the disease, followed by long bone fractures. Patients
with VF are five times more likely to have other affected vertebrae and
twice as high risk if they suffer fractures of the proximal femur and other
appendicular bones. Approximately 2/3 of spinal fractures are asymptomatic.
The absence of the diagnosis is shown as a barrier to intervention and early
treatment of osteoporosis. Although bone densitometry by double X-ray
absorption (DXA) is the method of differential diagnosis, the high cost and
availability act as limiting factors for its execution in the public health
system. Thus, the presence of VF found on radiographic examination may be a
more important clinical finding than quantitative DXA analysis and
bioindicators of bone quality. The purpose of this study was to determine
the incidence of VF in hospitalized patients with bone fragility fractures
in the appendicular skeleton and to correlate with the concentrations of
osteometabolic bioindicators and to identify risk factors. Material
and Methods: The cross-sectional analytical study included 124
patients admitted to a public teaching hospital in the State of São Paulo,
Brazil, from January 2019 to January 2020, with fracture due to bone
fragility. Radiographs in the vertebral column profile allowed the
quantification of according to the semi-quantitative method of Genant.
Information related to previous history and biological material were
collected to evaluate bone quality indicators. Statistical analyzes were
performed using the Pearson Correlation test, Linear Regression and
Student's T test. Results: Fracture of proximal femur was
present in 55.65% and VF was identified in 58.87% of the sample. The
concentrations of 25 (OH) D and Parathyroidhormone (PTH) were altered and
associated with VF. Aging, previous history of fractures, smoking and
Diabetes mellitus, were the most identified risk factors, whose fractures
were more frequent in the thoraco-lumbar transition of the spine.
Conclusion: A high incidence of VF was observed in
hospitalized patients with fractures in the appendicular skeleton due to
frailty, whose risk factors presented an important association. Among the
evaluated bioindicators, hypovitaminosis D established an important
relationship with fragility fracture. The identification of individuals with
risk factors associated with the systematic radiographic evaluation of the
thoraco-lumbar spine, is an important tool for screening and diagnosis of
fragility fractures.

## 1903

## A026: Impact of Postmenopausal State on the Distribution of Bone Mineral
Density in the Lumbar Spine

Avani Vaishnav

1

, Philip Louie

2

, Chirag Chaudhary

1

, Michael McCarthy

3

, Ryan Lee

4

, Yoshihiro Katsuura

1

, Sravisht Iyer

1

, Steven McAnany

1

, Todd Albert

1

, Catherine Himo Gang

1

, and Sheeraz Qureshi

1

1

Hospital for Special Surgery, New York, USA

2

Virginia Mason Medical Center, Seattle, USA

3

Indiana Spine Group, Carmel, USA

4

George Washington University School of Medicine, Washington, DC,
USA

Introduction: Hounsfield units (HU), typically measured at
L1-L2, have been identified as a surrogate marker for lumbar Bone Mineral
Density (BMD). However, concern remains that L1-L2 BMD may not fully capture
BMD differences throughout the lumbosacral spine and inadvertently provide
inaccurate assessment. Thus, the purpose of this study was to evaluate the
impact of to analyze how conventional HU evaluation relates to local HU at
commonly instrumented levels, and to evaluate the impact of age and
post-menopausal state on HU in the lumbar spine. Material and
Methods: Consecutive female patients presenting to a spine clinic
who underwent lumbar CT were selected. Previous lumbar surgery, tumor,
fracture or infection were excluded. Patients were divided based on whether
they were pre- or post-menopausal. Hounsfield Units (HU) were assessed on
lumbar CT by placing an elliptical region of interest confined to the
medullary space of the vertebral body, and avoiding cortical bone or
sclerosis. HU measurements were performed for L1-S1 in 7 regions:
Mid-sagittal; Axial plane - Superior, Waist, and Inferior; Axial plane at
the waist – Anterior, Middle and Posterior. HU were compared between the
pre- and post-menopausal cohorts using student t-test or Manny-Whitney
u-test. The difference between routinely used L1L2 average HU and local HU
in each region was calculated and compared between groups. Association of
age and menopausal state with HU was assessed using regression analyses.
Results: Forty-eight patients, 18 pre-menopausal and 30
post-menopausal were included. The post-menopausal group was significantly
older (67 vs 41 years; P < .0001). Post-menopausal women
had lower HU in all regions at all levels (P < .05),
with the mean difference ranging from 45 to 90 HU. Depending on the region,
the L1L2 average was more than 10 units greater than L4 in 30-70% of
pre-menopausal and 40-70% of post-menopausal women (P >
.05). L1L2 average was also more than 10 units greater than L5 measurements
in 17-78% of pre-menopausal and 40-70% of post-menopausal women
(P > .05, except Sagittal region P
= .038). Age, but not BMI showed a significant negative correlation with HU,
which was strong in pre-menopausal and moderate in post-menopausal women.
Age and menopausal state account for 35-60% of the variability in HU, except
in the Posterior region, where they account for 25-45%.
Conclusion: Age and post-menopausal state were negatively
associated with HU in the lumbosacral spine, and the conventionally used
L1L2 average did not adequately capture local HU variations. Local BMD
assessment using HU may provide a more accurate assessment of morphometric
characteristics and trabecular milieu in the operative region.

## 510

## A027: Analysis of Industry Payments to Spine Surgeons Using the Open
Payments Database

Andrew Platt

1

, Anil Mahavadi

2

, and Martin Herman

1

1

University of Chicago, Chicago, USA

2

University of Alabama at Birmingham, Birmingham, USA

Introduction: Since the 2013 Physician Payments Sunshine Act,
all payments to physicians from drug and device manufacturers greater than
$10 are required to be publicly disclosed and publicly accessible through
the Open Payments Database (OPD). We analyzed differences in payments to
academic spine surgeons based on specialty (neurosurgery vs. orthopedics) or
geography and how they correlate with academic production. Material
and Methods: Payments to academic spine surgeons in 2018 were
queried through the OPD. Academic spine surgeons practicing at institutions
in Chicago, Los Angeles, New York, Philadelphia, and Houston with both
orthopedic and neurosurgical residency programs were included. All payments
were recorded and combined to create the total reported payment. Number of
publications for each academic spine surgeon for 2018 was taken from PubMed.
Results: One hundred and thirty-eight academic spine
surgeons were included in analysis including seventy neurosurgeons and
sixty-eight orthopedic surgeons. The average total reported payments for all
surgeons was $172,366 ± 778,701 (Range $12-7,820,343). The average number of
publications in 2018 was 5.39 ± 7.98 (Range 0-46). The average in total
reported payments to orthopedic spine surgeons ($311,035 ± 1,093,359) was
significantly higher than the average in total reported payments to
neurosurgery spine surgeons ($37,659 ± 76,289) (P = .044).
The averages in total general payments and consulting fees were also
significantly higher to orthopedic spine surgeons. The average number of
publications in 2018 was higher from orthopedic spine surgeons (6.00 ± 8.47)
compared to neurosurgeons (4.79 ± 7.48) but not statistically significant
(P = .385). There were no linear relationships between
payment amounts in any category (including royalty or license, consulting,
or honoraria) and number of publications. Average payments to academic spine
surgeons on the West Coast, East Coast, or Midwest were not significantly
different(P = .34). Conclusion: This is
the first study to examine payments to spine surgeons using OPD data. This
study shows that in 2018, orthopedic spine surgeons received significantly
higher industry contributions than neurosurgery spine surgeons. There was no
significant correlation between industry payments and research publications.
There was no significant difference in industry payments across different
regions of the country.

## OP04: Tumor and Infections

## 776

## A028: Risk Factors Associated with Infection and Blood Transfusion in
Pediatric Population Undergoing Scoliosis Correction

Fernando Alvarado Gómez

1

, María José Bravo Otero

1

, Fabián Armando Gil

2

, and Maria Fernanda Garcia

1

1

Instituto Roosevelt, Bogota, Colombia

2

Pontificia Universidad Javeriana, Bogota, Colombia

Introduction: Scoliosis is a three dimensional structural spine
deformity where the deviation in the coronal plane exceeds 10°; 80% of them
are idiopathic, the remaining 20% includes congenital, neuromuscular and
syndromic etiologies. Scoliosis surgery has improved substantially during
the past years, great efforts have been made in order to decrease surgical
infections. Nonetheless, deep and superficial wound infections and
healthcare-associated infection (HAI) still hind scoliosis patients
recovery, lengthen hospital stay and increase scoliosis surgery costs.
Current reported scoliosis infection rates ranging from 0.4% to 8.7%,
superficial and deep infections occurred in 1.0% and 1.7% of pediatric
patients respectively (n = 25,432). Several studies have established the
relationship between blood transfusion and higher infection rates, even in
idiopathic scoliosis surgery patients. The main object of this study was to
determine if there is an association between patient baseline condition
including the preoperative hemoglobin and other perioperative variables and
the risk of perioperative transfusion and infection, in pediatric population
undergoing scoliosis surgical correction. Materials and
Methods: A retrospective cohort study was conducted using
children undergoing scoliosis correction surgery between January 2014 and
December 2016 at Roosevelt Children’s Orthopaedics Institute. Preoperative,
intraoperative and postoperative variables were evaluated. A descriptive
analysis of the variables was conducted using central tendency statistics
and dispersion measurements for quantitative variables. Categorical
variables frequency were registered. Separated bivariate analysis were
performed between variables and blood transfusion and variables and
infection. Multivariate analysis was performed for each outcome variable.
Results: A total of 358 patients were included. Risk
factors associated with infection were American Society of Anesthesiologists
(ASA) III and IV, neuromuscular scoliosis and intraoperative blood
transfusion. Risk factors associated with transfusion were preoperative
hemoglobin values less than 10g/dl, longer surgical timing and surgical
bleeding. HAI were 2.6 more frequent than SSI. Non- transfused patients had
on average 1g/dl more preoperative hemoglobin than transfused patients.
Conclusions: Ideal preoperative hemoglobin level has not
been determined in literature, some authors propose a goal of 5g/dl above
the cut-off point for transfusion in idiopathic scoliosis. Low presurgical
hemoglobin is a risk factor for transfusion and the latter is a risk factor
for infection. Preoperative administration of re-combinant human
erythropoietin has been suggested as a measure to decrease BT in spine
surgery. Considering that scoliosis correction surgery is an elective
procedure, we should evaluate whether increasing hemoglobin levels before
surgery decreases complications.

## 1113

## A029: Operative Site Antibiotic Concentrations in Spine Surgery: Do the
Prophylactic Antibiotics Reach the Surgical Site in Adequate Concentrations?
Systematic Review on Analysis of Wound Concentrations of Various
Prophylactic Systemic Antibiotics

Viswanadha Arun-Kumar

1

, J Naresh-Babu

1

, and Jeffrey C. Wang

2

1

Mallika Spine Centre, Department of Spine Surgery, Guntur,
India

2

USC Spine Center, Department of Spine Surgery, Los Angeles,
USA

Introduction: Prophylactic systemic antibiotic administration
prior to any surgery has been a standard of care. One of the major
determinants of prophylactic systemic antibiotic’s efficacy is its
availability in sufficient concentrations at the surgical site. The drug
concentrations achieved at the operative site is critically more important
than that achieved in the serum. There are controversial reports in the
literature regarding the drug concentrations of antibiotics in the wound.
The purpose of this systematic review is to analyze the studies
investigating the operative site concentrations of various prophylactic
intravenous antibiotics in elective spine surgery. Material and
Methods: A systematic review with search limited to English
language was conducted of Pubmed/Medline SCOPUS, EBSCO and Cochrane Library
using Medical Subject Heading (MeSH) terms. Studies investigating operative
site antibiotic concentrations in human subjects who received prophylactic
systemic antibiotic prior to elective spine surgery were included. Operative
site concentrations were defined as concentrations measured in soft tissue,
bone, ligament, intervertebral disc or wound/drain fluid at or near the site
of surgery. Search of prophylactic antibiotic was not limited to any
specific class. Studies excluded were case reports, animal, in vitro and
biomechanical studies. Quality of the studies were assessed by
Newcastle-Ottawa Scale. Results: Total number of citations
reviewed were 742. After title and abstract exclusion, 48 were selected for
retrieval of full text. Out of which 33 were excluded as they did not meet
the inclusion criteria of the present study. Fifteen studies were selected
and included for final analysis in this study. 13 of the included
publications were prospective cohorts, Type of surgery varied from
discectomy in 5 studies to short spinal fusion in 6 studies and deformity
correction in 4 studies. Majority of the publications estimated the
operative site concentrations of Cephalosporins followed by Aminoglycosides,
Pencillins, Glycopeptides and Beta lactamase. Overall, antibiotic
concentrations in the intervertebral disc ranged from 2.23 - 68.2 μg/g.
Pencillins were observed to achieve the least concentrations in IVD. Of all
the articles on Cephalosporins, there were considerable differences in
tissue concentrations between various Cephalosporins (P
value >.05). Highest penetrated antibiotic into IVD was found to be
gentamycin followed by sulbactum, clindamycin and ampicillin. Cephalosporins
and vancomycin had the least penetrating capacity into the intervertebral
disc. The overall quality of the studies seemed to be less than average as
only seven studies scored 5 or more out of 9 points on the NOS.
Conclusion: Availability of an antibiotic in local tissues
depends on various factors such as protein binding capacity of the
antibiotic, penetration capability of antibiotics into tissues and seroma or
haematoma formed during surgery which may not be accessible to systemic
antibiotics and this may limit the availability of the drug in required
concentrations at the operative site. This review identifies the lacunae in
the literature and there is an urgent need for large prospective trials
estimating wound concentrations of routinely used prophylactic systemic
antibiotics in spine surgery.

## 844

## A030: Subclinical Propionibacterium Acnes Infection Estimation in the
Intervertebral Disc (SPInE-ID): A Prospective Cohort

Nelson Astur

,1,2

, Marcelo Wajchenberg

1,3

, Michel Kanas

1,3

, Andre Mario Doi

4

, Marines Dalla Valle Martino

4

, Mario Lenza

5

, and Delio E. Martins

1,6

1

Hospital Israelita Albert Einstein, Orthopaedics - Spine Group, Sao
Paulo, Brazil

2

Santa Casa de Sao Paulo School of Medical Sciences, Department of
Orthopaedics and Traumatology, Sao Paulo, Brazil

3

Universidade Federal de Sao Paulo, Department of Orthopaedics and
Traumatology, Sao Paulo, Brazil

4

Hospital Israelita Albert Einstein, Department of Microbiology, Sao
Paulo, Brazil

5

Hospital Israelita Albert Einstein, Orthopaedics, Sao Paulo,
Brazil

6

Universidade Anhembi-Morumbi, School of Medicine, Sao Paulo,
Brazil

Introduction:
Cutibacterium acnes, formely known as
Propionibacterium acnes is an anaerobic bacteria
present in the skin flora, hair follicles and sebaceous glands. It has also
been related to spine infection and osteomyelitis. Degenerative disc disease
and Modic changes were associated to the presence of C.
acnes within the intervertebral disc. Modic changes Type I
appearance is very similar to spondylodiscitis and sometimes diferential
diagnosis cannot be made. Those changes could be secondary to infection by a
low-virulent pathogen. We know that subclinical disc infection leads to low
back pain, sciatica and endplate abnormalities and C. acnes
has been implicated with it. The purpose of this study was to identify if
the presence of an infective pathogen within the disc is primary or an
intraoperative contamination and if it correlates with low back pain.
Material and Method: We prospectively gathered patients
from 18 to 65 years old with lumbar disc herniation requiring decompression
surgery and sent a disc sample collected during surgery to tissue culturing
and pathogen identification. Patients were clinically followed during one
year for pain (VAS), disability (ODI) and quality of life (EQ-5D)
assessment. Modic changes were assessed comparing preoperative and 1 year
postoperative MRI. Infection was also controled with ESR, CRP and Leucogram.
During standard fashion microdiscectomy surgery, we first collected samples
of the ligamentum flavum, then the herniated disc fragment and finally the
muscle. They were sent to microbiology for anaerobic and aerobic culturing
and were incubated respectively for 5 and 14 days. After positive culturing,
pathogen was identified by MALDI-TOF and molecular analysis. Our primary
endpoint was rate of disc infection which we considered as a positive disc
culture with both negative muscle and ligamentum culture. Secondary
endpoints were the correlation of infection with performance scores, Modic
changes and laboratory screening. The protocol of this study was registered
at clinicaltrials.gov. Results: We included 108 patients, with
most cases being men (58.3%). Mean age was 42 years-old. We had only two
cases out of 108 patients that were considered disc infection. Twelve
patients also presented positive control tissue cultures and were considered
contamination. The vast majority of our patients had no positive culture for
any of the collected tissues. Muscle sample was the one with most positive
cultures. C. acnes was the most frequent pathogen
identified followed by S. aureus. Of the two patients
diagnosed with disc infection, one was due to S. aureus and
other by C. acnes. Laboratory exams had no significant
variance during follow up. There was not a clear pattern of how Modic
changed one year after surgery. Mostly, the incidence of Modic increased
after surgery presenting types I and II at the same time. Our disc infection
rate was 1.8%. We did not find any correlation of infected patients with
clinical outcomes, laboratory or Modic changes. Conclusion:
Subclinical infection rate of the intervertebral lumbar disc is at 1.8% and
may be overestimated in the current literature. Subclinical infection is not
related to worst outcomes or worsening of Modic changes over time.

## 1200

## A031: A change in Protocol of Wound Care in Spinal Surgery and its Impact
on Postoperative Wound Infections in Neurosurgery

Sara Lener

1

, Granit Molliqaj

2

, Aria Nouri

2

, Karl Schaller

2

, Claudius Thomé

1

, Pierre-Pascal Girod

1

, and Enrico Tessitore

2

1

Medical University of Innsbruck, Department of Neurosurgery,
Innsbruck, Austria

2

Geneva University Hospital, Department of Neurosurgery, Geneva,
Switzerland

Introduction: Surgical site infections (SSI) are an unfortunate
post-operative complication responsible for morbidity. They account for 3%
in spine surgery and can increase to 12% with instrumentation. Their
treatment usually consists in a surgical revision associated with prolonged
antibiotic therapy. This work focuses on wound closure technique, which has
an essential influence on SSI. We recently introduced a closed wound
dressing (Dermabond or Dermabond + Prineo) that is applied
in the operating room. The aim of our study is to determine if a closed
dressing protocol reduces SSI. Material and Methods: All
patients diagnosed with SSI (based on inspection, clinics and MRI), during
the initial stay or at readmission, are prospectively followed. Based on
this data, we retrospectively included all primo-operated spine procedures
from April 2016 to July 2017 in 2 different centers (Geneva, Switzerland,
and Innsbruck, Austria). Data regarding patients, individual infection risk
factors, type of surgery and SSI were collected. They were separated in 2
general groups: Closed-Protocol, where we applied the
dressing system Dermabond +/- Prineo (a self-adhering mesh
with 2-octyl-cyanoacrylate skin glue, removed after 14 days; and
Conventional-Protocol, which included dermal,
intradermal sutures or staples. Surgical closure of fascia and subcutaneous
layer was identical in both groups. For preliminary analysis, we compared
the infection rate of each closure type versus all others.
Results: 672 patients were included in our study:157
received staples, 122 skin sutures, 101 intracutaneous closure, 78
Dermabond, 217 Demabond+Prineo. The infection rate was 2.4 % (n = 16). The
highest infection rate was observed with skin sutures (4.9%) and the lowest
was with Dermabond (1.3%) and Dermabond + Prineo (1.4%) compared to an
overall infection rate of 2.4%. However, only skin sutures showed a
statistically significant difference versus all other closures (4.9% vs
1.8%, P = .05). Despite having lower rates of infection,
Dermabond (1.3% vs 2.5 %, P = .43) or Dermbaond+Prineo
(1.4% vs 2.9%, P = .24) did not have significantly lower
infection rates. Conclusion: Surgical site infections are
significanly higher with skin surtures. Dermabond or Dermabond-Prineo had
the lowest infection rates, but a larger cohort is necessary to demonstrate
a significant superiority versus all other closure types. Further
investigation via a multicentric controlled randomized trial is planned.

## 1672

## A032: Malignant Spinal Cord Compression in the Pediatric Population - A
Systematic Review, Meta- Analysis and Formulation of National
Guidelines

Nigil Palliyil

1

, Nasir Quraishi

1

, Daniel D'Aquino

1

, and David Walker

1

1

Queens Medical Centre, Nottingham University Hospital, Spinal
Surgery, Nottingham, United Kingdom

Study Design: Systematic review. Introduction:
Malignant Spinal Cord Compression (MSCC) has been noted in 3-5% of children
with primary malignant tumours. MSCC can be associated with permanent
neurological deficits, hence prompt diagnosis and treatment is necessary.
Etio-pathogenesis of spinal cord compression in children is entirely
different from that in the adult population and hence the results from adult
studies cannot be extrapolated. Our aim was to perform a systematic review
on MSCC in children less than 18 years to help formulate national
guidelines. Materials and Methods: A systematic review of the
English language was undertaken using the Preferred Reporting Items for
Systematic Reviews and Meta-Analyses (PRISMA) guidelines. Search criteria
included ‘MSCC in children, paediatric and metastases’ for papers published
between January1999 and September 2019. Isolated case reports/case series
with <10 patients were excluded. Results: From a total of 17
articles identified, a final 7 were analysed (Level III/IV). Neuroblastoma
constituted the most common cause for MSCC in children (62.7%) followed by
sarcoma (14.2%). Soft tissue sarcomas constituted the most frequent cause of
MSCC in children >5 years old. The median age at time of diagnosis was
50.9 months (.5-204). The median follow up duration was 50.3 months
(14.8-139). Thoracic spinal cord was the most common site of neural
compression (45.5%). 95.6% of children presented with motor deficits
followed by pain (65.4%) and sphincter disturbance (24%). MRI (Magnetic
Resonance Imaging) was the imaging modality of choice. First line steroid
therapy was given to all patients before definitive therapy was instituted,
resulting in neurological improvement in 75% of cases. 78.6% of patients
presenting within 4 weeks of the onset of symptoms showed complete
neurological recovery as against 25% of patients making complete recovery
amongst those who presented later than 4 weeks. The overall five year
survival rate was 72.6% (70.5-79.2%). Definitive treatment modality
instituted varied according to the type of primary tumour. Radiotherapy
(60%) was associated with the highest incidence of scoliosis as a late
sequelae following treatment followed by laminectomy (33%) and chemotherapy
(7%). Conclusion: Neuroblastoma is the most common cause for
MSCC in children (62.7%) followed by sarcoma (14.2%). Whilst, soft tissue
sarcomas constituted the most frequent cause of MSCC in children >5 years
old. In children with Neuroblastoma/Lymphoma, chemotherapy was the primary
modality of treatment. Early surgery should be a consideration with rapid
deterioration of neurology despite chemotherapy. A multimodality approach
including chemo-radiotherapy and surgery should be the treatment of choice
in metastatic sarcomas. It is worth noting that multi-level
laminectomy/decompression and asymmetrical radiation to the spine can lead
to spinal column deformity in the future. The prognosis for neurological
recovery was found to be inversely proportional to the degree of
neurological deficits and duration of symptoms at the time of diagnosis.

## 1321

## A033: ApoE4 Polymorphic Genotype-Associated Neck or Back Pain and
Radiculopathy Incidence in Intradural Spinal Cord Tumor Patients in Beijing:
A Prospective Clinical Observation

Nicholas Van Halm-Lutterodt

1,2

, Ziyang Ye

3

, Wei-Cheng Chen

4

, Wei-Hsun Huang

2

, Mohamed Kamal Mesregah

1

, Brandon Yoshida

1

, Andrew Mecum

5

, Krishna Mandalia

1,6

, Wenxin Lei

7

, Mercy Bartels-Mensah

8

, Yu Wang

2

, and Yulun Xu

2

1

Keck Medical Center of University of Southern California (USC),
Department of Orthopaedics and Neurosurgery, Los Angeles, USA

2

Beijing Tiantan Hospital, Department of Neurosurgery, Beijing,
China

3

Wake Forest University, Department of Mathematics and Statistics,
Winston-Salem, USA

4

Beijing Tongren Hospital, Department of Clinical Sciences, Beijing,
China

5

Emory University, Department of Psychology, Atlanta, USA

6

University of Southern California, Dornsife College of Letters, Arts
and Sciences, Los Angeles, USA

7

Melbourne University, Department of Mental Health Nursing,
Parkville, Australia

8

University of Debrecen, Department of Clinical Sciences, Debrecen,
Hungary

Introduction: One clinical conundrum spine surgeons face is
that, after exhausting all potential treatment options, some spine patients
recalcitrantly retain or accrue some neurological deficits without any
obvious reasons. Currently, Apolipoprotein Eε2 and Eε4 alleles are the most
widely studied neurodegenerative and metabolomics genes owing to their
reported health- and risk-related properties, respectively. In the spine
literature, how ApoEε2 and ApoEε4 impact neurological and patient-related
outcomes (PROs) are seldom discussed. We investigated the impacts of ApoEε2
and ApoEε4 genotypes on outcomes of intradural spinal cord tumor (ID-SCT)
patients at baseline and 2 year postoperative. Materials and
Methods: Following approval by the institutional review board
(IRB) of Beijing Tiantan Hospital-Affiliated Capital Medical University, a
prospective clinical study of 336 adult (≥18 years) ID-SCT patients who
underwent surgical treatment without any prior primary therapy were
assessed. ApoE single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) were evaluated for all
the ID-SCT patients. Patients within each ApoE2 and ApoE4 categories were
then dichotomized into homozygosity-wild type (WT)
versus heterozygosity-variant type (VT) as
follows: ApoEε2-(rs7412) [WT (
C/C
)] vs ApoEε2-(rs7412) [VT (
C/T
)] and ApoEε4-(rs429358) [WT (
T/T
)] vs ApoEε4-(rs429358) [VT (
C/T
)]. Perioperative clinical and PROs were compared between the
genotypes. Key primary outcomes comprised of demographics and tumor-related
findings as well as W.H.O. classification of the ID-SCTs between the
genotypes. Secondary outcomes compared neurological and PROs between the
genotypes at baseline and at 2 year postoperative for patient self-reported
outcomes that included: visual analogue scale (VAS), Neck Disability and
Oswestry Disability Indices (NDI or ODI). Functional measures included:
McCormick’s classification and the RAND-36 [Short-Form 36 (SF-36)]
health-related quality of life (HRQoL) assessment. Laboratory measures
included: Serum glucose, lipids, and protein profiles. Univariate and
multivariate analyses were carried out by student t-test, Pearson’s
Chi-squared test, Mann-Whitney U test and general linear model (GLM),
respectively, with age, gender, body mass index (BMI), and multivitamin
intake considered as covariates. Statistical significance was set at
P < .05. Results: Of the 336 ID-SCT
patients, approximately 85.4% vs 14.6% were ApoEε2-(rs7412)-WT vs
ApoEε2-(rs7412)-VT and 81.2% vs 18.8% were ApoEε4-(rs429358)-WT vs
ApoEε4-(rs429358)-VT carriers, respectively. The overall average age of
patients was 45.0 years, with a female incidence of 53.3%. No significant
outcomes were observed for tumor characteristics and W.H.O. grading between
the genotypes, (P > .05). At baseline,
ApoEε4-(rs429358)-WT carriers showed 300% increase in Neck or Back Pain
incidence and 400% increased Neck or Back Pain intensity compared to the
ApoEε4-(rs429358)-VT carriers. At 2 Year postoperative, higher significant
rates of intractable pain, radiculopathy
(paresthesia), and significant inferior social functioning (SF) component
score outcome were observed in the ApoEε4-(rs429358)-VT carriers compared to
the other 3 genotypes, (P < .05).
Conclusion: Findings from this study indicate that the
ApoEε4-(rs429358)-WT genotype was significantly associated with increased
neck or back pain incidence and intensity at baseline. At 2 year
postoperative, the ApoEε4-(rs429358)-VT genotype was significantly
associated with increased inferior outcomes of intractable pain,
radiculopathy, and social functioning. These outcomes are incentivized
value-based information. Our report advocates for genetic-based precision
spine practice and warrants further investigation of the possible
cost-associated revenues and clinical impacts of ApoE gene in spine
patients.

## 1388

## A034: Application of Instrasite Vancomycin for Risk Reduction of Surgical
Site Infection After Degenerative Thoracolumbar Posterior Fusion and
Idiopathic Scoliosis Surgeries

Zoltan Hoffer

1

, Istvan Klemencsics

1

, Aron Lazary

1

, and Peter Pal Varga

1

1
National Center for Spinal Disorders, Budapest, Hungary

Introduction: Idiopathic scoliosis and degenerative
thoracolumbar spinal surgeries can achieve significant improvement in
patients’ quality of life. However, surgical site infection can have a
significant impact on the final results of surgical treatment. Because of
that several preoperative and also intraoperative risk reduction strategies
have been developed. The use of intrasite vancomycin is a widely used
method. Material and Methods: The aim of our comparative
prospective cohort study was to evaluate the effect of local administration
of vancomycin on surgical site infection (SSI) after extended degenerative
thoracolumbar and idiopathic scoliosis surgeries. Study cohort was made up
by patients who underwent surgical treatment between 02/July/2015 and
30/June/2016 because of degenerative thoracolumbal pathologies or idiopathic
scoliosis from posterior approach. Patients in the control group were
surgically treated because of the same spinal pathologies between
02/July/2015 and 30/June/2016. All of the patients in the study group
received both sub- and suprafascially 1g of vancomycin powder before
surgical wound closure. Prevalence of SSIs was prospectively analyzed for
the two cohorts. Results: The control cohort consisted of a
total of 238 patients. The mean age was 50.8 years (8-82 years), with a
gender distribution of 172 women (72.3%) and 66 men (27.7%). 175 patients
(73.5%) underwent surgery for degenerative thoracolumbar pathology and 63
cases (26.5%) for idiopathic scoliosis. The prevalence of SSI in the control
cohort was 13.4%. A total of 199 patients were included in the study cohort.
The mean age was 51.1 years (11-84 years), with a gender distribution of 137
women (68.8%) and 62 men (31.2%). 148 patients (74.4%) underwent surgery for
degenerative thoracolumbar pathology and 51 cases (25.6%) for idiopathic
scoliosis. The prevalence of SSI in the study cohort was 9.5%. Difference in
the prevalence of total SSIs proved not to be statistically significant
(P = .207) between study and control cohorts, not even
in terms of superficial (P = .212) or deep
(P = .563) SSIs. Conclusion: The
prevalence of SSI was relatively lower in the study cohort during
intraoperative local administration of vancomycin. However, the difference
between the two cohorts in terms of SSI’s prevalence was not significant
regardless of the depth of SSI. Based on our results we can not recommend
routinely prophylactic, intraoperative local use of vancomycin.

## 679

## A035: Spinal Infection: Analysis of 600 Patients Over 11-years

Hamdan Abdelrahman

1,2

, Mootaz Shousha

3

, and Heinrich Boehm

3

1

Asiut Universty Hospitals, Asiut, Egypt

2

Helios Hospitals Erfurt, Erfurt, Germany

3

Zentralklinik Badberka, Bad Berka, Germany

Introduction: Spinal infection encompasses a broad range of
clinical entities and accounts for approximately 2% to 7% of all cases of
osteomyelitis. Primarily, it is a disease of adults affecting predominantly
those in their fifth decade of life. The age-adjusted incidence increases
with every decade thereafter. The overall incidence of pyogenic spinal
infection is on the increase. Methods: Retrospective analysis
of prospectively collected data between 2005 and 2015. Data of 600
consecutive patients had been reviewed. The patients previously operated at
the spinal region of infection and postprocedual infections had been
excluded from the study. In patients with haematogenous spinal infection,
the collected demographic, clinical, radiological and laboratory data had
been analysed and the effects of various causative organisms on these
parameters has been studied. Results: 250 females and 350 males
(mean age of 66.1 years). 73.7% of patients were older than 60 years. 67.3%
of patients were overweight or obese (P-value .000*). DM
in42.2%, Cardiac diseases in 48.2%, renal diseases in 207 (43 patients were
on renal dialysis), liver cirrhosis in 34 patients. 56.7% of the patients
were in ASA- class III and IV and it had a positive correlation with age
(P-value .000*). Other site of infection found in 51.7%
as a possible source of infection. 51.2% neurological deficit was found at
the presentation; increased with age (P-value .001*),
infected spinal region (P-value .000). Lumbar spine in 67%,
cervical spine in 7.5% and in 11 patients SIJ. Multifocal was detected in
11.3%; with renal insufficiency in 35 patients (P-value
.003*), other sites of infection in (P-value .003*). The
commonest type of infection was pyogenic in 95.6%, fungal infection in 6
patients, TB in 14. Mixed infection in 26 patients (4.3%). MRSA in 30
patients of them). Gram-negative organisms in 45 patients (7.5%); E. coli in
20 of them. Discussion: The elderly patients are more
susceptible to spinal infections due to the associated comorbidities and
immunocompromise than the other age groups. Thanks to the advent of various
techniques which helped to improve the diagnostic efficiency to early
diagnose these cases and to isolate various causative organisms in spinal
infections and hence improve the prognosis of the disease in the recent
years. Yet, even with improved diagnosis tools and procedures, the delay in
diagnosis remains an important issue. This review aims to highlight the
importance of a methodological attitude towards accurate and prompt
diagnosis of spinal infections. The introduction of PCR as well as special
media for organism culture, especially in patients with low inflammatory
parameters, can facilitate the identification of the causative organism and
reduce the number of culture with ‘No Growth’.

## 295

## A036: Standardising Post Operative Care Documentation Practices in Spinal
Surgery

Raveen Jayasuriya

1

, Lucy Amos

1

, Rye Yap

1

, Michael Athanassacopoulos

1

, Lee Breakwell

1

, Neil Chiverton

1

, Ashley Cole

1

, Marcel Ivanov

1

, Rex Michael

1

, Shreya Srinivas

1

, and James Tomlinson

1

1

Sheffield Teaching Hospitals NHS Foundation Trust, Spinal Surgery
Service, Sheffield, United Kingdom

Introduction: In the United Kingdom’s National Health Service
the structure of a regular healthcare team is no longer the case. There are
an increasing number of junior doctors, nurses and physiotherapists
cross-covering speciality teams, and increasing use of locum staff and
regular shift changes. Comprehensively documented post-operative care
instructions are more imperative than ever to ensure patient safety, enhance
recovery, and even potentially reduce length of stay after major spinal
surgery.The Royal College of Surgeon’s Good Surgical Practice guide promotes
“Detailed post-op care instructions”, but no published standard exists for
what minimum “detail” is required. In a speciality as highly litigious as
spinal surgery, we as a community should have minimum standard for
post-operative care documentation. This quality improvement project
demonstrated how we used 4 audit cycles, reviewing 200 operations notes,
over a 24 months period to make a simple and effective change to our
centre’s post-operative care documentation practices. Methods:
1) identify the minimum dataset expected in post-operative care
documentation, 2) audit our current practice, 3) successfully implement a
change department wide, 4) re-audit at 3, 12 and 24 months
post-implementation, 5) questionnaire to review change implemented.
Results: Stage 1: A consensus from all 7
consultant spinal surgeons identified 15 criteria, including important
negatives, deemed as mandatory in all major elective and trauma spinal
post-operative care documentation. Stage 2: Baseline audit (n =
50 operation notes) observed >75% compliance in only 4 criteria, 50-75%
compliance in 1 criterion, and <50% compliance for 10 criteria. This data
was presented to the 7 consultants, and the unexpected poor documentation
compliance justified Stage 3. Stage 3: A post-operative
instruction template was designed based on the 15 key criteria, which could
be embedded within the existing IT system. It allowed continued use of
existing operative templates, with the addition of a non-overwriting suffix
requiring only two mouse clicks. Existing templates were not overwritten to
respect autonomy. Template had a “delete as appropriate” format. Stage
4: Re-audit at 3 months demonstrated improved compliance to
>75% in 7 criteria, and 50-75% compliance in 7 criteria, and <50% in 1
criterion. Re-audit cycle at 12 months showed that compliance has not only
been maintained but continued to improve, with >75% compliance in 8
criteria, and 50-75% compliance in 7 criteria. Feedback from ward staff
(Juniors Doctors/Nurses/Physiotherapists) was highly supportive of the
template introduced. Re-audit at 24 months demonstrated compliance of
>75% in 7 criteria, and 50-75% compliance in 8 criteria. This subtle
decline prompted Stage 5. Stage 5: Questionnaire of template
usage identified problems criteria response options, and lack of awareness
of template by newly appointed consultants and registrars.
Conclusion: We successfully changed documentation practices
by a) achieving a consensus first, b) a “shock and awe” moment to highlight
existing poor documentation, c) implementing a change which fit easily into
existing systems, d) respecting autonomy rather than enforcing change and e)
an iterative process to ensure template was fit for purpose. We recommend
our 15-point template as a step towards standardisation of post-operative
care documentation.

## OP05: Degenerative Lumbar/Surgical Complications

## 343

## A037: Risk Factors for Reoperation and Joint Replacement Surgery After
Short-Segment Spinal Cord Surgeries for Lumbar Degenerative Disc Disease: A
Population Based Cohort Study

Meng-Huang Wu

1

, Christopher Wu

2

, Jiann-Her Lin

3

, Ching-Yu Lee

1

, Tsung-Jen Huang

1

, Yi-Chen Hsieh

4

, and Li-Nien Chien

4

1

Taipei Medical University Hospital, Department of Orthopedics,
Taipei, Taiwan

2

College of Medicine, Taipei Medical University, Taipei,
Taiwan

3

Taipei Medical University Hospital, Neurosurgery, Taipei,
Taiwan

4

Taipei Medical University, Taipei, Taiwan

Introduction: Short-segment lumbar spinal surgery is the most
commonly performed procedure for treatment of degenerative disc disease.
However, population-based data regarding reoperation and joint replacement
surgeries after short-segment lumbar spinal surgery is limited.
Material and Methods: The study was a retrospective cohort
design using Taiwan National Health Insurance Research Database for data
collection. Patients diagnosed with lumbar disc disease and first received
lumbar discectomy between 2002 and 2013. The Kaplan-Meier method estimated
the incidence of 1 year reoperation and joint replacement surgery. Cox
proportional hazard regression examined risk factors associated with
reoperation. Subgroup analysis were also performed for the reoperation.
Results: A total of 90,105 patients received lumbar
discectomy surgery (29,719 patients: fusion with fixation group, 2897
patients: fusion without fixation, 57,489 patients: non-fusion group). The
incidence of 1 year reoperation and joint replacement surgery
for hip and knee was .27, .04, and .04 per 100 person-month, respectively.
Compared to fusion with fixation group, fusion without fixation and
non-fusion group had a higher risk of reoperation, with an adjusted hazard
ratio of 2.3 (95% confidence interval [CI]: 1.76-3.02) and 4.12 (95% CI:
3.57-4.76), respectively. Risk factors for reoperation include fusion
without fixation, non-fusion surgery, age >45 years, male gender,
diabetes, Charlson Comorbidity Index = 0, lowest social economic status, and
steroid use history. Conclusion: Non-fusion surgery and spinal
fusion without fixation had higher risk for reoperation compared to spinal
fusion with fixation. Higher reoperation risk should be explained to
patients who will receive non-fusion surgery even though the risk is
low.

## 680

## A038: Prevalence of Occult Infections in Primary Posterior Instrumented
Spinal Susion

Jessica Dorilio1, Daniel Alicea1, Christina Dowe1, Tucker Callanan1,
Nicole Utah1, Antonio Brecevich1, Fedan Avrumova1, Andrew Sama1, Darren
Lebl

1

, Frank Cammisa

1

, and Celeste Abjornson

1

1

Hospital for Special Surgery, Spine Surgery, New York, USA

Introduction: Occult bacteria have been linked to deep and
chronic infections in spine surgery. These organisms are commensal to dermal
and deeper tissue layers, including the intervertebral disc and bone. This
study assesses the colonization rate of occult bacteria from various layers
traversed during standard surgical spine exposure. We hypothesize that
standard surgical skin preparation nor preoperative antibiotics properly
access and eradicate these organisms prior to primary spine surgery.
Methods: Fifty-four consecutive patients undergoing primary
instrumented lumbar spine surgery were prospectively enrolled. All patients
received preoperative antibiotics and skin preparation with povidone-iodine
(Betadine) or chlorhexidine-gluconate (ChloraPrep). Culture samples were
subsequently obtained from the superficial skin, dermal wound-edge following
incision, hypodermis, and the vertebral pedicle prior to instrumentation
implantation. Control culture samples were taken from the scalpel prior to
incision. Results: A total of 525 culture samples were
obtained, and samples were positive in 33.3% of patients (18/54).
Culture-positive patients had on average 3.1 positive samples per case.
Superficial skin samples were positive in 13.0% (n = 7), dermal layer
samples in 16.7% (n = 9), hypodermis samples in 13.0% (n = 7), and vertebral
samples in 20.4% (n = 11) of cases. All control samples taken of the scalpel
prior to incision were culture-negative. C. acnes was the
most common organism isolated, in 83.3% of culture-positive cases. Factors
protective against positive culture results included female gender
(P = .007; odds ratio, .06; 95% confidence interval,
.01-.43) and ChloraPrep utilization (P = .014; odds ratio,
.04; 95% confidence interval, .01-.39). Discussion: Occult
bacteria was detected in one third of patients undergoing primary
instrumented spine surgery. Deep culture samples of the vertebral pedicle
were more often positive than dermal layer samples. The data collected
supports our hypothesis that occult bacteria persist in the skin and deeper
tissue layers perioperatively, regardless of the efforts made by
preoperative skin preparation and prophylactic antibiotics.

## 1193

## A039: Reoperation and Long-Term Clinical Consequences Following
Single-Segment Surgery for Meyerding Grade 1 Degenerative Lumbar
Spondylolisthesis

Andrew Chan

1

, Erica Bisson

2

, Mohamad Bydon

3

, Steven Glassman

4

, Kevin Foley

5

, Christopher Shaffrey

6

, Eric Potts

7

, Mark Shaffrey

8

, Domagoj Coric

9

, John Knightly

10

, Paul Park

11

, Michael Wang

12

, Kai-Ming Fu

13

, Jonathan Slotkin

14

, Anthony Asher

9

, Michael Virk

13

, Panagiotis Kerezoudis

3

, Mohammed Alvi

3

, Jian Guan

2

, Regis Haid

15

, and Praveen Mummaneni

1

1

University of California, San Francisco, San Francisco, USA

2

University of Utah, Salt Lake City, USA

3

Mayo Clinic, Rochester, USA

4

Norton Leatherman Spine Center, Louisville, USA

5

Semmes-Murphey Neurologic and Spine Institute, Memphis, USA

6

Duke University, Durham, USA

7

Goodman Campbell Brain and Spine, Indianapolis, USA

8

University of Virginia, Charlottesville, USA

9

Carolina Neurosurgery & Spine Associates, Charlotte,
USA

10

Atlantic Neurosurgical Specialists, Morristown, USA

11

University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, USA

12

University of Miami, Miami, USA

13

Weill Cornell Medical Center, New York, USA

14

Geisinger Health, Danville, USA

15

Atlanta Brain and Spine Care, Atlanta, USA

Introduction: There is conflicting evidence whether surgical
approach (decompression alone versus decompression with fusion) impacts
reoperation rates following surgery for lumbar spondylolisthesis. Here, we
utilize the prospective QOD registry to investigate reoperations following
surgery. Material and Methods: We studied 608 patients
undergoing elective single-segment spine surgery for degenerative grade 1
lumbar spondylolisthesis. Baseline through latest follow-up data (at least
greater than 2 years) were collected. Reoperations were recorded that were
deemed related to the index surgery. Results: Four-hundred
sixty eight (77.0%) patients underwent fusion [140 (23.0%) underwent
decompression alone]. The overall reoperation rate was 6.9% (42 of 608
patients with 44 reoperations). There were a similar proportion of
reoperations for decompression and fusion cohorts (9.3% vs 6.2%,
P = .21). There were significantly more reoperations
within 30 days for the fusion cohort (P = .02), whereas
there were significantly more reoperations from 30 days to 1 year for the
decompression cohort (P = .01). There were no significant
differences at other time points (P > .05). In adjusted
analyses, reoperations were independently associated with a decreased odds
of reaching ODI minimal clinically important difference (MCID) (defined as
14.3 improvement) (adjusted OR = .4, 95%CI(.2-.7), p =
.003), inferior change in ODI (adjusted β = 10.1, 95%CI(4.5-15.7),
P < .001), NRS Back Pain (NRS-BP) (adjusted β = 1.1,
95%CI(0.1-2.1), p = .03), NRS Leg Pain (NRS-LP) (adjusted β
= 1.6, 95%CI(.6-2.5), P < .001), EQ-5D (adjusted β =
-.07, 95%CI(-.14- -.003), P = .04), and NASS Satisfaction
(adjusted OR = 3.1, 95%CI(1.7-5.5), P < .001) at latest
follow up. In a subgroup analysis of the cohort receiving decompression and
fusion, reoperations remained independently associated with a decreased odds
of reaching ODI MCID (adjusted P = .001), lower NASS
satisfaction (adjusted P = .003), and inferior change in
ODI (adjusted p < .001), NRS-BP (adjusted
P = .006), NRS-LP (adjusted P <
.001), and EQ-5D (adjusted P = .001). For the subgroup
receiving decompression alone, reoperation occurrence was not associated
with significantly different outcomes at 24 months (adjusted
p > .05, all comparisons). Conclusion:
Twenty-four months following surgery, decompression surgery alone was
associated with a higher reoperation rate (9.3% vs 6.2%) compared to
decompression with fusion, though the result was not statistically
significant. Fusions had a higher rate of reoperation 30 days following
surgery, whereas decompression surgery had a higher rate between 30 days and
1 year. Reoperations, particularly when they occur for patients receiving
decompression and fusion, negatively impacted patient satisfaction.

## 1430

## A040: The Effect of Total Hip Arthroplasty on Lumbar Pain and Sagittal
Balance of the Spine: A Prospective Observational Study

Helder Fonte

1

, Melissa Silva

2

, Carolina Luísa Lemos

2

, and Ricardo Rodrigues-Pinto

1,2

1

Spinal Unit (UVM), Department of Orthopaedics, Centro Hospitalar
Universitário do Porto, Porto, Portugal

2

Instituto de Ciências Biomédicas Abel Salazar, Porto,
Portugal

Introduction: Hip-Spine Syndrome (HSS) can occur in patients
with back pain symptoms secondary to pathological changes in the hip.
Patients develop a fixed flexion of the hip, pelvic anteversion and lumbar
hyperlordosis, leading to dislocation or overload on the posterior lumbar
facets which is responsible for pain due to the mechanical stress. This
paper aims to prospectively evaluate the effect of hip arthroplasty on hip
and back pain and to analyze the sagittal balance of the spine in patients
submitted to hip arthroplasty. Material: A prospective study
was carried out to evaluate the changes in lumbar pain and sagittal balance
on patients undergoing total hip arthroplasty. Clinical and radiographic
data were collected preoperative and at 2, 6 and 12 months postoperative,
using Visual Analog Scale (VAS) to assess hip and low back pain, Harris Hip
Score (HHS) and Oswestry Disability Index (ODI). The radiographic evaluation
included the measurement of pelvic index (PI), pelvic tilt (PT), sacral
slope (SS) and sagittal vertical axis (SVA). Results:
Thirty-one patients were included. Hip VAS score decreased from 7.45 ± 1.39
preoperative to 4.58 ± 1.03 (P < .001) at 2 months and
to 2.95 ± 2.04 (P = .006) at 12 months. Low back VAS
decreased from 5.74 ± 2.02 preoperative to 4.48 ± 1,29 at 2 months
(P < .001) and to 3.09 ± 2.37 at 12 months
(P = .023). HHS had an average value of 44.35 ± 9.74
preoperative increasing to 55.00 ± 10.81 (P < .001) at
2 months and to 72.25 ± 13.24 (P < .001) at 12 months.
ODI revealed a pre-operative average disability of 45.03 ± 11.90 with a
decrease to 35.94 ± 10.50 (p < .001) at 2 months and to
21.10 ± 15.94 (P = .001) at 12 months. Radiographic
pre-operative evaluation found a mean PI of 58.88° ± 14.36, PT of 18.12° ±
9.95, SS of 40.63° ± 6.95 and SVA of 19.47 ± 30.16 mm. At 2 months, PI
(63.91° ± 11.51, P = .015) and SS (45.61° ± 7.85,
P = .008) significantly increased. PT was 17.87° ± 7.81
(P = .446) and SVA had a tendency to increase (27.79 ±
28.87, P = .061). One year after the surgery, PI (52.38° ±
13.60, P = .004) and SS (36.89° ± 10.52, P
= .001) had significantly decreased, as the vertical sagittal axis (11.57 ±
33.31 mm, P = .023). Conclusion: This study
showed that patients suffering for concomitant severe primary hip
osteoarthritis and low back pain show a significant improvement of low back
pain and disability which continues to improve at 1 year. While no
definitive conclusions can be drawn concerning sagittal spine alignment, SVA
worsened in the first 2 months after hip arthroplasty, possibly because at
this stage patients are still starting to discontinue walking aids, but
significantly improved thereafter, obtaining a better sagittal alignment
than pre-operatively. In conclusion, hip arthroplasty improves not only hip
but also back pain and disability. Improvement in sagittal alignment may
contribute to this clinical improvement.

## 1530

## A041: Spinal Alignment Comparison for Lateral Versus Supine L5-S1 ALIF in
the Treatment of Patients with Degenerative Conditions of the Lumbar
Spine

Kaveh Khajavi

1

, Cristiano Menezes

2

, Brett Braly

3

, and J Alex Thomas

4

1

Georgia Spine & Neurosurgery Center, Atlanta, USA

2

Columna Institute, Belo Horizonte, Brazil

3

The Spine Clinic of Oklahoma City, Oklahoma City, USA

4

Atlantic Neurosurgical and Spine Specialists, Wilmington,
USA

Introduction: Anterior lumbar interbody fusion (ALIF) is a
widely accepted technique for lumbar fusion. The traditional ALIF (S-ALIF)
approach utilizes a supine patient position with the surgeon approaching
L5-S1 through a variety of incision starting points. With the introduction
of lateral single-position surgery techniques that allow for lateral (e.g.,
XLIF) procedures from L4 5 and above and posterior pedicle screw fixation
without prone patient repositioning, a modified ALIF via an anterolateral
retroperitoneal approach (lateral ALIF [L ALIF]) permits access to L5 S1 to
extend anterior column access from a single position across the
thoracolumbar to sacral spine. Objectives: The objective of
this multicenter, retrospective study was to assess differences in
spinopelvic parameters (lumbar lordosis, segmental lordosis, restoration of
disc space height, and reduction of spondylolisthesis (when present))
following L-ALIF as compared to S-ALIF at L5 S1. Methods:
Radiographs from 479 consecutive patients who underwent L5-S1 L-ALIF (n =
317) or S ALIF (n = 162) for degenerative lumbar conditions were included.
Patients treated at L4-5 and above with other single-position interbody
fusion and posterior fixation techniques were included in the analysis.
Lumbar lordosis, L5-S1 segmental lordosis, L5-S1 disc space height, and
reduction of L5-S1 spondylolisthesis were measured on preoperative and
postoperative lateral X-ray images. Of the 479 patients included in this
study, 276 (58%) patients were female, the mean age at surgery was
56.9 years, and the mean body mass index was 29.5 kg/m2.
Results: From preoperative to postoperative, mean lumbar
lordosis improved by 5.0° and 4.9° in L ALIF and S ALIF groups, respectively
(P = .874). Over the same period of time, the mean
L5-S1 segmental lordosis also improved by 6.4° and 4.9° in L-ALIF and S ALIF
groups, respectively (P = .1149). The L5-S1 disc space
height also increased from preoperative to postoperative by 6.5 mm and 6.3
mm in L-ALIF and S-ALIF groups, respectively (P = .596) and
the spondylolisthesis slip reduced by 1.4 mm and 2.2 mm in L ALIF and S ALIF
groups, respectively (P = .146). Conclusion:
The results of this study show that L5-S1 ALIF in both lateral and supine
positions led to postoperative improvement in segmental lordosis, overall
lumbar lordosis, restoration of disc space height at L5 S1, and reduction of
spondylolisthesis. Overall improvement in radiographic outcomes following
both L-ALIF and S-ALIF procedures suggests that L-ALIF appears to be a
reasonable alternative to S-ALIF for L5 S1 interbody fusions. Further, these
results suggest that single-position techniques (e.g., XLIF and ALIF and
posterior fixation, all in the lateral position) result in
substantially.

## 678

## A042: The Impact of Modifiable Risk Factors on Post-Operative
Complications Following Lumbar Spine Fusion

Andy Ton

1

, Shane Shahrestani

1

, Xiao Chen

1

, Alexander Ballatori

1

, Jeffrey C. Wang

1

, and Zorica Buser

1

1

Keck School of Medicine, University of Southern California,
Department of Orthopaedic Surgery, Los Angeles, USA

Introduction: The increasing prevalence of lumbar spinal fusion
has been accompanied by an increase in costly and untimely readmissions.
Many studies emphasize perioperative and intraoperative care, few highlight
the role of modifiable risk factors on postoperative outcomes in spine
surgery. Therefore, this study explores the impact of modifiable risk
factors (MRFs) on complications, costs, and readmission rates at 30, 90, and
180 days following lumbar spine fusion. Material and Methods:
In a retrospective cohort analysis, patients with lumbar spine fusions were
identified within the 2016-2017 Nationwide Readmissions Database (NRD) using
ICD-10 codes. Patients were stratified by the following MRFs: Alcohol use,
tobacco/nicotine use, malnourishment, dyslipidemia, and primary
hypertension. ICD-10 codes for MRFs were confirmed through comparison with
prior studies analyzing MRFs. Differences in complications, non-elective
readmission rates, costs, and length of stay (LOS) were compared between
MRFs and the non-MRF group. Exclusion criteria included surgical indications
for trauma and neoplasms and malabsorption syndromes. Statistical analysis
was conducted using Tukey multiple comparisons of means, one-way ANOVA, Wald
testing, and unpaired Welch two-sample t-tests. Predictive modeling was
performed to demonstrate increased risk of readmission per additional MRF.
Results: The final analysis included 297,579 patients
(56.5% female, 43.5% male) with an overall mean age of 56.72 +
16.53 years. At 30 and 90 days, patients with malnutrition
(6.57%, P = .016; 12.87%, P < .001),
dyslipidemia (6.26%, P < .001; 10.78%, < .001), and
primary hypertension (6.07%, P < .001; 10.26%,
P < .001) had significantly greater readmission
rates than patients without MRFs (4.84%; 8.01%). At 180 days readmission,
all MRFs had significantly greater readmission rates relative to patients
without MRFs (11.01%) as shown: alcohol use (18.06%, p =
.018), tobacco/nicotine use (13.22%, P = .002),
malnourishment (18.47%, P < .001), dyslipidemia (15.37%,
P < .001), and primary hypertension (14.50%,
P < .001). The dyslipidemia cohort demonstrated
significantly greater rates of myocardial infarction (MI) and acute kidney
injury (AKI) at 30 days compared to patients without MRFs, primary
hypertension, and tobacco/nicotine use (all P < .001)
and at 90 and 180 days compared to all MRF groups (all P
< .05). Alcohol usage was associated with a significantly greater
mortality rate compared to all MRF groups at 90 days (all P
< .05). The average LOS and cost of index admission was significantly
different between all groups (P < .001) except when
comparing dyslipidemia and the non-MRF group. Malnutrition was associated
with the highest average LOS (9.07 + 13.29 days) and cost of index admission
($59,936 + $57,341 USD). Predictive modeling showed increases of 0.77%,
1.70%, and 2.44% risk of readmission at 30, 90, and 180 days respectively
per additional MRF (all P < .001).
Conclusion: These findings highlight the negative impact
each MRF has on postoperative outcomes following lumbar spinal fusion.
Further longitudinal research using prospective multicenter data is
necessary to comprehensively outline the effects of various MRFs on lumbar
spine fusion outcomes.

## 535

## A043: Responsiveness of Depression and its Influence on Surgical Outcomes
of Lumbar Degenerative Disease

Asdrubal Falavigna

1

, Orlando Righesso Neto

2

, Alisson R. Teles

2

, Sabrina Busnello

2

, and Yan Assunção Bicca

2

1

University of Caxias do Sul (UCS), Health Sciences Postgraduate
Program, Caxias do Sul, Brazil

2

University of Caxias do Sul (UCS), Cell Therapy Laboratory and
Clinical Studies and Basic Models of Spinal Disorders Laboratory, Caxias
do Sul, Brazil

Introduction: an association between spinal disorders and
psychological disturbances has been reported in recent years. Also, the
presence of preoperative depression has been shown to negatively affect
surgical outcomes for spine surgery. Surgical treatment of spine disease may
contribute to the capacity to recover from depression. Given the importance
of identifying prognostic factors for patients undergoing spine surgery, the
present study aims to demonstrate the responsiveness of depression after
surgery for lumbar degenerative disease and to verify the impact of this
condition on surgical outcomes. Material and Methods: a
prospective cohort study with 91 patients with lumbar degenerative diseases
who were evaluated preoperatively, at 30 days and 1 year postoperatively.
Primary outcome measure was the evolution of depression between the
follow-ups and its correlation with satisfaction. Depression was assessed
with Beck Depression Inventory. According to depression responsiveness,
patients were classified into four groups: NN = no depression; ND = normal
during the preoperative period and depression within 1 year; DN = depression
during the preoperative period and normal within 1 year; DD = depression
during the preoperative period and within 1 year. Results:
prevalence of preoperative depression was 28.6 % and 17.6 % within 1 year
postoperatively. Most patients (65.4 %) with depression in the preoperative
period recovered postoperatively. Poor preoperative health-related quality
of life (HRQoL) measures were associated with higher rates of responsiveness
of depression during the follow-up. Patients with depression at the 1 year
postoperative follow-up had a worse functional outcome. Patients who
improved from depression had similar outcome to those without depression.
Dissatisfaction within 1 year postoperatively was greater in patients who
become depressed after surgery and remain depressed at 1 year follow-up (NN
= 8.8 %; ND = 42.9 %; DN = 17.6 %; DD = 44.4 %; P = .012).
Conclusion: most patients with depression in the
preoperative recover within 1 year postoperatively.
Responsiveness of depression is associated with surgical outcomes. The
presence of depression after the surgical treatment, independent of when it
starts, had a major negative impact on prognosis.

## 1644

## A044: Physical Therapy on Postoperative Day Zero Following Lumbar Spine
Surgery Decreases Length of Stay

Blaine Manning

1

, Casey Fogarty

1

, Suryanshi Rawat

1

, Stefan Hanish

1

, Andy Lee

1

, Ahdarsh Vallabhaneni

1

, Nathan Cherian

1

, Muhammad Mirza

1

, Theodore Choma

1

, and Don Moore

1

1

University of Missouri-Columbia, Department of Orthopaedic Surgery,
Columbia, USA

Introduction: Postoperative length of stay (LOS) is a major
factor in overall cost for lumbar spine surgery, and its duration often
depends on discharge clearance from physical therapy (PT). The study goal
was to compare postoperative LOS for lumbar spine surgery patients who
initiated formal PT on POD 0 versus POD 1. Methods: A
retrospective review was conducted of 1870 patients who underwent elective
1-2 level laminectomy +/- posterior lumbar fusion +/- instrumentation by 13
spine surgeons at 1 institution from 2011-2019. Patients were categorized by
timing of postoperative PT, with POD 0 defined as within 24 hours after
surgery. Patients were excluded if they had incomplete data, admitted under
a trauma visit, admitted to the ICU between surgery and discharge for
observation or complications, did not see PT before discharge, or had
qualifying surgery at >2 levels. Demographics, perioperative variables,
and postoperative variables were collected. Statistical methods for
categorical bivariate analysis included Chi-square test of independence and
Fisher’s Exact test, if Chi-square assumptions were not met. For continuous
outcomes, normality was tested using a Shapiro-Wilk test and a two-sample
t-test or Wilcoxon Rank Sum test was used to determine differences across
POD groups. Data were analyzed using R with two-sided P
< .05 considered significant. Results: Of 1870 patients, 336
met inclusion criteria. Formal PT was initiated on POD 0 for 202 patients,
and POD 1 for 134 patients. There was no significant difference between POD
0 and POD 1 groups (respectively) regarding: age (57.9 +/- 14.4 years vs
58.4 +/- 14.3 years, P = 1.00), gender (45.5% male vs 52.2%
male, P = .28), insurance type (42.1% Medicare vs 44%
Medicare, P = .58), BMI (33.2 +/- 7.8 kg/m2 vs
31.7 +/- 5.8 kg/m2, P = .23), or discharge
destination (home discharge 88.6% vs 85.1%, P = .61). The
difference in LOS (9.9 hours) was large enough to be of statistical and
clinical significance (P = .000001214) (median 65.3 hours
for POD 0 PT [interquartile (IQ) range, 43.7-74.6] vs 74.2 hours for POD 1
PT [IQ range 51.6-99.8]; p = .000001214). The difference in
distribution of postoperative nights spent in the hospital was also
clinically and statistically significant between POD 0 and POD 1 groups,
respectively (p = .002265922) (1 night stay 21.3 % vs 8.3%,
2-3 night stay 56.4% vs 54.9%, 4 or more nights 22.3% vs 36.8%).
Conclusion: Early initiation of PT has been proposed to
facilitate discharge following lumbar spine surgery. In our study, lumbar
spine patients who initiated physical therapy (PT) on postoperative day
(POD) 0 demonstrated clinically and statistically significant earlier
discharge than patients who initiated PT on POD 1. Given the role of LOS in
quality metrics and reimbursement, it remains important for orthopedic spine
surgeons to optimize postoperative LOS. A multidisciplinary approach which
includes physical therapists, along with early formal postoperative PT, may
facilitate discharge following lumbar spine surgery.

## 1864

## A045: Preoperative Cross-Sectional Area of Psoas Muscle Impacts
Short-Term Functional Outcomes After Posterior Lumbar SuSrgery

Hikari Urakawa

1

, Kosuke Sato

1

, Avani Vaishnav

1

, Ryan Lee

1

, Chirag Chaudhary

1

, Jung Kee Mok

1

, Yoshihiro Katsuura

1

, and Sheeraz Qureshi

1

1

Hospital for Special Surgery, New York, USA

Introduction: The decrease of psoas cross-sectional area has
been reported to be a predictor of increased risk of mortality and
complications in various surgery including spine surgery. However, it is
unclear which level should be selected to measure it on MRI and whether the
psoas size impacts postoperative functional outcomes in lumbar surgery. The
aim of this study was to (1) elucidate the optimal level for the measurement
by examining the inter-rater reliability at each level and (2) investigate
the impact of psoas cross-sectional area on short-term functional outcomes
of posterior lumbar surgery. Material and Methods: Patients who
underwent minimally invasive posterior lumbar surgery for degenerative
diseases with more than 6 months follow-up were included in this study. The
cross-sectional area of psoas muscle was measured at each intervertebral
level on T2-weighted axial images of preoperative MRI by 2 observers.
Normalized total psoas area (NTPA) was calculated as total psoas area
normalized to patient height. Intraclass Correlation Coefficient (ICC) was
calculated to evaluate inter-rater reliability of NTPA at each level.
Patient reported outcome measures (PROMs) including ODI, VAS (back, leg),
SF-12 (PCS, MCS) and PROMIS were collected at pre-op, 2 weeks, 6 weeks,
3 months and 6 months. Results: The total of 215 patients were
included in this study. ICC was the highest at L3/4. [ICC .983 (95%CI
.973-.989) at L1/2, .991 (95%CI .986-.994) at L2/3, .992 (95%CI .987-.994)
at L3/4 and .928 (95%CI .893-.952) at L4/5]. Patients were divided into 2
groups [Lower NTPA group (LG) and Higher NTPA group (HG)] at the point of
the sex-specific lowest quartile of NTPA at L3/4 threshold. There were no
significant differences in preoperative PROMs except for SF-12 MCS, however
they were significantly worse in the Low NTPA group at 6vmonths [ODI: LG
23.4 ± 19.9 vs HG 15.0 ± 15.2, P = .014; VAS back: LG 2.8 ±
2.5 vs HG 2.0 ± 2.3, P = .048; VAS leg: LG 2.5 ± 2.5 vs. HG
1.5 ± 2.2, P = .003; SF-12 PCS: LG 39.7 ± 10.9 vs HG 44.2 ±
10.3, P = .012; PROMIS PF: LG 43.9 ± 9.9 vs HG 47.0 ± 8.7,
P = .026)]. In terms of SF-12 MCS, preoperative score
was significantly better in the low NTPA group, however, no significant
differences were found at all postoperative points. Multivariate logistic
regression showed low NTPA was an independent predictor of high ODI (OR =
2.50; 95% CI, 1.23-5.08; P = .011) and VAS leg (OR = 3.85;
95% CI, 1.68-8.81; p = .001) at 6 months.
Conclusion: The decrease of psoas cross-sectional area on
preoperative MRI had a negative impact on short-term functional outcomes of
posterior lumbar surgery for degenerative diseases. Low NTPA was an
independent predictor of high ODI and VAS leg at 6 months. NTPA, which is a
highly reliable and easy to assess, may be useful for a decision making for
more effective treatment based on muscle health in each patient.

## OP06: Adult Deformity-Surgical Management

## 360

## A046: Acute Failure of S2-Alar-Iliac Pelvic Fixation Following Adult
Deformity Correction

Christopher Martin

1

, David Polly

1,2

, Kenneth Holton

1

, Jose San Miguel-Ruiz

1

, Melissa Albersheim

1

, Paul Lender

1

, Jonathan N. Sembrano

1

, Matthew Hunt

2

, and Kristen Jones

2

1

University of Minnesota, Department of Orthopaedic Surgery,
Minneapolis, USA

2

University of Minnesota, Department of Neurosurgery, Minneapolis,
USA

Introduction: Pelvic fixation with S2-alar-iliac (S2AI) screws
is a widely accepted technique to anchor thoracolumbar constructs in adult
deformity surgery. Compared to traditional iliac screws, S2AI screws have
been reported to have lower rates of reoperation and wound complications. To
our knowledge, there are no prior published reports of acute failure
mechanisms of S2AI instrumentation. Material and Methods: We
performed a retrospective review of all fusion surgeries extending from L2
or higher with instrumentation to the pelvis in which S2AI screws were
placed with at least 6 months follow-up between 3/2017 and 6/2019. We
excluded patients under 18 years of age and non-ambulatory patients. Acute
instrumentation failure was defined as any case requiring revision of the
pelvic fixation within 6 months from the index surgery. We reviewed the
demographic and surgical characteristics of each patient, and reviewed
pre-operative and 6 week post-operative radiographs to document the change
in their deformity parameters as well as for the presence of a transitional
lumbo-sacral segment. Results: Failure occurred in 6 of 125
cases (5%), and consisted of either slippage of the rods or displacement of
the set screws from the S2AI tulip head, with resultant kyphotic fracture.
All occurred within 6 weeks post-operatively. Revision with a minimum of 4
rods connecting to 4 pelvic fixation points was successful. 2 of 3 (66%)
patients revised with less fixation sustained a second failure. Failure
patients were younger (56.5 years v. 65 years, p = .03).
The magnitude of surgical correction was higher in the failure cohort
(number of levels fused, change in lumbar lordosis, change in T1-Pelvic
Angle, and change in coronal C7 vertical axis, each P <
.05). In the multivariate analysis, younger patient age and change in lumbar
lordosis were independently associated with increased failure risk
(P < .05 for each). There was a trend towards the
presence of a transitional S1-2 disc being a risk factor (OR = 8.8, 95% CI
.93-82.6). Failure incidence was the same across implant manufacturers
(P = .3). Conclusion: All failures
involved large magnitude correction and resulted from stresses that exceeded
the failure loads of the set plugs in the S2AI tulip, with resultant rod
displacement and kyphotic fractures. Patients with large corrections may
benefit from four total S2AI screws at the time of the index surgery,
particularly if a transitional segment is present. Salvage with a minimum of
4 rods and 4 pelvic fixation points can be successful.

## 1098

## A047: Patient Reported Outcomes After Complex Adult Spinal Deformity
Surgery: 5 year Follow-Up Results of the Scoli-RISK-1 Study

Scott Zuckerman

1

, Meghan Cerpa

1

, Lawrence Lenke

1

, Christopher Shaffrey

2

, Justin Smith

3

, Leah Carreon

4

, Kenneth Man Chee Cheung

5

, Michael Kelly

6

, Michael Fehlings

7

, Christopher Ames

8

, Oheneba Boachie-Adjei

9

, Mark Dekutoski

10

, Khaled Kebaish

11

, Stephen Lewis

12

, Yukihiro Matsuyama

13

, Ferran Pellisé

14

, Yong Qiu

15

, and Frank Schwab

16

1

Columbia University Medical Center, New York, USA

2

Duke, Raleigh, USA

3

University of Virginia, Charlottesville, USA

4

Norton Health, Louisville, USA

5

The University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong, China

6

Washington University, St. Louis, USA

7

University of Toronto, Toronto, Canada

8

University of California San Francisco, San Francisco, USA

9

The FOCOS Hospital, Patang West, Ghana

10

Marshfield Clinic Eau Claire Center, Eau Claire, USA

11

Johns Hopkins, Baltimore, USA

12

University of Toronto, Toronto, USA

13

Hamatsu University, Hamamatsu, Japan

14

Hospital Universitari Vall d’Hebron, Barcelona, USA

15

Affiliated Drum Tower Hospital of Nanjing University Medical School,
Nanjing, China

16

Hospital for Special Surgery, New York, USA

Summary: Comparing baseline to 5 year data following complex
adult spinal deformity (ASD) surgery, significant improvement was seen in
ODI, SF-36 PCS/MCS, SRS-22, and NRS-back pain. In long-term follow-up,
durable and sustained improvement was seen at 5 years in nearly all PROs
however, at 5 years NRS leg pain scores were similar to baseline.
Hypothesis: To prospectively evaluate patient-reported
outcomes (PROs) up to 5 years after complex ASD surgery. Study
Design: Prospective, multicenter, international, observational
Scoli-RISK-1study. Introduction: Long-term patient-reported
outcomes (PROs) after complex adult spinal deformity (ASD) are important yet
sparsely reported. Methods: The Scoli-RISK-1 study enrolled 272
ASD patients undergoing surgery from 15 centers. Inclusion criteria was Cobb
angle of >80, corrective osteotomy for congenital or revision deformity,
and/or 3-column osteotomy. The following PROs were measured prospectively at
intervals up to 5 years: ODI, SF-36 PCS/MCS, SRS-22, NRS back/leg.
Comparisons were made from baseline to, 2 years, and 5 years postoperative.
Mixed effects models were used for analysis in order to account for those
lost to follow-up. Results: Of the 272 patients enrolled, 217
(79.8%) and 77 (28.3%) were seen at 2 years and 5 years. postoperative
respectively. 7 Comparing 5 year to baseline data, significant improvement
was seen in ODI (31.8 vs 45.7, P < .001), SF-36 PCS
(38.3 vs 31.8, P < .001), SF-36 MCS (46.6 vs 42.6,
P = .003), SRS-22 (3.46 vs 2.71, P
< .001), NRS back pain (3.22 vs 5.99, P < .001). Even
though we could see significant improvement in NRS leg pain at 6 weeks,
6 months, and 2 years postoperative (2.46, 2.54, 2.78; P
< .001) at 5 years NRS leg pain was similar to baseline (3.53 vs 3.79,
P = .844). Conclusion: In long-term
follow-up of complex ASD surgical patients, durable and sustained
improvement was seen at 5 years postoperative in nearly all PROs, including
ODI, SF-36 PCS/MCS, SRS-22, and NRS-back pain; however, at 5 years
postoperative NRS leg pain scores were similar to baseline. Take Home
Message: 5 years postoperative in complex ASD patients,
significant improvement was seen ODI, SF-36PCS/MCS, SRS-22, and
NRS-back-pain compared to baseline. Sustained improvement was seen in nearly
all PROs except NRS-leg-pain at 5 years.

## 1106

## A048: Lower Extremity Motor Scores (LEMS) After Complex Adult Spinal
Deformity Surgery: 5 year Follow-Up of the Scoli-RISK-1 Study

Lawrence Lenke

1

, Meghan Cerpa

1

, Scott Zuckerman

1

, Christopher Shaffrey

2

, Justin Smith

3

, Leah Carreon

4

, Kenneth Man Chee Cheung

5

, Michael Kelly

6

, Michael Fehlings

7

, Christopher Ames

8

, Oheneba Boachie-Adjei

9

, Mark Dekutoski

10

, Khaled Kebaish

11

, Stephen Lewis

12

, Yukihiro Matsuyama

13

, Yong Qiu

14

, Ferran Pellisé

15

, and Frank Schwab

16

1

Columbia University Medical Center, New York, USA

2

Duke, Raleigh, USA

3

University of Virginia, Charlottesville, USA

4

Norton Health, Louisville, USA

5

The University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong, China

6

Washington University, St. Louis, USA

7

University of Toronto, Toronto, Canada

8

University of California San Francisco, San Francisco, USA

9

The FOCOS Hospital, Patang West, Ghana

10

Marshfield Clinic Eau Claire Center, Eau Claire, USA

11

Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, USA

12

University of Toronto, Toronto, USA

13

Hamamatsu University School of Medicine, Hamamatsu, Japan

14

Affiliated Drum Tower Hospital of Nanjing University Medical School,
Nanjing, China

15

Hospital Universitari Vall d’Hebron, Barcelona, Spain

16

Hospital for Special Surgery, New York, USA

Summary: At 5 years postoperative from complex ASD surgery there
was no significant changes in LEMS compared to baseline. Mean LEMS remained
stable following the 6 months visit at both 2 and 5 years follow-up for all
patients reviewed. However, 8/75 (10.7%) patients did experience a worsening
in LEMS in the 2-5 year period. These results highlight the importance of
long-term follow-up to 5 years postoperative to truly evaluate neurologic
motor function following complex ASD surgery. Hypothesis: To
prospectively evaluate lower extremity motor function (LEMS) before and at
5 years following surgical correction of complex ASD. Study
Design: Prospective, multicenter, international observational
study (Scoli-Risk-1). Introduction: Neurologic complications
after surgery for complex adult spinal deformity (ASD) are important, yet
outcomes are heterogeneously reported and long-term follow-up is sparse.
Methods: The Scoli-RISK-1 study enrolled 272 ASD patients
undergoing surgery from 15 international centers. Inclusion criteria was
Cobb angle of >80°, corrective osteotomy for congenital or revision
deformity, and/or 3-column osteotomy (76% of all patients). Change in LEMS
over a 5 year follow-up was analyzed. Results: Of the 272
patients, follow-up rates were: 271 (99.6%) discharge, 260 (95.6%)
6 weeks, 255 (93.8%) 6 months, 217 (79.8%) 2 year, and 77
(28.3%) 5 years postoperatively. Comparing all patients who returned for
follow-up, rates of postoperative LEMS decline compared to preoperative
function were 23.0% at discharge, 17.1% at 6 weeks, 9.9% at 6 months, 10.0%
at 2 years and 9.3% at 5 years. At 5 years there was no significant changes
in LEMS compared to baseline (49.0 vs 48.4 P = .163). Mean
LEMS remained quite stable following the 6 months visit at both 2 and
5 years follow-up (49.0 vs 48.7 vs 49.0). However, 8/75 (10.7%) patients did
experience a worsening in LEMS in the 2-5 years follow-up period.
Conclusion: After complex ASD surgery, mean LEMS function
stabilized after 6 months postoperative until the 5 year follow-up with
10.0% of returning patients still having lower LEMS than preoperatively. In
addition, subtle LEMS decline occurred in 10.7% of returning patients during
the 2 year to 5 year follow-up period. These results document long-term
5 year follow-up of LEMS following complex ASD surgery and the importance of
assessing both individual and group average LEMS. Take Home
Message: No significant changes in LEMS were seen at
5 years-postop as mean LEMS stabilized at 6 months, 2 and 5 years follow-up.
However, 10.7% of individual patients experienced worsening in LEMS in the
2-5 years-period.

## 1403

## A049: Evaluation of the Reliability and Reproducibility of Roussouly
Classification for Lumbar Lordosis Types

Camila Yamazato

1

, Gustavo Ribeiro

2

, Fábio Chaud de Paula

2

, Ramon Soares

2

, Paulo Daniel Sousa Santa Cruz

1

, Nelson Astur

2,3

, Delio E. Martins

2,4

, Marcelo Wajchenberg

1,2

, and Michel Kanas

1,2

1

Federal University of Sao Paulo, Ortopedia, São Paulo,
Brazil

2

Hospital Israelita Albert Einstein, Ortopedia, São Paulo,
Brazil

3

Santa Casa de Sao Paulo, Ortopedia, São Paulo, Brazil

4

Universidade Anhembi Morumbi, São Paulo, Brazil

Introduction: The type of lumbar lordosis is associated with
symptoms, propensity to degeneration and post-surgical prognosis in adult
patients. Roussouly et al. proposed a classification for types of lumbar
lordosis in 2005, which is widely accepted both in research and in clinical
practice. However, there is still a lack of validation for its reliability
and reproducibility. The objective of the research was to determine the
reliability and reproducibility, intra and interevaluator of Roussouly’s
classification for the types of lumbar lordosis. Material and
Methods: The measurements were made in 104 panoramic radiographs
of the spine in lateral view, of male individuals aged between 18 and
40 years old. Using the Surgimap® software, six examiners with
different levels of experience measured the spinopelvic angles and
classified the type of lordosis according Roussouly’s classification. After
1 month, the measurements were taken again; intra and interevaluator
agreements were calculated using the Kappa Fleiss test.
Results: The study showed positive evidence regarding the
reproducibility of the Roussouly classification, with the Kappa Fleiss test
for intraevaluator agreement between reasonable to almost perfect
(.307-.827), and interevaluator between moderate (.43) and reasonable
(.369). The most experienced evaluators showed greater interevaluator
agreement, ranging from substantial (.619) to moderate (.439).
Conclusion: Roussouly et al. classification for lumbar
lordosis types, demonstrated good reliability and reproducibility, as intra
and interevaluator agreement was considered to be at least reasonable,
reaching substantial to almost perfect levels in some situations. Evaluators
with higher level of experience showed greater agreement.

## 1085

## A050: Adult Degenerative Scoliosis Shares the Same Spino-Pelvic Alignment
as Lumbar Adolescent Idiopathic Scoliosis: A CT-Based and Sex-Age Matched
Controlled Analysis

Steven de Reuver

1

, Philip van der Linden

1

, Moyo Kruyt

1

, Tom Schlosser

1

, and René Castelein

1

1

University Medical Center Utrecht, Department of Orthopedic Surgery,
Utrecht, The Netherlands

Introduction: The mechanical basis of spinal deformities is
becoming better understood. Spino-pelvic morphology is recognized as the key
regulator of spinal biomechanics. Recent research indicates that pelvic
morphology plays a role in which spinal segments may become part of a
scoliotic deformity, especially in different types of Adolescent Idiopathic
Scoliosis (AIS). We hypothesize that the same mechanical influences may play
a role in the development of Adult Degenerative Scoliosis (ADS), located in
the lumbar spine. Therefore, we analyzed an existing database of total-body
CTs obtained for indications not related to the spine, to accurately measure
the differences in Pelvic Incidence (PI) in ADS patients and a sex-age
matched non-scoliotic controls. Material and Methods: CT-scans
of 202 subjects were analyzed: 101 ADS patients were matched to a control
patient of the same sex and closest age. With multi-planar reconstruction
the PI was measured as the angle between the line from the exactly
superimposed femoral-heads-axis to the mid-point of the sacral endplate, and
the perpendicular line from the mid-point of the sacral endplate. For this
method, the intraclass correlation coefficients were .993 for inter- and
.998 for intra-observer reliability. Results: Of the sex-age
matched included subjects, the median age was 68-69 years and
57% were female. In ADS patients the mean Cobb angle was 21° ± 8° and ranged
from 10° to 47. The PI was 54.1 ± 10.8 in ADS patients and 47.7 ± 10.8 in
non-scoliotic controls (p < .001). There was no
difference between sex, a weak correlation between age and PI in both groups
(R = .197-.225; P = .024-.048) and no significant
correlation between PI and the level of the apex (P = .880)
and the length of the scoliotic curve (P = .440).
Conclusion: De novo ADS develops predominantly in the
lumbar spine. This current study showed that he PI in ADS patients is higher
than in non-scoliotic controls, similarly to what is observed in lumbar AIS.
This suggests a similar mechanical basis of both spine deformities.
Spino-pelvic alignment predisposes certain areas within the sagittal
curvatures of the spine to be more prone to develop a scoliotic deformity.
Whether and during which phase in life this will occur, depends on the
mechanical properties of the stabilizers of the spine, predominantly the
discs.

## 919

## A051: Intra-Operative Neurophysiological Monitoring Alters During
Three-Column Osteotomy: Incidence and Risk Factors

Yong Qiu

1

, Benlong Shi

1

, Zezhang Zhu

1

, Dun Li

1

, Zhen Liu

1

, and Yang Li

1

1

Nanjing University Medical School, Najing, China

Introduction: The intra-operative iatrogenic neurological
deficits are always essential concerns for patients undergoing posterior
three-column osteotomy (3CO). However, the incidence and risk factors for
intra-operative neurophysiological monitoring (IONM) alerts during 3CO are
not clear. We aim to analyze the incidence and risk factors of IONM alerts
in patients undergoing 3CO. Materials and Methods:
Retrospective analysis of IONM outcomes in patients undergoing 3CO. Patients
sample: A total of 551 patients (340 M, 211 F, 31.9 ± 15.5 years) with
severe spinal deformity undergoing posterior 3CO were retrospectively
reviewed. The coronal Cobb angle of main curve and sagittal global kyphosis
(GK) were measured on pre-operative standing whole spinal x-rays. The
neurological status at pre-operation, post-operation and the last follow-up
was recorded and the Frankel scores were applied for assessment of
neurological status. Surgical procedures and other factors associated with
IONM alerts were analyzed. The IONM alerts were defined as somatosensory
evoked potentials (SEPs) latency increased >10%, SEPs amplitude decreased
>50%, or motor evoked potentials (MEPs) amplitude decreased >80%.
Comparison analysis between patients with and without IONM alerts was
performed by Chi-square test. Results: A total of 98 (17.8%)
IONM alerts were reported during surgery, including 82 SEPs alerts and 91
MEPs alerts. Positive wake-up test was revealed in 57 (10.3%) patients even
after prompt managements, and new neurological deficits were observed in 50
(9.1%) patients at immediate post-operation. Of the 50 patients with new
neurological deficits at post-operation, the Frankel scores were A in 5
patients, B in 4, C in 9, D in 32. At the last follow-up, the Frankel scores
improved from A to C in 1 patient, from B to D in 2, from C to D in 4, from
C to E in 2, from D to E in 7. The Chi- square test showed that patients
with congenital deformities, GK >90°, vertebral column resection (VCR)
procedure, cervicothoracic/thoracic osteotomy, blood loss >3000 ml,
pre-operative neurological deficit were at a higher risk of IONM alerts.
Conclusions: The incidence of IONM alerts in patients
undergoing 3CO was 17.8%. Congenital deformities, GK >90°, VCR,
cervicothoracic/thoracic osteotomy, blood loss >3000ml and pre-operative
neurological deficit indicated high risk of IONM alerts.

## 1208

## A052: The Efficacy and Safety of Large Diameter Pedicle Screws in Adult
Thoracolumbar Deformity

Paul Park

1

, James Lin

2

, Cole Morrissette

1

, Joseph Osorio

3

, Meghan Cerpa

1

, Ronald A. Lehman

1

, and Lawrence Lenke

1

1

Columbia University Medical Center, New York, USA

2

Mount Sinai, New York, USA

3

University of California San Diego, San Diego, USA

Summary: With the use of the all-posterior approach, screw
pullout strength is a critical factor in adult spinal deformity (ASD)
surgical correction. In our series, using large diameter screws (96% ≥6.0 mm
diameter) placed transpedicularly or juxtapedicularly can be safe without
intraoperative complications. The increased diameter and pullout strength of
these screws allows for excellent correction and maintenance over follow-up.
Hypothesis: Placement of large diameter pedicle screws
(≥6.0 mm) in the thoracolumbar (TL) spine in ASD surgery is safe and can be
done without added complication. Study Design: Retrospective,
Single-center. Introduction: Pedicle screw instrumentation is
the foundation of posterior ASD surgery, and ensuring high screw pullout
strength is critical, especially in osteoporotic bone. It is our practice to
maximize screw diameter to optimize construct integrity. The operative
strategy is to consistently use large diameter (≥6.0 mm) pedicle screws to
expand the pedicle or place screws juxtapedicularly; however, placement of
larger screws can be dangerous, especially in upper lumbar, upper thoracic,
and previously instrumented pedicles, given proximity of adjacent
structures. Methods: ASD patients undergoing a primary
posterior instrumented fusion were included. Radiographic measurements
included: major curve Cobb angle, coronal imbalance (CI), & sagittal
vertical axis (SVA). Every implanted screw diameter & length was
recorded. Apical pedicle diameters were measured on preoperative CT. Primary
outcomes included: 1) intraoperative neuromontoring (IONM) changes and 2)
revision surgery. Results: 19 pts and 543 pedicle screws were
evaluated (28.6 screws/patient). Mean age was 49.6 years, levels was 13.8,
and follow-up was 1.5 years, with 7 patients having >2 years follow-up.
Screw analysis revealed: 4% 5.5 mm, 40% 6.0 mm, 24% 6.5 mm, 31% 7.0 mm or
greater. Focusing on challenging levels, the average screw diameter at T4 =
6.2 mm, T5 = 6.2 mm, T6 = 6.1 mm, L1 = 6.3 mm. Average screw diameter at the
concave apical pedicle was 1.7 mm greater than the pedicle diameter. Mean
coronal Cobb of the major curve was 65.4, with Average correction of 75.4%.
No IONM changes occurred due to screw placement. There were 2 revision
surgeries, both for rod breakage/pseudarthrosis. Conclusion: In
a series of 542 consecutive TL pedicle screws placed, 96% of screws were
≥6.0 mm & 56% were ≥6.5 mm. Screws placed at the concave pedicle were on
average 1.7 mm greater than the pedicle diameter without any neurovascular
complications. Large diameter screws can be safely and consistently placed
throughout the TL spine in ASD patients, while achieving and maintaining
excellent coronal correction of 75.4%. Take Home Message: In
treatment of adult spinal deformity, large diameter screws wider than the
native apical pedicle may be safely placed in the thoracolumbar spine for
increased pullout-strength and optimal deformity correction.

## 226

## A053: Clinical Outcomes of Cocygectomy for Coccydynia: A Single
Institution Series with Mean 5 year Follow-Up

Neha Mulpuri

1

, Nisha Reddy

1

, Kylan Larsen

1

, Ankit Patel

1

, Bassel Diebo

2

, Peter Passias

3

, Lori Tappen

1

, Kevin Gill

1

, and Shaleen Vira

1

1

University of Texas at Southwestern Medical Center, Dallas,
USA

2

SUNY Downstate Health Sciences University, Brooklyn, USA

3

NYU Langone Medical Center-Hospital for Joint Disease, New York,
USA

Introduction: Coccygectomy is generally reserved for patients
who have severe coccydynia despite conservative management. Prior studies
consist of small patient groups, heterogenous techniques, and high wound
complication rates (up to 22%). This study investigates our institution’s
experience with coccygectomy using a novel “off-center” wound closure
technique and analyzes prognostic factors for long term success.
Material and Methods: Retrospective review of all patients
that underwent coccygectomy between 2006 and 2019 at a single academic
center was conducted. Demographics, symptomatology, mechanism of injury,
attempted conservative management, prior non-operative coccydynia treatment,
history of spine surgery prior to coccygectomy, coccyx morphology
(Postacchini and Massobrio), and post-operative complications were
collected. Pre-operative versus post-operative HRQOLs such as Oswestry
Disability Index (ODI), Visual Analog Scale (VAS), PROMIS-29 scores, SF-12,
EQ-5D were compared. Risk factors for surgical site infection were
identified with logistic regression analysis and similarly, risk factors for
failing to meet MCID for ODI, PROMIS-Physical function, and PROMIS-Pain
interference were identified. Risk factors for remaining disabled after
surgery (ODI <20) were investigated using a stepwise logistic regression.
Patient characteristics associated with improvement in post-operative VAS
scores and EQ-5D ‘health self-scores’ were identified using stepwise
logistic regression and stepwise linear regression, respectively.
Results: 173 patients (77% female, mean age =
46.56 years-old, mean follow-up 5.58 ± 3.95 years) underwent coccygectomy
between 2006 and 2019. 111 patients had adequate imaging for classification
of coccyx morphology. Type IV coccyx morphology (54.05 ± 12.73 years-old)
patients were older compared to Type III (41.86 ± 12.03 years-old). The most
common etiology of coccydynia was spontaneous/unknown (42.2%), closely
followed by trauma/accident (41%). The most common conservative treatments
for coccydynia included steroid injections (66.3%), analgesic medications
(51.2%), and physical therapy (42.2%). Patients improved from pre-operative
to post-operative with respect to ODI, VAS back pain, and several PROMIS-29
domains such as fatigue, sleep disturbance, satisfaction with social role,
and pain interference. A patient characteristic identified as a predictor of
disability (ODI > 20) post-operatively was older age (OR = 1.054, 95% CI
1.004 to 1.107). Patient characteristics identified as predictors of lower
self-reported ‘health scores’ were history of prior spine surgery (ß =
.651), coccydynia due to trauma (ß = .363), and women (ß =
.264). Having no history of spine surgery to coccygectomy (OR = .161, 95% CI
.031 to .844) predicted improved post-operative VAS back pain scores. No
clinical outcome differences were demonstrated among the coccyx types (all
P < .05). 16 patients (9.25%) had post-operative
infections of the incision site. Post-operative infection successfully
resolved after management with local wound care and antibiotics.
Additionally, no significant association was found between post-operative
wound infection and long term improvements in HRQOLs following surgery.
Conclusion: This is the largest series of coccygectomy
patients to date demonstrating long term improvements in patient-reported
outcomes. Our cohort had a significantly lower wound infection rate of 9.42%
which we attribute to an “off-center” closure technique. Patients should be
counseled that their surgical history, along with age, gender, and etiology
of pain can influence their probability of reaching a successful clinical
outcome.

## 1192

## A054: Iliac Screw Fixation Revisited: Improved Clinical and Radiological
Outcomes Using a Modified Iliac Screw Fixation Technique

Alexander von Glinski

1

, Christopher Elia

1

, James G, Wiginton

1

, Darius Ansari

1

, Clifford Pierre

1

, Ronen Blecher

1

, Joseph R. Dettori

1

, Emre Yilmaz

1

, Thomas A. Schildhauer

1

, Rod Oskouian

1

, and Jens Chapman

1

1

Swedish Neuroscience Institute, Seattle, USA

Introduction: The traditional entry point of an iliac screw
often causes post- operative gluteal pain from the prominent screw head. The
use of an offset connector also adds a point of weakness to the construct.
By choosing a different screw entry point offset connectors. This study aims
to describe the modified iliac screw (mILS) technique and compare it to
other spinopelvic fixation techniques in terms of wound healing
complications, hardware prominence, and failure. Methods: A
retrospective analysis was performed of adult patients undergoing
lumbopelvic fixation between January 2014 and June 2019. Patients were
grouped into one of three groups based on the technique of pelvic fixation:
S2 alar-iliac screw (S2AI), traditional iliac screw (tILS), and modified
iliac screw (mILS). The primary outcome parameter was the minimal distance
from screw head to skin (MDSS). Secondary outcome parameters were
instrumentation loosening/failure, adjacent level fractures,
pseudoarthrosis, and medial or lateral iliac screw perforation.
Results: A total of 190 patients undergoing lumbopelvic
fixation were included in the following three groups: mILS group (n = 113),
tILS group (n = 40), and S2AI group (n = 37). The mean MDSS in the mILS
group was 31.3 mm compared to 23.7 mm in the tILS Group (P
< .00199). No statis- tically significant differences were found when
comparing the three groups with respect to com- plications. The mILS group
did not show any cases of prominent instrumentation and had the lowest rate
of instrumentation failure. Conclusions: The mILS technique is
an acceptable alternative for lumbopelvic fixation, offering the benefits of
iliac screw fixation while avoiding offset connectors and screw prominence
complications associated with tILS.

## OP07: Spine Biologics and Novel Technologies

## 677

## A055: Intravenous v. Oral Acetaminophen Administration in Perioperative
Care of One and Two Level LLIFs With Instrumented Posterior Lumbar Fusion: A
Comparative Effectiveness Study

Celeste Abjornson

1

, Jessica Dorilio

1

, Fedan Avrumova

1

, Daniel Alicea

1

, Nicole Utah

1

, Christina Dowe

1

, Antonio Brecevich

1

, Frank Cammisa

1

, Darren Lebl

1

, Alexander Hughes

1

, Andrew Sama

1

, Russel Huang

1

, Matthew Cunningham

1

, Federico Girardi

1

, and Chad Craig

1

1

Hospital for Special Surgery, Spine Surgery, New York, USA

Introduction: Since 2000, the annual death toll from an opioid
associated overdose has increased by over 300%. To reduce the opioid
consumption, physicians have used alternative approaches, which have proven
to be effective and also reduce side effects such as nausea, constipation,
and addiction. IV acetaminophen has been shown to successfully reduce opioid
usage, however, it is an expensive alternative. Testing the efficacy of IV
acetaminophen versus its oral formulation will likely modify future
postoperative pain management regimens while also addressing
cost-effectiveness. The purpose of the study is to prospectively evaluate
clinical outcomes and determine the cost effectiveness of IV vs oral (PO)
acetaminophen following lumbar circumferential spine surgery. We hypothesize
that IV acetaminophen will perform better than PO in terms of length of
stay, morphine equivalence, and change in VAS scores from baseline.
Methods: The study is a prospective, single center,
randomized control trial. The eligible population included patients between
the ages of 18-85 who underwent circumferential lumbar fusion surgery, while
failing conservative treatment for more than 6 months. Patients
were excluded if they had already undergone lumbar surgery at the index
level(s), were diagnosed with osteoporosis, had dysphagia prohibiting oral
administration, or had a history of substance abuse. The outcome measures
included opioid equivalence, length of hospital stay, Visual Analog Scale
(VAS) measurements, and Oswestry Disability Index (ODI) scores. Once
enrolled, patients were randomized to either the IV or PO acetaminophen
treatment groups. Preoperatively, patients completed a baseline analgesic
regimen questionnaire, surveys including VAS, SF-12, and ODI. Patients were
administered their first acetaminophen dose within three hours of first
incision. Postoperatively, patients received seven subsequent doses of their
assigned acetaminophen, with access to supplemental analgesics. Analgesic
usage and VAS scores were monitored until discharge. Surveys were completed
at 6 weeks and 6 months follow up. Results: The average daily
opioid consumption for the IV group was significantly lower than the PO
group during the immediate postoperative period. Average length of stay was
similar between groups, 3.3 days for PO and 3.6 days for IV. VAS back and
leg scores were not statistically different between groups, however, both
groups experienced a decrease by more than the minimally clinically
important difference (MCID) of 12 points from baseline. ODI also decreased
by the MCID at the 6 months follow-up, which was defined as 12.8% for ODI.
Discussion and Conclusion: Along with an overall reduction
in opioid usage, patient reported outcomes depict successful improvement of
pain management with the use of IV acetaminophen following circumferential
spinal fusion surgery. Furthermore, despite the large discrepancy between
the two formulations in cost-to-perceived-benefit ratio, the significant
reduction of opioid usage and, therefore, its associated costs, provides a
far less dramatic divergence. The continued testing of the efficacy of IV
acetaminophen versus its oral formulation will likely modify future
postoperative pain management regimens while also addressing the opioid
epidemic plaguing communities across the US.

## 1881

## A056: The Use of Telemedicine as a Rehabilitation Tool for Lower Back
Pain (LBP) During the COVID-19 Pandemic

Karen Weissmann

1,2

, Paola Torres

3

, Nicolas Cubillos

1

, Maria Paz Aguilera

4

, Francoise Descazeaux

1

, Nicolas Sepulveda

5

, and Rodrigo Alarcon

5

1

MEDS, Santiago, Chile

2

Universidad de Valencia, Valencia, Spain

3

Fundacion Medica San Cristobal, Santiago, Chile

4

Redsalud, Santiago, Chile

5

Patagonia Spine Foundation, Santiago, Chile

Introduction: Physiotherapy is an important part of the spine
pathology treatment. During the COVID-19 pandemic, access to it was limited.
The use of tele-rehabilitation increases patient's access to therapists. The
objective was to evaluate user's satisfaction and clinical outcomes in
patients treated online. Material and Methods: The Delphi
method was used. An expert committee of five kinesiologists and four spine
surgeons developed a consensus for a telerehabilitation program for lower
back pain. 6 synchronic sessions of 40 minutes through digital platforms
like Zoom meeting, Microsoft Teams and WhatsApp video. This program was
designed at a 42% cost of the original on-site program. Patients were
evaluated using the Oswestry Disability Index (ODI) before and after
therapy, we considered an MCID (minimally important clinical difference) of
at least a 50% change as a positive outcome. User satisfaction was measured
with the University of Washington Telemedicine Patient Satisfaction Survey.
Happy and very happy were considered as positive answers and unhappy and
very unhappy as negative answers. Results: Between April and
September 2020, 85 patients accepted to be treated through
telerehabilitation: 54 women and 29 men. Of the total of patients, 67
suffered from LBP pathology and were included in this analysis. ODI scores
decreased from 39 points pre - intervention to 11.7 points after
rehabilitation. Only one patient did not achieve the MCID. Regarding
satisfaction surveys, 100% of patients answered, “this is the first time I
get treated by a physiotherapist online”. Out of 10 items, 5 items had more
than 75% of positive answers and no item had less than 50% positive answers.
The average of positive answers was 80%, of neutral answers 16.7% and of
negative answers 13.4%. 80% of the users would submit to online
physiotherapy treatment again, 15% might use it again and 5% won’t. 68.8% of
patients had full insurance reimbursement, the ones that did not had public
health coverage. Conclusion: Telerehabilitation offers an
alternative to treat LBP increasing easy access to physiotherapy with good
satisfaction and outcomes and at lower cost for the patient.

## 1055

## A057: Macrophage Therapy for Intervertebral Disc Herniation: In Vivo
Proof-of-Concept

Inês A. Amaral

1,2,3

, Susana G. Santos

1,2,3

, Paulo Pereira

4,5,6

, Mário A Barbosa

1,2,3

, and Carla Cunha

1,2

1

i3S - Instituto de Investigação e Inovação em Saúde, Universidade do
Porto, Porto, Portugal, Porto, Portugal

2

INEB - Instituto Nacional de Engenharia Biomédica, Universidade do
Porto, Porto, Portugal, Porto, Portugal

3

ICBAS -Instituto de Ciências Biomédicas Abel Salazar, Universidade
do Porto, Porto, Portugal, Porto, Portugal

4

Centro Hospitalar São João, Porto, Portugal, Department of
Neurosurgery, Porto, Portugal

5

Faculty of Medicine, University of Porto, Porto, Portugal,
Department of Clinical Neurosciences and Mental Health, Porto,
Portugal

6

Neurosciences Center, CUF Porto Hospital, Porto, Portugal, Porto,
Portugal

Introduction: Intervertebral disc (IVD) herniation and
degeneration is often associated with low back pain, constituting the
leading cause of spinal surgery worldwide1. The spontaneous
hernia regression is a widely described phenomenon but the underlying
mechanisms remain unclear. The main hypothesis is that hernia resorption is
associated with a cascade of events, from inflammation to matrix remodeling,
and angiogenesis, in which macrophages might be major players2.
This study provides a preclinical proof-of-concept of the functional role of
macrophages in hernia regression, by their direct administration into the
hernia site using a rat model of IVD herniation. Material and
Methods: Macrophages were differentiated from syngenic rat bone
marrow precursors. Bone marrow was collected by flushing from the femurs and
tibias and isolated cells were cultured in RPMI + 10% FBS media,
supplemented with M-CSF for 7 days, for macrophage differentiation.
Macrophages were administered locally in the hernia site using the
previously developed IVD animal herniation and regression model3.
A percutaneous needle puncture was performed in male Lewis (LEW/Crl) rats at
10 weeks of age, into coccygeal IVDs Co5/6, Co6/7, and Co7/8 IVDs.
Macrophages were collected and 10 × 106 cells administered per
hernia 2 weeks after IVD lesion, using a 31-G needle coupled to a
microsyringe (Hamilton) and using an adaptor to assure 5 mm depth
administration to the center of the IVD. Detailed analysis of in vivo hernia
regression was performed by histology and immunohistochemistry and the
associated systemic response by flow cytometry for main immune cell
populations and cytokine array, at 6w post lesion. Control groups consist in
lesioned animals sacrificed at 2w and 6w post lesion, without macrophage
administration. Results: A detailed local and systemic analysis
was performed to assess the functional potential of macrophage
administration for in vivo hernia regression. Histological analysis
consisting in delimitation of the hernia area in sections along the IVD for
each animal, revealed that the group in which macrophages were administered,
the hernia size was significantly smaller than in the untreated group, at 6w
post-lesion. Systemically, no significant alterations in the main immune
cell populations were found, but a decrease in the circulating levels of
GM-CSF, together with increased spleen sizes, was found in the group
administered with macrophages. Detailed histological, flow cytometry and
cytokine analysis is underway. Conclusion: This study proposes
an in vivo functional proof-of-principle of the role of macrophages in
hernia regression. The concept of immunotherapy for tissue engineering
strategies is still underexplored, but has the potential to provide
important breakthroughs to currently unsolved clinical problems.

## Acknowledgements
This work was funded by AO Foundation, AOSpine through project no
AOSDIA2019-057 and by Portuguese funds through FCT - Fundação para a Ciência
e a Tecnologia - CEECIND/00184/2017/CP1392/CT0001 and
UID/BIM/04293/2019.

## References
1. Weinstein, JN et al. Spine 33, 2789-2800 (2008).
2. Cunha, C. et al. Arthritis Res. Ther. 20, 251 (2018).
3. Cunha, C. et al. J. Orthop. Res. 35, 258–268 (2017).

## 413

## A058: Pedicle Screw Insertion Accuracy Using Intraoperative Computed
Tomography Image-Guided Navigation: A Series of 608 Screws

Bastian Stemmer

1

, Benedikt Trnovec

2

, Ertl Sebastian

1

, Bonk Maximilian-Niklas

1

, Ehab Shiban

3

, and Heidecke Volkmar

1

1

University hospital Augsburg, Department of Neurosurgery, Augsburg,
Germany

2

Universitätsklinikum Bratislava, Department of Neurosurgery,
Bratislava, Slovakia

1

University hospital Augsburg, Department of Neurosurgery, Augsburg,
Germany

Objective: The goals of this study were to assess the accuracy
of pedicle screw insertion using an intraoperative computed tomography
(iCT), and to analyze potential risk factors for screw misplacement.
Methods: A retrospective analysis of all patients following
iCT navigated spinal pedicle screw placement between November 2016 and
February 2019 was performed. Navigated drilling of the pedicle was followed
by screw placement. Screw position was checked by a further iCT scan. Screw
position was assessed according to the Gertzbein-Robbins classification.
Results: 109 consecutive patients were identified (52.3%
male, 47.7% female). Median age was 71 years. Screws were placed in all
spinal regions: cervical and cervico-thoracal (68), thoracic (118),
thoracic-lumbar (126), lumbar (206) and lumbosacral (90). Degenerative spine
disease was the most common diagnosis (49.0%). There were 75.3%, 12.0%,
7.4%, 2.5% and 3.1% screws classified as Gertzbein-Robbins A, B, C, D and E,
respectively. 30 screws (4.93%) were revised intraoperatively. Lumbar spine,
thoracic spine, tumor and infection diagnosis were associated with highest
rates of screw misplacement. None of the patients suffered from any
neurovascular damage. Conclusion: The all-over revision rate
was 4.93%. The highest revision rates were observed for tumor (6.38%),
infection patients (6.86%), lumbar spine (6.30%) and thoracic spine (5.90%).
None of the patients suffered from any neurovascular damage. No secondary
operation to revise the misplaced screws was required. Keywords:
pedicle screw, accuracy, intraoperative computed tomography,
navigated, malplacement

## 20

## A059: Efficacy of Anterior Vertebral Body Tethering in Skeletally Mature
Children with Adolescent Idiopathic Scoliosis - A Preliminary Report

Keyur Akbari

1

, Vignesh Badikillaya

1

, Muralidharan Venkatesan

1

, and Sajan Hegde

1

1

Apollo Hospital, Spine Unit, Chennai, India

Introduction: Anterior Vertebral Body Tethering (AVBT) offers a
dynamic fusionless correction option for children with Adolescent Idiopathic
Scoliosis (AIS). Fewer existing clinical studies evaluating novel AVBT in
skeletally immature children has questioned the mid-term efficacy with
concerns of overcorrection and curve progression with remaining growth. The
goal of current study is to investigate the safety and efficacy of this
novel AVBT technique in the treatment of more skeletally mature children
with AIS. Our hypothesis is that novel AVBT technique with maximum
intraoperative correction in skeletally mature AIS children with less
remaining growth potential can restrict complication of overcorrection, cord
breakage, return to theatre or revision to fusion surgery. Material
and Methods: We prospectively studied patients with Adolescent
Idiopathic Scoliosis (AIS) who were operated between 2018 and2019 with AVBT
technique with a minimum of one year of follow up. Our inclusion criteria
for this novel technique were skeletally mature children, single structural
AIS curve (40-80) with ≥50% flexibility on dynamic radiographs. We do supine
awake manual traction and standing side bending dynamic radiographs
routinely in all our patients to assess the flexibility of the curve. The
curve should correct to ≥50% on dynamic radiographs to be eligible for the
option of AVBT. Pertinent clinical and radiographic data collected include
skeletal maturity, curve type, Cobb angle, sagittal parameters and patient
reported outcome measure SRS-22 questionnaire. Repeated ANOVA test was
performed to measure the difference between Cobbs angle. Wilcoxn Signed Rank
Test was used to compare pre and post op SRS 22 score. P
value < .05 was considered statistically difference.
Results: All 10 children were female with mean age of
14.9 years at the time of surgery. Mean follow up was 18.1 months. Mean
Rissers and Sander’s score were 4.2 ± .6 and 7.2 ± .64 respectively. 3
patients had Major Thoracic (MT) and 7 patients had Thoraco Lumbar
(TL)/Lumbar (L) curves. Cranial and caudal instrumented levels were T5 and
L4. Mean pre operative Cobb’s angle was 52˚ ± 11.6˚ and corrected to15.9 ±
6.8o on first erect post op radiograph, with stabilization of
corrected curve at one year follow-up (mean Cobb’s 15.3 ± 8.70).
Average blood loss during surgery was 112 ± 12.4 ml and average surgical
time was 162 ± 13.2 minutes. The average radiation dose during surgery was
.6 ± .05 mGy and average radiation exposure time was around 8 ± .6 seconds.
Average hospital stay was 3.5 ± .5 days. The average gain in height was 2.7
±.6 cm. Mean SRS-22 score pre op and post op were 78 and 92.5 respectively
(P < .01). No complications were noted till last
follow up. Conclusion: AVBT is a safe and effective novel
alternative technique to fusion to stabilize progressive idiopathic
scoliosis in skeletally mature children. Our short term outcome is promising
but it has to stand the test of time.

## 1826

## A060: Lumbar Spine Fusion Outcomes Using a Cellular Bone Allograft with
Lineage - Committed Bone Forming Cells in 96 Patients

Hossein Elgafy

1

, Brad Wetzell

2

, Marshall Gillette

1

, Hassan Semaan

3

, Andrea Rowland

1

, Christopher A Balboa

1

, Thomasa Mierzwa

1

, Julie B Mclean

2

, Kimberly Dorsch

2

, and Mark Moore

2

1

University of Toledo, Orthopedic, Toledo, USA

2

LifeNet Health, Virginia Beach, USA

3

University of Toledo, Radiology, Toledo, USA

Introduction: Instrumented posterior lumbar fusion (IPLF) with
and without transforaminal interbody fusion (TLIF) is a common treatment for
low back pain when conservative interventions have failed. Certain patient
comorbidities and lifestyle risk factors, such as obesity and smoking, are
known to negatively affect these procedures. An advanced cellular bone
allograft with viable lineage-committed osteogenic cells (V-CBA) has
demonstrated high fusion rates, but these rates for patients with severe
and/or multiple comorbidities remains understudied. The purpose of this
study was to assess fusion outcomes in patients undergoing IPLF/TLIF using
V-CBA with baseline comorbidities and lifestyle risk factors known to
negatively affect bone fusion. Materials and Methods: This was
a retrospective study of de-identified data from consecutive patients at an
academic medical center. All study patients underwent IPLF procedures with
or without TLIF, and with V-CBA. Baseline patient and procedure
characteristics were assessed. Radiological outcomes included fusion rates
per the Lenke scale. Clinical outcomes were evaluated by the Oswestry
Disability Index (ODI) and Visual Analog Scale (VAS) for back and leg pain.
Operating room times were also assessed. Results: Data from 96
patients with a median follow-up time of 16 months (range:
4-45 months) were assessed. Successful fusion (Lenke A or B) was reported
for 88 of 96 patients (91.7%). Of 24 patients with diabetes, fusion was
reported in 22 patients (91.7%). In patients currently using tobacco (n =
21), fusion was reported in 18 patients (85.7%), while in those with a
history of tobacco use (n = 61), fusion was observed in 56 patients (91.8%).
Successful fusion was reported in all 6 patients with pseudarthrosis at the
same level. Mean VAS ratings at the final study visit ranged from 3.5 to 6.0
and mean ODI ranged from 15.2% to 18.3%. The overall mean OR time was
192.7 minutes. Conclusion: The results of this study suggest
that V-CBA yields consistently successful fusion despite patient
comorbidities and life-style risk factors that are known to negatively
affect such bony healing.

## 398

## A061: Development of AOSpine BOnE (Bone Osteobiologics and Evidence)
Classification

Jeffrey C. Wang

1

, Timothy S. Yoon

2

, Darrel Brodke

3

, Jong-Beom park

4

, Patrick Hsieh

5

, Hans-Jörg Meisel

6

, and Zorica Buser

1

1

Keck School of Medicine, University of Southern California,
Department of Orthopaedic Surgery, Los Angeles, USA

2

Emory Spine Center, Emory University, Atlanta, USA

3

University of Utah School of Medicine, Salt Lake City, USA

4

Uijongbu St. Mary’s Hospital, The Catholic University of Korea
School of Medicine, Uijongbu, South Korea

5

Keck School of Medicine, University of Southern California, Los
Angeles, USA

6

Department of Neurosurgery, Bergmannstrost Hospital, Halle, Germany,
Halle, Germany

Introduction: The use of osteobiologics for spine fusion has
increased significantly over the years with the expansion of available graft
materials. Although various biologics are used frequently, the literature on
their effectiveness is inconclusive. The aim of our study was to develop a
three-tier classification for the levels of evidence for osteobiologics and
provide a description of the principles by which osteobiologics can be
evaluated. BOnE (Bone Osteobiologics and Evidence) classification evaluates
each osteobiologic based on the available evidence, and if the published
evidence is based on clinical, in vivo or in vitro studies. Material
and Methods: The process of establishing the BOnE classification
included five face-to-face meetings and two web calls among members of the
AOSpine Knowledge Forum Degenerative. Initial draft of the BOnE
classification was based on a notion that it should be possible to divide
osteobiologics into a few categories that are easily recognizable by
clinicians, researchers, patients, and industry. Results: The
three levels of evidence were determined based on the type of data on
osteobiologics, level A for human studies, level B for animal studies, and
level C for in vitro studies, with level A being the highest level of
evidence. Each level was organized into three sub-groups (e.g., A1, A2 and
A3). During the initial testing of the BOnE classification, it was realized
that each category required a level 4 sub-group for evidence of very low
quality leading to four sub-groups (A1, A2, A3 and A4). The grading
principle is very straightforward: evaluation of each osteobiologic would
start with the highest level of evidence and it would be downgraded based on
the available evidence primarily focusing on peer review publications.
Conclusion: The use and the variety of osteobiologics for
spine fusion has dramatically increased over the past few decades, however
literature on their effectiveness is inconclusive. Several prior systematic
reviews developed by AOSpine Knowledge Forum Degenerative reported low level
of evidence primarily due to the high risk of bias, small sample size, lack
of control groups, and limited patient reported outcomes. BOnE
classification will provide a universal platform for research studies and
journal publications to classify a new or an existing product, and will
allow for creating decision-making algorithms for surgical planning.

## 1444

## A062: Cervical BMP Use is Associated with Increased Fusion Rates Without
More Complications in Anterior Cervical Discectomy and Fusion

Colin Haines

1

, Catherine Gorick

2

, Alexandra Thomson

1

, Ehsan Jazini

1

, Thomas Schuler

1

, Rita Roy

2

, and Christopher Good

2

1

The Virginia Spine Institute, Reston, USA,

2

The National Spine Health Foundation, Reston, USA

Study Design: A retrospective review of patients who underwent
anterior cervical discectomy and fusion (ACDF) with and without the use of
low-dose recombinant human bone morphogenetic protein 2 (rhBMP-2).
Objective: To determine whether low dose rhBMP-2 with
postoperative oral steroid administration is effective in improving fusion
rates and whether the rate of adverse events after ACDF are elevated with
low-dose rhBMP-2 use. Background: RhBMP-2 is a naturally
occurring human protein shown to promote bone formation. In 2002, the FDA
approved its use in anterior lumbar spinal fusion. Despite the potential
benefits of its use, concern exists regarding increased risk of dysphasia
and retropharyngeal edema with cervical spine use. Materials and
Methods: A retrospective review of 164 prospectively collected
patients (80 male, 84 female).71 patients received rhBMP-2 during ACDF and
93 patients underwent ACDF without rhBMP-2. Incidence of surgical
complications, adverse events, and revision surgeries was compared between
the two groups. Fusion was analyzed by flexion and extension radiographs at
one year. Results: Patients receiving low dose rhBMP-2 and oral
postoperative steroids had significantly higher fusion rates at one year
follow up compared to BMP naïve patients (91% vs 82% P =
.02, respectively). The rhBMP-2 group averaged more risk factors for
pseudarthrosis including tobacco use, prior history of pseudarthrosis, and
multilevel fusions compared to non-BMP group (P > .01).
There were no statistically significant differences in the rates of graft
subsidence, dysphagia, hematoma, or surgical complications between the two
groups. No patients experienced post-operative radiculitis, ectopic bone
growth, retropharyngeal edema, or wound infection. Conclusions:
The use of rhBMP-2 in ACDF with postoperative oral steroids can be a safe
and effective approach to improve fusion rates when dosed appropriately. We
report a significant increase in fusion rates with low-dose rhBMP-2 and oral
postoperative steroids, without a significant difference in complication
rates. Keywords: BMP, ACDF, fusion, dysphasia

## 575

## A063: AO Spine Guideline for Using Osteobiologics in Spinal Degenerative
Cases: Protocol for AO Spine Guideline Development (AO-GO) - Chapter I
ACDF

Hans Joerg Meisel

1

, Zorica Buser

2

, Neha Agarwal

3

, Yabin Wu

4

, Amit Jain

5

, S. Tim Yoon

6

, and Jeffrey C. Wang

2

1

Bergmannstrost Hospital, Halle, Department of Neurosurgery, Halle,
Germany

2

Keck School of Medicine, University of Southern California,
Department of Neurological Surgery, California, USA

3

Bergmannstrost Hospital Halle, Department of Neurosurgery, Halle,
Germany

4

AO Foundation, AO Spine, Davos, Switzerland

5

Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, MD, Department of Orthopaedic
Surgery, Baltimore, USA

6

Emory University, Department of Orthopaedic Surgery, Atlanta,
Georgia, USA

Introduction: AO Spine Guideline for Using Osteobiologics in
Spine Degeneration (AO-GO) project is an international, multidisciplinary
collaborative initiative to identify and evaluate evidence on existing use
of osteobiologics in spine degenerative diseases. It aims to formulate
precisely defined, clinically relevant and internationally applicable
guidelines ensuring evidence-based, safe and effective use of
osteobiologics, considering regional preferences and cost-effectiveness. The
current focus is the use of osteobiologics in anterior cervical discectomy
and fusion surgeries. Methodology: The guideline development is
planned in three phases. Phase 1- Evidence synthesis and Recommendation;
Phase 2- Guideline with osteobiologics grading and Validation; Phase 3-
Guideline dissemination and Development of a clinical decision support tool.
The key questions formulating the guidelines for the use of osteobiologics
will be addressed in a series of systematic reviews in Phase 1. The evidence
synthesized by the systematic reviews will be assessed by Grading of
Recommendations, Assessment, Development and Evaluations (GRADE)
methodology, including expert panel discussions via web calls and
face-to-face meetings to formulate a recommendation. In Phase 2,
osteobiologics will be graded based on up-to-date evidence and the grading
will be integrated with the recommendation from Phase 1, and thus formulate
a guideline for using osteobiologics in anterior cervical discectomy and
fusion (ACDF). The guideline will be further validated by using
prospectively collected clinical data. In the third phase, dissemination of
the proposed guideline and development of a decision support tool is
planned. Discussion: AO-GO aims to bridge an important gap
between quality of evidence and use of osteobiologics in spine fusion
surgeries. Owing to differences in osteobiologics preparation and functional
characteristics, respective regulatory requirements for approval may vary,
therefore it is highly likely that these products enter market without
quality clinical trials. With a holistic approach the guideline aims to
facilitate evidence-based, patient-oriented decision-making process in
clinical practice, thus stimulating further evidence-based studies regarding
osteobiologics usage in spine surgeries.

## OP08: Trauma-Thoracolumbar 2

## 1477

## A064: Diagnostic Value of Horizontal Vs Vertical Laminar Fracture for
Diagnosis of Posterior Ligamentous Complex Injury in Thoracolumbar
Fractures

Mohamed Ali

1

1

Prince Mohamed Bin Abdelaziz Hospital, Neurosurgery, Riyadh, Saudi
Arabia

Background Context: According to AO classification, a horizontal
laminar fracture (HLF) is a recognized feature of AO type-B injury, whereas
a vertical laminar fracture (VLF) is a distinct fracture pattern that
typically accompanies a burst fracture and has less likely to disrupt
posterior ligamentous complex (PLC). However, the association of these 2
fracture patterns with PLC injury is seldom reported. Purpose:
To analyze the diagnostic value of vertical vs horizontal laminar fracture
for diagnosis of PLC injury in patients with TLF using MRI as a reference
study. Study Design/Setting: A retrospective single-center
study conducted in a level 1 trauma center. Patient Sample: Two
hundred sixty-two consecutive patients with acute TLF (T1-L5) between 2014
and 2020 who underwent CT and MRI. Patients with translation injury,
osteoporotic fracture or pathological fractures were excluded.
Methods: Two reviewers evaluated CT for the following
findings: Abnormal facet joint alignment (FJA), facet joint widening (FJW),
horizontal laminar fracture (HLF), spinous process fracture (SPF),
interspinous widening (ISW). Incompetent PLC was defined by supraspinous or
ligamentum flavum rupture. Univariate and multivariate association between
CT findings and PLC injury was examined. The diagnostic performance
(sensitivity, specificity, accuracy, positive predictive value (PPV),
negative predictive value (NPV), positive likelihood ratio (+LR), and
negative likelihood ratio (-LR) of horizontal and vertical laminar fracture
in the diagnosis of PLC injury. Results: In the univariate
analysis, VLF showed no significant association with PLC injury (OR 1.5, 95%
CI .89-2.5, P = .1) and was therefore not included in the
multivariate analysis in which HLF demonstrated an independent association
with PLC injury (AOR range 2.5-14.7, P = 000.1). HLF
yielded a PPV of 84% (95% CI 72-91) and a +LR of 7.4 (95% CI 4.0-13.3),
whereas VLF yielded a PPV of 48% (95% CI 37-58) and a +LR of 1.3 (95% CI
.93-1.8). Conclusions: Our study found that HLF was an
independent predictor of PLC injury (AOR 6.2), whereas VLF was not
associated with PLC injury. Therefore, confusing HLF and VLF might have
resulted in an underestimation of the diagnostic value of HLF in previous
studies. Keywords: posterior ligamentous complex, thoracolumbar
fractures, diagnostic accuracy, computed tomography, MRI, horizontal laminar
fracture, vertical laminar fracture

## 1379

## A065: Timing of Surgical Spine Stabilization in Multiple Injured
Patients: Introducing Damage Control Spine

Sascha Halvachizadeh

1

, Henrik Teuber

1

, Kai Oliver Jensen

1

, Jakob Hax

1

, Ladislav Mica

1

, Hans Christoph Pape

1

, and Kai Sprengel

1

1

University Hospital Zurich, Trauma, Zurich, Switzerland

Introduction: Timing of definitive surgical treatment in
multiple injured patients still is controversial. In these discussions,
timing of surgical spine stabilization has only been marginally addressed.
The role of Early Spine Stabilization is still unclear. Therefor this study
investigates the influence of timing of spinal stabilization on the outcome
of multiple injured patients. Material and Methods: This study
analyses multiple injured patients treated at one Level 1 trauma center.
Inclusion criteria: ages 16 years and older, injury severity score (ISS) ≥16
with injuries to the spine that need surgical stabilization. Group
stratification according to first surgical stabilization of the spine:
immediate (day of admission), early (within 48 hours) and delayed
stabilization (>48 hours). Results: Stratification of 303
multiple injured patients with injuries to the spine with indication of
surgical stabilization according time of first surgical procedure to the
spine: Immediate (n = 141), early (n = 68) and delayed (n = 94). Group
Delayed showed highest total length of stay (LOS) (27 ± 14 days) as well as
ICU LOS (15 ± 11 days) and ventilation days (10 ± 11 days). Delayed
stabilization of spine injury triples the risk of developing pneumonia (OR
3.0, 95% 1.9-4.8) each day. It further increases the risk of developing
sepsis by 1.7 (95%CI 1.0-2.8) each day. There was no significant differences
in mortality the groups without injuries to the spine or immediate versus
early stabilization. Conclusion: Delayed surgical stabilization
of the spine in multiple injured patients increases the risk of developing
pneumonia, or sepsis substantially. Therefore, we introduce Damage Control
Spine to highlight spinal instability as an important issue in managing
multiple injured patients. Stabilization of the spine should be addressed
with high priority in the timing of surgical procedures of multiple injured
patients.

## 1229

## A066: Systematic Review of RCT: Use of Orthosis in Thoracolumbar
Fractures

Daniela Linhares

1

, Bernardo Sousa-Pinto

2

, Manuel Ribeiro da Silva

1

, João Fonseca

2

, and Nuno Neves

1

1

CHUSJ, Orthopedics and Traumatology, Porto, Portugal

2

FMUP, MEDCIDS, Porto, Portugal

Introduction: Although recent studies suggest that orthosis have
no benefit, and may have a negative impact in recovery, these devices are
traditionally used in conservative treatment of thoracolumbar (TL)
fractures. This systematic review and meta-analysis of RCT evaluating
radiological and clinical outcomes of treatment of acute traumatic TL
fractures in skeletally mature patients with orthosis, compared with no
immobilization. Material and Methods: A systematic search was
conducted from inception to June 2019, and selection was performed in two
phases by two blinded reviewers, based in pre-defined inclusion and
exclusion criteria. Two independent reviewers performed data extraction and
quality assessment. A previous plan for extraction of radiological (kyphosis
progression; loss of anterior height) and clinical (pain; disability; length
of stay) outcomes was applied. Meta-analysis were computed. PRISMA
guidelines were followed. Results: Five studies, from eight
papers, were included. No study reported significant differences in pain,
kyphosis progression and loss of anterior height. Only one found a better
ODI with orthosis at 12 weeks assessment but not at 24 weeks. No other study
reported differences in disability. All authors concluded an equivalence
between treatments. Meta-analysis showed a significant increase of
3.47 days (95%CI 1.35; 5.60) in mean admission time in
orthosis group. No differences were found in kyphosis at 6 and 12 months;
kyphosis progression between 0-6 or 0-12 months; loss of anterior height
0-6 months; VAS for pain at 6 months; and VAS change 0-6 months. Conclusion:
This study showed that orthosis seems to add no benefit to conservative
treatment of patients with acute TL fractures.

## 609

## A067: Associated Injuries in Patients with Thoracic Spine
Fractures

Patrick Curtin

1

, Jay Patel

1

, Jenna Lansbury

1

, Taylor Dickinson

1

, and Michael Stauff

1

1

University of Massachusetts, Orthopedic Surgery, Worcester,
USA

Introduction: Thoracic spine fractures (TSFs) are rarely
isolated injuries, and they tend to present with a characteristic set of
vertebral and non-vertebral injuries based on mechanism of injury. There is
limited research on the rates and distribution of injuries that occur
concurrently with TSFs. The purpose of this study is to characterize the
distributions of these injuries by region of the body and by mechanisms of
injury, so that trauma and spine surgeons are able to efficiently evaluate
and treat patients presenting with TSFs. Material and Methods:
We retrospectively reviewed the trauma database records of 3646 patients
presenting with a TSFs at a single institution from 2015 to 2019. We
recorded patient demographics, comorbidities, and associated injuries by
body region. We characterized the TSFs using the AO classification system,
as well as the presenting physical exam and treatment. All associated
injuries among the TSF patients were classified into the following
categories: head injury (HI), thoracic injury (TI), non-thoracic vertebral
injury (NTVI), abdominal injury (AI), upper extremity injury (UEI), lower
extremity injury (LEI), and spinal cord injury (SCI). Results:
The three leading causes of TSFs were mechanical falls (38%), falls from
height (23%), and motor vehicle crashes (MVCs) (21%). TSFs resulting from
MVCs had a higher amount of concurrent TI (52.9% vs 38.6%,
P = .005), UEI (23.1% vs 14.4%, P =
.02), and LEI (24.0% vs 12.6%, P = .002) compared to all
other mechanisms. TSF’s after MVCs had a high amount of NTVI (38.8% vs
37.5%) and HI (43.8% vs 40.6%) compared to other mechanisms, but the
difference was not statistically different. Need for treatment for TSFs was
high with 58.7% requiring a brace, and 11.6% requiring surgical
stabilization. TSFs after a fall from height had a higher amount of
concurrent NTVI compared to all other mechanisms (51.1% vs 33.7%,
P = .0003). There were high rates of TI (48.1% vs
39.7%), and HI (46.6% vs 39.7%) compared to other mechanisms, but the
difference was not statistically significant. Need for treatment was high
with 61.8% requiring a brace, and 11.5% requiring surgical stabilization.
TSFs after mechanical falls had a significantly lower rate of concomitant
injury compared to other mechanisms. There was a high rate of other injuries
such as TI (25.5%), NTVI (28.8%), and HI (30.7%). TSFs required brace
treatment in 51.4% of patients and 2.8% required surgical stabilization.
Motor cycle crashes (MCCs) were the mechanism in 4.8% of all TSFs, and were
never an isolated injury. Associated injuries and TSFs in MCCs were
typically more severe, with 7.4% dying before an exam could be obtained,
7.4% with an ASIA A SCI, and 59.3% requiring bracing for their TSFs.
Conclusion: TSFs after MVCs, mechanical falls, and falls
from height presented with a predictable pattern of injuries and were rarely
an isolated injury. This cross-sectional data may help spine and trauma
surgeons better understand patterns of injury associated with TSFs, with the
hope of preventing missed injuries and better advising patients with TSFs on
severity of injuries.

## 1579

## A068: Venous Thromboembolism in Patients with Thoracic Spine
Fractures

Patrick Curtin

1

, Jay Patel

1

, Jenna Lansbury

1

, Taylor Dickinson

1

, and Michael Stauff

1

1

University of Massachusetts, Orthopedic Surgery, Worcester,
USA

Introduction: Thoracic spine fractures (TSFs) are rarely an
isolated injury. Venous thromboembolism (VTE) management can be increasingly
complicated in these patients when trying to balance the risk of VTE against
the risk of epidural hematoma or other bleeding complication with chemical
prophylaxis. The purpose of this study is to better characterize VTE risk in
patients with TSFs. Material and Methods: We retrospectively
reviewed the trauma database records of 557 patients presenting with a TSFs
at a single institution from 2015 to 2019. We identified 157 patients as
having an AO classification B or C TSF. For these 157 patients we recorded
patient demographics, comorbidities, and associated injuries by body region.
We characterized the TSFs using the AO classification system, as well as the
presenting physical exam and treatment. Results: Of the 157
patients, 6 (3.8%) were found to have a VTE event during their
hospitalization. Patients with a spinal cord injury (SCI) had 8.2 times the
risk (1.73 to 39.06, P = .0081) of having a VTE compared to
patients without SCI. Patients with a VTE compared to those without a VTE
had high rates of thoracic injury (TI) (48.3% vs 53.6%), non-thoracic
vertebral injury (NTVI) (50.0% vs 38.4%), head injury (HI) (67.7% vs 34.4%),
abdominal injury (AI) (50.0% vs 17.9%), upper extremity injury (UEI) (16.7%
vs 16.6%), and lower extremity injury (LEI) (33.3% vs 14.6%), however none
conveyed a statistically higher risk of VTE. Patients who underwent surgery
for their TSF had 5.3 times the risk (1.01 to 27.91, P =
.049) of VTE compared to patients who did not undergo surgery. Patients with
VTE compared to without had similar rates of bracing for definitive
treatment of their TSF (83.3% vs 70.2%). Three of the 157 patients died
prior to receiving definitive treatment for the TSFs due to the severity of
their other injuries. Of the 6 patients found to have a VTE, 5 have
prophylactic IVC filters placed prior to discovery of VTE. None of these
patients received chemical prophylaxis during their hospitalization, and all
had multiple injuries in addition to their TSF. The one patient with a VTE
and no IVC filter was placed on SQH prior to discovery of VTE, and had no
other injuries besides their TSF. Seven filters were placed in patients who
were never found to have a VTE. Conclusion: Although rates of
VTE in TSF patients are low, their care is complicated by the presence of
additional injuries. SCI and surgery were found to increase relative risk of
VTE in this small series. Despite high rate of additional injury in patients
with TSF, no body region was clearly associated with increased risk of VTE.
The prophylactic benefit of IVF filters in patients in these patients is a
consideration given the complexities associated with chemical DVT
prophylaxis in the perioperative setting.

## 911

## A069: Thoracolumbar Injuries in Polytrauma: the Importance of the M2
Modifier

Jessica Gilchrist

1

, Michalis Kaminaris

1

, Parker O'Neill

1

, and Darren Lui

1

1

St. George's Hospital NHS Foundation Trust, Department of
Orthopaedic and Trauma Surgery, London, United Kingdom

Introduction: Protocol states Major Trauma Centre (MTC) patients
receive whole-body CT scans to assess for injuries. The AO Thoracolumbar
Injury Classification System (AO TLICS) is used to classify spinal fractures
and generate a score delineating if surgery is warranted. Within this AO
TLICS, the M2 modifier can be applied to signal a patient specific
comorbidity, and carrying no score itself, is useful for arguing both for or
against surgery. We evaluate the incidence of thoracolumbar spine injuries
in MTC patients with an Injury Severity Score (ISS) >15, with concomitant
orthopaedic, visceral, thoracic, head and/or maxillofacial trauma and the
importance of the M2 modifier in the justification for or against surgery.
Material and Methods: Retrospective analysis of the Trauma
Audit Research Network (TARN) data from 1st January to
31st December 2016, with patients of ISS >15.
Thoracolumbar injuries and orthopaedic, visceral, thoracic, head and
maxillofacial trauma were determined from CT scans, and thoracolumbar
fractures classified using AO Spine. Results: 377 patients
identified with traumatic spinal injuries from 2433 MTC patients (15.5%). Of
these, 186 patients had an ISS >15 (49.3%), with 171 of these patients
having CT scans accessible for interpretation (91.9%). 117 of the 171
patients sustained thoracolumbar spine injuries (68.4%). Of these patients
63.2% sustained concomitant orthopaedic trauma, 22.2% sustained visceral
trauma, 54.7% sustained thoracic trauma, 38.5% sustained head trauma and
17.1% sustained maxillofacial trauma. 96.6% of the thoracolumbar fractures
were A type, 6.8% were B type and 1.7% were C type. Most A type fractures
were A0 (56.4%). There were also A1 (33.3%), A3 (12.0%) and A4 (15.4%), with
no A2 fractures. There were 4.3% B1 type fractures, 2.6% B2 type fractures
and 0% B3 type. The Thoracolumbar AOSpine Injury Score (TL AOSIS) for A3,
A4, B1 and B2 injuries indicated 34.2% of these patients should have
received surgery. Interestingly, only 57.5% of the recommended patients
actually received surgery. Conclusion: In orthopaedic
polytrauma, just over 1:3 have spinal fractures that are suitable for
surgery according to AO TLICS, but 42.5% of recommended polytraumas did not
receive surgery. The M2 modifier may justify no surgery in high TL AOSIS
scoring patients with concomitant injuries not suitable for surgery.
However, the M2 modifier may also justify surgery in low TL AOSIS scoring
fractures in patients with concomitant injuries requiring early
mobilisation. The M2 modifier in thoracolumbar spine trauma is particularly
important in the context of polytrauma. These patients often have
comorbidities making the decision to operate an ambiguous one. To the
discerning surgeon, the case-specific nuances indicated by the M2 modifier
provide a simple, effective method of communicating and justifying the
optimal treatment.

## 1242

## A070: Vertebral Bone Density Variation and the Risk of Subsequent
Fracture After Cement Augmentation: A Retrospective Study of Site Specific
Computed Tomography Measurements

Alon Grundshtein

1

, Dana Niry

2

, Khalil Salame

1

, Zvi Lidar

1

, Dror Ofir

1

, Morsi Khashan

1

, and Gilad Regev

1

1

Tel Aviv Sourasky Medical Center, The spinal unit, department of
neurosurgery, Tel Aviv, Israel

2

Tel Aviv Sourasky Medical Center, Department of Radiology, Tel Aviv,
Israel

Introduction: Subsequent vertebral fractures are a common
(12-52%) complication of percutaneous cement augmentation procedures for
osteoporotic compression fractures. Pre-operative CT scans allow for
opportunistic indirect measurement of bone density through the scanned spine
through Hounsfield units (HU) values. The study aims to test the hypothesis
that low site-specific preoperative HU values can predict a subsequent
vertebral fracture after cement augmentation. Material and
Methods: Between the years 2007-2017, 66 patients (16 men, 50
women, mean age 77.9 years) were treated by a single level thoraco-lumbar
percutaneous cement augmentation (kyphoplasty/vertebroplasty) for a low
energy osteoporotic compression. HU values (average and standard deviation)
were measured for each vertebra in three different locations in the
pre-operative CTs. 22 patients (33.3%) had subsequent vertebral body
fractures, within an average of 31.2 months (range 1-79 months). Patient
imaging and clinical notes were retrospectively reviewed.
Results: Across the cohort, mean HU values were
significantly different between the different measurement locations
(P < .001) – below the superior endplate (57), the
middle of the vertebral body (85.9) and superior to the inferior endplate
(81.9). Clinical variables tested including age, gender, steroid treatment,
fracture morphology, local kyphosis and augmentation procedure type did not
correlate with the risk of subsequent fractures. Mean and minimal HU values
were lower in the subsequent level fracture group (47.22 and 74.74 vs 53.86
and 85.11), however that result was not statistically significant (P values
of .63 and .36). Fractures of the L2 vertebra correlated significantly with
the risk of a subsequent vertebral fracture (P = .012).
Conclusion: Bone density was lowest at the cranial part of
the cancellous vertebral body, possibly contributing to the common finding
of upper endplate compression fractures. This study did not demonstrate
statistically significant correlation between low site-specific bone density
and the risk of subsequent vertebral fractures. L2 vertebral fractures as a
specific risk factor for a subsequent level fracture is a significant
finding not previously reported in the literature.

## 1777

## A071: Outcomes of Posterior Short Segment Fixation in AO Type A3 and A4
Thoracolumbar Fractures in Patients with High Occupational Activity

Nihar Shah

1

, Ramavtar Saini

1

, and Mirant Dave

1

1

Geetanjali Medical College and Hospital, Orthopaedics, Udaipur,
India

Introduction: With rapid economic development, high velocity
trauma and injuries like fall from height are increasing. The inherent
anatomy of the thoracolumbar region makes it more susceptible for fractures
because the thoracolumbar region is straddled between rigid thoracic spine
and mobile lumbar spine. In order to achieve and maintain anatomic
reduction, the forces that caused the injury must be counteracted by the
instrumentation construct, which should be robust enough to withstand
physiologic loads until the injury heals. With posterior fixation becoming
the gold-standard treatment of these fractures some surgeons creatively
started fixing the fractured vertebra without extension of fixed segments
and named the technique short same segment fixation. Managing AO type A3
& A4 thoracolumbar fractures by reinforcing the fractured vertebra by
placing additional 1 or 2 screws at the fracture level gives increased
stability to the overall construct, maintains anterior vertebral body
height, maintaining local kyphotic angle all while sacrificing less segments
and helps early return to routine activities. Material and
Methods: This study was a prospective study involving 30 patients
with single level AO type A3 & A4 thoracolumbar burst fractures with or
without neurological deficit between 2016 to 2018 in department of
orthopaedics of a tertiary care teaching hospital of southern Rajasthan. All
the patients were primarily managed accordingly to ATLS protocol, all the
fractures were confirmed by plain radiographs, subsequent CT and MRI were
done at surgeon’s discretion. All patients were surgically treated with
short same segment fixation using a posterior surgical approach with
transpedicular instrumentation. Pedicle screws were placed at one level
above and below the fracture site and also inserted at the level of the
fracture and connected with rods. Laminectomy done and bone graft was placed
post fixation. Rod contouring was done according to the lumbar lordosis and
distraction was done to maintain curvature. Results: A total of
30 patients were included in the study with an average age of 43 years
(range 30 to 68 year), most common mode of injury was fall from height. All
patients were of labour class and high occupational activity. Preoperative
AO Classification was A3 in 28 patients A4 in 2 patients. Mean preoperative
local kyphosis angle was 9.68 ± 2.11°. Postoperative local kyphosis angle
was 2.53 ± 1.17°. Preoperative anterior vertebral body height was 51.64 ±
5.83%, postoperative being 91.68 ± 5.12%. Out of 30, one patient was lost to
follow-up. No implant failure was encountered at two years follow up. At
2 years follow-up local kyphosis angle was 2.53 ± 1.12° and anterior
vertebral body height was 90.34 ± 4.93%. Conclusion: The team
concludes that short same segment pedicle fixation in AO type A3 and A4
thoracolumbar burst fractures provides reliable fixation while sacrificing
less motion segments, early return to work and minimal soft tissue handling
while maintaining local kyphosis angle and anterior vertebral body height at
two-years follow-up. Surgical fixation in A3 and A4 type fractures is the
choice of treatment for high occupational activity patients.

## 1260

## A072: Virtual Thoracolumbar Fracture Clinics are a Safe and Effective
Alternative to Traditional Clinic Models

Thomas York

1

, Vishal Borse

1

, Mark Nowell

1

, Nigel Gummerson

1

, Almas Khan

1

, and Peter Loughenbury

1

1

Leeds General Infirmary, Leeds Centre for Neurosciences, Leeds,
United Kingdom

Introduction: Virtual fracture clinics (VFCs) are an alternative
to conventional fracture clinics. There is limited data to support their use
for specialist thoracolumbar fracture clinics. Materials &
Methods: Lean methodology including process mapping was applied
to identify a safe virtual alternative for the existing pathway. First cycle
analysis of 100 consecutive referrals to the traditional clinic and second
cycle analysis of 100 consecutive referrals to the VFC.
Results: 
First cycle
: Mean time to outpatient review 84 days. 240 outpatient
appointments; 66 were missed (28% non-attendance). 54% of referrals had 3 or
more appointments. 82/100 were AO type A1-3. 9/100 were AO type A4 or B. 1
patient received operative stabilisation (AO type B).Process
mapping identified two pathways – virtual review with advice
letter and physiotherapy referral (outcome A - AO type A1-3) or face to face
review (outcome B - AO type A4 or B). 
Second cycle
: Mean time to outpatient review 10 days. 79/100
received outcome A. 8/79 (10%) made a telephone call for advice and only
2/79 (3%) asked for a face to face appointment. 19/100 received outcome B
and all were discharged after one visit. No patients required operative
stabilisation. Statistically significant reduction in number of scheduled
face-to-face reviews (240 vs 19; P < .001) and mean time
to first review (84 days versus 10 days; P < .001).
Conclusion: Virtual thoracolumbar fracture clinics are a
safe and effective alternative to traditional fracture clinic models. Lean
methodology can be uses to extend virtual clinic pathways to specialist
spinal trauma clinics.

## OP09: Endoscopic Spine Surgery

## 694

## A073: Clinical and Radiographic Outcomes of Cervical Disc Replacement
Versus Posterior Endoscopic Cervical Decompression: A Matched-Pair
Comparison Analysis

Vit Kotheeranurak

1

, and Taweechai Tejapongvorachai

2

1

Queen Savang Vadhana Memorial Hospital, Sriracha, Thailand

2

Chulalongkorn University, Orthopaedic department, Bangkok,
Thailand

Introduction: Cervical disc replacement (CDR) and posterior
endoscopic cervical decompression (PECD) are the cervical motion-sparing
surgeries to treat cervical radiculopathy. We aimed to compare the clinical
and radiographic outcomes between the two procedures. Material and
Methods: Eighteen patients, with a single-level unilateral
cervical radiculopathy, in each of the CDR and PECD groups were
retrospectively recruited as matched pairs. Clinical outcomes included
visual analog scale score (VAS) for neck and arm pain, Neck Disability Index
(NDI), and satisfaction rates. Radiographic outcomes were index level
motion. Intraoperative data, complications, and hospital stay were
collected. Patients’ outcomes were compared preoperatively and
postoperatively. Results: Matched pairs were compared between 2
groups in terms of demographic data and preoperative measurements; CDR group
had less operative time (P< .032), while PECD group has
less blood loss PECD (P<.027). The total complication
rate was 5% in both groups. VAS for neck and arm, and NDI were significantly
improved in both groups, which was no significant difference between 2
groups. Satisfaction rates of the both groups were more than 90%. CDR group
was superior to PECD group with respect to its capability to restore DH
(P< .001). Early postoperative follow-up periods
showed no significant difference in terms of index level motion. PECD group
achieved less hospital stay and return-t o-work time significantly
(P < .021). Conclusion: PECD may achieve equivalent
clinical and radiologic outcomes compared with CDR when certain criteria for
surgery are met. Early results showed that both techniques have potential to
maintain index level motion. Furthermore, the PECD group showed less blood
loss, shorter hospital stays, and faster return-to-work time. While, CDR
group had less operative time and better ability to restore disc height.

## 725

## A074: Endoscopic Transnasal Odontoidectomy for Ventral Decompression of
the Craniovertebral Junction: Surgical Technique and Clinical Outcome in 18
Cases

Vicki Butenschön

1

, Maria Wostrack

1

, Bernhard Meyer

1

, and Jens Gempt

1

1

Technical University Munich, Department of Neurosurgery, Munich,
Germany

Objective: Basilar invagination, odontoid rheumatoid pannus and
osteomyelitis result in compression of the brainstem at the cranio-vertebral
junction and symptoms of myelopathy. A staged procedure with posterior
stabilization and anterior transnasal endoscopic decompression is recently
considered a less invasive alternative to the transoral approach. We hereby
present a considerably large case series with focus on the operative
technique and neurological clinical outcome. Methods: We
retrospectively reviewed all patients treated in our neurosurgical
department from January 2009 to December 2019. Demographics, pre- and
postoperative clinical status as well as operative technique and
complications were extracted and analyzed. Results: In total,
21 transnasal operations were performed in 18 patients from 2009 to 2019.
All but one patient underwent posterior C1-C2 instrumentation prior to the
anterior transnasal CT-navigated full-endoscopic decompression. Median
duration of symptoms before surgery was 3 months, only 1 patient suffered
from Chiari Malformation Type II. Complications occurred in one patient who
died from septic organ failure due to his initial diagnosis of
osteomyelitis. Lumbar drains were placed in 19% of the cases, transient
swallowing disturbances were observed in 41%, which mostly resolved at
follow-up. Postoperative CT imaging showed sufficient decompression in 15
patients, 3 patients underwent a transnasal endoscopic re-decompression
(16.7%). Conclusions: Transnasal endoscopic odontoidectomy
presents a safe procedure with a satisfying clinical and radiological
postoperative outcome compared to the transoral approach.

## 140

## A075: Transforaminal Endoscopic Discectomy. Comparison with
Microdiscectomy

Roman Khalepa

1

1

FSBI "Federal Neurosurgical Center", Spinal neurosurgical
department, Novosibirsk, Russian Federation

Introduction: The incidence of lumbar disc herniation is 11-25%
of all complaints about pain in the lumbar spine. Today microdiscectomy is
the gold standard for surgical treatment of lumbar disc herniation. Full
endoscopic surgical treatment of lumbar disc herniations has similar
results. The aim of this trial was to determine whether endoscopic method
leads to equivalent, better or worse outcomes than the current ‘gold
standard’ of microdiscectomy. Material and Methods: 210
patients with lumbar disc herniation were operated on with full endoscopic
transforaminal technique (TED) and 2205 patients underwent microdiscectomy
(Micro). The average age of patients was 39 years (14-76). Standard scales
and questionnaires VAS, ODI, SF36 were used to objectify and standardize the
clinical manifestations of the disease before and after surgical treatment.
MRI, CT, and radiography were used to determine the localization of disc
herniations, to determine the consistency of herniated disc, to plan a
surgical procedure. Clinical outcome defined during 24 months after surgery
by visual analogue scale (VAS), Oswestry Disability Index (ODI) and Short
Form 36 (SF36) questionnaires. Results: After the surgery, the
leg pain, backpain (VAS), disability (ODI) and quality of life (SF36) were
significantly improved (P < .001) in both groups. When
comparing the results of TED and standart microsurgical method, it was
established that the indices of back (2.4 vs 3.1 respectively) and leg pain
(1.7 vs 2.5), disability (ODI 30 vs 31) and quality of life (SF36 MH 42 vs
38; PH 40 vs 36) after endoscopic technique are better but without
statistically significant difference (P value > .05).
There were 19 (9%) of complications after TED and 104 (4.7%) after
microdiscectomy: unintended durotomy (13 (6.4%) vs 79 (3.5% respectively),
transitory hypalgesia (3 (2.1%) vs 25 (5%)), retroperitoneal haematoma (1
(0.7%) vs 0 (0%)). Revision surgery (4 (2.1%) vs 11 (0.5%)). Recurrent disc
herniations (TED 12 (5.7%) vs microdiscectomy 94 (4.3%)). McNab results:
excellent 28% endoscopy vs 26% microdiscectomy; good 56% vs 58%;
satisfactorily 16% vs 15%; unsatisfactory 0% vs 1%. Conclusion:
Transforaminal endoscopic discectomy and microdiscectomy give comparable
outcomes. A less leg and back pain, better parameters of physical ability
and quality of life after endoscopic technique due to minimal surgical
trauma but are offset by a greater requirement for revision surgery and
complications.

## 250

## A076: Comparison of Primary Versus Revision Lumbar Discectomy Using a
Biportal Endoscopic technique

Min-Seok Kang

1

, and Hyun-Jin Park

2

1

Bumin Hospital Seoul, Orthopedic Surgery, Seoul, South
Korea

2

Kangnam Sacred Heart Hospital, Hallym University College of
Medicine, Orthopedic Surgery, Seoul, South Korea

Introduction: The outcomes of the microscopic revision lumbar
discectomy (Micro-RLD) are acceptable, but it is known to be inferior to the
microscopic primary lumbar discectomy (Micro-LD). The peridural scar
formation that inevitably accompanies the primary LD, is the main reason why
Micro-RLD is more difficult, increasing the risk of complication such as
unintended durotomy, nerve injury, and iatrogenic spinal instability. The
biportal endoscopic technique (BE) for primary LD has known to yield similar
clinical outcomes and patient satisfaction to Micro-LD, but incurred less
bleeding loss, hospital stay and postoperative pain. This study aims to
compare the clinical outcomes of patients who underwent the BE-LD and
BE-RLD. Material and Methods: A retrospective study of a
prospectively collected data was conducted on 81 consecutive patients who
underwent BE-LD or BE-RLD and could be follow-up for more than 12 months,
between March 2018 and June 2019. Patients were divided into two groups:
Group A (BE-LD) and Group B (BE-RLD). Recurrent Lumbar disc herniation
(RLDH) was defined as case in which the lumbosacral radicular pain recurs
after a pain-free period after primary Micro-LD, and the RLDH was confirmed
by magnetic resonance imaging. Clinical outcomes included visual analogue
scale (VAS), Oswestry Disability Index (ODI), and modified MacNab’s
criteria. In addition, total operation time, length of hospital stay (LOS),
amount of surgical drain, and kinetics of serum creatine phosphokinase (CPK)
and C-reactive protein (CRP) were recorded. Results: Eighty-one
patients were enrolled in this study; 59 from group A and 22 from group B.
The demographic data was comparable between the two groups. Both groups were
observed to have significant improvement in pain (VAS) and disability (ODI)
compared to the baseline values from two days after surgery
(P < .05), which lasted until the final follow-up.
According to the modified MacNab’s criteria on the follow-up, 88.1 % of the
patients was excellent or good in Group A and 90.9% in Group B. There were
no significant differences between the two groups in regard to operating
time, LOS, amount of surgical drain, and variation of serum CRP and CPK
level. There was also no significant difference in improvement of VAS score
and ODI score between Group A and B. Two cases of incidental durotomy, one
case of epidural hematoma, and one case of local recurrence occurred in
Group A. All but one patient who had local recurrence were recovered without
secondary surgical treatment. One case of incidental durotomy and one case
of epidural hematoma occurred in Group B. Conclusion: BE-RLD
showed less postoperative pain, favorable functional improvement, and early
laboratory recovery equivalent to BE-LD. Although this study is limited by
its retrospective design, the results suggest that even in the BE-RLD, it is
useful because of its less invasiveness and clinical results.

## 1600

## A077: Full Endoscopic Lumbar Discectomy f or the Treatment of Lumbar Disc
Herniation and Radiculopathy: An Observational Study and Experience of a
Single Surgeon in 273 Patients

Wael Chaaban

1

1

Healthpoint Hospital LLC, Spine Unit, Orthopedic department, Abu
Dhabi, United Arab Emirates

Introduction: Many endoscopic techniques to treat different
spinal motion segment disorders has been described. The Open Lumbar
Microdiscectomy has been the Gold standard for the treatment of Lumbar disc
Herniation (LDH) with radiculopathy since long time; however, Full
Endoscopic Lumbar Discectomy (ELD) is becoming a less invasive surgical
alternative with similar benefits and outcomes; with shorter Hosp stay and
earlier return to work. Materials and Methods: 273 Patients
with LDH and radiculopathy underwent to Full Endoscopic Lumbar Discectomy by
a single surgeon between August 2012 and July 2019 with a minimum follow up
of 1 year were included in the study. These patients include
177 male and 96 females, with mean age of 37.5 (18-68 years). Patients with
other spinal co-morbidities like instability, Lumbar canal stenosis,
Discogenic Low Back pain, Deformities and Failed Back surgery syndrome were
not included in the study. Either Transforaminal (TELD) or Interlaminar
(IELD) approach was decided based on Herniation features on preoperative
images and Surgeon experience. Side of approach was decided based on
dominant symptoms side. A 25° scope was used to operate all cases. The
Visual Analogue Scale (VAS) and Oswestry Disability Index (ODI) were
measured before the procedure and at 3, 6 and 12 months after the procedure.
Length Hospital stay, Return to work, Recurrence/re-intervention rate,
Incomplete decompression, overall complication and complication/related
factors were also measured in the study. Results: 315 segments
were operated, 231 patients underwent a single level procedure and 42
patients underwent 2-levels procedure. Overall satisfaction rate was 89.74%
(n:245). The VAS and ODI had both significant improvement after the
procedure which keep improved up to 1 year follow up (P
< .01). The success rate in patients who underwent a single-level
procedure was remarkably higher than those patients who underwent 2-levels
procedures (97.40% vs. 47.62%). The overall complication rate was 2.93% (n =
8), Infection 1.10% (n = 3), Incomplete decompression / Residual herniation
.73% (n = 2), Recurrence 1.10% (n = 3) but only 1 patient was symptomatic
and required a new procedure. Transitory postoperative dysesthesia was seen
in 25 patients, where Prolonged operative time (>90 minutes) and
Transforaminal approach at L5/S1 level were both significant related factors
to present this undesirable post operative outcome. Conclusion:
Full Endoscopic Lumbar Discectomy is an effective and safe surgical
procedure for the treatment of selected group of patients with Lumbar Disc
Herniation and Radiculopathy.

## 685

## A078: A Comparison of Patient Reported Outcomes Between Tranforaminal and
Interlaminar Endoscopic Discectomy in Treating Patients with Paracentral
Disc Herniation: A Randomized Controlled Trial

Vit Kotheeranurak

1

, Weerasak Singhatanadgige

2

, Worawat Limthongkul

2

, Khanathip Jitpakdee

1

, Wicharn Yingsakmongkol

2

, and Jin-Sung Kim

3

1

Queen Savang Vadhana Memorial Hospital, Conburi, Thailand

2

Chulalongkorn University, Orthopaedic department, Bangkok,
Thailand

3

The Catholic University, Seoul St.Mary's Hospital, Neurosurgery,
Seoul, South Korea

Introduction: Transforaminal endoscopic lumbar discectomy (TELD)
and interlaminar endoscopic lumbar discectomy (IELD) are the minimally
invasive procedures that have been increasing in popularity when dealing
with surgical cases of herniated nucleus pulposus (HNP) patients. The
paracentral disc herniation can be treated with both techniques. We aimed to
compare the patient-reported outcomes (PROs) between TELD and IELD in
treating patients with paracentral-typed HNP patients. Material and Methods:
Fifty-six patients with paracentral-typed disc herniation were randomized
into two groups: the transforaminal and interlaminar group. The patients
have then received treatment according to their groups and they all
completed at least 3 months of follow-up. The patient-reported outcomes were
assessed according to the Oswestry Disability Index (ODI), Visual Analog
Scale (VAS) score for back leg and wound, and modified MacNab criteria. The
operation time, intraoperative radiation time, hospitalization period,
returned-to-work time, and complications were obtained. All parameters were
compared between the two groups. Student t-test, a Mann-Whitney U test, and
a χ 2 were used in statistical analysis. Results: All the
patients completed follow up with a mean of 6.8 months (range,
3.1-9.8 months). In the TELD group, the mean operation time was 51.0 ±
7.3 minutes, and the intraoperative radiation time was 4.60 ± 1.32 seconds.
While in the IELD group, the mean operation time was 42.2 ± 23.4 minutes,
and the intraoperative radiation time was 0.57 ± 2.21 seconds. There were
significant differences in operation time and radiation time between the two
groups (P < .01) but not in the hospitalization period,
return-to-work time, or complication rate (P > .05).
There were 2 incidental dural tears, and 1 recurrent herniation in the IELD
group and 1 recurrent herniation in the IELD group. Concerning the PROs,
patients’ satisfactory rates were 82.6% (19/23) and 87.0% (20/23) owing to
the good-to-excellent modified Macnab criteria without a significant
difference (P > .05). The postoperative ODI and VAS were
significantly improved in the two groups when compared with preoperative
status (P < .01) which achieved a minimal clinically
important difference (MCID). Early postoperative wound pain was more in the
IELD group (VAS = 3.4 ± 1.2 vs 0.8 ± 0.3, P = .047) but not
different after 2 weeks follow-up periods. Conclusion: Both
IELD and TELD yielded good PROs without statistical difference. The patients
in the IELD group experienced a slightly earlier postoperative pain than in
the TELD group. However, without any anatomy restriction, IELD provides a
more familiar operative orientation associated with shorter operative time
and less radiation exposure when compared to the TELD. Skillful needle
placement could reduce the operative time and radiation exposure in TELD
surgery.

## 229

## A079: Percutaneous Endoscopic Lumbar Discectomy: Presentation of 110
Operated Cases in Argentina and Revision of the Surgical Technique

Guillermo Frucella

1

, and daniel maldonado

2

1

COT, Neurosurgery, Rosario, Argentin

2

HECA, Neurosurgery, Rosario, Argentina

Introduction: Percutaneous Endoscopic Lumbar Discectomy (PELD)
is a minimally invasive technique that has been used in different countries
since the late eighties for the treatment of Herniated Discs. The purpose of
this article is to present the results of the clinical evolution of 110
patients operated on for different lumbar disc herniations by percutaneous
endoscopic technique, with a six-months follow-up. Likewise, to describe the
technique performed and the most relevant aspects of the preoperative
planning, including the percutaneous entry point. Materials and
Methods: In a group of 110 patients who together had 141 discs
operated on between April 2016 and October 2019, data were collected on
patient age and gender, clinical presentation, MRI abnormalities and
preoperative Planning (measuring the distance between midline and Skin Entry
Point with target in the herniated disc fragment). A directed fragmentectomy
was performed in all cases, and then supplemented with the In-Out technique.
The main data recorded was the difference in Oswestry scores (ODI) before
and after surgery at 6 months after the procedure. The duration of the
operation, the length of hospitalization, and the need for reoperation were
also verified. All patients were operated awake, receiving epidural
anesthesia and sedation. Results: 110 patients and 141
herniated discs were operated on. The average reduction in ODI at 6 months
was 47.5 points (SD = 5.7), representing a mean reduction percentage of 85%
(SD = 9.5). From the technical point of view, it was possible to average the
distance from the midline to the Skin Entry Point, according to the level
operated and the chosen approach. Conclusion: Analyzing the
results in our series of 110 patients with lumbar herniated discs operated
on awake by percutaneous endoscopy, improvements in average pain of 85% were
obtained at six months. The endoscopic technique can be considered as an
effective procedure for patients with foraminal, extraforaminal and central
herniations at the L3L4, L4L5 and L5S1 levels.

## 32

## A080: Partial Pediculotomy, Partial Vertebrotomy Approach for Posterior
Endoscopic Cervical foraminotomy and Discectomy

Pang Hung Wu

1

, Hyeun Sung Kim

2

, Ji Yeon Kim

2

, and Il-Tae Jang

2

1

National University Health Systems, Jurong Health Campus, SINGAPORE,
Singapore

2

Nanoori Gangnam Hospital, Seoul, South Korea

Introduction: Cervical radiculopathy is a common cervical spine
condition. There is paucity of literature in discussing the effect of
partial pediculotomy and partial vertebrotomy for posterior endoscopic
cervical foraminotomy (PPPV PECF) on cervical radiculopathy. We investigate
the radiological and clinical outcome of this approach. Materials and
Methods: Retrospective evaluation of 30 cases with cervical
radiculopathy underwent PPPV PECF. Preoperative, post-operative
roentgenogram for evaluation of stability, Computer Tomography evaluation of
foraminal dimensions and area in sagittal view was performed. 3D
reconstruction area of decompression evaluations were performed. Clinical
outcomes of Visual Analog Scale (VAS), Oswestry Disability Index(ODI) and
MacNab’s score were evaluated. Results: There was no
complication and recurrence in our PPPV PECF cohort during the study period.
At preoperative, 1 week postoperative, and
3 months postoperative and final follow up, the mean Visual
Analog Scale had significant improvement with scores of 7.6, 3.0, 2.1, and
1.7 respectively, P < .05; and the mean Oswestry
Disability Index with scores of 73.9, 28.1, 23.3, and 21.5 respectively,
P < .05. MacNab’s criteria showed all patients
scoring good and excellent. Radiological result showed PPPV PECF had
significant increase in decompression in the foramen area all CT measured
parameters, as compared to the mean preoperative values; 1) sagittal area
increased 60.1+/- 23.1 mm², 2) CT Cranio- Caudal length increased 4.0+/-
1.54 mm and 3) CT ventro-dorsal length increased 4.0 +/- 1.97 mm and 4) 3D
CT scan reconstruction decompression area increased 996+/- 266 mm²,
P < .05. Conclusion: PPPV PECF is a
safe route of decompression of cervical spine with good clinical and
radiological outcome.

## 34

## A081: Comparative Clinical and Radiologic Cohort Study: Uniportal
Thoracic Endoscopic Laminotomy with Bilateral Decompression Using One Block
Resection Technique and Thoracic Open Laminotomy with Bilateral
Decompression for Thoracic Ossified Ligamentum Flavum

Pang Hung Wu

1

, Hyeun Sung Kim

2

, Ji Yeon Kim

2

, and Il-Tae Jang

2

1

National University Health Systems, Jurong Health Campus,
Orthopaedic Surgery, Singapore

2

Nanoori Gangnam Hospital, Seoul, Spine Surgery, Seoul, South
Korea

Introduction: Thoracic Ossified Ligamentum Flavum is an uncommon
cause of thoracic spinal canal stenosis. Symptomatic thoracic myelopathy
secondary to Thoracic Ossified Ligamentum Flavum often required
decompression spinal surgery. We aimed to evaluate the comparative clinical
and radiological outcomes in uniportal endoscopic versus open thoracic
decompression for Thoracic Ossified Ligamentum Flavum. Materials and
Methods: Retrospective evaluation of all patients who underwent
Uniportal Thoracic Endoscopic Laminotomy with Bilateral Decompression Using
One Block Resection Technique (TE-ULBD) were compared with Thoracic Open
Laminotomy With Bilateral Decompression (TOL) for myelopathic patients with
thoracic ossified ligamentum flavum. 3 independent fellowship trained spine
surgeon evaluated the radiological and clinical outcomes in computer
tomography, magnetic resonance imaging scan and clinical charts. Pre and
postoperative MRI parameters of axial cut spinal canal area in upper, middle
and lower disc, clinical parameters of VAS, ODI and JOA at preoperative,
postoperative 1 week, 6 months and final follow up
were compared. Results: 35 levels of TE-ULBD performed in 28
patients were compared with 24 levels of TOL were performed. The overall
complication rate of TOL was 8.3% with 2 complications while TE-ULBD was
2.8% with one complication. Both TOL and TE-ULBD cohort had significantly
improved their VAS, ODI and JOA score when comparisons were made within
their cohort. Comparative analysis of TE-ULBD showed statistically
significant improvement than TOL in improvement of final VAS and JOA score.
The mean difference+/- standard deviation of VAS and JOA improvement in
final follow up when compared with preoperative state of TE-ULBD and TOL
were .717+/-.131 and 1.03+/-.2 respectively, P< .05.
There was no statistical difference in change in preoperative and final ODI
and MRI volume at upper, middle and lower disc canal cross sectional area.
Conclusion: Uniportal thoracic endoscopic unilateral
laminotomy with bilateral decompression achieved significantly improved pain
and neurological recovery with equally sufficient spinal canal decompression
as compared to thoracic open laminectomy for patients with myelopathy
secondary to ossified ligamentum flavum in our cohort of patients.

## OP10: Degenerative Lumbar Surgery 1

## 1037

## A082: 6 Month Outcomes for Patients Undergoing Posterior vs
Circumferential Surgical Approach for Isthmic Spondylolisthesis

Paul Arnold

1

, Alexander Vaccaro

2

, James Harrop

3

, Steven Ludwig

4

, Darrel Brodke

5

, Justin Smith

6

, Zach Ray

7

, Michael Fehlings

8

, and Branko Kopjar

9

1

Carle Illinois College of Medicine, Urbana, USA

2

Rothman Institute, Philadelphia, USA

3

Thomas Jefferson University, Philadelphia, USA

4

University of Maryland Medical Center, Baltimore, USA

5

University of Utah, Salt Lake City, USA

6

University of Virginia, Charlottesville, USA

7

Washington University School of Medicine, St. Louis, USA

8

Toronto Western Hospital, Toronto, Canada

9

University of Washington, Seattle, USA

Introduction: There is no consensus on the optimal surgical
approach in treating isthmic spondylolisthesis (IS). Both posterior and
circumferential surgical approaches are used. Materials and
Methods: This is an interim analysis of a prospective,
multicenter; observational, comparative study of surgically naïve patients
with IS grade I-III at a single level between L4 and S1. Subjects are
between 18 and 80 years of age, are enrolled at one of 12 sites
in North America, and will be followed for 2 years. Patients
with significant scoliosis or cauda equina syndrome are excluded. This
interim analysis compares 6 months follow-up outcomes between
posterior and circumferential surgical approaches. Results: So
far, 161 patients have been enrolled (115 posterior and 46 circumferential).
The majority of patients were operated at L5/S1 (74.6% posterior and 95.7%
circumferential). 6 month data is available for 112/126
subjects (84 posterior and 28 circumferential). At this time point, there
are no differences in age, race, gender, or the baseline score values
between the groups. There has been an improvement in all endpoints in both
groups. While pain outcomes trend better in the circumferential group and
EQ-5D scores in the posterior group, neither of these is significant. There
are no differences between the posterior and circumferential groups in
change in Oswestry Disability Index (ODI) (20.0 and 15.5 respectively,
P = .2277); lumbar pain (2.6 and 3.0 respectively,
P = .5817); buttocks and leg pain (3.1 and 3.5
respectively, P = .4701); EQ-5D Index (.23 and .14
respectively, P = .098); SF-36 Physical Component Score
(PCS) (10.7 and 11.3 respectively, P = .7347); and SF-36
Mental Component Score (MCS) (7.0 and 3.4 respectively, P =
.1855). Conclusion: Patients in both treatment groups have
improved in quality of life, pain, and functional outcomes. The extent of
improvement is clinically meaningful. There are no differences in outcomes
between the posterior and circumferential surgical approaches; however, this
is an ongoing study and the current sample size is insufficient to provide
confirmatory evidence.

## 519

## A083: Do Organs Change Position In Prone Patients Compared to
Supine?

Fauzan A. Hashmi

1

, Peter Loughenbury

1

, Richard Fawcett

2

, and Almas Khan

1

1

Leeds General Infirmary, Spine Surgery, Leeds, United
Kingdom

2

Leeds General Infirmary, Radiology, Leeds, United Kingdom

Introduction: The lateral retroperitoneal approach to the spine
is a minimally invasive route for performing lumbar interbody fusion,
traditionally performed in a lateral decubitus position. Recent interest in
single position surgery has led to performing the lateral approach in the
prone position, enabling the surgeon to proceed to posterior stabilisation
without repositioning the patient. Most spine imaging is performed supine,
in a different position to surgery. We sought to define the retroperitoneal
anatomical relationships to the intervertebral discs in the prone position
compared to supine, so the surgeon may be aware of hazards posed by
unexpected changes in anatomy. Materials and Methods: This was
a retrospective cross-sectional study conducted at the Department of Spine
Surgery, Leeds General Infirmary, Leeds, UK. Patients who had undergone
concurrent supine and prone axial CT scans were included. A line drawn
between the transverse processes at each vertebral level was named the
Inter-transverse process line (ITPL) and the following measurements were
recorded in supine and prone positions: 1) the distance and change in ITPL
to the anterior border of each Psoas Major muscle at L3, L4 and L5 2) the
distance and change from ITPL to the posterior margin of each kidney at of
L2/L3 or L1/L2. 3) the distance and change from ITPL to the inferior vena
cava. Results: A total of 20 patients were included in the
study. The mean displacement of Psoas Major at L3 on left was 2.06 mm ± 1.66
mm (range -1-6.0 mm), on right was 1.77mm ± 1.9 mm (range 0-6.0 mm), at L4,
on left was 1.0 mm ± 1.60 mm (range -1-5 mm) and on right was 1.33 mm± 1.60
mm (range -2-4.0 mm). At L5, displacement on left was 1.94 mm ± 2.26 mm
(range -2-6 mm) whereas on right it was 1.72 mm±2.19 mm (range -2 - 6.0 mm).
The mean kidney displacement at L1 on left was 7.17 mm± 2.2 mm (range 3.0
mm-9.0 mm), on the right 6.57 mm ± 5.38 mm (range .0-15.0 mm), at L2 on left
was 9.69 mm ± 7.09 mm (range 1-24.0 mm), on right was 11.44 mm ± 4.83 mm
(range 0-20 mm) and at L3, on left was 8.27 mm ± 6.75 mm (range -3-21.0 mm),
on right was 14.50 mm ± 7.73 mm (range 4-26 mm). The mean displacement of
the inferior vena cava was 1.0 mm at L2 and 2.0 mm at L3.
Conclusion: In the majority of patients, the kidney
position altered in prone compared to supine. The psoas muscles moved
minimally, likely due to its vertebral attachments. The great vessels
appeared more static; however, some patients showed posterior movement of
the Inferior Vena Cava when prone, bringing the vessel closer to the
anterior annulus, potentially increasing the risk of great vessel injury
during retractor positioning or ALL release. These findings provide insight
into possible alterations in clinical anatomy and must be considered when
making the surgical approach.

## 1337

## A084: Morphological Changes in The Major Psoas Position in Relation to
the Patient Positioning

Rodrigo Amaral

1

, Luiz Pimenta

1

, Gabriel Porkony

1

, Murilo Daher

2

, and Daniel Arnoni

1

1

Instituto de Patologia da Coluna, São Paulo, Brazil

2

Universidade Federal de Goiânia, São Paulo, Brazil

Introduction: The lateral lumbar interbody fusion (LLIF) is a
safe and effective technique to treat a vast range of lumbar disorders. The
LLIF is a good option for interbody fusion, as it reduces posterior muscle
damage, is capable of relief neurological symptoms through indirect
decompression, and promotes more significant gains of segmental lordosis
than standard posterior techniques. However, the transient plexus symptoms
and the small gain of segmental lordosis still burden the traditional LLIF
technique. Therefore, the study aims to assess if a prone decubitus frame is
capable of promoting a plexus retraction and the increase of the lumbar
lordosis in the surgical table. Methods: Singlecentric,
retrospective, non-randomized, comparative, observational study. Inclusion
Criteria: The patient had consented to have his/her information collected,
with no prior lumbar spine surgery. Exclusion Criteria: Patients with
deformities or anatomical variations that impossibilities the evaluation of
the key structures of the study, unable to complete MRI at the three
proposed positions. The following measures were performed: vertebral body AP
size, area of major psoas muscle, a distance of the plexus from the
posterior border of the vertebrae, distance from the anterior margin of the
psoas muscle from the anterior border of the vertebrae, L1S1 lordosis, and
L4S1 lordosis. The difference between the two groups was compared using the
T-test with, and the difference between 3 groups was compared using
Kruskal-Wallis test, a P < .05 being considered
significant. Results: Twenty-four patients were included in the
study, 14 female (58%), The area of the psoas muscle significantly increased
from L1L2 to L4L5, experiencing a subtle decrease in the L5S1 level. The
plexus was located in the first quintile of the vertebrae in all positions
for L3L4 and at the beginning of the second quintile for L4L5. A significant
increase both in L1S1 and L4S1 was observed in the pone decubitus regarding
the other two positions (L1S1-57.6 vs 46.5, P < .001;
L4S1-40,4 vs 36.9, P < .01) and Dorsal (L1S1-57.6 vs
47.2, P < .001; L4S1-40.4 vs 36.8, P
< .05). Conclusion: The prone position promotes an increase
in the lumbar lordosis. However, it did not exert significant effect over
the plexus position neither in L3L4 nor L4L5.

## 603

## A085: Low Back Pain Patients With Modic Changes Should not be Treated
with Antibiotics

Peter Udby

1

1

Zealand University Hospital, Spine Unit, Køge, Denmark

Introduction: This state-of the-art presentation is based on
results from three research groups in Sweden, Denmark and Norway.
Independently, studies have been conducted with three different
perspectives, but with a focus on treatment of patients with Modic changes.
The results of these studies have been published in international journals
over the last half of 2019. Material and Methods: In Sweden, a
multicenter study with 7 participating clinics, where the presence of
bacteria in disci were evaluated in two different patient groups (n = 60)
were conducted. DNA technology at two independent university clinics in
Gothenburg and Uppsala were used to analyze samples from patients undergoing
surgery for respectively lumbar disc herniation and scoliosis. In Denmark, a
cohort study with 13 year follow-up on low back patients (n =
204) not undergoing surgery was conducted. The purpose was to evaluate the
long-term prognosis of Modic changes in back pain and level of functioning.
In Norway the effect of antibiotic treatment for back pain was evaluated, in
a multicenter study. The study included patients with chronic low back pain
(n = 180), with MC1 or MC2 changes, in a randomized placebo-controlled
double-blind study in six hospitals. Results: The Swedish study
found no relevant difference in presence of bacteria between the two groups.
Also, there was no association between back / leg pain and presence of
bacteria. It concluded that findings of bacteria or traces of bacteria,
described in previous studies, is likely the result of contamination during
the surgical process. The Danish study found that physical function measured
by RMDQ was similar in the two groups at baseline, but was statistically
significantly better in patients with Modic changes at follow-up, 7.4 vs 9.6
(P = .024). In addition, patients with Modic changes
had statistically significantly fewer sick days due to back pain at
13 years follow-up, 9.0 vs 22.9 (number of days per year,
P = .003). It concluded, that Modic changes in patients
was not negatively associated with the occurrence of back pain or function
level at 13 years follow-up. In the Norwegian study, the mean
difference in RMDQ score between the Amoxicillin and placebo groups for
patients with either MC1 or MC2 was -1.6 (95% CI, -3.1 to .0;
P = .04). The difference between the groups in patients
with MC1 changes was −2.3 (95% Cl, −4.2 to −.4; P = .02),
thus not clinically relevant. Similar results were also found for pain
intensity and quality of life. It concluded, that three months treatment
with Amoxicillin not associated with a relevant patient-reported clinical
effect after one year in terms of function (RMDQ) compared to placebo.
Conclusion: Based on the available knowledge, including the
three Nordic studies that are reported above, there is currently no basis
for recommending treatment with antibiotics for back pain with or without
radiculopathy, provided there are no signs of serious infection.

## 770

## A086: What Preoperative Factors are Associated with Achieving a
Clinically Meaningful Improvement and Satisfaction After Lumbar Fusion for
Degenerative Spondylolisthesis? A Multivariate Analysis of 997
Patients

Graham Goh

1

, and Reuben Soh

1

1

Singapore General Hospital, Singapore, Singapore

Introduction: roper patient selection is key to ensuring good
surgical results in spine surgery. Identifying preoperative characteristics
that predict postoperative outcomes may guide surgical decision-making and
facilitate preoperative counselling. This study aimed to identify
characteristics associated with clinically meaningful improvement, patient
satisfaction and expectation fulfilment in patients undergoing
transforaminal lumbar interbody fusion (TLIF) for degenerative
spondylolisthesis. Materials and Methods: Patients who
underwent a primary, single-level TLIF for degenerative spondylolisthesis
between 2006 and 2015 were identified from our institutional spine registry.
Demographic and perioperative characteristics were recorded.
Patient-reported outcomes (PRO) such as the Oswestry Disability Index (ODI),
36-Item Short-Form Physical Component Score (SF-36 PCS), Mental Component
Score (SF-36 MCS), Visual Analogue Scale (VAS) back pain and VAS leg pain
were collected preoperatively and at 2 years postoperatively.
Patients also completed the North American Spine Society (NASS)
questionnaire for patient satisfaction and expectation fulfilment.
Multivariate logistic regression was used to identify preoperative
characteristics associated with achieving MCID for each PRO, patient
satisfaction and expectation fulfilment using a forward stepwise inclusion
algorithm. Results: In total, 997 patients were included.
Significant improvements in VAS Back, VAS Leg, ODI, SF-36 PCS and SF-36 MCS
were observed. The majority of patients achieved MCID (79.5% for VAS Back,
78.4% for VAS Leg, 85.9% for ODI, 76.8% for SF-36 PCS), satisfaction (87.9%)
and expectation fulfilment (85.5%) at 2 years. After adjusting
for confounding variables, multivariate analyses showed that increasing age
and better preoperative ODI were associated with achieving MCID for VAS
Back; increasing age and better preoperative VAS Back were associated with
achieving MCID for VAS Leg; lower BMI and better preoperative ODI were
associated with achieving MCID for SF-36 PCS. Better preoperative SF-36 MCS
was associated with MCID attainment for ODI (OR 1.038, 95% CI 1.019-1.057,
P < .001), satisfaction (OR 1.034, 95% CI
1.018-1.049, P < .001) and expectation fulfilment (OR
1.024, 95% CI 1.010-1.039, P < .001). Other preoperative
variables such as sex, diabetes, arthritis, comorbidity burden and surgical
approach were not associated with postoperative outcomes.
Conclusion: Older patients were more likely to experience a
clinically significant improvement in back or leg pain after lumbar fusion
for degenerative spondylolisthesis, while patients with less disability were
more likely to experience an improvement in back pain and quality of life.
In particular, a patient’s preoperative mental health was independently
associated with multiple outcomes, such as clinically meaningful improvement
in functional disability, postoperative satisfaction and expectation
fulfilment.

## 1471

## A087: Lumbar Disc Herniation Surgery Preferences Amongst Latin America
Spine Surgeons: A Web-Based Survey

Asdrubal Falavigna

1

, Miguel Bertelli Ramos

2

, Carolina Matté Dagostini

2

, Nestor Taboada

3

, Alexandre Iutaka

4

, and Cristiano Menezes

5

1

University of Caxias do Sul (UCS), Health Sciences Postgraduate
Program, Caxias do Sul, Brazil

2

University of Caxias do Sul (UCS), Cell Therapy Laboratory and
Clinical Studies and Basic Models of Spinal Disorders Laboratory, Caxias
do Sul, Brazil

3

Pontificia Universidad Javeriana, Neurosurgery Department, Bogota,
Colombia

4

University of São Paulo, Orthopedics Department, São Paulo,
Brazil

5

Dr. Cristiano Menezes Institute, Spine Surgery, Belo Horizonte,
Brazil

Introduction: Lumbar disc herniation surgery is hallmarked by
many technical nuances which may vary according to surgeons’ specialty or
experience. Post-operative recommendations may also differ according to
surgical strategies adopted. This study aims to evaluate the surgical
preferences and post-operative recommendations of Latin American spine
surgeons in the lumbar disc herniation setting, assessing possible
differences according to surgeons’ specialty, experience, and techniques.
Material and Methods: A link containing a 22-item
questionnaire was sent to AOSpine Latin America members’ e-mails in June
2020. The survey evaluated: (1) General information; (2) Surgical
preferences; and (3) Post-operative recommendations of spine surgeons in the
setting of lumbar disc herniation surgery. Results: A total of
438 spine surgeons from 18 different countries answered the questionnaire.
Of them, 50.7% were neurosurgeons and 49.3% were orthopedic surgeons. The
mean experience of the respondents was 11.7 ± 10.4 years of
experience (95%CI 10.7-12.6), and the median was 10.0 years of
experience. The majority of surgeons (60.3%) perform ≤5 lumbar disc
herniation surgeries per month. Sixty-five (14.8%) surgeons do not use any
magnification device. The most commonly used were microscope (51.8%) and
magnifying glass (47.5%). Magnification devices were more often used by
neurosurgeons (97.2%) than by orthopedic surgeons (72.7%) (OR = 13.09;95%CI
= 6.72-38.82;P = .001), especially the microscope (OR =
12.21;95%CI = 7.83-21.31;P = .001). The majority of
surgeons (57.3%) perform only open surgery. Specialty and years of
experience were not related to the type of surgical technique adopted.
Surgeons who performed >5 surgeries per month were more likely to use
less invasive techniques (OR = 2.01;95%CI = 1.29-3.36; P =
.004). Orthosis or lumbar support devices are never or rarely recommended by
71.9% of surgeons. This recommendation was more frequent among orthopedic
surgeons than among neurosurgeons (P < .001). The
majority (79.5%) recommended only the restriction of flexion movements and
weight-bearing activities in the immediate post-operative period. Mild
physical activity is recommended within 30 days and after
30 days following surgery by 44.3% and 55.7% of surgeons,
respectively. Unrestricted physical activity is recommended within
3 months of surgery by 28.8%, within 6 months
by 48.9%, and after 6 months by 22.4%. Surgeons who perform at least one
type of less invasive techniques more often recommended the return to light
physical activity within 30 days (50.8%) than those who only
perform open surgery (39.4%) (P = .02). Surgeons with
≥10 years of experience also recommended also recommended
the return to light physical activity within 30 days (49.8%)
more often than less experienced surgeons (38.7%) (P =
.02). Conclusion: Some surgical preferences and post-operative
recommendations varied among Latin American spine surgeons according to
their specialty, years of experience, and number of surgeries per month. The
majority of Latin American respondents do not use any less invasive
technique for lumbar disc herniation surgery. Neurosurgeons used
magnification devices more often than orthopedic surgeons. Surgeons with a
higher case volume used less invasive techniques more frequently. Orthosis
or lumbar support devices were recommended more often by orthopedic surgeons
than by neurosurgeons. Early return to light physical activity was further
recommended by more experienced surgeons and by those who performed less
invasive techniques.

## 1285

## A088: Early Results of 3D Printed Porous Titanium Thoracolumbar Interbody
Cages

Peter Loughenbury

1

, Vishal Borse

1

, Robert Dunsmuir

1

, Almas Khan

1

, Peter Millner

1

, Debasish Pal

1

, Abhay Rao

1

, Greg Rudol

1

, Senthil Selvanathan

1

, and Nigel Gummerson

1

1

Leeds General Infirmary, Leeds Centre for Neurosciences, Leeds,
United Kingdom

Introduction: Interbody cages can be used as an adjunct when
performing a lumbar spinal fusion. Numerous materials and implant geometries
are available. Porous cages aim to improve bone ingrowth and biological
fixation. We report early experience of a porous 3D printed titanium
interbody cage. Methods: Retrospective review of prospectively
collected data entered into the British Spine Registry (BSR). All cases
performed with 3D printed titanium cages (November 2016 to December 2019)
included. Results: 148 cages implanted into 84 patients by 10
surgeons. Mean age 46.7 years (range 17.7-78.7). 83 were single (70), two
level (12) or three level (1) fusions plus one case where cages were used
above and below a pedicle subtraction osteotomy. Total 99 levels
instrumented with interbody cages – 50 tranforaminal lumbar interbody fusion
(TLIF) cages and 49 posterior lumbar interbody fusion (PLIF) cages. Mean
Oswestry Disability Index (ODI) score improved from 59.2 (SD 21.2) pre-op to
37.3 (SD 21.1) at one year. Over the same period mean Visual Analogue Scale
(VAS) back score improved from 7.8 to 3.8 and mean VAS leg score improved
from 8.0 to 3.1. Mean EQ5D score improved from 47.2 to 69.3. Complications –
cage subsidence (4), broken cage (1), superficial infection (1), incidental
durotomy (1). Conclusion: Early clinical results of 3D printed
porous titanium interbody cages demonstrate safety and efficacy when used as
an adjunct to lumbar fusion. Patient reported outcomes comparable to
alternative cages and posterolateral fusion in our unit. BSR surveillance
should allow useful comparison with other implants.

## 963

## A089: Is There a Place for Surgical Repair in Adults with Spondylolysis
or Grade I Spondylolisthesis? A Systematic Review and Treatment
Algorithm

Sirisha Madhu

1

, Naveen Pandita

1

, Miguel Rafael Ramos

1

, Dinesh Shree Kumar

2

, Colum Patrick Nolan

3

, Barry Wei Loong Tan

1

, Jiong Hao Tan

1

, Keith Gerard Lopez

1

, Andrew Thomas

1

, and Naresh Kumar

1

1

National University Health System, Singapore, Singapore

2

Changi General Hospital, Singapore, Singapore

3

National Neuroscience Institute, Singapore, Singapore

Introduction: Surgical repair is less explored than fusion in
adults with spondylolysis/low-grade isthmic spondylolisthesis, due to
associated disc-degeneration with increasing age. However, there may be a
place for lysis-repair in these adults who have pars defect as the only
source of pain with no progressive radiological disc-changes. There are no
systematic reviews, exploring direct pars-repair in adults. Hence, we
conducted a systematic review to: (1) describe the characteristics of adults
suitable for pars-repair, and (2)evaluate the effectiveness and safety of
various pars-repair techniques. Materials and Methods: This
review is in accordance with PRISMA-P guidelines and registered with
PROSPERO(CRD42020189208). Studies in English, including
patients>18 years with spondylolysis/grade-I
spondylolisthesis treated with standard pars-repair techniques, were
considered eligible. A systematic search was performed in June 2020 in
PubMed, Embase, Scopus and Web of Science databases. The MeSH terms for
search were “spondylolysis” and “spondylolisthesis”, while free-text words
included “pars interarticularis”, “pars defects”, “repair”, “pars repair”,
“surgical repair”, “Buck*”, “Scott*”, “Scott wiring”, “modified Scott”,
“Morscher*”, “pedicle”, “screw”, “pedicle–screw–rod system”,
“pedicle–screw–hook system”, “minimally invasive”, “minimal access”,
“endoscopic”, “percutaneous”, “navigation”, “image-guided”, and “robot*”.
Search strings were developed by combining the MeSH and free-text words
using Boolean operators. A two-staged screening process was used. The
articles identified in four data bases were screened initially by three
independent reviewers by reading title/abstracts and applying eligibility
criteria. Full-text of shortlisted articles after removal of duplicates were
further screened for eligibility by three independent reviewers. Any
conflict in article selection was discussed and resolved. Data was extracted
from finalised articles into a data-extraction template and narrative
synthesis was conducted. Results: A total of 5813-articles were retrieved.
Initial screening resulted in identification of 289-articles. Of these,
111-articles (PubMed,n = 34; Embase,n = 51; Scopus,n = 20; Web of Science,n
= 6) were available for full-text review. Further screening resulted in
exclusion of 63-articles. A final 48-articles were available for data
extraction. The total number of adults across 48-studies was 596. The
overall age ranged from 19-60 years, with a high proportion of
patients being young/middle-aged adults(19-55 years) (n =
593/596;99.5%). Male:female ratio was 4.2:1. Commonest presentation was
persistent low-back-pain (LBP) with duration history of
6-144 months. The lysis defect was primarily bilateral (97.9%).
The most involved vertebral level was L5(67.9%) followed by L4(16.2%) and
multiple levels (14%). Majority had no disc degeneration (82.9%) and
no/<25% slippage (98%). Spondylolysis was the primary diagnosis in 85.5%
of patients. Diagnostic pars-infiltration test was conducted in 22-studies.
Conservative-therapy prior to pars repair ranged from
3-72 months. Buck’s-repair was the commonest technique
(27-studies, n = 365), and pedicle-screw-rod method was the least explored.
Successful pars-repair was reported in 78%-100% of adults with high rate of
radiological union across all techniques. Greater than 85% returned to
regular activity/sport within 3-12 months with positive
long-term (≥2 years) outcomes in >80% of patients. The
complication-rate was 11.7%, with implant loosening in 3.4%.
Conclusion: We have established the feasibility, success,
safety, and long-term effectiveness of pars-repair in selected adults with
spondylolysis/grade-I spondylolisthesis. We propose the following parameters
for optimising selection of adults: (1) age:19-55 years, (2)
no/minimal disc-degeneration, (3) no progressive disc-changes on serial-MRI,
(4) no/<25% slippage, and (5) positive pars-infiltration test. We present
a treatment algorithm for adults and conclude that all standard techniques
have comparable clinical outcomes/complications.

## 260

## A090: K-Wireless Robotic and Navigation Assisted Pedicle Screw Placement
in Adult Degenerative Spine Surgery

Fedan Avrumova

1

, Kyle Morse

2

, Madison Heath

3

, Roger Widmann

3

, and Darren Lebl

1

1

Hospital for Special Surgery, Spine Surgery, New York, USA

2

Hospital for Special Surgery, Academic Training, New York,
USA

3

Hospital for Special Surgery, Pediatric Orthopaedic Surgery, New
York, USA

Introduction: K-wireless robotic pedicle screw instrumentation
with navigation is a new technology potential to improve spinal
instrumentation. Barriers to adoption include registration time with a
robotic-navigated system and concern about screw positioning. Understanding
the learning curve and limitations is crucial for successful implementation.
The purpose of this study was to describe a learning curve of k-wireless
robotic assisted pedicle screw placement with navigation, screw position,
and risk factors for failure of robotic technique. Material and
Methods: Retrospective review of prospectively collected data of
65 adult patients (59.7 ± 13.4 years) underwent
robotic-navigated posterior lumbar spinal fusion. Registration, screw
placement, and positioning times were recorded. All patients underwent
intra-operative 3D fluoroscopy (2019-2020) and screw position was compared
to pre-operative CT. Results: A total of 364 instrumented
pedicles in 65 adult patients (59.7 ± 13.4 years) were planned
robotically, 311 (85.4%) of which were placed robotically. Seventeen screws
(4.7%) converted to k-wire, 21 (5.8%) converted to freehand, and 15 (4.1%)
planned freehand. Reasons for conversion included morphology of starting
point resulting in skive(n = 18), soft tissue pressure on drill guide(n =
9), hypoplastic pedicles causing breach(n = 6), and obstructive reference
pin placement(n = 2). A total of 17 (5.5%) critical breaches (≥2-4 mm) were
recorded, nine (3.6%) critical breaches were in six patients, from soft
tissue pressure. An additional two patients exhibited a total of six (1.9%)
critical breaches (>2-4 mm) due to hypoplastic pedicles Three screws
(.9%) exhibited lateral breaches in one patient, and isthmic
spondylolisthesis in another patient causing skive in one screw (.4%). Two
screws (.8%) were abandoned due to interference with the robotic arm. Mean
time per screw was 3.6 minutes robotically vs
3.7 minutes freehand (P = .08). Decrease in
time per robotic screw was found between first to last ten cases,
5.5 minutes vs 2.3 minutes(P
= .0001). Robotic-navigation registration showed a decrease in time between
the first to last ten cases, 9.1 ± 2.5 minutes vs 6.0 ±
2.0 minutes, (P = .006). Based on axial
plane imaging,143 (46.0%) of screws were placed medial with an average
displacement of 1.2 ± .9 mm and 170 (54.0%) of screws were placed lateral
with an average displacement of 1.2 ± 1.0 mm. In the sagittal plane, there
were 117 (37.9%) screws placed cranial to plan with an average difference of
0.6 ± 0.5 mm, and 193 (62.1%) of screws were placed caudal to plan with an
average difference of 1.0 ± .6 mm. Overall, screw positioning was within 1.0
± .7 mm of the pre-operative template in all planes. No adverse clinical
sequelae occurred from implantation. Conclusion: A learning
curve for robotic k-wireless screw placement showed improvement in screw
times within the first several cases. Additional time per screw was not
significantly different between freehand and robotic methods, then converged
after the first ten cases. Understanding the learning curve and situations
where the robotic technique may be suboptimal can help guide the surgeon
safe and effectively for adoption, as well as further refine these
technologies.

## OP11: Spinal Trauma

## 308

## A091: Validation of the AO Spine Sacral Classification System:
Reliability Among Surgeons Worldwide

Gregory Schroeder

1

, Brian Karamian

1

, Jose Canseco

1

, Luiz Vialle

2

, Frank Kandziora

3

, Lorin Michael Benneker

4

, Shanmuganathan Rajasekaran

5

, Jörg Holstein

6

, Klaus Schnake

7

, Mark Kurd

1

, Marcel Dvorak

8

, Emiliano Vialle

2

, Andrei Joaquim

9

, Rishi Kanna

5

, Michael Fehlings

10

, Jefferson Wilson

10

, Jens Chapman

11

, Carlo Bellabarba

12

, Cumhur Oner

13

, AO Spine Sacral Classification Group

14

, Christopher Kepler

1

, and Alexander Vaccaro

1

1

Rothman Orthopaedic Institute, Philadelphia, USA

2

Department of Orthopaedics, Catholic University of Parana, Curitiba,
Brazil

3

Center for Spine Surgery and Neurotraumatology, BG Unfallklinik
Frankfurt am Main, Frankfurt, Germany

4

Spine Service, Orthopaedic Department, Sonnenhofspital, Bern,
Switzerland

5

Department of Orthopaedics, Trauma and Spine Surgery, Ganga
Hospital, Coimbatore, India

6

Department of Orthopaedic Surgery, Saarland University Medical
Center, Homburg, Germany

7

Center for Spinal Surgery, Malteser Waldkrankenhaus St. Marien,
Erlangen, Germany

8

Department of Orthopaedics, Vancouver General Hospital, Vancouver,
Canada

9

Neurosurgery Division, Department of Neurology, State University of
Campinas, Campinas-Sao Paulo, Brazil

10

Division of Neurosurgery, Department of Surgery, University of
Toronto, Toronto, Canada

11

Swedish Neuroscience Institute, Swedish Medical Center, Seattle,
USA

12

Department of Orthopaedic Surgery, Harborview Medical Center,
University of Washington, Seattle, USA

13

University Medical Center, Utrecht, Utrecht, The
Netherlands

14

AO Foundation, Davos, Switzerland

Introduction: Current sacral fracture classification systems are
mainly descriptive, lack prognostic correlation, and are non-validated. The
lack of an appropriate conceptual framework in classifying sacral fractures
has resulted in barriers to communication, research, education, and
standardized care. The AO Spine Sacral Classification System, a concise and
comprehensive hierarchical classification scheme, has recently demonstrated
substantial reliability among expert spine and trauma surgeons. Although
promising, these results must be validated in the broader clinical context
incorporating surgeons of all types from around the world to evaluate
generalizability. Therefore the aims of this study were to 1) demonstrate
that the AO Spine Sacral Classification System can be reliably applied by
general orthopaedic surgeons, as well as subspecialists, universally around
the world, and 2) delineate those injury subtypes which are most difficult
to classify reliably in order to refine the classification before evaluating
clinical outcomes. Methods: The AO Spine Sacral Classification
System was applied to 26 cases by 172 surgeons including orthopaedic spine
surgeons, general orthopaedic surgeons, neurosurgeons, and orthopaedic
traumatologists from around the world. 2 independent assessments were
performed 3 weeks apart. Statistical analysis utilized
agreement percentages to evaluate the correct classification of each rating
in comparison to the gold standard. Cohen’s Kappa (k) statistic was used for
classification agreement and reproducibility. Results: A total
of 8,097 case assessments were performed. Overall, 94.0% of assessments were
correctly classified by morphology type. When stratifying by morphologic
group, 98.3% were correctly classified as type A, 92.5% were correctly
classified as type B, and 92.3% were correctly classified as type C
fractures. Subtype A1 had the highest agreement percentage (95.4%), while
fracture subtypes C1 and C3 had the lowest agreement percentages (67.6% and
77.5%, respectively). The Kappa coefficient for inter-observer agreement for
all cases was .72/.75 (Assessment 1/Assessment 2), representing substantial
reliability. When comparing classification grading (A/B/C) regardless of
subtype, the Kappa coefficient was .84/.85 corresponding to excellent
reliability. The Kappa coefficients for inter-observer reliability were
.95/.93 for type A fractures, .78/.79 for type B fractures, and .80/.83 for
type C fractures. The overall Kappa statistic for intra-observer reliability
was .82 (range .18-1.00), representing excellent reproducibility. When only
evaluating morphology type (A/B/C), the average Kappa value was .87 (range
.18-1.00) representing excellent reproducibility. Conclusion:
The AO Spine Sacral Classification System is universally reliable among
general orthopaedic surgeons and subspecialists worldwide, with substantial
inter-observer and excellent intra-observer reliability.

## 672

## A092: Percutaneous Lumbopelvic Fixation Significantly Decreases Blood
Loss, Operating Time, and Return to OR Risk Compared to Open Fixation for
Unstable Sacral Fractures

Jimmy Zhu

1

, Carlo Bellabarba

1

, Richard Bransford

1

, and Haitao Zhou

1

1

Harborview Medical Center, Orthopedics and Sports Medicine, Seattle,
USA

Introduction: Lumbopelvic fixation is a treatment option for
unstable sacral fractures albeit having significant wound complications.
Percutaneous lumbopelvic fixation has been developed and increasingly
utilized in recent years with hopes of addressing certain complications
associated with open lumbopelvic association. However, current literature
lacks well designed comparison studies due to the diversity of sacral
fractures in pattern and displacement. A key piece of information missing in
the reported literature is whether open reduction is necessary to achieve
stable fixation when comparing to percutaneous group. The purpose of this
study is to carefully identity comparable patient populations and fracture
patterns that are either treated with open or percutaneous lumbopelvic
fixation to determine if percutaneous fixation provides better outcomes.
Material and Methods: This study was a retrospective review
of patients at a single academic center between the years 2014 and 2019.
Current Procedural Terminology (CPT) codes were used to identity patients
requiring lumbopelvic fixation. Patients were included if undergoing
lumbopelvic fixation for unstable sacral fractures. Exclusion criteria
included subacute injury, insufficiency fractures, pathologic fractures,
non-unions, pediatric fractures, concomitant lumbar pathologies, including
burst fractures and spondylolisthesis. More importantly, sacral fractures
that required open reduction, as indicated by operative report, were
excluded. Radiographic features were obtained from preoperative CT imaging
to classifying fractures based on AOSpine Sacral Classification system by
fellowship trained spine surgeon. Demographic data were collected including
age, gender, and mechanism of injury. The utilization of open and
percutaneous lumbopelvic fixation was surgeon preference. Clinical measures
were collected including operative time, blood loss, intraoperative
transfusion, length of stay, return to operating room prior to discharge for
wound related complications. Student's t-test and ANOVA were used for
statistical analysis. Results: Over 650 patients were
identified using CPT codes. 67 patients had unstable sacral fractures. 36
patients were excluded, of which 23 required open reduction methods. For the
remaining 31 patients, 15 were treated with open lumbopelvic fixation and 16
were treated with percutaneous technique. There was no significant
difference in patient demographics or fracture morphology according to AO
classification between the 2 groups. In the percutaneous group, the average
estimated blood loss was 168 ml, which was significantly less than 434 ml in
the open group (P = .0065). The average OR time in the
percutaneous group was 130 minutes compared to
200 minutes in the open group (P = .0094).
Length of stay was similar in both groups, 27 days in
percutaneous group compared to 24 days in open group. 4/15
patients in the open group developed deep wound infection and required
return to OR prior to discharge, all within 30 days. 0/16
patients in the percutaneous group developed infection or wound related
complications requiring return to OR prior to discharge (P
= .043). The average return to OR in open group was 20 days.
Conclusion: Percutaneous lumbopelvic fixation significantly
decreased blood loss, operative time, and in-hospital wound complications or
infections requiring return to operating room. This conclusion was made with
the careful selection of comparable patient populations and fracture
patterns in open and percutaneous groups. 

## 136

## A093: Spinal Posttraumatic Deformity: An International Expert Survey
Amongst AO Spine Knowledge Forum Members

Erin De Gendt

1

, Gregory Schroeder

2

, Andrei Joaquim

3

, Jin Tee

4

, Rishi Kanna

5

, Frank Kandziora

6

, Gaurav Raj Dhakal

7

, Emiliano Vialle

8

, Mohammad El-Sharkawi

9

, Klaus Schnake

10

, R Shanmuganathan

5

, Alexander Vaccaro

2

, Sander Muijs

1

, and Cumhur Oner

1

1

UMC Utrecht, Utrecht, The Netherlands

2

Rothman Institute, Thomas Jefferson University, Philadelphia,
USA

3

State University of Campinas, Campinas, Brazil

4

The Alfred Hospital, Melbourne, Australia

5

Ganga Hospital, Coimbatore, India

6

BG Unfallklinik Frankfurt am Main gGmbH, Frankfurt am Main,
Germany

7

Bir Hospital, National Academy of Medical Sciences, Kathmandu,
Nepal

8

Cajuru Hospital, Catholic University of Paraná, Curitiba - PR,
Brazil

9

Assiut University Medical School, Assiut, Egypt

Introduction: There is no clear definition of clinically
relevant spinal posttraumatic deformity (SPTD). This leads to a wide
variation in characteristics used for diagnosis and treatment indications of
SPTD. In order to understand the current concepts of SPTD a survey was
conducted among spine trauma surgeons. The aim of this study was to
investigate the different views and opinions of spine experts on the
different domains (definition, risk factors and management) of clinically
relevant SPTD. Material and Methods: The members of the AO
Spine Knowledge Forum Trauma participated in an online survey. The survey
was divided in four domains: demographics, criteria to define SPTD, risk
factors for SPTD and management of SPTD The data was collected anonymously
and analyzed using descriptive statistics, absolute and relative
frequencies. Consensus on dichotomous outcomes was set to 80% of agreement.
Results: Fifteen members with extensive experience in
treatment of spinal trauma participated, representing the five AO Spine
Regions. Back pain was the only criterion for definition of SPTD with
complete agreement. Consensus (≥80%) was reached for kyphotic angulation
outside normative ranges and impaired function. 87% and 100% agreed that a
full-spine conventional radiograph was necessary in diagnosing and treating
SPTD respectively. The ‘missed B-type injury’ was rated at most important by
all but one participant. There was no agreement on other risk factors
leading to clinically relevant SPTD. Concerning the management, all
participants agreed that an asymptomatic patient should not undergo surgical
treatment and that neurological deficit is an absolute surgical indication.
For most of the participants the preferred surgical treatment of acute
injury in all spine regions but the subaxial region is posterior fixation.
Conclusion: There is some consensus among leading experts
in the field of spine trauma concerning the definition, diagnosis, risk
factors and management of SPTD. This study can act as the foundation for a
Delphi study amongst the global spine community

## 1523

## A094: Predicting Survival in Elderly Spine Trauma Patients

Catherine Carlile

1

, Andrew Rees

2

, Jacob Schultz

2

, Inamullah Khan

1

, Jacquelyn Pennings

1

, and Byron Stephens

1

1

Vanderbilt University Medical Center, Nashville, USA

2

Vanderbilt University School of Medicine, Nashville, USA

Background: Spine trauma in the elderly population is increasing
in prevalence. Given their often extensive medical comorbidities, surgical
decision-making in this patient cohort presents unique challenges when
compared to younger patients with similar fracture patterns. The marked
decrease in physiologic reserve, bone density and increased cognitive and
spatial impairment in these patients lead to a weakened response to injury
and traditional severity scores can be unreliable in this population.
Predictive nomograms have proven useful in other areas of spine surgery;
however, there have yet to be any meaningful clinical tools to predict
outcomes following the surgical treatment of spine fractures in elderly
patients. The goal of this study was to develop a clinical nomogram to
better guide patient care and surgical decision-making in this complicated
but rapidly-growing population. Methods: Using data extracted
from our clinical trauma registry, we conducted a single center
retrospective cohort study. All elderly patients (65+) with spine trauma who
presented to a single, level I trauma center from 2010 to 2019 who underwent
surgical treatment of their spine fractures were included. Outcomes were
identified and recorded including in-hospital mortality, mortality after
discharge, medical and surgical complications. Retrospective chart review
was completed to record comorbidities, presenting injury information,
frailty scores, imaging evidence of sarcopenia and osteopenia, presence of
spinal cord injury, as well as long-term outcomes for all patients who
underwent operative treatment. Operative specifics including site, approach,
number of levels, estimated blood loss were recorded as well as trends in
lactate at the time of admission and time of surgery. Results from
multivariate logistic regression analyses served as the basis for
development of the nomogram. Nomogram calibration and discrimination were
assessed graphically and by calculation of a concordance index,
respectively. LASSO method was used to identify 12 variables which accounted
for the majority of the variance in mortality. A subsequent model was
developed with those 12 variables including Age, AO/OTA fracture class (A,
B, or C), platelet count on admission, lactate on admission, Max AIS, ASIA
score, and MFI-5 score. Results: A total of 1760 patients met
inclusion criteria over the 9 years period. Patients were
primarily male (n = 934, 53%) with an average age of 76. The overall
mortality rate within the study period was 36%. The nomogram model was
created with outcome variables of 30d, 90d and 365d mortality after
traumatic injury. Conclusions: The incidence of spine fractures
in the elderly patient cohort secondary to high-energy trauma (eg., motor
vehicle collisions) and low-energy trauma (eg., falls) will continue to
increase as the population ages. Previous data has described the patient
characteristics and preexisting conditions that imply increased morbidity
and mortality in these patients, but this is the first study to be able to
use a predictive model to guide care and treatment plans in patients with
operative spine fractures. Additional prospective research is indicated and
planned to internally and externally validate this nomogram to better
determine its predictive value.

## 1788

## A095: Baseline, Effect Size of the AO Spine PROST in a Spine Center in
The Netherlands

Erin De Gendt

1

, Dino Ahmetagic

1

, Said Sadiqi

1

, Sander Muijs

1

, and Cumhur Oner

1

1

UMC Utrecht, Utrecht, The Netherlands

Introduction: The evaluation of a spine trauma patient is based
on the clinicians views, radiological follow-up and preferably a patient’s
health and function questionnaire. The questionnaires previously used in the
clinic and research were not designed for spine trauma patients
specifically. The AO Spine Patient Reported Outcome Spine Trauma (AO Spine
PROST) is specifically developed to measure the function and health status
of patients after a spinal trauma. The AO Spine PROST validated for a
follow-up up to 13 months on content validity and internal
consistency. To integrate the AO Spine PROST in the clinic, it is necessary
to provide a baseline. The aim of this study was to provide baseline
measurements of the AO Spine PROST. Materials and Methods:
Consecutive patients after a spine trauma visiting our outpatient clinic
were included. Floor and ceiling effects of the AO Spine PROST were
analyzed. Effect size was calculated for each time point using the average
change in score divided by standard deviation (SD). A baseline of the AO
Spine PROST was formed by calculating the mean and corresponding SD for each
time point. Differences in baseline score between patients based on fracture
type, fracture level and treatment were analyzed. Results: In
total, 166 patients completed the AO Spine PROST at different follow-up (FU)
visits: 69 at 2 weeks (FU1), 77 at 6 weeks (FU2),
107 at 3 months (FU3), 89 at 1 year (FU4).
Baseline scores for the FU point were as followed: FU1 51 (±19.3), FU2 59
(±18.4), FU3 67 (±19.4) and FU4 72 (± 21.1). 43 suffered from an A0-1-2
fracture, 38 from an A3-4 fracture, 50 from a B fracture, 6 from a C
fracture and 29 classified as other. The number of patients per fracture
region was: 45 with a cervical, 60 with a thoracic and 28 with a lumbar
fracture. In total, 106 patients were treated conservatively and 54
surgical. Baseline scores for the subgroups were all within 1 SD of the main
baseline. The largest effect size found in consecutive follow-up was .44
between FU2 and FU3. Largest effect size found overall was 1.07 between FU1
and FU4. Analysis showed no floor or ceiling effect.
Conclusion: This study provides a baseline of the AO Spine
PROST for the use in an outpatient clinic. Baseline measurements fit within
expectations as the mean total score increased over time. We expected to see
a difference of more than 1SD in the different fractures subgroups, but
unfortunately not all patients completed all the FU-point. As this is an
ongoing study the results will be more reliable and the duration of
follow-up will be increased to 2 years. Also a further
differentiation will be applied to detect certain reference groups.

## 779

## A096: Epidemiology of Spinal Trauma in Trauma-Reference Hospitals in
Brazilian Metropolis

Francisco Araujo Jr

1

, Anderson Matsubara

1

, Gabriel Luiz De Souza Kondlatsch

2

, Eric Henrique Batista Schmidt

2

, and Luiz Henrique Cardoso Pereira

1

1

Mackenzie Evangelical University Hospital, Neurosurgery, Curitiba,
Brazil

2

Mackenzie Evangelical of Paraná University, Curitiba,
Brazil

Introduction: The epidemiological profile of patients who are
affected by Spinal Trauma is subject to the interference of numerous
variables, mainly the demographic profile as well as the lifestyle of the
population studied, thus the epidemiological profile of patients affected by
this disease suffers specific variations. according to the study site.
Therefore, it is necessary to trace the epidemiological profile regionally,
since this trauma is a disease that brings with it great morbidity and
mortality, and can cause spinal cord injuries to varying degrees of extent,
burdening the public system. Objective: To obtain information
to trace the epidemiological profile, as well as to identify the main trauma
mechanisms for this type of injury, in addition to their possible outcomes
(death rate, spinal cord injury, surgical treatment), in order to stimulate
public policies focused on prevention of accidents involving spinal trauma
and the reduction of morbidity and mortality from this pathology, in the
city of Curitiba-Parana, Brazil. Methodology: Retrospective
cross-sectional study. All reports of patients who underwent spine computed
tomography in 3 trauma centers of Curitiba in 2018 were analyzed, if the
patient had a fracture, his medical record was analyzed, with
epidemiological data, mechanism of trauma, characteristics of the associated
injury, radiological and surgical data collected. Results: Were
analyzed 9752 computed tomography reports and medical records; 705 patients
had a spinal fracture due to trauma; approximately 36% were female and 64%
were male, with a mean age of 48.23 years (± 20.62), the male
mean age was nine years lower than female (45 and 54); the number of cases
was higher in younger age groups (peak in 21-30 old), decreasing as age
increased; the main mechanisms were traffic accidents (33.76%), falls from
height (29.08%) and falls from the same level (25.39%); the most affected
segment was the thoracolumbar-transition (T10-L2), with an incidence of 45%;
followed by lumbar spine (L3-L5) with 17.12% and lower cervical spine
(C3-C7), with 15,27%. The first lumbar vertebra was the most affected (226
fractures) followed by the second lumbar vertebra (154 fractures) and the
twelfth thoracic vertebra (114 fractures). Death occurred in 2.84%, spinal
cord injury in 5.05%. Almost fifteen percent of the admitted patients were
treated operatively. Conclusion: The modal profile of the
patient victim of spinal trauma in the year 2018 in the City of Curitiba-PR
was that of a young man (between 21 and 30 years old), victim
of a Traffic Accident with involvement of the thoracolumbar segment without
associated spinal cord injury and under conservative treatment. Therefore,
these should be the starting points for the development of new preventive
measures in that city. Keywords: spinal injuries, spinal
fractures, spinal cord injuries, epidemiology, spine.

## 1803

## A097: Percutaneous SI-screw Fixation in High Energy and Low Energy Pelvic
Ring Injuries - A 15 years Retrospective Analysis on Over 640
Screws

Oliver Riesenbeck

1

, Moritz Lodde

1

, Jonas Keller

1

, Maria Eveslage

2

, Josef Stolberg-Stolberg

1

, Michael Raschke

1

, and René Hartensuer

1

1

University Hospital Muenster, Trauma-, Hand- & Reconstructive
Surgery, Muenster, Germany

2

University of Muenster, Institute of Biostatistics and Clinical
Research, Muenster, Germany

Introduction: Percutaneous sacroiliac-screw (SI-screw) fixation
is a well-established procedure for the minimal invasive treatment of
posterior pelvic ring injuries. There is only limited clinical data
available on risk, safety and immediate effects of SI-screw fixation.
Materials and Methods: The present retrospective cohort
study investigates percutaneous SI-screw fixation over 15 years
in a single, level I trauma center. All high energy pelvic ring injuries
were classified according to AO classification. All low energy pelvic ring
injuries were classified according to fragility fractures of the pelvis
(FFP) classification. Groups were compared concerning general
epidemiological data, mobilization, complication rates and duration of stay.
Multivariable analyses were performed using logistic regression.
Results: Between 2005 and March 2020, 448 patients were
treated with 642 SI-screws. 124 injuries were classified AO B, 176 AO C, 117
FFP II, 9 FFP III and 22 FFP IV. The high energy traumata were younger
(median age AO B 49.3 years, AO C 46.5 years) than
low energy traumata (median age FFP II: 80.2 years, FFP III
71.6 years, FFP IV 76.3 years). The sex
distribution favored the male in high energy trauma (f/m 39.7/60.3%) and the
female in low energy trauma (f/m 87.8/12.2 %). Multivariable regression
analysis revealed and increased risk in AO C compared to AO B (OR 3.5), a
similar risk in FFP II compared to AO B (OR .8), an increased risk in FFP
III/IV compared to AO B (OR 4.1) and an minimal increased risk in FFP III/IV
compared to AO C (OR 1.2). In AO B injuries mobilization was not possible in
8.8 % and a wheelchair had to be used in 11.3%. In AO C injuries
mobilization was not possible in 16.5 % and a wheelchair had to be used in
26.7%. In all FFP injuries together 6.7 % mobilization was not possible and
in 7.4 a wheelchair had to be used. Conclusion: Percutaneous
SI-screw fixation of high energy and low energy pelvic ring injuries
facilitates mobilization in most of the cases. Considering the injuries FFP
II and AO B injuries seem to be comparable considering complications. FFP
III/IV seem to have enormous complication risks even compared to AO C
injuries. It is reported, that FFP injuries might be progressive in
severity, so early surgical treatment might be advisable.

## 513

## A098: An Independent Intra-and Interobserver Agreement Assessment of the
AOSpine Sacral Fracture Classification System

Julio Urrutia Escobar

1

, Arturo Meissner-Haecker

1

, Nelson Astur

2

, Manuel Valencia Carrasco

3

, Ratko Yurac

4

, Gaston Camino Willhuber

5

, and Marcelo Alejandro Valacco

6

1

Department of Orthopaedic Surgery, School of Medicine, Pontificia
Universidad Catolica de Chile, Santiago, Chile

2

Santa Casa de Misericordia de São Paulo, Sao Paulo, Brazil and
Hospital Israelita Albert Einstein, Morumbi, Sao Paulo, Brazil, San
Pablo, Brazil

3

Hospital Mutual de Seguridad, Santiago, Chile, Santiago,
Chile

4

Department of Orthopaedic Surgery, Clinica Alemana de Santiago,
Chile, Santiago, Chile

5

Institute of Orthopedics “Carlos E. Ottolenghi,” Hospital Italiano
de Buenos Aires, Buenos Aires, Argentina., Ciudad Autónoma de Buenos
Aires, Argentina

6

Hospital Churruca Visca, Ciudad Autónoma de Buenos Aires,
Argentina

Introduction: The AOSpine sacral classification scheme was
recently described. It demonstrated substantial inter- observer and
excellent intra-observer agreement in the study describing it; however, an
independent assessment has not been performed. Purpose: To
perform an independent inter- and intra-observer agreement evaluation of the
AOSpine sacral fracture classification system. Material and
Methods: Complete computerized tomography (CT) scans, including
axial images, with coronal and sagittal reconstructions of 80 patients with
sacral fractures were selected and classified using the morphologic grading
of the AOSpine sacral classification system by six evaluators (from three
different countries). After a four-week interval, the 80 cases were
presented to the same raters in a random sequence for repeat assessment. We
used the Kappa coefficient (κ) to establish the inter- and intraobserver
agreement. Results: The inter-observer agreement was
substantial when considering the fracture severity types (A, B, or C), with
κ= .68 (.63-.72), but moderate when considering the sub-types: k= .52
(.49-.54). The intra-observer agreement was substantial considering the
fracture types, with κ= .69 (.63-.75), and considering sub-types, κ= .61
(.56-.67). Conclusion: The sacral classification system allows
adequate agreement among different raters and by the same rater on separate
occasions. Future prospective studies should evaluate whether this
classification system allows surgeons to decide the best treatment and to
establish prognosis in patients with sacral fractures

## 434

## A099: Vertebral Fractures and Neurological Injury Associated with
Increased Recreational Vehicle Use

Sarthak Mohanty

1

, Alex Beschloss

1

, Sachin Gupta

1

, and Comron Saifi

1

1

University of Pennsylvania, Department of Orthopaedics,
Philadelphia, USA

Introduction: Recreational vehicle use has become increasingly
popular over the past decade both in the USA and around the world. The
global all-terrain vehicle market size was valued at 3.9 billion USD in 2018
and is expected to grow at a rate of 3.1% between 2019 and 20251.
Men and women who suffer accidents while using such vehicles are prone to
spinal injury 2,3,4. However, few studies have examined this
relationship at the national scale. The goal of this study was to
investigate the trends between recreational vehicle use and spinal injury
nationwide. Material and Methods: This study identified spinal
injury cases associated with recreational vehicles using the NEISS (National
Electronic Injury Surveillance System) database. National estimates,
standard errors, and 95% confidence intervals were derived using the
provided survey parameters (strata, weights, and primary sampling units) in
the NEISS database. Crude rate, defined as number of cases per 100,000
persons was calculated by diving the total number of cases per year by the
annual population published by US Census data. Significance for trends were
determined using adjusted Wald tests, for which P < .05
(2-sided) were considered significant. Proportions of fracture and nerve
injury by recreational vehicle were determined by Pearson’s Chi Squared Test
between bicycles, four wheeled ATVs, 2 wheeled ATVs, and other all-terrain,
recreational vehicles. Results: 56,349 spine injuries related
to recreational vehicle use were isolated from the database. Injuries
located in the lower trunk/lumbar vertebrae were most common (47.9%). 78.0%
of all spine injuries were experienced by males. Between 2010 and 2019,
there was an increase in national cases of spine injury involving
recreational vehicles (P < .00001). Nerve injury was
more prevalent in four wheeled ATVs (10.2%) when compared to all-terrain
vehicles and two wheeled powered vehicles (2.93%) (P <
.0001) (Figure 2A). Lumbar spine injury, despite being the most prevalent
region of spine injury, showed lower odds (P < .0001) of
being admitted. Conclusion: With the increasing popularity of
recreational vehicles, there is high concern for traumatic spinal injury.
This study was able to identify increasing numbers of spinal injury related
to such vehicle use. Such injuries are not trivial and lead to not only
life-altering limitations for patients but also increasing healthcare costs.
Physicians and patients alike should remain aware and discuss the potential
harms regarding the use of recreational vehicles and their high risk for
spinal injury.

## References
1. National Center for Injury Prevention and Control. CDC Injury
Research Agenda, 2009-2018. (2018).
2. Waitt, T., Reddy, V., Grogan, D., et al. A case of dual
three-column thoracic spinal fractures following traumatic injury.
Surg. Neurol. Int.
11, 150 (2020).
3. Stern, J. & Anand, R. J. Traumatic Decompression of the Jejunum: A
Case of Small Bowel Perforation From High-Speed Motor Vehicle Crash.
Am. Surg. 3134820933611 (2020).
doi:10.1177/0003134820933611
4. Huang, Z., Hu, C., Tong, Y., et al. Percutaneous pedicle
screw fixation combined with transforaminal endoscopic spinal canal
decompression for the treatment of thoracolumbar burst fracture with severe
neurologic deficit: A case report. Medicine (Baltimore).
99, e20276 (2020).

## OP12: Spine Surgical Topics

## 1969

## A100: Total Disc Replacement as a Part of Adult Scoliosis Surgical
Treatment of 205 Patients with Minimum of 2 years of
Follow-Up

Thierry Marnay

1

1

Clinique du Parc, Montpellier, France

Introduction: Surgical scoliosis treatment in adults must face
beyond the curve correction, degenerative disc disease, dislocations,
spondylolisthesis with sagittal and frontal unbalance and lumbar kyphosis. 2
technical components of the surgery have been used to resolve those
difficult problems: the fixation through the pelvis, with a complete loss of
lumbar mobility and its consequences. The higher rate of pseudoarthrosis,
despite complex contracts, on one hand, and the necessity of posterior
lumbar osteotomies to restore an acceptable lordosis with severe risk of
complications on the other hand. The purpose of the study was to explore the
capacity to maintain or restore part of mobility and lumbar lordosis, using
total disc replacement (TDR), by anterior approach (with or without ALIF) in
association with the posterior reduction, fixation. Methods:
205 patients (40M, 165F, 18-82 year old, average age
57 years) with scoliosis and lumbar disc degeneration have
received 1 or more TDR between 2000 and 2018. 112 idiopathic scoliosis never
operated before, 43 degenerative scoliosis in adults never operated on, and
50 cases already operated on by posterior approach (below prior surgery).
286 TDR Prodisc implanted (129-1 level, 71-2 levels, 5-3 levels). The choice
of TDR is one of the key points as with the deformity, there is a need for
semi-constrained (fixed center) prosthesis, to neutralize the shear forces
and compensate the deficit of anterior and posterior longitudinal ligaments.
The patients’ analysis includes the perioperative, preoperative, and
postoperative VAS and ODI (3, 6, 12, 24 months follow-up),
mobility of the disc replacement and the evolution of the curve (Cobb,
sagittal parameters). Results: ODI pre-op was 24/50 and
declined to 10 in 24 months, VAS lumbar 7.2, radicular 5.7 prep
went to 2.6 and 2.1 at 24 months and stabilized at latest
follow-up. The mobility measurement at 24 months showed: 151 of
205 patients had a ROM at the TDR level more than 10 in flexion-extension at
24 months. The lordosis capacity of the implants eventually
associated to and ALIF with appropriated angulation, allowed the sagittal
balance restoration, with T1 axe correction and pelvic tilt reduction. There
were no major complications, 4 anterior hematomas (2 drainages, 2 surgical
treatments), 2 partial neurological deficits (1 L4, 1 L5). We had no implant
TDR complications, no displacements, no explantation required. 2 cases of
screw revised, 6 Posterior device removal (2 total, 4 partial), 2
complementary laminectomies, and 2 extension of posterior instrumentation.
Conclusion: The choice of TDR, with a semi-constrained
prosthesis and loss restoration of motion and sagittal balance in adult
scoliosis. It shows interest in the results, as a clinical and mobility
point of view that is maintained in long term follow up. That allows to
avoid the pelvic fixation in majority of cases, escaping for the clinical
bad results and complications of the lawn posterior constructions extend it
to the pelvis and also illuminates the risks of posterior transpedicular
osteotomies. In elderly people, there is a need for osteodensitometry
measurement and eventually cementopalsty of the vertebrae that receive the
prosthesis.

## References
1. Kim YJ, Bridwell KH, Lenke LG, et al. Pseudarthrosis in primary fusions
for adult idiopathic scoliosis: incidence, risk factors, and outcome
analysis. Spine. 2005; 30: 468-474.
2. Shaffer AD, Shonuga OA, Hirsch BP, et al. Sclerostin antibody enhances
spine fusion in a rat posterolateral transverse process fusion model:
preliminary results. Proc 33rd Annual Meeting of the American Society for
Bone and Mineral Research, San Diego, CA, 2011, p S517 (Abstract
MO0461).
3. Boden SD, Schimandle JH, Hutton WC. An experimental lumbar intertransverse
process spinal fusion model. Radiographic, histologic, and biomechanical
healing characteristics. Spine (Phila Pa 1976). 1995 Feb
15;20(4):412-20.

## 1649

## A101: Characteristic Features of Cervical Spine Deformity in Dropped Head
Syndrome

Yoshifumi Kudo

1

, Ichiro Okano

1

, Koji Ishikawa

1

, Tomoaki Toyone

1

, Akira Matsuoka

1

, Hiroshi Maruyama

1

, Ryo Yamamura

1

, Chikara Hayakawa

1

, Soji Tani

1

, and Yushi Hoshino

1

1

Showa University, Orthopedic Surgery, Shinagawa-ku, Japan

Introduction: Recently, there are several studies focused on
whole spine sagittal alignment of Dropped Head Syndrome (DHS). However, few
studies have described the details about cervical deformity of DHS ever. The
purpose of this study is to investigate the characteristic features of
cervical spine deformity in DHS. Materials and Methods: DHS
patients who presented to our hospital in 2014-2019 were included in this
study. Patients with cervical spondylotic myelopathy (CSM) were also
included as control. The following spinal parameters were assessed: C2-7A
(C2-5, C5-7), C2-7ROM (Flex and Extension, C2-5, C5-7), C2-7SVA, T1S. We
also assessed the degree of cervical degeneration using cervical
degenerative index (CDI: Ofiram E, J Orthopaed Traumatol 2009). CDI consists
of four factors; Disc space narrow (D), Sclerosis (S), Osteophyte (O),
Listhesis (L) with grading 0(normal)∼3(most severe spondylotic change).
Student T-tests were used to compare the two groups. The level of
significance was set at P < .05. Results:
Forty one DHS patients (10 male and 31 female, average 75.8 ±
8.7 years) and 41 CSM patients (10 male and 31 female,
average 75.2 ± 7.6 years) were enrolled in this study. The
comparison of data of the radiologic parameters were as follows (DHS vs CSM:
P value); C2-7A (-35.53 ± 20.94° vs 15.26 ± 13.92°: P <
.0001), C2-7ROM(34.34 ± 20.58° vs 42.26 ± 12.47°: P =
.029), C2-7SVA(63.90 ± 15.25° vs 23.34 ± 12.18°: P <
.0001), T1S(38.8 ± 23.37° vs 28.58 ± 9.78°: P = .013),
C2-7F(-43.24 ± 17.39° vs -11.92 ± 16.10° :P < .0001),
C2-7E(-8.90 ± 24.98° vs 30.34±14.42° :P < .0001). In
every parameter, there was a statistical significance between two groups. In
more detailed analysis in DHS cases, there was no significant difference in
C2-5A vs C5-7A (-16.07 ± 14.26° vs -19.46 ± 11.63° :P<),
and C2-5F vs C5-7F (-23.09 ± 14.16° vs -20.14±12.71° :P =
.36). However, there was a significant difference in C2-5E vs C5-7E(-.83 ±
18.29° vs -8.073 ± 10.72° :P = .0079), that means focal
kyphosis at C5-7 remains whereas focal kyphosis at C2-5 reduces to 0° in
extension. In assessment of CDI, more degenerative changes were seen in
lower levels in both groups. In comparison between DHS and CSM, the scores
of Disc space narrowing at C3/4/5/6/7, Sclerosis at C5/6/7, Osteophyte at
C4/5/6/7 and Listhesis at C2/3/4/5 of DHS group were significantly higher
than these of CSM. This means that massive degenerative changes in lower
cervical level and slippage in middle cervical level were more obvious in
DHS group compared to CSM group. Conclusion: These results
suggest that dropped head deformity is not a simple kyphosis, but is a
complexed deformity including severe degeneration with irreversible kyphosis
at lower level (C5-7) and reducible listhesis at upper and middle level
(C2-5). It is not certain that these characteristic features are cause or
consequence of this deformity, however, we believe that these are deeply
involved with this pathology. Surgeons should take these characteristic
features into account in corrective surgery.

## 297

## A102: Does Posterior Scoliosis Correction Improve Respiratory Function in
Adolescent Idiopathic Scoliosis? A Systematic Review and
Meta-Analysis

So Kato

1

, Jean-Christophe Murray

2

, Yongyao Tan

3

, Mario Ganau

4

, Yasushi Oshima

1

, and Sakae Tanaka

1

1

The University of Tokyo, Tokyo, Japan

2

Laval University, Quebec City, Canada

3

Hospital for Sick Children, Toronto, Canada

4

Oxford University Hospitals NHS Foundation Trust Oxford, Oxford,
United Kingdom

Introduction: Pulmonary dysfunction is often advocated among the
indications for surgical correction of adolescent idiopathic scoliosis
(AIS). Previous studies have discussed the effect of scoliosis correction on
respiratory function without reaching a definitive conclusion: some showed
that the respiratory function can improve after scoliosis surgery without
defining the precise role of anterior, posterior and combined approaches on
this improvement; furthermore, the majority of these studies did not take
normal growth into account. As a result, the role of surgery remains to be
clarified. The object of the present study was to synthesize the current
knowledge regarding changes in respiratory function after posterior
corrective surgery for AIS. Material and Methods: A
comprehensive systematic search was performed to identify all relevant
studies in the following electronic databases: MEDLINE, EMBASE, CINAHL and
EBSCO. We focused on the studies that discussed 1) posterior fusion surgery
for AIS without thoracoplasty, 2) comparisons of pre- and post-operative
percent-predicted values of forced vital capacity (%FVC) or forced
expiratory volume (%FEV), 3) with minimum 2 years follow-up.
Forest plots were depicted and Z value was calculated as a test for overall
effect. Results: Ten studies (6 prospective and 4 retrospective
studies) met our inclusion criteria. The overall effect showed that there
was no significant difference in %FVC or %FEV between pre- and
post-operative measurements (very low evidence). Conclusion:
Posterior correction surgery for mild to moderate AIS patients showed no
significant improvement of post-operative respiratory function measured by
relative, percent-predicted values at minimum 2 years
follow-up.

## 1660

## A103: Treatment of Acute Spinal Cord Injuries: Use of High-Doses Steroids
- Survey Among Ibero-Latinoamerican Spine Surgeons

Ana Ribau

1,2

, Jorge Alves

3

, and Ricardo Rodrigues-Pinto

1,2

1

Spine Unit (UVM). Department of Orthopaedics. Centro Hospitalar
Universitário do Porto, Porto, Portugal

2

Instituto de Ciências Biomedicas Abel Salazar, Porto,
Portugal

3

Centro Hospitalar do Tâmega e Sousa, Department of Orthopaedics,
Penafiel, Portugal

Introduction: The recommendations for the use of a high dose
steroids - Methylprednisolone Sodium Succinate (MPSS) in the management of
patients with acute spinal cord injury (ASCI) have changed over the years.
While initially recommended based on the initial analysis of the National
Acute Spinal Cord Injury Studies (NASCIS), in 2013 the Congress of
Neurological Surgeons (CNS) and the American Association of Neurological
Surgeons (AANS) recommended against its use. However, more recent evidence
and clinical practice guidelines have again suggested a potential benefit of
its use, particularly when started in the first 8 hours and
only during 24 hours. The aim of this study was to evaluate the
current practice of use of MPSS in ASCI among spinal surgeons from
Ibero-Latinoamerican countries. Material and Methods: A
descriptive cross-sectional study design as a survey was conducted. A
questionnaire composed of 2 sections: demographic data regarding the
surgeons and MPSS administration, was sent by an email to members of SILACO
and associated societies. IBM SPSS Statistics 24 was used for the
statistical analysis. Results: A total of 182 surgeons
participated on the study: 65.4% (119) Orthopaedic surgeons and 24.6% (63)
Neurosurgeons. 69 (37.9%) used MPSS in the initial management of ASCI. There
was no significant difference between countries (P = .451),
specialty (P = .352) or surgeon seniority
(P = .652) for the inclusion of steroids in the initial
management of ASCI. From those that used MPSS, 45 (65.2%) reported using an
initial high-dose bolus (30 mg/Kg) followed by a perfusion (5.4 mg/Kg) and
28 (65.1%) of them maintain the perfusion for 24 hours, while
13 used a high-dose bolus (30 mg/Kg) and 11 performed a low dose steroid
bolus or perfusion. Thirty-eight (65.2%) of the surgeons who used MPSS only
prescribed them if the patients presented within 8 hours of
ASCI. The majority of the surgeons (50.7% (35)) administrated high dose
steroids because of the conviction that it has clinal benefits and will
improve the recovery. Conclusion: Results from this survey show
that MPSS use in ASCI is not widespread within spine surgeons and that the
controversy regarding its use remains unanswered. This is probably due to
the low level of evidence of the available data, variations over the years,
inconsistencies in acute care protocols and health service pathways.

## 973

## A104: The Clinical Course of Disease During Wait Time for Lumbar Spinal
Stenosis Surgery and its Effect on Postoperative Outcome: A Retrospective
Cohort Study

Thorsten Jentzsch

1,2

, Kala Sundararajan

3

, and Raja Rampersaud

1,3

1

Toronto Western Hospital, University Health Network; University of
Toronto, Orthopaedics, Toronto, Canada

2

Balgrist University Hospital, University of Zurich, Zurich,
Switzerland

3

Krembil Research Institute, University Health Network, Arthritis
Program, Toronto, Canada

Introduction: The purpose of the study is to evaluate the effect
of surgical wait times for spinal surgeries on the clinical course of
disease during the wait time and its effect of postoperative outcome for
patients with lumbar spinal stenosis. Materials and methods:
This was a retrospective cohort study between 2007 and 2019 using a
convenience sample of patients from several prospective longitudinal studies
that provided preoperative Oswestry Disability Index (ODI) data at two
different time points. Wait time was defined as the time period between the
date of the initial visit at intake and immediately preoperatively. It was
categorized into three different time points (short (<6 vs
≥6 months), moderate (<12 vs ≥12 months),
and long (<24 vs ≥24 months)). The primary outcome was the
total ODI. It was categorized into minimal clinically important difference
(MCID) of <30% vs ≥30% improvement for last follow-up. The Spearman
correlation, Wilcoxon rank sum test, and robust regression analysis
adjusting for age and surgery type were used. Results: 134
patients were analyzed. The median age was 69.0 (interquartile range (IQR)
14.0) years, 66 (49.3 percent (%)) were female, 89 (66.4%)
underwent decompression, while 45 (33.6%) underwent decompression and
instrumented fusion. The median wait time was 5.9 (IQR
8.2) months and the postoperative follow-up was 19.2 (IQR
8.1) months. In univariate analysis, wait time was
borderline associated with worsening of total ODI scores at the short
(P = .051) and moderate (P = .064)
time point, and significantly associated at the long time point (0 (IQR
11.8) for <24 months vs 8.0 (IQR 16.0) for
≥24 months, P = .026). In the multivariate
analysis, wait time was associated with worsening of total ODI scores at
each time point (coefficient 2.7 (95% CI .2-5.2), P =
.036). In uni- and multivariate analysis, wait time was not associated with
absolute postoperative change in ODI scores, but patients with wait times
<12 and <24 months were significantly more likely to
reach the ODI MCID at last follow-up (OR = .29 (95% CI .12-.75),
P= .011 and OR = .24 (95% CI .06-.93),
P = .038, respectively). Conclusions:
Clinical outcome assessments of disability from the initial visit at intake
may become outdated after six months and are very likely to be outdated
after two years, after which the level of disability appears to worsen.
Although longer wait times do not appear to negatively influence
postoperative outcome in patients with lumbar spinal stenosis considering
absolute values, but may potentially impact patients when using MCID.
Patients may benefit from measures to reduce wait time for surgery to
prevent patients from preoperative deterioration in quality of life.
Keywords: wait time, outcome, lumbar, spinal stenosis,
surgery

## 1290

## A105: Increase in Thoracic Kyphosis with Aging is the Main Factor that
Leads to Positive Sagittal Balance: Results of the Multi-Ethnic Alignment
Normative Study (MEANS)

Zeeshan Sardar

1

, Meghan Cerpa

1

, Jean Charles Le Huec

2

, Stephane Bourret

2

, Kazuhiro Hasegawa

3

, Wong Hee Kit

4

, Denni Hey

4

, Hend Riahi

5

, Michael Kelly

6

, and Lawrence Lenke

1

1

Columbia University Medical Center, New York, USA

2

CHU Bordeaux, Bordeaux, France

3

Niigata Spine Surgery Center, Niigata, Japan

4

NUH University Spine Center, Singapore, Singapore

5

Kassab Institute, Tunis, Tunisia

6

Washington University, St. Louis, USA

Summary: Volunteers from five countries were enrolled in this
radiographic study to evaluate spinal alignment. The results showed no
significant difference in lumbar lordosis between the different age groups.
Thoracic kyphosis was noted to be significantly higher in patients over the
age of 50. The increase in TK appeared to be the main driver for increasing
SVA. Interestingly, the odontoid remained centered over the knees and not
the hips in the sagittal plane in all age groups despite increasing SVA.
Hypothesis: We hypothesize that the spinal alignment in
adults changes with age. Study Design: Retrospective review of
prospectively collected data. Introduction: Adult sagittal
spinal alignment can have a significant impact on overall quality of life.
While significant advances have been made over the last few decades in
better defining normal alignment, predicting the ideal alignment of a
specific individual is still a difficult task. Normal variations of the
spinal alignment parameters are studied in this asymptomatic cohort in hopes
to define patient specific alignment goals. Methods:
Radiographic evaluation of Full-body low dose stereoradiography in the
largest reported multiethnic cohort of 488 asymptomatic adult volunteers
(Mean age: 40.8; Range: 18-79 years). Patients from 5 different
countries were included; France, Japan, Singapore, Tunisia, and the USA. 3D
measurements were performed using a commercially available 2D/3D modeling
software. Results: The lumbar lordosis was similar between the
different age groups with means ranging from 56.7 ± 11.9 to 57.8 ± 11.5
(P = .92). Mean T1-T12 thoracic kyphosis (TK) did
increase significantly with age increasing from 43.5 ± 11.9 in patients
younger than 50 to 48.6 ± 12.1 in those older than 50 (P
< .0001). Following the trend of TK, there was an increase in the
sagittal vertical axis (SVA) with age (-13.9 ± 23.3 vs 5.3 ± 32.1;
P < .0001). The mean distance between the odontoid
and the middle of the knees in the sagittal plane range from -3.2 ± 30.7 to
4.5 ± 32.1, and did not vary significantly with age in asymptomatic patients
(P = .26). The patients compensated with increased
cervical lordosis, increased hip extension, and increased knee flexion as TK
and SVA increased with age to maintain the odontoid centered over the knees.
Pelvic tilt also increased with age from 10.5 ± 6.8 to 15.9 ± 7.6.
Conclusion: Lumbar lordosis was similar across the
different age groups, while thoracic kyphosis increased in patients over the
age of 50 and accounted for the increase in SVA. Take Home
Message: Lumbar lordosis may not decrease with age as previously
thought. Thoracic kyphosis was the main parameter that increased with age
and led to an increase in SVA.

## 1339

## A106: Outcome and Predictive Factors in Rapid Progressive Cervical
Spondylotic Myelopathy: A Retrospective Case-Control Study

Haimiti Abudouaini

1

, and Hao Liu

1

1

West China Hospital, Sichuan University, Orthopedics, Chengdu,
China

Introduction: Cervical spondylotic myelopathy (CSM) is a major
cause of cervical spinal cord dysfunction in people over
55 years of age. Most patients with CSM usually present with
chronic and phased compression, however, some patients with CSM develop
rapid severe neurological dysfunction without any trauma. To our knowledge,
markers that can be used for early identification of patients with potential
to develop rapid neurological deterioration have not been totally
identified. Here, we evaluate epidemiological, clinical and radiographic
features associated with the development and prognosis of rapid progressive
cervical spondylotic myelopathy (rp-CSM). Material and Methods:
A retrospective study was carried out for 175 patients diagnosed with CSM
between March 2011 and January 2017 at West China Hospital. Patients were
divided into rp-CSM group and chronic CSM (c-CSM) group based on the time
taken for neurological deterioration to occur and the severity of
preoperative neurological dysfunction. The clinical outcomes were assessed
using the Modified Japanese Orthopaedic Association (mJOA) score, and
imaging parameters such as Torg-Pavlov Ratio (TPR), intervertebral disc
level compression ratio and increased signal intensity (ISI) on T2W1.
Multivariate analysis was used to compare the outcomes between the 2 groups
and identify potential predictors for rapid neurological dysfunction in CSM
patients. Results: Out of the 175 patients enrolled in the
study, 25 developed rp-CSM (18 males; median age 59.04 ±
12.81 years) and the remaining 75 (54 males; median age 56.88 ±
12.31 years) were used as controls for the study (c-CSM
group). The average time taken to develop severe neurological deterioration
was .8 months in rp-CSM group and 24 months in
c-CSM group (P = .001), while the preoperative mJOA scores
were 6 in rp-CSM patients and 12 in c-CSM patients (P =
.014). In addition, rp-CSM patients demonstrated worse outcomes than the
controls in one year after surgery (mJOA improvement rate 54.5% and 80%,
respectively, P = .021). There were no differences in the
clinical parameters evaluated between the two groups except for the history
of diabetes and smoking. Analysis of radiographic parameters indicated that
TPR MRI, intervertebral disc level compression ratio and
increased signal intensity (ISI) on T2W1 were poor in rp-CSM patients
compared to c-CSM patients. Regression analysis also showed that the history
of diabetes, TPR MRI < 0.4, compression ratio ≥50%, and the
sagittal diameter of ISI ≥50% of spinal canal diameter on T2W1 were strongly
associated with the rapid progressive neurological dysfunction in patients
with CSM. Conclusion: The prognosis of rapid progressive CSM is
worse than that of common chronic CSM. The rapid neurological deterioration
can be identified by TPR MRI (< .4), compression ratio (≥50%),
sagittal diameter of ISI (≥50% of spinal canal diameter). Besides, a history
of diabetes is a risk factor for the development of rp-CSM.

## 1466

## A107: Indications of Electromyography in Lumbar Spine Surgery, Literature
Review

Alejandro Tejera Morett

1

, Michael Dittmar

2

, Francisco Cruz López

1

, Jorge De Haro Estrada

2

, Francisco Javier Sánchez García

1

, and Isaac López Peña

3

1

Reespalda A.C, Zapopan, Mexico

2

Reespalda A.C, Zapopan, Mexico

3

Hospital Versalles, Zapopan, Mexico

Objectives: The objective of this study is to perform a
bibliographic analysis of the indications and usefulness of electromyography
(EMG) in patients undergoing spinal surgery diagnosed with lumbar disc
herniation. Material and Methods: Studies from the last three
decades were collected, referring to the use, utility and indications of
pre-surgical electromyography in degenerative lumbar spine surgery, in
electronic databases Cochrane, Medline, Google Scholar, Pubmed, Scopus and
Science Direct, articles that used electromyography as a study to diagnose
lesions in the cervical region were excluded. Bibliographic analysis: EMG
has been used to study physiological aspects of muscle activity. Two
currents were identified, the first that prevailed during the 1990s, in
which the combination of EMG with magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) was used
for the diagnosis of radiculopathy, in studies of the next two decades, MRI
prevailed as a diagnostic method since it has a greater sensitivity and
specificity. Currently, electromyography is used as a diagnostic method of
post-surgical lesions and sensitivity is affected by the technique performed
and the professional interpreting the study. Discussion: It is
necessary to emphasize that despite the accessibility and diffusion that was
given to this diagnostic method in the early 1990s, it is currently a study
that can be dispensed with since non-invasive studies such as magnetic
resonance imaging are more effective, without However, in complex cases,
where the clinical symptomatology does not correspond to the radiographic
diagnosis, or the patient has neuromuscular pathologies that make the
clinical diagnosis prior to surgery complex, electromyography has proven to
be of help for preoperative planning. EMG has a greater impact on the
diagnosis of post-surgical lesions. Conclusions: The EMG, for
diagnosis of degenerative lumbar pathology is in disuse, due to the little
information it provides prior to surgery, it is suggested to carry out the
study after surgical procedures where the evolution has not been the desired
one.

## 1661

## A108: Observational Prospective Study of Efficacy of Non-Operative
Management of Thoracolumbar Osteoporotic Compression Fractures

Ankit Singh

1

, and Nishat Goda

1

1

K J Somaiya Medical College and Research Centre, Orthopaedics,
Mumbai, India

Introduction: Majority of the osteoporotic compression vertebral
fractures occur at the thoracolumbar region as it is a zone of structural
and functional transition thus vulnerable to injury. These fractures occur
most commonly in elderly following trivial trauma prompting disability,
debilitating pain and poor quality of life. There has been a noted trend in
surgical intervention being employed frantically. To diminish the economic
burden in a resource limited and developing region and in patients with
significant comorbid conditions, non-operative treatment is of prime
significance and we assess its efficacy prospectively. Material and
Methods: Consecutive 40 patients with diagnosed thoracolumbar
osteoporotic compression fractures excluding those with neurodeficits were
subjected to the foreordained protocol of non-operative treatment
encompassing analgesics, short period of bed rest, anti-osteoporotic drug
therapy (Calcium, Vitamin D3, bisphosphonates, calcitonin
intra-nasal spray) orthotic bracing (hyperextension braces) and guided
physiotherapy under supervision. Demographics, clinical history and
examination findings with relevant radiographic and hematology parameters
were recorded. Clinical examination findings, VAS (Visual analogue scale)
score, Oswestry disability index (ODI), hematological and radiological
findings were assessed at 3 months,6 months and
12 months’ follow up after start of treatment. Counselling
regarding compliance was carried at each follow up and whenever deemed
necessary. Results: Patients’ mean age was 61.7 +/ -
11.45 years with female preponderance (63.3%) and 90% being
postmenopausal. 30% patients had hypertension and 16.7% patients had
diabetes mellitus while 10% patients were obese. Back pain followed by
deformity were chief complaints with VAS score and ODI score being 6.74 ±
.55 and 42.40 ± 16.13 respectively. 6 months following
treatment, noteworthy reduction in the VAS score (P <
.05) and the ODI scores (P < .05) were found, with VAS
score and ODI score improving by 49.1% and 45.50% respectively from the
baseline at 12 months post-treatment. Anti-osteoporotic regimen
normalised the serum Vitamin D, calcium, phosphorus, alkaline phosphatase
and Parathyroid hormone levels. Kyphotic angles were found to be unchanged.
None of the patients developed any form of neurodeficit during the course of
treatment. Conclusion: With the increasing longevity of the
population, the incidence of this age related disease process is increasing.
Patients often believe that the pain and impaired mobility associated with
these fractures are permanent and that little can be done besides surgical
intervention. Resortment and compliance to multifaceted non-operative plan
of management is effective in mitigating backache, disability in patients
with thoracolumbar osteoporotic compression fractures especially in those
with associated co-morbidities and is viable in forestalling further
worsening of the disease process. The efficacy was evident on clinical,
hematological and radiological examination thus improving quality of life.
Keywords: non-operative management, thoracolumbar,
osteoporotic compression fractures, efficacy

## OP13: Surgical Complications of Adult Deformity

## 1943

## A109: Patients with Severe Baseline Global Alignment and Proportion may
Require More Aggressive Age-Adjusted Alignment Goals for Lumbo-Pelvic
Mismatch

Peter Passias

1

, Katherine Pierce

1

, Nicholas Kummer

1

, Lara Passfall

1

, Oscar Krol

1

, Sara Naessig

1

, Waleed Ahmad

1

, Bassel Diebo

2

, Renaud Lafage

3

, Virginie Lafage

3

, and Shaleen Vira

4

1

NYU Langone Orthopedic Hospital; New York Spine Institute,
Departments of Orthopaedic and Neurologic Surgery, New York,
USA

2

SUNY Downstate Medical Center, Department of Orthopaedics, Brooklyn,
USA

3

Hospital for Special Surgery, Department of Orthopedics, New York,
USA

4

UT Southwestern Medical Center, Department of Orthopedics, Dallas,
USA

Introduction: For surgical adult spinal deformity (ASD)
patients, the age-adjusted alignment ideals were proposed in order reduce
the occurrence of complications such as proximal junctional kyphosis (PJK).
The under- and overcorrection of the postoperative age ideal value for the
mismatch between pelvic incidence and lumbar lordosis (PI-LL) has yet to be
related to the Global Alignment and Proportion (GAP) Score. Materials
and Methods: ASD patients with baseline (BL) and
2 years postoperative (2Y) radiographic and HRQL data were
included. Age-Adjusted correction groups generated at postoperative
follow-up for actual alignment compared to age-adjusted values for
PI-LL-adjusted ideal values (Matched, Overcorrected, Undercorrected). GAP
Score in the literature includes the four parameters relative pelvic
version, relative lumbar lordosis, lordosis distribution index, relative
spinopelvic alignment, and an age factor to formulate a sagittal plane score
out of 13 (Proportional, Moderately Disproportional, Severely
Disproportional). GAP improvement scores were noted as less at 2Y compared
to BL, with deterioration as an increase in score at 2Y. Means comparison
and chi-squared ANOVA analyses assessed the relationship between pre- and
postoperative GAP scores in the PI-LL age-adjusted correction groups.
Results: Included: 140 ASD patients (55.5 ±
16.4 years, 81% female, 25.2 ± 4.7 kg/m2). At
BL, mean SS: 30.7°, PT: 23.2°, PI: 54.5°, PI-LL: 13.3°, SVA: 61.6 mm, and
L1-S1: 40.4°. Assessment of 2Y age-adjusted PI-LL alignment found that 20.3%
of patients Matched, 45.1% Overcorrected, and 34.6% Undercorrected. Baseline
GAP assessment across the age-adjusted correction groups found that the
patients who were Overcorrected, Matched, and Undercorrected groups had
similar scores (Over: 6.3, Under: 7.2, Match: 7.6; P =
.282). At 2 years, mean GAP score for the Undercorrected group
was found to be 7.5 (+0.3), while the Matched group was 4.8 (-2.8) and the
Overcorrected group was 3.0 (-3.3), P < .001. 49.1% of
Overcorrected patients were Proportional in GAP at 2 years
(Under: 15.2%, Matched: 15%, P < .001). The
Undercorrected group had significantly more patients who were classified as
Severely Disproportional in GAP at 2Y (63%, vs Matched: 25%, Overcorrect:
7%, P < .001). The Overcorrected age-adjusted PI-LL
group was found to improve in their GAP score from BL to 2Y more (61.4%,
P < .001), while the Undercorrected group was found
to remain the same proportionality in their GAP score (74.4%,
P < .001) and deteriorate (18.6%, P
= .042) significantly more than the Matched and Overcorrected groups.
Patients who were Undercorrected in PI-LL and had severe proportionality in
GAP at 2Y had more major complications (41.4% vs 22.5%; P =
.041) and underwent more reoperations (34.5% vs 16.2%; P =
.029) compared to the remainder of the cohort. Conclusion:
Patients who are Overcorrected in their PI-LL age-adjusted alignment are
more likely to improve and become proportional in their GAP scores at
2 years, implying that certain subgroups require more
aggressive realignment.

## 1247

## A110: Prospective Validation of the Spinal Cord Shape Classification
System (SCSCS) to Assess the Risk of Intraoperative Neuromonitoring Data
Loss with Thoracic Deformity Correction

Meghan Cerpa

1

, Alex Sielatycki

1

, Scott Zuckerman

1

, Earl Thuet

1

, Griffin Baum

2

, Paul Park

1

, Nathan Lee

1

, Joseph Lombardi

1

, Zeeshan Sardar

1

, Ronald A. Lehman

1

, and Lawrence Lenke

1

1

Columbia University Medical Center, New York, USA

2

Northwell Health, New York, USA

Summary: We present a prospective validation of the novel spinal
cord shape classification system (SCSCS) that is able to identify patients
with Type 3 spinal cords (spinal cord deformed against the concave pedicle
in the axial plane), have 4x greater odds of losing monitoring data during
thoracic deformity correction versus type 1 or 2 spinal cords.
Hypothesis: Preoperative morphology of the spinal cord
within the spinal canal assessed at the thoracic apical concavity can be
used to predict intraoperative loss of intraoperative neuromonitoring (IONM)
data. Study Design: Prospective single-center cohort.
Introduction: A prior retrospective study of the SCSCS
demonstrated increased risk of IONM data loss in type 3 spinal cords, and we
now present a prospective study to further validate this novel preoperative
SCSCS to identify spinal cords at risk for data loss with correction of
thoracic spinal deformity. Methods: 176 consecutive patients
undergoing surgical correction of a thoracic deformity with pedicle
screw/rod constructs were prospectively enrolled. Spinal cords were
classified into 3 types based on the appearance of the cord on the apical
axial T2 MRI: Type 1 a circular/symmetric cord with visible CSF between the
cord and the apical concave pedicle/vertebral body; Type 2 a
circular/oval/symmetric cord with no visible CSF between the concave pedicle
and the spinal cord; Type 3 a spinal cord that is flattened/deformed by the
apical concave pedicle or vertebral body, with no intervening CSF. Logistic
regression was used to assess odds ratios and predictor variables of losing
IONM data. Results: Of 176 patients, 93 (53%) had a Type 1
cord; 46 (26%) had a Type 2 cord, and 37 (21%) had Type 3 spinal cord
shapes. IONM data changes in trans-cranial motor-evoked potentials (TcMEPs)
and/or somatosensory evoked potentials (SSEPs) in 44 (25%;
P < .001) cases; 19/93 (20%) in Type 1, 6/46 (13%)
in Type 2, and 19/37 (51%) in Type 3. On regression analysis, Type 1 and 2
spinal cords showed a protective effect against IONM data loss (OR = .24,
95%CI: .11-55; P < .001; OR = .14, 95%CI: .05-.42;
P < .001). Type 3 spinal cords had a significantly
higher odds of IONM data loss (OR = 4.1, 95%CI: 1.8-9.3; P
< .001). Vertebral column resection itself was not associated with loss
of IONM data (P = .12). Conclusion: This
prospective validation of the novel SCSCS to identify patients with
increased odds of losing IONM data with thoracic spinal deformity
correction, we found that Type 3 spinal cords were 4x more likely to have
IONM data changes than types 1 or 2. Take Home Message: We
recommend careful review of the axial apical MRI to classify the spinal cord
morphology using the SCSCS which demonstrates a markedly increased risk of
losing IONM during deformity correction.

## 1524

## A111: The Impact of Preoperative Cross-Sectional Area of Psoas Muscle on
Postoperative Outcomes of Adult Spinal Deformity Surgery

Hikari Urakawa

1

, Kosuke Sato

1

, Renaud Lafage

1

, Jonathan Elysee

1

, Avani Vaishnav

1

, Yucheng Yao

1

, Han Jo Kim

1

, Frank Schwab

1

, Virginie Lafage

1

, and Sheeraz Qureshi

1

1

Hospital for Special Surgery, New York, USA

Introduction: Proximal junctional kyphosis (PJK)/ proximal
junctional failure (PJF), which is caused by soft tissue or bony failure, is
a critical challenge in ASD surgery. The cross-sectional area of psoas
muscle has been used as a parameter of sarcopenia and reported to have a
negative impact on functional outcomes of lumbar spinal surgery for
degenerative diseases. However, it is unclear whether it also impacts
outcomes of adult spinal deformity (ASD) surgery. The aim of this study was
to examine the impact of preoperative cross-sectional area of psoas muscle
on postoperative outcomes of ASD surgery. Material and Methods:
ASD patients who were over 18 years old and underwent fusion surgery with
>5 levels with > 6 months follow-up were included in this
study. The cross-sectional area of psoas muscle was measured at L3/4 on
T2-weighted axial images of preoperative MRI. Normalized total psoas area
(NTPA) was calculated as total psoas area normalized to patient height.
Patient reported outcome measures (ODI, SRS-22), radiographic parameters
(PT, PI, SS, LL, SVA, C2-C7 SVA, C2-T3 SVA, TS, TK, TPA and Cobb angle) and
prevalence of PJK/ PJF were evaluated at pre-op and 6 months.
Results: The total of 65 patients were included in this
study. All patients underwent a posterior spinal fusion, if needed, in
conjunction with osteotomy. The median of NTPA at L3/4 was 806 (range
482-1194) mm2/m2 in males and 629 (range 315-1129)
mm2/m2 in females. It was significantly higher in
males than in females (P = .018). Patients were divided
into 2 groups [lower NTPA group (LG) and Higher NTPA group (HG)] at the
point of the sex-specific lowest quartile of NTPA threshold (male 573
mm2/m2, female 493 mm2/m2).
ODI and SRS-22 including all sub-items except for mental health were worse
in the LG at 6 months compared to the HG, however, no
significant differences were found between groups at all points. In
radiographic parameters, C2-C7 SVA was significantly higher in the LG at
pre-op and 6 months (pre-op LG 34.2 ± 14.8° vs HG 26.4 ± 11.8°,
P = .040; 6M LG 34.5° ± 17.4° vs HG 26.9°±10.3°,
P = .044) Additionally, SS at pre-op and 6 months was
significantly lower in the LG at pre-op and 6 months (pre-op LG 25.0° ±
11.3° vs HG 33.9° ± 12.7°, P = .013; 6M LG 30.9° ± 7.9° vs
HG 37.9° ± 10.8°, P = .025). Prevalence of PJK was
significantly higher in the LG, compared to the HG (LG 50.0% vs HG 18.4%,
P = .021). There were no patients with PJF in both
groups. Conclusion: The decrease of psoas cross-sectional area
on preoperative MRI significantly increased prevalence of PJK. It was also
associated with higher C2-C7 SVA and lower SS before surgery and at
6 months. This muscle-health related parameter may be
useful for a decision making in ASD surgery.

## 1811

## A112: Stratifying Outcome Based on the Oswestry Disability Index for
Operative Treatment of Adult Spinal Deformity on patients
60 years of Age or Older: A Multicenter, Multi-Continental
Study on Prospective Evaluation of Elderly Deformity Surgery (PEEDS)

Christopher Nielsen

1

, Colby Oitment

1

, Allan Martin

2

, Thorsten Jentzsch

1

, Anna C. Rienmüller

1

, Han Shear Yashuv

1

, and Stephen Lewis

1

1

Toronto Western Hospital, Arthritis Program, University of Toronto,
Department of Orthopaedic Surgery, Toronto, Canada

2

Toronto Western Hospital, Arthritis Program, University of Toronto,
Department of Neurosurgery, Toronto, Canada

Introduction: Patients with adult spinal deformity suffer from
disease related disability as measured by the ODI for which surgery can
result in significant improvements. The purpose of this study was to show
the change in overall and individual components of the Oswestry Disability
Index (ODI) in patients aged 60 years or older following
multi-level spinal deformity surgery. Material and Methods: A
prospective, multicenter, multi-continental, observational longitudinal
cohort study was performed of patients ≥60 years undergoing
primary spinal fusion surgery of ≥5 levels for coronal, sagittal or combined
deformity. 12 sites participated in this study. Local investigators assessed
and included patients for eligibility and performed the surgeries according
to their standard of care with techniques according to their discretion. ODI
forms were completed at baseline, 10vweeks, 12 months, and
24 months. ODI scores were grouped into deciles. Change was
calculated based on total range of ODI scale and improvement or worsening
was further categorized from baseline as substantial (≥20%), marginal (≥10%
- <20%) or no change (within 10%). Results: Two-hundred
nineteen patients met inclusion criteria for the study. Most patients were
female (80.1%) and Caucasian (56.6%), and the mean age was
67.5 years. The mean BMI was 26.1 kg/m2 with
over 50% of the patients being either overweight (29.7%) or obese (21.5%).
Aggregate BMD scores demonstrated that 43% of patients had normal BMD, 45.6%
of patients were osteopenic, and 11.4% were osteoporotic. The median number
of spinal levels fused was 9 [Q1 = 5.0, Q3 = 12.0]. 2 years
mean (95% CI) ODI improvement was 19.3% (16.7%; 21.9%; P
< .001) for all age groups, with mean scores improved from a baseline of
46.3% (44.1%; 48.4%) to 41.1% (38.5%; 43.6%) at 10 weeks
(P < .001), 28.1% (25.6%; 30.6%) at
12 months (P < 0.001), and 27.0% (24.4%;
29.5%) at 24 months (P < .001). At
2 years, 45.5% of patients showed 20% or greater
improvement in ODI, 23.7% improved between 10% and 20%, 26.3% reported no
change (defined as ± 10% from baseline), 4.5% of patients reported a
worsening between 10-20%, and none reported worsening greater than 20%.
59.0% of patients were severely disabled (ODI >40%) pre-operatively,
which decreased to 20.2% at 2 years. Significant improvement
was observed across all 10 ODI items at 12 and 24 months. The
largest improvements were seen in pain, walking, standing, sex life, social
life and traveling. Conclusion: In this prospective,
multicenter, multi-continental study of patients 60 years or
older undergoing multi-level spinal deformity surgery, almost 70% of
patients reported significant improvements in ODI without taking into
account surgical indications, techniques or complications.

## 51

## A113: Adult Spinal Deformity Surgery: Instrumentation-Related
Complication-Free Survival

Nikita Zaborovskii

1

, Dmitry Ptashnikov

1

, Dmitry Mikhaylov

1

, Oleg Smekalenkov

1

, Sergei Masevnin

1

, and Anton Denisov

1

1

R.R.Vreden National Medical Research Center of Traumatology and
Orthopedics, Saint-Petersburg, Russian Federation

Introduction: The surgical management of adult spinal deformity
can provide significant improvements in pain, disability, and health-related
quality of life. However, these procedures are technically demanding and are
associated with a high complication rate. Complications arising from spinal
surgery instrumentation present a host of challenges in prevention as well
as treatment. We explored the factors that influence the duration of
instrumentation-related complication-free (IRCF) survival in adult deformity
surgery. Material and Methods: One hundred ninety four patients
with spinal deformity (SRS-Schwab type L, sagittal modifiers: 2 grade and
more) were included, and the following parameters were studied: age, sex,
body mass index (BMI), comorbidities, smoking status, neurological deficit,
presence of osteoporosis, Oswestry Disability Index (ODI), Miller frailty
index, previous spinal surgeries, type of osteotomy, levels of
instrumentation, pelvic fixation, presence of anterior interbody fusion at
L5-S1 (ALIF L5-S1), pelvic incidence (PI) and lumbar lordosis (LL) mismatch
to evaluate spino-pelvic re-alignment. Instrumentation-related complications
were implant instability and proximal junction disorders requiring revision.
Multivariate Cox proportional hazard model analysed clinical parameters for
their prognostic relevance. Results: The 12 months
IRCF rate is 89%. The 24 months IRCF rate is 48%. In patients
with instrumentation-related complications, multivariable analysis suggested
that severe Miller frailty index (95% CI 1.19-5.87; HR 2.64), ODI less than
40 scores (95% CI 1.16-8.67; HR 3.17), 3-column osteotomy (95% CI 1.46-7.23;
HR 3.25), pelvic fixation (95% CI 1.25-13.17; HR 4.21), overcorrection of PI
- LL mismatch (95% CI 1.09-6.92; HR 2.74) impacted the probability of
shorter IRCF survival. The model found that ALIF L5-S1 was associated with
better IRCF survival (95% CI .14-.79; HR .33). Half of adult spinal
deformity patients had instrumentation-related complications
2 years following surgery. Individual patient characteristics
at baseline as well as surgical invasiveness influence the duration of IRCF
survival in adult deformity surgery. Conclusion: Preoperative
Miller frailty index, ODI score, type of osteotomy and instrumentation,
overcorrection of PI - LL mismatch influence the duration of IRCF survival
in adult deformity surgery.

## 1754

## A114: Complications of Multilevel Surgery in Elderly Patients: The
Prospective Evaluation of Elderly Deformity Surgery (PEEDs)

Sigurd Berven

1

, Larry lenke

2

, Michael Venezia

3

, Allan Martin

4

, John T. Street

5

, Eric Klineberg

4

, Michael kelly

6

, Justin Smith

7

, Christopher Shaffrey

8

, Yong Qiu

9

, Marinus deKleuver

10

, Kenneth Man Chee Cheung

11

, Ahmet Alanay

12

, Yukihiro Matsuyama

13

, David Polly

14

, and Stephen Lewis

15

1

UC San Francisco, San Francisco, USA

2

Columbia University Medical Center, New York, USA

3

University of Tampa, Tampa Bay, USA

4

UC Davis, Sacramento, USA

5

University of British Columbia, Vancouver, USA

6

Washington University, St Louis, USA

7

University of Virginia, Charlottesville, USA

8

Duke University, Durham, USA,

9

University of Beijing, Beijing, China

10

University of Utrecht, Utrecht, The Netherlands

11

Hong Kong University, Hong Kong, China

12

Acibadem Maslak Hospital, Istanbul, Turkey

13

Hamatsu University School of Medicine, Hamamatsu, Japan

14

University of Minnesota, Minneapolis, USA

15

University of Toronto, Toronto, Canada

Introduction: The appropriateness of surgery for patients with
deformity of the spine is based upon the expected risks and benefits.
Understanding the risks of spinal deformity surgery in elderly patients is
important to empower informed choice for patients and physicians.
Complications of surgery in elderly patients with spinal deformity are
reported with significant variability in the literature. The purpose of this
study is to report the observed complications over a two year period after
surgery in elderly patients undergoing multilevel surgery.
Methods: The study is a review of data from a prospective
multicenter observational longitudinal case series with 12 sites distributed
around the world. Patients included were adults over age 60 with spinal
deformity who were treated with primary spinal fusion of at least 5
segments. The Adverse Events (AEs) were collected prospectively throughout
the study at an individual institutional level, and the collection of data
was overseen by on site and remote data monitors. The severity of AEs, and
the relationship to treatment was determined by the site investigators.
Complications were classified into Medical, Neural, and Surgical
complications, and the timing, severity and resolution of complications were
recorded. Results: 219 of the 255 patients enrolled from 12
centers met the criteria for inclusion in the study. There were 176 females
and 43 males with a mean age of 67.5 (range 60-83 years). 124
patients suffered AEs within the 2 years FU period, and the
total number of AEs recorded was 289. AEs were rated as mild in 29 pts
(23.4%), moderate in 36 pts (29.0%) and severe in 59pts (47.6%). There were
a total of 101 SAEs, of which 81 were treatment related. The most common
SAEs were implant failure, junctional pathology, and neural injuries. AEs
were classified as Medical, 50pts (23%), Neural in 55 pts (25%), and
Surgical in 79pts (36%). Rating complications by intervention required, 44
(15%) required no intervention,162(56%) required Testing and Diagnostic
interventions or minimal interventions (transfusion, intraoperative
interventions, medicine changes). 7 complications (2%) required invasive
non-surgical interventions, and 76 (35%) required a surgical intervention.
The outcome of the AEs at patient level was: 66 patients (53% of the
patients with AE) recovered without persist damages; 40 patients (32%) were
still in the process of recovering at the end of FU; five patients (4%)
sustained persistent damages; and five patients (4%) died, and the
resolution remains unknown for 8 patients (7%). Conclusions:
Complications are common in multilevel fusion surgery for elderly patients
with spinal deformity. Understanding the types of complication, rates and
severity of complication, interventions required and resolution is important
to guide informed choice regarding the appropriateness of surgical
interventions in this population. Further work will identify specific risk
factors for complications, and correlate complications with changes in
health status, and with satisfaction with surgery.

## 458

## A115: Postoperative Complications and Unplanned Readmission After Adult
Spinal Deformity Surgery. Multicentric Registry in Latin America

Gaston Camino Willhuber

1

, Alfredo Guiroy

2

, Mariano Servidio

3

, Fernando Nin

4

, Murilo Daher

5

, Bruno Saciloto

6

, Allan Ono

7

, Olavo Letaif

8

, Fernando Alvarado Gómez

9

, Ratko Yurac

10

, Baron Zarate-Kalfopulos

11

, Nelson Astur

12

, Emiliano Vialle

13

, and Marcelo Alejandro Valacco

3

1

Hospital Italiano de Buenos Aires, Institute of Orthopedics “Carlos
E. Ottolenghi,”, Ciudad Autonoma de Buenos Aires, Argentina

2

Hospital Español de Mendoza, Mendoza, Argentina

3

Hospital Churruca Visca, Ciudad Autonoma de Buenos Aires,
Argentina

4

Medica Uruguaya Casmu, Montevideo, Uruguay

5

Universidade Federal de Goiás, Goiânia, Goiânia, Brazil

6

Clínica Bambina, Guarapuava, Brazil

7

Clínicas da Faculdade de Medicina FMUSP, San Pablo, Brazil

8

Hospital das Clínicas da Faculdade de Medicina da Universidade de
São Paulo, San Pablo, Brazil

9

Hospital Universitario Fundación Santa Fe de Bogotá, Bogotá,
Colombia

10
Universidad del Desarrollo, Santiago, Chile; Spine Unit,
Department of Orthopedic and Traumatology, Santiago, Chile, 
11
Instituto Nacional de Rehabilitación, Distrito Federal,
Mexico., Mexico, Mexico

12

Hospital Israelita Albert Einstein, Morumbi, San Pablo, Brazil, San
Pablo, Brazil

13

Cajuru Hospital, Catholic University of Parana, Curitiba, Brazil.,
Curitiba, Brazil

Introduction: Postoperative complications in adult spinal
deformity surgery is associated with increased morbidity, hospital length of
stay and health care costs. The prevalence of complications in adult
deformity is heterogenous mainly based of lack of proper registry and
consensus of a universally accepted classification of complications. The
objective of this study was to register the prevalence of postoperative
complications and analyze its risk factors based on two different
classifications for postoperative complications. Material and
Methods: A retrospective multicentric registry from 8 centers in
Latin America was conducted. We included patients of 18 years
or older with adult spinal deformity based on at least one of the following
parameters: thoracic, thoracolumbar or lumbar scoliosis with a cobb angle of
at least 20 degrees, sagittal vertical axis of 5 cm or more, pelvic tilt of
20 degrees or more or thoracic kyphosis of 60 degrees or more treated with
spinal fusion of at least three levels. Patients with spinal fracture,
infection, tumor or Parkinson disease were excluded. We analyzed the rate of
postoperative complications a modified Clavien-Dindo and Glassman
classification at 30 days, unplanned readmission and hospital
length of stay was also analyzed. Results: 172 patients were
included based on our defined criteria (mean age 54.4 ± 7.2). 62% of all
cases suffered at least one complication according to Clavien-Dindo system,
18% of complications were considered major. Hospital length of stay was
significantly higher in patients with complications (median:
21 days, range 6-142 days) compared with
patients without complications (median of 5 days, range
3-9 days). Factors associated with increased risk of
complications were age, number of levels fused and postoperative time.
Conclusion: Postoperative complications reached a 62% rate
in spinal fusion after adult spinal deformity. This is the first
multicentric registry of postoperative complications after fusion surgery in
Latin America, more studies are required to stablish the real usefulness of
Clavien-Dindo Classification when assessing the rate of complications.

## 714

## A116: Predictors of 30 Day Complications in Deformity Correction Surgery:
A National Database Study

Yaroslav Gelfand

1

, James Lin

2

, Simon Morr

3

, Meghan Cerpa

3

, Griffin Baum

4

, Joseph Osorio

5

, and Lawrence Lenke

3

1

Montefiore, New York, USA

2

Mount Sinai, New York, USA

3

Columbia University Medical Center, New York, USA

4

Northwell Health, New York, USA

5

University of California San Diego, San Diego, USA

Summary: We analyzed a multi-center operative database for
independent predictors of 30 days morbidity and length of stay
in spine deformity patients. We found that dependent functional status along
with ASA class, age, and operative time were predictors of complications,
while transfusions, operative time, dependent functional status, ASA class
of 3 or greater, female gender, and anemia were predictors of prolonged
length of stay. ASA class over 3 and op-time were predictors of severe
complications, but those are often unmodified factors.
Hypothesis: Certain pre-operative patient characteristic
along with operative parameters are predictive of 30 days
postoperative complications and length of stay in deformity surgery.
Design: Patients undergoing surgery for adult deformity
correction were identified in the American College of Surgeons National
Surgical Quality Improvement Program (ACS-NSQIP) database from 2006 to 2016.
Introduction: Knowledge of pre-operative patient
characteristics that contribute to post-operative morbidity would be helpful
in risk stratification and pre-op evaluation. Methods:
Inclusion criteria were CPT codes for deformity surgery, a combination of
ICD 9 and 10 codes for deformity (kyphosis, scoliosis, proximal junctional
kyphosis, etc.) with a combination of CPT codes for a 5 or more level
fusion. Multivariate regression model was used to analyze the predictors of
non-neurologic complications, severe complications and the length of stay
within 30 days of surgical intervention. Results: 2869 cases
fit the inclusion criteria. Mean age was 56.4, 36.3% were male, and 63.7%
female. Complications occurred in 13.0% of cases, life-threatening
complications in 5.2%. Wound infection was the most common complication
(3.1%). On multivariate regression predictors of complications were
dependent functional status (OR 2.5 95% CI: 1.6-3.8, P <
.001), ASA calss of 3 or greater (OR 1.7 95% CI: 1.3-2.2, P
< .001), age over 55 (OR 1.6 95% CI: 1.2-2.1, P = .004),
and operative time (OR 1.2 95% CI: 1.2-1.3, P < .001),
while predictors of severe complications were only ASA category of 3 or
greater (OR 1.6 95% CI: 1.0-2.4, P = .031) and operative
time (OR 1.2 95% CI: 1.1-1.3, P < .001). Predictors of
the length of stay (LOS) were blood transfusion (OR 3.8 95% CI: 3.2-4.5,
P < .001), operative time over 7 hours (OR 2.9 95%
CI: 2.4-3.8, P < .001), dependent functional status (OR
2.6 95% CI: 1.9-3.5, p<0.001), ASA class of 3 or greater (OR 1.6 95% CI:
1.4-1.9, P < .001), female gender (OR 1.4 95% CI:
1.2-1.6, P < .001), and anemia (OR 1.3 95% CI: 1.1-1.5,
P = .001). Conclusion: We identified
independent predictors of complications, severe complications, and prolonged
length of stay for better patient risks stratification.

## 357

## A117: 30-Day Complications for Deformity Correction Surgery
in Patients Older and Younger Than 55

Yaroslav Gelfand

1

, James Lin

2

, Joseph Osorio

3

, Meghan Cerpa

4

, Griffin Baum

5

, Simon Morr

4

, and Lawrence Lenke

4

1

Montefiore, New York, USA

2

Mount Sinai, New York, USA

3

University of California San Diego, San Diego, USA

4

Columbia University Medical Center, New York, USA

5

Northwell Health, New York, USA

Summary: This is a multicenter retrospective review of patients
undergoing deformity surgery comparing the complications between those
younger and older than 55. Results showed that while severe complications,
mortality, and length of stay were not significantly different between the
groups, those over 55 suffered more overall complications, were more likely
to be discharged to rehab or sub-acute rehab, and more likely to require
unplanned return to the operating room. Hypothesis: Older
patients (over 55) are generally sicker and are more likely to suffer from
post-surgical complications. Design: National database study.
Introduction: This is a retrospective review of multicenter
national database to compare the complications in deformity surgery for
patients older than 55 to those younger than 55. Methods:
Patients undergoing surgery for adult deformity correction were identified
in the American College of Surgeons National Surgical Quality Improvement
Program (ACS-NSQIP) database from 2006 to 2016. Inclusion criteria were CPT
codes for deformity surgery, a combination of ICD 9 and 10 codes for
deformity (kyphosis, scoliosis, proximal junctional kyphosis, etc.) along
with a combination of CPT codes for a 5 or more level fusion. Two groups
were established: patients under 55 (group 1) and patients over 55(group 2).
Multivariate analysis was used to compare those groups.
Results: Total of 2869 cases fit the inclusion criteria.
Mean age was 56.4, 36.3% were male, and 63.7% female. 1012 (35.3%) of
patients were younger than 55 and 1857 (64.7%) were 55 or older.
Complications occurred in 13.0% of cases: 8.4% and 15.6% in group 1 and 2
respectively (OR 1.4 95% CI: 1.1-1.9, P = .018). Severe
(life-threatening) complications accounted for 5.2%: 3.5% and 6.2% in groups
1 and 2 respectively, but was not significant on multivariate analysis (OR
1.3 95% CI: .9-2.1, P = .207). Overall mortality was .4%
and did not differ between the groups (P = .329). Return to
the operating room was more likely in those over 55 (7.0% vs 4.0%), and that
remained significant in multivariate regression (OR 1.6 95% CI: 1.1-2.4,
P = .027). Discharge to any rehab (OR 4.7 95% CI:
3.7-6.0, P < .001) or subacute rehab (OR 5.7 95% CI:
4.0- 8.1, P < .001) were much more likely in those
55 years of age or older. The length of stay (OR 1.1 95%
CI: 1.0-1.3, P = .112) was not significantly different.
Conclusion: We found no significant difference in severe
complications, mortality, or length of stay between those younger and older
than 55. Those over 55 were significantly more likely to suffer from any
complication, have unplanned return to the operating room, and had higher
rates of discharge to rehab.

## OP14: Novel Diagnostics

## 156

## A118: Subclassification of Sanders Stage 7: The Use of Ulna Physis Can
Improve Decision-Making for Brace Weaning in Adolescent Idiopathic
Scoliosis

Prudence Wing Hang Cheung

1

, and Jason Cheung

1

1

The University of Hong Kong, Orthopaedics and Traumatology, Hong
Kong, Hong Kong

Introduction: Adolescent idiopathic scoliosis(AIS) is a
three-dimensional deformity which progresses rapidly during pubertal growth
spurt and stablizes near skeletal maturity. Previous studies found that
curve progression can occur if bracing is weaned at Sanders stage (SS) 7
which represents the early mature stage. A wide range of radiographic
appearance occurs from open to fusion of the distal radius and ulna physis
between SS7 and SS8. This warrants the investigation of whether
subclassification of SS7 allows more accurate identification of skeletal
maturity that can lead to an earlier and safe timing for brace weaning. The
distal radius and ulna (DRU) classification utilizes the radiographic
appearance of the distal radius and ulna comprehensively, and gradings are
readily available for assessing decelerating growth and growth cessation.
This study aims to investigate whether including the stages of ulnar physeal
closure in SS7 aids in more accurate maturity assessment for brace weaning
in AIS. Materials and Methods: This was a retrospective
analysis of AIS patients at a specialist clinic from June 2016 to Decemeber
2018. Patients who weaned brace-wear at Risser stage ≥4, static standing
body height and arm span for at least 6 months and
≥2 years post-menarche were included. Skeletal maturity at
weaning was assessed using DRU classification and Sanders staging with SS7
subclassified into SS7a (all phalangeal physes are fused and only distal
radial physes are open, with narrowing of medial physeal plate of the distal
ulna) and SS7b (those with >50% fusion of the medial growth plate of
distal ulna). The relationship of weaning maturity grading and any curve
progression was analyzed using Fisher’s exact test, with Cramer’s V and
Goodman and Kruskal’s tau. Results: A total of 179 AIS patients
(83.2% females) were studied with mean age of 14.8 ± 1.1 years
and Cobb angle of 34.6 ± 7.7° at weaning. Follow-up period was 3.4 ±
1.8 years. At post-weaning 6-months, curve progression
rates for patients weaned at SS7a versus SS7b were 11.4% and 0% respectively
for <40° curves. Similarly, curve progression rate for weaning at U7 was
13.5% vs 0% for weaning at U8. Skeletal maturity assessment at weaning using
SS6, SS7a/b, SS8 strongly associated (Cramer’s V: .326, P =
.016) with whether curve progressed at post-weaning 6 months.
Weaning with SS7 subclassification allowed a significant 10.6% reduction of
error in predicting curve progression. For curves ≥40°, post-weaning curve
progression rate was not associated with any maturity grading at weaning.
Conclusion: The use of SS7a and SS7b allows accurate
maturity assessment for guiding brace weaning in patients with AIS. Weaning
at SS7b or U8 is more appropriate without any curve progression cases
immediately post-weaning for small curves <40°. This makes reaching full
fusion of both distal radius and ulna physis (SS8) not necessary and brace
weaning can be initiated approximately 9.0 months earlier. This
study demonstrates the importance of accurate bone age assessment for more
precise timing for weaning, avoiding the overuse of bracing while limiting
the risk of curve progression. For large curves, curve progression can occur
regardless of the skeletal maturity status at which weaning takes place.

## 116

## A119: Utility of Magnetic Resonance Imaging in Diagnosing the Pathology
of Vertebral COmpression Fractures - Comparison of 3 Observers and
Radiologist with Biopsy Report

Shaffaf Kareem

1

1

Manipal Hospitals HAL Airport Road Bangalore, Spine Care Department,
Bangalore, India

Introduction: Vertebral compression fractures (VCFs) in elderly
maybe benign (due to osteoporosis) or malignant. Literature shows
inconsistent results with Magnetic Resonance Imaging (MRI) in
differentiating between them. Biopsy obtained during cement augmentation
procedures (CAPs) like Kyphoplasty or vertebroplasty of such VCFs helps in
confirming the diagnosis. This study aims to find the usefulness of MRI in
differentiating benign from malignant VCFs when compared to their biopsy
obtained during the time of CAP, and to evaluate the clinical outcome of the
procedure. Methods: Retrospective observational study was done
using the database collected from January2017 to January2020. All patients
who underwent CAP for VCFs following no/trivial trauma with a
histopathological diagnosis were included in the study. The agreement
between MRI and biopsy reports was studied. Each MRI images were also read
by 3 spine-fellows for inter-observer agreement. For evaluation of
intra-observer agreement, these MRI images were read again by the same
fellows after 2 weeks duration. Clinical outcome was assessed
by Visual-Analogue-Scale (VAS) and Modified-Oswestry-Disability-Scale (MODS)
evaluated pre-operatively and compared with values recorded at
3 months post-procedure. The intra-observer agreement of
the spine-fellows (done at zero and at 2 weeks) over the MRI
diagnosis, and the inter-observer agreement between the spine fellows and
radiologist diagnosis (taken as the gold standard for MRI diagnosis) was
assessed by Cohen’s Kappa coefficient (K). Wilcoxon signed-rank test
(nonparametric median test) was used to compare pre-procedure and
post-procedure VAS & MODS. A P-value≤ .05 was
considered statistically significant. Results: The study
population included 152patients (218 vertebrae). Mean age was
66.63 years with 92 females and 60 males. Maximum number of
VCF was found in thoracolumbar junction. Both MRI and Biopsy-reports showed
118osteoporotic VCFs and 34malignant VCFs. But there were 4unsuspected
malignancy in MRI and 4benign VCFs were wrongly suspected as malignant in
these. This resulted in a sensitivity, specificity and accuracy of 96.61%,
88.24%, and 94.74% respectively. The agreement between MRI and biopsy,
intra-observer agreement and the inter-observer agreement were found to be
statistically significant. Mean VAS and MODS reduced from pre-operative
scores of 7.86 ± .78 and 31.06 ± 4.33 to 1.74 ± 0.69 and 8.96 ± 8.00
respectively. Conclusion: Diagnosing VCFs is not a major
hurdle, but to differentiate benign (osteoporotic) from malignant VCF is a
diagnostic challenge as both presents in the same age group of the
population and have almost similar clinical characteristics. MRI can safely
be used for the diagnosis of VCF and to differentiate the underlying
pathology of VCF, with the advantage of being a non-invasive technique
compared to biopsy. Evaluating MRI based on the combination of features is
the key to increasing diagnostic accuracy. Vertebroplasty/Kyphoplasty
significantly improves the pain and functional disabilities associated with
the fracture and enable the patients to regain early pain-free mobility.
Procuring biopsy concomitantly is easy, accessible, with no increase in
morbidity, identifies the unsuspected malignancy and aids in the appropriate
staging, planning, and prognostication of the patient. Besides, treatment of
a patient depends highly on MRI in whom biopsy report came as inconclusive
or insufficient sample was procured.

## 1868

## A120: In Vivo Response to Corrective Spinal Fusion Surgery of Disc
Morphology in Adolescent Idiopathic Scoliosis: Initial Response &
1 year Follow-Up

Mary Foltz

1

, Greta Long

2

, Casey Johnson

3

, Tenner Guillaume

4

, Walter Truong

4 5

, David Polly

5

, and Arin Ellingson

1

1

University of Minnesota, Rehabilitation Medicine, Minneapolis,
USA

2

University of Minnesota, Computer Science and Engineering,
Minneapolis, USA

3

University of Minnesota, Veterinary Clinical Sciences, St Paul,
USA

4

Gillette Children's Specialty Healthcare, St Paul, USA

5

University of Minnesota, Orthopaedic Surgery, Minneapolis,
USA

Introduction: Adolescent idiopathic scoliosis (AIS) is a 3D
deformity of the spine and trunk, primarily identified in coronal
radiographs; initially observed as disc wedging and accompanied by nucleus
pulposus (NP) migration towards the convexity. Corrective fusion surgery is
required to rectify severe scoliosis. Disc degeneration is known to occur at
discs adjacent to fusion due to increased mechanical demand; the more levels
fused, the higher mechanical demand on the caudal unfused levels. However,
the time course of this degeneration is unknown, and understanding the
unfused disc’s response to surgery may help to better inform clinical
decisions. Aims were to assess discs caudal to lowest instrumented vertebra
(LIV), immediately and one-year following surgery. Our hypotheses are: (1)
NP will migrate towards disc center in response to surgery and (2)
1 year following surgery there will be a decrease in disc
health. Material and Methods: AIS patients indicated for
corrective fusion surgery (n = 9F; 14.4 ± 1.13 years;
12-16 years) were enrolled. 3T MRI (T2-weighted images) was
used to image caudal adjacent (immediately caudal to LIV) and sub-adjacent
(two levels caudal to LIV) discs at 3 time-points: (1) pre-operatively, (2)
3 months and (3) 1 year post-operatively.
Axial slices were reconstructed, and scripts were developed to segment disc
and NP regions of interest. From segmented regions we evaluated and
normalized the (1) NP geometric and weighted (based on signal intensity)
centers, (2) NP area, and (3) average NP signal intensity. NP centers inform
on NP migration; NP area and signal intensity inform on disc health. Disc
angles were manually measured in the coronal plane. Paired t-test were used
to compare between time-points (pre-operatively and 3 months
post-operative; 3 months and 1 year
post-operatively) for each metric. Alpha = .05. Results:
Following surgery, at the adjacent disc there was a significant migration of
the NP weighted center towards the disc’s center (P = .03);
no other significant differences were observed. 1 year
post-surgery, a trend was observed, where the adjacent disc’s angle
decreased (P = .06); no other significant differences were
observed. At the sub-adjacent disc there were no significant differences
between the time-points. Conclusion: Our results indicate that
in AIS patients the adjacent NP migrates towards mid-line following surgery;
however, the disc angle did not change, but one-year post-operation there
was a slight decrease in disc angle without a corresponding NP migration.
Therefore, NP migration towards mid-line may re-distribute loads more
uniformly throughout the disc, followed by a decrease in disc angle.
Analysis of the disc health metrics found no significant changes between
three-months and one-year following surgery, indicating that the T2-weighted
images were unable to detect early signs of degeneration. Limitations
include small sample size and one-year follow-up evaluation. Corrective
surgery may guide more uniform load transfer through the disc adjacent to
LIV. Furthermore, NP migration may be an initial indicator of correction at
discs caudal to LIV, since NP migration towards mid-line was detected prior
to change in disc angle. Although early signs of degeneration were not
observed at 1 year post-surgery, further imaging at two and
5 years time points is planned to track signs of
degeneration.

## 1781

## A121: Ossification of Posterior Longitudinal Ligament in Cervical Spine
and its Association with Ossified Lesions in the Whole Spine: A
Cross-Sectional Study of 2500 CT Scans

Ajoy P Shetty

1

, Neerav Anand Singh

2

, Vibhu Krishnan Viswanathan

2

, and Shanmuganathan Rajasekaran

1

1

Ganga Medical Center and Hospitals, Coimbatore, India

2

Ganga Medical Center and Hospitals, Spine Surgery, Coimbatore,
India

Introduction: Cervical ossified posterior longitudinal ligament
(c-OPLL) is a rare entity. The current literature evidence regarding the
epidemiological data on c-OPLL is scarce. The present study was thus planned
to identify the prevalence and characteristics of c-OPLL lesions; and their
association with other spinal ligament ossifications. Methods:
We performed a retrospective review of whole spine computed tomography (CT)
scans of polytrauma patients from 2009 to 2018 using the PACS Database. CT
scans were screened for c-OPLL, thoraco-lumbar OPLL, thoracic ossified
ligamentum flavum (OLF), cervical and thoracolumbar ossified anterior
longitudinal ligament (C-OALL AND T-L OALL), ossified nuchal ligament (ONL)
and, diffuse idiopathic skeletal hyperostosis (DISH) and their prevalence
and distribution were calculated. Chi square test was used to find out the
significance of study parameters on a categorical scale between two groups.
Results: Out of 2500 patients, 128 had cervical OPLL with a
prevalence rate of 5.12% with mean age of 55.89 years. The most
common affected level was C5 followed by C6, and C4. Segmental OPLL was the
highest in number 77.7% followed by localized type 14.8%. Thoracic OPLL had
prevalence rate of .56% and for OLF 9.90%. The co-existing ossifications
with cervical OPLL were thoracic OPLL 7.81%, thoracic OLF 36.71%, cervical
OALL 29.68%, thoracolumbar OALL 37.5%, DISH 27.34% and, ONL 7.03%.
Conclusion: Our study showed a prevalence of 5.12 % for
cervical OPLL, with more than 36% of these patients having co-existing
thoracic OLF. We recommend screening MRI analysis of the whole spine for
patients with radiographic evidence of OPLL in the cervical spine for the
early detection of additional sites of ossification.

## 709

## A122: Prenatal Counselling for Spine Anomalies - Algorithm of Management
- From the Genesis to Treatment

Hriday Acharya

1

, Foram Acharya

2

, Rini Sutaria

2

, Prashant Acharya

2

, and Abhay Nene

1

1

Lilavati Hospital and Research Center, Mumbai, India

2

Paras Advanced center for fetal medicine, Ahmedabad, India

Introduction: A lot of spinal anomalies like scoliosis,
kyphosis, Hemivertebra, tethered cord anomalies, spina bifida and many more
can be diagnosed even before birth. In this era of early diagnosis and
prevention, this could be a boon to spine surgeons to educate and counsel
the parents minimise the physical deformity before correction and prevent
the child’s problem by proper management. Not only that, since we could now
followup the child since the very day he/she is born, it gives us a lead
time in early management of any disorders or complications, which would
develop in the life to come. It can provide the child with a better future.
Here, we propose an algorithm in management of these spine anomalies from
their diagnosis intrauterine till management after birth. Material and
Methods: We studied over 10,000 fetal scans and the most commonly
diagnosed spine anomalies were isolated. The management of each of those
anomalies ranging from their intrauterine management, postnatal management,
treatment in early childhood and adulthood were reviewed. An algorithm was
formulated by a team of spine surgeon, fetal medicine specialist and an
obstretician which took into consideration the time of diagnosis by a fetal
medicine specialist, the follow up till the birth of the fetus by the
obstretician and management of those anomalies from an spine surgeons point
of view. Results: The algorithm comprised of a team of spine
surgeon, fetal medicine specialist and an obstretician each of whom have a
defined role to play. Early diagnosis of spine anomalies like hemiverterbra
and other segmentation defects along with spina bifida could be easily
diagnosed at 12 weeks. Most other anomalies like tethered cord
syndrome, kyphosis, scoliosis and any other sydromic association or CNS
anomalies can be identified by 20 weeks. After a primary
diagnosis of the fetal spine,by pre-set protocols, by the fetal medicine
expert the parents are couselled by a team of spine surgeon and an
obstretician.The spine surgeon would manage anomalies by either intra
uterine surgery (for spina bifida) or post natal management as early as
possible, in coordination with the obstretician, to prevent any sequela of
the condition. Conclusion:This algorithm gives us a lead time
in diagnosing and management of spinal anomalies. This would help in
providing the correct treatment to the child in a structured fashion
avoiding the delay in diagnosis due to late presentation of symptoms and
thereby preventing related complications. It would also,most importantly,
help in making the parents prepared for their child’s problems and providing
them with an effective plan to managed them.

## 1042

## A123: The Utility of Surgeon-Directed DICOM Manipulation Software as a
Preoperative Surgical Planning Tool in Pediatric Craniovertebral
Anomalies

Kshitij Chaudhary

1

, Arjun Dhawale

1 2

, Avi Shah

2

, and Abhay Nene

2

1
Sir HN Reliance Foundation Hospital, Mumbai, India, 
2
Wadia Children's Hospital, Mumbai, India
Introduction: Rigid instrumentation for complex craniovertebral
junction (CVJ) anomalies in children can be challenging. However, orthogonal
CT images are inadequate for planning as they are not in the screw
trajectory plane. Open source DICOM software, such as Horos, has allowed
surgeons to perform multiplanar reconstructions in line with the screw
trajectory. This study aims to present a step-by-step preoperative workflow
that we have utilized to plan surgery in pediatric CVJ anomalies using
Horos. We assessed each site’s suitability for screw anchors preoperatively
and correlated the preoperative planning with intraoperative findings and
our ability to execute a preoperative plan successfully. We have also
evaluated whether this method of preoperative planning can provide
additional anatomical information compared to conventional PACS.
Methods: The study included 25 consecutive children, less
than 12 years old, operated for atlantoaxial instability by two
surgeons between 2014 and 2019. The preoperative demographics, presenting
symptoms, and the diagnosis were recorded. The preoperative CT angiogram was
available on hospital PACS (Picture archiving and communications system),
and its findings were noted. The DICOM data was then transferred to the
surgeon’s laptop and loaded in Horos. The surgeon manipulated the DICOM
images to determine an idealized path of screws at each cervical site in
four steps. 3D volume rendering of the pathoanatomy was generated, and
anomalies were noted. The surgeon compared the anatomical data obtained
using Horos with that from the PACS CT and graded it as; Grade A
(substantial new information), Grade B (confirmatory with improved
visualization and understanding), Grade C (no added information). Any
deviations inconsistent with preoperative planning were recorded. Fusion was
assessed on a CT scan. Results: All children presented with a
neurological deficit at a mean age of 7.2 years
(2-12 years). Etiology was congenital anomalies (n = 11),
skeletal dysplasia (n = 7), isolated os odontoideum (n = 5), and Down
syndrome (n = 2). Surgeries were occipitocervical fixation (n = 18, 72%),
C1-C2 fusion (n = 9, 36%), transarticular screws (n = 5, 20%). The most
common cervical anchors used were C2 laminar screw (C2LAM) (n = 20), C2
pedicle screw (n = 10), and transarticular screw (n = 10). In 18 (72%)
patients, the surgeon noted substantial new information (Grade A) about CVJ
anomalies on Horos compared to PACS CT. Concerning planning for fixation
anchors, the surgeon graded the information obtained as Grade A in all
patients (100%). In 7 patients with dysmorphic C2 lamina, we used a novel
uncrossed trajectory with an ipsilateral entry point for the C2LAM. In 4
(16%) patients, the surgery could not be executed precisely as planned Horos
and alternative anchors were used. The average follow up was
25 months. Neurology improved in all except one patient.
There were four (16%) complications; VA injury (n = 1), neurological
worsening (n = 1), and loss of fixation (n = 1), non-union (n = 1).
Conclusion: Horos is a free-to-use, user-friendly DICOM
software, which can be a significant value addition to the surgeon’s
preoperative workflow in planning complex craniovertebral anomalies. In our
experience, surgeon-directed DICOM manipulation gives more anatomical
information compared to studying PACS images. We describe a novel
alternative entry point and trajectory for C2 laminar screws.

## 688

## A124: Spine Anomalies in Fetus: Diagnosis & Incidence - A
Retrospective Study of 10,000 Cinsecutive Fetal Scans

Hriday Acharya

1

, Prashant Acharya

2

, and Abhay Nene

1

1

Lilavati Hospital and Research Center, Mumbai, India

2

Paras Advanced Center for Fetal Medicine, Ahmedabad, India

Introduction: Looking for spinal anomalies is now an integral
part of most prenatal ultrasound evaluations worldwide. However, we have
very few published figures relating to the incidence and types of spinal
anomalies from a prenatal scan. Here we look into how big this spectrum of
disease is in the context of India and which anomalies can commonly be
identified and how often are they identified at a tertiary care center. The
purpose of the study was to find the incidence of various spine anomalies in
the fetus and to evaluate the scope of early diagnosis in the management of
these anomalies. Material and Methods: We report the results of
10,000 consecutive prenatal ultrasound scans specifically with respect to
the incidence and distribution of spinal anomaly. All consecutive scans were
done at a tertiary center by a single Fetal Medicine expert, between 2011
and 2019, were studied. Of the data obtained, all patients having spinal
bony and cord anomalies were included in the study. Results:
Out of 10,000 patients studied,89 (.008%) were diagnosed with spine and
Spinal cord anomalies. Of these 89 patients, 57 had spinal dysraphism.10 had
one or more level of hemivertebra.9 patients presented with intra-uterine
scoliosis and 22 with kyphosis. Sacral agenesis was present in 7 of these
patients. Conclusion: This is the first study to evaluate the
incidence of prenatal diagnosis of spinal anomaly. Prenatal information will
be of great value to spine surgeons as well as parents for counseling and
planning treatment. A team approach comprising of a Spine surgeon, a fetal
medicine expert and an obstetrician, in all cases should be the order of the
day.

## 1034

## A125: High-Resolution Computed Tomography Angiography (CTA) for
Diagnosing Blunt Cerebrovascular Injury: Does it Cut the Mustard? A
Systematic Review and Meta-Analysis

Charlotte Kik

1

, Willem Bart Slooff

1

, Nizar Moayeri

2

, and Sander Muijs

3

1

University Medical Center Utrecht, Neurosurgery, Utrecht, The
Netherlands

2

University Medical Center Utrecht, Utrecht, The Netherlands

3

University Medical Center Utrecht, Orthopaedic surgery, Utrecht, The
Netherlands

Introduction: Blunt cerebrovascular injuries (BCVI) collectively
describe all non-penetrating traumatic injuries to the extra- or
intracranial carotid and vertebral arteries. Screening of patients with BCVI
is pivotal as up to 80% of these patients do not display neurological
symptoms at presentation. Non-invasive and fast screening modalities, such
as computed tomography angiography (CTA), are increasingly being utilized in
the acute phase. Previous literature showed that the diagnostic accuracy of
CTA is not yet equal to that of the rarely used golden standard of digital
subtraction angiography (DSA) in detecting BCVI in trauma patients. However,
the recent implementation of higher channel CTA (≥64 channels) may prove
more sensitive. This article aims to determine whether high channel (≥64)
multidetector CTA is equally or more accurate in diagnosing BCVI than DSA in
trauma patients. Methods: An electronic database search was
performed in PubMed, EMBASE, and Cochrane Library. Summary estimates of
sensitivity, specificity, positive and negative likelihood, diagnostic odds
ratio, and their 95% confidence intervals were determined using a bivariate
random-effects model. Results: Of the 3293 studies identified,
9 met the inclusion criteria. Pooled sensitivity was 64% (95% CI, 53%-74%)
and specificity 95% (95% CI, 87%-99%) The estimated positive likelihood
ratio was 11.8 (95%, 5.6-24.9), with a negative likelihood ratio of 0.38
(95%, .30-.49) and a diagnostic odds ratio of 31 (95%, 17-56).
Conclusion: CTA has good specificity but poor sensitivity
when compared to DSA in diagnosing any type of BCVI. CTA with higher
channels (≥16) did not have higher diagnostic accuracy as compared to CTA
with lower channels (<16). These results show that the common clinical
practice of using DSA only to confirm BCVI for CTA positive cases may pose
the risk of underdetection and, consequentially, of undertreatment. However,
most of the studies included in this analysis only reported on CTA with
channels equal to or lower than 16, while contemporary trauma centers
utilize CTA with up to 128 channels. Considering the invasiveness of DSA and
common use of high channel CTA as the primary screening modality for BCVI,
it begs the question of whether there will ever be enough evidence to
replace DSA as the golden standard. Therefore, instead of aiming to replace
DSA, we recommend that future research should focus on the harmfulness of
undertreatment in BCVI patients, especially with regards to low-grade
dissections.

## 1928

## A126: Diagnostic and Treatment Criteria of Craniocervical Instability in
Ehlers Danlos Syndrome - A Systematic Review

Laura-Nanna Lohkamp

1

, Nandan Marathe

1

, and Michael Fehlings

1

1

Division of Neurosurgery, Department of Surgery, Toronto,
Canada

Introduction: Treatment indications for craniocervical
instability (CCI) in patients with Ehlers Danlos syndrome (EDS) remain a
matter of debate resulting in inconsistent surgical care availability among
various countries. The aim of this systematic review is to summarize the
diagnostic and therapeutic criteria currently applied in EDS and to identify
consecutive knowledge gaps. Material and Methods: A systematic
literature review was performed using the databases Ovid Medline, EMbase,
Cochrane Library and PubMed based on the PRISMA guidelines. Search terms
were Ehlers Danlos and spine, cervical spine, craniocervical instability or
craniocervical junction, respectively. Articles were included if they
described the application of diagnostic and/or treatment criteria for CCI in
the context of EDS. Reported parameters pertaining to CCI and treatment
indication in EDS patients are summarized. Results: Out of 113
articles, 7 met the inclusion criteria, including one case report, research
article and editorial each as well as 4 original articles. All of them
reported radiographical criteria for diagnosis of CCI, mainly established in
lateral flexion and extension x-rays of the cervical spine, followed by
dynamic CT imaging. Overall 13 distinct linear and angular morphometric
parameters of CCI were recorded and applied according to the type of
instability. The most common parameters to define CCI were the atlantodental
interval (ADI), the basion-axis interval (BAI), the clivo-axial angle (CXA)
and angular displacement of C1 to C2. The choice of diagnostic parameters
was inconsistent among the majority of articles. Consistent treatment
criteria were proposed in two of the studies, including a total of 42 EDS
patients, who underwent cervical instrumentation for CCI. Reported symptoms
representing treatment indications were neurological deficits, headache and
neck pain or symptoms of cervicomedullary syndrome combined with
radiographic signs of instability. In 22 patients the outcome was assessed
radiographically, neurologically and via Karnofsky Performance Score (KPS)
at 2 and 5 years follow up. The second study additionally used the Short
Form Health Survey (SF-36) and patient-reported frequency of symptoms at 12
and 24 months in another set of 20 EDS patients. Postoperative improvement
of neurological deficits was observed in all patients. Statistically
significant improvement of headache or neck pain as well as of symptoms
related to cervicomedullary syndrome were documented in most of the patients
in both studies. Conclusions: Based on the current literature
there is a significant lack of evidence for the choice and correct
application of CCI criteria in EDS patients. The parameters mainly used are
the ADI, BAI, CXA and angular displacement between C1 and C2, but warrant
further assessment in bigger cohorts. Published outcome data after
craniocervical instrumentation in these patients is scarce and univocal,
although positive, not yet able to guide us in surgical decision-making.
Further studies are required to evaluate a set of dedicated diagnostic
criteria and to establish clinical guidelines for craniocervical
instrumentation.

## OP15: Cervical Surgery

## 326

## A127: Fusion Rate for Combined Antero-Posterior vs Anterior Fixation with
Allograft for 3 and 4 level Cervical Spine Pathology

Ekamjeet Dhillon

1

, Celeste Tavolaro

1

, Carlo Bellabarba

1

, and Richard Bransford

1

1

Harborview Medical Center, Orthopaedics and Sport Medicine, Seattle,
USA

Introduction: Multilevel cervical spine decompression and fusion
is the treatment of choice for patients with advanced degenerative cervical
spine pathologies. Two common techniques include an anterior cervical
discectomy and fusion (ACDF) or combining the ACDF with posterior spine
instrumented fusion (PSIF). The anterior approach is often preferred,
however, the rates of pseudoarthrosis is high using an anterior-only
approach to 3 or more levels of interbody fusion. This study examines the
radiological rates of fusion in patients undergoing an anterior-only vs
combined anterior-posterior approach for 3 or more levels of interbody
fusion. Material and Methods: We conducted a retrospective
study of all patients undergoing three or more levels of interbody fusion
between 2006 and 2016. Inclusion criteria included at least one year of
radiographic follow-up with either flexion-extension plain radiographs or
computed tomography (CT). Demographical, preoperative, and postoperative
variables were documented, including BMI, indication for surgery, and rates
of revision surgery secondary to pseudoarthrosis. Two orthopaedic surgeons
independently reviewed the imaging to determine the levels of interbody
fusion or nonunion for each patient. Results: 62 patients were
included in our study, with 24 undergoing anterior-only approach with a
total 74 interbody levels and 38 undergoing an anterior-posterior approach
with a total of 119 interbody levels. The rate of radiographic interbody
fusion of all levels was 79.73% (n = 59/74) in the anterior-only approach
with 46% (n = 11) having at least one level of interbody nonunion and 17% (n
= 4) requiring reoperations to address pseudoarthrosis. The rate of
radiographic interbody fusion was 98.32% (n = 117/119) in the
anterior-posterior approach with 5% (n = 2) having at least one level of
interbody nonunion and 3% (n = 1) requiring reoperation to address
pseudoarthrosis. In addition, 11% (n = 4) in the anterior-posterior group
underwent reoperation for posterior wound dehiscence, which was not seen in
the anterior-only approach. Conclusion: Almost half (46%) of
the patients undergoing an anterior-only approach to interbody fusion of 3
or more levels developed a pseudoarthrosis, with one-sixth requiring
revision surgery. Alternatively, combined anterior and posterior fixation
resulted in a much higher radiographic fusion rate of 98.32%, compared to
79.73% in the anterior-only approach, with only 1 patient requiring a
revision. However, this improvement in interbody fusion rate must be weight
against the higher rates of wound dehiscence requiring reoperation.

## 1549

## A128: ACDF with Ultra-Low Dose BMP-2 Versus the Posterior Approach in
Multilevel Fusions to the Cervico-Thoracic Junction

Daniel Coban

1

, Michael Faloon

1

, Stuart Changoor

1

, Conor Dunn

1

, Michael Pompliano

1

, Ki Hwang

1

, Kumar Sinha

1

, and Arash Emami

1

1

St. Joseph's University Medical Center, Paterson, NJ, USA

Introduction: The cervicothoracic junction (CTJ) is a critical
surgical landmark, acting as a mechanical transition point between the
cervical and thoracic spine. Multilevel surgery in this region is subject to
a number of potential sequelae, including adjacent segment disease (ASD),
pseudoarthrosis, and sagittal malalignment. Surgical approach and length of
construct can impact the rate of complications, revisions and clinical
outcomes; however, there is a paucity of reports comparing the anterior
approach with posterior cervical fusion (PCF) and inclusion of the CTJ.
Therefore, the purpose of this study was to compare the clinical and
radiographic outcomes in multilevel cervical fusion with respect to the
approach and inclusion of the CTJ. Material and Methods:
Between 2005 and 2013, 155 patients with at least 5 years of follow-up
underwent multilevel fusion to the CTJ. Patients were divided into three
groups: 1) ACDF to C7, 2) PCF to C7, and 3) PCF to T1/T2. Patients with
complete records were included in outcome analysis, and patients with
complete preoperative, early (<1 mo postop), and late (>2 years) films
were included in radiographic analysis. Standard binomial and categorical
comparative analysis were performed. Results: 155 patients were
included in the final outcome analysis. Overall re-operation rates were 1)
14.5%, 2) 8.3%, 3) 10.0% (P = .588), respectively. The rate
of pseudoarthrosis was 7.2% in Group 1, 2.8% in Group 2 and 6% in Group 3
(P = .869). ASD was seen in 2.9% of patients in Group
1, 2.8% of patients in Group 2 and 2% of patients in Group 3
(P = .951). Group 1 had 4 revisions due to
neuroforaminal stenosis, 2 revisions due to persistent radicular pain, 2
hardware removal operations due to dysphagia, 1 revision due to
pseudoarthrosis and 1 revision due to ASD. Group 2 had 3 revisions total,
one due to ASD, another due to pseudoarthrosis and one due to hardware
failure. Group 3 had 4 total revisions. Three due to pseudoarthrosis, 1 due
to ASD and one due to persistent pain. Radiographic analysis showed a
statistically significant difference (P = <.001) in both
mean early and late restoration of lordosis between the ACDF group (-7.0°
and -8.0°) and the PCF groups (C7: +8.3° and +6.6°; T1/T2: + 6.6° and +
5.5°). Conclusion: Clinically relevant complication rates
leading to reoperation for long cervical fusions were less than anticipated
in all groups. Anterior procedures underwent a higher rate of revisions but
had better restoration of lordosis and pain scores at 5 years. Stopping at
or crossing the CTJ did not result in better overall clinical outcomes.

## 638

## A129: Preoperative and Postoperative Sagittal Cervical Alignment is
Predictive of PROMIS Patient Reported Outcomes and Nurick Scores

Sarthak Mohanty

1

, and Comron Saifi

1

1

University of Pennsylvania Health System, Orthopaedic Surgery at the
Hospital of the University of Pennsylvania. The Spine Center at
Pennsylvania Hospital, Philadelphia, USA

Introduction: Normal lordotic curvature enables fluid motion and
functionality for the cervical spine. Cervical spinal deformity causes
increased muscular energy expenditure that may contribute to pain. This
study explores the impact of cervical sagittal alignment on patient reported
outcomes and neurologic function following cervical spine fusion surgery.
Methods: A single center, retrospective analysis of 54
cervical spine fusion patients undergoing posterior cervical fusion (PCF)
between 2017 and 2018 who had (1) 12 months (12M) of follow-up office
visits, and (2) pre- and 12M post-operative cervical X-rays in the lateral
view and (3) Patient reported outcomes along a 12 M period. The following
parameters were measured: (1) C2-C7 Slope (CL), the C2-C7 Cobb angles which
are obtained by drawing a line parallel to the inferior end plate of C2 and
another line parallel to the inferior end plate of C7. Perpendicular lines
are drawn from each of these lines, and the angle subtended by their
intersection is measured; (2) T1 sagittal slope (T1S), the angle between the
superior endplate of T1 and the horizontal plane; (3) cSVA, the distance
between the C2 and C7 plumb lines. Patient-Reported Outcomes Measurement
Information System (PROMIS) physical pain and mental stress scores were
assessed at pre- op and 12M post-op. The effect of radiographic and clinical
parameters on these scores was analyzed by multiple linear regression
modeling. Nurick Grades, for myelopathic disability, were estimated from
office visits pre- and post-op and analyzed by multivariable binary logistic
regression, with Nurick scores >1 coded as "1" and Nurick scores of 0 or
1 coded as "0". Odds ratios are reported as (OR [95% CI]).
Results: The multiple linear regression analysis built
significant models for physical pain and mental stress PROMIS scores at 12M
post-op (Physical: F (7, 47) = 7.631, P < .0001; Mental:
F (7, 47) = 6.6292, P < .0001). Values are reported as
(Increase in PROMIS score per unit change in sagittal, cervical parameter, p
value). Significant predictors for a higher physical PROMIS score at 12M
were pre- operative CL (.4711, P = .0010), cSVA (.3080,
P= .0129) and post-op CL (0.3592, P=
.0299). Significant predictors for a higher mental PROMIS score were
pre-operative CL (.5268, P = .0033), and cSVA (.3444,
P= .0299). Higher physical PROMIS scores (OR:1.797,
[1.115- 5.840]) and higher post-op cSVA (OR:1.607 [1.054-4.500]) as well as
lower pre-op T1S (OR:.4544 [.09399-.9195]) were associated with increased
odds of having a Nurick score of >1 at 12M post-op (Table 3).
Pre-operative C2-C7 lordosis, pre-op cSVA, and post-op C2-C7 lordosis
strongly predicted increase in physical pain and mental stress patient
reported, PROMIS scores. Conclusions: We provide meaningful
data on the correlation between patient reported pain and cervical alignment
parameters. Notably, increased physical pain PROMIS score, lower pre-op T1
slope, lower post-op T1 slope, and higher post-op cSVA were associated with
increased odds of developing a Nurick score of >1 at 12M follow up.
Pre-operative C2-C7 lordosis, pre-op cSVA, and post-op C2-C7 lordosis may
serve as useful measures for surgeons to consider in counseling and caring
for patients undergoing PCF.

## 1724

## A130: The effect of the positioning of the screws and plate in anterior
cervical fusion

Sara Diniz

1 2

, Ana Ribau

1 2

, Arnaldo Sousa

1 2

, João Esteves

1 2

, and Ricardo Rodrigues-Pinto

1 2

1

Centro Hospitalar Universitário do Porto. Portugal, Spinal Unit,
Department of Orthopaedics, Porto, Portugal

2

Instituto de Ciências Biomedicas Abel Salazar, Porto,
Portugal

Introduction: Anterior cervical fusion is a standard technique
for the treatment of both degenerative and traumatic pathology of the spine.
The purpose of this study is to retrospectively evaluate the cases of
anterior cervical fusion with plate augmentation and try to relate the
positioning of the plate and screws with the development of adjacent disc
ossification (ADO). Material and Methods: Were reviewed all
patients who underwent single-level anterior cervical fusion with autologous
iliac crest graft and plating, between January 2009 and September 2016. Both
trauma and degenerative cases were included. For the plate and screw
positioning measurements was used the immediate postoperative cervical
lateral radiograph. For all patients were measured the plate-to-endplate
distance for both the superior and inferior border, the screw-plate angle
and the distance from the tip of the screw to the endplate and ADO degree.
Results: The disease developed or progressed in 40%
(seventeen) of the superior adjacent discs and in 35% (fifteen) of the
inferior adjacent discs. The mean superior plate-to-endplate distance was
3.74 +/- 2.60 mm and the inferior plate-to-endplate distance was 4.31 +/-
2.25 mm. The increase of the plate-to-endplate distance was related to the
decrease of the ADO progression/development in the level above
(P .022). The mean angle of the superior screws was
94.3 +/- 6.4 mm and the mean angle of the inferior screws was 92.4 +/- 5.8
mm. There was no significant relation between screw angle and disease
progression for both levels. Conclusion: In this study the
increase of the plate-to-endplate distance was related to the decrease of
the ADO progression/development in the level above (P =
.022). This is in accordance to many studies that defend the closer the
plate is to the adjacent disk, the higher the risk of ADO development. This
study goes in accordance to the idea that plates should be placed as far as
possible from the endplates. However, this study raises the hypothesis that
the distance from the screw to the endplate may also have an influence in
the disease progression.

## 698

## A131: Clinical Risk Factors Associated with the Development of Adjacent
Segment Disease in Patients Undergoing Cervical Spine Procedure

Samuel Broida

1

, Kimihide Murakami

1

, Aidin Abedi

2

, Hans-Jörg Meisel

3

, Patrick Hsieh

4

, Jeffrey C. Wang

2

, Steven Presciutti

1

, Zorica Buser

2

, and Timothy S. Yoon

1

1

Emory Spine Center, Emory University, Atlanta, USA

2

Keck School of Medicine, University of Southern California,
Department of Orthopaedic Surgery, Los Angeles, USA

3

Department of Neurosurgery, Bergmannstrost Hospital, Halle, Germany,
Halle, Germany

4

Keck School of Medicine, University of Southern California,
Department of Neurological Surgery, Los Angeles, USA

Introduction: Intervertebral disc disease (IDD) is characterized
by progressive degeneration of intervertebral discs, resulting in local
inflammation, loss of structural disc integrity, and chronic pain. In IDD of
the cervical spine, surgery is often reserved for patients experiencing
severe pain or compressive lesions causing myelopathy or radiculopathy.
Cervical fusion for IDD carries a known risk of adjacent segment disease
(ASD), a complication that often requires surgical intervention to relieve
symptoms. Proposed risk factors for development of ASD include both clinical
and radiographic patient characteristics, however assessment of the true
impact of these risk factors has been limited by small sample sizes and loss
to follow-up in individual studies. The aim of this study was therefore to
synthesize and critically examine the clinical risk factors associated with
development of adjacent segment disease in the cervical spine following
fusion. Materials and Methods: We systematically reviewed the
literature for cervical ASD according to the Preferred Items for Systematic
Reviews and Meta-Analyses (PRISMA) guidelines and protocol. A total of 6850
unique studies were obtained in the initial search. Of those, screening by
title and abstract resulted in 19 articles for full text review. The
methodological quality of included papers was evaluated by two reviewers
according to the Methodological Index for Non-Randomized Studies (MINORS). A
meta-analysis was performed to compute the odds ratio [OR] with
corresponding 95% confidence interval [CI] for dichotomous outcome data, and
mean difference [MD] with 95% CI for continuous variables. The data were
pooled using both fixed and random effects models. Results:
Eleven papers met the criteria for final analysis. Congenital /developmental
stenosis (OR 1.94, 95% CI 1.06-3.56), age (MD 3.47, 95% CI 2.12-4.81),
pre-operative VAS (neck) (MD .54 95% CI .09-.99), pre-operative VAS (arm)
(MD .89 95% CI .43-1.34), pre-operative NDI (MD 4.18, 95% CI 2.11 to 6.26),
and final post-operative JOA/ recovery rate (MD -.25, 95% CI -.48 to -.02)
were found to be statistically significant clinical risk factors for
development of ASD following cervical fusion. There were no significant
differences in gender (OR .76, 95% CI .57-1.00), smoking (OR 1.03, 95% CI
.73-1.44), alcohol (OR 1.07, 95% CI .70-1.64), diabetes (OR .85, 95% CI
.56-1.31), number of segments (single vs multi- level) (OR .93, 95% CI
.69-1.24), BMI (MD -.09, 95% CI -.46-1.00), and pre-operative JOA (MD -.34,
95% CI -.85-.17). Conclusion: This study provides a
comprehensive review of risk factors for ASD development after fusion for
cervical IDD. The overall quality of evidence is limited due to a
considerable heterogeneity of the current literature as well as moderate to
low methodological quality of the available studies.

## 789

## A132: Clinical Outcomes of Patients with Degenerative Cervical Myelopathy
Managed Nonoperatively: An Ambispective Longitudinal Cohort Study in 117
Patients

Allan Martin

1,2

, Sukhvinker Kalsi-Ryan

2

, Muhammad Akbar

2

, Anna Rienmueller

2

, Jetan Badhiwala

2

, Jefferson Wilson

2

, Lindsay Tetreault

2

, Aria Nouri

2

, Eric Massicotte

2

, and Michael Fehlings

2

1

University of California, Davis, Neurological Surgery, Sacramento,
USA

2

University of Toronto, Toronto, Canada

Introduction: Degenerative cervical myelopathy (DCM) is among
the most common pathologies affecting the spinal cord, but its natural
history is poorly characterized. Mild DCM is often managed non-operatively,
but surgery is recommended by clinical practice guidelines if neurological
deterioration occurs. The purpose of this study is to investigate functional
outcomes of patients with DCM managed nonoperatively, and study the utility
of quantitative clinical measures and MRI to detect neurological
deterioration. Material and Methods: Patients with DCM (newly
diagnosed or recurrent myelopathic symptoms after previous surgery) who were
initially managed nonoperatively were included. Retrospective chart reviews
were performed to analyze clinical outcomes and anatomical MRI scans for
worsening compression or increased signal change. Quantitative neurological
assessments were collected prospectively, including mJOA, QuickDASH,
GRASSP-myelopathy (motor, sensory, and dexterity), grip dynamometer, Berg
Balance, gait stability ratio, and gait variability index; a deterioration
of 10% on each measurement scale was considered positive for deterioration
(e.g., 2-point decrease in mJOA). A composite score was considered positive
if 3 or more measures worsened by 10%. Results: 117 patients
were included (95 newly diagnosed, 22 recurrent myelopathy), including 74
mild, 28 moderate, and 15 severe cases. Over a mean follow-up of 2.5 years,
57% (95% CI = 46-67%) of newly diagnosed and 73% (95% CI = 50-88%) of
recurrent DCM patients deteriorated neurologically. In newly diagnosed
patients, deterioration occurred in 31/63 mild patients (49%; 95% CI =
37-62%), 15/21 moderate patients (71%; 95% CI = 48-88%), and 8/11 severe
patients (73%; 95% CI = 39-93%). Deterioration was best detected with grip
strength (60%), GRASSP dexterity (60%), and gait stability ratio (50%),
whereas mJOA had low sensitivity (33%) in 50 patients. A composite score had
sensitivity = 81% and specificity = 82%. Sensitivity of anatomical MRI was
28% (83 patients). Conclusion: DCM appears to have a poor
natural history, even in patients with mild severity, with the majority
deteriorating in short to mid-term follow-up. Prospective studies with
robust neurological outcome measures are needed to validate these findings
and fully characterize the natural history of DCM. Serial assessments to
detect deterioration should include mJOA, grip strength, dexterity, balance,
and gait analysis, and the use of composite scores shows promise to improve
diagnostic accuracy. Lack of worsening on anatomical MRI or mJOA are not
sufficient to determine clinical stability.

## 798

## A133: Inter-Rater Reliability of the Modified Japanese Orthopaedic
Association Score in Degenerative Cervical Myelopathy: A Prospective
Study

Allan Martin

1,2

, Thorsten Jentzsch

2

, Jamie Wilson

2

, Ali Moghaddamjou

2

, Fan Jiang

2

, Anna Rienmueller

2

, Jetan Badhiwala

2

, Muhammad Akbar

2

, Anick Nater

2

, Colby Oitment

2

, Mario Ganau

2

, Eric Massicotte

2

, and Michael Fehlings

2

1

University of California, Davis, Sacramento, USA

2

University of Toronto, Toronto, Canada

Introduction: The modified Japanese Orthopedic Association
(mJOA) score is widely accepted as the most important assessment in
degenerative cervical myelopathy (DCM); this score has been utilized in
clinical practice guidelines and directly influences treatment
recommendations, but its reliability has not been established. This study
aims to determine the inter-observer reliability of the mJOA in a large
cohort of DCM patients. Material and Methods: This prospective
cross-sectional study involved blinded administration of a refined version
of mJOA to DCM patients by 2 or more experienced clinicians. Inter-rater
reliability was measured using intra-class correlation (ICC), agreement, and
mean difference for mJOA total score and subscores. Data were also analyzed
with ANOVA for differences by mJOA severity (mild: 15-17, moderate: 12-14,
severe: <12), assessor, assessment order, previous surgery, age, and sex.
Results: 154 DCM patients underwent 322 mJOA assessments
(183 paired assessments). ICC was .88 for total mJOA, .79 for upper
extremity (UE) motor, .84 for lower extremity (LE) motor, .63 for UE
sensation, and .78 for urinary function subscores. Paired assessments were
identical across all 4 subscores in 25%. The mean difference in mJOA was
0.93 points between assessors, and this differed by severity (mild: .68,
moderate: 1.24, severe: .87, P = .001). Differences of
>= 2 points occurred in 19%. Disagreement between mild and moderate
severity occurred in 12% of patients. Other variables did not demonstrate
significant relationships with mJOA scores. Conclusion: The
inter-rater reliability of the mJOA and its subscores is good, except for UE
sensory function, which is moderate. However, the vast majority of
assessments differed between observers, indicating that this measure should
be interpreted carefully and used in conjunction with other neurological
assessments for surgical decision-making, particularly when near the
threshold between severity categories, or when a patient is reassessed for
deterioration. Further efforts to educate clinicians on administration and
refine UE sensory subscore may enhance the reliability of this tool.

## 529

## A134: Stand Alone Cages Versus Cage and Plate Constructs for One- and
Two-Level Anterior Cervical Discectomy and Fusion: A Prospective Randomized
Controlled Trial

Athan Zavras

1

, Zakariah Siyaji

1

, Ali Piracha

1

, Talha Qadri

1

, Michael Nolte

1

, Arash Sayari

1

, Garrett Harada

1

, Bryce Basques

1

, Kern Singh

1

, and Matthew Colman

1

1

Rush University Medical Center, Orthopedic Surgery, Chicago,
USA

Introduction:Although anterior cervical discectomy and fusion
(ACDF) with interbody spacer and separate plate/screw construct (PLATE)
construct is commonly performed, some have suggested this procedure may be
associated with higher incidence of postoperative dysphagia, elevated
operative time, malpositioned hardware, higher costs, and adjacent segment
impingement. To address these concerns, others have opted to utilize an
interbody cage with integrated screws and no plate (CAGE) with good results.
This study’s purpose was to compare the perioperative and radiographic
outcomes between stand-alone and anterior plated 1-2 level ACDF.
Methods:This study was a prospective, randomized,
controlled trial with minimum 6 months follow-up. Allprocedureswere
performed between July of 2017 and February 2020. Patients with 1-2 level
degenerative disease were randomized into one of two treatment arms
consisting of either PLATE or stand-alone CAGE reconstruction. Measured pre-
and postoperative patient-reported outcomes (PROs) included Swallowing
Quality of Life (SWAL-QOL), Neck Disability Index (NDI), Visual Analog Scale
(VAS) Arm, VAS Neck, Short Form 12-Item Health Survey (SF12), Veteran’s Rand
12-Item Health Survey (VR12). Primary endpoints assessed included clinical
improvement, successful arthrodesis, and subsequent revision surgeries.
Differences in populations were identified using T-test. Statistical
significance was set toP< .05. Results:A
total of 46 patients were randomized: 12 patients were treated with 1-level
PLATE, 12 with 1-level CAGE, 12 with 2-level PLATE, and 10 with 2-level
CAGE. For 1-level ACDF: There were no differences in clinical outcomes as
assessed by PROs with the exception of worse swallow function reported on
SWAL-QOL in the PLATE cohort at 6 weeks (PLATE: 71.3 ± 14.1, CAGE: 87.8 ±
11.1,P =.049) and 6 months (PLATE: 80.5 ± 9.23, CAGE:
92.0± 7.89,P =.042). Radiographic analysis noted no
differences in the degree of changein cervical sagittal alignment, magnitude
of disc height correction, arthrodesis, or cage subsidence. Pseudarthrosis
requiring revision was observed in 1 PLATE patient. For 2-level ACDF: While
there were no differences in baseline PROs, patients in the CAGE cohort
reported worse outcomes immediately postoperatively via the VAS Neck PRO
metric (PLATE: 1.49 ± 2.15, CAGE: 5.82 ± 2.86,P =.014), and
significantly less symptomatic reduction at 1 year on SF12 (PLATE: 8.09 ±
5.98, CAGE -.55 ± 4.15,P =.024) and VAS ARM
(PLATE-5.70±3.57, CAGE: .036 ± 3.84,P =.019)
questionnaires. On the other hand, PLATE patients reported worse dysphagia
on SWAL-QOL at 6 weeks postoperatively (PLATE: 76.5 ± 7.34, CAGE: 91.3 ±
8.22,P =.038). Radiographic cervical sagittal alignment
showed significantly greater lordotic correction in the PLATE group at the
cephalad index level for 6 months follow-up (PLATE: 2.92 ± 2.77, CAGE: -.56±
3.87,P =.048). No differences were observed in the
magnitude of postoperative disc height correction, rate of arthrodesis, or
implant subsidence. Conclusion:There was a significantly
greater incidence of transient postoperative dysphagia in both the 1-level
and 2-level PLATE cohorts. However, postoperative outcomes demonstrated
worse results for 2-level CAGE in certain patient-reported metrics, while
radiographic assessments of cervical sagittal alignment showed few
differences. These findings indicate that although a greater degree of
anterior instrumentation corresponds to increased dysphagia, the immediate
stability conferred by anterior plating in PLATE may translate to improved
symptomatic reduction than CAGE. Further longitudinal follow-up is necessary
to fully elucidate these differences.

## 1926

## A135: Predicting Severe Clinically Relevant Distal Junctional Kyphosis
Development Following Adult Cervical Deformity Surgery with Further
Distinction from Mild Asymptomatic Episodes

Peter Passias

1

, Sara Naessig

1

, Waleed Ahmad

1

, Katherine Pierce

1

, Lara Passfall

1

, Nicholas Kummer

1

, Oscar Krol

1

, Renaud Lafage

2

, Virginie Lafage

2

, Breton Line

3

, Bassel Diebo

4

, Themistocles Protopsaltis

1

, Han Jo Kim

2

, Robert Eastlack

5

, Alex Soroceanu

6

, Eric Klineberg

7

, Robert Hart

8

, Douglas Burton

9

, Shay Bess

10

, Frank Schwab

2

, Christopher Shaffrey

11

, Justin Smith
11 and
, Christopher Ames

12

1

NYU Langone Orthopedic Hospital, Department of Orthopedics, New
York, USA

2

Hospital for Special Surgery, Orthopaedics, New York, USA

3

Presbyterian St. Luke's/Rocky Mountain Hospital for Children, Spine
Surgery, Denver, USA

4

SUNY Downstate Medical Center, Orthopaedics, Brooklyn, USA

5

Scripps Clinic, Orthopaedic Surgery, La Jolla, USA

6

University of Calgary, Orthopaedic Surgery, Calgary, Canada

7

University of California, Davis, Orthopaedic Surgery, Davis,
USA

8

Swedish Neuroscience Institute, Seattle, USA

9

University of Kansas Medical Center, Orthopaedic Surgery, Kansas
City, USA

10

Denver International Spine Clinic, Presbyterian St. Luke's/Rocky
Mountain Hospital for Children, Denver, USA

11

University of Virginia Medical Center, Charlottesville, USA

12

University of California, San Francisco, San Francisco, USA

Background:While advances have been made in the surgical
management of distal junctional kyphosis(DJK), complication rates remain
high. Although individual factors related to its occurrence have been cited,
many of these cases are mild and have no clinical relevance nor have these
been combined into a formal predictive model, particularly for cases that
are clinically impactful. the aim of this study was to develop a formal
predictive model distinguishing between symptomatic and asymptomatic DJK.
Methods: CD patients(pts) were stratified into Aysmptomatic
(Asym) and Symptomatic (Sym) DJK. DJK angle(DJKA) was defined>10° change
in kyphosis between LIV and LIV-2 and a>10° index angle.
Asym: ΔDJK to be>10° in the absence neurologic
sequelae. Sym: 1)DJKA>10° and either reop due to DJK
or>1 new-onset neurological sequelae related to DJK or 2)pts who had
either a DJKA>20° or ΔDJKA>20°. Stepwise logistic regressions were
used to identify patient-specific, surgical, radiographic, and HRQL factors
that were associated with these types of DJK. Decision tree analysis
established cut-offs for the continuous variables. Results: 99
CD pts included (60 years, 26.5 kg/m2, 66.7%F). Surgical
characteristics: 7.4 ± 4 levels fused, 47.5% posterior, 18.2% anterior, and
34.3% combined. Overall 32.2% developed DJK(34.3% Asym, 65.7% Sym). 37.5% of
Asym pts received a reop versus 62.5% Sym pts. At BL, Asym pts had a greater
BMI(28.5 vs 23 kg/m2) and NSR back pain(5.2 vs 4.6; all
P < .05). Decision tree analysis identified
osteoporosis, UIV level, and the apex of the region of the spine where the
primary deformity is located to predict Sym pts. Top factors predicting Sym
pts over Asym were BL EQ5D>0.65, UIV cephalad to C2, and C2-C7 apex
caudal to C5. Multivariate analysis identified independent radiographic and
surgical factors for developing Sym DJK: [Radiographic] BL
PI(1.02[.9-1.07]), preop cervical flexibility(1.04[1.01-1.07]); [Surgical]
combined approach (6.2[1.4-27]; all P < .05). Having
abnormal hyper kyphosis in the thoracic spine, more so than abnormal
cervical lordosis, was an independent factor for developing Sym when
analyzed against Asym pts (1.2[0.01-115]). Predictive modeling identified
factors that were predictive of Sym against no DJK pts such as having
myelopathy (mJOA score:12-14), combined approach, UIV = C3 or C4,
preoperative hypermobility, and >7 levels fused(AUC: .89). A predictive
model for Sym versus Asym pts yielded an AUC of 85% and included being
frail, having a TS-CL>20, and a PI>46.3. Controlling for BL deformity
and disability, Sym pts had greater cSVA(4-8 cm: 47.6%vs 27%) and were more
maligned according to their SRS-SVA (.1[.76-.02]) than non DJK pts at 1Y
(all P < .05). Despite their symptomatology and higher
re-operation rate, outcomes equilibrated in the Sym cohort at 1Y following
revision. Conclusions: Overall 32.2% cervical deformed patients
suffered from DJK most of which were clinically significant. Severe
symptomatic DJK can be predicted with high reliability using combined
determinants of baseline spinal cord dysfunction, mobility, frailty, and
surgical factors including end levels, number of levels fused and use of a
combined approach. It can be further distinguished from asymptomatic
occurrences by taking into account pelvic incidence and baseline cervico
thoracic deformity severity

## OP16: Spinal Tumors

## 1232

## A136: Incidence, Management, and Outcomes of Adult Spinal Chondrosarcoma
Patients in the USA

Ravi Nunna

1

, Saavan Patel

2

, Shashank Patil

2

, Darius Ansari

2

, Taylor Burch

2

, Ankit Mehta

2

, Jens Chapman

1

, and Rod Oskouian

2

1

Swedish Medical Center, Seattle, USA

2

University of Illinois at Chicago, Chicago, USA

Objective: Spinal chondrosarcomas are rare primary malignant
neoplasms composed of cartilage-producing cells. They are slow growing but
locally aggressive lesions that have high rates of recurrence and
progression after treatment. Gold standard treatment remains en-bloc
surgical resection; however, complete excision is often difficult due to
proximity to critical structures. Radiation and chemotherapy are
historically ineffective. We have conducted a comprehensive analysis of
demographics, treatment modalities, and survival outcomes in spinal
chondrosarcoma patients using a large, prospectively-collected national
database to investigate prognostic factors for enhanced clinical
decision-making. Methods: Patients with diagnosis codes
specific for chondrosarcoma of spine, sacrum, and coccyx were queried from
the National Cancer Database (NCDB) during the years 2004-2016. Outcomes
were investigated using Cox univariate and multivariate regression analyses,
and survival curves were generated for comparative visualization.
Results: 1843 individuals were identified with a diagnosis
of chondrosarcoma, 82.1% of which were at the sacrum or coccyx and 17.9% at
the spine. The mean overall survival of patients in our cohort was
7.91 years. Increased age, larger tumor size, dedifferentiated histology,
and presence of metastases were associated with worsened overall survival.
In regards to management, 77.7% of patients received surgical intervention
and both partial and radical resection were associated with significantly
improved overall survival (P < .001). Neither
radiotherapy or chemotherapy administration improved overall survival;
however, amongst patients who received radiation, those who received
higher-dose radiation had significantly improved overall survival compared
to lower-dose radiation. Conclusion: In the largest analysis to
date, surgical resection was found to be significantly associated with
improved overall survival in patients with spinal chondrosarcoma. In those
patients receiving radiation, those who receive high doses have improved
overall survival compared to those who receive lower doses. Further studies
into optimal radiation modality and doses are required.

## 1824

## A137: Correlation Between the Spinal Instability Neoplastic Score (SINS)
and Patient Reported Outcomes

Anne Versteeg

1

, Arjun Sahgal

2

, Laurence Rhines

3

, Daniel Sciubba

4

, James Schuster

5

, Michael Weber

6

, Aron Lazary

7

, Stefano Boriani

8

, Chetan Bettegowda

4

, Michael Fehlings

9

, Michelle Clarke

10

, Paul Arnold

11

, Ziya Gokaslan

12

, and Charles Fisher

13

1

University of Toronto, Orthopaedics, Toronto, Canada

2

Sunnybrook Odette Cancer Centre, Toronto, Canada

3

MD Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, USA

4

Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, USA

5

Hospital of the university of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia,
USA

6

McGill University, Montreal, Canada

7

National Center for Spinal Disorders and Buda Health Center,
Budapest, Hungary

8

IRCCS Istituto Ortopedico Galeazzi, Milan, Italy

9
University of Toronto and Toronto Western Hospital, Toronto,
Canada, 
10
Mayo clinic, Rochester, USA

11

The University of Kansas Hospital, Kansas, USA

12

The Warren Alpert Medical School of Brown University and Rhode
Island Hospital and The Miriam Hospital, Providence, USA

13

University of British Columbia and Vancouver General Hospital,
Vancouver, Canada

Introduction: The Spinal Instability Neoplastic Score (SINS) is
used to define neoplastic-related spinal instability. Mechanical instability
is one of the criteria for surgical intervention in patients with spinal
metastases, however there is a paucity of data regarding the association
between mechanical instability and patient reported outcomes (PROs). The aim
of this study was to investigate the association between the total SINS
score, individual SINS components and PROs. Methods: The AO
Spine Knowledge Forum Tumor conducted a multicenter prospective
observational study on patients undergoing radiation and/or surgical
intervention for the treatment of symptomatic spinal metastases. Data
regarding patient demographics, diagnostics, treatment, and PROs (SF-36,
SOSGOQ) were collected at baseline, 6 weeks, and 12 weeks post-treatment.
The SINS score was assessed using routine diagnostic imaging. The Spearman's
rank correlation coefficient was used to assess the association between
SINS, PRO at baseline and change in PROs. A multivariable analysis of
covariance was performed to detect the important factors on SOSGOQ2.0 total
score. Results: A total of 307 patients, including 174 patients
who underwent surgery+/- radiotherapy and 133 patients who underwent
radiotherapy were eligible for analyses. In the surgery+/- radiotherapy
group, 18 patients were classified as having a stable lesion (SINS 0-6), 118
as potentially unstable (SINS 7-12), and 38 as unstable (SINS 13-18) as
compared to 55 stable, 71 potentially unstable, and 7 unstable lesions in
the radiotherapy alone group. At baseline, the total SINS score and the
presence of mechanical pain was significantly associated with the SOSGOQ
pain domain (r = -.519, P < .001) and the NRS pain score
(r = .445, P < .001). The presence of mechanical pain
demonstrated to be significantly associated with a positive change in PROs
at 12 weeks post-treatment. In a multivariate model, SINS demonstrated to
have the greatest impact (P < .001) on the SOSGOQv2.0 at
baseline as compared to other variables including ECOG, CCI, gender, age,
primary tumor type, duration of symptoms, MESCC, and ASIA AIS score.
Conclusion: Spinal instability, as defined by the SINS
score, demonstrated to be significantly correlated with PROs at baseline and
change in PROs post-treatment. Mechanical pain, as a single SINS component,
showed the highest correlations with PROs.

## 1186

## A138: Outcomes of an Enhanced Recovery After Surgery (ERAS) Program for
Patients with Metastatic Spine Tumors

Anubhav Amin

1

, Ori Barzilai

1

, Cindy Vuong

1

, Cynthia Correa

1

, Petal-Ann Persaud

1

, Solange Inglis

1

, Lisa Ruppert

1

, Vinay Puttanniah

1

, Anoushka Afonso

1

, Jess Brallier

1

, Brittany King

1

, Joanna Liu

1

, Wayne Quashie

1

, Vivek Malhotra

1

, Mark Bilsky

1

, and Ilya Laufer

1

1

Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer, New York, USA

Introduction: Metastatic spine tumor surgery generally consists
of palliative operations performed on frail patients with multiple medical
comorbidities. Perioperative complications that may arise can mitigate any
potential benefit in this vulnerable patient cohort. Enhanced recovery after
surgery (ERAS) programs involve an evidence-based multidisciplinary approach
to improve perioperative outcomes. While ERAS programs have been shown to be
beneficial in other surgical fields, there is a paucity of literature
evaluating the feasibility, implementation, and outcomes of an ERAS program
dedicated to spinal oncology surgery. We present the Spine Tumor ERAS
pathway and describe the clinical outcomes of the program. Materials
and Methods: The spinal oncology surgery ERAS program went into
effect in April 2019. This protocol focused on multimodality analgesia,
including preoperative gabapentinoid, NSAID, and acetaminophen
administration in combination with local field blocks with liposomal
bupivacaine, to minimize opioid consumption; intraoperative goal-directed
fluid management, early advancement of diet, and early ambulation with
physical therapy. Two hundred and forty consecutive patients enrolled in the
ERAS program were compared to 240 consecutive historical pre-ERAS patients.
Outcomes measured included: length of hospitalization stay, time to
ambulation, urinary catheter duration, time to regular diet, total
intraoperative fluid intake, estimated blood loss, intraoperative opioid
use, and cumulative postop day 0-5 opioid use. Results: While
the case duration was similar in the ERAS vs. pre-ERAS cohort (276 minutes
vs 266 minutes) with similar EBL (165.7 mL vs 199.4 mL), the ERAS cohort
utilized less intraoperative opioids (34.7 MME vs 43.2 MME), less postop day
0-5 cumulative opioid use (155.0 MME vs 305.0 MME), ambulated earlier (32.7
hours vs 52.1 hours), discontinued urinary catheters earlier (33.1 hours vs
50.9 hours), advanced to a normal diet earlier (21.6 hours vs 28.1 hours),
and had a shorter length of stay (6.6 days vs 8.4 days), in comparison to
the pre-ERAS cohort. Conclusion: To date, this is the largest
study focusing on outcomes of an ERAS program specifically for patients
undergoing metastatic spine tumor surgery. The implementation of an
evidence-based multidisciplinary ERAS program has led to a significant
reduction in opioid consumption, earlier ambulation, improved clinical
quality metrics, and shorter hospitalization.

## 1920

## A139: Outcomes in surgically treated patients with symptomatic spinal
metastases: results from "EPOSO", a prospective, multi-institutional and
international study

Ori Barzilai

1

, Arjun Sahgal

2

, Laurence Rhines

3

, Daniel Sciubba

4

, Aron Lazary

5

, Michael Weber

6

, James Schuster

7

, Stefano Boriani

8

, Chetan Bettegowda

4

, Paul Arnold

9

, Michelle Clarke

10

, Michael Fehlings

11

, Ziya Gokaslan

12

, Ilya Laufer

1

, Charles Fisher

13

, and AO Knowledge Forum Tumor AOKFT

14

1

Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center, Neurosurgery, New York,
USA

2

Department of Radiation Oncology, Sunnybrook Odette Cancer Center
and University of Toronto, Toronto, Ontario, Canada, Toronto,
Canada

3

Division of Surgery, Department of Neurosurgery, The University of
Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, TX, Houston, USA

4

Department of Neurosurgery, Johns Hopkins University School of
Medicine, Baltimore, MD, Baltimore, USA

5

National Center for Spinal Disorders and Buda Health Center,
Budapest, Hungary, Budapest, Hungary

6

Division of Surgery, McGill University and Montreal General
Hospital, Montreal, Quebec, Canada, Montreal, Canada

7

Department of Neurosurgery, Hospital of the University of
Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA, Philadelphia, USA

8

Spine Surgery Division, IRCCS Galeazzi Orthopedic Institute, Milan,
Italy, Milan, Italy

9

Department of Neurosurgery, The University of Kansas Hospital,
Kansas City, KS, Kansas City, USA

10

Department of Neurosurgery, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN, Rochester,
USA

11

Division of Orthopedic surgery, University of Toronto and Toronto
Western Hospital, Toronto, Ontario, Canada, Toronto, Canada

12

Department of Neurosurgery, The Warren Alpert Medical School of
Brown University and Rhode Island Hospital and The Miriam Hospital,
Providence, RI, Providence, USA

13

Division of Spine, Department of Orthopaedics, University of British
Columbia and Vancouver General Hospital, Vancouver, British Columbia,
Canada, vancouver, Canada

14

Research Department, AO Spine International, Davos, Switzerland,
davos, Swaziland

Introduction: Recent integration of targeted therapies has
revolutionized cancer care. Treatment strategies for metastatic spine
disease has been redefined with the integration of radiosurgery and
minimally invasive surgical strategies. The impact of surgery in this
rapidly evolving landscape is not well defined. The goal of this study was
to prospectively evaluate clinical, neurological and HRQoL outcomes in
patients with symptomatic spinal metastases who underwent surgical
management. Methods: This is a prospective, international
collaboration from 10 specialist centers as part of the AO Spine Knowledge
Forum Tumor titled: 'The Epidemiology, Process and Outcomes of Spine
Oncology' (EPOSO, ClinicalTrials.gov identifier: NCT01825161). Adult
patients (aged 18 to 75), who underwent surgery for the treatment of spinal
metastases with or without adjuvant radiotherapy were included. Clinical
data including spine tumor specific, cancer validated, patient reported
outcome tools were used and collected for a minimum of 2 years.
Results: Two-hundred and eighty patients (51.8% females,
mean age 58) were included in the final analysis. At presentation the mean
Charleson comorbidity index was 6.0, mean time from diagnosis of primary
tumor was 39.1 months, 35.7% had neurologic deficits as defined by ASIA
scores, high grade compression (ESCC 2-3) was present in 47.8% and SINS
scores of 7 or more (indicating frank or impending instability) were present
in 89.6%. Most common primary tumor sites were; breast (20.3%), lung
(18.8%), kidney (16.2%) and prostate (6.5%). Of patients who completed the
2 year follow up, median survival after surgery was 500 days, with 90% local
control. Significant and durable improvement in HRQoL was seen at 6 weeks,
12 weeks, 26 weeks, 1 year and 2 years follow-up compared to baseline with
various patient reported outcome questionnaires including the Spine Oncology
Study Group Outcome Questionnaire 2.0 (SOSGOQ), SF-36 V2, EQ-5D and pain
NRS. Conclusions: Surgery maintains a key role in the treatment
of symptomatic spinal metastases. These broad, multicenter prospective data
represent outcomes demonstrating that surgical decompression and/or
stabilization provide oncologic benefit as well as rapid and durable
improvement in quality of life for patients with metastatic spine
disease.

## 960

## A140: Comprehensive Surgical Treatment Strategy for Spinal Metastases:
Results of a Single-Center Series

Arthur Wagner

1

, Elena Haag

1

, Ann Kathrin Joerger

1

, Philipp Jost

2

, Stephanie Combs

3

, Maria Wostrack

1

, Jens Gempt

1

, and Bernhard Meyer

1

1

Technical University Munich School of Medicine, Department of
Neurosurgery, Munich, Germany

2

Technical University Munich School of Medicine, Department of
Oncology, Munich, Germany

3

Technical University Munich School of Medicine, Department of Radio
Oncology, Munich, Germany

Introduction: Based on a large consecutive single-center series
of patients with spinal metastases (SM), we devised a comprehensive
treatment algorithm for surgical strategies and adjunct therapies.
Material and Methods: Between January 2007 and December
2018, patients with a SM were screened for study inclusion after an
interdisciplinary neurooncological board meeting decided on the treatment
plan. We report baseline characteristics, surgical procedures, complication
rates, functional status and outcome of a consecutive cohort managed in
accordance to a stratified treatment algorithm and adjunct therapy.
Results: 667 consecutive patients underwent 989 operations
for SMs at our institution. Mean age was 65 years (range 20-94), median
preoperative KPS was 80. Most common primary entities were prostate (21.7%),
breast (15.9%) and non-small cell lung cancer (10.0%). The thoracic spine
was affected in 48.3% of cases, followed by the lumbar spine in 26.7%. We
conducted posterior instrumentation with or without vertebral body
replacement in a staged approach in 69.5%, sole decompression in 12.4% and
vertebral body augmentation in 18.0% of cases. Follow up was available for
58.9% of patients. Median OS amounted to 18.4 months (95% CI 9.8-26.9), OS
after 12 months was 56.0% and median KPS improved from 70 to 80 by
discharge. Conclusion: Surgical management of SMs should
generally represent the first step of a conclusive treatment algorithm. The
need to preserve long-term symptom control and biomechanical stability stems
from the growing life expectancy of patients with SMs, and requires a staged
invasive surgical strategy currently not supported by level I evidence.

## 216

## A141: Cortical Integrity, Lesion's Position and Size as Additional
Parameters for the Characterisation of the Mechanical Weakness of Metastatic
Vertebrae

Marco Palanca

1,2

, Luca Cristofolini

2

, Enrico Dall'Ara

1

, Daniele Marras

2

, Alessandro Gasbarrini

3

, and Giovanni Barbanti Bròdano

3

1

The University of Sheffield, Dept of Oncology and Metabolism,
Sheffield, United Kingdom

2

Alma Mater Studiorum - Università di Bologna, Dept of Industrial
Engineering, Bologna, Italy

3

Rizzoli Orthopaedic Institute, Dept of Oncological and Degenerative
Spine Surgery, Bologna, Italy

Introduction: In the oncological field, the rational for
mechanical stabilization of vertebrae affected by metastasis is still a
challenge. The Spine Instability Neoplastic Score (SINS) is a useful scoring
system that aims to help the clinicians deciding the best orthopedic
solution[1]. It provides a characterization of the entire spine stability,
but due to the large possible variations of the metastasis, frequently the
biomechanical outcomes could be unexpected[2-4]. The aim of this work was to
identify what geometrical parameters are useful for a mechanistic
characterization of the metastatic vertebra weaknesses in addition to the
clinical spine characterization provided by the SINS. Material and
Methods: Twenty spines with metastases (blastic, lytic and mixed)
originated by different primary tumors, were obtained through an
ethically-approved donation program. Each spine was CT scanned as in the
clinical routine (voxel size = 0.9 mm) and two expert surgeons of the
Rizzoli Orthopaedic Institute evaluated the SINS and indicated which surgery
they would perform. From the twenty spines, thirty-five segments, consisting
of four vertebrae each were isolated. Each segment included a healthy and a
metastatic vertebra in the middle and two additional cranial and caudal
ones. The specimens were CT scanned again with a better resolution (voxel
size = 0.2 mm) in order to accurately measure the size and position of the
metastases. Each specimen was biomechanically tested in four different
loading conditions: flexion, left lateral bending, right lateral bending,
and pure compression. Each test was repeated three times, for ensuring the
repeatability of the results. The full-field strain distributions were
evaluated on the entire vertebral body surface, through a state-of-the-art
4-cameras Digital Image Correlation[5]. The “mechanical ratio” was computed
for each loading scenario, as the ratio between the mean strain on the
metastatic vertebra and the adjacent healthy vertebra. Results:
A total of 372 tests were performed. The SINS of the 31
metastatic vertebrae was in the range 3-13. Poor agreement was found between
the surgery suggestions of the clinicians and SINS, as well as between the
evaluated mechanical ratio and the SINS. Larger mechanical ratios were
observed in lytic metastasis: lesions on the cortical shell and large
lesions close to the cortical shell were associated with higher mechanical
ratio (lower vertebral strength) also in case of low SINS. In exceptional
cases (4/35 specimens) with lesions on the cortical shell, the metastatic
vertebra fractured under low loads. Conversely, vertebrae with only blastic
lesions did not show any sign of weakness. Conclusion: The
quantitative mechanical evidences confirmed what could be qualitatively
expected. The extensive collection of quantitative data will be used in
multiple regression analysis to build a phenomenological model. Indeed, the
encouraging findings support the idea of improving the risk evaluation
including mechanical characterization of the metastatic vertebra in
combination with the SINS, and paves the way to retrospective and
prospective clinical studies.

## Acknowledgements
The study was funded by the AOSpine2019 Discovery and Innovation Award (SONS,
AOSDIA2019_063) and the Marie Skłodowska-Curie Individual Fellowship
(MetaSpine, MSCA-IF-EF-ST, 832430/2018).

## References
1. Fisher, et
al.Spine2010,35,E1221–E1229
2. Palanca,et
al.Materials2020,13,3256
3. Costa,et
al.JBMMB2019,98,268–290
4. Costa,et al.Bone
Reports2020,12,100257
5. Palanca,et
al.MEP2018,52,76–83

## 45

## A142: An Externally Validated Machine Learning Algorithm for Prediction
of Ninety-Day and 1 year Mortality After Surgery for Spinal
Metastasis

Akash Shah

1

, Aditya Karhade

2

, Howard Park

1

, Arya Shamie

1

, Don Park

1

, Joseph Schwab

2

, and Francis Hornicek

1

1

UCLA Medical Center, Orthopaedic Surgery, Los Angeles, US

2

Massachusetts General Hospital, Orthopaedic Surgery, Boston,
USA

Introduction: The spinal column is the most common site of bony
metastasis, with up to 5-10% of patients with cancer developing metastatic
epidural spinal cord compression. Surgical decompression and stabilization
in the setting of spinal metastasis is performed in order to relieve pain,
preserve functional status, and improve quality of life. These potential
benefits must be weighed against the risks of perioperative morbidity and
mortality. Accurate prediction of a patient’s post-operative survival is
thus a crucial component of patient counseling. The Skeletal Oncology
Research Group (SORG) previously developed machine learning (ML) algorithms
to pre-operatively predict risk of ninety-day and one-year mortality in
patients undergoing surgery for spinal metastasis. These algorithms are
available in an open-access application. Using an independent geographically
distinct patient population, we aim to externally validate these algorithms
and assess their utility in providing mortality risk scores at key
post-operative time points. Materials and Methods:
Retrospective review was employed to identify patients 18 years or older at
a tertiary care academic medical center who were treated with surgical
intervention for spinal metastatic disease between 2004 and 2020. The
primary outcomes were 90 days mortality and 1 year mortality from the date
of index surgery. Baseline characteristics of the external validation cohort
were compared to the derivation cohort for the SORG ML algorithms. The
following metrics were used to assess the performance of the algorithms:
discrimination, calibration, overall model performance, and decision curve
analysis. Results: Overall, 298 patients underwent surgery for
spinal metastatic disease. Sixty-one patients (21.9%) died within 90 days of
surgery; 133 (52.6%) died within one year of surgery. The external
validation cohort differed significantly from the derivation cohort on the
following variables: primary tumor histology, performance status, body mass
index, medical comorbidities, previous systemic therapy, and preoperative
laboratory values (platelet count, platelet to lymphocyte ratio,
creatinine). The SORG algorithms for ninety-day mortality and one-year
mortality performed excellently with respect to discrimination with AUC 0.84
and .90, respectively. The algorithm for one-year mortality was
well-calibrated with intercept = .04 and slope = 1.17. At both
post-operative time points, the SORG algorithms showed greater net benefit
than the default strategies of changing management for no patients or for
all patients. Use of the algorithms thus results in a greater balance of
true positives than false positives. Conclusion: With the
increasing prevalence of malignancy in the aging population, the incidence
of spinal metastasis is likely to increase. Using a contemporary,
geographically distinct independent population, we report successful
external validation of SORG algorithms for pre-operative risk prediction of
ninety-day and one-year mortality after surgery for spinal metastasis. Often
difficult to reliably obtain, patient survival is a critical prognostic
consideration when weighing the risks and benefits of operative
intervention. By providing accurate prediction of intermediate and long-term
mortality risk, the externally validated SORG algorithms may inform shared
decision-making with patients and families when determining operative versus
non-operative management of spinal metastatic disease. To facilitate the use
of these algorithms, the open-access SORG ML algorithms have been made
available in a digital interface: https://sorg-apps.shinyapps.io/spinemetssurvival/.

## 1538

## A143: High Predictive Value of Spinal Instability Score Following
Radiosurgery for Spinal Metastases

Maximilian-Niklas Bonk

1

, and Ehab Shiban

1

1

University Hospital Augsburg, Department of Neurosurgery, Augsburg,
Germany

Aim: The aim of this study was to determine the predictability
of progression of a pathologic fracture due to spinal metastases applying
the spinal instability neoplastic score (SINS) prior to delivery of
radiotherapy for spinal metastases. Methods: A retrospective
analysis of Patients with a pathologic fracture due to a spinal metastases
between January 2018 and December 2018 was performed. We selected patients
with a minimum follow up of 12 months and analysed them according to the
SINS criteria. The primary endpoint was the progression of fracture
following radiotherapy. Results: 117 Patients were identified.
Median age was 70. 42% were Female. Median Follow up was 14 months (range
12-27). 6, 104 and 7 Patients presented with low (0-6), moderate (7-12) and
high (13-18) SINS, respectively. 0%, 19% and 85% of Patients with low (0-6),
moderate (7-12) and high (13-18) SINS developed a fracture progression after
Radiosurgery. Of those eight had neurological deterioration.
Conclusion: SINS is a very useful tool for predicting the
progression of a pathologic fracture due to spinal metastases after
radiotherapy for spinal metastases.

## 530

## A144: Expectations of Treatment Outcomes in Patients with Spinal
Metastases; What do We Tell Our Patients? A Qualitative Study

Anne Versteeg

1

, Roxanne Gal

1

, Raphaële Charest-Morin

2

, Jorrit-Jan Verlaan

1

, Hester Wessels

1

, Charles Fisher

2

, and Lenny Verkooijen

1

1

University Medical Center Utrecht, Utrecht, The Netherlands

2

University of British Columbia and Vancouver General Hospital,
Vancouver, Canada

Introduction: Realistic pre-treatment expectations are important
and have been associated with post-treatment health related quality of life
(HRQOL). Patient expectations are greatly influenced by physicians, as they
are the primary resource for information. This study aimed to explore the
communication practices of physicians regarding treatment outcomes for
patients with spinal metastases, and physician experiences with patient’s
pre-treatment expectations. Material and Methods: An
international qualitative study using semi-structured interviews with
physicians routinely involved in treating metastatic spine disease (spine
surgeons, radiation and medical oncologists, and rehabilitation specialists)
was conducted. Physicians were interviewed about the content and extent of
information they provide to these patients regarding treatment options,
risks and treatment outcomes. Interviews were transcribed verbatim and
analyzed using a thematic coding network. Results: After 22
interviews data saturation occurred. The majority of the physicians
indicated that they currently do not validate patients pre-treatment
expectations, despite acknowledging the importance of these expectations.
Spine surgeons often believe that patient expectations are disproportionate.
Physicians expressed they manage expectations by detailing the most common
risks and providing a broad but nonspecific overview of treatment outcomes.
While the palliative intent seems clear to the physicians, their perception
is that the implications of a palliative treatment remains elusive to most
patients. Conclusion: This study highlights the current gap in
patient-physician communication regarding expectations of treatment outcomes
of patients with spinal metastases. These results warrant further projects
to improve communication practices and determine the effect of patient
expectations on patient reported outcomes in this population.

## OP17: Minimally Invasive and Novel Surgical Treatments

## 1706

## A145: Preoperative MRI-Based Vertebral Bone Quality (VBQ) Score
Assessment in Patients Undergoing Lumbar Spinal Fusion

Stephan Salzmann

1

, Ichiro Okano

1

, Conor Jones

1

, Jiaqi Zhu

1

, Shuting Lu

1

, Ikenna Onyekwere

1

, Venkatesh Balaji

1

, Marie-jacqueline Reisener

1

, Erika Chiapparelli

1

, Jennifer Shue

1

, John Carrino

1

, Federico Girardi

1

, Frank Cammisa

1

, Andrew Sama

1

, and Alexander Hughes

1

1

Hospital for Special Surgery, New York, USA

Introduction: The importance of bone quality assessment in spine
surgery is well recognized. The current gold standard for assessing bone
mineral density is dual-energy X-ray absorptiometry (DEXA), however the
majority of patients undergoing spinal fusion do not have preoperatively
available DEXA data. Furthermore, DEXA has been shown to overestimate BMD in
patients with spinal degenerative disease and obesity. Consequently,
alternative radiographic measurements using data routinely gathered during
preoperative evaluation have been explored for the evaluation of bone
quality and fracture risk. Opportunistic quantitative computed tomography
(QCT) and more recently the MRI-based vertebral bone quality (VBQ) score
both have been shown to correlate with DEXA T-scores and predict
osteoporotic fractures. However, to date the correlation between those two
modalities has not been studied. The objective of this study was to assess
whether the VBQ score can predict the prevalence of QCT based
osteopenia/osteoporosis and to evaluate the correlation between those two
modalities. Material and Methods: Patients undergoing lumbar
fusion from 2014 to 2019 at a single, academic institution with available
preoperative lumbar CT and T1-weighted MRIs were included. Asynchronous QCT
measurements were performed. The average L1-L2 BMD was calculated and
patients were categorized as either normal BMD (>120 mg/cm3)
or osteopenic/osteoporotic (≤120 mg/cm3). The VBQ score was
calculated by dividing the median signal intensity of the L1-L4 vertebral
bodies by the signal intensity of the cerebrospinal fluid on midsagittal
T1-weighted MRI images. To assess inter-observer reliability of the VBQ
measurements, a validation study was performed. Demographic data and the VBQ
score were compared between the normal and osteopenic/osteoporotic group. To
determine the area-under-curve (AUC) of the VBQ score as a predictor of
osteopenia/osteoporosis receiver operating characteristic (ROC) analysis was
performed. VBQ scores were compared with QCT BMD using Pearson’s
correlation. Results: A total of 198 patients (53% female) were
included. The mean age was 62 years and the mean BMI was 28.2 kg/m2. The
inter-observer reliability of the VBQ measurements was excellent (ICC of
.90). When comparing the patients with normal QCT BMD to those with
osteopenia/osteoporosis, no significant differences existed in terms of sex,
race, and BMI. However, the patients with osteopenia/osteoporosis were
significantly older compared to the patients with normal BMD (64.9 vs
56.7 years, P < .0001). The osteopenic/osteoporotic
group had significantly higher VBQ scores (2.6 vs 2.2, P
< .0001). ROC analysis revealed that the VBQ score predicts the presence
of osteopenia/osteoporosis based on QCT with an accuracy of 71%
(P < .0001). The VBQ score showed a statistically
significant moderate correlation with QCT BMD (correlation coefficient =
-.358, P < .001). Conclusion: This is the
first study to correlate MRI VBQ scores with QCT BMD. We found that the VBQ
score significantly differentiates patients with normal BMD versus
osteopenic/osteoporotic BMD based on QCT. However, the correlation between
both modalities was only moderate suggesting that VBQ might not solely be a
measurement of bone density, but rather bone quality. Since the two
modalities seem to reflect different properties of bone, VBQ may be an
interesting adjunct to clinically performed bone density measurements,
rather than a substitution.

## 761

## A146: Prospective Study Pf Intraoperative Motor Evoked Potential
Monitoring to Identify Lumbosacral Nerve Root Motor Deficits

Kelley McGowan

1

, Hyunmi Choi

1

, Meghan Cerpa

1

, Earl Thuet

1

, Anil Mendiratta

1

, Ronald A. Lehman

1

, and Lawrence Lenke

1

1

Columbia University Medical Center, New York, USA

Summary: In a prospective cohort study of 328 thoracolumbar
spinal surgeries, EP (MEP+/-SEP) responses reached warning criteria
indicative of nerve root dysfunction in 44 patients (13%). Postop exam
within the first 24 hours demonstrated 25 patients (7.6%) had new onset of
weakness attributable to nerve root dysfunction. Adjusted logistic
regression analyses showed that EP status at closure was an independent
predictor, with unimproved EP change significantly more likely to be
associated with neurological deficit. Hypothesis:
Intraoperative MEP changes can predict post-op deficits. Study
Design: Prospective. Introduction: The reliability
of nerve root monitoring has not been demonstrated. Methods:
This was a prospective cohort study of 328 patients over a 12 months period.
The primary outcome was a binary variable of new deficit detected post-op
within the first 24 hours. 6 independent variables (Table 1) were considered
as potential predictors of outcome. Bivariate logistic regression was used
to estimate the unadjusted association between potential predictive factors
and neurological outcome (Table 1). Stepwise multivariate logistic
regression was then used to determine which factors were independent
predictors for postop neuro deficit. Results: Of 328 patients,
EP changes occurred in 44 patients (13%). 25 patients (7.6%) had new onset
of weakness detected during the first 24 postop period. As seen in Table 1,
notification of EP change, type of data change, and data at closure were
associated with postop weakness. Of 44 patients with EP data change, 32 did
not improve by closure with 23 developing new weakness. On the other hand,
of 44 patients with EP data change, 12 improved by closure with 2 developing
new weakness. Compared to those with EP improvement at closure, patients
without improvement in EP were significantly more likely to have postop
weakness (adjusted OR 12.8, 95% CI 2.22 - 70.12). Conclusion:
During thoracolumbar spine surgeries, EP nerve root warnings occurred in 13%
of patients. EP change that did not improve by closure was an independent
predictor of postop neurological weakness. Take Home Message:
In a prospective cohort study of thoracolumbar spine surgery, EP change that
did not improve by closure of surgery was an independent predictor of
lumbosacral nerve root motor deficits.

## 1696

## A147: Thoracic Bone Mineral Density Measured by Quantitative Computed
Tomography in Patients Undergoing Spine Surgery

Stephan Salzmann

1

, Ichiro Okano

1

, Conor Jones

1

, Eric Basile

1

, Anthony Iuso

1

, Jiaqi Zhu

1

, Marie-jacqueline Reisener

1

, Erika Chiapparelli

1

, Jennifer Shue

1

, John Carrino

1

, Federico Girardi

1

, Frank Cammisa

1

, Andrew Sama

1

, and Alexander Hughes

1

1

Hospital for Special Surgery, New York, USA

Introduction: The thoracic spine is a common location for
vertebral fractures as well as instrumentation failure after long spinal
fusion procedures. The association between those complications and bone
mineral density (BMD) are well recognized. The current gold standard to
measure spinal BMD is dual energy x-ray absorptiometry (DXA). However, due
to the overlying sternum and ribs in the thoracic spine, DXA is limited to
the lumbar spine. Quantitative computed tomography (QCT) circumvents several
shortcomings of DXA and allows for level-specific BMD measurements. To the
authors’ knowledge, no investigation has comprehensively quantified the BMD
of the entire thoracic spine in patients undergoing spine surgery. The
objective of this study was to: 1) assess the reliability of thoracic QCT
measurements, 2) determine possible level-specific BMD variation and 3)
assess the correlation between BMDs of the spinal levels T1-T12.
Material and Methods: Patients undergoing spine surgery
from 2016-2020 at a single, academic institution with available preoperative
thoracic spine CTs were included. Subjects with previous instrumentation at
any thoracic level, concurrent vertebral fractures or a Cobb angle of more
than 20 degrees were excluded. Asynchronous QCT measurements of T1-T12 were
performed. To assess inter- and intra-observer reliability, a validation
study was performed on 10 randomly selected patients. The interclass
correlation coefficient (ICC) was calculated. A pairwise comparison of BMD
was conducted and correlations between each thoracic level were evaluated.
Results: 60 patients (men, 51.7%) met inclusion criteria.
The study population was 90% Caucasian with a mean age of 62.2 years and a
mean BMI of 30.2 kg/m2. The inter- and intra-observer reliability
of the thoracic QCT measurements was excellent (ICC of 0.968 and 0.967,
respectively). The trabecular BMD was highest in the upper thoracic spine
and decreased in the caudal direction (T1 = 182.3 mg/cm3, T2 =
168.1 mg/cm3, T3 = 163.5 mg/cm3, T4 = 164.7
mg/cm3, T5 = 161.4 mg/cm3, T6 = 152.5
mg/cm3, T7 = 43.5 mg/cm3, T8 = 141.3
mg/cm3, T9 = 143.5 mg/cm3, T10 = 145.1
mg/cm3, T11 = 145.3 mg/cm3, T12 = 133.6
mg/cm3). The BMD of all thoracic levels cranial to T6 was
statistically higher than the BMD of all levels caudal to T6
(P < 0.001). Nonetheless, significant correlations
in BMD among all measured thoracic levels were observed, with a Pearson’s
correlation coefficient ranging from .74 to .97. Conclusion:
Our results indicate significant regional BMD differences in the thoracic
spine. This BMD variation might contribute to several clinically relevant
phenomena: First, vertebral fractures have a bimodal distribution and occur
most commonly at the thoracolumbar junction (T12-L1), with the midthoracic
region (T7-T8) being the second most common site. In addition to mechanical
reasons, this might be partially attributed to thoracic BMD that is lowest
at T12, followed by T8. Second, optimal upper instrumented vertebra (UIV)
for stopping long fusions to the sacrum and pelvis are controversial. The
BMD of surgically relevant upper thoracic stopping points (T2-T4) was
significantly higher than the BMD of lower thoracic stopping points
(T10-T12). Besides stress concentration at the relatively mobile lower
thoracic segments, the low BMD at these levels might contribute to
previously suggested higher rates of junctional failures with short
fusions.

## 169

## A148: Imaging Profile of Subjects with Lumbar Developmental Spinal
Stenosis in a Population-Based Cohort

Prudence Wing Hang Cheung

1

, Marcus Kin Long Lai

1

, and Jason Cheung

1

1

The University of Hong Kong, Orthopaedics and Traumatology, Hong
Kong, Hong Kong

Introduction: Developmental spinal stenosis (DSS) occurs when
there is narrowing of spinal canal due to maldevelopment of posterior
elements relating to genetic disturbance during fetal and postnatal period.
Lumbar DSS is of clinical significance as the pre-existing narrowed
vertebral canal predisposes patients to experiencing neural compression at a
lower threshold, as well as symptoms being presented even with milder degree
of degenerative changes of the lumbosacral spine. Current knowledge of DSS
mainly lies at the level-specific radiographic definition of the smaller
canal size, the relationships between the presence of DSS and different
spinal tissues remain unknown. This study aims to determine the differences
of spinal imagining phenotypes between subjects with lumbar DSS and those
without DSS in a population-based cohort. Materials and
Methods: This was a radiological analysis of 2387 subjects who
underwent L1-S1 magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) in the population-based
disc degeneration cohort. Data collection included patient’s age, gender,
body mass index and MRI measurements. Differentiation of cases of lumbar DSS
from non-DSS was based on the anteroposterior (AP) vertebral canal
diameters. The measurement of other imaging parameters included the
vertebral body dimensions, spinal canal dimensions, disc degeneration scores
and facet joint orientation. Mann-Whitney U and chi-square
tests were used to assess for any differences of these parameters between
DSS and non-DSS subjects. To identify possible associations between the
presence of DSS and various MRI parameters, univariate and multivariate
regression analyses were conducted with adjustment for subject demographics.
Results: Axial AP vertebral canal diameter, interpedicular
distance, AP dural sac diameter, lamina angle and sagittal mid-vertebral
body height were significantly different between lumbar DSS and non-DSS
subjects (all at P < .05). Lamina angle (OR: 1.127;
P = .002) was associated with the presence of lumbar
DSS. Narrower interpedicular distance (OR: 0.745, P = .002)
and AP dural sac diameter (OR: 0.506, P < .001) as well
as right facet joint angulation (OR: 0.022; P = .002) were
also associated with lumbar DSS. No association was observed between disc
parameters and DSS. Conclusion: In this large-scale cohort, the
vertebral canal size is found to be independent of subject body habitus and
vertebral body dimensions. A more obtuse lamina angle and smaller dural sac
are found associated with the presence of DSS at the lumbosacral spine,
whereas no associations between DSS and disc and endplate parameters such as
disc herniation, disc degeneration, Schmorl’s notes, endplate irregularity.
Other than spinal canal dimensions, abnormal orientations of lamina angle
and facet joint angulation may be a result of developmental variations,
leading to increased likelihood of DSS. Other skeletal parameters are
spared. The lack of relationship between DSS and soft tissue changes of the
spinal column suggested DSS is purely a result of bony maldevelopment.

## 733

## A149: Clinical and Radiographic Outcomes MISS Stand-Alone ALIF vs
Posterior Approach Surgery (PCO and Transpedicular Fixation) for Adult
Degenerative Scoliosis

Anton Denisov

1

, Dmitry Ptashnikov

1,2

, Dmitry Mikhaylov

1

, Oleg Smekalenkov

1

, Nikita Zaborovskii

1

, and Sergei Masevnin

1

1

National Medical Center of Traumatology and Orthopaedics n.a. Vreden
R.R., Bone oncology and spinal surgery, Saint-Petersburg, Russian
Federation

2

North-Western State Medical University named after I.I. Mechnikov,
Traumatology and Orthopaedics, Saint-Petersburg, Russian
Federation

Introduction: Despite the effectiveness of various types of
Posterior Column Osteotomies (PCO), they are associated with several
disadvantages ( high blood loss, long hospital stay, prolonged
intraoperative time, post-op neurological deficit). Minimally invasive
spinal surgery (MISS) is gaining popularity around the world as an
alternative to open interventions. Also, for improving segmental and total
lordosis began to applicate interbody cages with high lordotic angles which
contribute for appropriate correction degree and induce indirect
decompression by increasing of intervertebral heights. For degenerative
scoliosis, asymmetric lordotic titanium cages could help not only in
sagittal but in frontal balance correction that can improve radiographic and
clinical outcomes. Material and Methods: One -center
prospective study of 72 patients with lumbar degenerative scoliosis, mean
age 64 (95% CI 57-68). 2 groups were formed in accordance with the
classification of SRS-Schwab (2012) and randomized using a random numeral
table. The first group (control): transpedicular fixation, SPO and deformity
correction from posterior approach. The second group (MISS ALIF): interbody
fusion with ALIF stand-alone technique. Was measured intraoperative blood
loss, surgery time, hospital stay, sagittal and spine-pelvic parameters (PI,
PI-PT, LL, SVA). The degree of pain (VAS scale), SRS-22 and Oswestry scale
were evaluated at 5 days-3-6-12 months. Observational period from 2018 to
2020 years. Results: Statistically significant differences
(P < .05) were observed in the comparison of such
parameters: duration of hospitalization (17 ± 5 in the control, 8 ± 2 in the
ALIF group), blood loss (730 ± 380 and 288 ± 61), LL (34 ± 6.2 in mis group
and 23 ± 7.3, control). At 5 days of post-op: VAS (3.5 ± 1 and 2.8 ± 1.1 for
mis group), ODI ( 55.6 ± 2.1 and 27.9 ± 1.3 for mis group) SRS-22 (55.6 ±
2.14 and 82.3 ± 2.7 for mis group).At 3 months of post- op: VAS (4.4 ± 1.2
and 1.8 ± 0.8 for mis group) ODI (69.2 ± 2.4 and 34.0 ± 1.6 for mis group)
SRS - 22 (46.3 ± 3.1 and 74.6 ± 1.1 for mis group). In the rest of
post-operative period we haven't observed statistically significant
differences (P > .05). But clinically for the rest of
post-op period it was still being observed tendency of improvement in MISS
ALIF group. Conclusion: Our results support our hypothesis that
implementation of lordotic cages as stand-alone MISS ALIF could be a best
alternative for PCO technique. Hyperlordotic cage provides a significant
degree of correction of lumbar lordosis. Despite the clinical and
statistical the same degree of restoration of sagittal balance, this
technique allows to reduce blood loss, hospital stay days and give better
functional results in early post-op period, that can reduce the usage of
painkillers and start rehabilitation process much earlier.

## 239

## A150: Rate of Failure of Indirect Decompression in Lateral
Single-Position Surgery - Clinical Results

J Alex Thomas

1

, Christopher I. M. Thomason

1

, Brett Braly

2

, and Cristiano Menezes

3

1

Atlantic Neurosurgical and Spine Specialists, Neurosurgery,
Wilmington, USA

2

Oklahoma Sports Science and Orthopedics, Orthopedics, Oklahoma City,
USA

3

Columna Institute/ H. Ortopedico Lifecenter, Orthopedics, Belo
Horizonte, Brazil

Objective: Lateral single-position surgery (LSPS) of the lumbar
spine generally involves anterior lumbar interbody fusion (ALIF) performed
in the lateral position (LALIF) at L5/S1 with or without lateral lumbar
interbody fusion (LLIF) at L4/5 and above, followed by bilateral pedicle
screw fixation (bPSF) without repositioning the patient. One obstacle to
more widespread adoption of LSPS is the perceived need for direct
decompression of the neural elements, which typical requires a flip to the
prone position. The purpose of this study is to examine the rate of failure
of indirect decompression (ID) in a cohort of patients undergoing LSPS from
L4-S1. Methods: A multi-center, post-hoc analysis was
undertaken from prospectively collected data of patients who underwent LALIF
at L5/S1 with or without LLIF at L4/5 with bilateral PSF the lateral
decubitus (LD) position between March 2018 and March 2020. Inclusion
criteria were symptoms of radiculopathy or neurogenic claudication, central
or foraminal stenosis (regardless of degree or etiology), and indication for
interbody fusion at L5/S1 or L4-S1. Skeletally immature patients, those with
tumor, trauma, suspicion of infection, needing revision surgery, or greater
than two levels of fusion were excluded. Baseline patient demographic
information as well as surgical data were collected and analyzed. The number
of patients that failed ID was recorded and each individual case of failure
was analyzed. Results: 178 consecutive patients underwent LSPS
during the time period (105 patients underwent LALIF at L5/S1 and 73
patients underwent LALIF at L5/S1 with LLIF at L4/5.) Average follow up was
10.9 months (±6.5). bPSF was placed in the LD position in 149 patients;
there were 29 standalone cases. Average case time was 101.9 minutes (±41.5),
79.3 minutes for single-level cases, and 134.5 minutes for 2-level cases. 2
patients (1.1%) required reoperation for failure of ID. There were no major
operative complications. Conclusions: The rate of failure of ID
in LSPS from L4-S1 is exceedingly low. This low risk of failure should be
weighed against the risks associated with direct decompression as well as
the risks of the extra operative time needed to perform this
decompression.

## 1882

## A151: The Impact of Posterior Cervical Foraminotomy on Neck Pain: A
Systematic Review and Meta-Analysis

Hikari Urakawa

1

, Kosuke Sato

1

, Avani Vaishnav

1

, Bridget Jivanelli

1

, and Sheeraz Qureshi

1

1

Hospital for Special Surgery, New York, USA

Introduction: Posterior cervical foraminotomy (PCF) is a safe
and reasonable surgical treatment option for cervical radiculopathy. There
are a plethora of studies evaluating the improvement of radiculopathy, but
very few studies report on the impact of the procedure on neck pain. The aim
of this study was to elucidate the impact of PCF on neck pain.
Material and Methods: A systematic review and meta-analysis
was performed based on rules set forth by preferred reporting items for
systematic reviews and meta-analysis (PRISMA). A comprehensive literature
search was performed in PubMed/ MEDLINE, EMBASE and the Cochrane Library,
using Medical Subject Heading terms (“neck” and “foraminotomy”) and
associated text words. The search strategy was created by one author and one
librarian. Two authors independently reviewed all articles and identified
studies presenting clinical outcomes including visual analog scale (VAS) at
neck or neck disability index (NDI) for patients who underwent PCF for
cervical radiculopathy. Exclusion criteria included patients who had surgery
for myelopathy or non-degenerative cervical diseases or who underwent PCF in
conjunction with laminoplasty or laminectomy with or without fusion. We also
excluded studies that did not provide both pre- and postoperative outcomes,
were not written in the English language, or were review articles or case
reports of less than 10 patients. Meta-analysis was performed with studies
that provided means with standard deviations of VAS and NDI.
Results: The initial literature search resulted in 766
articles, of which, 30 studies were met inclusion criteria. VAS neck and NDI
improved after PCF in all studies. 11 studies (14 cohorts) with 366 patients
were included in meta-analysis. The mean follow-up period was 27.1 months.
Minimally invasive techniques for PCF (MI-PCF) were used in 9 articles. The
mean delta improvement of VAS neck was 3.99 (95%CI 2.92-5.07,
P < .001). The mean delta improvement of VAS arm was
5.73 (95%CI 5.25-6.22, P < .001). The mean delta
improvement of NDI was 24.72 (95%CI 21.03-28.42, P <
.001). While the mean delta improvement of VAS neck in conventional PCF was
3.74 (95%CI 2.89-4.59), that in MI-PCF was 4.07 (95%CI 2.83-5.31) (P
= .66). Conclusion: Contrary to popular belief,
patients undergoing posterior cervical foraminotomy can expect to have
improvement in their neck pain. Moreover, patients undergoing MI-PCF may
experience a greater improvement in neck pain compared to open
techniques.

## 1547

## A152: Does Obesity Affect Long-Term Outcomes of Lateral Lumbar Interbody
Fusion

Stuart Changoor

1

, Michael Faloon

1

, Conor Dunn

1

, Aksha Parray

2

, Kumar Sinha

1

, Ki Hwang

2

, and Arash Emami

1

1

St. Joseph's University Medical Center, Paterson, NJ, USA

2

Rutgers New Jersey Medical School, Newark, NJ, USA

Introduction: Obese patients can pose significant challenges to
spine surgeons in lumbar fusion procedures. The increased risk of
complications has led surgeons to be wary in pursing operative interventions
in these patients. With the increased proportion of obese patients, it is
imperative to understand the long-term outcomes in minimally-invasive
approaches. The purpose of this study was to evaluate the long-term safety
and efficacy of LLIF in the obese. Material and Methods: A
retrospective review was performed to identify patients who underwent LLIF
with posterior stabilization since 2007 with a minimum of 5 years follow-up.
Demographics including BMI were recorded and patients were subdivided into 2
cohorts: (A) nonobese (BMI <30 kg/m2) and (B) obese (BMI
>30 kg/m2). Functional outcomes were assessed by comparing
pre- and post-operative VAS and ODI scores. Reoperation rates were compared
between cohorts. Pelvic incidence (PI) and lumbar lordosis (LL) mismatch was
calculated from both pre- and post-operative radiographs.
Results: 115 consecutive patients were included (53
nonobese & 62 obese) with a mean follow up of 95.3 months. Mean BMI was
25.3 in cohort A and 35.3 in cohort B (P < .001). There
were more females in cohort A. VAS scores decreased by a mean of 5.7 in
cohort A, and 5.4 in cohort B (P = .213). ODI improvement
was also similar between the cohorts. 5.6% of nonobese patients required
reoperation compared to 9.6% of obese patients (P = .503).
Both cohorts achieved a similar proportion of PI-LL mismatch correction, 85%
in obese vs 78% in nonobese patients (P = .526).
Conclusion: Obese patients have similar surgical outcomes
to nonobese patients with respect to functional outcome scores, reoperation
rates, and correction of PI-LL mismatch after long-term follow-up. With
similar outcome and reoperation profiles, minimally-invasive approaches to
the spine, such as LLIF, may be an acceptable alternative to traditional
open procedures in obese patients.

## 740

## A153: Clinical and Radiological Outcomes for Mini-Open Combined 1 Step
Anterior and Oblique Approach for 2 Level Lumbar Interbody Fusion

Pablo Mendivil

1

, Guillermo Vergara

1,2

, Juam Pablo Sirena

1

, William Velázquez

1,2

, Sofia Beltrame

1

1

Unidad de Cirugía Espinal Compleja y Minimamente Invasiva -
Neurocentro Salta - IMAC Instituto Medico de Alta Complejidad, Salta
Argentina, Departamento de Neurocirugía, Salta, Argentina

2

Hospital San Bernardo, Salta Argentina, Servicio de Neurocirugia,
Salta, Argentina

Introduction: Lumbar interbody fusions techniques include
anterior (ALIF), posterior (PLIF), transforaminal (TLIF), extreme lateral
(XLIF) and oblique lateral interbody fusion (OLIF), each with its own
advantages and disadvantages. L4-L5 and L5-S1 arthrodesis is the most common
lumbar double fusion association. The objective of this work is to assess
the clinical and radiographic outcomes and complications and determine the
comparative effectiveness and safety of mini-open combined one step anterior
and oblique approach for two level lumbar interbody fusion. Material
and Methods: Eleven patients with indication of L4-L5 and L5-S1
arthrodesis underwent mini-open combined one step L5-S1 anterior and L4-L5
oblique interbody fusion and percutaneous posterior pedicle screws.
Demographics, fusion rate, Modified Macnab Criteria Outcome and surgical
complications were assessed. Visual Analog Scale score, Oswestry Disability
Index and spinopelvic parameters, were evaluated before and after surgery.
Results: The mean age of the patients was 49 years. Visual
Analog Scale mean improved from 6.27 to 1.09 9 months after surgery and Mean
Oswestry Disability Index from 42.5 % to 10.36 %.The mean value of the
spinopelvic parameters ± SD preoperative and postoperative was pelvic tilt
(PT) 12.4 ± 9.36 - 14.9 ± 7.25, sacral slope (SS) 35.9 ± 14.20 - 140.6 ±
7.60, pelvic incidence (PI) 52.3 ± 17.04 - 59.5 ± 13.60 and lumbar lordosis
(LL) 55.8 ± 11.68 - 59.1 ± 10.73. Fusion rate was found to be 95,4% at
9 months. There was no spinal nerve or urinary injury, one major vessel
(venous) and two peritoneal lesions without clinical consequences and one
case of transient retrograde ejaculation. Conclusions: ALIF
seems to be the preferred method in L5/S1 for discogenic LBP and lordosis
restoration, in L4/L5 alif/olif the second option because increased risk of
vascular injury. Combined one step ALIF for L5-S1 and oblique approach
through the surgical window between the psoas and the left common iliac vein
for L4-L5 interbody fusion seems to be a good option that combines the good
results of the anterior technique minimizing the surgical risks.

## OP18: Spinal Tumor Surgery 1

## 495

## A154: Surgical Treatment of Spinal Metastases of the Cervicothoracic
Junction

Vanessa Hubertus

1

, Michelle Marino

1

, Czabanka Marcus

1

, Arthur Wagner

2

, Nicole Lange

2

, Ann Kathrin Joerger

2

, Jens Gempt

2

, Björn Sommer

3

, Sven Eicker

4

, Martin Stangenberg

5

, Insa Janssen

6

, Christoph Wipplinger

7

, Veit Rohde

3

, Karl Schaller

6

, Claudius Thomé

7

, Peter Vajkoczy

1

, Julia Onken

1

, and Bernhard Meyer

2

1

Charité - Universitätsmedizin Berlin, Neurosurgery, Berlin,
Germany

2

Technische Universität München, Neurosurgery, Munich,
Germany

3

Universitätsmedizin Göttingen, Neurosurgery, Göttingen,
Germany

4

Universitätsklinikum Hamburg-Eppendorf, Neurosurgery, Hamburg,
Germany

5

Universitätsklinikum Hamburg-Eppendorf, Traumatology, Hamburg,
Germany

6

Hôpitaux Universitaires de Genève, Neurosurgery, Genève,
Switzerland

7

Medizinische Universität Innsbruck, Neurosurgery, Innsbruck,
Austria

Introduction: Spinal metastases of the cervicothoracic junction
(CTJ; C7-Th2) pose a challenge for treatment. The aim of our study is to
compare surgical strategies for their treatment with respect to surgical
complexity and associated complications. Material and Methods:
238 patients were surgically treated with spinal metastases of the CTJ in
2005-19 at 7 university centers in Europe. SINS, clinical, surgical and
outcome data were assessed. Patients were divided into 4 groups: those with
high comorbidities were only decompressed (1), decompression and
instrumentation from posterior (2) or anterior (3) was performed in case of
instability (SINS) dependent on location of myelon compression (2/3). 360°
anterior-posterior instrumentation was performed in extensive lytic lesions
and in cases with low comorbidities (4). Results: 37 patients
were treated in (1) (15%), 127 patients in (2) (53%), 18 patients in (3)
(8%) and 56 patients in (4) (24%). Medium SINS was (1) 7, (2 + 3) 11 and (4)
12. In (1-2) patients presented with worse neurological function than (3-4),
whereas in (1) systemic tumor burden was highest. In (2-4) 83-89% suffered
from mechanical pain, in (1) 50%. Complications occurred in (1) 17%, (2)
43%, (3) 22% and (4) 32%. Hardware failure (HwF) during follow-up occurred
exclusively in (2) and led to surgical revision in 6 cases. HwF occurred
exclusively in monocortically placed massa lateralis screws (mMLS) in the
cervical spine. In case of bicortical massa lateralis screws (bMLS) or
pedicle screws (PS) no HwF was observed at 10 months follow-up.
Conclusion: The biomechanical loading capacity of dorsal
instrumentation alone seems to have a decisive influence on revision rate in
metastases of C7-Th2. In patients with favorable comorbidity rate, the
extension of life expectancy through new therapy options should play a
crucial role in choosing the right surgical strategy. Attention should be
paid to the distinct biomechanical properties of the CTJ, with 360°
stabilization and placement of bMLS or PS preferable to mMLS in our
multicentric cohort.

## 1687

## A155: Multilevel Total en-Bloc Excision of Primary Chondrosarcoma of the
Thoracic Spine Through an all Posterior Approach. Case Presentation and
Systematic Review of Literature

Nigil Palliyil

1

, Nasir Quraishi

1

, and Kedar Deogaonkar

2

1

Queens Medical Centre, Nottingham University Hospital, Spinal
Surgery, Nottingham, United Kingdom

2

Deenanath Mangeshkar Hospital and Research Centre, Pune,
India

Introduction: Chondrosarcomas are malignant cartilage forming
neoplasms which account for 10% of all the primary bone tumours. As these
tumours are resistant to chemotherapy and radiotherapy, en-bloc excision of
the tumour with wide margins is the only option that provides maximum
disease free survival and possible cure. We present two cases of primary
chondrosarcoma of the thoracic spine treated by multilevel en-bloc excision
through an all posterior approach and review the literature pertaining to
anterior-posterior versus posterior only approaches for multilevel en-bloc
excision of primary malignant tumours. Methods: Two cases of
multilevel chrondrosarcoma are presented who both underwent posterior only
approaches. Further, a systematic review of the English language literature
was carried out using search criteria en-bloc primary thoracic spinal
tumours/ vertebrectomy/ spondylectomy, for papers published between (January
1999 and September 2019) using the Preferred Reporting Items for Systematic
Reviews and Meta-Analyses (PRISMA) guidelines. Results: Both
our patients tolerated the procedure well without any postoperative
neurological deficits and no major perioperative complications. No local
tumour recurrence or distant metastasis was observed till last follow up at
36 months. From our systematic review, a total of 48 articles were
identified, and final 7 papers (all retrospective reviews, Level III/IV)
were analysed. These studies reported the outcome of 135 cases of en-bloc
resections of primary malignant tumours with a mean follow up duration of
39 months (3-211). The primary tumours mainly comprised of chondrosarcomas,
chordomas, GCTs and osteosarcomas. The local recurrence rate following
en-bloc resections was found to be 14.9%. The complication rate was higher
in multi-level resections and when combined anterior+posterior approach
(48.3%) was performed as against posterior only approach (10.6%,
(P < .0001)). The incidence of local recurrence was
higher in patients undergoing en-bloc resection for a recurrent tumour than
previously untreated tumour (38.9% vs 7.1%, P < .0001),
but not affected by the surgical approach. Conclusions:
Multilevel en-bloc tumour resection of the spine is a technically demanding
procedure, however it remains the treatment of choice in certain primary
tumours as they are potentially curative. A posterior only approach appears
to show a significantly lower complication rate when compared to combined
anterior-posterior approaches. Local recurrence rate is the highest
following en-bloc resection for recurrent tumours, emphasising the
importance of a meticulously performed primary surgery.

## 819

## A156: Multiple Cavernous Angiomas of Central Nervous System Associated
with Neurofibromatosis Type 2 (NF2)

Dimitar Haritonov

1

1

University Hospital Heart and Brain, Neurosurgery and Spine Surgery,
Pleven, Bulgaria

Introduction: Cavernous angiomas (CA) represent 5-12% of all
spinal vascular lesions and 1% of all intramedullary lesions in pediatric
and young adult patients. Intramedullary spinal cavernomas are relatively
rare with only 24 cases reported till date to the best of our knowledge. The
aim of presentation of this case is findings of multiple cavernous angiomas
of central nervous system associated with Neurofibromatosis type 2 (NF 2).
Material and Methods: A 35 year-old man presented to the
clinic with acute onset motor weakness in lower limbs. He was diagnosed with
multiple cerebral cavernomas and an acutely bleeding spinal cavernoma. MRI
showed multiple cerebral silent cavernous angiomas, symptomatic spinal cord
cavernous angioma with perilesion bleeding in thoracic region and right
acoustic schwannoma associated with café au late spots on the back.
Results: Complete surgical excision of the spinal cavernoma
was done. Postoperatively the patient's weakness gradually improved to a
power of 4/5 in lower limbs over a period of 10 days.
Conclusion: Only 24 cases of pediatric and young adults
spinal cavernomas have been reported in the current literature. Current
consensus on management of these rare lesions is based on previously
published case reports/series and surgery appears to be the only definitive
treatment.

## 1369

## A157: Metastatic Spine Tumor Surgery in Elderly Patients: Analysis of 78
Patients

Ibrahim Hussain

1

, Benjamin Hartley

1

, Anne Reiner

1

, Ilya Laufer

1

, Mark Bilsky

1

, and Ori Barzilai

1

1

Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center, New York, USA

Introduction: Octogenarians living with spinal metastases are a
challenging population to treat, given a high incidence of medical
comorbidities. Our purpose was to identify the rate, types, management, and
predictors of complications and survival in octogenarians following surgery
for spinal metastases. Material and Methods: A
single-institution retrospective review of a prospectively collected cohort
was performed. Patients aged 80 years or older who underwent open or
minimally invasive surgery (MIS) with instrumentation for metastatic spinal
tumor treatment between 2008 and 2019 were included. Demographic,
intraoperative, and postoperative clinical characteristics were collected.
Complications were classified into categories such as wound-related,
hematoma, venous thrombosis, pulmonary, and cardiac, among others. We also
divided complications into 5 grades based on intervention or outcome.
Discharge destination was classified as either home, rehabilitation center,
hospice, or death in hospital. Cox proportional hazards regression was used
to associate variables with overall survival. Logistic regression was used
to associate variables with postoperative complications.
Results: 78 patients (mean 83.6 years) met inclusion
criteria, of which 81% had open surgery. Average operative time, blood loss,
and length of stay were 157 minutes, 615 mL, and 9 days, respectively. The
overall complication rate was 31% (N = 24). 16% of all patients required an
interventional procedure to address a complication and 7% had
life-threatening or fatal complications. The most common complications were
wound dehiscence/infection (N = 6), pulmonary (N = 4), and hematoma (N = 3).
91% of patients were discharged home or to rehab. 4 patients (5.1%) died the
same admission. Blood loss was significantly associated with increased risk
of complications (OR = 1.001; P = .048). There was a
non-significant trend towards increased mortality when decompression was
also performed (OR = 2.12; P = .09). For deceased patients,
median survival was 136 days. For patients still alive, median follow-up
period was 441 days. Conclusion: Surgery for metastatic spine
disease in octogenarians should not be ruled out based on age only as it can
be performed with goals of palliation. Octogenarians undergoing surgery for
spinal metastases are at increased risk for postoperative complications and
mortality particularly when performing decompression in addition to
stabilization and with increasing intraoperative blood loss.

## 1769

## A158: Are Vertebral Hemangiomas Always Innocuous? A Retrospective Series
of 23 Patients Who Underwent Surgical Treatment Following Aggressive,
Symptomatic, Atypical Vertebral Hemangiomata

Ajoy P Shetty

1

, Guna Pradeep

1

, Vibhu Krishnan Viswanathan

1

, and Shanmuganathan Rajasekaran

1

1

Ganga Medical Center and Hospitals, Coimbatore, India

Introduction: Aggressive vertebral hemangiomata are rare forms
of vertebral body hemangiomas, which present with significant vertebral
expansion, extra-osseous components with extension into epidural space,
disturbance of vascularity and compression fractures leading to spinal cord
and/or nerve root compression. They constitute 1% of all spinal hemangiomas
and are usually symptomatic. Three-fourths of these lesions occur in the
thoracic segments between T3 and T9 levels. The literature evidence on this
subject till date is scarce. Materials and methods: A
single-centre, retrospective observational study was conducted to analyze
the clinical presentation and surgical outcome of patients, who presented
with aggressive haemangiomas between January 2010 and February 2020. Only
patients who underwent surgical treatment and instrumented stabilization,
and had at least 6 months follow-up were included. Results: A
total of 23 (mean age 46.4 ± 17.1 years; 15 females) patients
with symptomatic, aggressive (Enneking stage III) vertebral haemangioma were
diagnosed and surgically treated at our Institution during this period. 3
female patients presented during the peri-partum period (2 during antepartum
and 1 in the immediate post-partum periods). Gait instability was the most
common presenting symptom in 39.1% (n = 9) patients. Pain, radiculopathy and
neurodeficit were the presenting symptoms in 30.4% (n = 7), 17.4% (n = 4)
and 13.0% (n = 3) of patients, respectively. Two of these patients had
associated bowel/ bladder disturbances. The clinical signs of myelopathy was
seen in 73.9% (n = 17). The most common site of lesion was the thoracic
spine (n = 13), followed by thoraco-lumbar (D11-L2; n = 18) and lumbar
regions (n = 2). The lesion was solitary in 56.5% (n = 13). In the remaining
patients with multifocal hemangiomas, only one of the lesions was
symptomatic. Preoperative embolization was performed in 73.91% (n = 17) of
patients. Radiologically, 12 patients had an epidural component, 5 had both
epidural and paravertebral components and 2 had paravertebral extension.
Three patients had isolated involvement of vertebral body and 1 patient
presented with extension of the lesion into the bilateral pedicles. In all
the four patients without significant soft tissue extension, the lesion
spanned the entire body and led to significant collapse of the vertebra
necessitating surgery. Overall, 65.21% (n = 15) underwent posterior-alone
surgery, while the remaining underwent combined antero-posterior surgery.
The local recurrence rate was 8.7% (n = 2). Preoperatively, 43.4% patients
(n = 10) had normal neurology, while 39.1% (n = 9), 13% (n = 3) had ASIA D
and ASIA C neurology respectively. One patient presented with ASIA A
neurology. During postoperative followup, all patients regained normal power
except the one with ASIA A who improved to ASIA C. Conclusion:
Vertebral haemangiomas are commonly-encountered, benign vascular
malformations. On rare occasions, they can manifest with aggressive lesions
causing extracorporeal extension and neurodeficit. These aggressive lesions
require aggressive, timely surgical interventions to prevent progressive
collapse and neurological catastrophes. Patients who present with
neurological deficit benefit significantly from lesion excision, spinal
decompression and instrumented stabilisation. Complete excision of the
lesions is necessary to reduce the recurrence rates.

## 1913

## A159: Long-Term Result of Sacrococcygeal Chordoma Surgical Management:
About 13 Cases

Mouadh Nefiss

1

, Nouira Amine

1

, Bousrih Anis

1

, Saied Abdellali

1

, Ezzaouia Khelil

1

, and Tborbi Anis

1

1

Mongi Slim Hospital, Orthopedic Surgery Department, La Marsa,
Tunisia

Introduction: Chordoma is a rare slowly evolving malignant
tumour. The sacral location is the most common. The curative treatment is
surgical, either by a double approach or by a simple posterior approach.
However, surgery is not always possible when the diagnosis is late. The aim
of our work is to evaluate the long-term results in the management of
sacro-coccygeal chordomas. Material and Methods: We report a
series of 13 cases collected over a period of 18 years. Epidemiological,
clinical, radiological and therapeutic characteristics were studied. Factors
of poor prognosis were investigated. Results: The patients were
9 men and 4 women, ranging in age from 24 to 79 years. The diagnosis was
made with an average delay of 2 years from the onset of symptomatology. The
surgical biopsy confirmed the diagnosis for all patients. No metastases were
found in the extension work-up. The treatment was exclusively surgical for
10 patients. For 3 patients, abstention was chosen because of the extension
of the lesions, notably distal and intra-pelvic, preventing any surgical
removal. Carcinological resection was performed in 6 cases using a double
approach for 5 patients and a single posterior approach for 1 patient. No
adjuvant treatment was associated. The average delay was 8 years for the 10
patients operated on. Four patients developed genito-sphincter disorders but
without sacral recurrence. These disorders were definitive in only one case.
2 patients died, one by metastasis and the other in immediate post-operation
by an uncontrollable bleeding and the two other patients developed a local
recurrence at 2 years of age treated by simple curettage. Finally, at
7 years of age, a patient developed a second location in the dorsal spine
(D6) complicated by paraplegia. The factors of poor prognosis in our series
were the low socio-economic level of the patients, a symptomatology made of
constipation and radiculalgia in preoperative period and a proximal
localization at the level of S2 on MRI. In the literature the factors of
poor prognosis differ according to the studies, however the majority of them
incriminate intra-lesional surgery in a non-specialised centre,
non-carcinological resection of the tumour and invasion of the rectal wall
on MRI. Conclusion: Sacral chordoma is a slow-growing tumour
invading noble structures which are difficult to respect during excision.
The technique of the double approach for carcinological resection seems to
be the safest, allowing a better clinical result and a better quality of
life. Diagnostic delay is the most important factor in poor prognosis, which
can be addressed especially with improved imaging techniques.

## 54

## A160: Pre-Treatment Expectations of Patients With Spinal Metastases: What
Do We Know and What Can We Learn from Other Disciplines? A Systematic Review
of Qualitative Studies

Roxanne Gal

1

, Douwe Oostinga

2

, Hester Wessels

3

, Jorrit-Jan Verlaan

2

, Raphaële Charest-Morin

4

, Charles Fisher

4

, Lenny Verkooijen

1

, and Anne Versteeg

1

1

University Medical Center Utrecht, University of Utrecht, Division
of Imaging and Oncology, Utrecht, The Netherlands

2

University Medical Center Utrecht, University of Utrecht, Department
of Orthopaedic Surgery, Utrecht, The Netherlands

3

University Medical Center Utrecht, Department of Corporate
Communications, Utrecht, The Netherlands

4

University of British Columbia, Vancouver General Hospital,
Department of Orthopaedics, Division of Spine, Vancouver, British
Columbia, Canada

Introduction: Currently, little is known about treatment
expectations of patients with spinal metastases undergoing radiotherapy
and/or surgery. Assuming that patients with spinal metastases share
characteristics with patients who had spinal surgery for non-cancer related
conditions and with advanced cancer patients, we performed a systematic
review to summarize the literature on patient expectations regarding
treatment outcomes of spinal surgery and advanced cancer care.
Material and Methods: A comprehensive search was performed
in MEDLINE, EMBASE and PsycINFO for studies between 2000 and sep-2019.
Studies including adult patients (>18 years), undergoing spinal surgery
or receiving advanced cancer care, investigating patients’ pre-treatment
expectations regarding treatment outcomes were included. Two independent
reviewers screened titles, abstracts and full-texts, extracted data and
assessed methodological quality. Results: The search identified
7343 articles, of which 92 were selected for full-text review. For this
review, 31 articles were included. Patients undergoing spinal surgery had
overly optimistic expectations regarding pain and symptom relief, they
underestimated the probability of functional disability, and overestimated
the probability of (complete) recovery and return to work. Studies
highlighted that patients feel not adequately prepared for surgery in terms
of post-treatment expectations. Similarly, advanced cancer patients
receiving palliative treatment often had overly optimistic expectations
regarding their survival probability and cure rates.
Conclusion: Patients tend to have overly optimistic
expectations regarding pain and symptom relief, recovery and prognosis
following spinal surgery or advanced cancer care. Pretreatment consultation
about the expected pain and symptom relief, recovery and prognosis may
improve understanding of prognosis, and promote and manage expectations,
which, in turn, may lead to better perceived outcomes.

## 554

## A161: Time Between the First Symptoms and the Onset of Neurological
Deficits in Patients with Metastatic Spinal Disease

Floris van Tol

1

, Anne Versteeg

2

, Tom Snijders

1

, Cumhur Oner

1

, and Jorrit-Jan Verlaan

1

1
UMC Utrecht, Utrecht, The Netherlands, 
2
University of Toronto, Toronto, Canada
Introduction: Spinal metastases are among the most debilitating
complications of (untreated) malignant disease. Without timely treatment,
patients are at risk for metastatic spinal cord compression, severely
hampering their quality of life and survival. It is essential for
oncological health-care providers to be aware of the limited time available
to diagnose and treat spinal metastases. The primary objective of the
current study was to quantify the time between the onset of symptoms related
to metastatic spinal disease and the onset of signs of spinal cord
dysfunction. Materials and Methods: A retrospective review of
303 patients with an indication for surgical treatment of spinal metastases
was conducted. The time to neurological deficits was determined in days by
calculating the time between the onset of symptoms related to spinal
metastases and the onset of neurological deficits for each individual
patient. Multivariate Poisson regression was used to correlate the time to
neurological deficits to the primary tumor, the localization of spinal
metastases and the oncological history of the patient. Results:
Sensorimotor deficits occurred in 113 patients with a median time to
neurological deficits of 66.5 days, showing great variation between spinal
localization, tumor type and the absence or presence of a preexisting cancer
diagnosis. Of all the neurological deficits, 75% occurred while under active
medical care for symptoms related to spinal metastases. More than 30% of
neurological deficits occurred after the diagnosis of metastatic spinal
disease, but prior to initiation of specific treatment.
Conclusion: The current study shows the limited time
available before the potential onset of spinal cord injury in patients with
spinal metastases. These results emphasize the importance of awareness
amongst oncological health-care providers on the timely identification and
treatment of metastatic spinal disease, thereby potentially improving their
outcome considerably.

## 910

## A162: Single-Stage Minimal-Invasive Posterolateral Transpedicular
Approach (MITPA) in the Treatment of Metastatic Tumors in Thoracic
Spine

Rafal Zaluski

1

, and Wiktor Urbanski

1

1

Medical University of Wrocław, Neurosurgery, Wroclaw,
Poland

Introduction: Surgical treatment of spinal metastatic tumors
usually consists of combination of neural structures decompression and
spinal fixation. If the lesion extends to the vertebral body, the anterior
column may require additional support. In these cases, typically open
one-stage postero-lateral approach is performed or occasionally combined
two-stage posterior and anterior approach. Unfortunately, these extensive
open surgeries are associated with high complication rate. In our study we
designed a minimally invasive technique of posterolateral transpedicular
approach (MITPA) for posterior pedicular fixation and anterior corpectomy in
patients with metastatic tumors. The object of the paper is to present the
MITPA technique and compare perioperative results with open techniques.
Material and Methods: This is a single surgeon series of 35
patients who had posterior pedicular fixation with corpectomy and anterior
cage insertion due to metastatic lesion in thoracic spine. In 15 consecutive
patients operated between 2017 and 2019 in the Department of Neurosurgery,
posterior percutaneous pedicular fixation with additional corpectomy and
decompression with minimal invasive posterolateral transpedicular approach
(MITPA) were performed (showed in figure 1). The operation time, average
blood loss, neurological functions recovery and occurrence of complications
were assessed. The measurements on radiographs were preformed pre and
postoperatively to assess the restoration of spinal alignment. The group of
20 patients operated between 2015 and 2019 due to metastatic tumors who
underwent open procedures of pedicular fixation with corpectomy were
assessed similarly and the results compared between open and MITPA groups.
Results: The average operation time in MITPA group was
3 hours 27 minutes and was comparable to the duration of the procedure
performed using the open technique (3 hours 42 minutes). We have noticed
significantly decreased intraoperative blood loss in MITPA group vs open
surgery group (313 ± 74 vs 815 ± 257, P = .0016). In both
groups, no deterioration of patients' neurological status was observed. In
open group there was one deep infection requiring wound debridement and one
superficial wound infection treated conservatively, no wound healing
problems in MITPA group was noticed. The preoperative kyphosis improved by
7.80 in MITPA group and 8.10 in open group, however difference was not
statistically significant with p value of .43. Conclusions:
Presented technique of metastatic thoracic spinal tumors management seems to
be an efficient and safe method. It has lower complication rate than open
surgery, restores spinal stability and alignment comparably to open
technique. However, more observation is necessary, particularly showing how
the technique affect the general oncologic treatment.

Figure 1. The overview of presented single-stage minimal invasive
posterolateral transpedicular approach (MITPA). A - Intraoperative view;
shows extenders of percutaneous screws and inserted PEEK intervertebral
cage. B,C,D,E - consecutive intraoperative X-rays.

## OP19: Degenerative Lumbar Surgery 2

## 1919

## A163: Incremental Clinical Benefit of Adding Layers of Complexity to the
Planning and Execution of Adult Spinal Deformity Corrective Surgery

Peter Passias

1

, Katherine Pierce

1

, Waleed Ahmad

1

, Sara Naessig

1

, Virginie Lafage

2

, Renaud Lafage

2

, Gregory Mundis

3

, Jeffrey Gum

4

, Robert Eastlack

5

, Bassel Diebo

6

, Justin Smith

7

, Christopher Ames

8

, Christopher Shaffrey

9

, Douglas Burton

10

, Robert Hart

11

, Frank Schwab

2

, Munish Gupta

12

, Oscar Krol

1

, Lara Passfall

1

, Nicholas Kummer

1

, and Shay Bess

13

1

NYU Langone, Department of Orthopedics Spine Surgery, Manhattan,
USA

2

Hospital for Special Surgery, Manhattan, USA

3

University of California, Department of Neurological Surgery, San
Diego, USA

4

Norton Leatherman Spine Center, Louisville, USA

5

Division of Orthopaedic Surgery, Scripps Clinic, La Jolla,
USA

6

SUNY Downstate Department of Orthopedics, Brooklyn, USA

7

University of Virginia Medical Center, Charlottesville, USA

8

University of California, San Francisco, USA

9

University of Virginia Medical Center, Charlottesville, USA

10

University of Kansas Medical Center,, Kansas City, USA

11

Swedish Neuroscience Institute, Seattle, USA

12

Washington University,, St Louis, USA

13

Denver International Spine Center, Denver, USA

Introduction: For surgical adult spinal deformity (ASD)
patients, determining optimal restoration of alignment and spinal shape have
been increasingly studied. Temporally, the SRS-Schwab classification system
was the first severity categorization system. Next, the age-adjusted
alignment was proposed, followed by Roussouly classification, and then a
spinal proportionality score to minimize mechanical complications. These
additional layers of complexity add to an already technically challenging
and high risk case. What hasn’t been determined is the incremental benefit
of these. Material and Methods: ASD patients with baseline (BL)
and 2-year postoperative(2Y) data included. Patients were classified by the
four proposed corrective alignment measures: SRS-Schwab: PT, SVA and
PI-LL(0, +, and ++); Age-Adjusted: PT, PI-LL, and SVA-adjusted ideal;
Roussouly Type: ‘Match’ or ‘Mismatch’ their theoretical type; Spinal
Proportionality: sagittal disproportion score out of 13. Alignment
improvement: SRS-Schwab 0 or decrease in severity, Age-Adjusted ideal match,
Roussouly theoretical Match, and decrease in proportion. To assess the
incremental benefit of layers of complexity, patients were separated into 4
groups: the first layer (1st) solely improving in SRS-Schwab at
2Y, 2nd as Schwab improvement and matching Age-Adjusted,
3rd as the two prior with matching of Roussouly, and
4th improvement in Schwab and proportionality, as well as
matching both Age-Adjusted ideals and Roussouly. Comparison was accomplished
with means comparison tests and chi-squared analyses. Results:
732 ASD patients (57.5 years, 82.4%F, 27 kg/m2) included.
SRS-Schwab BL: PI-LL (++:32.9%), SVA(++: 23%), PT(++:24.6%). At 2Y, 54.9%
improved in PT modifier, 71% SVA, 74.3% PI-LL. For Age-Adjusted ideal, 28%
met PT ideal, 18.8% PI-LL, and 31.3% SVA. By 2Y, 44.7% matched Roussouly
types. At 2Y, 30.8% improved in spine proportion. According to layer of
correction complexity groups: 640 (87.4%) met criteria for 1st,
517 (70.6%) 2nd, 176 (24%) 3rd, and 55 (7.5%)
4th. When comparing the incremental adding of the
2nd layer, or age-adjusted ideals to Schwab improvement,
complications and HRQLs were similar (P > .05). Addition
of Roussouly (3rd) had less mechanical complications and PJK
(48.3%), and met MCID for PCS and SRS-Mental (P < .05)
more compared to the 2nd tiered. The addition of the spinal
proportion score (4th) compared to the 3rd, met MCID
for ODI (44.2% vs 3rd: 28.3%, P =.011) and
SRS-Appearance (70.6% vs 44.8%, P < .001) more. When
assessing baseline components included in the classifications, PI, PT, PI-LL
and SVA were smallest in the 3rd group (P <
.020). Invasiveness was the greatest in the 4th layer
(P < .001). Mechanical complications and PJK
occurred to a greater extent in the 1st and 2nd
complexity groups (P = .024). According to HRQL follow-up,
the 4th layer met MCID more than all other complexity groups for
SRS-22 Appearance (P = .002) and ODI (P =
.085). Conclusion: Consideration of multiple complex
realignment techniques, taking into account deformity severity, age, shape,
and spinal proportion, may assist in optimizing patient-reported outcomes
following spinal realignment surgery.

## 1317

## A164: Bilateral Radioscopy-Guided Erector Spinae Plane Block for
Postoperative Analgesia in Spine Surgery: A Prospective, Randomized
Study

Sofia Beltrame

1

, Francisco Fasano

2

, and Pablo Jalon

3

1

Hospital de Clínicas José de San Martin, Buenos Aires, Argentina.,
Neurosurgery, Ciudad Autónoma, Argentina

2

Hospital de Clínicas José de San Martin, Buenos Aires, Argentina.,
Ciudad Autónoma de Buenos Aires, Argentina

3

Hospital de Clínicas José de San Martin, Buenos Aires, Argentina.,
Neurosurgery, Ciudad Autónoma de Buenos Aires, Argentina

Introduction: The erector spinae plane block is a novel
technique described recently for neuropathic pain treatment. Although there
are a few case reports in the literature about it`s usefulness, it appears
to be an effective and simple procedure to manage postoperative pain in
spine surgery. It’s the aim of this study to compare two perioperative
techniques, the erector spinae plane block with the infiltration of the
wound with long lasting local anesthetics, for the management of
postoperative wound pain in spinal surgery. Material and
Methods: Prospective, single-blind clinical trial, was performed
at the Hospital de Clínicas de Buenos Aires, from July 2018 to March 2019.
Patients undergoing spinal lumbosacral surgery without fixation were
enrolled. 2 perioperative infiltration techniques were compared: pre and
postoperative wound infiltration with long lasting analgesics with the
interfascial spinae plane erector block. Postoperative results were analyzed
in terms of pain relief (VAS), need for opioids, days of immobilization in
bed, hours of hospitalization and complications. A P <
.05 was considered statistically significant. Results: 40
patients were included. 20 (50%) underwent the standard infiltration
technique and 20 (50%) the interfascial spinae plane erector block. The
spinae plane erector block was superior in pain wound relief in the first 7
postoperative hours in patients who underwent discectomies or one level
decompressions (P = .000). In all the patients with
decompressions of 2 or more levels, the new technique proved to be
statistically significant superior in all the postoperative variables
analyzed: VAS (P = .0004) and number of patients with wound
pain after 7 hours of the surgery (P = .000), hours of
hospitalization (P = .0007), days of immobilization in bed
(P = .0004) and use of opioids (P =
.000). Conclusion: The interfascial spinae erector plane is a
better technique compare with the standardized infiltration of the wound for
postoperative wound pain relief in patients undergoing open spinal surgery.
This is the first study that use the blockage with fluoroscopic guideline.
It will be the reason for future work to verify its effectiveness in
fixation surgeries, minimal invasive spine surgery with anterior or lateral
approach, cervicalgia and chronic low back pain management. Keywords:
interfascial block, spinal erector muscles, spinal surgery,
postoperative pain.

## 21

## A165: Clinical Outcomes in Patients >75-years Undergoing Spine Surgery
for Lumbar Degenerative Spine Disease: Impact of Increasing Age and Modified
Frailty Index on Surgical Morbidity

Keyur Akbari

1

, Sasidharan M D S

1

, Muralidharan Venkatesan

1

, and Sajan Hegde

1

1

Apollo Hospital, Spine Unit, Chennai, India

Introduction: Surgical procedures are becoming more common in
the elderly population, which is likely because of the advancements in
surgical technique, improved anesthesia, patient expectations, and
increasing longevity. The current study aims to find out the relation
between pre operative frail status and post operative complications among
patients >75 years undergoing lumbar spine surgery for degenerative disc
disease (DDD) using 11 variable modified Frailty Index (mFI). Material
and Methods: This is a retrospective study conducted at a
tertiary care hospital during the time period 1 May 2017 to 1 May
2019.Consecutive 50 patients > 75 years who met inclusion criteria were
included in the study. A match cohort of consecutive 50 patients (age
:61-75 years) was also included in the study. The occurrence of
perioperative complications and 30 days mortality were analysed in
comparison with the modified Frailty Index (mFI) score. Length of hospital
stay and 6 months VAS scores for back and leg pain as well as ODI were
noted. For the purpose of analysis, we have classified mFI score of 0 has no
frail, mFI score of < .27 as pre frail and mFI score of ≥ .27 as frail.
ANOVA- test was used to assess statistical significance. P
value < 0.05 was considered statistically significant.
Results: Demographic metrics included (1) Mean age:
80 years (2) Sex: M:28 F:22. Our study showed that the rates of post
operative adverse events increased stepwise as the mFI score increases. In
the age group 61-75, as the mFI scored increased from 0 to 0.36, the rate of
complications increased from 0 to 100 %. Similarly, for the age group >
75 years, the rate of complications increased from 0 to 100% as the mFI
scored increased from 0 to .36. The length of hospital stay with mFI score 0
was 2.5 ± .67 which increased to 8.33 ± 5.77 with mFI score 0.36 in the age
group > 75 years. Our study showed that proportion of Clavien Dindo class
IV complications (mortality, ICU admissions) was higher in mFI ≥ .27. In our
study, there was significant improvement in VAS and ODI scores post surgery
in both the age groups and there was no significant difference amongst them
despite the mFI being higher in older age group. Superficial infection and
delirium were the most common complication in our cohort. Univariate
logistic regression analysis showed that age and mFI are associated with any
complications in the study group (P < .05) and the
association between ASA (American Society of Anesthesiologists) score and
any complications was not significant. Conclusion: Our study
shows that 11 variable mFI owing to its brevity and practicality is a simple
and useful tool for predicting post-op morbidity and mortality in geriatric
population undergoing spine surgery for degenerative lumbar spinal
condition. Thus, mFI objectively measures risk and might benefit spine
surgeons enhancing operative decision making and refining post op care in
geriatric population.

## 456

## A166: Efficacy and Feasibility of Percutaneous Transforaminal Endoscopic
Surgery (PTES) for Selective Treatment of Responsibility Segments in
Multi-Level Lumbar Degenerative Disease

YuTong Gu

1

, Wu Che

1

, Liang Zhang

1

, and Yichao Wang

1

1

Zhongshan Hospital Fudan University, Shanghai, China

Introduction: To evaluate the efficacy and feasibility of
selective treatment using PTES for responsibility segments in multi-level
(≥2 levels) lumbar degenerative disease including lumbar disc herniation,
lateral recess stenosis and intervertebral foraminal stenosis, which needed
decompression and fusion for almost each involved level if open surgery was
performed. Materials and Methods: From November 2012 to
December 2016, 218 patients of multi-level lumbar degenerative disease with
unilateral or asymmetric bilateral leg pain or numbness underwent PTES.
There were multi-level lumbar disc herniation, lateral recess stenosis or
intervertebral foraminal stenosis in MRI or CT. Although the central spinal
canal was very narrow in some cases, they should not be diagnosed as lumbar
central spinal canal stenosis because there was no symmetric intermittent
claudication, and the pain, discomfort, numbness or tiredness during walking
relieved by a few minutes of rest occurred in the unilateral leg or more
severely in one leg and less in the other, which indicated the symptoms of
nerve root compression. In this study, 211 patients were followed for more
than 2 years after surgery. There were 64 cases of 2-level, 72 of 3-level,
58 of 4-level and 17 of 5-level. The involved nerve roots and the
corresponding responsibility segments were determined according to the
location of pain or numbness in the leg. PTES under local anesthesia was
performed for the possible responsibility segment. If the patient had
obvious relaxation of involved legs during the procedure, which confirmed
that the treated segment was exactly responsible for the symptom, it was
unnecessary to treat other segments and the operation could be finished. Or
other possible responsibility segments should be treated using PTES till the
involved legs were relaxed. Results: In 211 cases, 203 patients
underwent PTES for 1 segment, 7 cases for 2 segments through one small
incision and 1 case for 3 segments. The mean duration of operation was 50.7
± 9.4 minutes per level. The mean frequency of intraoperative fluoroscopy
was 5 (3-11) times per level. The mean blood loss was 5 (2-30) ml. The mean
length of incision was 8.1 ± 2.6 mm. The mean stay in the hospital was
3(2-4) days. The patients were followed for an average of 27.4 ± 3.2 months.
The VAS score of leg pain significantly dropped from 9 (6-10) before
operation to 1(0-3) (P < .001) immediately after the
operation and to 0 (0-3) (P < .001) 2 years after
operation. However, there were 8 (3.8%) patients with the rebound effect of
leg pain 1 week after operation, in which all cases got pain relief during
2 months. At 2 years follow-up, 97.2% (205/211) of the patients showed
excellent or good outcomes, 1.9% (4/211) fair and .9% (2/211) poor according
to MacNab classification. Two patients underwent reoperation of PTES for
recurrence of disc herniation more than 6 months after surgery. No patients
had nerve damage and a major complication. Conclusion: The
responsibility segments in multi-level lumbar degenerative disease including
lumbar disc herniation, lateral recess stenosis and intervertebral foraminal
stenosis are selected for surgical treatment using PTES, which is effective,
safe and minimally aggressive.

## 653

## A167: Impact of Modic Changes on Functional Outcomes After
Microdiscectomy: A Prospective Comparative Cohort Study

Sri Vijay Anand KS

1

, Dinesh Kumarasamy

1

, Shanmuganathan Rajasekaran

1

, Dilip Chand Raja Soundararajan

1

, Ajoy P Shetty

1

, Rishi Kanna

1

, and Pushpa BT

2

1

Ganga Hospital, Department of Spine Surgery, Coimbatore,
India

2

Ganga Hospital, Department of Radiology, Coimbatore, India

Introduction: Microdiscectomy is the gold standard procedure
performed for lumbar disc herniation with a high success rate (80%).
However, in some patients, the preoperative back pain persists after
microdiscectomy, and leads to poor functional outcomes after surgery. The
presence of pre-operative Modic changes has been correlated to poor outcomes
by some authors. This study aims to elucidate the relationship between Modic
endplate changes and clinical outcomes after a lumbar microdiscectomy.
Methods: A prospective comparative cohort study was
performed in consecutive patients undergoing microdiscectomy for lumbar disc
herniation (LDH) in a single centre after ethics committee approval.
Patients between 18 to 65 years of age with symptomatic single-level disc
herniation and failed a trial of conservative management were included.
Patients with cauda equina syndrome and significant motor deficits were
operated at the earliest and were also included. Patients with prior lumbar
surgery, presence of lumbar instability, severe canal stenosis, facetal
hypertrophy, high risk for anesthesia, and patients who were lost to follow
up during the study period were excluded. Pre-operative clinical and
radiological parameters (Presence, location, size and type of Modic changes,
Pfirrmann grading, Total endplate score - TEPS) were recorded. The pain was
assessed by Numeric pain rating scale (NPRS), and functional assessment by
Oswestry Disability Index (ODI). Minimal clinically important difference
(MCID) in outcome was calculated for both the groups. Complications related
to surgery were studied. Follow-up was done at six weeks, three months, six
months and one year. Mac Nab criteria were used to assess patient
satisfaction at one year. Statistical analysis was performed to understand
the evenness of the distribution of variables across groups and to
understand the relationship of Modic changes with functional outcomes.
Results: Out of 309 patients, 86 had Modic changes, and 223
had no Modic changes. Both groups had similar back pain
(P-value: .07) and functional scores
(P-value: .85) pre-operatively. Postoperatively patients
with Modic changes had poorer back pain and ODI scores in the third month,
sixth month and one year (P-value: .001). However, MCID
between the groups were not significant (P-value- .18 for
back pain and .58 for ODI scores). Mac Nab criteria at one year were worse
in Modic patients (P-value: .001). No difference was noted
among Modic types (Type 1 vs Type 2) in the pre-operative and postoperative
pain and functional outcomes. Four patients in Modic group (4.7%) and one
patient in the non-Modic group (.5%) developed postoperative discitis
(p-value: .009). Conclusions: Our study
found a negative association between the presence of Modic change in
preoperative MRI and postoperative back pain, functional outcomes and
patient satisfaction at one year in patients with lumbar disc herniation
undergoing microdiscectomy. Modic changes were associated with higher grades
of disc degeneration and higher Total endplate scores. However, no
difference in clinical outcomes was seen between different types of Modic
changes. Our study also found a increased incidence of postoperative
discitis and the need for repeat procedures in patients with Modic
changes.

## 1784

## A168: Preoperative Community-Based Functional Exercise Training With
High-Risk Patients Opting for Lumbar Spinal Fusion: Feasibility and
Preliminary Effectiveness

Esther Janssen

1 2

, Ilona Punt

1 3

, Camille Biemans

1

, Lodewijk van Rhijn

1

, Paul Willems

1

, and Nico van Meeteren

4

1

Maastricht University Medical Center+, Department of Orthopedics and
Research School Caphri, Maastricht, The Netherlands

2

VieCuri Medical Center, Department of Orthopedics, Venlo, The
Netherlands

3

Maastricht University Medical Center+, Department of Surgery and
Trauma Surgery, Maastricht, The Netherlands

4

Top Sector Life Sciences and Health (Health∼Holland), the Hague, The
Netherlands

Introduction: Preoperative exercise training before major
surgery can decrease the risk of adverse postoperative outcomes. This may
also apply for patients opting for lumbar spinal fusion (LSF). However,
large interindividual differences in risk for negative outcome after LSF
exist. Therefore, a focus on deconditioned (a.k.a. “high-risk”) patients is
warranted, as these will probably benefit most from preoperative
interventions like exercise training. This study aimed to determine the
feasibility and preliminary effectiveness of community-based high-intensity
functional interval training (HIFIT) program for high-risk patients
undergoing LSF. Materials and Methods: In this case control
study, a preoperative HIFIT program was implemented into standard care.
High-risk patients were identified during a preoperative screening,
measuring a patient’s fitness level. A patient was classified as high-risk
if they could not achieve 2.5 Wattpeak/kilogram on the Steep Ramp
Test (a cycle ergometry test). Feasibility of the HIFIT program was
determined by measuring training adherence, training progression, number of
adverse events and reached training intensity. A matched Mann-Whitney U test
was used to compare trained high-risk patients with untrained high-risk
patients on time to functional recovery and length of hospital stay (LoS).
In an Interrupted Time Series Analysis (ITSA) the preliminary effectiveness
on time to functional recovery and LoS pre- and post-implementation was
analyzed. Results: Participation in the HIFIT program was
moderate: 47.8% (11/23) of all high-risk patients (after implementation),
due logistic reasons (n = 9) or the patient did not want to participate (n =
3). The program was safe and feasible, as no adverse events occurred and
only one session was missed (1.35%). Based on the BORG rating of perceived
exertion, patients reached on average adequate training intensity in 71% of
the supervised sessions. Trained patients increased their preoperative
aerobic capacity by 17.6%, and obtained faster time to functional recovery
than untrained patients (median 4.5 vs 7.5 (P = .013)).
However, this effect was not found for LoS (median 7 vs 8 (P
= .575)). The ITSA showed a positive effect of implementation
of the HIFIT program on time to functional recovery (relative risk (RR) =
.540 (95% Confidence Interval (CI) = .32-.92), P = .023)
and but not on LoS (RR = .650 (.41-1.03), P = .070).
Conclusion: The HIFIT program is feasible and safe for
high-risk patients undergoing LSF. Participation rates of the HIFIT program
can be improved by broadening the catchment area of the training network and
timely operative planning. The HIFIT program shortened time to functional
recovery, but not LoS. This was expected as LoS is largely influenced by
logistic and socioeconomic factors. This study can help guide future
research endeavors on 1) the effect and 2) the implementation of a
preoperative HIFIT program for high-risk patients undergoing LSF.

## 689

## A169: Complication Rates and Onset of Mental Disorders in Patients who
Developed Failed Back Surgery Syndrome

Eloise Stanton

1

, Ki-Eun Chang

1

, Blake Formanek

1

, Jeffrey C. Wang

1

, and Zorica Buser

1

1

Keck School of Medicine, University of Southern California,
Department of Orthopaedic Surgery, Los Angeles, USA

Introduction: Failed back surgery syndrome (FBSS) is a complex
and multifaceted condition associated with significant disability and
morbidity. FBSS diagnosis is associated with new incidences of further spine
complications, as well as mental health disorders. Material and
Methods: Data were obtained for patients diagnosed with FBSS from
January 2010 to December 2017 from the Mariner insurance database. Patient
records were analyzed to determine rates of new lumbar, cervical, and
thoracic pathologies, and of new mental health disorders, including tobacco
use, depression, anxiety, sleep disorder, bipolar disorder, post-traumatic
stress disorder (PTSD), panic disorder, suicidal disorder, and
attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder (ADHD). Rates were determined at
3 months, 6 months, 9 months, and 12 months post-FBSS diagnosis.
Results: From 2010 to 2017, 110,097 patients (56% female,
44% male) were diagnosed with FBSS. The most common age group was
70-74 years old. Cumulative incidence rates of new lumbar spine pathology at
3, 6, 9, and 12 months post-FBSS diagnosis were 4.1%, 5.9%, and 7.1%, and
8.0%, respectively. Rates of new cervical spine pathology at 3, 6, 9, and
12 months following post-FBSS diagnosis were 2.9%, 3.9%, and 5.3%, and 6.7%,
respectively. Rates of new thoracic spine pathology at 3, 6, 9, and
12 months post-FBSS diagnosis were 1.8%, 3.0%, and 4.0%, and 4.9%,
respectively. The rates of new overall mental health disorders within 3, 6,
9, and 12 months post-FBSS diagnosis were 3.4%, 5.8%, 7.8%, and 9.8%,
respectively, with rates of anxiety and depression being the highest. The
rates of new anxiety diagnosis at 3, 6, 9, and 12 months were 2.3%, 4.0%
5.5%, and 6.8%, respectively. The rates of new depression diagnosis at 3, 6,
9, and 12 months were 2.1% 3.6% 5.0%, and 6.3%, respectively. The rates of
new tobacco use at 3, 6, 9, and 12 months were 1.5% 2.6% 3.5%, and 4.2%,
respectively. The rates of new sleep disorder at 3, 6, 9, and 12 months were
1.1% 2.0% 2.8%, and 3.5%, respectively. At 12 months, the rate was 0.9% for
PTSD, 0.7% for panic disorder, 0.7% for bipolar disorder, 0.5% for suicidal
disorder, and 0.2% for ADHD. Conclusion: In our study, patients
diagnosed with FBSS experienced subsequent spine-related and mental health
complications that continued to increase within the 12 months observational
period. The most common spinal complication was lumbar pathology, with its
highest incidence rate occurring within the first three months post-FBSS
diagnosis. The high rates of both spine pathology and mental health
complications observed in this patient population warrants further study
into the pathology of FBSS as well as preventative and post-diagnosis
treatment paradigm.

## 1596

## A170: Targeting Self-Efficacy More Important Than Dysfunctional
Behavioural Cognitions in Patients with Longstanding Chronic Low Back Pain;
A Longitudinal Study

Miranda van Hooff

1 2

, Johanna E. Vriezekolk

3

, Robert Jan Kroeze

1

, John O'Dowd

4

, Jacques van Limbeek

5

, and Maarten Spruit

1

1

Sint Maartenskliniek, Orthopedic surgery, Nijmegen, The
Netherlands

2

Radboud university medical center, Orthopedic surgery, Nijmegen, The
Netherlands

3

Sint Maartenskliniek, Research, Nijmegen, The Netherlands

4

Hampshire hospitals NHS Trust, Basingstoke, United Kingdom

5

Independent epidemiologist, Nijmegen, The Netherlands

Introduction: Multidisciplinary pain management programmes based
on cognitive behavioural training principles are recommended to improve
daily functioning in patients with chronic low back pain (CLBP). Targeting
self-efficacy, i.e. confident in achieving a desired outcome, is suggested
to be a more potent determinant for beneficial treatment outcomes than
restructuring the patient’s dysfunctional behavioural cognitions (i.e. pain
catastrophizing and fear of movement [FoM]), but the evidence is scarce. An
evidence-based two-week residential combined physical and psychological
(CPP) programme targeting both self-efficacy and dysfunctional behavioural
cognitions to improve functional outcome was developed, showed
long-term-benefits and was used to evaluate self-efficacy and these
behaviourial cognitions. Purpose: To determine whether this CPP
programme resulted in post-treatment improvements and maintenance of
improvements at one year follow-up in self-efficacy and decreased
dysfunctional behavioural cognitions. Subsequently, the unique contribution
of self-efficacy to improvement in post-treatment functional status was
investigated. Material and Methods: Cohort study including 524
patients with CLBP (727 eligible), aged 18 to 65 years, for whom
conservative primary care treatment failed and who were not eligible for an
invasive intervention. Primary outcome: functional status (Oswestry
Disability Index; minimal clinical important change [MCIC] 10 points).
Secondary outcomes: catastrophizing (Pain Catastrophizing Scale; MCIC 5.8
points), FoM (Tampa Scale for Kinesiophobia; MCIC 4.5 points), and
self-efficacy (Pain Self-Efficacy Questionnaire; MCIC 5.5 points).
Assessments: pre- and post-treatment, 1 and 12-months follow-up (FU). A
paired Students’ t-test was used to examine pre- and post-treatment values
and post-treatment and 1 year follow-up assessment values. Percentages of
patients reaching MCIC at post-treatment were described. Multivariate linear
regression techniques were applied to examine the influence of
self-efficacy, pain catastrophizing, and fear of movement on the
post-treatment functional status. The models' performances were determined
by the percentage of variance explained (i.e. Nagelkerke's
R
2
). Results: Participants with incomplete data (12.8%) did
not differ from those with complete data (n = 457). 59% were females, mean
age 46 (± 9.5) years, mean CLBP-duration 12 (± 10.8) years. All outcomes
significantly improved at post-treatment and a slight significant
improvement between post-treatment and 12 months FU was observed.
Post-treatment relevant improvements in outcomes ranged from 62.4% (FoM) to
68.7% (self-efficacy). After adjustment for baseline values, adding
self-efficacy to the basic linear regression model, comprising dysfunctional
behavioural cognitions, improved the model explaining post-treatment
functional status (basic model R
2
 = .49, F(6517) = 83.67, P < .001; final model
R
2
 = .57, F(8515) = 85.20, P < .001). The relative
contribution of self-efficacy, expressed in standardized betas, was 5.67
times higher than catastrophizing and 9.75 times more than FoM.
Conclusion: Targeting self-efficacy uniquely contributes to
a rapid improvement of functional status in the treatment of selected and
motivated patients with longstanding persistent CLBP. Clinically relevant
post-treatment improvements and maintenance over time are shown in
self-efficacy and dysfunction behavioural cognitions. Targeting patients’
self-efficacy should have a prominent place in treatments for patients with
CLBP, such as CPP programmes and (online) self-management programmes.

## 53

## A171: Lordosis Restoration with Midline Minimally Invasive Cortical
Trajectory Screws (MiDLF) and Transforaminal Interbody Fusion: A Safe
Technique with a Short Stay

Brett Rocos

1

, and Ian Harding

2

1

Toronto Western Hospital, Department of Spine Surgery, Toronto,
Canada

2

North Bristol NHS Trust, Department of Orthopaedic Surgery, Bristol,
United Kingdom

Introduction: The minimally invasive cortical trajectory screw
(MidLIF) technique has been described accompanied with posterolateral
interbody fusion (PLIF). We present our 2 years results of a hybrid
technique to show that using transforaminal interbody fusion (TLIF) rather
than PLIF in conjunction with MidLF is a less invasive and safe technique.
Material and Methods: We prospectively identified 25
patients undergoing MidLIF with TLIF from July 2015. The surgical technique
was the same for each, with radiological, clinical and patient reported
outcome data collected and analysed at 2 years follow up.
Results: The cohort showed a mean age of 55 (35-85) years.
The length of hospital stay was between 1 and 4 days, with an average of
2.7 days. Post operatively, lordosis across the motion segment fused
increased by a mean of 7.3° (0-24), mean pelvic incidence was 53° (31-80°)
and pelvic tilt reduced by an average of 3.5° (0-11°). The Oswestry
Disability Index improved from 34 pre operatively to 22 post operatively.
Visual analogue pain score improved by 5.2 points, from 6 down to 1. One
patient showed delayed wound healing. There were no incidences of
neurological injury or durotomy. Conclusion: Our data suggests
that MidLF with TLIF is both less invasive than traditional techniques and
safe. It restores lordosis, requires less exposure and retraction of neural
elements than the more widely used PLIF, and shows early discharge and
satisfactory medium term patient reported outcomes.

## OP20: Basic Science/Cellular Therapy

## 650

## A172: Mesenchymal Stem Cell Secretome: A Potential Anabolic and
Immunomodulatory Therapy for Early Intervertebral Disc Degeneration

Sebastian Wangler

1,2

, Amir Kamali

1

, Christina Wapp

1,3

, Karin Wuertz-Kozak

3,4,5

, Sonja Häckel

2

, Claudia Fortes

6

, Lorin Michael Benneker

2

, Lisbet Haglund

7

, R. Geoff Richards

1

, Mauro Alini

1

, Marianna Peroglio

1

, and Sibylle Grad

1,3

1

AO Research Institute Davos, Davos, Switzerland

2

Inselspital, University of Bern, Bern, Switzerland

3

ETH Zürich, Zürich, Switzerland

4

Rochester Institute of Technology, Rochester, USA

5

Schön Clinic Munich, Munich, Germany

6

Functional Genomics Center Zurich, Zurich, Switzerland

7

Mc Gill University, Montreal, Canada

Introduction: Mesenchymal stromal cells (MSCs) have been
introduced as promising cell source for intervertebral disc (IVD)
regeneration and treatment of low back pain. Besides their multilineage
differentiation capacity, MSCs release a wide spectrum of bioactive factors.
This secretome holds immunomodulatory and regenerative capacities and has
therefore significant therapeutic potential. For clinical translation of
secretome-based treatment, characterization of the secretome composition is
needed to better understand the induced biological processes and identify
the most effective secretomes. The aim of this work was to analyze the
secretomes of MSCs stimulated with conditioned medium (CM) from
degenerative, traumatic, and healthy IVD tissues. Material and
Methods: Degenerative and traumatic human IVD tissue was obtained
with written consent from patients undergoing spine surgery. Healthy IVDs
were harvested from organ donors after donor and familial consent. IVD
tissues were incubated in culture medium for 48h to obtain IVD CM. Human
MSCs (n = 12 donors) were isolated from bone marrow aspirates obtained with
written consent from patients undergoing spine surgery. MSCs were stimulated
with pooled IVD CM (n = 4 for degenerative, traumatic, and healthy IVD
groups) for 24 hours. Then, CM was replaced by fresh culture medium to
generate MSC secretome during 24 hours. MSCs stimulated with 10 ng/mL IL-1β
served as proinflammatory control, and MSCs incubated with culture medium as
baseline control. MSC secretomes were analyzed by LC-MS/MS proteomics
profiling and cytokine/chemokine immunoassays. Results:
Compared to MSC baseline secretome, there were 224 significantly up- or
down-regulated proteins following healthy, 179 following traumatic, 223
following degenerative IVD CM, and 160 following IL-1β stimulus. Gene set
enrichment analysis revealed different upregulated biological processes
depending on the environment the MSCs were exposed to. MSC secretome
following stimulation with healthy IVD CM showed upregulation of
extracellular structure organization, immune response, and metabolic
processes. Degenerative and traumatic IVD CM stimulation revealed common
activated processes, including anabolic/catabolic processes, extracellular
matrix organization and structure, resulting from upregulated growth
factors, enzymes, and enzyme inhibitors. After IL-1β stimulation, immune
modulatory and inflammatory processes were enriched. Interestingly, most
proinflammatory and immunomodulatory cytokines were undetectable by
immunoassay in the secretomes of MSCs incubated with healthy IVD CM. In
contrast, the concentration of several chemokines/cytokines like GM-CSF,
TNF-α, IL-12p70, IFN- γ, MCP-1, MIP-1β, VEGF, IL-13 and IL-6 was
significantly increased in the secretomes of IL-1β primed MSCs
(P < .05). In traumatic and degenerative IVD CM, a
similar trend was observed for IL-13, IL-8, and IL-6 which were higher than
the healthy group (P < .01). Discussion and
Conclusion: Stimulation of MSCs with IVD CM induced a more
complex MSC secretome, involving more diverse sets of upregulated biological
processes, compared to stimulation with IL-1β. Furthermore, the MSCs'
response to stimulation with IVD conditioned medium was dependent on the
IVD's pathological status. The MSC secretome seemed to match the primary
need of the IVD: homeostasis maintenance in the case of healthy IVDs, versus
immunomodulation, adjustment of extracellular matrix synthesis, degradation,
and (re)organization in the case of traumatic and degenerative IVDs. These
findings highlight the significance of MSC preconditioning in the
development of tailored and personalized secretome therapies.

## 1048

## A173: Mesenchymal Stem Cell-Seeded High-Density Collagen Gel for Annular
Repair: 16 weeks Results from in Vivo Sheep Models

Sertac Kirnaz

1

, Christoph Wipplinger

1

, Stephen Sloan

2

, Franziska Anna Schmidt

1

, Jacob Goldberg

1

, Branden Medary

1

, Fabian Sommer

1

, Lynn McGrath

1

, Lawrence Bonassar

3

, and Roger Härtl

1

1

Weill Cornell Medicine, Department of Neurological Surgery, New
York, USA

2

Cornell University, Meinig School of Biomedical Engineering/Sibley
School of Mechanical and Aerospace Engineering, College of Engineering,
New York, USA

3

Cornell University, Meinig School of Biomedical Engineering/Sibley
School of Mechanical and Aerospace Engineering, College of Engineering,
Ithaca, USA

Introduction: The objective of the current study was to assess
whether performing annular repair in a sheep model of annular injury using
high-density collagen (HDC) gel seeded with allogenic mesenchymal stem cells
(MSCs) yielded improved histological and radiographic benefits when compared
to collagen gel alone. Material and Methods: We performed an
anterolateral, retroperitoneal pre-psoas approach to access the IVDs L1-6 in
a total of 10 skeletally mature Finn sheep. IVDs were randomized into four
groups: 1) intact, 2) injured via 3x10mm box annulotomy and removal of 200
mg of NP, 3) injury and acellular HDC gel patch for AF repair, 4) injury and
MSC-seeded HDC gel patch for AF repair. At 16 weeks postoperatively, sheep
were sacrificed and underwent post-mortem 3T-MRI scans as well as gross
anatomical and histological evaluation. Disc height index (DHI) analysis and
modified Pfirrmann grading (PG) were performed on each segment using MR
images. Results: Intact control discs showed no degeneration
and had an average PG of 1/8 while injured, untreated discs had significant
degeneration with an average PG of 5/8. Discs receiving MSC-seeded HDC gel
patch for AF repair showed fewer signs of degeneration than the injury only
group and equivalent amounts of degeneration as the PG to the acellular HDC
gel receiving group. DHI confirmed the trends seen in the PG, where injured
discs lost 32% of the intact disc height, the acellular group lost 21% of
intact disc height, and the MSC-seeded HDC gel patch preserved 89% of the
intact disc height. Conclusion: PG and DHI results demonstrated
that HDC gel patch with/without MSCs were able to prevent disc degeneration
better than no treatment at all. MSC-seeded HDC gel group was better at
preserving DHI than the acellular group.

## 527

## A174: Ex Vivo Priming of Culture-Expanded Mesenchymal Stem Cells (MSCs)
with Bone Morphogenetic Protein-2 in a Lumbar Spinal Fusion Model: A
Comparative Study of Adipose-Derived and Bone Marrow-Derived MSCs

Alexander Perdomo-Pantoja

1

, Christina Holmes

2

, Ethan Cottrill

1

, Wataru Ishida

1

, Sheng-fu L. Lo

1

, and Timothy F. Witham

1

1

Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, Neurosurgery - Division
of Spine, Baltimore, USA

2

Florida A&M University-Florida State University College of
Engineering, Chemical and Biomedical Engineering, Tallahassee,
USA

Introduction:
In vivo studies have proved that culture-expanded
adipose-derived stem cells (ADSCs) enable spinal fusion, especially when
combined with bone morphogenetic protein-2 (BMP-2). However, clinical
delivery of rhBMP-2 often requires supraphysiological concentrations and has
been associated with complications. Therefore, the development of solutions
for having successful outcomes of rhBMP-2 without undesired side effects is
needed. It has previously reported that a short period of in vitro treatment
with BMP-2 prior to transplantation enhanced bone marrow-derived stem cells
(BMSC)-mediated bone regeneration in vivo in a calvarial
defect model. We hypothesized that this technique might allow spinal fusion
using a lower dose of rhBMP-2. The purposes of this study were to examine
whether a brief period of in vitro priming with rhBMP-2 can
enhance MSC-mediated fusion and to compare the response of adipose-derived
and bone marrow-derived cells in a rat model. Materials and
Methods: We isolated ADSC and BMSC from the inguinal fat pads and
the long bones, respectively, of syngeneic 6-8 weeks old Lewis rats and
cultured in vitro. When passage 1 (P1) ADSCs and BMSCs reached 80%
confluency, they were primed for 24 hours with 1 ng of rhBMP-2 (Medtronic).
After priming, 2x10^6 MSCs (P2) were seeded onto Vitoss (Stryker) bone graft
substitute scaffolds for subsequent transplantation. Posterolateral
intertransverse spinal fusion surgery at L4-L5 was performed on female Lewis
rats divided into 4 experimental groups: [1] Vitoss + rhBMP-2-Primed
BMSCsP2; [2] Vitoss + non-primed BMSCsP2; [3] Vitoss + rhBMP-2-Primed
ADSCsP2; and, [4] Vitoss + non-primed ADSCsP2. Fusion was assessed eight
weeks post-surgery via micro-computed tomography (microCT) imaging, manual
palpation, and histology, by two blinded researchers. Manual palpation
scoring was estimated as follows: 0 = non-fused; 1 = partial fusion, some
motion across operative joint; and, 2 = fused, no motion across the operated
joint. MicroCT images were used to measure fusion mass volume (mm^3) and
calculate CT fusion score (0 = non-fused; 1 = unilateral fusion; 2 =
bilateral fusion). Results: MicroCT imaging data indicate that
culture-expanded rhBMP-2-primed ADSCs and BMSCs displayed significantly
higher fusion mass volumes than non-primed ADSCsP2 and BMSCsP2, respectively
(29.94 mm^3 vs 25.56 mm^3, respectively, P = .04; and 23.8
mm^3 vs 17.79 mm^3, respectively, P = .06). However, fusion
mass volumes were not significantly different between primed ADSCsP2 and
BMSCsP2. CT fusion scores were not significantly different between primed
and non-primed groups. Primed ADSCsP2 also yielded higher manual palpation
scores than primed ADSCsP2 (1.9 vs 1.3, respectively, P =
.03). Conclusions: In our rat model, rhBMP-2-priming allowed an
increased fusion mass volume and manual palpation score among ADSCsP2
compare to non-priming. rhBMP-2 primed BMSCsP2 showed a trend to a higher
fusion mass volume compared to non-primed BMSCs. We confirmed our hypothesis
that MSC BMP-2-priming enhances spinal fusion in a rat model. Ongoing
histological studies will evaluate the characteristics and quality of the
new bone formed within the fusion masses.

## 342

## A175: An in Vitro Model of Discogenic Pain. Immunomodulatory Properties
of Adipose-Derived Mesenchymal Stem Cells

Marta Esteban Blanco

1

, Elsa Gonzalez Cubero

2

, Jose Garcia Cosamalón

2

, Manuel Fernandez

1

, Maria Elisa Lopez Gonzalez

2

, Maria Luisa Fernandez Gonzalez

2

, and Vega Villar Suárez

2

1

Hospital of Leon, León, Spain

2

University of León, León, Spain

Introduction: Regenerative medicine includes a lot of strategies
that comprehend the use of materials and cells generated de novo. The
secretome of ASCs (adipose-derived mesenchymal stem cells) released in the
medium of cell growth, also called conditioned medium (MC), is being
intensively investigated for its therapeutic potential. The main objective
was the evaluation of the immunomodulatory properties of the MC obtained
from ASCs in discogenic pain. Material and Methods: In this
study, it has been developed an in vitro model of
discogenic pain in human and rat. Tumor necrosis factor (TNF) was used to
induce an inflammatory environment. The ability of the MC to modulate the
expression of several pro-inflammatory cytokines and neurotrophins in
in vitro model of discogenic pain was analyzed.
Results: It was shown the capacity of TNF to induce an
inflammatory environment and how the MC is able to modulate the response,
showing its paracrine action, both in the proinflammatory genes analyzed and
in the neurotrophins that participate in the transmission and in the
maintenance of pain. Conclusion: We observed a paracrine action
of MC on inflamed cells, carrying out the immunomodulation of
pro-inflammatory cytokines and improving their therapeutic efficacy
producing an anti-inflammatory effect. These results have a fundamental
implication in the treatment of discogenic pain. For this reason, the MC has
a great immunomodulatory and neuroprotective capacity. In conclusion, the MC
obtained from ASCs presents very promising therapeutic measures for its use
in regenerative medicine.

## 532

## A176: Effect of Hypoxia Preconditionated Culture-Expanded Adipose-Derived
Mesenchymal Stromal Cells in a Posterolateral Lumbar Spinal Fusion
Model

Alexander Perdomo-Pantoja

1

, Christina Holmes

2

, Ethan Cottrill

1

, Wataru Ishida

1

, Sheng-fu L. Lo

1

, and Timothy F. Witham

1

1

Johns Hopkins University School Of Medicine, Neurosurgery - Division
of Spine, Baltimore, USA

2

Florida A&M University-Florida State University College of
Engineering, Chemical and Biomedical Engineering, Tallahassee,
USA

Introduction: Implantation of adipose-derived mesenchymal
stromal cells (ASCs) has become a promising strategy for bone regeneration
therapies and an attractive alternative to bone marrow-derived mesenchymal
stromal cells (BMSCs), particularly in elderly patients. Nevertheless,
limited cell survival after implantation due to the in vivo hypoxic
environment has been one of the main barriers of the effectiveness of this
approach. Hypoxia Inducible Factor-1α (HIF-1α) is a critical mediator of the
adaptive cell response to hypoxia and plays an essential role in
angiogenic-osteogenic coupling during bone regeneration.1
Dimethyloxaloylglycine (DMOG) treatment has shown to stabilize cellular
expression of HIF-1α in cells, as well as enhances osteogenic and angiogenic
capacity of MSCs.2 We aimed to demonstrate that hypoxia
preconditioning of culture-expanded ASCs before implantation prolongs
improve spinal fusion by therapeutically targeting both osteogenesis and
vascularization in a rat model. Materials and Methods: ASCs
were isolated from the inguinal fat pads of syngeneic 6-8 weeks old Lewis
rats and culture-expanded in vitro. When passage 1 (P1) ASCs reached
approximately 80% confluency they were preconditioned for 24 hours with 1 ng
of DMOG (Fisher Scientific). After preconditioning, 2 × 10^6 ASCs Passage 2
(P2) were seeded onto Vitoss (Stryker) bone graft substitute scaffolds for
subsequent transplantation. Posterolateral spinal fusion surgery at L4-L5
was performed on female Lewis rats divided into two experimental groups: [1]
Vitoss + DMOG-preconditioned ASCP2s; and, [2] Vitoss + non-preconditioned
ASCP2s. Fusion was assessed eight weeks post-surgery via manual palpation,
micro-computed tomography (µCT) imaging, and histology. Manual palpation
scoring was performed to evaluate the motion across the operated joint by
blinded researchers as follows: 0 = non-fused; 1 = partial fusion, some
motion across operative joint; and, 2 = fused, no motion across the operated
joint. µCT images were used to estimate fusion mass volume (mm^3) and
determine CT fusion score (0 = non-fused; 1 = unilateral fusion; 2 =
bilateral fusion). Histology was used to assess bone quality and
neovascularization within the fusion masses. Results:
Preliminary µCT imaging data suggest that DMOG-preconditioned ASCP2 group
yielded significantly higher fusion mass volumes than non-preconditioned
ASCP2 group (23.49 mm^3 vs 15.39 mm^3, respectively, P
=.001). DMOG-preconditioned ASCP2 group showed a trend towards
higher rates of µCT fusion and manual palpation scores compared to the
non-preconditioned ASCP2 group (1.16 vs 0.50, respectively, P
=.06; and 1.25 vs 0.66, respectively,
P>.05). Conclusions: In our rat
posterolateral fusion model, hypoxia preconditioned culture-expanded ASCs
exhibited significant increased fusion mass volumes compared to
non-preconditioned ASCs. In addition, µCT fusion scores and manual palpation
scores showed to be higher in the group pretreated with DMOG. Ongoing
histological studies are evaluating the characteristics, quality, and
vasculature of the new bone formed within the fusion masses.

## 950

## A177: Characterisation of Acute Peripheral Inflammatory Responses
Identifies Distinct Phenotypes of Circulating Monocytes Following Spinal
Cord Injury

Ryan Doig

1

, Sandra Jenkner

1

, Aleesha Searle

1

, Jillian Clark

2

, Brian Freeman

2

, and Stan Gronthos

3

1

South Australian Health and Medical Research Institute (SAHMRI),
Neil Sachse Centre for Spinal Cord Research, Adelaide,
Australia

2

Royal Adelaide Hospital, Spinal Services, Adelaide,
Australia

3

University of Adelaide, Adelaide Medical School, Adelaide,
Australia

Introduction: Spinal cord injury (SCI) elicits a cellular
inflammatory immune response to protect the host. This acute cellular
inflammatory has contrasting characterising: contributing to helpful
clearance and repair, but can also exacerbate CNS tissue damage. In addition
to resident inflammatory cells, it is well recognised that infiltrating
immune cells are active participants in the host response to injury and may
exacerbate or counter excess inflammation or promote tissue healing. The
next step was to realise that infiltrating inflammatory immune cells may
modulate the survival, distribution or differentiation of engrafted
pluripotent stem cells. It is important to try to understand these
peripheral immunomodulatory events, and the context in which they occur
because of the urgent need for viable therapeutics. The aims of this study
were: i) to examine the temporal profile of the peripheral blood mononuclear
cell (PBMC) response to acute SCI and ii) characterise phenotypic and
pathophysiological properties of peripheral immune cells. Material and
Methods: In brief, animals received a moderate- severe T10
contusion (200kDyne) injury. At 24 hours, 48 hours, 72 hours, 7, 14, and
28 days after surgery, PBMC were isolated from whole blood samples of Normal
(n = 6/group), Laminectomy only (Sham, n = 6/group)) and SCI animals (n =
6/group). PBMCs were isolated from whole blood samples for 9-colour flow
cytometry coupled with gated fluorescent activated cell sorting. Isolated
hematopoietic cells (CD45) were sorted into T lymphocytes (CD3), B Cells
(CD45R), NK Cells (CD161), and monocyte subsets (CD43Lo/CD11bHi and
CD43Hi/CD11bInt-Lo). Results: This study examined the temporal
profile of T lymphocytes, B cells, NK cells and monocyte subsets represented
in peripheral blood from 1-28 days post-injury. Counterintuitive to our
hypothesis, we did not detect a significant effect of time on the relative
proportion of B, NK cell or monocyte subsets. However, there appeared to be
a proportional shift in T lymphocyte subsets; with bi-phasic shifts between
the proportion of regulatory and cytotoxic T cells. Interestingly, we
identified early shifts in a third sub-population of immature
CD45+ monocytes; CD43int/CD11bLo/SSC-A cells during the first
48 hours post-injury with a decrease of the proportion of
CD43int/CD11bLo/SSC-A cells in SCI vs SHAM animals, and corresponding
increase in CD43Lo/CD11bHi and infiltrating immature M1 CD43Hi/CD11bInt-Lo
monocytes. Conclusion: This study characterised peripheral
blood monocyte subsets of differing granularity and cell-surface antigen
expression in the context acute SCI. Our data point towards the potential
for immune cell sub-sets of peripheral origin to participate in the CNS
inflammatory response, or modulate the fate of pluripotent stem cells in
vitro or in vivo. The findings provide a precedent for examining the
immunomodulatory effects of peripheral PBMC subsets on donor stem cells,
which may have important implications for regenerative medicine.

## 1281

## A178: What is the Mesenchymal Stem Cell Concentration in the Vertebral
Body Compared to the Iliac Crest in Patients Undergoing Posterior
Instrumentation?

Robin McManus

1

, Ciara Murphy

2

, Henry Turner

1

, and Patrick Kiely

1

1

Children's Health Ireland at Crumlin, Dublin, Ireland

2

Royal College of Surgeons in Ireland, Dublin, Ireland

Introduction: Spinal fusion is a procedure that is indicated in
the management of multiple spinal pathologies. Pseudoarthrosis is a
condition where fusion between two or more vertebrae has not been achieved
as demonstrated by the presence of intervertebral motion. Following lumbar
spine surgery there is up to a thirty five percent chance of the development
of pseudoarthrosis. Revision surgery may be required. In order to reduce the
chances of fusion failure, the spine is fused using tissue harvested from
the patient, a donor or synthetic graft. The iliac crest, (IC), serves as
the gold standard for bone graft and bone marrow harvesting, however it can
be associated with complications. The vertebral body, (VB), is known to be a
good source of bone marrow cells. During spinal procedures the VB is
routinely used for instrumentation either by an anterior or posterior
approach. The principle aim of this study is to review the literature to
determine can the VB serve as a suitable source of mesenchymal stem cells
(MSC’s) in patients who require spinal fusion. Methods: A
database search was conducted to identify relevant studies for inclusion.
Databases searched include Medline, Embase, CINAHL and The Cochrane Library.
Search terms were identified by breaking down the question. The only
limitation applied to the database search was inclusion of studies published
in the English language only. Preferred Reporting Items for Systematic
Reviews and Meta-Analyses was used to guide the review. Of the 1032 studies
identified following the database search, five of these studies were
included in this review paper. Quality appraisal of each of the included
studies was completed using the evidence based librarianship checklist.
Results: Four of the five included studies scored an
overall low validity score of <75%. One article did achieved overall high
validity by scoring >75%. However, all studies were included in this
review paper in an effort to provide an accurate representation of all of
the available literature. Two of five studies reported a higher
concentration of progenitor cells in the vertebral body compared to the
iliac crest. Two of five studies reported comparable concentrations of
progenitor cells in the vertebral body compared to the iliac crest. One
study reported a lower concentration of progenitor cells in the vertebral
body compared to the iliac crest. Conclusion: There is a
paucity of literature in this field and further studies need to be
conducted. Based on the included studies it can be concluded that the VB
serves as a suitable reservoir for MSC harvest.

## 606

## A179: Exploring the Core matrisome Profile of Fetal Intervertebral Discs
in Search of Molecular Targets of Therapeutic Potential

Shanmuganathan Rajasekaran

1

, Chitraa Tangavel

2

, Niek Djuric

3

, Dilip Chand Raja Soundararajan

1

, Sharon Miracle Nayagam

2

, Monica Steffi Matchado

2

, and Sri Vijay Anand KS

1

1

Ganga Medical Centre and Hospitals Pvt Ltd, Spine Surgery,
Coimbatore, India

2

Ganga Research Centre, Biotechnology, Coimbatore, India

3

Leiden University Medical Centre, Neurosurgery, Leiden, The
Netherlands

Introduction: Intervertebral disc degeneration is accompanied by
a loss of Extra-cellular matrix (ECM) content due to an imbalance in
anabolic and catabolic pathways. Identifying ECM proteins with anabolic
and/or regenerative potential could be the key to developing regenerative
therapies. Since human fetal discs grow and develop very rapidly, studying
these discs may provide valuable insights on proteins with regenerative
potential. The primary aim of this study was to explore fetal intervertebral
disc and identify molecules with regenerative potential. Materials and
Methods: LC-MS/MC analysis of 9 fetal and 7 healthy adult (age
22-79) nucleus pulposus (NP) was performed to profile the core matrisome.
Protein expression was compared between the two groups and a pathway
analysis was performed with all proteins that were uniquely expressed or
significantly upregulated in fetus, or >2 fold upregulated if the protein
was expressed in <3 samples fetus samples. Relevant pathways for ECM
assembly were selected and the respective proteins were discussed.
Results: Of the 64-expressed core matrisomal proteins in
fetus, 22 were unique in > 1 sample,7 were significantly higher expressed
compared to healthy adult NP’s, and 4 proteins >2 fold higher. Pathway
analysis with these 33 proteins revealed that 20 proteins were integrated in
ECM assembly and growth pathways: Fibromodulin, Biglycan, Heparan Sulfate
Proteoglycan 2, Chondroitin Sulfate Proteoglycan 4 were involved in
Glycosaminoglycan metabolism. In addition, Fibromodulin, Biglycan,
procollagen C-endopeptidase enhancer (PCOLCE) and Collagen- type 1a1, 1a2,
6a1,6a3,11a1,11a2, 12a1, 14a1 and 15a1 were involved in Collagen fibril
formation, biosynthesis and organization. Regarding the growth pathways:
Thrombospondin 1,2,3 and 4, Tenascin C and Collagen- type 1a1, 1a2,
6a1,6a3,11a1,11a2 were involved in ‘PIK3-Akt signaling’ and Matrilin-3 and
tenascin C in ‘IGF transport and uptake’. Conclusion: The
consistency of the human fetal NP differs greatly from that of a healthy
adult. The Core-matrisome of human fetal discs is of great potential for
developing future regenerative therapies.

## 1874

## A180: Analysis of 3D-Printed Titanium Porous Scaffolds Using Mesenchymal
Stem Cells

Jessica Dorilio

1

, Nicole Utah

1

, Christina Dowe

1

, Antonio Brecevich

1

, Fedan Avrumova

1

, Frank Cammisa

1

, and Celeste Abjornson

1

1

Hospital for Special Surgery, New York, USA

Background: With a reported implant failure rate of 35% in
anterior cervical discectomy and fusion (ACDF) procedures, implant design
has become more precise. Failed fusion is caused by a number of factors, one
of which is the inability to osseointegrate with the surrounding bone
tissue. The cellular response to the environment created by an implant is
critical when determining short and long-term outcomes. Titanium has been
the gold standard biomaterial in implant design because of its
hydrophilicity. This fosters an environment that allows for successful
cellular attachment and expression of protein factors that drive osteoblast
differentiation, such as BMP-2 and osteocalcin. When coupled with implant
features, such as porosity, the long-term favorability of titanium is
enhanced. Porosity can alleviate the biomechanical drawbacks of titanium,
which is its high elastic modulus. A porous structure allows for bone
in-growth, on-growth, and through-growth, as well as, vascularization,
promoting successful osseointegration. The purpose of the study was to
evaluate the mesenchymal stem cell response based on varying levels of
porosity. This includes cellular attachment, viability, and protein
expression. Materials & Methods: Scaffolds were comprised
of a 3D-printed titanium alloy of the FLX lattice in various porosities and
sizes, 40, 50, 60, 70, 80% (Centinel Spine, West Chester, PA). The hMSCs
were seeded onto replicas of each sample at a density of 25,000 cells/mL in
growth media, and were cultured for 3, 7, and 28 days. Using a cytotoxicity
assay with a double stain mechanism, live cells were stained. For each
sample, images were capturerd on the florescence microscope of the section
with the highest live:dead ratio. Cellular attachment, as well as cellular
extensions such as filipodia, was visualized on scanning electron microscopy
(SEM). Lastly, to assess protein expression driving osteoblast
differentiation, individual ELISA assays and a multiplex assay were
utilized. Results: As exhibited through scanning electron
microscopy, all samples displayed similar stem cell attachment. Fluorescent
microscopy showed that viability showed preference to both longer cultures
(28 days), and the 70% porous sample, which showed greater live:dead ratio
among samples. Total protein concentration at the later time points were
greatest after a culture on the 60% porous sample. However, all samples
displayed a higher concentration of osteogenic factors BMP-2 and osteocalcin
than the interleukins.. Conclusion: Given the many factors that
can diminish the success rate of spinal fusion, it is beneficial to mitigate
the risk through the optimization of implant design. Microporosity is a
feature that can enhance the biocompatibility of titanium implants. As
nanotexturing was kept constant between samples, stem cell attachment was
similar. However, cellular viability demonstrated that increasingly longer
cultures produce the environment sufficient for proliferation and survival
of cells. Additionally, the microenvironment promoted by the 70% porous
sample enhanced viability. Overall, all samples showed increased expression
of factors that encourage osteoblast differentiation and decreased
expression of inflammatory cytokines that promote the formation of fibrous
tissue, potentially indicating a lower risk of implant failure. Our study
has shown that titanium surfaces are better optimized at 60-70% porous size
(300-700 micron).

## OP21: Cervical Trauma and Spinal Cord Injury

## 518

## A181: Early Versus Late Surgical Decompression for Acute Spinal Cord
Injury: A Meta-Analysis of Individual Patient Data

Jetan Badhiwala

1

, Jefferson Wilson

1

, Christopher Witiw

1

, James Harrop

2

, Alexander Vaccaro

3

, Bizhan Aarabi

4

, Robert Grossman

5

, Fred Geisler

6

,and Michael Fehlings

1

1

University of Toronto, Division of Neurosurgery, Department of
Surgery, Toronto, Canada

2

Thomas Jefferson University, Department of Neurological Surgery,
Philadelphia, USA

3

Thomas Jefferson University, Rothman Orthopaedic Institute,
Philadelphia, Canada

4

University of Maryland School of Medicine, Department of
Neurosurgery, Baltimore, USA

5
Houston Methodist Hospital, Department of Neurosurgery,
Houston, USA, 
6
Independent Consultant, Chicago, USA
Background: Decompressive surgery for acute traumatic spinal
cord injury (SCI) involves the mechanical removal of injured tissue (e.g.,
bone, disc) exerting pressure on the spinal cord. The influence of the
timing of surgical decompression for acute SCI remains unclear and there is
substantial variability in current clinical practice. Materials and
Methods: Patients who underwent decompressive surgery for acute
SCI were identified from four independent prospective, multi-center data
sources (NACTN SCI Registry; STASCIS; Sygen Trial; NASCIS III). Patients
were stratified into early (< 24 hrs) and late (≥ 24 hrs) decompression
groups. Neurological outcomes were assessed by American Spinal Injury
Association (ASIA) examination. The primary endpoint was change in total
motor score at 1 year. Secondary endpoints included ASIA Impairment Scale
(AIS) grade and change in upper extremity motor, lower extremity motor,
light touch, and pin prick scores at 1 year. One-stage meta-analyses were
performed by hierarchical mixed-effects regression adjusting for baseline
score, age, injury mechanism, AIS grade, level of injury, and steroids.
Effect sizes were summarized by mean difference (MD) for sensorimotor scores
and common odds ratio (cOR) for AIS grade, along with corresponding 95%
confidence intervals (CIs). As a secondary analysis, Δtotal motor score was
regressed against time to surgical decompression (hours) as a continuous
variable using a restricted cubic spline and adjusting for the same
covariates. Results: The study cohort consisted of 1,548
patients. Mean age was 39.1 years. Patients who underwent early surgical
decompression (N = 528) experienced greater recovery than
the late surgery group (N = 1,020) at 1 year for total
motor score (MD 4.0, 95% CI 1.7-6.3, P = .001), light touch
score (MD 4.3, 95% CI 1.6-7.0, P = .002), and pin prick
score (MD 4.0, 95% CI 1.5-6.6, P = .002). There was a shift
toward better AIS grades, indicating less severe impairment, at 1 year in
favor of early decompression (cOR 1.48, 95% CI 1.16-1.89, P
= .002). In patients with cervical SCI, early decompressive surgery resulted
in disproportionate motor score improvement in the upper (MD 2.2,
P < 0.001) over lower limbs (MD 1.3,
P = .115). When time to surgical decompression was
modeled as a continuous variable, there was a steep decline in Δtotal motor
score with increasing time over the first 24 to 36 hours after injury;
thereafter, recovery encountered a ‘floor’. This non-linear relationship was
statistically significant (P <.001).
Conclusion: Surgical decompression within 24 hours of acute
SCI improves sensorimotor recovery. The first 24 to 36 hours after injury
represent a critical window during which earlier decompressive surgery may
augment neurological outcomes. Thereafter, the benefit of timeliness may be
lost likely because of irreversible tissue injury. These findings have
important implications for guideline recommendations, clinical practice, and
healthcare policy, which may need to be revised to support and facilitate
the expeditious delivery of surgical care for acute SCI.

## 615

## A182: The Subaxial Cervical AO Spine Injury Score

Jose Canseco

1

, Gregory Schroeder

1

, Taylor Paziuk

1

, Brian Karamian

1

, Frank Kandziora

2

, Emiliano Vialle

3

, Cumhur Oner

4

, Marcel Dvorak

5

, Klaus Schnake

6

, Jens Chapman

7

, Lorin Michael Benneker

8

, Shanmuganathan Rajasekaran

9

, AO Spine Cervical Classification Validation Group

10

, Christopher Kepler

1

, and Alexander Vaccaro

1

1

Rothman Orthopaedic institute, Philadelphia, USA

2

3 Center for Spine Surgery and Neurotraumatology, BG Unfallklinik
Frankfurt am Main, Frankfurt, Germany

3

Department of Orthopaedics, Catholic University of Parana, Curitiba,
Brazil

4

University Medical Center, Utrecht, Utrecht, The
Netherlands

5

Department of Orthopaedics, Vancouver General Hospital, Vancouver,
Canada

6

Center for Spinal Surgery, Malteser Waldkrankenhaus St. Marien,
Erlangen, Germany

7

Swedish Neuroscience Institute, Swedish Medical Center, Seattle,
USA

8

Spine Service, Orthopaedic Department, Sonnenhofspital, Bern,
Switzerland

9

Department of Orthopaedics, Trauma and Spine Surgery, Ganga
Hospital, Coimbatore, India

10

AO Foundation, Davos, Switzerland

Introduction: The purpose of an effective classification system
is to provide distinct and clinically relevant morphological descriptions of
injury patterns in a manner that helps guide treatment. The AO Spine
Subaxial Cervical Spine Injury Classification System (SCICS) is a
compressive classification system has demonstrated adequate inter- and
intra-observer reliability in classifying subaxial cervical spine injuries.
Establishing a scoring system based on the relative injury severity
associated with the classification’s subgroups is the next step in
establishing treatment guidelines. By generating a scoring system based on a
consensus of relative injury severity, the purpose of this study is to
develop an injury score for the AO Spine Subaxial Cervical Spine Injury
Classification System. Methods: A survey was sent to the
members of the AO Spine Cervical Classification Validation Group composed of
spine surgeons from six different world regions (North America, South
America, Europe, Africa, Asia, and the Middle East). For each of the
subgroups of the AO Spine SCICS, respondents graded each variable of the
classification system for severity on a scale from 0 to 100. Each
classification subgroup was ranked hierarchically based on relative injury
severity, and with limited input from the AO Spine Trauma Knowledge Forum,
the Subaxial Cervical AO Spine Injury Score was developed.
Results: An A0 injury was assigned an injury score of 0, A1
a score of 1, and A2 a score of 2. Given the significant increase in
severity, A3 was given a score of 4. Based on equal severity assessment, A4
and B1 were both assigned a score of 5. B2 and B3 injuries were assigned a
score of 6. Unstable C-type injuries were given a score of 7. Stable F1
injuries were assigned a score of 2, with a 2-point increase for F2
injuries. Likewise, F3 injuries received a score of 5, whereas more unstable
F4 injuries a score of 7. Neurologic status severity rating scores increased
stepwise, with scores of 0 for N0, 1 for N1, and 2 for N2. Consistent with
the Thoracolumbar AO Spine Injury Score, N3 (incomplete) and N4 (complete)
injuries were given an score of 4. Finally, case-specific modifiers M1 (PLC
injury) received a score of 1, while M2 (critical disc herniation) and M3
(spine stiffening disease) received a score of 4. Conclusions:
The Subaxial Cervical AO Spine Injury Score is an easy-to-use metric that
can help develop a surgical algorithm to supplement the AO Spine Subaxial
Cervical Spine Injury Classification System.

## 1233

## A183: Spinal Cord Signal Change on Magnetic Resonance Imaging Predicts
Worse Clinical in-and Outpatient Outcomes in Patients with Spinal Cord
Injury: A Prospective Multicenter Study in 459 patients

Thorsten Jentzsch

1 2

, Muhammad Akbar

1

, Brett Rocos

1

, Fan Jiang

1

, Jetan H. Badhiwala

1

, David Cadotte

3

, Jefferson Wilson

4

, Robert Grossman

5

, Bizhan Aarabi

6

, James Harrop

7

, and Michael Fehlings

1

1

Toronto Western Hospital, University Health Network, University of
Zurich, Toronto, Canada

2

Balgrist University Hospital, University of Zurich, Zurich,
Switzerland

3

Hotchkiss Brain Institute, University of Calgary, Calgary,
Canada

4

St. Michael’s Hospital, University Health Network; University of
Toronto, Toronto, Canada

5

Houston Methodist Hospital, Houston, USA

6

University of Maryland Medical Center and R Adams Cowley Shock
Trauma Center, Baltimore, Canada

7

Thomas Jefferson University, Philadelphia, Canada

Introduction: Spinal cord injury (SCI) is a devastating event
and prognostic factors for clinical outcome serve an important role in
patient management and education. There is a lack of evidence regarding
magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) and clinical outcome in the setting of SCI.
This study investigated if MRI signal changes predict the clinical course of
disease in patients with SCI. Materials and methods: This is an
ancillary to the prospective North American Clinical Trials Network (NACTN)
registry. Patients were enrolled from 2005-2017. MRI within 72 hours of
injury and a minimum follow-up of one year were available for 459 patients.
Patients with American Spinal Injury Association impairment scale (AIS) E
were excluded. Patients were grouped into those with (n = 354) vs without (n
= 105) cord signal change. The primary outcome was any adverse event.
Secondary outcomes were the AIS at baseline and final follow-up, length of
hospital stay, and mortality. The chi-squared, Wilcoxon rank sum tests and a
logistic regression model (adjusting for age and gender) were used.
Results: Patients with intrinsic cord signal change were
younger (46.0 (interquartile range (IQR) 29.0 vs 50.0 (IQR 20.5) years,
P = .039). There were no significant differences in the
other baseline variables, gender, body mass index, comorbidities, and injury
location. There were more complications in patients with spinal cord signal
change (230 (65.0%) vs 47 (44.8%), P < .001). These
differences remained significant in a logistic regression model (odds ratio
(OR) = 2.01 (95% confidence interval (CI) 1.29-3.32), P =
.003). Patients were less likely to be in the AIS D category with SC signal
change at baseline (OR = .45 (95% CI .28-.73), P = .001)
and final follow-up (OR = 36 (95% CI .16 - .82), P = .015).
The length of stay was longer in patients with SC signal change (13.0 (IQR
17.0) vs 11.0 (IQR 14.0), P = .049). There was no
difference between groups in mortality (11 (3.2%) vs 4 (3.9%),
P = .767). Conclusions: MRI signal change
predicts the clinical course of disease in patients with SCI. If present,
patients are more likely to have an inferior baseline clinical presentation
as well as in- and outpatient clinical outcome. Therefore, patients with SC
signal change may benefit from earlier and more aggressive treatment
strategies and need to be educated about an unfavorable prognosis.
Keywords: Spinal cord injuries, magnetic resonance imaging,
MRI, tomography, neurology, paralysis, walking, outcome

## Acknowledgements
The NACTN SCI Registry is supported by the US ARMY MEDICAL RESEARCH
ACQUISITION ACTIVITY (USAMRAA) under Contract No. W81XWH-16-C-0031 and
earlier Department of Defense Awards.

## 1555

## A184: How Does Surgical Approach Affect Outcomes Following Cervical
Trauma in the Elderly?

Catherine Carlile

1

, Jacob Schultz

2

, Andrew Rees

2

, Amir Abtahi

1

, and Byron Stephens

1

1

Vanderbilt University Medical Center, Nashville, USA

2

Vanderbilt University School of Medicine, Nashville, USA

Introduction: Both anterior - anterior cervical discectomy and
fusion (ACDF) and posterior - posterior cervical fusion (PCF)] approaches
are commonly used to treat traumatic injuries of the cervical spine. Some
evidence exists to suggest that ACDF may be superior in younger patients
with studies demonstrating shorter hospital stays and fewer complications.
However, there is a paucity of evidence comparing outcomes between these
surgical approaches in elderly patients with cervical spine injuries. With a
rapidly aging population in the USA and the corresponding increase in spine
trauma in this population, this topic is of increasing importance. Outcome
studies comparing ACDF to PCF in the elderly are important to inform
surgical management of elderly patients with spinal injury. This study aims
to determine if there are outcome differences of ACDF versus PCF in elderly
patients - particularly with regard to complication rates and hospital
admission length. Methods: Patient demographics, comorbidities,
and long-term outcomes were collected into a deidentified institutional
spine trauma database. Elderly patients (65+) were age-matched and divided
into ACDF and PCF groups. There were no statistically significant difference
in the ISS score, injury pattern, or rate of concurrent polytrauma, or
comorbidities between these groups (P > .05). Surgical
and medical morbidity variables that were evaluated include surgical site
and hospital acquired infections, DVT, PE, stroke, pneumonia, and myocardial
infarction. A combination of Pearson and t-tests were used
to assess correlation between approach and preexisting comorbidities as well
as correlations between approach and outcomes (estimated blood loss during
surgery, hospital stay length, death during admission, and time to death).
Results: A total of 40 patients, 19 anterior and 21
posterior, were included with an average age of 69.8 and 76.6, respectively.
There was a significant difference in average age between these cohorts
(P < .001). Of intraoperative variables, there was a
significantly greater average blood loss (P <. 01) in
the PCF group. However, there was no correlation between approach and length
of stay (P = .97), medical (P = .58) or
surgical (P = .30) complication, in- hospital mortality
(P = .52), or death within one year (P
= .79). Conclusion: In this cohort, there was no significant
difference in morbidity or mortality between ACDF and PCF. Estimated blood
loss was found to be significantly lower with patients who underwent ACDF,
but this did not translate to a difference in complications or hospital
stay. Therefore, our data suggests that ACDF remains a safe option in the
appropriate elderly patient with fractures amenable to anterior fixation.
However, the benefits of ACDF over PCF may not be as pronounced as in
younger populations. Future study, including larger multi-center studies
focusing on patient reported outcomes may help elucidate additional
differences between the two approaches in this population.

## 700

## A185: Subaxial Spine Arthrodesis in Patients With Spine Fractures and
Facet Dislocations: Is Magnetic Resonance Imaging Required to Determine the
Optimal Surgical Approach?

Guilherme Finger

1

, Andre Martins de Lima Cecchini

1

, Ericson Sfreddo

1

, Felipe Martins de Lima Cecchini

1

, Otavio Garcia Martins

2

, Tiago Paczko Bozko Cecchini

3

, Alisson R. Teles

4

, and Asdrubal Falavigna

5

1

Cristo Redentor Hospital, Neurosurgery Spine, Porto Alegre,
Brazil

2

Federal University of Pelotas,, Pelotas, Brazil

3

Brazilian Lutheran University, Canoas, Brazil

4

McGill University, McGill Scoliosis and Spine Group, Montreal,
Canada

5

Caxias do Sul University, Neurosurgery Spine, Caxias do Sul,
Brazil

Introduction: The medical literature suggests that facet
dislocations (FDs) must be managed surgically, even in the absence of spinal
cord injury. In fact, there is no standard guideline for managing FD cases
and whether magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) should be utilized for
optimizing treatment planning. Methods: Fifteen cases of FD
were evaluated twice by nine spine surgeons. The first assessment included
computed tomography (CT) images only. Secondarily, original CT studies were
supplemented with MRI. In each case, the participating surgeon had to
acknowledge whether and what surgical treatment they would offer. Data for
the two responses from all nine surgeons were then compared.
Results: Based on CT images alone, there was no consensus
regarding treatment choices in 13 cases, and a trend toward consensus in
just two instances (κ = .01). When MRI scans were added to CT studies, among
the 15 cases evaluated, 10 cases demonstrated a trend toward consensus, and
in 1 case consensus was achieved. The Kappa interpersonal agreement based on
MRI was .13. The analysis of the answers by each contributor in each case
demonstrated that in 58.51% of cases the surgical treatment options were
changed when analyzed by CT + MRI, in comparison to the options indicated
based on CT alone. Conclusion: It appears that obtaining an MRI
in addition to a CT before spine surgery for FD is essential mandatory, as
it changed the treatment option in nearly 60% of cases.

## 623

## A186: Establishing the Injury Severity of Subaxial Cervical Spine Trauma:
Validating the Hierarchical Nature of the AO Spine Subaxial Cervical Spine
Injury Classification System

Gregory Schroeder

1

, Jose Canseco

1

, Parthik Patel

1

, Srikanth Divi

1

, Brian Karamian

1

, Frank Kandziora

2

, Emiliano Vialle

3

, Cumhur Oner

4

, Klaus Schnake

5

, Marcel Dvorak

6

, Jens Chapman

7

, Lorin Michael Benneker

8

, Shanmuganathan Rajasekaran

9

, AO Spine Cervical Classification Validation Group

10

, Christopher Kepler

1

, and Alexander Vaccaro

1

1

Rothman Orthopaedic institute, Philadelphia, USA

2

Center for Spine Surgery and Neurotraumatology, BG Unfallklinik
Frankfurt am Main, Frankfurt, Germany

3

Cajuru Hospital, Catholic University of Parana, Curitiba,
Brazil

4

14 University Medical Center, Utrecht, The Netherlands

5

Center for Spinal Surgery, Malteser Waldkrankenhaus St. Marien,
Erlangen, Germany

6

Department of Orthopaedics, Vancouver General Hospital, Vancouver,
Canada

7

Swedish Neuroscience Institute, Swedish Medical Center, Seattle,
USA

8

Spine Service, Orthopaedic Department, Sonnenhofspital, Bern,
Switzerland

9

Department of Orthopaedics, Trauma and Spine Surgery, Ganga
Hospital, Coimbatore, India

10

AO Foundation, Davos, Switzerland

Introduction: Classification systems should be simple and
reproducible, yet be able to transmit comprehensive information including
diagnosis and prognosis to help guide clinical management. Previous subaxial
cervical spine injury classifications have been limited by subpar
interobserver reliability and clinical applicability. In an attempt to
create a universally validated scheme with prognostic value, AO Spine
established a subaxial cervical spine injury classification involving four
elements: (1) injury morphology, (2) facet injury involvement, (3)
neurologic status, and (4) case-specific modifiers. The purpose of this
study is to validate the AO Spine Subaxial Cervical Spine Injury
Classification System by examining the perceived injury severity by surgeons
around the world with various practice experience. Methods: A
survey was sent to 272 AO Spine members across six different geographic
regions (North America, South America, Europe, Africa, Asia, and the Middle
East) with various years of practice experience. Respondents graded the
severity of each variable of the classification system on a scale from zero
(low severity) to 100 (high severity). The primary outcomewas to assess
differences in perceived injury severity for each injury type over
geographic regions and level of practice experience. Results: A
total of 189 responses were received. Overall, the classification system
exhibited a hierarchical progression in subtype injury severity scores. Only
three subtypes showed a significant difference in injury severity score
among geographic regions: F3 (floating lateral mass fracture,
P = .04), N3 (incomplete spinal cord injury,
P = .03), and M2 (critical disk herniation,
P = .04). When stratified by surgeon experience,
pairwise comparison showed only 2 morphological subtypes, B1 (bony posterior
tension band injury, P = .02) and F2 (unstable facet
fracture, P = .03), and one neurologic subtype (N3,
P = .02) exhibited a significant difference in injury
severity score. Conclusions: The AO Spine Subaxial Cervical
Spine Injury Classification System has shown to be reliable and suitable for
patient management. The study shows this classification is substantially
generalizable by geographic region and surgeon experience; and provides a
consistent method of communication among physicians while covering the
majority of subaxial cervical spine traumatic injuries.

## 47

## A187: Odontoid Fracture Extending into the Pars Interarticularis: A
Distinct Clinico-Pathological Injury Pattern?

Salvatore Russo

1

1

Imperial College NHS - St Mary's Hospital, Dept of Neurosurgery -
Spine division, London, United Kingdom

Purpose: Fractures of the axis can traverse the body of the
vertebra below the odontoid process and extend rostrally into the pars
interarticularis. The posterior arch of C2, on the side of the fractured
isthmus, is often displaced cranially with a contralateral anterior
subluxation of the atlantoaxial joint. We investigated clinical and
radiological outcomes of this injury pattern specifically addressing the
issue of atlantoaxial stability and its impact on consolidation. These
aspects have not been sufficiently examined in previous studies. To overcome
the surgical challenges related to the morphology of these fractures, we
also describe a novel surgical strategy performing an osteotomy of the pars
interarticularis and a distraction arthrodesis of the atlantoaxial joints.
Methods: We conducted a single centre cohort study of 114
fractures of the axis treated between June 2016 and June 2018 and reviewed
the clinical history of 13 consecutive patients with odontoid fracture
extending into the pars. Osseous union was defined as osseous bridging
across the fracture line on CT while the criteria for a stable fibrous
non-union were an Atlanto-Dens Interval (ADI) <3 mm,
Posterior-Atlanto-Dens-Interval (PADI) >14 mm and lack of symptomatic
motion at the fracture site. Atlantoaxial instability was defined as greater
then 50% subluxation across the C1-C2 joint. Return to pre-injury
performance status was consider a satisfactory clinical outcome. We used the
Barnard exact test for 2 x 2 contingency tables to evaluate statistical
correlation for atlantoaxial instability and consolidation.
Results: The mean age of the patient population presenting
with an odontoid fracture with extension into the pars was 77.2 years (95%
CI 70.5-83.9). The mean follow up time was 15 months (95% CI 12-18). 69% had
an associated atlantoaxial instability (P-value < .0005)
and 54% were displaced. 46% reported an hyperextension injury. The mean time
interval from the injury to the hospital presentation was 13.6 days (95% CI
4-23.2). Cervical orthosis treatment was associated with a high non-union
rate (70%) (P-value .04) although it did not affect the
overall clinical outcome. Fractures causing progressive myelopathy were
successfully treated with atlantoaxial distraction arthrodesis.
Conclusions: Odontoid fractures extending into the pars
interarticularis is a marker of increased injury severity. These fractures
are common in the over 70 s and can present after a significant time
interval from the initial injury. Hyperextension could be the main injury
vector of this fractures. This injury is associated with atlantoaxial
instability and non-union when treated with cervical orthosis. The C1-C2
segment can be surgically stabilised with atlantoaxial distraction
arthrodesis achieved through an osteotomy of the pars interarticularis. We
suggest to consider pars fracture with atlantoaxial subluxation as a risk
factor for instability and non-union in odontoid failure.

## 1642

## A188: Fusion Failure Analysis in Anterior Cannulated Screw Fixation of
Odontoid Fracture of C2 II Type

Tahir Tamaev

1

, Vadim Manukovsky

1

, Valerii Serikov

1

, and Irina Afanaseva

1

1

Saint-Petersburg I.I. Dzhanelidze Research Institute of Emergency
Medicine, Sankt-Petersburg, Russian Federation

Introduction: Anterior fusion with cannulated screw for odontoid
fractures of C2 is both minimally invasive and functional technique.
Material and Methods: The results of treatment of 40 (20
men and women each) somatically healthy non-smoking patients with anterior
cannulated screw fixation using the F. Magerl technique are presented.
Patients were divided into 2 age groups 18-44 years old and 45-59 years old.
The average age was 36,7 years in the first group and 52.4 years in the
second. After surgery, all patients were prescribed to wear a cervical
orthosis (Philadelphia type) until signs of consolidation appear. The fusion
status was evaluated after 2, 4, 6 months from fixation. Result of treatment
was considered unsuccessful, if within 6 months from the moment of injury
there was no consolidation or signs of instability of implant appeared.
Results: In the studied groups there were no statistically
significant differences by gender and age. Signs of consolidation after 2
months were observed in 10% (n = 2) of patients in group 1 and in 10% (n =
2) of patients in group 2. Implant instability at this time was observed
only in group 1 in 10% (n = 2) of patients. Within 4 months, fusion occurred
in 70% (n = 14) of patients in group 1 and 80% (n = 16) of patients in group
2. After 6 months, fusion occurred in another 5% (n = 1) of patients in
group 1 and 5% (n = 1) in group 2. Implant instability up to 6 months
developed in another 5% (n = 1) of patients in every group. Over 6 months,
fusion occurred in 36 patients, which amounted to 90%. Analysis of the
negative results of 10% (n = 4) of cases revealed that common to all of
these patients was a violation of the doctor’s prescriptions (total or
partial refusal of wearing an orthosis, driving a car, returning to work).
Conclusion: Results obtained indicate that anterior
cannulated screw fixation of odontoid fractures of C2 II type is a reliable
and functional method of treatment, in compliance immobilization until signs
of consolidation appear. Patients at least 2 months after the surgery must
carefully observe the orthopedic regimen, in the form of restriction of
rotational movements and wearing a cervical orthosis. Anterior cannulated
screw fixation of odontoid fractures of C2 II type leads to a good
orthopedic result in most of the operated patients.

## 1797

## A189: The Impact of HBOT in Spinal Cord Injury

Renate Krassnig

1

, Smolle-Juettner Frayja-Maria

2

, Berzins Uldis

3

, Hohenberger Gloria

3

, and Wildburger Renate

1

1

AUVA Rehabilitation Clinik Tobelbad, Tobelbad, Austria

2

University Hosptial of Surgery, Thoracic Surgery, Graz,
Austria

3

University Hospital of Orthopaedics and Trauma, Graz,
Austria

Introduction: Spinal cord injury (SCI) represents a central
nervous system complication as a result of severe trauma to the spinal
column. It often causes neurological disorders of the extremities and the
trunk below the injured spinal segments. Due to the increase of traffic
accidents and aerial work types, the incidence of SCIs remains at a high
level including 130.000 to 500.000 cases per year. SCI represents a
significant cause of morbidity and mortality and an immense socioeconomic
burden affecting mainly young patients. Material and Methods:
All consecutive patients which presented with spinal cord injury (SCI) -
edema at the cervical spinal cord - and were treated with or without
hyperbaric oxygenation therapy (HBOT) at a level-I university trauma center
and which finished their primary rehabilitation at a cooperating
rehabilitation clinic between January 1, 2006 and December 31, 2019 were
included in the study. The time line was chosen on the base of data
accessibility. From this data cohort, two subgroups were built. One involved
those patients who had undergone HBOT and the second group included patients
who had not received HBOT. All data were collected prospectively in a
dedicated trauma database. Specific patient characteristics (age at time of
trauma, gender) as well as details on trauma (trauma characteristics, height
of SCI, type of surgical intervention) were evaluated retrospectively.
Results: Sixteen patients (17.0%; 16/94) presented with
either isolated spinal edema or combination of edema and fracture. All of
these formations were located at the cervical spine and all of the patients
primarily presented with tetraplegia. Ten of the patients (62.5%; 10/16)
were treated with, and six (37.5%; 6/16) without HBOT. In the group without
HBOT, 20% of all patients (2/10) showed ASIA Score improvements, whereas in
the sample that received HBOT, 83.3% (5/6) had improved values at the end of
primary rehabilitation (P = ≤. 001).
Conclusion: HBOT has a statistically significant impact on
recoverage after edema of the cervical spinal cord.

## OP22: Deformity-Thoracolumbar (Adult)

## 1433

## A190: Compensation for Standing Posture by Whole-Body Sagittal Alignment
in Relation to Health-Related Quality of Life

Kazuhiro Hasegawa

1

, Masashi Okamoto

2

, Shun Hatsushikano

3

, Kei Watanabe

4

, Masayuki Ohashi

5

, Jean-Marc Vital

6

, and Jean Dubousset

7

1

Niigata Spine Surgery Center, 2-5-22 Nishi-machi, Konan-ku, Niigata
City, Japan

2

Niigata Spine Surgery Center, 2-5-22 Nishi-machi, Konan-ku, Niigata
City, Japan

3

Niigata Spine Surgery Center, 2-5--22 Nishi-machi, Konan-ku, Niigata
City, Japan

4

Niigata University Medical and Dental General Hospital, Dept. of
Orthop. Surg.,, Niigata, Japan

5

Niigata University Medical and Dental General Hospital, Niigata,
Japan

6
Spinal Unit, University Hospital, Bordeaux, France, 
7
Académie Nationale de Médecine, Paris, France
Introduction: The aim of this study is to test the hypothesis
that three grades of sagittal compensation for standing posture (normal,
compensated, and decompensated) correlate with health-related quality of
life measurements (HRQOL). Material and Methods: A total of 50
healthy volunteers (normal), 100 patients with single-level lumbar
degenerative spondylolisthesis (LDS), and 70 patients with adult to elderly
spinal deformity (deformity) were enrolled. Following collection of
demographic data and HRQOL measured by the Scoliosis Research Society-22r
(SRS-22r), radiological measurement by the biplanar slot-scanning full body
stereoradiography (EOS) system was performed simultaneously with force-plate
measurements to obtain whole body sagittal alignment parameters. These
parameters included the offset between the centre of the acoustic meatus and
the gravity line (CAM-GL), SVA), T1 pelvic angle (TPA), McGregor slope, C2-7
lordosis, thoracic kyphosis (TK), lumbar lordosis (LL), pelvic incidence
(PI), PI-LL, sacral slope (SS), pelvic tilt (PT), and knee flexion. Whole
spine MRI examination was also performed. Cluster analysis of the SRS-22r
scores in the pooled data was performed to classify the subjects into three
groups according to the HRQOL, and alignment parameters were then compared
among the three cluster groups. Results: On the basis of
cluster analysis of the SRS-22r subscores, the pooled subjects were divided
into three HRQOL groups as follows: almost normal (mean 4.24 (SD . 32)),
mildly disabled (mean 3.32 (SD . 24)), and severely disabled (mean 2.31 (SD
. 35)). Except for CAM-GL, all the alignment parameters differed
significantly among the cluster groups. The threshold values of key
alignment parameters for severe disability were TPA > 30°, C2-7 lordosis
> 13°, PI-LL > 30°, PT > 28°, and knee flexion > 8°. Lumbar
spinal stenosis was found to be associated with the symptom severity.
Conclusion: This study provides evidence that the three
grades of sagittal compensation in whole body alignment correlate with HRQOL
scores. The compensation grades depend on the clinical diagnosis, whole body
sagittal alignment, and lumbar spinal stenosis. The threshold values of key
alignment parameters may be an indication for treatment.

## 970

## A191: Is There a Heritability Impact on Spinal Sagittal Alignment? A Twin
Study in the United Kingdom

Khai Lam

1

and Carlos De La Torre

1

1

London Bridge Hospital, Suite 105, St Olaf's House, London,
UK

Introduction and Purpose: Sagittal balance of the spine is a
well documented and resounding concept in the understanding and treatment of
spinal pathologies. Pelvic incidence (PI) tends to increase linearly with
adolescent growing age and becomes a constant anatomical parameter in
adulthood. Lumbar lordosis (LL) and thoracic kyphosis (TK) is strongly
correlated to the PI. Based on that, Roussouly et al. proposed four types
classification for normal sagittal balance depending on the PI, sacral slope
and spinal shape. This classification helps in determining the high local
stress zones in the spine, vis a vis, the lower lumbar curvature or flat
back (low PI) the higher the impact on the disks; the more the lumbar spine
is curved or hyper-lordosis (high PI) the more the contact force on the
posterior elements (facets in particular). Currently, there are no studies
to determine if genetics may act in the causation of a specific sagittal
profile, i.e., Roussouly’s classification. The purpose of this study is to
study the effects of heritability on measurements in sagittal balance in
older adult females based on the classification proposed by Roussouly.
Materials and Methods: This is a retrospective
observational study on a healthy adult twin population of monozygotic and
dizygotic twins obtained from the UK Twins register at King’s College
London. The inclusion criteria were twin participants without spine or hip
disease or previous spine surgery at the time of enrolment. Each patient
underwent simultaneous standing antero-posterior and left lateral full spine
radiographs that included the pelvis. The following spinal and pelvic
radiographic parameters were then measured: Pelvic parameters consisted of
PI to assess sacropelvic morphology, PT and SS. And based on that we
classified each individual to a specific spinal shape category based on
Roussouly Types 1 to 4. Results: A total of 288 female twins
from the general population were included. The average age was 63.2 years.
23% (66) of the individuals were classified as Roussouly Type 1, 33.3% (96)
as Type 2, 33.3% (96) as Type 3, and 10.4% (30) as Type 4. Of the 144 pairs
of twins, only 50 (34.7%) pairs of twins shared the same Roussouly type of
which Type 1 represented 26%, Type 2 represented 38%, Type 3 represented
28%, and Type 4 represented 8%. The remaining pairs of twins had a different
Roussouly types between each twin. Conclusion: This study found
no strong correlation between heritability and sagittal alignment,
regardless of the zygosity of the twins. Only 34.7% of the pairs had the
same sagittal spinal phenotype based on the Roussouly’s classification for
normal spine sagittal balance.

## 1054

## A192: Optimal Intraoperative Fluid Management in Adult Spinal Deformity
Correction Surgery

Meghan Cerpa

1

, Chris Lai

1

, Scott Zuckerman

1

, Joseph Lombardi

1

, Zeeshan Sardar

1

, and Lawrence Lenke

1

1

Columbia University Medical Center, New York, USA

Hypothesis: Intraoperative fluid management using liberal
amounts of crystalloids and reduced colloids is safe and results in optimal
postoperative outcomes in adult spinal deformity correction surgery.
Design: Observational cohort. Introduction:
Intraop fluid management is a vital component in adult spinal deformity
(ASD) surgery that is not standardized nor has consensus on the ideal
management. Increased intraop use of crystalloids and colloids is correlated
with an increased risk for developing postoperative complications,
especially pulmonary complications. This study aims to assess and describe
the fluid management protocol for adult deformity surgery at a single-center
with minimal pulmonary complications, high intraop extubation rate, and no
intraop coagulopathies. Methods: 50 consecutive ASD who
underwent corrective surgery at a single institution were included.
Preoperative medical records, intraoperative anesthesia and surgical
records, and postoperative complications were compiled. Descriptive
statistics including means, percentages, and ratios were calculated.
Results: The average age was 44 ( ± 17.49) years, 74%
(37/50) were female, and 56% (28/50) were revision cases. The average number
of levels instrumented was 13 ( ± 4), average number of levels fused was 11
( ± 5), and an average length of surgery 7.18 ( ± 2.08) hrs. 18% (9/50) of
pts had a 3-column osteotomy (PSO or VCR) and the average estimated blood
loss was 1316 ( ± 635) ccs. Only 50% of pts received an intraop packed red
blood cell transfusion and there were no pts that received platelet or fresh
frozen plasma transfusions. Average intraop crystalloids given was 4650 ( ±
1280) mL while the average colloids given was 1556 ( ± 744) mL. The ratio of
intraop crystalloids: colloids administered was 2.99:1. 96% (48/50) were
extubated intraoperatively. 9 pts had postop pulmonary complications of
either pulmonary edema or pleural effusion with an average length of stay of
6.04( ± 2.82) days. Conclusion: Minimizing blood loss and
administering a 3:1 ratio of crystalloids:colloids is an optimal intraop
fluid management protocol that results in no intraop coagulopathies, a 96%
intraop extubation rate, and minimal posto pulmonary complications in ASD
surgery.

## 228

## A193: Sagittal Balance Study in Professional Brazilian Football
Players

Paulo Daniel Sousa Santa Cruz

1

, Michel Kanas

1

, Nelson Astur

2

, Delio E. Martins

3

, and Marcelo Wajchenberg

1

1

Federal University of Sao Paulo, Ortopedia, Sao Paulo,
Brazil

2

Santa Casa de Sao Paulo, Ortopedia, Sao Paulo, Brazil

3

Universidade Anhembi Morumbi, Sao Paulo, Brazil

Introduction: High incidence of postural disorders, mainly in
young athletes leads to question the influence of different sport activities
in posture and sagittal balance. The study aims to compare spinopelvic
angles and sagittal balance of Brazilian professional football players with
non-athlete population, classify their lordosis type according Roussouly,
and measure the prevalence spondylolysis and spondylolisthesis.
Material and Methods: A cross-sectional study was carried
out, using standardized panoramic spine radiographs, in lateral view, of 110
Brazilian professional football players, aged between 18 and 40 years, who
participated in pre-season evaluation at FIFA Reference Center. Using the
Surgimap® software, spinopelvic angles were measured, together with Sagittal
Vertical Axis (SVA) and Lumbar Lordosis (LL). The mean values were compared
to Brazilian literature data. Lordosis type was classified according
Roussouly, and cases with spondylolysis and spondylolisthesis were
identified. Results: From de evaluated radiographs, 104 had
appropriate measurement quality. Pelvic Tilt (PT) and SVA were statistically
lower in professional players when compared to non-athlete population
(P = .013 and P = .037). Furthermore,
Sacral Slope (SS) tent to be higher in professional football players (P =
.054). Most athletes presented type 3 lordosis (54.8%) followed by type 4
(26.9%). Eight athletes (7.7%) presented spondylolysis, from those, seven
(6.7%) also had spondylolisthesis. Conclusion: When compared to
non-athlete population, significant differences were found in Brazilian
professional football players, referring to PT and SVA. Roussouly’s lordosis
type 3 was the most common, and the prevalence of spondylolysis and
spondylolisthesis was higher than in general population; but lower than
found in the literature for professional football players.

## 757

## A194: The Posterior Cranial Vertical Line (PCVL): A Novel Global Sagittal
Alignment Parameter that Correlates to Proximal Junctional Kyphosis
Following Adult Spinal Deformity Surgery

Paul Park

1

, Cole Morrissette

1

, Nathan Lee

1

, Meghan Cerpa

1

, Ronald A. Lehman

1

, and Lawrence Lenke

1

1

Columbia University Medical Center, New York, USA

Introduction: Restoring sagittal alignment has been associated
with improved functional status and patient outcomes. While the gold
standard for sagittal alignment is the C7-sagittal vertical axis (SVA), this
is in fact only a regional measure of sagittal alignment, excluding the
position of the skull and lower extremities. We propose a novel radiographic
marker of global sagittal alignment, the posterior cranial vertical line
(PCVL). The PCVL is a practical, easy-to-implement vertical line drawn from
the posterior-most aspect of the occiput down to the floor; its relationship
to the thoracic apex, pelvis, and feet are reviewed in this study and its
relevance to proximal junctional kyphosis (PJK) is analyzed in adult spinal
deformity patients. Methods: Full-length radiographs of 72
adult spinal deformity patients were retrospectively reviewed undergoing
posterior spinal fusion (minimum 6 levels) and a minimum radiographic
follow-up of 1 year. Average age was 52 years and average follow-up was 1.7
years. The distance of the PCVL to the thoracic apex, posterosuperior S1
endplate, and tibial plafonds were measured and patients were separated into
3 grades according to a previous study in a healthy volunteer population.
Radiographic PJK was defined as a sagittal proximal junctional angle (PJA)
from the upper instrumented vertebra (UIV) to UIV+2≥10° and/or a change of
≥10° compared to preoperatively. ANOVA, chisquare, logistic regression, and
ad-hoc statistical analyses were performed. Results: Of 72
patients included in the study, 47 were preoperatively categorized as PCVL
grade 1, 19 as grade 2, and 6 as grade 3. At final follow-up, preoperative
PCVL grade was significantly correlated with increased rates of PJK
(P = .0027), and a larger PJA (P =
.0001). The preoperative PCVL grade differed in 27.8% (20/72)
patients when compared to the immediate postoperative PCVL grade. As such,
the immediate postop PCVL grade had a significant correlation with
radiographic PJK at final follow-up (P = .0097) as well.
When the PCVL fell anterior to the cephalad-most extent of the
instrumentation on immediate postoperative radiographs, patients were
significantly more likely to have radiographic PJK at final follow-up
(P = .038), as well as an increased PJA (P
= .035). PCVL anterior to cephalad instrumentation at final
follow-up was significantly correlated with radiographic PJK (P
= .0097) and increased PJA (P = .078); if the
PCVL was anterior to cephalad instrumentation at final follow-up, patients
were 4.7 (95%CI: 1.4-16.2) times more likely to have radiographic PJK.
Discussion and Conclusion: The PCVL is a novel radiographic
marker for global sagittal balance in adult spinal deformity patients, in
which the preoperative and immediate postoperative PCVL grades are
significantly correlated with postoperative rates of radiographic PJK. The
PCVL is helpful postoperatively to monitor patients over time, and may
highlight patients that are high-risk for developing PJK. A PCVL anterior to
the cephalad-most instrumentation is also significantly associated with
increased PJA and rates of PJK. The PCVL is a practical, easy-to-implement
radiographic marker that provides additional information on sagittal balance
that may be used in conjunction with various other factors in determining an
appropriate surgical plan in patients that may be more at risk for
development of PJK.

## 394

## A195: Multilevel thoracic spine fusion complications for the treatment of
idiopathic and neuromuscular scoliosis

Alexander Ballatori

1

, Shane Shahrestani

1

, Xiao Chen

1

, Andy Ton

1

, Jeffrey C. Wang

1

, and Zorica Buser

1

1

Keck School of Medicine, University of Southern California,
Department of Orthopaedic Surgery, Los Angeles, USA

Introduction: Surgical stabilization for both idiopathic
scoliosis (IS) and neuromuscular scoliosis (NMS) is critical to prevent
further deformity, chronic pain, restrictive lung disease, as well as many
other complications. As technology and surgical technique advances in the
field of medicine, one would hope to see improvement in outcomes following
scoliosis corrective surgeries. The purpose of this study is to analyze
outcomes of IS and NMS patients in the recent years. Material and
Methods: We conducted a retrospective cohort study using data
from the 2016-2017 National Readmission Database (NRD). Using ICD-10 codes,
we identified 1,367 patients under the age of 25 that received multilevel
thoracic spinal fusion for diagnosed IS (n = 547) and NMS (n = 820).
Mann-Whitney U testing was performed to compare costs, LOS, and 30- and
90-day readmission rates. All statistical analyses were conducted in R.
Results: The mean age of our IS group was 14.89 ± 2.99
years old and was 74.4% female. The mean age of our NMS group was 13.09 ±
3.16 and was 51.4% female. We found that multilevel thoracic fusion for NMS
was significantly more costly than IS (NMS: $80,735.99 ± 42,097.63, IS:
$63,201.46 ± 40,820.19, P < .0001). The NMS group also
had longer LOS compared to the IS group following the procedure (NMS: 8.23 ±
9.75, IS: 4.63 ± 2.99, P < .0001). Finally, the NMS
group had higher rates of 30- (NMS: 16.0%, IS: 1.34%, P
< .0001) and 90-day (NMS: 16.0%, IS: 1.53%, P
< .0001) readmissions. Conclusion: Our data
showed that NMS patients have higher costs and complications following their
surgical correction for scoliosis compared to IS patients. These rates of
readmissions are comparable for NMS and lower for IS with respect to studies
conducted in the early 2000s, and highlights the need for continued
development in the surgical correction of NMS patients.

## 896

## A196: A New Intradiscal 3-Column Osteotomie Technique in Adult Spinal
Deformity Using Expandable and Non-Expandable Cages

Sven Frieler

1 2 3 4

, Alexander von Glinski

1 2 3

, Basem Ishak

1 3

, Clifford Pierre

1 3

, Ryan Goodmanson

3

, Rod Oskouian

3

, and Jens Chapman

3

1

Seattle Science Foundation, Seattle, Washington, USA, Swedish
Medical Center, Seattle, Seattle, USA

2

BG University Hospital Bergmannsheil, Ruhr University Bochum,
Department of Orthopaedics and Trauma Surgery, Bochum, Germany

3

Swedish Medical Center, Swedish Neuroscience Institute, Seattle,
USA

4

Swedish Hospital, Seattle, Hansjörg Wyss Hip and Pelvic Center,
Seattle, USA

Introduction: Thoracolumbar deformity remains a challenge in
spine surgery. Several types of spine osteotomy techniques have been
described to maintain sagittal alignment, differing in the invasiveness and
degree of possible deformity correction. Intradiscal osteotomy (IDO) is a
new and less invasive technique, which can be used in sagittal spinal
deformity correction and may be especially beneficial in the lower lumbar
region. This retrospective cohort study evaluates the degree of focal and
global lordotic changes and emphasized the complications rates as well as
cage subsidence achieved with an IDO comparing both static and expandable
interbody devices. Methods: A single institutional database was
retrospectively reviewed for all patients who underwent IDO with expandable
or non-expandable cages in spinal instrumentation. Inclusion criteria were
fusion with a minimum of ≥5 motion segments, thoracolumbar and lumbar adult
deformity and a follow-up ≥ 6 months. Spinal IDO includes resection of the
posterior portions of the surrounding endplates of target disc level
including posterior facetectomies, laminaes and spinous processes.
Furthermore, an interbody spacer device is placed with posterior
instrumentation which allows for lordotic deformity correction. The
demographic and surgical data collected includes age, gender, body mass
index (BMI), comorbidities, prior surgeries and fused levels. Besides
changes in segmental and global lordosis, primary outcome parameters were
blood loss and subsidence. Secondary outcome parameters were the presence or
absence of intra- and postoperative complications as well as revision
surgery. Results: The IDO was performed at 40 levels in total
with an average of 2 IDO per case in 20 patients (8 male) with a mean age of
68.5 (range 50-80, SD 8.11). In 11 cases 19 IDO with expandable cages (eIDO)
were conducted, while in 9 cases only static cages were used (21 sIDO). The
average number of levels fused in the eIDO group was 7.19 (SD 4.0) and a
mean blood loss of 1050 ml (SD 898,89) compared to 7.2 levels (SD 1.8) and a
mean blood loss of 1283,33ml (SD 440,88) in the sIDO group with no
statistical difference. The lumbar lordosis was significantly improved in
both groups (eIDO 15° SD 6.8, sIDO 14.9° SD 5.9). The total subsidence rate
was 5.0%, while there was no subsidence in the eIDO cohort and two cases in
sIDO (9.5%). We encountered overall 6 complications (30.0%) in 5 patients.
Two intraoperative complications (dura tear, instrumentation misplacement)
within the eIDO cohort and 2 intraoperative complications (dura tear,
instrumentation misplacement) in the sIDO group as well as 2 post discharge
complication (hardware failure) in both cohorts. Conclusion:
Intradiscal osteotomy (IDO) may be a safe and effective intervention for
correction of sagittal imbalance. Due to less blood loss and the relatively
low complication rate, it might be especially beneficial in elderly
patients. Neither the posterior endplate osteotomy, allowing to close the
posterior margin as close as possible, is associated with higher subsidence
rates nor the use of expandable cages.

## 949

## A197: Variation Patterns of Cervical Alignment in Ankylosing
Spondylitis-Related Thracolumbar Kyphosis Following Pedicle Subtraction
Osteotomy in Sitting Position: An Eos-Based Investigation

Bangping Qian

1

, Shi-zhou Zhao

1

, Ji-chen Huang

1

, Mu Qiao

1

, Bin Wang

1

, and Yong Qiu

1

1

Nanjing University Medical School, Nanjing, China

Introduction: Both unchanged upper cervical lordosis combined
with decreased lower cervical lordosis and decreased upper cervical lordosis
combined with decreased lower cervical lordosis have been reported to occur
after the correction surgery adult spinal deformity. However, cervical
alignment variations following the correction surgery in ankylosing
spondylitis (AS) patients have not been investigated. The current study was
aimed to investigate the cervical alignment variations following the
correction surgery in AS patients with thoracolumbar kyphosis.
Materials and Methods: AS patients who underwent pedicle
subtraction osteotomy (PSO) for thoracolumbar kyphosis from June 2016 to
June 2019 with a minimum of 1-year follow-up were reviewed. Patients were
grouped according to the presence (the Ossified group) and absence (the
non-Ossified group) of total ossification of anterior longitudinal ligament
(ALL) in the lower cervical spine. Radiographic parameters were measured on
lateral sitting EOS images including thoracolumbar, craniocervical and
global radiographic parameters. Results: Thirty-two patients
(27 males and 5 females) with a mean follow-up of 1.5 years were identified.
There were 21 patients in the non-Ossified group and 11 patients in the
Ossified group. After PSO, both groups showed a decrease in OC7
(P < .001, both). In the non-Ossified group, C2C7
decreased significantly (P < .001) while the OC2 angle
remained unchanged (P = .570). In the Ossified group, the
OC2 decreased significantly (P < .001) while C2C7
remained unchanged (P = .311). In addition, the change in
OC2 was correlated with the osteotomy angle in the Ossified group
(R = .776, P = .005).
Conclusions: The variation patterns of cervical alignment
following correction surgery for AS-related thoracolumbar kyphosis were
different based on the patients with / without total ossification of ALL in
the lower cervical spine. When planning PSO for patients in the Ossified
group, restoration of the physiological upper cervical lordosis angle could
be achieved by adjusting osteotomy angle.

## 420

## A198: The Minimally Invasive Interbody Selection Algorithm for Spinal
Deformity

Praveen Mummaneni

1

, Ibrahim Hussain

2

, Christopher Shaffrey

3

, Robert Eastlack

4

, Gregory Mundis

4

, Juan Uribe

5

, Richard Fessler

6

, Paul Park

7

, Leslie Robinson

8

, Joshua Rivera

9

, Dean Chou

1

, Adam Kanter

10

, David Okonkwo

10

, Pierce Nunley

11

, Michael Wang

2

, Frank La Marca

12

, Khoi Than

3

, and Kai-Ming Fu

13

1

University of California San Francisco, San Francisco, USA

2

University of Miami, Miami, USA

3

Duke University, Durham, USA

4

Scripps Clinic, San Diego, USA

5

Barrow Neurological Institute, Phoenix, USA

6

Rush University, Chicago, USA

7

University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, USA

8

Enloe Neurosurgery and Spine, Chico, USA

9

University of California, Berkeley, USA

10

University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, USA

11

Spine Institute of Louisiana, Shreveport, USA

12

Henry Ford Health System, Detroit, USA

13

Weill Cornell Medical Center, New York, USA

Introduction: Minimally invasive surgery (MIS) for spinal
deformity use interbody techniques for correction, indirect decompression,
and arthrodesis. Selection criteria for choosing a particular interbody
approach is lacking. We created the minimally invasive interbody selection
algorithm (MIISA) to provide a framework for rational decision making in MIS
deformity surgery. Methods: A retrospective dataset of
circumferential minimally invasive surgery (cMIS) for adult spinal deformity
(ASD) collected over a five-year period was analyzed by level in the lumbar
spine to identify preferences and evaluate segmental lordosis outcomes. This
data was used to inform a Delphi session of MIS deformity surgeons from
which the algorithm was created. The algorithm lead to one of four interbody
approaches: anterior lumbar interbody fusion (ALIF), anterior column release
(ACR), lateral lumbar interbody fusion (LLIF), and transforaminal interbody
fusion (TLIF). Preoperative and 2-year postoperative radiographic parameters
and clinical outcomes were compared. Results: 11 surgeons
completed 100 cMIS for ASD with 338 interbody devices that had minimum
2-year follow-up. The type of interbody approach used at each level from
L1-S1 was recorded. The MIISA was then created with substantial agreement.
The surgeons generally preferred LLIF for L1-L2 (91.2%), L2-L3 (85.2%), and
L3-L4 (80.7%). ACR was most commonly performed at L3-L4 (8.4%) and L2-L3
(6.2%). At L4-L5, LLIF (69.5%), TLIF (15.7), and ALIF (9.8%) were most
commonly utilized. TLIF and ALIF were the most selected approaches at L5-S1
(61.4% and 38.6%, respectively). Segmental lordosis at each level varied
based upon approach with greater increases reported using ALIF, especially
at L4-5 (9.2 degrees) and L5-S1 (5.3 degrees). Substantial increase in
lordosis was achieved with ACR at L2-L3 (10.9 degrees) and L3-L4 (10.4
degrees). Lateral interbody arthrodesis without the use of an ACR did not
generally result in significant lordosis restoration. There were
statistically significant improvements in PI-LL mismatch, coronal Cobb
angle, and ODI at 2-year follow-up. Conclusions: The use of the
MIISA provides consistent guidance for surgeons who plan to perform MIS
deformity surgery. For L1-L4, the surgeons preferred lateral approaches to
TLIF and reserved ACR for patients who needed the greatest increase in
segmental lordosis. For L4-L5, the surgeons’ order of preference was LLIF,
TLIF, and ALIF, however TLIF failed to demonstrate any significant lordosis
restoration. At L5-S1 the surgeon team typically preferred an ALIF when
segmental lordosis was desired and preferred a TLIF if preoperative
segmental lordosis was adequate.

## OP23: Cervical Myelopathy

## 630

## A199: Multi-Level Cervical Myelopathy is Associated with Cervical Spinal
Deformity

Sarthak Mohanty

1

, Sachin Gupta

1

, David Casper

1

, and Comron Saifi

1

1

University of Pennsylvania Health System, Department of Orthopaedic
Surgery, The Spine Center at Pennsylvania Hospital, Philadelphia,
USA

Introduction: Understanding changes in sagittal curvature of the
cervical spine is crucial in differentiating physiologic and diseased
states.Changes in curvature occur during aging and are often asymptomatic.
Therefore, discerning the natural progression of the cervical curvature
parameters to distinguish changes associated with clinical presentations
from those that are asymptomatic is imperative. This study compared baseline
and post-operative differences in cervical alignment of patients who
underwent cervical fusion to correct multi-level cervical myelopathy
(constructs terminating either at C7 or spanning the cervico-thoracic
junction (CTJ)) to those of non-surgical, age matched controls.
Methods: A single center, retrospective analysis of 52
patients undergoing posterior cervical fusion (PCF) between 2017 and 2018,
with 12-month postoperative visits, cervical spine x-rays, and patient
reported outcomes was performed. Of these, 22 patients’ fusions terminated
at C7, while 30 patients’ fusions crossed the CTJ. A control group
comprising of fifty-two age-matched controls with cervical radiographs, no
symptoms of myelopathy or radiculopathy, were also analyzed. Pre- and
post-operative radiographs were analyzed for cervical lordosis, cervical SVA
(cSVA), and T1 slope. Modified Japanese Orthopedic Association (mJOA)
scores, which graded functional impairment, were calculated for each
subject. A Pearson chi-square test was used to compare incidence of
neurological defecits. Differences in radiological parameters were assessed
using one-way ANOVAs and post-hoc Tukey's t-tests. Kruskal-Wallis (KW)
nonparametric analysis of variance with post-hoc Dunn’s tests were used for
mJOA scores. Results: Pre-operatively, patients undergoing
fusion showed significant differences in cervical alignment by T1S (21.27 vs
28.43, P < .0001), C2-C7 lordosis (11.58 vs 25.96,
P < .0001), and cSVA (36.08 vs 24.93, P
< .0001) when compared to non-surgical controls. Despite
significant correction post-operatively, patients undergoing fusion remained
less lordotic than controls by T1S (25.61 vs 28.43, P <
.0001) and C2-C7 lordosis (17.69 vs 25.96, P < .0001).
Within the fusion cohort, patients whose fusion constructs spanned the CTJ
demonstrated more severe pre-op malalignment than those in the C7 cohort by
T1 slope (14.33 vs 21.27, P < .0001), C2-C7 lordosis
(9.03 vs 13.07, P < .0001), and cSVA (9.03 vs 13.07,
P < .0001). Compared to C7 patients, CTJ patients
had more pronounced alignment corrections by T1 slope (28.43 vs 23.26,
P < .0001) and C2-C7 lordosis (20.74 vs 15.16),
although differences in the mJOA motor and sensory scores showed no
significant differences between the CTJ and C7 cohorts at pre- and post-op
timepoints. Conclusion: Patients undergoing posterior cervical
spinal fusion and decompression for symptomatic cervical myelopathy have a
significant cervical malalignment based on T1 slope, cervical lordosis, and
cSVA when compared to physiologic, age-matched controls who did not have
symptoms of myelopathy. Within symptomatic patients who underwent PCF,
extension of the fusion construct across the CTJ resulted in more pronounced
corrections of cervical alignment by T1 slope and C2-C7 lordosis when
compared to patients whose fusion constructs terminated at C7. Taken
together,in cases of elective posterior cervical laminectomy and fusion,
fusing across the CTJ may better achieve physiologic cervical alignment and
should be evaluated against the trade-offs of increased surgical time,
estimated blood loss, and the rates of wound dehiscence reported in
literature.

## 1087

## A200: Frailty is a Better Predictor than Age of Mortality and
Perioperative Complications After Surgery for Degenerative Cervical
Myelopathy: An Analysis of 41,369 Patients from the NSQIP Database
2010-2018

Jamie Wilson

1 2

, Jetan Badhiwala

2

, Ali Moghaddamjou

2

, Albert Yee

2

, Jefferson Wilson

2

, and Michael Fehlings

2

1

University of Nebraska medical center, Neurosurgery, Omaha,
USA

2

University of Toronto spine program, Toronto Western Hospital,
Toronto, Canada

Introduction: Degenerative Cervical Myelopathy (DCM) is the
leading cause of adult spinal cord dysfunction and surgery is typically the
accepted treatment. DCM is frequently diagnosed in the elderly and this can
present management challenges as older age is associated with increased risk
of perioperative adverse events. Frailty may be a more accurate predictor of
medical risk than age, therefore we hypothesized that frailty would be a
better indicator of surgical risk in DCM than advanced age and that this
could guide clinical management. The objective of the current study was to
model the effects of frailty and age on the risk of perioperative adverse
events for surgical DCM patients in order to produce an accurate predictive
tool suitable for clinical use. Material and Methods: The NSQIP
inpatient sample database records from 2010-2018 were interrogated for adult
patients who underwent surgery with a diagnosis of DCM based on ICD9/ICD 10
codes (721.1, 722.71, M47.12, M50*). MFI11, MFI5, Charlson Co-Morbidity
Index (CCI) and the American Society of Anesthesiologists (ASA) scores were
calculated using previously published conventions matching variables within
the NSQIP database volume. Outcomes of Mortality, major complication,
readmission <30 days, reoperation <30 days and length of stay were
calculated for each patient and compared initially with univariate analysis.
Multivariable modelling of age and frailty with a base model (type of
surgical approach, number of operated levels and gender) was performed, with
receiver operating characteristic area under the curve analysis to define
discriminative ability of each measure. Results: 41,369
patients were included, mean age 56.6 (56.5-56.7), 46% were female. Anterior
was the most common approach (80%), with 3% combined anterior/posterior. On
univariate analysis, age and MFI5/MFI11 were significantly correlated with
mortality, major complication, unplanned readmission, reoperation within 30
days, length of hospital stay and discharge destination other than home
(P < .05 for each), whereas CCI and ASA scores
showed an inferior correlation. Increasing frailty for both MFI5/MFI11
demonstrated increasing risk for each outcome, and the effect size for
frailty (“Frail” & “Severely Frail” patients) was higher compared to
age. The multivariable regression model confirms that the MFI5 score is a
stronger predictor of all outcome variables compared to age as a continuous
variable (P < .05). The discriminative value of the Base
model + MFI5 was excellent (.85), and superior to all other measures of
frailty. Conclusion: In the one of the largest studies of
perioperative complications in DCM, Frailty indices appear to be stronger
predictors of adverse events compared to age alone. This has important
implications in the pre-operative assessment and counselling of patients
undergoing surgery for DCM. The multivariable model presented has the
potential for widespread clinical use for perioperative risk
stratification.

## 832

## A201: Clinical Impact of OPLL Progression After Cervical
Laminoplasty

Kawaguchi Yoshiharu

1

, Taketoshi Yasuda

1

, Shoji Seki

1

, Kayo Suzuki

1

, Kenta Watanabe

1

, Yasuhito Yahara

1

, Hiroto Makino

1

, and Katsuhiko Kamei

1

1

University of Toyama, Toyama, Japan

Introduction: Laminoplasty is a standard operation for the
treatment of cervical myelopathy caused by cervical ossification of the
posterior longitudinal ligament (OPLL), as cervical OPLL often causes
multi-level spinal cord compression. It has been reported that the long-term
surgical outcome of laminoplasty is favorable in most of the patients with
cervical OPLL.1 However, as OPLL is a progressive
disease,2 neurological deterioration is frequently
encountered due to the progression of the ossified lesion. However, the
incidence and characteristics of neurological deterioration due to OPLL
progression after the first posterior surgery have not yet been precisely
elucidated. The purpose of this study was 2 fold: 1) To analyze the
incidence of patients who required an additional second surgery for the
neurological deterioration due to OPLL progression, and 2) To clarify the
clinical characteristics and surgical outcome of the patients.
Material and Methods: This study was carried out in a
single institute with a long-term follow-up. From 1981 to October 2015, 201
patients with myelopathy due to cervical OPLL underwent laminoplasty. One
hundred sixty-seven patients who could be followed for more than 2 years
were included. The neurological finding was graded by JOA score. If the
patients had both neurological deterioration with clinical symptoms and OPLL
progression, we judged as the neurological deterioration was caused by the
OPLL progression. We retrospectively examined the incidence of the patients
who required an additional second surgery. We also evaluated the clinical
characteristics and the surgical outcome after second operation. In the
patients who required a second surgery due to OPLL progression (the second
surgery group), the period from laminoplasty to second surgery was checked.
The symptoms requiring the second surgery were evaluated. Clinical
characteristics, including sex and age at cervical laminoplasty, were
compared with the patients who did not have a second surgery during
follow-up (the control group). Results: Nine patients (5.4%)
out of 167 patients had the second surgery by neurological deterioration due
to OPLL progression. The age in the second surgery group was younger than
that in the control. The mixed type of OPLL in the second surgery group was
more than that in the control group. The symptoms of neurological
deterioration were progressive cervical or thoracic myelopathy in 6 patients
and radiculopathy in 3. The neurological recovery was achieved in 6 patients
after the second surgery, however, 3 still had the neurological deficit. The
patients who showed poor recovery had clear T2 high intensity by MR image in
the spinal cord. Conclusion: Young age at laminoplasty and
mixed type of OPLL were risk factors for OPLL progression. Revision surgery
was effective, but if the patients had clear T2 high intensity in the spinal
cord, the recovery was poor. Thus, revision surgery should be considered
before irreversible neural damage occurs.

## 721

## A202: Efficacy of Surgical Decompression in Patients with Degenerative
Cervical Myelopathy: Results of the Canadian Prospective Multi-Center
Study

Syed Mohammed Karim

1 2

, Bradley Jacobs

3

, Michael Johnson

4

, Chris Bailey

5

, Sean Christie

6

, Jerome Paquet

7

, Andrew Nataraj

8

, David Cadotte

3

, Jefferson Wilson

9

, Neil Manson

10

, Hamilton Hall

11

, Ken Thomas

3

, Raja Rampersaud

12

, Greg McIntosh

13

, Charles Fisher

2

, and Nicolas Dea

2

1

Mayo Clinic, Department of Orthopedic Surgery, Rochester,
USA

2

Vancouver General Hospital, Combined Neurosurgical and Orthopaedic
Spine Program, Vancouver, Canada

3

University of Calgary, Department of Clinical Neurosciences,
Division of Neurosurgery, Department of Radiology, Calgary,
Canada

4

University of Manitoba, Department of Surgery, Section of
Orthopaedics and Neurosurgery, Winnipeg, Canada

5

Western University, Department of Surgery, London, Canada

6

Dalhousie University, Division of Neurosurgery, Halifax,
Canada

7

Centre Hospitalier Universitaire de Quebec, Department of
Orthopaedics, Quebec, Canada

8

University of Alberta, Division of Neurosurgery, Faculty of Medicine
and Dentistry, Edmonton, Canada

9

University of Toronto, Division of Neurosurgery, Department of
Surgery, Toronto, Canada

10

Canada East Spine Centre, Saint John Regional Hospital, Saint John,
Canada

11

University of Toronto, Department of Surgery, Toronto,
Canada

12

University of Toronto, Division of Orthopaedic Surgery and
Neurosurgery, Department of Surgery, Toronto, Canada

13

Canadian Spine Society, Toronto, Canada

Introduction: Recent evidence suggests that patients who undergo
decompression for degenerative cervical myelopathy (DCM) benefit from
surgery regardless of disease severity. The goal of this study was to
evaluate the impact of surgery on patient reported outcomes one year after
surgery in a prospective cohort of Canadian patients with mild, moderate,
and severe DCM. Material and Methods: Patients with a clinical
diagnosis of DCM and evidence of spinal cord compression were prospectively
enrolled in the Canadian prospective DCM study by 35 surgeons from 7
Canadian centers between 2015 and 2019. The cohort comprised patients who
underwent surgical decompression and completed one year of follow-up.
Neurologic (mJOA), disability (NDI), health related quality of life (HRQoL)
(EQ-5D; SF-12 PCS; SF-12 MCS), and pain related (NRS neck and arm) outcome
measures were collected at 3 and 12 months post-operatively. Outcomes at 3
and 12 months were compared to baseline for the whole cohort and were
further stratified by baseline disease severity. Results: 391
patients were included in the analyses with 110 patients (28%) classified as
mild (mJOA ≥ 15), 163 (42%) as moderate (mJOA 12-14), and 118 (30%) as
severe (mJOA < 12). Follow up data at 12 months were available for 298
patients (76%). At 12 months after surgery, the entire cohort saw
statistically significant improvements in all outcome measures. Mean mJOA
scores improved from 12.82-14.75; NDI scores improved from 40.76-28.72;
EQ-5D scores improved from .56-.71; SF-12 PCS scores improved from 34.78 to
40.80; SF-12 MCS scores improved from 47.20 to 50.41; NRS neck pain improved
from 5.61 to 3.48; NRS arm pain improved from 5.65 to 3.25
(P < .001 for all comparisons). Only improvements in
the NDI, EQ-5D, and SF-12 PCS were clinically significant, however, in terms
of meeting their respective MCIDs. When stratified by disease severity,
there was a clinically significant improvement in all outcome measures among
patients with severe myelopathy. Clinically significant improvements in
patients with mild to moderate myelopathy were limited to the NDI, EQ-5D,
and SF-12 PCS. Conclusion: Surgical decompression for DCM is
associated with improvements in disability and HRQoL outcomes at 12 months
after surgery among all patients. Only the subset of patients with severe
myelopathy experience clinically significant improvements in mJOA and pain
scores, signifying that the magnitude and breadth of improvement are
directly related to baseline disease severity.

## 1895

## A203: Cervical Spine Steroid Injections for Delay of Surgery for Cervical
Spondylotic Myelopathy

Mustfa Manzur

1

, Andre Samuel

2

, Steven McAnany

2

, Todd Albert

2

, Sravisht Iyer

2

, Avani Vaishnav

2

, and Sheeraz Qureshi

2

1

Sidney Kimmel Medical College at Thomas Jefferson Universit,
Philadelphia, USA

2

Hospital for Special Surgery, New York, USA

Introduction: Cervical spine steroid injections are increasingly
being used for diagnosis and treatment of degenerative pathology. For
cervical spondylotic myelopathy, traditionally treated with surgery, there
has been little investigation of the possible therapeutic or preventative
effects of targeted injections. As injections may be targeted to the
epidural space, the transforaminal region, or the zygapophyseal joints,
differing injection modalities may also have variable therapeutic effects.
Material and Methods: All patients with a new diagnosis of
cervical spondylotic myelopathy, without previous cervical spine surgery or
steroid injection treatment, were identified in a large insurance databases.
Administration of steroid injections and surgical treatment timing was
determined based on Current Procedural Terminology (CPT) codes. Multivariate
logistic regression was used to determine the association of steroid
injection administration with surgical treatment at various time points
after initial diagnosis. Significance at P < .01.
Results: A total of 686 surgically managed CSM patients
were retrospectively identified in the PearlDiver database. A total of 244
patients underwent pre-surgical spinal steroid injection therapy to manage
CSM symptoms. Of these, 185 patients (75.8%) underwent epidural steroid
injections, 35 (14.3%) underwent zygapophyseal injections, and 24 (9.8%)
underwent transforaminal steroid injections. Median time from initial CSM
diagnosis to surgery was 75.5 days (µ = 351.6 days; σ = 544.9 days). In
multivariate analysis, both transforaminal injections (OR = .40, P
= .20) and zygapophyseal injections (OR = .33, P
= .02) were insignificantly associated with decreased odds of
surgery within 1 month of diagnosis, while epidural injections were not
associated with decreased odds of surgery (OR = 1.17, P =
.35). Interestingly, epidural and transforaminal injections were both
associated with increased odds of surgery after six months post-diagnosis
(P < .01). Only zygapophyseal injections had
consistently reduced odds of surgery (without significance).
Conclusion: The practice of steroid injection, regardless
of approach (epidural, transforaminal, or zygapophyseal), does not prevent
treatment of CSM via a surgical modality over the long term. While
symptomatic relief may lead to short-term benefits from steroid injection,
specifically in the case of transforaminal and zygapophyseal injections, it
appears that this short-term benefit only delays definitive surgical
treatment. Assessment of diagnostic and treatment decision-making workflow
may enable identification of other aspects of CSM management that lead to
delays in diagnosis and definitive treatment as well as additional cost
burden.

## 701

## A204: Prospective Randomized Control Pilot Study to Compare the Role of
Injection Cerebrolysin in Operated Cases of Cervical Myelopathy

Ayush Sharma

1

, Romit Agarwal

1

, Ajay Jaiswal

1

, and Vijay Singh

1

1

central railway hospital, Department of Orthopaedic and spine
surgery, Mumbai, India

Introduction: Cerebrolysin which contains a mixture containing
85% free amino acids and 15% biologically active low-molecular weight
peptidest and mimics the effects of endogenous neurotrophic factors to
interact with the pathologic process cascade of neurodegenerative diseases.
Cerebrolysin has been used successfully in a large number of neurologic
conditions such as Alzheimer disease, stroke, and other cognitive disorders
resulting in significant improvement, with no significant adverse reactions
reported. Aim of the study was to compare the effect of injection
cerebrolysin in operated cases of cervical myelopathy. Material and
Methods: The study commenced after approvalfrom the institutional
ethics committee. 60 operated cases of cervical myelopathy were randomly
divided into two groups. All the cases were operated by a single team of
surgeons. Group one was administered injection cerebrolysin post operatively
for 3 weeks while group two was administered placebo for 3 weeks. Modified
Japanese orthopedic association scores (mJOA) and visual analog scale (VAS)
were used to document functional outcomes at 3 weeks, 3 months, 6 months and
1 year. Recovery of hand function was separately accessed by improvement in
hand power and sensations.ASIA (American Spinal Injury Association) scores
were used to study the post-operative neurological recovery.
Results: The preoperative mJOA and Vas scores were
comparable between the two groups(P < .05). Both the
group showed significant improvement in both mJOA and Vas scores at 3weeks,
3 months, 6 months and one year follow up (P < .01).On
comparing the two groups there was no difference in improvement of mJOA and
Vas scores at 3 weeks, 3 months, 6 months and one year follow up(P
< .05).On comparing the hand function, the cerebrolysin
group showed significant improvement in hand function at one year compared
to the placebo group(P = .03). Post-operative neurological
recovery was better in the cerebrolysin group with 66.7% patients showing
complete neurological recovery compared to 56.7% for the placebo group, but
this difference was statistically not significant (P =
.318). Conclusion: Use of cerebrolysin in post-operative cases
of cervical myelopathy is safe and can result in improved hand function.

## 16

## A205: Do Intra-Operative Neurophysiological Changes During Decompressive
Surgery for Cervical Myeloradiculopathy Impact Functional Outcome? A
Prospective Study

Keyur Akbari

1

, Sajan Hegde

1

, and Muralidharan Venkatesh

1

1

Apollo Hospitals, Spine Unit, Chennai, India

Introduction: Current safe spine surgery guidelines recommend
multimodal intra-operative neuromonitoring (IONM) during spinal surgery as a
reliable and valid diagnostic adjunct to assess spinal cord integrity. IONM
accurately identifies the topography of neural structures and gives real
time alarm to the surgical team about intraoperative surgical insults. There
is insufficient evidence on the therapeutic relationship between IONM
changes during cervical spinal decompressive surgery for cervical
spondylotic myelopathy and neurological outcomes. The primary objective of
the present prospective study was to investigate whether IONM positive
changes can predict functional outcome after surgical intervention for
cervical myeloradiculopathy. Material and Methods: 28 patients
who underwent cervical spine surgery with IONM for compressive
myelo-radiculopathy were enrolled. During surgery motor evoked potential
(MEP) and somatosensory evoked potential (SSEP) at baseline, before and
after decompression were documented. A decrease in latency >10% or an
increase in amplitude >50% was regarded as a “positive changes”. Patients
were subgrouped based on IONM changes into Group A(those with positive
changes) and Group B (those with no change or deterioration). Nurick grade
and modified Japanese Orthopaedic Association (mJOA) were evaluated before
and after surgery. Unpaired t test was used to evaluate the significance of
the difference in Nurick grade and the mJOA between the groups. Spearman
correlation coefficient was used to ascertain the strength of association.
Results: 9 patients (32.1%) showed improvement in MEP. The
mean age at the time of surgery, mean duration of symptoms, cord signal
changes on MRI preoperatively and type of surgery were equally distributed
between the two groups. Hence, there was no major confounding effect of all
these factors in the present study. The mean preop Nurick grade and mJOA
score of group A and B were (2.55 ± 83 and 11.11 ± 1.65) and (2.47 ± 7 and
11.32 ± 1.24) respectively. The mean postoperative Nurick grade of group A
and B at three months was 1.8 ± .97 and 2.0 ± . 67 respectively and this
difference was not significant. The mean postoperative Nurick grade of group
A and B at 6 months was 1.55 ± .74 and 1.63 ± .46 respectively and this
difference was not significant. The mean postoperative mJOA score of group A
and B at 3 months was 13.1 ± 1.76 and 12.1 ± 1.39 respectively and unpaired
t test concluded that this difference was not significant. The mean
postoperative mJOA score of group A and B at six months was 14.3 ± 1.03 and
12.9 ± .98 respectively and this difference was statistically significant
(P value = .011). Spearman correlation coefficient
showed significant positive correlation between the IONM change and the mJOA
score at six months postoperatively (r = .47; P = .01).
Conclusion: Intraoperative neuromonitoring is a valuable tool in predicting
neurological recovery in patients undergoing decompressive surgery for CCM.
Patients with improved MEP after cervical cord decompression have a better
prognosis in immediate and long-term neurological function recovery.
Improvement in functional mJOA score is more significant at 6 months post
surgery in patients with improved MEP changes.

## 1735

## A206: A Multicentric Prospective Study on Cervical Spine Myelopathy
Surgery in France

Philippe Bancel

1

1

Institut Arago, Spinal Department, Paris, France

Introduction: It is the first multicentric prospective study on
cervical spine surgery realized in France. Material and
Methods: Material: It is a Cohort study observational,
prospective (inclusion June 2013 to October 2015). This study was
multicentric. Inclusion criteria were: older than 18 years, volunteers,
cervical myelopathy clinically. The study was composed of 180 patients.
Method: Tool of data used was KEOPS software. Clinical evaluation included:
general status, previous treatment, neurological examination, comorbidities,
etiologic diagnosis. Radiological evaluation: included standard and dynamic
X-Ray’s, Cervical MRI. Outcome measures used was: SF12, NDI, Walking test
(Crockard) and Prehension test (Pascal-Mousselard). Statistical analysis was
done by the: IMER center Lyon. Results: Clinical results: NDI
score was 39 before surgery, 22.9 after surgery, mLOA score was 12.4, became
14. Crockard score was 45.6 and became 34.5. SF 12 mental: 43.4 became 46.6,
SF12 physical: from 34.3 became 40.2. Radiological results: Diameter was
significatively bigger after laminectomy and laminoplasty. but we did not
observe correlation between mJOA and canal diameter.,no correlation between
mJOA and Hyper T2 signal, No correlation neither observed between Fujiwara
and mJOA and NDI pre and post-op. At least nno correlation between mJOA and
spine type. Conclusion: Our indication surgical strategy and results are
similar to the international literature. But It is the first multicentric
prospective study conducted in France

## 1588

## A207: The Role of Nutrition in Degenerative Cervical Myelopathy: A
Systematic Review

Celine Partha-Sarathi

1

, Benjamin Davies

1

, and Oliver Mowforth

1

1

Division of Neurosurgery, University of Cambridge, Department of
Clinical Neurosciences, Cambridge, United Kingdom

Introduction: Degenerative cervical myelopathy (DCM) is the
commonest cause of adult spinal cord impairment worldwide, encompassing
chronic compression of the spinal cord, neurological disability and
diminished quality of life. Evidence on the contribution of environmental
factors is sparse; in particular, the role of nutrition in DCM is unknown.
The objective was to assess the effect of nutrition on DCM susceptibility,
severity and surgical outcome. Methods: A systematic review in
MEDLINE and Embase was conducted following PRISMA guidelines Full-text
papers in English, with a focus on cervical myelopathy and nutrition,
published between before January 2020 were considered eligible. Quality
assessments were performed using the Downs’ and Black’s tool and GRADE
assessment tool. Patient demographics, nutritional factor and DCM outcomes
measures were recorded. Relationships between nutritional factors and
interventions and disease prognosis were assessed. The results were
separated depending on whether they discussed effects on spinal cord
disease, spinal column disease or adverse, post-operative outcomes.
Results: A total of 5835 papers were identified, 38 of
which were included in the final analysis. DCM patients with pathological
weight pre-operatively were likely to see poorer improvements
post-surgically. Obese patients experienced poorer physical and mental
improvements from surgery compared to non-obese patients, were more likely
to suffer from post-operative complications such as infection, DVT and PE
and were also more likely to have comorbidities such as diabetes,
hyperlipidaemia and CVD. An unbalanced diet, a history of alcohol abuse and
malnourishment were associated with poorer post-operative outcome.
Supplementation of vitamins, minerals and proteins reduced disease-severity
in malnourished patients with chronic spinal cord injury.
Conclusion: Nutritional factors appear important in
influencing surgical outcomes and disease progression in DCM patients.
Further elucidation of the role of nutritional factors in susceptibility to
DCM may be beneficial in disease prevention. In addition, better
characterisation of the role of nutritional deficiencies as risk factors may
aid DCM diagnosis. Further work on the role of nutrition in surgical
outcomes may help inform decisions surrounding peri-operative nutrition and
be useful in decisions pertaining to peri-operative optimisation.

## OP24: Basic Science/Novel Therapy

## 854

## A208: SERPINs-A Potential Target for Arresting Intervertebral Disc
Degeneration

Sri Vijay Anand KS

1

, Shanmuganathan Rajasekaran

1

, Dilip Chand Raja Soundararajan

1

, Chitraa Tangavel

2

, Sharon Miracle Nayagam

2

, Sunmathi R

2

, Ajoy P Shetty

1

, Rishi Kanna

1

, Pushpa BT

3

, and Raveendran M

4

1

Ganga Hospital, Department of Spine surgery, Coimbatore,
India

2

Ganga Research Centre, Department of Proteomics, Coimbatore,
India

3

Ganga Hospital, Department of Radiology, Coimbatore, India

4

Tamilnadu Agricultural University, Department of Biotechnology,
Coimbatore, India

Introduction: The etiology of disc degeneration (DD) is claimed
to be multifactorial. Irrespective of the initiating factor, breakdown of
extracellular matrix (ECM) is a critical event in DD. This ECM disassembly
is brought about by proteolytic enzymes called proteases that cleave the
bond holding the ECM. Serine proteases are a large family of proteases whose
activities are kept in check by regulators, Serine protease inhibitors
(SERPINS). The role of SERPINs in health and disease of IVD has not been
studied in detail so far. In this context, we did a systematic study using
high throughput proteomics with appropriate healthy control discs and
discuss the inferences here. Materials and Methods: After
ethical committee approval and consent, twelve intervertebral Nucleus
Pulposus tissues each from (1) Normal organ donor volunteers without any
sign of low back pain (ND), and patients with (2) herniated discs (DH) and
(3) degenerated discs (DD) were harvested under sterile operating conditions
and subjected to proteomic analysis. Immunohistochemistry(IHC) was performed
to confirm the presence of two SERPINs A1 and E2. Results: Mass
spectrometry identified a total protein of 2164 in ND, 1734 in DH, and 2394
in DD groups, respectively. We identified 21 SERPINs present in at least one
disc sample out of a total of 37 human serpins already reported in the
literature. With stringent cut off (>5 PSM and presence in at least in 2
samples per group) to increase the authenticity, we shortlisted 14 SERPINS,
8 in ND, 12 in DH, and 13 in DD group, respectively. 7 SERPINs were common
to all three groups that include SERPINA1, SERPINA3, SERPINA5, SERPINA8,
SERPINC1, SERPINE2, and SERPING1. SERPINA4, SERPIND1, SERPINF1, SERPINF2,
and SERPINH1 were found common to DH and DD groups. SERPINE1 and SERPINB1
were found unique to ND and DD groups, respectively. SERPINA1, SERPINA5,
SERPINE2, and SERPING1 showed higher expression in healthy control NP discs
(ND) when compared to diseased discs- DH and DD. SERPINs A1 and E2 are known
to play a protective role in maintaining disc homeostasis by inhibiting
proteases such as matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs). SERPIN A5, a
multifunction protein, inhibits several proteases involved in the
coagulation pathway. SERPIN G1 regulates other proteases in the tissue
leading to inflammation and has an anti-inflammatory role. SERPIN A3, an
acute phase pro-inflammatory protein, was found in abundance in DH.
SERPINH1, a procollagen-specific molecular chaperone Hsp47 was found in
abundance in DH, the dysregulation of which leads to changes in the
expression of ECM proteins such as fibronectin (FN1) and collagen type I.
Validation of selected SERPINA1 and E2 IHC staining in the healthy ND and
diseased DH and DD IVD confirmed the expression as observed in the
proteomics data. Conclusion: Our study confirmed the presence
of many SERPINs with various functions in the human intervertebral disc.
These SERPINs A1 and E2 with inhibitory effect on MMPs could be utilized as
a potential target to arrest disc degeneration.

## 363

## A209: Effects of Single-Dose Versus Hypo-Fractionated Focused Radiation
on Vertebral Body Structure and Biomechanical Integrity: Development of an
Irradiation Model

Alexander Perdomo-Pantoja

1

, Christina Holmes

2

, Benjamin D. Elder

3

, Sheng-fu L. Lo

1

, Wataru Ishida

1

, Brian C Goh

4

, Chukwuebuka C. Achebe

5

, Ethan Cottrill

1

, Warren L. Grayson

5

, Soojung C. Hur

6

, Thomas L Clemens

4

, and Timothy F. Witham

5

1

Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, Neurosurgery - Division
of Spine, Baltimore, USA

2

Florida A&M University-Florida State University College of
Engineering, Chemical and Biomedical Engineering, Tallahassee,
USA

3

Mayo Clinic, Neurosurgery, Rochester, USA

4

Johns Hopkins University School Of Medicine, Orthopaedic Surgery,
Baltimore, USA

5

Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, Biomedical Engineering,
Baltimore, USA

6

Johns Hopkins University Whiting School of Engineering, Mechanical
Engineering, Baltimore, USA

Introduction: The spine is the most frequent bone metastasis
site, with 30% of cancer patients developing symptomatic spinal lesions
during their illness. Among the treatment armamentarium for spine tumors,
spine stereotactic body radiation therapy (SBRT) is one of the main
modalities since it allows the precise and accurate delivery of
high-intensity radiation to spinal tumors. However, these harmful doses of
radiation may be sufficient to cause toxicity in the surrounding vertebrae,
resulting in osteoradionecrosis and an increased risk of vertebral
compression fracture (VCF). Although a few studies have reported radiation
dosage among the predictive factors for VCF, there is little known regarding
how radiation treatment affects vertebral integrity and if there is a
significant advantage to using hypofractionated therapies instead of a
single-dose treatment. Having an in vivo irradiation model
is imperative to answer those questions. For that purpose, we aimed to
develop a needed, clinically-relevant animal model to analyze the effects of
localized, high-dose radiation on vertebral microstructure and mechanical
integrity, utilizing the small animal radiation research platform (SARRP).
Materials and Methods: Following anesthesia, male New
Zealand white (NZW) rabbits, 8-12 weeks old, were positioned into a padded
acrylic tube to maintain an “upright” position, exposing the lumbar region.
Rabbits were placed inside the Small Animal Research Radiation Platform
(SARRP, Xstrahl) to administer the radiation treatment. In all cases, the L5
vertebrae were located using preliminary X-ray imaging, and a customized
collimator was used to irradiate the L5 spine level exclusively. According
to the radiation protocol applied (220 kVp, 13 mA), rabbits were divided
into three experimental groups: (1) Single 24-Gy dose; (2) Hypofractionated
in three 8-Gy doses on three consecutive days; and (3) Nonradiated or
Control. Rabbits were euthanized at a 6-month time point post-irradiation,
and their lumbar vertebrae harvested for radiological, histological, and
biomechanical testing. Results: In the CT micro-architectural
analysis, we observed that a localized single-dose of 24 Gy radiation led to
loss of vertebral bone volume and decreased trabecular number and a
subsequent increase in trabecular spacing and thickness at L5.
Hypofractionation of the radiation dose (3 x 8 Gy) similarly led to reduced
trabecular number and increased trabecular spacing and thickness, yet
preserves normalized bone volume at L5. In the biomechanical testing,
single-dose irradiated samples showed lower fracture loads and stiffness
compared to those receiving hypofractionated irradiation and non-irradiated
controls. Interestingly, hypofractionated and control groups exhibited
similar means for fracture load and stiffness. For all samples, bone volume,
trabecular number, and spacing were positively correlated with fracture
loads and Young's modulus (P < .05). Although
hypocellularity was histologically observed in both irradiated groups' bone
marrow, only the hypofractionated group conserved bone healing features.
Conclusions: Single-dose radiation was detrimental to a
greater degree than hypofractionation for the micro-architectural, cellular
and biomechanical characteristics of irradiated vertebral bodies. The
significant correlation between radiological measurements and biomechanical
properties confirmed the reliability of this animal model of
radiation-induced VCF.

## 619

## A210: The Spatial and Temporal Expression of Sclerostin and Canonical Wnt
Signaling Factors in Maturing Posterolateral Spinal Fusions

Thanh Doan

1

, Mesfin Teklemariam

1

, Sreedhara Sangadala

1

, Scott D. Boden

1

, Hicham Drissi

1

, and Steven Presciutti

12

1

Emory University School of Medicine, Orthopaedic Surgery, Atlanta,
USA

2

Atlanta Veteran Affairs Medical Center, Decatur, USA

Introduction: Despite state-of-the-art techniques, spinal
pseudarthrosis remains common (10-40%) and is associated with significant
morbidity and cost.1 One promising strategy is to enhance canonical Wnt
signaling locally in the fusion bed because it positively uncouples bone
formation/resorption. Anti-sclerostin treatments have also been shown to
result in greater bone volume after spinal fusion.2 Very little, however, is
known about sclerostin and canonical Wnt signaling during the fusion
process. Material and Methods: Twenty-two adult female New
Zealand White rabbits underwent a bilateral posterolateral intertransverse
process arthrodesis at L5-L6 using autologous iliac crest bone graft
(ICBG).3 Rabbits were euthanized at 1-week (N = 5), 2-weeks (N = 4), 3-weeks
(N = 4), 4-weeks (N = 4), and 6-weeks (N = 5) after arthrodesis. Immediately
following euthanasia, tissue samples were collected from the decorticated
transverse processes (TPs), ICBG between the TPs (Inner Zone) and overlying
the TPs (Outer Zone), and paraspinal muscle touching the ICBG. Two rabbits
did not undergo surgery (controls), whereby ICBG, L5/6 TPs, and paraspinal
muscle were harvested. All tissue was immediately snap-frozen within minutes
of euthanasia. High-quality RNA was isolated using a cryogenic tissue
homogenizer. Expression of sclerostin and canonical Wnt signaling factors
(Wnt3a, LRP6, Gsk3b, β-catenin) were measured in duplicate using real-time
qPCR and normalized to GAPDH. Immunohistochemistry using an anti-sclerostin
antibody was also performed to determine protein levels temporally.
Results: Successful fusion was confirmed at 6 weeks via μCT
in 3/5 rabbits, which is consistent with the known fusion rate in this model
(66%).3 We identified unique temporal trends in sclerostin
gene expression and protein levels in the TPs, Outer Zone, Inner Zone, and
muscle. The act of harvesting ICBG caused significantly increased expression
of sclerostin, with a >6-fold increase in the Outer and Inner Zones at
1-week (P <.05). The surrounding muscle had a
>13-fold increase in sclerostin expression at 3-weeks (P
< .05). Sclerostin was also significantly expressed in the
TPs at 6-weeks (∼5-fold increase, P < .05), which could
be a signal to stop forming bone once the fusion is complete. Wnt3a was the
most dynamically expressed Wnt factor, with an almost 20,000-fold increase
in the muscle at 1 week and a 500-fold increase in expression in the TPs at
6-weeks (P < .05). Conclusion: This is the
first description of how sclerostin levels, and levels of various canonical
Wnt signaling factors, are both spatially and temporally dynamically
controlled during the maturation of a posterolateral spine fusion mass. This
fills an important knowledge gap in our understanding of the basic biology
of spinal fusion and provides insight into an understudied regulator of
osteogenesis in this setting. Sclerostin and canonical Wnt factors seem to
play a role in osteogenesis after spinal arthrodesis and their dynamic
expression is regulated differently within specific regions of the maturing
fusion mass. Understanding these signaling patterns will be critical in
aiding in the design of novel local delivery strategies of biologics that
modulate canonical Wnt signaling for the purpose of preventing
pseudarthrosis (i.e., determining the specific region of the fusion to be
targeted with biologics or determining the optimal timing needed for drug
release from its carrier).

## 580

## A211: Bilateral Erector Spinae Plane Block-A Promising Protocol For
Post-Operative Pain Relief

Sathish Muthu

1 2

and Kartik Kumar Natarajan

1 3

1

Orthopaedic Research Group, Coimbatore, India,

2

Government Hospital, Velayuthampalayam, Karur, India,

3

Lok Manya Tilak Municipal General Hospital, Mumbai, India

Introduction: Although opioids remain the mainstay of
perioperative pain management in spine surgery, inclusion of methods to
utilize the non-opioid medications into the multimodal pain control regimens
helps to avoid opioid-related side-effects. Dorsal rami innervate all the
pain generators following lumbar spine surgery. Hence regional anesthetic
techniques like Thoraco Lumbar Interfascial Plane (TLIP) Block, Erector
Spinae Plane Block (ESPB) have been developed to address them locally and
thereby enhancing postop recovery. There was increasing evidence to support
their usage for postoperative pain management but no meta-analyses exist so
far to give conclusive evidence for their utilization in spine surgery.
Hence, we performed this meta-analysis to analyze the efficacy of bilateral
ESPB for postoperative analgesia in lumbar spine surgery from the available
evidence in literature so far. Materials and Methods: We
conducted independent and duplicate electronic database searches including
PubMed, Embase and Cochrane Library till February 2020 for comparative
studies analyzing the efficacy of bilateral ESPB for postoperative pain
relief in lumbar spine surgeries. Post-operative pain scores, total
analgesic consumption, number of patients requiring rescue analgesics, first
analgesic requirement time and complications were the outcomes analyzed.
Analysis was performed in R platform using OpenMeta (Analyst) software.
Results: Four studies including 170 patients (ESPB/Control
= 80/90) were included in the analysis. There was a significant pain relief
in ESPB group compared to placebo across all timelines such as during
immediate post-operative period (P < .001), 4 hours
(P = .041), 8 hours (P = .001), 12
hours (P = .038) and 24 hours post-surgery (P
= .002). ESPB group showed a significant reduction in number of
patients requiring rescue analgesic (P < .001) and total
analgesic consumption(P < .001) and post-operative
nausea and vomiting (P = .012) compared to controls. ESPB
group also had significant prolongation of time for rescue analgesic if
needed (P < .001). Conclusion: Bilateral
ESPB offers prolonged post-operative pain relief compared to controls,
thereby reducing the need for opioid consumption and its related
complications. Although our meta-analysis establishes the efficacy of ESPB
for postoperative pain relief in spine surgeries, future studies
investigating the type of local anesthetic with its volume and concentration
need to be done to develop a standard protocol for its routine use in
multimodal analgesia employed in spine surgeries.

## 1417

## A212: Anti-Inflammatory Effect of BSP-Resveratrol Membrane for the
Prevention of Epidural Fibrosis After Laminectomy

Hsuan-Yu Chen

1

, Tsung-Han Yang

2

, Chih-Wei Chen

3

, Tze Hong Wong

2

, Po-Quang Chen

3

, Ming-Hsiao Hu

3

, Shu-Hua Yang

3

, and Feng Huei Lin

1

1

Institute of Biomedical Engineering, National Taiwan University,
Taipei, Taiwan

2

National Taiwan University Hospital, Hsin-Chu Branch, Hsin-Chu City,
Taiwan

3

National Taiwan University Hospital, Taipei, Taiwan

Introduction: Laminectomy is a surgical procedure required for
the treatment of spinal disorders such as lumbar disk herniation, spinal
stenosis, or tumor excision. Although the treatment is effective and
relieves neural compression, 8-40% patients suffer from failed back surgery
syndrome (FBSS) post laminectomy and 4-9% patients received revision
surgery. Material and Methods: An CMC-BSP-Reservatrol membrane
would be the material of choice for this purpose, since it could fill an
irregular surgical defect and be delivered in a minimally-invasive manner.
The objective of this study was to evaluate, in vitro and
in vivo, the cytocompatibility and anti-adhesive effect
of CMC-BSP-Reservatrol membrane. Different cell types present in the spine
were used to test the cytocompatibility of the hydrogel. CMC-BSP-Reservatrol
membrane extraction medium had no deleterious effects on neural cells
(PC-12), but reduced fibroblasts viability (NIH/3T3). Results:
Although CMC-BSP-Reservatrol membrane did not change the release of lactate
dehydrogenase from myoblasts (C2C12) and Schwann cells (RSC96), the
extraction medium concentration slightly affected the mitochondrial activity
of these two cell types. qPCR showed that the CMC-BSP-Reservatrol membrane
down-regulated S100a and P4hb expression
in NIH/3T3 cells, supporting the hypothesis that the CMC-BSP-Reservatrol
membrane might inhibit fibroblast activity. Conclusion: The
CMC-BSP-Reservatrol membrane is a promising injectable and thermosensitive
material for prevention of post-operative epidural fibrosis.

## 882

## A213: Use of NPY Y1 Selective Antagonist to Suppress Neuropathic
Pain

Michelle Tucci

1

, Robert McGuire

2

, and Hamed Benghuzzi

3

1

University of Mississippi Medical Center, Anesthesiology, US,
USA

2

University of Mississippi Medical Center, Orthopedics, Jackson,
USA

3

Mississippi Academy of Sciences, Jackson, USA

Introduction: Severe pain that is chronic (lasting >3 months)
represents a major complication associated with tissue or neuronal injury,
and it has become clear these types of injuries produce dramatic alterations
in the gene expression of peptidergic neurotransmitters and receptors at the
level of the primary afferent neuron, spinal cord, dorsal horn, and brain.
The chronic pain state is characterized by persistent long-lasting
activation of peripheral nociceptors. Such plastic changes are thought to
take the subject from acute to chronic pain. Several neuropeptides and their
receptors are expressed in these target regions and contribute to modulating
the pain signals. One important neuropeptide, NPY, and its receptor, Y1,
appears to be an important mediator of NP. Neuropeptide Y and especially the
NPY Y1 receptor (Y1-R) are highly expressed at key sites of pain
transmission, including lamina II of the spinal cord dorsal horn, and tissue
or nerve injury dramatically alters their expression profiles.
Currently, several major classes of analgesics are available for the
management of NP, and include antidepressants, anticonvulsants, opioids, and
adjuvant analgesics, which have shown incomplete effectiveness and do not
target NPY or alter Y1-R density. Targeting NPY or the Y1-R could optimize
pain management and minimize the occurrence of side effects associated with
current pain treatment strategies. Material and Methods:
Sixteen male Sprague Dawley rats were randomized into four equal groups,
naïve, CCI +saline, CCI + 100 µg/kg/day gabapentin, and CCI + 10 µg/kg/day
NPY 1 receptor antagonist. Von Frey filaments were used to obtain the
response latencies to mechanical stimuli pre surgery. Animals underwent
unilateral sciatic nerve chronic constriction injury (CCI) and assessed with
Von Frey filaments 3 days post-surgery, and drug treatments were started.
Latency changes were assessed on days 3, 5 and 7 post drug treatment.
Results: The results indictated that rat withdrawal
latencies were significantly increased in gabapentin and NPY Y1 receptor
antagonist treated animals on days 3, 5, and 7 compared to CCI + saline. By
7 days withdrawal latencies for rats treated with NPY 1 receptor anatagonist
were similar to naive control. Conclusion: A 10 µg/kg/day dose
of a selective Y1 receptor antagonist had a significantly greater capacity
to suppress pain in comparison to gabapentin. Targeting NPY or the Y1-R
could optimize pain management and minimize the occurrence of side effects
associated with current pain treatment strategies (e.g., dependence, abuse
liability) and may be an alternative non-opioid pain.

## 334

## A214: Biomimetic Platelet-Derived Growth Factor Delivery System with
Osteoinductive Bone Particles and Adipose-Derived Stem Cells in
Biodegradable Tissue-Engineered Grafts for Spinal Fusion

Alexander Perdomo-Pantoja

1

, Alexandra N Rindone

2

, Emma Whitehead

2

, Christina Holmes

3

, Warren L. Grayson

2

, and Timothy F. Witham

1

1

Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, Neurosurgery - Division
of Spine, Baltimore, USA

2

Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, Biomedical Engineering,
Baltimore, USA

3

Florida A&M University-Florida State University College of
Engineering, Chemical and Biomedical Engineering, Tallahassee,
USA

Introduction: Biodegradable biomaterials are a promising graft
material for spinal fusion due to their ability to degrade as new bone
tissue grows into the graft while also providing mechanical stability during
the early stages of bone healing. A newly designed, biodegradable
polycaprolactone-decellularized bone (PCL-DCB) hybrid is desirable for
spinal fusion due to its mechanical rigidity and osteoinductivity, but it
requires a stem cell source for the bone to regenerate into the material.
Pre-clinical studies have demonstrated that incorporation of ex
vivo expanded adipose-derived stem cells (ADSCs) into grafting
materials enables complete spinal fusion, but their approaches require
supraphysiological doses of BMP-2, which can lead to undesirable clinical
complications.4Platelet‐derived growth factor‐BB (PDGF) is an
attractive alternative to BMP‐2, since it directly promotes the osteogenesis
of ADSCs when applied at physiological concentrations. Recently, Rindone
et al. developeda biomimetic PDGF delivery system using
heparin-conjugated, decellularized bone particles (HC-DCB) that enhances
ADSC-mediated bone regeneration in critical-sized murine calvarial defects.
In this study, we utilized this promising delivery system for the controlled
release of PDGF-BB in 3D-printed PCL-DCB spinal fusion grafts in a rat
model. Materials and Methods:ADSCs were isolated from the
inguinal fat pads of syngeneic 6-8-week-old Lewis rats and
culturedin vitro. When passage 1 (P1) ADSCs reached 80%
confluency, cultured-expanded ADSCs (P2) were seeded onto PCL-DCB scaffolds
along with HC-DCB particles (40 mg/mL in fibrin) and 20 ug/mL PDGF for
subsequent transplantation. Dorsolateral spinal fusion surgery at L4-L5 was
performed on Lewis rats divided into 5 experimental groups: [1] PCL only;
[2] PCL-DCB + HC-DCB particles; [3] PCL-DCB + HC-DCB particles + PDGF; [4]
PCL-DCB + HC-DCB particles + 2.5 x 106 ADSCP2/side; and, [5]
PCL-DCB + HC-DCB particles + 2.5x106 ADSCP2/side + PDGF. Fusion
was evaluated eight weeks post-surgery. Micro-computed tomography (microCT)
images were evaluated to determine CT fusion status and fusion mass volume.
Histology and immunohistochemistry were performed to assess new bone
quality. Results: MicroCT imaging analyses revealed bone
formation along the scaffolds struts for all PCL-DCB groups. Additionally,
all PCL-DCB groups created fusion masses between the L4-L5 transverse
processes (TPs). By contrast, [1] PCL only scaffolds did not form bone. Of
all the PCL-DCB groups, the [3] PCL-DCB + HC-DCB particles + PDGF group
significantly displayed a higher CT volume (P < .05).
Furthermore, histological staining demonstrated that PCL-DCB grafts were
well-integrated with the host TPs in all groups. A more significant bone
deposition was found in the graft-TP interface in the treated groups ([3],
[4], and [5]) compared to [2] PCL-DCB + HC-DCB particles, being more
remarkable in the [3] PCL-DCB + HC-DCB particles + PDGF group. Expression of
Runx2, osteocalcin, and CD31 was observed in the treated groups ([3], [4],
and [5]). Conclusions: We demonstrated that biodegradable
PCL-DCB grafts enable spinal fusion when combined with osteoinductive HC-DCB
particles. Although the presence of both cells and growth factors was not
required to achieve spinal fusion in PCL-DCB + HC-DCB grafts,PDGF-BB
enhanced bone formation when added to these grafts.

## 800

## A215: Validity of Scoliotic Discs as Controls for Molecular Research in
Intervertebral Disc Disorders

Sri Vijay Anand KS

1

, Shanmuganathan Rajasekaran

1

, Dilip Chand Raja Soundararajan

1

, Chitraa Tangavel

2

, Sharon Miracle Nayagam

2

, Sunmathi R

2

, Raveendran M

3

, Ajoy P Shetty

1

, and Rishi Kanna

1

, Pushpa BT

4

1

Ganga Hospital, Department of Spine Surgery, Coimbatore,
India

2

Ganga Research Centre, Department of Proteomics, Coimbatore,
India

3

Tamilnadu Agricultural University, Department of Biotechnology,
Coimbatore, India

4

Ganga Hospital, Department of Radiology, Coimbatore, India

Introduction: Despite being a highly researched subject, the
studies on etio-pathogenesis have been inconclusive. One of the primary
reasons for elusiveness being, lack of appropriate controls for making a
precise comparison with degenerated discs. Discs from scoliosis surgery is a
common control used in molecular studies of disc disorders. This study aims
to compare the validity of scoliotic discs as controls by comparing it
against MRI normal discs from voluntary organ donors and establish 'True
Controls' that can be utilized for future Intervertebral disc (IVD)
research. Materials and Methods: After appropriate ethical
clearance and consent, nucleus pulposus of Eight MRI normal discs from eight
brain dead voluntary organ donors (ND) and eight scoliotic discs (SD) from
three patients who underwent anterior surgery for adolescent idiopathic
scoliosis were harvested under sterile precautions. After protein
extraction, prefractionation and in-gel tryptic digestion, the extracted
peptides were subjected to tandem mass spectrometry. The raw data were
subjected to further bioinformatic analysis to understand the
patho-mechanisms involved. Results: Mass spectrometry
identified a total of 235 proteins in ND and 438 proteins in the SD group
and 157 proteins common to both group. About 78 (15.31%) proteins were found
only in the ND group, and 281 (54.45%) were found only in the SD group.
Proteins involved in Extracellular matrix integrity (Versican, Keratins
KRT6A, KRT14, KRT5 and KRT 13A1, A-kinase anchor protein 13, Coagulation
factor XIII A chain, Proteoglycan 4) and proteins involved in transcription
and DNA repair (Von Willebrand factor A domain-containing 3B, Eukaryotic
initiation factor 2B, Histone H4, Leukocyte Cell-Derived
Chemotaxin 2) were found to be down-regulated in SD. Inflammatory proteins
(C3, C1S), and oxidative stress response proteins (Peroxiredoxin-2,6,
Catalase, Myeloperoxidase, Apolipoprotein E) were found to be up-regulated
in SD. These changes were reflected at the pathway level also.
Conclusion: Our study found that scoliotic discs have an
abundance of inflammatory, oxidative stress response proteins. Whereas,
these proteins were either absent or downregulated in the MRI normal discs
from voluntary organ indicating a more biologically inert state. These
findings establish MRI normal discs from voluntary organ donors as the
'true' control for molecular studies in IVD research and recommend it for
future studies.

## 569

## A216: Intra-Operative Topical Vancomycin Powder Application-Is the
Practise Safe in Paediatric Spine Surgeries?

Sathish Muthu

1 2

and Girinivasan Chellamuthu

1 3

1

Orthopaedic Research Group, Coimbatore, India

2

Government Hospital, Velayuthampalayam, Karur, India

3

Ganga Hospitals, Orthopaedic Trauma Surgery, Coimbatore,
India

Introdcution: Various methods have been developed and
implemented to prevent SSI in the paediatric population. The practices vary
among different groups of surgeons based on their training and expertise.
One such practice is the application of Topical Vancomycin Powder (TVP) in
the surgical wound before closure. Vancomycin powder is increasingly used
off-label as TVP to prevent infection in spine surgeries. Uncertainty exists
on its safety and usefulness in pediatric population. Hence, we aim to
systematically review the available articles on TVP use in pediatric spine
surgeries exploring the usefulness and safety of such practice.
Materials and Methods: We conducted independent and
duplicate electronic database search in PubMed, Embase and Cochrane Library
till March 2020 to identify all relevant literature on the use of TVP for
pediatric spine surgeries. Surgical Site Infection (SSI) rate, specific
reported complications, reoperation rate, microbial flora pattern in
reported SSI and safety profile were the outcomes analyzed. Analysis was
performed in R platform using OpenMeta[Analyst] software.
Results: No prospective studies were available to evaluate
the use of TVP in pediatric spine surgeries for the prevention of SSIs.
Neither standardized protocol nor drug dosage or safety profile was
established for pediatric use. Three retrospective cohort studies including
824 patients (TVP/Control = 400/424) were included in the meta-analysis.
There was a low-quality evidence suggesting no significant difference
between the two groups in SSI rate (RR = .474, 95% CI [0.106, 2.112],
P = .327) with significant heterogeneity (I2
= 70.14, P = .035). TVP group showed a significant benefit
on cost-analysis in one of the included studies. However, TVP did not
prevent gram-negative co-infection on SSI in the TVP group.
Conclusion: TVP does not qualify to be recommended as a
safe and useful option to prevent SSI following pediatric spine surgeries
from the literature available at present. High-quality prospective
interventional studies are needed to arrive at a consensus on its use along
with appropriate dosage and method of application.

## OP25: Lumbar Degeneration

## 799

## A217: Lessing PROM Burdens Via Machine Learning

Gregory Schroeder

1

, Andrea Wood

2

, and Otho Plummer

2

1

The Rothman Institute at Thomas Jefferson University, Philadelphia,
USA

2

OBERD, Columbia, USA

Introduction: Clearly and concisely understanding patient
conditions is a universal goal of physicians. Patient Reported Outcomes
Measures (PROMs) are employed as tools to scientifically gain this insight
as efficiently as possible in order to optimize medical consultations. While
PROMs alone are generally not burdensome, they are often administered
directly following a substantial amount of other registration, past medical
and history of present illness paperwork. Attempts to improve the situation
have been made by administering shorter PROM forms. Computer Adaptive
Testing (CAT) is a strategy that dynamically selects the most appropriate
next question based on previous response and in turn, reduces the amount of
questions required to complete the form session. Unnecessary questions are
omitted based on the patient’s unique current condition and a valid score is
still effectively assigned via this more concentrated technique. Examples of
CAT include PROMIS and PediCat instruments, both of which rely on Item
Response Theory (IRT). Recent publications have validated a machine learning
(ML) method which voids the need for calibrated item banks and permits CAT
application to historically popular PROM instruments. Our aim is to expand
on such ML approaches to further explore question reduction. Material
and Methods: ML CAT methods have yielded up to fifty-percent
savings in questions, while having a correlation coefficient >.98 with
the full questionnaire. The algorithms sought maximum accuracy, and question
reduction occurred as a collateral benefit. This work may be extended by
focusing on lowering question count to the absolute extent possible while
still maintaining score integrity for the Neck Disability Index (NDI) and
Oswestry Disability Index (ODI) instruments. Data analysts examined the ML
algorithm and CAT results for NDI and ODI, honing in on questions revealed
to be less significant for score accuracy. The ML CAT model was adjusted
based on new findings and reapplied to the data set. The resulting system,
in view of its increased speed of use, is informally called CAT+ or
Cheetah. Results: The full form NDI asks
10 questions. The NDI (ML) CAT managed to obtain a correlation coefficient
>.97 with an average of 5.92 questions per session. The NDI Cheetah
obtained a correlation coefficient >.96 with an average of 4.97 questions
per session. See Table 1 for statistical details. The full form ODI asks 10
questions. The ODI (ML) CAT averaged 5.53 questions per session with a
correlation coefficient >.98. The ODI Cheetah averaged 4.36 questions per
session with a correlation coefficient >.96. See Table 2 for statistical
details. Conclusion: The CAT method verified for a number of
legacy PROMs shows consistent findings when applied to NDI and ODI
instruments. Still, our research demonstrates that previously used ML
methods ask questions that produce minimal gains in terms of score accuracy.
These questions can also be eliminated to further shorten NDI and ODI form
sessions through careful analysis and advanced ML CAT techniques, thus
lessening patient form burden.

## 1360

## A218: Preoperative Sagittal Imbalance Associated with Improved
Radiographic and Clinical Outcomes After MIS TLIF for Degenerative
Spondylolisthesis

Andre Samuel

1

, Catherine Himo Gang

1

, and Sheeraz Qureshi

1

1

Hospital for Special Surgery, New York, USA

Introduction: Existing literature demonstrates the importance of restoring
sagittal balance for long-segment lumbar fusion. However, it remains to be
seen how sagittal balance relates to outcomes after short segment minimally
invasive fusions. Specifically no previous studies have stratified patients
based on preoperative PI-LL mismatch to identify differences in radiographic
and clinical outcomes. Methods: 56 consecutive patients undergoing 1- or 2-
level MIS TLIF for degenerative spondylolisthesis were grouped based on
preoperative PI-LL mismatch greater than or less than 10°. Postoperative
improvement in radiographic sagittal parameters and patient reported outcome
measures (PROMs) were assessed compared between groups at mean follow up of
41 weeks. Results: A total of 25 patients (44.6%) had a preoperative PI-LL
(pelvic incidence - lumbar lordosis) mismatch of > 10°. Preoperative
pelvic incidence (67.3° vs 53.3°) and pelvic tilt (30.0° vs 17.5°) were
greater in patients with preoperative PI-LL mismatch (P
<. 05). There were no significant differences in preoperative PROMs
between groups. Postoperatively, there was a greater decrease in PI-LL
mismatch (-7.2° vs + 1.7°) and SVA (-16.4mm vs +12.6mm) in patients with
preoperative sagittal imbalance (P < .05), but not with
pelvic tilt (PT). Patients had statistically significant improvements in all
PROMs in both groups, with no significant differences between groups. In
multivariate analysis, preoperative SVA > 40mm was associated with
increased odds of achieving MCID (minimum clinically important difference)
in PROMIS® (odds ratio: 14.38, P = .03). However, preoperative PI-LL >
10° and PT > 20° were not associated with increased MCID for any measured
PROMs. Conclusion: MIS TLIF results in good clinical outcomes despite
preoperative radiographic sagittal parameters. However, patients with
preoperative sagittal imbalance may benefit from greater improvement in both
radiographic and clinical outcomes.

## 1559

## A219: Sagittal Balance in Short-Segment Decompression and Fusion for the
Management of Degenerative Lumbar and Sacral Spine Stenosis

Valerii Serikov

1

, Vadim Manukovsky

1

, Vissarionov Sergey

2

, Irina Afanaseva

3

, and Tahir Tamaev

1

1

Saint-Petersburg I.I. Dzhanelidze Research Institute of Emergency
Medicine, Neurosurgery, Saint-Petersburg, Russian Federation

2

H.Turner National Medical Research Center for Сhildren’s Orthopedics
and Trauma Surgery, Pushkin, Saint-Petersburg, Russian
Federation

3

Saint-Petersburg I.I. Dzhanelidze Research Institute of Emergency
Medicine, Diagnostics and Imaging, Saint-Petersburg, Russian
Federation

Introduction: The role of the sagittal balance in surgical
treatment of diseases and injuries of spine becomes more and more actual and
important every year. Sagittal profile balance influence on quality of
patients life has been noted in many studies. We assessed the effect of
sagittal profile parameters correction during short-segment decompression
with stabilization on quality of patients life with degenerative stenosis of
the lumbar and sacral spine. Material and Methods: We present
the results of a retro-prospective cohort study of 60 patients with
clinically significant degenerative stenosis (Schizas grade C-D) at L3-S1
levels. The follow-up period was 12 months. Patients were divided into 2
groups. The control retrospective group consisted of 30 people. These
patients underwent treatment of degenerative stenosis with stabilization
without taking into account the sagittal balance. In the second group, when
stabilizing spine, lordosis and sagittal profile were corrected according to
the FBI formula (FBI = C7TA + FOA + PTCA). The average age in the groups was
47.1 and 50.3, respectively. All patients assessed pain syndrome on a VAS
scale before surgery, in the first 10 days and at 1.5, 3, 6, 9, 12 months
after surgery. Patients life quality was assessed using the ODI and RDQ
scales at the same time as assessment of pain syndrome.
Results: There were no statistically significant
differences in gender, age, levels and number of affected levels of spine in
the study groups. During the analysis, average correction volume in the
second group was 13,4 degrees. There were statistically significant
differences in pain syndrome dynamics and life quality between study groups
during entire observation period. After 12 months of observation in the
second group of the study, there was a significant decrease in the level of
pain syndrome according to VAS (H = 215,5 P < .001), an
improvement of life quality according to the RDQ (U = 238 P
< .001) and ODI (U = 158,5 P < .001)
scales. Conclusion: Correction of lumbar lordosis and sagittal
profile even with short-segment fixation in patients with degenerative
lumbar and sacral spine stenosis leads to a significant improvement in life
quality and a decline of patients pain syndrome in up to 12 months.

## 1859

## A220: Isovue Contrast for Intraoperative Assessment of Discectomy Quality
in Tlif: A Preliminary Report of A Prospective Randomized Controlled
Trial

Athan Zavras

1

, David Rossi

1

, Michael Nolte

1

, Nicholas Shepard

1

, Kern Singh

1

, and Matthew Colman

1

1

Rush University Medical Center, Orthopedic Surgery, Chicago,
USA

Introduction: Transforaminal lumbar interbody fusion (TLIF) allows for
increased fusion biology, stability, and the capacity to provide
intersegmental manipulation when treating instability and deformity of the
lumbar spine. Certain TLIF techniques rely on interbody arthrodesis as the
primary source of arthrodesis, making the extent and quality of endplate
preparation and discectomy critical to successful fusion. However, prior
studies have demonstrated that even under ideal ex-vivo conditions, the
extent of discectomy is surprisingly low. This study aimed to develop an
effective technique for intraoperative quantitative and qualitative feedback
during discectomy and endplate preparation in TLIF. Materials and
Methods:This study is a prospective, randomized, controlled trial that began
enrolment in 2019 of patients undergoing 1-2 level TLIF for low-grade
spondylolisthesis with the same surgeon. Patients included in this report
had a minimum 6-month follow-up. The surgeon completed the endplate
preparation and discectomy via standard technique, at which time ISOVUE-300M
contrast was administered via spinal needle into the disc space and
orthogonal radiographs were obtained. Patients were randomized into a
control (OBSERVATION) and investigational group (FEEDBACK). The case
proceeded as usual with grafting and cage insertion in OBSERVATION, while
contrast imaging guided further disc preparation in FEEDBACK, after which
the disc was re-imaged with ISOVUE. The surface area and clearance density
of preparation was calculated from intraoperative radiographs. The ABC/2
formula was applied for volumetric measurements of the ellipsoid disc
preparations. Other primary endpoints included clinical improvement on
patient-reported outcomes (PROs), disc height correction, parameters of
spinopelvic alignment, and radiographic or CT evidence of arthrodesis.
Differences between cohorts were identified using univariate statistics.
Significancewas set toP <.05. Results:
Twelve patients were randomized into OBSERVATION and 10 into FEEDBACK.
Initial preparation showed no differences between cohorts in the surface
area or clearance density of the prepared superior or inferior endplates.
The volume of disc space cleared did not differ. After additional
preparation in FEEDBACK, final pre-fusion status differed significantly.
Clearance density was greater in FEEDBACK compared to OBSERVATION at the
superior (90.39 ± 2.41% vs 71.62 ± 7.47%,P <.001) and
inferior endplates (89.92 ± 3.13% vs 73.92 ± 6.03%,P
<.001). The percent of endplate surface area prepared was also
greater in FEEDBACK at the superior (61.49 ± 14.58% vs 37.30 ±
15.63%,P =.001) and inferior endplates (62.28 ± 8.86%
vs 42.60 ± 14.04%,P =.001), while the percent of disc
volume cleared showed superior results in this group (90.89 ± 6.53% vs 57.63
± 22.82%,P <.001). Arthrodesis was observed in 100% of
FEEDBACK compared to 83.30% of OBSERVATION patients (P
=.296), as assessed using Bridwell radiographic criteria, or CT
when available. There were no differences in subsidence, spinopelvic
correction, or postoperative PROs. Conclusion:Additional
endplate preparation and discectomy following ISOVUE in TLIF showed several
benefits. There were significant increases in superior and inferior endplate
clearance density, percent of endplate surface area prepared, and percent of
disc volume cleared. Although the higher percentage of arthrodesis in
FEEDBACK was not statistically significant, further investigation of a
larger data set may elucidate the impact on arthrodesis and other important
clinical endpoints.

## 731

## A221: Long-term outcomes in in cauda equina syndrome. Measurement of core
outcomes using validated questionnaires

Thomas Barker1, Lennel Lutchman1, Nick Steele1, am rai1, andrew
cook1, girish swamy1, and robert crawford1

1

Norfolk and Norwich University Hospital, Trauma and Orthopaedics,
Norwich, United Kingdom

Introduction: Cauda Equina Syndrome (CES) is a relatively
uncommon condition that can be associated with long-term autonomic
dysfunction and chronic severe lower back pain. Historical studies have had
either small numbers of patients, short periods of follow up, or did not use
validated methods of assessing patient reported outcomes. In January 2020 a
core outcome set (COS) for CES were defined by international consensus among
key stakeholders. These measures include autonomic function (bowel, bladder,
sexual function, and genital/perineal sensation), non-autonomic function
(strength, pain, complications) and quality of life. This study aims to
assess the long-term outcomes of patients treated for CES, using validated
questionnaires. Material and Methods: Institution approval and
Caldecott approval was granted for the study. A retrospective review of a
prospectively collected database of patients treated for CES was performed.
All patients had undergone surgical decompression for acute CES secondary to
intervertebral disc prolapse at our institution between January 2007 and
December 2019. Patients were included only of they presented with clinical
features compatible with Incomplete Cauda Equina Syndrome (CESI) or Cauda
Equina Syndrome with retention (CESR) and had MRI confirmation of a large
lumbar disc herniation which was occluding the majority of the spinal canal.
The time from onset of autonomic dysfunction symptoms to time of surgery and
the reason for any delay was recorded. All patients provided written consent
of their willingness to participate in the study and completed a series of
validated questionnaires that evaluated the core outcome set. These included
the Oswestry Disability Index (ODI), EQ-5D, Qualiveen urinary function
questionnaire, Neurogenic Bowel Dysfunction score and Arizona Sexual
Experiences Scale. Results: A cohort of 86 patients was
identified over the study period. 42 were male and 44 female. 61 patients
had CESI and 25 CESR. The average duration of follow-up was 59.7 months
(range 11 to 182, SD 42.4). Only twenty-five patients had surgical
decompression within 48 hours of symptom onset. The most frequent reason for
delay was a delay in patient presentation, with only a few exceptions.
Persistent severe back pain was a frequent complaint. Many patients had
undergone further MRI imaging or pain intervention treatment for chronic,
severe back pain. Persistent autonomic dysfunction was present in some
patients and we analysed the distribution of these symptoms between the CESI
and CESR groups. Conclusion: To our knowledge, this study
reports the longest follow-up of patients with CES and is the first to use
validated patient-reported outcome measures to assess the Core Outcome Set
for CES. Persistent severe back pain and on-going autonomic dysfunction was
frequently noted in this cohort of 86 patients at a mean follow-up of five
years.

## 1197

## A222: Body Mass Index Impact on Clinical Outcomes After Minimally
Invasive Extreme Lateral Interbody Fusion

Carlos De La Torre

1

and Khai Lam

1

1

London Bridge Hospital, London, United Kingdom

Introduction and Purpose: The minimally invasive extreme lateral
interbody fusion (ELIF) has increasingly been used in the treatment of
lumbar pathology. The perceived benefits suggest it will continue to play an
important long-term role in the treatment of these disorders. It has been
proposed that patients baseline anthropomorphic characteristics may
influence the clinical outcomes following ELIF. The purpose of this study
was to determine the effect of Body Mass Index (BMI) on the clinical
outcomes in patients treated with ELIF. Materials and Methods:
Between January 2013 and January 2020, we identified 142 consecutive
patients undergoing ELIF for lumbar pathology. Patient related outcome
measures (PROMS) were collected in 104 patients preoperatively, and up to 12
months postoperatively. PROMS included Oswestry Disability Index (ODI),
Visual Analog Scale (VAS) for both back (BP) and leg pain (LP) and SF-36.
Based in the WHO nutritional status classification we categorised patients
as Normal, Pre-obese and Obese according to their BMI (18.5-24.9, 25-29.9,
>30 kg/m2 respectively). Results: There were 56%
female and 44% male patients with a mean age of 56 (26-84) years. 37
patients were identified as normal, 40 as pre-obese and 27 as obese. For
ODI, statistically significant mean improvements from pre-operative to last
follow-up were 23.9 ± 21.2 (P < .0001) for normal
weight, 17.8 ± 23.8 (P < .0001) for pre-obesity weight
and 16.2 ± 4.32 (P < .0001) for obesity weight. For VAS
BP, significant mean improvements from pre-operative to last follow-up were
3.4 ± 3.1 (P < .0001) for normal weight, 3.7 ± 3.13
(P < .0001) for pre-obesity weight and 3.6 ± 3.5
(P < .0001) for obesity weight. For VAS LP the mean
improvements were 3.4 ± 3.14 (P < .0001) for normal
weight, 3.7 ± 3.08 (P < .0001) for pre-obesity weight
and 3.5 ± 3.3 (P < .0001) for obesity weight. For the
PCS domain of SF-36 the mean improvements were 10.7 ± 14.2 (P
< .0007) for normal weight, 6.14 ± 12.3 (P
< .02) for pre-obesity weight and 7.2 ± 10.7 (P
< .01) for obesity weight. For the MCS domain 7.7 ± 12.4
(P < .003) for normal weight, 4.5 ± 13.3 (P
< .04) for pre-obesity weight and 5.7 ± 9.6 (P
< .02) for obesity weight. Based on a previous
study1 the percentage of patients that met the MCID for ODI
was 62%, 50% and 60% for normal, pre-obese and obese respectively. For VAS
BP was 75%, 79% and 72% for normal, pre-obese and obese respectively. For
VAS LP was 54%, 51% and 60% for normal, pre-obese and obese respectively.
Conclusions: Our analysis revealed that BMI did not affect
the mean outcome scores in patients who underwent surgery of the lumbar
spine using the ELIF approach. Comparison between baseline and last
follow-up results demonstrated a similar improvement in all BMI groups and
showed statistically significant improvements in all aspect of PROMS and
MCID. These results corroborate that the ELIF approach is an effective and
safe treatment for lumbar pathology regardless of BMI.

## 624

## A223: Post-Operative Outcomes After Degenerative Lumbar Spine Surgery in
Rheumatoid Arthritis Patients - A Propensity Score Matched Analysis

So Kato

1

, Hideki Nakamoto

1

, Yasushi Oshima

1

, Yuki Taniguchi

1

, Yoshitaka Matsubayashi

1

, Toru Doi

1

, Naohiro Kawamura

2

, Nobuhiro Hara

3

, Akiro Higashikawa

4

, Takashi Ono

5

, and Yujiro Takeshita

6

1

The University of Tokyo, Tokyo, Japan

2

Japanese Red Cross Medical Center, Tokyo, Japan

3

Musashino Red Cross Hospital, Tokyo, Japan

4

Kanto Rosai Hospital, Kawasaki, Japan

5

JCHO Tokyo Shinjuku Medical Center, Tokyo, Japan

6

Yokohama Rosai Hospital, Yokohama, Japan

Introduction: Despite that treatment options for rheumatoid
arthritis (RA) have significantly evolved with the introduction of biologic
agents, degenerative lumbar disease in RA patients still remains a major
challenge. The risk of adverse events and reoperation is known to be high in
RA patients. However, well-controlled comparisons between RA patients and
non-RA counterparts have not yet been conducted in the literature and the
current evidence is scarce. The object of the present study was to compare
post-operative outcomes after lumbar spine surgery between RA and non-RA
patients using propensity score matched analysis. Material and
Methods: Patients who underwent primary posterior spine surgery
for degenerative lumbar disease in our prospective multicenter study group
between 2017 and 2019 and completed pre- and post-operative questionnaires
for patient-reported outcome measures were enrolled. Demographic data
including age, sex, body mass index (BMI), American Society of
Anesthesiologists Classification (ASA), diabetes mellitus, steroid use,
smoking, operative spinal level, fusion surgery were investigated and these
factors were used to calculate propensity score for RA diagnosis. One-to-one
matching was performed and 1-year post-operative outcomes (numerical rating
scale [NRS] for back pain, Oswestry Disability Index [ODI], EuroQOL [EQ5D],
Short Form-12 [SF-12], Core Outcome Measures Index for theback [COMI]) and
30-day complication rates were compared between RA and non-RA patients.
Results: Among 4545 patients included, 78 had RA (1.7%). In
comparison to non-RA patients, RA patients were older (71 vs 64 yrs,
P < .01), leaner (BMI 23 vs 24, P =
.02) and more likely to be female (82% vs 40%, P < .01),
diabetic (22% vs 14%, P < .01), and steroid user (51% vs
2%, P < .01). ASA was greater (2.0 vs 1.9, P
< .01) and fusion surgery was more commonly performed (55%
vs 27%, P < .01) with greater spinal levels involved in
surgery (3.5 vs 2.7, P < .01). Propensity matching
generated 62 pairs of RA and non-RA patients who underwent posterior lumbar
surgery. After background adjustment, it was revealed that there were no
statistically significant differences in post-operative NRS (2.8 vs 3.5,
P = .32), ODI (24.6 vs 26.9, P = .79),
EQ5D (0.68 vs 0.71, P = .43), SF-12 physical component
score (32.1 vs 32.7, P = .71) or COMI (3.2 vs 3.2,
P = .98). 30-day complication rate (10% vs 8%,
P = .75) did not differ either between the two groups.
Conclusion: Diagnosis of RA was found not to have negative
impact by itself on post-operative outcomes after posterior surgery for
degenerative lumbar disease.

## 1632

## A224: Relation Between Patient Perceived Surgical Indication, Fullfilment
of Expectations and Functional Outcome in Patients Undergoing Spine
Surgery
Sara Diniz1 2, Pedro Manuel Mendes dos Santos2,
Carolina Luísa Lemos2, and Ricardo Rodrigues-Pinto1
2

1

Centro Hospitalar Universitário do Porto. Portugal, Spinal Unit,
Department of Orthopaedics, Porto, Portugal

2

Instituto de Ciências Biomedicas Abel Salazar, Porto,
Portugal

Introduction: Patient expectations regarding surgery have been
shown to affect self-reported clinical outcome. In spinal surgery,
misconceptions about surgery outcome are frequent which may lead to patient
dissatisfaction. The objective of this study was to understand patient
misconceptions relatively to the self-perceived surgical indication and how
they can influence patient satisfaction and functional outcomes.
Material and Methods: From an initial pool of 316 patients,
149 were included in the study. A questionnaire was retrospectively applied
to assess patient-perceived surgical indication, fulfilment of expectations
and subjective improvement with surgery. Additionally, two validated
questionnaires (Neck Disability Index (NDI) and Oswestry Disability Index
(ODI) for were also used to assess objective clinical outcome.
Results: Patients submitted to lumbar surgery were 2984
times more likely to report fulfilment of expectations and those reporting
appendicular symptoms were 2675 times more likely to report fulfilment of
expectations than those submitted to cervical surgery or reporting axial
symptoms, respectively. Being male was the only factor associated with
subjective improvement. Among cervical pathologies, patients with cervical
myelopathy reported higher subjective improvement than patients with
cervical disc herniation. NDI was significantly lower in patients reporting
fulfilment of expectations with cervical surgery. Patients undergoing lumbar
surgery with predominant appendicular symptoms had lower disability than
those with predominant axial symptoms (39.34 vs 29.98). Patients who
reported fulfilment of expectations had lower disability as did those who
reported a subjective improvement after surgery. Conclusion:
This study showed that patients with appendicular symptoms and those
undergoing lumbar surgery were more likely to report subjective improvement
with spinal surgery. A surprisingly high percentage of patients reported
axial symptoms as the main indication for undergoing surgery (38.26%).
Misconceptions about spine surgery can lead to unrealistic expectations
towards treatment and ultimately lead to dissatisfaction with surgery. This
underlines the importance of the communication between surgeons and
patients.

## 247

## A225: Nose to back: spheroids derived from human nasal chondrocytes for
nucleus pulpous repair

Jesil Kasamkattil

1 2

, Anna Gryadunova

2 3

, Max Hans Peter Gay

1 2

, Vladimir Mironov

3

, Stefan Schären

1

, Ivan Martin

2

, Andrea Barbero

2

, Olga Krupkova

1 2

, and Arne Mehrkens

1

1

Spine Surgery, University Hospital Basel, Basel,
Switzerland

2

Tissue Engineering, Department of Biomedicine, University of Basel
& University Hospital Basel, Basel, Switzerland

3

Institute for Regenerative Medicine, I.M. Sechenov First Moscow
State Medical University, Moscow, Moscow, Russian Federation

Introduction: Autologous nasal chondrocytes (NC) could be an
excellent source for nucleus pulposus (NP) repair/regeneration. Indeed, NC
possess large cartilage-regenerative capacity and survive in harsh NP
microenvironment better than traditionally used MSCs (Gay et al., 2019). We
aim this in vitro study at analyzing the therapeutic
potential of NC spheroids (NCS), namely their capacity for injectability,
NP-like matrix accumulation, and integration in conditions simulating
degenerative disc disease (DDD). Material and Methods: Human NC
(n = 5) were cultured as spheroids with different culture supplements for
1-7 days. Injectability (size, shape) and biosynthetic potential of NCS
(biochemical content, gene expression, proliferation, elastic modulus) were
evaluated at each time point. Human NP cells (n = 3) were cultured as
spheroids for up to 14 days. DDD mimicking conditions (inflammation,
acidity, low glucose, hypoxia) were introduced and NCS-NP fusion kinetics
was monitored for 4 days (microscopy/image analysis). Anabolic and catabolic
responses of NCS vs NC single-cell suspension were assessed histologically,
biochemically, and by ELISA. Results: Non-adhesive technology
allowed the fabrication of NCS compatible with a common spinal needle
(<600 µm). NCS cultured with different supplements for 1-7 days
upregulated aggrecan and collagen type II expression and accumulated GAG and
total collagen (P < .05). In DDD mimicking conditions,
NCS performed superior to NC single-cell suspension in terms of cell
viability and catabolic shift (IL-8 release, P < .05).
The kinetics of NCS-NP fusion was not impaired by the DDD mimicking
conditions. Interestingly, “growth” culture supplements facilitated fusion
with NP tissue, while “chondrogenic” supplements increased elastic modulus
(P < .05). Conclusion: Our data
indicate that NC cultured as spheroids can produce NP-compatible matrix,
develop biomechanical properties similar to NP tissue, and possess the
capacity to integrate within degenerated NP. Moreover, specific NCS
properties are potentially tunable by culture supplements. These results
need to be verified in a whole disc organ culture bioreactor, towards
demonstration of the functionality of NC for scaffold-free NP repair.

## OP26: Trauma-Thoracolumbar 1

## 1463

## A226: AO Spine PROST (Patient Reported Outcome Spine Trauma) - Validation
of the English and Dutch Versions

Said Sadiqi

1

, Cumhur Oner

1

, and AO Spine Knowledge Forum Trauma

2

1

University Medical Center Utrecht, Department of Orthopaedics,
Utrecht, The Netherland

2

AO Foundation, Davos, Switzerland

Introduction: No outcome instrument was specifically designed
for traumatic spinal column injury patients, making it difficult to measure
the effect size of various treatment options. The AO Spine Knowledge Forum
Trauma initiated a project and developed the Patient Reported Outcome Spine
Trauma (AO Spine PROST) consisting of 19 items. The psychometric properties
of the English (ENG) and Dutch (NL) language versions of the tool were
investigated in an international multicenter validation study.
Material and Methods: Patients were recruited from four
level-1 trauma centers from North America and the Netherlands. The study
consisted of 3 parts: cross-sectional, test-retest, and responsiveness. For
concurrent validity, next to AO Spine PROST also SF-36 was filled out by
patients. Patient characteristics were analyzed using descriptive
statistics. Floor and ceiling effects as well as the number of inapplicable
and missing questions were analyzed for content validity. Cronbach’s α and
item-total correlation coefficients (itcc) were calculated for internal
consistency. Spearman correlation tests were performed within AO Spine PROST
items and in correlation to SF-36. Test-retest reliability was assessed
using Intraclass Correlation Coefficients (ICC). Responsiveness of the Dutch
version was assessed by calculating effect sizes (ES) and standardized
response mean (SRM). Factor analysis was performed to explore any dimensions
within AO Spine PROST. Results: Out of 179 and 196 enrolled
patients, 163 (91.1%) and 162 (82.7%) were included in the ENG and NL
validation study, respectively. Content validity showed good results, and no
floor and ceiling effects were seen. The internal consistency was excellent
(ENG: Cronbach’s α = .97; itcc 0.50-0.90, NL: Cronbach’s α = .96, itcc
0.50-0.86), with also good Spearman correlations (ENG: 0.29-0.85, NL
0.25-0.79). Also test-retest reliability was excellent (ENG: ICC = .97, NL:
ICC = .92). The strongest correlations of AO Spine PROST with SF-36 were
seen with the physical components (0.69-0.82; P < .001).
Factor analysis revealed 2 possible dimensions (Eigenvalues >1),
explaining 75.7% (ENG) and 65.4% (NL) of variance. Concerning responsiveness
analysis, very good results were seen with ES = 1.81 and SRM = 2.03
(P < .001). Conclusion: Very
satisfactory results were obtained for reliability, validity and
responsiveness of the English and Dutch versions of the AO Spine PROST, a
disease-specific patient-reported outcome measure for traumatic spinal
column injury patients. It is considered as a valuable tool, and has the
potential to contribute to the reduction of ongoing controversies in spine
trauma care.

## 224

## A227: Ability and Limits of Kyphoplasty to Stabilise Post Traumatic
Segmental Instability

Oliver Riesenbeck

1

, Niklas Czarnowski

1

, Michael Raschke

1

, and René Hartensuer

1

1

University of Muenster, Department of Trauma-, Hand- and
Reconstructive Surgery, Muenster, Germany

Introduction: Several case series in the literature suggest that
kyphoplasty may be an option to stabilize segmental instability after
traumatic vertebral body fractures. However, this approach contradicts the
classical biomechanical idea of ​​segmental instability after injury to the
central column. The aim of this study is to investigate the effect of
intravertebral vertebral reconstruction using kyphoplasty to stabilize
posttraumatic segmental instability with a robotic spine tester.
Material and Methods: The intact kinematic values ​​of 14
osteoporotic human spine (TH11-L3) were recorded using a robot-based spinal
cord tester in combination with active 3D motion tracking with and without
tracking bias and used as a baseline. After standardized induction of
incomplete burst fracture (AOS A3) of L1, the kinetic test was repeated to
assess posttraumatic values. The fractured vertebra (L1) was
then treated by kyphoplasty. Kinematic values ​​of each FSU were examined
after kyphoplasty. The following results focus on the injured plane (TH12 -
L1). Results: The experimental fracture situation resulted in a
significantly increased range of motion (ROM) of the TH12 - L1 level for
extension/flexion, lateral bending, and axial rotation. The increase in ROM
for axial rotation was 201% (P = .001), for
extension/flexion 132% (P = .0002), and for lateral bending
277% (P = .0002) of intact kinematic values. After
kyphoplasty a significant decrease of the posttraumatic instability TH12 -
L1 was observed for all three directions of movement. The ROM reduced to 80%
(P = .002) for axial rotation, 90% (P
= .0002) for extension flexion, and 71% (P =
.0002) for lateral bending. However, for all three directions of movement,
the original intact values ​​could not be restored, and there was a
significant remaining increase in the ROM compared to the values ​​before
the injury. Compared with intact values, ROM increased by 161% (P
= .002) with axial rotation, 120% with extension flexion
(P = .001), and 197% with lateral bending (P
= .0002). Conclusion: Kyphoplasty seems to have
the potential to reduce segmental instability after trauma. However, in the
model presented, intravertebral reconstruction failed to restore intact
levels and significant instability persisted. These observations may help
understand the stabilizing effect of kyphoplasty, but they do not answer how
much stabilization gain is needed to achieve good clinical outcomes. The
observed residual instability after kyphoplasty suggests that this treatment
offers limited opportunities to stabilize traumatic segmental
instability.

## 1721

## A228: Is the AO Spine Thoracolumbar Injury Classification System Reliable
and Practical? A Systematic Review

Zion Hwang

1

, James Houston

2

, Evangelos Fragakis

2

, Cristina Lupu

2

, Jason Bernard

2

, Timothy Bishop

2

, and Darren Lui

2

1

St. George's University of London, London, United Kingdom

2

St. George's Hospital, Trauma and Orthopaedics, London, United
Kingdom

Introduction: Controversy surrounding the classification of
thoracolumbar injuries has given rise to various classification systems over
the years, including the most recent AOSpine Thoracolumbar Injury
Classification System (ATLICS). This systematic review aims to provide an
up-to-date evaluation of the literature, including assessment of a further
three studies not analysed in previous reviews. In doing so, this is the
first systematic review to include a mixed adult and paediatric (age range:
9-96) subject cohort in their dataset and, more importantly, the reliability
among non spine-subspecialty professionals; something that is essential in
validating the classification as an inter-disciplinary communication tool.
Also detailed in this review is the wide variety between reliability across
studies, particularly with regard to sub-type classification, documenting
findings that have not been previously published. The final goal of this
up-to-date and accurate analysis of the ATLICS is to comment on its
characteristics and whether it should be adopted by the spinal community,
taking into account aspects that could be further improved. Material
and Methods: In this systematic review, electronic searches of
PubMed, EBESCO, Cochrane, and Web of Science databases were conducted. Data
extraction and quality assessment were in accordance with Cochrane
Collaboration guidelines. Results: Twelve articles assessing
the reliability of ATLICS were included in this review. The overall
inter-observer reliability varied from fair to substantial, but the three
additional studies in this review, compared to previous reviews, presented
on average only fair reliability. Least reliably classified were A1, A4 and
B subtypes. The overall intra-observer reliability was reported in seven
studies, of which six studies presented substantial reliability. Excluding
subtypes improved both overall inter- and intra- observer reliability. Only
one study assessed the reliability of the neurological classification,
yielding substantial reliability, and no studies were found on
patient-specific modifiers. Conclusion: This systematic review
concludes that ATLICS is reliable for the majority of injuries, but the
variability within subtypes suggests the need for further research in
assessing the needs of users in order to increase familiarity with ATLICS or
perhaps the necessity to include more subtype-specific criteria into the
system. Further research is also recommended on the reliability of
modifiers, neurological classification and the application of ATLICS in a
paediatric context.

## 1537

## A229: Posterior Stabilisation of Fractures of the Thoraco-Lumbar
Junction: Does the Inclusion of the Fracture-Level Pedicle Screw Affect
Functional and Radiological Outcomes?

Riaz Mohammed

1

, Roberto Carrasco

2

, Rajat Verma

1

, Irfan Siddique

1

, Saeed Mohammad

1

, and Mahmoud Elmalky

1 3

1

Salford Royal NHS Foundation Trust, United Kingdom, Department of
Complex Spine Surgery, Salford, United Kingdom

2

Salford Royal NHS Foundation Trust, Division of Population Health,
Health Services Research and Primary Care, Salford, United
Kingdom

3

Menoufia University, Faculty of Medicine, Shibin el Kom,
Egypt

Introduction:The thoracolumbar junction representing the
transition zone between the rigid thoracic and the mobile lumbar spine, is
subjected to greater loading stresses. Fractures of this area are therefore
common and associated with neurological deficit, instability and deformity.
The optimal construct for fractures of the thoraco-lumbar junction is
debatable, with no high-quality evidence to support the superiority of one
method over any other. Though posterior pedicle screw fixation is the gold
standard for unstable thoracolumbar fractures, instrumenting the fractured
level in the construct is a relatively new technique. Our study assesses
both functional and radiological outcomes of this construct in single level
fractures of the thoracolumbar junction (T11-L1). Methods:Radiological
parameters and functional outcomes (hospital registry database) were
prospectively collected for 53 consecutive thoracolumbar junction fractures
operated between the years 2010-2018. Patients where the fracture level was
instrumented (FL group: 34 patients) were compared with the group where
fracture level was not instrumented (NFL group: 19 patients).Radiological
parameters analysed were sagittal index, bi-segmental kyphosis (Cobb) angle
and the degree of vertebral height restoration. Outcomes were compared
between pre-operative, immediate post-operative and final follow up study
periods. To counter for small numbers and unequal groups, stepwise
regression analysis adjusted by age at the time of intervention, gender and
functional scores were performed. Only those variables with
P value≤0.2 were selected in the stepwise regression
model. Results:Post-operative back pain score was significantly lower in the
FL group(P< .025)compared to NFL group.Core Outcome
Measures Index (COMI) scores and leg pain scores, though low in theFLgroup,
were not statistically significant. Stepwise regression analysis showed that
inclusion of fracture-level screw is independently associated with a greater
change in sagittal angle from pre-operative to immediate post-operative
measurement after intervention and also from pre-operative to final
measurement. Also the FL group was associated with a greater change in
vertebral height ratio from pre-operative to immediate post-operative
measurement. There was no significantdifference between the groups for
revision surgery, deep infection, implant failure or post-operative length
of hospital stay. Conclusion: The inclusion of the fracture-level pedicle
screw in the fixation construct seems to significantly improve the immediate
and final measured radiological parameters along with better functional
scores in patients with single level unstable vertebral fractures of the
thoracolumbar junction.

## 1045

## A230: Reliability of Thoracolumbar Injury Classification System (TLICS)
in Predicting the Outcome Following Thoracolumbar Fractures

Nishanth Ampar

1

and Shyamasunder Bhat

1

1

Kasturba Medical College, Manipal, Manipal Academy of Higher
Education, Orthopaedics, Manipal, India

Introduction: Thoracolumbar spine fractures are common injuries
that can result in significant disability, deformity and neurological
deficit. An effective classification system is required for classifying
thoracolumbar injuries that not only includes all the essential elements
guiding therapeutic management, but accurately predicts the neurological
outcome. Thoracolumbar injury classification system (TLICS) includes all the
essential elements required for classifying, planning the modality of
treatment. The aim of this study was to assess the clinical utility of this
scoring system in classifying thoracolumbar spinal injuries, selection of
treatment modality and assessment of the neurological outcome.
Material and Methods: In this single-centre retrospective
study, 85 consecutive cases of thoracolumbar spine injury over the age 17
admitted between 2015 and 2018 with a minimum follow-up time of 2 years were
included. The Fractures were then assigned a TLICS score after review of CT
and MRI scans. All the pathological fractures were excluded from the study.
Patient-specific clinical confounders collected and examined included: age,
sex, and neurological status according to the American Spinal Injury
Association (ASIA) impairment grading at time of presentation was
documented. As per guidelines of TLICS scoring system all fractures with
score of less than 4 were managed non-operatively, those with more than 4
were managed operatively (decompression and posterior instrumentation) and
the patients with TLICS score 4 were managed either non -operative
/operative based on the decision taken following the members of the spinal
team. At the end of two years the neurological status was documented as per
ASIA impairment grade and compared to the ASIA Impairment grade at the time
of presentation and documented as completely improved, partially improved
and not improved with objective of assessing the reliability of TLICS score
in selection treatment modality and to predict the prognosis following
thoracolumbar spine injury. Results: The normality of data was
assessed using Kolmogorov-Smirnov (K-S) and Shapiro-Wilk test. We also used
non-parametric Kruskal-Wallis test to obtain the mean TLICS values. Out of
85 patients, 58 patients completely improved, whereas in 12 cases partial
improvement was recorded and in 15 cases there was no neurological
improvement post treatment. Out of 15 patients who showed no neurological
improvement, 13 patients had TLICS score of >4. Overall, among 38
patients with TLICS score of >4, 13/38 cases showed improvement, 12/38
cases showed partial improvement and 13/38 did not show any improvement.
High mean score of 6.933 ± 1.624 was associated with cases which did not
show any neurological improvement. Those who showed partial neurological
improvement had a TLICS mean score of 6.000 ± 0.853 and a very low score of
3.897 ± 1.507 was observed in case of patients who showed complete
improvement. A statistically significant association between neurological
improvement and TLICS score was observed (Chi square = 37.530, P
< .01). Conclusion: We conclude that TLICS
score can aid in selection of treatment modality and can be a reliable
predictor of neurological outcome following thoracolumbar spine
injuries.

## 175

## A231: Single-Stage Short-Segment Posterior Fixation and Anterior
Decompression with Inter-Body Fusion as a Management Approach for Unstable
Thoracolumbar Burst Fractures

Shaffaf Kareem

1

1

Vardhman Mahavir Medical College & Safdarjung Hospital, Spine
Care Unit, New Delhi, India

Introduction: In unstable thoracolumbar spine injuries, surgical
intervention is necessary for decompressing the cord and stabilizing the
spine. In literature, various strategies for the same have been described.
When either posterior alone approach or anterior stabilization alone are
used, there is a high risk of failure, instability or loss of deformity
correction. Hence combined approach is useful in providing direct
decompression of the cord as well as stabilization of the spine. Along with
that flexibility of the spine is also not compromised. Hence, this study
explores the clinical and radiological outcomes of one-stage short-segment
posterior pedicle screw fixation and anterior decompression with fusion
using a titanium cage. Material and Methods: The study was
conducted in 30 consecutive patients of traumatic thoracolumbar unstable
burst fractures with evidence of spinal cord compression and neurological
deficit. After appropriate clinical and radiological diagnosis, all
underwent single-stage short-segment posterior fixation and anterior
decompression with fusion using a titanium cage filled with bone graft.
Results: In our study, the majority of the patients were of
male sex; with a mean age of 30.2 years. Falls from height constituted the
commonest mode of injury. The most common vertebra involved was L1. The mean
timing of surgery from incision to application of dressing was 249 minutes.
The mean blood loss was 1149 ml. Average follow-up of 3 years, showed that
those (6 patients) reported with cord discontinuity had no neurological
recovery. Out of the rest, 22 patients had improvement of at least 1 grade
in frankel grading. No patients showed deterioration of neurology. The mean
value of canal compromise reduced from the pre-operative value of 43.47- 0
postoperatively. Mean anterior vertebral height compression (AVHC) % was
corrected from 37.77% preoperatively to 18.53% in the immediate
postoperative period, and at 6 months it was 22.27% with a mean loss of
correction of 2.93%. There was a decrease in lateral Cobb's angle from a
mean pre-operative angle of 23.93°- 6.63°. None had post-operative
complications like hardware failure, spinal instability, cage subsidence or
progression of the deformity. Evidence of fusion was seen in 90%.
Conclusion: Adding anterior stabilization to unstable
thoracolumbar burst fracture prevents posterior implant failure, preserves
the number of motion segments and provides a larger area for a fusion of the
segments anteriorly. However, a randomized control study with larger
population size and longer follow-up is necessary to look for actual fusion
rates as well as the occurrence of complications.

## 1837

## A232: Post-Traumatic Thoracolumbar Kyphosis: A Major, Challenging, Late
Complication Following Tl Spinal Injuries - A Retrospective Analysis of its
Clinical Presentation, Surgical Management and Long-Term Outcome Following
Surgical Intervention

Ajoy P Shetty

1

, Rohit Kavishkar

1

, Rishi Kanna

1

, Vibhu Krishnan Viswanathan

1

, and Shanmuganathan Rajasekaran

2

1

Ganga Medical Center and Hospitals, Spine surgery, Coimbatore,
India

2

Ganga Medical Center and Hospitals, Coimbatore, India

Introduction: Post-traumatic kyphosis (PTK) is a challenging
complication following TL spinal trauma. It usually develops consequent to
missed or conservatively managed AO type B2 injuries (posterior ligamentous
complex disruption), injuries to the inter-vertebral discs or vertebral
end-plates, severe osteoporosis, pseudoarthrosis, or iatrogenic causes
including implant failure or loosening. Progressive kyphosis can lead to
recalcitrant symptoms including pain, progressive deformity and neurological
deterioration. The aim of the current study was to retrospectively analyze
the long-term radiological and clinical outcomes of patients who underwent
surgical correction of PTK. Material and Methods: A
retrospective analysis of the clinical and radiological data of PTK patients
who presented to our Out-Patient clinics or Emergency Department between
January 2016 and August 2018 was performed. Only surgically treated patients
with adequate (at least 2 year) follow-up were included. For deformity
correction we performed one of the following osteotomies - Ponte’s
osteotomy, pedicle subtraction osteotomy (PSO), disc-bone osteotomy (DBO)
and closing opening wedge osteotomy (COWO). Radiological evaluation of
kyphosis was performed using Cobb’s angle. The functional outcome at the
final follow-up was assessed using Oswestry Disability Index (ODI), visual
analogue scale (VAS), and SF-12 score. The statistical analysis was
performed using “student t test”. Results: A total of 22 cases
(male to female ratio 2.3; mean age 30.3 years) with PTK treated by
posterior spinal deformity correction and instrumented fusion were included
for this study. The most common presenting symptom was instability-type,
axial back pain [n = 22(100%)]. 9.1% of patients presented with neurological
deficit. The mean time of presentation from initial injury was 16.5 ± 7
weeks. The apex of kyphosis was located between T11 and L2 in all our
patients. Ponte’s osteotomies, PSO, DBO and COWO were performed in 9, 9,2
and 2 patients, respectively. The mean pre-operative Cobb’s angle was 33.3°.
Post-operatively, the mean correction, which was achieved, was 23.85°
(P < .05). The mean surgical time was 275 ± 40
minutes, and the mean intra-operative blood loss was 445 ± 71 ml. The mean
VAS score for back pain improved from 7.2 to 2, and ODI score decreased from
58.1 to 24.1 at the last follow-up. Conclusion: Symptomatic PTK
is a rarely encountered, delayed complication following TL traumata. They
usually develop at the junctional levels of TL spine and most commonly
present with axial, instability-type back pain. A certain proportion of
these patients present with significant neurological deficit. Surgical
deformity correction is a safe and effective method for treating this
condition. Such procedures can enable the surgeons to achieve adequate
correction of the kyphosis and also provide ameliorated, long-term
functional outcome for the patients. Keywords: PTK
(post-traumatic kyphosis), kyphosis, osteotomy

## 1400

## A233: Classifications and Therapy Recommendations for Thoracolumbar
Spinal Injuries: A Comparison Between AO Magerl, TLICS, and AOSpine

Fady Khamis

1

, Philipp Schleicher

1

, Pingel Andreas

1

, and Frank Kandziora

1

1

BGU Frankfurt, Frankfurt am Main, Germany

Introduction: To determine the efficiency or reliability of a
new classification system, a direct comparison with existing classification
systems should be performed. The aim of the present work is a comparative
evaluation of the interobserver reliability of the three international
classification systems for thoracolumbar spine injuries (AO Magerl,
Thoracolumbar Injury classification score “TLICS”, Thoracolumbar AO Spine
classification “TL AOSpine”) and the determination of modification
possibilities with regard to reliability, usability as well as therapy
recommendation of the currently common TL AOSpine classification system.
Materials/Method: This is a monocentric, prospective
analysis of patients with fractures of the thoracolumbar region. Only cases
with traumatic fractures were included, pathological fractures were
excluded. The available x-rays, CT and MRT images were classified by 5 spine
surgeons with different degrees of experience using the three classification
systems AOSpine, AO Magerl and TLICS, and the associated treatment
recommendation according to Thoracolumbar AO Spine classification injury
score “TL AOS IS”, German society for trauma surgery “DGU” and TLICS. For
the statistical evaluation, the interobserver reliability according to
Cohen's kappa was calculated. Results: Radiological and
clinical data of 100 patients were included. AO Magerl showed moderate
Interobserver reliability (κ = .46) for morphological classification and
substantial agreement (κ = .71) for DGU therapy recommendations. TLICS
showed fair Interobserver reliability (κ = .35) for morphological
classification, substantial agreement (κ = .69) for therapy recommendations
according to TLICS. TL AOS showed substantial Interobserver reliability (κ =
.69) for morphological classification and a substantial agreement (κ = .77)
for therapy recommendations (TL AOS IS). Discussion: In the
present study it could be shown that TL AOS is a reliable classification,
with superior interobserver reliability compared to AO Magerl and TLICS. The
treatment recommendations of TL AOSIS have higher interobserver reliability
compared to other treatment recommendations (DGU and TLICS).

## 1732

## A234: Burst Fractures Without Neurological Injury. Predictive Factors for
Surgical Treatment

Ana Ribau1, Tiago Barbosa1, Manuel Carrapatoso1, Ricardo
Rodrigues-Pinto1, and Pedro Neves2

1
Spinal Unit (UVM). Department of Orthopaedics. Centro
Hospitalar Universitário do Porto., Porto, Portugal, 
2
Centro Hospitalar e Universitário do Porto, Porto,
Portugal
Introduction: The optimal treatment of burst thoracolumbar
fractures without neurological injury remains controversial. Numerous
classifications have been developed with the goal of guiding the treatment
decision however none is completely accepted. On the other wise, there are
some factors indicating instability such as height loss greater than 50% and
angulation greater than 30°. This work aims to identify the factors that
were associated with the decision between surgical or conservative
treatment. Material and Methods: All patients treated for burst
thoracic and/or lumbar fractures, without neurological injury, in the period
of 1 year, in a single institution, were retrospectively evaluated using
clinical and image records. Demographic data, type of treatment, TLICS
classification, height loss and angulation were analyzed.
Results: Of the 97 patients, 27 men and 70 women, with a
mean age of 71 years, 79 (81%) were treated conservatively and 18 (19%)
underwent surgery. The average age was 52 years for those that underwent
surgical treatment and 75 years for the group that was conservatively
treated. Seventy-two patients were TLICS 2, of these 67 were treated
conservatively and 5 surgically. There were 25 patients with TLICS 4, 12 of
which were treated conservatively and 13 surgically. The average angulation
for patients treated conservatively was 10° and for those treated surgically
15°. In the univariate analysis, age (P < .001),
angulation (P = .007) and TLICS (P <
.001) were associated with the type of treatment performed. However, when
multivariate analysis was performed, only age (P = .001)
and TLICS (P < .005) maintained the association. The
TLICS classification was associated with the decision made, however there
are patients with same classification that are oriented differently (e.g., 5
patients with TLICS 2 treated surgically). Age is also an independent factor
associated with the treatment decision, with a trend towards surgical
treatment decision in younger patient. The angulation despite being
associated with the treatment decision is not an independent factor and is
therefore a confounding factor. Conclusion: Our results are in
line with those found in the literature. Although there are some guides for
the treatment decision, there is no algorithm and burst fractures without
neurological injury still represent a decision dilemma for the surgeon.

## OP27: Spinal Infections

## 582

## A235: Relapses, Complications and Mortality with Hematogenous Vertebral
Osteomyelitis

Alexander Bazarov

1

, Konstantin Sergeev

2 3

, Aleksei Farion

3

, and Roman Paskov

2 4

1

Tyumen regional hospital

2, Traumatology and Orthopedic Department

3, Tyumen, Russian Federation, 
2
Tyumen State Medical University, Department of Traumatology
and Orthopedics with a course in Pediatric Traumatology, Tyumen, Russian
Federation, 
3
Tyumen regional hospital No2, Traumatology and Orthopedic
Department No1, Tyumen, Russian Federation, 
4
Tyumen regional hospital No2, Tyumen, Russian
Federation
Introduction: Hematogenous pyogenic vertebral osteomyelitis is a
disease that requires a multidisciplinary approach. The rarity and severity
of this pathology requires focusing on relapses, complications and
mortality. The number of complications can reach 12.5%. Recurrences are a
potential problem for spondylodiscitis, especially when instrumentation is
used. The number of relapses according to different studies varies from 1 to
22%. Mortality rates in most publications do not exceed 5.0%, however, it
can increase up to 20.0% with late diagnosis. Material and
Methods: a retrospective analysis of 209 PVO cases was conducted
in the Tyumen Regional hospital #2 in 2007-2017 (Russia) with a diagnosis of
“Pyogenic vertebral osteomyelitis”. 68 patients (32.5%) were treated
conservatively, 141 (67.5%) operatively. Risk factors for relapse,
complications and mortality with various treatment methods were analyzed. A
statistical analysis was performed. Results: Recurrent disease
was observed in 21 patients (10.0%). Relapses after surgical treatment
amounted to 12.8% (n = 18), conservative - 4.4% (n = 3). The main causes of
complications were: diabetes mellitus, drug abuse, gross violation of the
treatment regimen. 17 patients were operated on again (12.0%), remission was
achieved in nine of them (52.9%). The risk of relapse was significantly
higher among drug-addicted patients (P = .015), but only in
the surgical group. Complications accounted for 15.8% (n = 33) of the total
number of patients. In the surgical group: intraoperative - 5.0% (n = 7),
postoperative - 19.8% (n = 28). The number of complications is significantly
higher in the group of operated patients who underwent volumetric surgery
and treatment in the intensive care unit for other diseases (P
= .028). Hospital mortality of 4.3% (n = 9) was significantly
higher in patients with diabetes mellitus (P = .039), among
those who were operated on (P = .023).
Conclusion: The risk of relapse was significantly higher
among drug-addicted patients (P = .015), but only in the
group of operated patients. With conservative treatment the rate of relapses
was 4.4% compared to surgical treatment - 12.0%. Complications are
significantly more common in patients who have been treated in the intensive
care unit and operated on for other diseases (P = .028).
Hospital mortality (n = 9) was 4.3% and significantly higher in patients
with diabetes mellitus (P = .039).

## 381

## A236: Tuberculosis of the Cranio-Vertebral Junction: Its Altered
Biomechanics and Treatment Strategy

Sudhir Srivastava

1

, Nandan Marathe

1 2

, Sunil Bhosale

1

, Aditya Raj

1

, and Ashraf Shaikh

1

1

Seth GS Medical College and KEM Hospital, Orthopedics, Mumbai,
India

2

Toronto Western Hospital, Orthopedic Surgery, Toronto,
Canada

Introduction: TB of the Craniovertebral junction (CVJ) is a not
so common form of spinal TB, accounting for less than 1% of all forms of
spinal TB. Usually, diagnosis gets delayed because of non-specific nature of
symptoms and difficulty in interpreting screening X-rays at the initial
stages of the disease. Neurological deficit in such a situation can be
catastrophic. Peculiar anatomy of this region further compounds the problem.
CVJ has a Y-shaped beam for load transmission and has no anterior loading
structure at C1. Stabilizing structures mainly include the ligaments and
destruction secondary to TB causes instability which in turn leads to neural
dysfunction. The authors have designed a protocol based management strategy
for TB of the CVJ. This study will assess functional outcomes of patients
with CVJ Koch treated using this protocol. Materials and
methods: 108 patients with TB of the CVJ were managed at a
tertiary care University Hospital in India over a period of 12 years. A
treatment algorithm was developed for these patients based on the clinical
and radiological classification. Patients were divided radiologically into 3
grades depending on the severity of involvement. Group A included patients
with presence of pre-vertebral shadow, no instability and only lytic lesion
in the bone. Group B had patients with instability and osseous destruction.
This group was further subdivided into patients with early involvement of
one lateral mass/ joint and those in whom lateral mass was bilaterally
affected. Group C included patients with significant destruction of lateral
mass complex, irreducible C1- C2 dislocation and persistent AAD in
paediatric age group. Patients were treated either conservatively or
surgically using the treatment algorithm. Conservative management strategies
included Anti- tuberculosis chemotherapy, Orthosis and Traction. Surgeries
performed included occipito-cervical fixation and fusion, Trans-articular
screw fixation and fusion, C1-C2 separate fixation (Pedicle screw/ Lateral
mass screw/ Laminar screw). Results: 60 patients were treated
conservatively, 28 patients required OCP, 18 patients needed trans-articular
screws, 2 patient was treated with C1-C2 separate fixation. 6 patients had
clinically appreciable tilt and 10 patients had axial settling in the
conservatively treated group. However, there was no functional impairment.
There was no neurological deterioration in any conservatively treated
patient. In the surgically treated group of 48 patients not a single patient
had neurological deterioration. Out of the 8 patients who were clinically
grade 3, 7 patients were ambulatory at 18 months follow-up. 1 patient
remained paraplegic. Fusion was achieved in all cases.
Conclusion: Though the bacteria and the chemotherapy are
the same, TB of the CVJ needs special attention because of the complex
anatomy of the region and presence of vital structures in the vicinity.
Early detection, initial rigid orthosis for adequate healing and protocol
base surgical intervention when warranted will give a long lasting fruitful
outcome. Keywords: Cranio- vertebral, tuberculosis,
trans-articular, orthosis, occipito-cervical

## 710

## A237: Current trends of drug resistance in spinal tuberculosis: a single
centre experience

Aditya Raj

1

, Sudhir Srivastava

1

, and Nandan Marathe

2

1

Seth G.S Medical College & K.E.M Hospital, Orthopaedics, Mumbai,
India

2

Toronto Western Hospital, Toronto, Canada

Introduction: Spinal tuberculosis accounts for about 50% of
cases amongst extra pulmonary osteoarticular tuberculosis. Resistance to
drugs in spinal tuberculosis patients is on a rise and there is inadequate
literature concentrating on the precise pattern of resistance in Indian
subcontinent which harbours 24% of global prevalence. The aim is to study
the pattern of drug resistance in spinal tuberculosis among first and
second-line drugs. Drug resistance is common in spinal tuberculosis and we
intend to find the prevalence of various drug resistance patterns.
Methods: This study represents a retrospective
observational analysis. Patients with spinal tuberculosis visiting a
tertiary centre were assessed. Samples were taken from the affected
vertebrae and sent for BACTEC Mycobacterium Growth Tube Indicator(MGIT) 960
culture. Patients with a positive growth in MGIT were included in the study.
All previously treated patients (Relapse, Treatment after failure, Treatment
after loss to follow-up and other previously treated patients) were
excluded. We routinely perform MGIT, Gene Xpert (Cartridge based nucleic
acid amplification technique) and histopathological examination in all the
patients undergoing a biopsy for suspected tuberculous spondylodiscitis.
Results: 150 patients with a positive growth in MGIT report
were included in the study, of which 43 patients had some kind of drug
resistance. Seven were multidrug resistant (MDR), 9 had pre-extensive drug
resistance (pre XDR) and 4 had extensive drug resistance (XDR). Among the 9
patients who had Pre XDR TB, 6 (13.95%) had resistance to FQ and 3 (6.97 %)
had resistance to an injectable 2nd line. Mono-drug resistance was present
in 17 cases (39.5%) and polydrug resistance was present in 6 (13.95%)
patients. The most common drug resistance among the first line agents was
encountered was with Isoniazid (74.4%) and least with pyrazinamide (30.23%).
Among the second line agents the drug resistance was more common with the FQ
group as compared to second line injectables. Resistance to RIF in the study
was less as compared to that of INH, showing that INH resistance is more
prevalent and examining patients with Gene Xpert for RIF resistance alone
will not prevent amplifier effect. Conclusion: Drug resistance
in spinal tuberculosis was found to be 28.6%. Out of these MDR was in 16.2
%, pre XDR in 20.9% and XDR in 9.3% patients. In recent years, new drug
regimens are being evaluated for drug resistant pulmonary tuberculosis based
on drug sensitivity pattern, while no such study has been performed for
spinal tuberculosis. This study provides pattern of drug resistance in
patients with drug resistant spinal TB.

## 661

## A238: Instrumented Fusion in Tubercular Spondylitis in Low Middle Income
Country, Nepal

Subin Byanjankar

1

and Dipak Maharjan

1

1

Green Pastures Hospital and Rehabilitation Center, Orthopedics and
spinal disorder, Pokhara, Nepal

Introduction: While Tuberculosis is rare in developed countries,
it is rampant in Low Middle-Income countries. Even though there is an
improvement in diagnosis with improved laboratory services, radiology, a
significant number of patients present late with complications of advanced
disease. Tubercular Spondylitis is primarily a medical disease. Surgery is
indicated for neurological complications, pain, diagnostic dilemma and
correction/prevention of deformity. Material and Methods: We
prospectively followed up 29 adults operated for Tubercular spine from May
2009 to April 2019. 19 patients underwent instrumented Fusion in thoracic
and lumbar Spine from T5- L5. The mean follow up was 34 months. Indications
for surgery included neurologic complication 10, recalcitrant pain
unresponsive to Anti-tubercular therapy (ATT) - 11. All the patients were
assessed clinically with American Spinal Injury Association (ASIA)
Impairment Scale and Oswestry Disability Index (ODI) preoperatively and
follow up at 6 weeks, 3 months and then at 3 months interval. Anterior
debridement, decompression and Anterior Column Reconstruction (ACR) using
Iliac Crest Bone Graft or Titanium cage filled with bone graft followed by
Posterior Spinal Instrumentation (PSI) were performed in 11 patients.
Posterior Spinal Instrumentation, circumferential debridement,
decompression, and Anterior Column Reconstruction through an Extended
Posterior Approach - 10 patients. Other surgeries included open
transpedicular biopsy in 5 patients with the diagnostic dilemma and
anterolateral decompression and Biopsy in other 2 and Anterior Cervical
Fusion 1. All patients received 12 months of Anti-tubercular therapy. 3
proven Multidrug-Resistant (MDR) TB received MDR regimen.
Results: 21 patients were reviewed. 1 paraplegic patient
who had recovered to ambulation with support, died at 6 months. Another
patient with Tuberculosis of L3L4L5 with pain and deformity was fully
ambulatory died after 3 years due to Alcoholic Liver Disease. Mean duration
of surgery was 5.3 hours (4 - 7 hours), mean blood loss 820 ml (400 - 1200
ml) and mean hospital stay was 20 days (12 - 40 days) in Anterior
Debridement, Decompression and Column Reconstruction followed by Posterior
Spinal Instrumentation and in the Singe stage Extended Posterior Approach
mean duration of surgery 3.5 (3 - 5 hours), mean blood loss 550ml (300 -
800ml) and mean hospital stay12.6 days (8-14 days). Neurological recovery
was seen in all 5 complete paraplegics and 3 incomplete paraplegics. There
was a significant improvement of ODI - mean 89.2% pre-operative to 19.1 %
(Range 13 - 40) at 6 months follow up and 6.1 % (Range 0 - 18) at 1 year
follow up. 2 patients developed surgical site infection requiring
debridement, 2 patients developed cold abscesses who were later diagnosed to
have MDR. 1 patient developed drug-induced Hepatitis. 1 patient developed
unhealed sinus and Implant breakage. Conclusion: Surgical
treatment when indicated for active Tubercular Spondylitis with Anterior
Debridement, Decompression, Anterior Column Reconstruction and Posterior and
Spinal instrumentation along with Anti-tubercular therapy offers good
clinical and neurological recovery. Single-stage Extended Posterior approach
for circumferential decompression and column reconstruction has an advantage
of reduced operative time, operative blood loss and shorter hospital
stay.

## 718

## A239: Modern Tactics and Surgical Treatment of 338 Patients with Purulent
Spondylitis

Maxim Goncharov

1

, Vadim Manukovsky

2

, and Evgeni Levchik

3

1

Ural State Medical Universitet, Neurosurgery, Ekaterinburg, Russian
Federation

2

Saint-Petersburg I.I. Dzhanelidze Research Institute of Emergency
Medicine, Neurosurgery, Saint-Petersburg, Russian Federation

3

ural State Medical Universitet, Ekaterinburg, Russian
Federation

Introduction: In the treatment of purulent spondylitis, there
are many problems, such as-the timing of specialized care, indications for
surgical treatment, one or two-stage surgical interventions, isolated
arthrodesis, or with instrumental fixation. We operated on 338 patients with
purulent spondylitis. Active surgical tactics in patients with purulent
spondylitis, together with the choice of low-traumatic and radical
approaches, as well as postoperative antibacterial therapy, allows achieving
good surgical outcomes in the majority (90%) of patients. Material and
Methods: During the period from 2007 to 2017, 338 patients were
operated on. The average age of patients was 47.6 ± 2.8 years. 38 (11.24%)
were diagnosed with HIV infection. The average duration of the disease from
the first signs to surgical treatment was 47.9 ± 23.3 days. Patients were
also divided into 3 groups according to the clinical classification of E.
Pola (2017): А1-4 - 0, В1-4 -10(2,9%), С1-4-328 (97,1%). Neurological
disorders of varying severity were detected in 256 (75.7%) patients.
Systemic inflammatory response syndrome was diagnosed in 141 (41.7%)
patients. Results: Performed the following operations:
decompression and debridement in 132 (39.05%) patients, decompression,
debridement and fusion in 198 (58.6%), and fusion in 8 (2.3%). To evaluate
the results of surgical treatment, we took into account the dynamics of pain
(according to VAS), neurological disorders (according to the ASIA/ISNCSCI
scale), systemic inflammatory response syndrome, indicators of quality of
life and patient satisfaction with treatment (Karnovsky, Oswestry scale),
and the presence of postoperative complications. Good and satisfactory
results of surgical treatment at the time of discharge from the hospital
were observed in 320 (94.6%) patients. These patients reported high
postoperative quality of life scores on the Karnovsky scale (average 81.2 ±
7.4 points) and low Oswestry disability scores (ODI 20.3 ± 2.3). The
majority of unsatisfactory outcomes in patients were due to: fatal outcomes
in 7 (2,07%), residual gross neurological disorders, repeated vertebral
operations in 6 (1.7%); repeated vertebral operations due to infection of
the autosteal graft or bone migration in 5 (1.5) patients.
Conclusion: Surgical treatment of purulent spondylitis is a
complex and multi-factorial task. Reducing the duration of the disease,
active surgical tactics, taking into account the syndrome of a systemic
inflammatory response, is accompanied by good outcomes in the majority (94%)
of operated patients.

## 676

## A240: Can Intra-Operative Irrigation with Antibiotics Reduce Bacterial
Load at the Surgical Site? An in-Vitro Study

Rawan Masarwa

1

, Ofir Uri

1

, and Eyal behrbalk

1

1

Hillel Yaffe Medical Center, Orthopaedic Department, Hadera,
Israel

Purpose: Intra-operative surgical site irrigation with
antibiotics and may reduce risk of infection in spine surgeries involving
instrumentation. Nevertheless, this common practice lacks supporting
evidence. This prospective in-vitro study evaluated short-term exposure to
antibiotics on growth of common pathogens involved in wound site infection
in spine surgery. Methods: A suspension of one of three
micro-organisms: (1) Staphylococcus Aureus, (2)
Staphylococcus Epidermidis, or (3) Pseudomans
Aeruginosa was added to 2-ml vials of enriched medium,
containing one of three antibiotics: (a) Vancomycin, (b) Gentamicin, or (c)
Cefazolin. The final inoculum of each micro-organism was 103
CFU/ml, representing a contaminated surgical wound in spine surgery.
Antibiotics were washed out from the suspension by centrifugation technique
after: (i) 5 minutes, or (ii) 8 hours, representing time of tissue exposure
to antibiotics after intra-operative surgical site irrigation or applying
antibiotic powder to the surgical field before wound closure, respectively.
Recovery growth of micro-organisms was monitored for 24h by laser light
scattering technology and compared to control vials containing
micro-organisms without antibiotics. Results: Pseudomans
Aeruginosa inoculated in vials with Gentamicin, showed no 24-hour bacterial
growth after 5-minute and 8-hour exposure to the antibiotic. Vials of all
other bacteria-antibiotic combinations showed bacterial growth curves
similar to the control vials after both 5-minute and 8-hour exposure to
antibiotics, with no signs of bacterial growth inhibition.
Conclusion: Our findings demonstrate that a 5-minute
exposure to Gentamicin may inhibit Pseudomonas Aeroginosa growth in enriched
medium vials and support surgical wound irrigation with Gentamicin in spine
surgery.

## 484

## A241: Outcomes of surgical treatment of spondylitis in HIV-infected
patients

Maxim Goncharov

1

, Evgeni Levchik

1

, and Arkadiy Vishnevsky

1

1

URAL State Medical Universitet, Ekaterinburg, Russian
Federation

Introduction: Currently, Russia ranks 4th in the world after
South Africa, Nigeria, and Mozambique in terms of the growth rate of new
cases of HIV-infected patients [WHO, 2018]. The total number of HIV-infected
patients in the Russian Federation is more than 1 million people. The goal
of the study was to improve the outcomes of surgical treatment of purulent
spondylitis in HIV-infected patients. A personalized approach to the
patient, taking into account the level of CD4 cells, is accompanied by
favorable outcomes of surgical treatment, comparable to the indicators of
the control group. Material and Methods: A monocenter
group-control study was conducted between 2005 and 2018. The catamnesis of
365 patients with pyogenic spondylitis was studied. 64 (17.5%) had HIV
infection. The average duration of HIV infection at the time of
hospitalization was 6.5 ± 2.2 years. Patients were also divided into 3
groups according to the clinical classification of E. Pola (2017): А1-4 - 0,
B1-4 - 2 (3,1%), C1-4 - 62 (96,8%). Neurological disorders of varying
severity were detected in 52 (81.3%) patients with HIV infection.
Results: Patients were operated on: 22 (34.4%) had
decompression and debridement, 42 (65.6%) had decompression, debridement and
fusion. Good and satisfactory results of surgical treatment at the time of
discharge from the hospital were observed in 57 (89.1%) patients. These
patients reported high postoperative quality of life scores on the Karnovsky
scale (average 79.2 ± 5.4 points) and low Oswestry disability scores (ODI
23.3 ± 4.5). 2 (3.1%) patients had unsatisfactory treatment outcomes due to
increased neurological symptoms in the immediate postoperative period. When
evaluating outcomes and complications in HIV-positive patients with
different levels of CD4 + lymphocytes, the prevalence of early infectious
complications (in 10 patients - 66.6%) was revealed in the group of patients
with CD4 cell levels less than 200 cells/µl (P < .05).
Conclusion: Patients with HIV infection are at risk for
developing purulent spondylitis. The choice of conservative or surgical
treatment of purulent spondylitis depends on the stage of the disease, the
type of vertebral destruction, the presence of spinal instability and
neurological disorders.

## 743

## A242: Risk Factors for Revision Surgery in Infectious Spondylitis
Patients: Prospective Cohort Analysis

Gereyhan Kaibov

1

, Denis Naumov

1

, and Alexander Mushkin

1

1

Saint-Petersburg State Research Institute of Phisiopulmonology,
Spine surgery, Saint-Petersburg, Russian Federation

Introduction: The rate of postoperative complications for
infectious spondylitis is about 20%. A health related quality of life
analysis shows the significant increase of a patient’s disability index
after revision surgery. The risk factors evaluation of a postoperative
failure produces a relevant data for treatment results improvement.
Materials and Methods: Prospective cohort analysis from
January to December 2019. During the evaluation period 227 consecutive
infectious spondylitis patients were operated. Pathological tissue
debridement, anterior fusion with titanium mesh cage and posterior fusion
with transpedicular screw or laminar hooks fixation was performed in all
cases. 58 cases of postoperative complications were detected, included 38
cases in patients with pyogenic spondylitis and 20 cases - with chronic
tuberculosis spondylitis. The average age of patients was 52 years (min-21
years, max-76 years), 35 male and 23 female were suffered post-op
complications. The Charlson Comorbidity index was 2.2 ± 1.3 for pyogenic
spondylitis and 3.2 ± 2 - for tuberculosis spondylitis. Next evaluation
parameters were analysis as potential risk factors: primary disease
etiology, level of spondylitis, length of anterior / posterior fusion,
Charlson Comorbidity index, sex and patients age, primary surgery time and
blood loss. Results: The rate of postoperative complications in
our cohort was 13%. Complications at early post-op period (less than 30 days
after initial surgery) were detected in 14 patients, at delay post-op period
(from 30 to 90 days) - in 8 patients, and at late post-op period (more than
90 days) - in 36 patients. The average period for post-op complications
development was 7 ± 3 months (min - 7 days post-op, max - 9 months post-op).
Primary disease recurrence was finding in 2 cases, anterior fusion failure -
in 12 cases, posterior fusion failure - in 21 cases, surgical site infection
- in 23 cases (superficial - 5 cases, deep - 18 cases). The primary disease
etiology, length of posterior instrumentation, sex and patient age, primary
surgery time and operation blood loss weren’t influence on a risk of post-op
complications. The rate of post-op complications was higher in patients with
lumbar spondylitis (OR = 2.384, CI = 95%, P = .038). The
most of complications was detected at delay post-op period (OR =
4.549, CI = 95%, P = .025). Conclusion: The
anterior and posterior fusion failures are the most common post-op
complications in patients with infectious spondylitis. The late post-op
period related with complications. The decrease of a complication rate is
correlate with catamnesis.

## 220

## A243: Recovery of Long Standing Neurological Deficit in Paediatric Dorsal
Spinal Tuberculosis

Sudhir Srivastava

1

, Aditya Raj

1

, and Nandan Marathe

2

1

Seth G.S Medical College & K.E.M Hospital, Orthopaedics, Mumbai,
India

2

Toronto Western Hospital, Toronto, Canada

Introduction: Neurological deficit among patients of spinal
tuberculosis is still frequently found in the developing countries. Patients
in developing nations do have a protracted course of this disease and
patients are frequently neglected in the low socioeconomic strata group.
These patients may have an onset of neurological deficit and still present
quite late in the course of disease. It is not uncommon for these patients
to remain non ambulatory for a long period of time before approaching a
clinician. The aim is to study the recovery of neurological deficit in
paediatric spinal tuberculosis cases presenting to us more than 6 months
after onset of motor weakness in lower limbs. Material and
Methods: This is a retrospective analysis of 13 consecutive
patients of paediatric spinal tuberculosis presenting to us at least 6
months after the onset of neurologic deficit. All these patients underwent
surgical intervention at our centre and their neurological recovery was
noted in terms of improvement in Frankel grading and spasticity improvement
by modified Ashworth scale. All the patients were followed up to at least 18
months post op and final neurologic status was assessed at that time.
Results: The mean age of the patients at presentation was
8.5 years. The mean duration of neurologic deficit at the time of
presentation was 10.23 months (6-24 months). Seven patients had a Frankel
grade B at presentation out of which six improved to Frankel grade D and one
improved to Frankel C at final follow up. Out of the other 3 patients with
Frankel A at presentation, 2 improved to Frankel grade D and 1 to Frankel
grade C. The remaining 3 patients presented with Frankel grade C at
presentation, two improved to Frankel D and one improved to Frankel E at the
time of final follow up. Six of these patients underwent a single incision
transthoracic versatile approach and supplemented with hartshill rectangle
and sublaminar wire fixation. The anterior reconstruction of the destroyed
vertebrae was done with iliac crest bone graft and rib graft harvested
during the exposure in these patients. Four patients were treated with
hybrid fixation by posterior approach. The distal part of the construct
comprised of pedicle screw system and the proximal part of the construct
comprised of sublaminar wire over the rod. A single connecting rod was bent
and contoured in an inverted U shape to achieve this construct. The
remaining three patients were operated with a pedicle screw and rod based
system only with anterior reconstruction by locally harvested autograft.
Conclusion: This study provides evidence in support of late
surgical decompression in paediatric patients with dorsal spinal
tuberculosis presenting after extended periods of neurological deficit and a
chance for neurological recovery still exists. The surgical decompression
should not be deferred only on the basis of time elapsed since the onset of
deficit and an optimum neurological environment should be provided for
recovery.

## OP28: Clinical Biomechanics 1

## 1927

## A244: Biomechanical Study of the Behaviour of the Intervertebral Disc:
Intact Lumbar Spine Versus Lumbar Arthrodesis

Khalil Habboubi

1

, Hassen Makhlouf

1

, Meddeb Mehdi

1

, Chaker Mohamed

1

, Lanouar Bouzid

1

, and Mondher Mestiri

1

1

Kassab Institute, Tunis, Tunisia

Background: Arthrodesis is the most common solution for the
treatment of degenerative pathology of the lumbar spine but it can expose to
adjacent syndrome in the long term. The aim of our study was to make
numerical simulations on finite element model of the lumbar spine, to
analyze the behaviour of the adjacent upper and lower intervertebral discs
after an arthrodesis. Methods: It was a prospective evaluative
study comparing the distribution of pressure on intervertebral disks between
two models of lumbar spine (from L2-L5): the first model of a 40 year-old
healthy man and a second model, of the same subject, having an L3-L4
arthrodesis. The model was constructed from high resolution computed
tomographic images. The dimensions and the material properties were chosen
from previous studies in the literature. We used SOLIDWORKS 2018 to create
the model and the simulation. We fixed the inferior surface of L5 vertebral
body and applied increasing loads in axial compression and flexion on the
upper surface of L2 vertebral body for the two models, with and without
arthrodesis. Results: The lumbar spine model was validated by
comparing the data of literature. The numerical results showed that the
intervertebral disc was exposed to higher pressure if the applied charges
increase; therefore a risk of disc degeneration. Our results showed that
L4-L5 disc support the maximum of pressure of the lumbar spine. Comparing
the distribution of pressure in the two models, with and without
arthrodesis, we found that the Vons Mises stress in the adjacent discs
increase, especially for the upper level, causing an accelerated
degeneration of the disc responsible of adjacent syndrome.
Conclusion: The finite element method allows us to create a
reliable numerical model. The results of our study showed increasing
pressure in the discs adjacent to an arthrodesis, whose clinical and
radiological involvement will be the development of an adjacent
syndrome.

## 158

## A245: Exploring the Effect of Different Implant Materials on the Active
Apex Correction Technique: A Finite Element Study Simulating 6-Month
Growth

Daksh Jayaswal

1

, Aakash Agarwal

1

, Alaaeldin Ahmad

2

, Amey Kelkar

1

, Manoj Kodigudla

2

, andVijay Goel

1

1
University of Toledo, Toledo, USA, 
2
Annajah Medical School, Nablus, Palestine
Summary: Selection of implant material has a significant
implication on both the outcome and the economics of spinal surgeries done
around the world. This study compares the correction achieved by the active
apex correction technique (APC) for constructs made with stainless-steel
(SS), titanium (Ti) and cobalt-chromium (CoCr) respectively. Minimal
variation in the clinical parameters indicate the flexibility available to
surgeons when planning surgery for early onset scoliosis (EOS) cases.
Hypothesis: Clinical outcome of implant constructs with
different materials could impact surgical planning for surgeons using the
APC technique. Study Design: Finite element study simulating
APC with a 6-month follow-up period. Introduction: Modern-day
surgical planning for EOS requires an understanding of biomechanical aspects
of implanted materials along with the associated economics (amongst other
factors), in order to best service the patient needs. This finite element
(FE) study explores the correction across different material constructs,
simulating the modified SHILLA/ active apex correction technique (APC) over
a 6-month follow-up period. Methods: A FE model simulating
coronal (T5-T11 cobb angle: 44° & T11-L1 secondary curve) of 36° and
sagittal deformity (T4-T12 kyphosis: 36° & L1-S1 lordosis: 46°) was
compressed (30N) above and below the apex to simulate APC technique. The
model simulated the effect of gravity and muscle forces, with 6-month spinal
growth. 3 versions models were created to simulate the effect of different
materials (SS, Ti, CoCr) construct. Chosen scoliotic parameters were
measured and compared for these models at various time points.
Results: Compared to the base model with no instruments,
all instrumented models showed a reduction in the coronal and sagittal
angles, apical vertebral translation and wedging at the end of the 6-month
growth period. All values showed negligible variance when compared across
different material cases (Table 1). Conclusion: The excellent
results across SS, Ti and CoCr constructs indicate multiple intra-operative
options while performing the active apex correction technique from an
implant (material) perspective. Take Home Message: The study
shows that the apical compression through a posterior approach, can be
adopted across most facilities around the world, adaptable to operative
resources available locally.[fx9]

Table 1. Output parameters from the finite element model simulating the
Active Apex Correction technique with different implant material cases

## 1808

## A246: Biomechanics of Different Cage Shapes and Positions in
Transforaminal Lumbar Interbody Fusion (TLIF) - A Finite Element
Analysis

Gael Dreher

1

, Wilfried Matthis

2

, and Timo Biedermann

2

1

Biedermann Motech GmbH & Co. KG, Karlsruhe, Germany

2

Biedermann Motech GmbH & Co. KG, Villingen-Schwenningen,
Germany

Introduction: Clinical outcome of transforaminal lumbar
interbody fusion (TLIF) is dependent on segmental stabilization as well as
sagittal alignment and disc height restoration, which are directly related
to cage subsidence. While TLIF cages are available as straight devices
placed in oblique fashion (OC) and banana-shaped devices to be placed
medially in more or less anterior positions (BC), there is limited research
on the biomechanics of each cage type. Our study aims to better understand
the influence of cage type and positioning on bone loading, cage subsidence
and of pedicle screw loading/loosening. Material and Methods: A
nonlinear finite element (FE) model of a lumbar spine with reduced bone
strength was developed and validated by comparing its range of motion with
literature data. A TLIF with facetectomy, discectomy and posterior pedicle
screw instrumentation was modelled in segment L4L5. The implanted cages were
an OC implanted obliquely and a BC with three different positions ranging
from central to anterior. Both cage types were given identical endplate
contact surface area. The spine was subjected to a follower load (FL) of
400N and a flexion of 7.5 Nm, which is the expected maximum loading
condition. We then reviewed the correlation between the results of our FE
model and outcomes of retrospective studies comparing TLIF with OC and BC.
Results: With 0.42 mm, sinking into the superior L5
endplate was highest for the OC, while for the BC it decreased further with
more anterior cage positions, the maximum value being 0.15 mm. For the OC,
plastic deformation of bone occurred below the endplates and in the vicinity
of the pedicle screws, an indicator for risk of subsidence and screw
loosening. The volume of plastically deformed bone was smaller for the BC
and it decreased further with more anterior cage positions while the stress
and moments on the posterior instrumentation were reduced as well. An
improved segmental stabilization was also noted for the BC. The fact that
the highly loaded anterior portion of the OC is asymmetric, narrow and
discontinuous and that the lever arms between BC and posterior
instrumentation are higher explain these different results. Various
retrospective studies [Rice 2016, Kim 2015] compared the outcome of TLIF
procedures with OC and BC. It was found that restored disc height and
segmental lordosis were significantly higher in the BC group than in the OC
group. Conclusion: Sagittal alignment and disc height following
TLIF are intimately connected to cage subsidence. A higher loading of the
bone surrounding intervertebral cages increases the risk for cage
subsidence. Based on our FE model, when compared to OC, BC can increase
segmental stability, reduce bone loading, cage subsidence, loading on
posterior instrumentation and the risk of screw loosening under combined FL
and flexion. This further improves with more anterior cage positions. This
finding is in line with retrospective studies comparing TLIF with OC and BC,
where restored disc height and segmental lordosis were significantly higher
in the BC groups than in the OC groups.

## 1571

## A247: Biomechanical comparison of two fixation techniques for B2
fractures of the sacrum according to the AO Spine Sacral classification
system

Moritz Lodde

1 2

, Christoph Katthagen

1

, Clemens Schopper

2

, Ivan Zderic

2

, R. Geoff Richards

2

, Boyko Gueorguiev

2

, Oliver Riesenbeck

1

, Michael Raschke

1

, and René Hartensuer

1

1

Department of Trauma-, Hand- and Reconstructive Surgery, Münster,
Germany

2

AO Research Institute Davos, Davos, Switzerland

Introduction: Pelvic ring fractures including Os sacrum
fractures occur with an incidence of 0.3 to 8% Klicken oder tippen Sie hier,
um Text einzugeben., which have increased during the last four decades
together with the number of operative treatments, particularly in the older
population [2, 10]. In young patients, they are mainly caused by high energy
trauma, whereas in older patients - by low energy falls [1]. Several systems
classifying Os sacrum fractures exist. The primarily descriptive
classification system according Denis [3] is well established. However, the
AO Spine Sacral classification system can be used uniformly, has been
validated and is associated with a treatment algorithm [9, 11]. Different
fixation methods are described as stabilization methods including Sacroiliac
(SI-) screw and S1/S2-alar-ilium-screw [4]. The aim of the present study was
to investigate the biomechanical competence of two fixation techniques for
B2 fractures of the sacrum. It was hypothesized that the
S1/S2-alar-ilium-screw would be biomechanically superior to the SI-screw.
Methods: A B2 fracture of the sacrum according to the AO
Spine Sacral classification system was simulated in 20 artificial pelvises,
assigned to two study groups of 10 specimens each (n = 10) for fixation with
either a SI-screw or S1/S2-alar-ilium-screw. The B2 fracture of the sacrum
was simulated by a transalar osteotomy. The specimens were tested under
progressively increasing cyclic loading. The specimens were aligned to the
machine axis so that an axial compression force was applied through the
center of the S1 vertebral body. Axial stiffness and displacement at the
fracture site were analyzed. The hypothesis was examined by comparisons
among the two groups using the Kruskal-Wallis test with Bonferroni
correction for multiple comparisons. The level of significance was set at
0.05 for all statistical tests. Results: Axial stiffness [N/mm]
was significantly greater (P < .05) in the group of the
S1/S2-alar-ilium screw (Median: 18.52 N/mm) compared to the group of the
SI-screw (Median: 3.66 N/mm). Furthermore, the displacement (cm) was
significantly (P < .05) lower in the group of the
S1/S2-alar-ilium screw (Median: 0.02 cm) than in the group of the SI-screw
(Median: 0.41 cm). Discussion: The hypothesis that the
S1/S2-alar-ilium-screw would be biomechanically superior to the SI-screw for
the treatment of a simulated B2 sacrum fracture was confirmed. Stabilization
of the posterior pelvic ring and the sacrum via the SI-screw is a safe,
effective and feasible [5]. Additionally, the SI-screw can be used minimally
invasive. Surgical treatment complications are mainly approach-related and
occur in up to 30% of the cases, especially in the elderly patient [8].
However, the results of the present study correspond to previous studies
showing, that the SI-screw only provides little vertical stability [6]. From
a biomechanically point of view, the S1/S2-alar-ilium screw can provide this
stability. Clinically, the S1/S2-alar-ilium screw and similar spinopelvic
fixation methods are used successfully [5-7]. Conclusion: The
S1/S2-alar-ilium screw is biomechanically superior to the SI-screw and
presents a successful alternative for treatment of fractures of the
posterior pelvic ring and the spinopelvic junction.

## 348

## A248: Biomechanical Effects of Changes in Cervical Alignment Following
Single-Level ACDF Using 3d Motion Capture

Darren Lebl

1

, Kathleen Meyers

2

, Hamidreza Jahandar

2

, and Timothy Wright

2

1
Hospital for Special Surgery, Spine Surgery, New York,
USA, 
2
Hospital for Special Surgery, Biomechanics, New York,
USA
Introduction: Alignment of the cervical spine likely has
significant effects on the clinical longevity of the subaxial motion
segments. The biomechanical effects of changes in alignment on the cervical
spine remain to be understood. Single-level ACDF is a commonly performed
procedure and cervical alignment may influence motion transfer to adjacent
and non-contiguous subaxial motion segments. To better understand the role
of alignment on unfused cervical motion segments, the present study was
designed to evaluate the biomechanical effects on the subaxial cervical
spine (C2 to T1) of: 1) changes in T1 tilt 2) single-level ACDF and 3)
combined effects of ACDF and changes in T1 tilt. Materials and
Methods: Six cadaveric cervical spines (C2-T1) were screened
fluoroscopically and placed with retro-reflective markers. Computed
tomography (CT) scans with sagittal/coronal reformats were performed and
degeneration was graded. Specimens were tested to 30° flexion and 30°
extension in the intact state and following single-level ACDF(C5-C6).
Motions of each vertebral body were tracked using a 3D-motion capture system
and input into an inverse kinematics model to correlate the 3D
reconstruction and motion capture data. A customized testing apparatus was
developed to alter the T1 slope in human cervical cadaveric spines to
neutral, +15degrees, and -15degrees. Generalized estimating equation
modeling was used to analyze the main effects as well as the interaction
effects of fusion and while we also controlled for the clustered nature of
the data. Parameter estimates of the model are reported as mean change in
range of motion and standard error, with statistical significance defined as
p-value =.05. SAS software was used for all statistical analyses.
Results: In the intact specimen, increase in T1 tilt (0 to
+15) did not result in increased ROM at any motion segment
(C2-3,C3-4,C4-C5,C5-6,C6-C7,C7-T1: P = NS). In the intact
specimen, decrease in T1 tilt (0 to -15) resulted in significantly increased
ROM at C2-C3 (P <.0001), C3-C4 (P
<.0001), C5-C6 (P <.01), C6-C7 (P
<.005), and C7-T1 (P <.02), but not at
C4-C5 (P = NS). The effects of ACDF on the unfused segments
at various cervical alignments was: Neutral T1 tilt, ACDF did not result in
significantly increased ROM at any level (C2-3, C3-C4, C4-C5, C6-C7, C7-T1:
P = NS). At increased T1 Tilt (+15deg), motion was
significantly increased at C2-C3 (P <.05), however, not
at any other segment (P = NS). At decreased T1 tilt
(-15deg), there was a trend toward increased motion at C7-T1 (P
= .06), and no significant increase in motion at any other
level (P = NS). The GEE model did not show significant
cumulative effects for the interaction of tilt and fusion on range of motion
(P = NS). Conclusion: Changes in cervical
alignment have a biomechanical influence on the observed patterns of motion
in both the intact state and following ACDF. In the unfused specimen,
increased T1 tilt resulted in no significant hypermobility whereas decreased
T1 tilt resulted in significantly increased hypermobility at five motion
segments. Following ACDF, hypermobility was transferred to non-contiguous
segments, cranially when T1 tilt was increased and trended caudally when T1
tilt was decreased.

## 1626

## A249: Analysis of Implants of Lumbosacral Spinal Fusion Using FEM

Hiroyuki Tachi

1

and Yuiciho Abe

1

1

Eniwa Hospital, Orthopedic surgery, Eniwa, Hokkaido, Japan

Background: In correction surgery for patients with adult spinal
deformity (ASD), iliac fixation was often performed to prevent loosening on
S1 pedicle screws (S1PS) and subsequent pseudarthrosis. Although Iliac
Screws (IS) or Sacral Alaa Iliac Screws (SAI) was frequently used to reduce
the strain on the caudad S1PS, the implant breakage could occur around
caudal side. From the biomechanical viewpoints, it is important to evaluate
the effect of SAI and IS on reducing the stress of S1PS. This study aimed to
analyze the stress of lumbosacral implants in correction surgery for ASD
using Finite Element Model (FEM). Materials and Methods: Three
patients who underwent ASD correction using SAI were enrolled. The
preoperative and postoperative CT DICOM data was used to simulate sacrum,
ilium, sacroiliac joint, screws and rods in FEM. The merge of the DICOM
data, and Finite Element Analysis (FEA) were performed using the Software
with the program code. Three model were created; S1PS only model (S1 model),
S1PS and IS model (IS model), and S1PS and SAI model (SAI model). The
forward bending loaded force of 500 N was applied on the proximal of rods
under the fixation of iliac side. We analyzed stress on the S1PS and the
cortical bone, and distribution effect of IS and SAI on stress of S1PS by
comparing with each model. Results: The stress on the S1PSs was
concentrated on their screw neck, and significantly reduced to 39.5% in IS
model and to 30.6% in SAI model (both; P < .001). ISs
and SAIs played a role in distributing the stress on S1PSs. The stresses on
the ISs and SAIs were mainly distributed on the lateral connector (53.9%)
and the screw surface around sacroiliac joint (69.2%), respectively. The
stress on the cortical bone was also significantly reduced to 21.2% in IS
model and 16.6% in SAI model (both; P < .001). Although
there wasn’t significant difference between distributed stress of SAIs (2.8
MPa) and one of ISs (3.9 MPa), the stress tended to be lower in SAI model
than IS model (P = .08). Conclusion: The
stress on the S1PS was reduced in IS and SAI model, indicating that ISs and
SAIs can prevent loosening or breakage of S1PS, which lead to
pseudoarthrosis. Main stress areas are located at the lateral connector in
IS model and the screw surface around sacroiliac joint in SAI model,
indicates that the center of the moment may be position at the lateral
connector in IS model and the screw surface around sacroiliac joint in SAI
mode, where mobile segments were controlled by implant fixation.
Furthermore, the risk of breakage may be higher in IS model than SAI model,
because distributed stress of SAIs tended to be lower.

## 931

## A250: Reduced Dynamic Stability in Simulated Scoliosis

Fraje Watson

1

, Rui Loureiro

1

, and Julian Leong

1 2

1

University College London, London, United Kingdom

2

Royal National Orthopaedic Hospital, London, United Kingdom

Introduction: Adolescent Idiopathic Scoliosis (AIS) is known to
affect standing balance. Measuring dynamic balance could lead to new
objective outcome measures for monitoring individuals with AIS. The Margin
of Stability (MoS) has been used to measure stability in pathologic
populations. The aim is to collect pilot data in a simulation of scoliosis
in healthy, adult volunteers prior to investigations in an adolescent,
clinical population. We hypothesise that the MoS will be different between
scoliosis simulation groups and controls, and that speed and incline will
impact these differences. Materials and Methods: A custom
thoracolumbosacral orthotic brace was designed and developed to simulate a
right thoracic scoliosis with a left truncal shift. An upper and lower
section were joined at the front and back by a hinge joint (XROM2,
ChanecoTM; Northampton, UK) that could be used to set the two
sections in a straight position (Brace-Straight) or at a 30 angle
(Brace-Tilt). Ten healthy volunteers walked for 1-minute each at 3 speeds
with 0% incline (0.8 m/s, 1.0 m/s, 1.6 m/s) and 3 inclines at 1.0 m/s (0.0%,
4.5%, 9.0%). Volunteers completed these walks under 3 conditions; Control,
Brace-Straight and Brace-Tilt. Volunteers underwent gait analysis in a Gait
Real-time Analysis Interactive Laboratory (GRAIL; Motekforce Link,
Amsterdam, The Netherlands) with a dual-belt instrumented treadmill,
surrounded by 10 Bonita motion-capture cameras (100Hz; Vicon, Oxford, UK) to
capture the location of 46 reflective markers on their body. Gaps were
filled using Nexus 2.7 (Vicon, Oxford, UK) and data was imported into Visual
3D v6 student edition (C-Motion Inc., Maryland, USA) to create a 14-segment
model for each participant. Pipelines calculated the average mediolateral
MoS (MoSml) for left and right heel strikes during the middle 30s
of each walk. Results: For the speed walks, a linear mixed
model showed that brace group significantly predicted left MoSml
F (2, 65.90) = 19.31, P < .001, but did not
significantly predict right MoSml. Left MoSml was
significantly bigger for the Brace-Tilt group compared to Control (P
< .001) and Brace-Straight (P < .001)
groups. Speed did not predict left MoSml, but did predict right
MoSml F (2, 65.39)=11.80, P < .001. Right
MoSml was significantly bigger for 0.8m/s (P
< .001) and 1.0 m/s (P < .001) compared
to 1.6m/s. For the incline walks, a linear mixed model showed that brace
group significantly predicted left MoSml F (2,71.53) = 22.74,
P < .001 and right MoSml, F (2, 63.47) =
14.29, P < .001. Left and right MoSml was
significantly smaller for the Brace-Tilt group compared to Control
(P < .001) and Brace-Straight (P
< .001) groups. Incline significantly predicted left
MoSml. Conclusion: Left MoSml for the
Brace-Tilt (scoliosis simulation) group was significantly different to the
Control and Brace-Straight groups for speed and incline trials. Right
MoSml for the Brace-Tilt group was significantly different to
the Control and Brace-Straight groups during incline trials only. The effect
of speed and incline on left and right MoSml was variable. If
these results were replicated in a clinical population, then use of the MoS
as an objective outcome measure in monitoring and treatment of AIS is
feasible, and this could be done with a wearable device at home.

## 1107

## A251: Biomechanics Following Two Special Constructs Of 3-Level Hybrid
Surgery with Cervical Disc Arthroplasty and Anterior Cervical Discectomy and
Fusion: A Finite Element Analysis

Kangkang Huang

1

, Beiyu Wang

1

, Hao Liu

1

, Tingkui Wu

1

, Xin Rong

1

, and Chen Ding

1

1

West China Hospital, Sichuan University, Orthopedics, Chengdu,
China

Introduction: To analyze the biomechanical characteristics of
two special constructs of 3-level hybrid surgery through a finite element
analysis. Material and Methods: A finite element model of a
healthy cervical spine (C0-T1) was constructed. Five surgical models were
developed. They were FAF model (C4/5ACDF+C5/6CDA+C6/7ACDF), AFA model
(C4/5CDA+C5/6ACDF+C6/7CDA), FFF model (C4/5ACDF+C5/6ACDF+C6/7ACDF), F model
(C5/6ACDF) and A model (C5/6CDA). A 75-N follower load and 1.0-N·m moments
were applied to the top of the cervical spine model to produce flexion,
extension, lateral bending and axial rotation in the intact model. The ROMs
of cervical spine, facet pressure, intradiscal pressure and prosthesis
pressure were recorded. Results: In FAF model, the ROMs of the
total cervical spine and the FSU decreased by 34.54%, 54.48%, 31.76%, 27.14%
and 56.56%, 59.17%, 62.04%, 53.57% in the flexion, extension, lateral
bending and axial rotation directions, respectively, compared with the
intact cervical spine model. In FFF model, the ROMs of the total cervical
spine and the FSU decreased by 55.96%, 54.58%, 46%, 46.87% and 90.79%,
89.7%, 88.14%, 85.36% in the flexion, extension, lateral bending and axial
rotation directions, respectively, compared with the intact cervical spine
model. In AFA model, the ROMs of the total cervical spine and the FSU
decreased by 20.97%, 16.74%, 12.75%, 15.45% and 33.68%, 30.4%, 26.6%, 32.75%
in the flexion, extension, lateral bending and axial rotation directions,
respectively, compared with the intact cervical spine model. In FAF model,
the ROMs of the C5/6 level was 7.48°, 5.35°, 8.33° and 7.47°in the flexion,
extension, lateral bending and axial rotation directions, respectively. In A
model, the ROMs of the C5/6 level was 7.36°, 5.25°, 8.2° and 7.32°in the
flexion, extension, lateral bending and axial rotation directions,
respectively. The ROMs of the adjacent segments, the intradiscal pressure
and the facet contact force in FAF model and AFA model were lower than FFF
model in all directions. The maximum prosthesis pressure of Prestige-LP in
FAF model was similar compared with A model in all directions. The maximum
prosthesis pressure of screws in FAF model was higher compared with FFF
model in all directions except left lateral bending. The maximum prosthesis
pressure of screws in AFA model was higher compared with F model and FFF
model in neutral, flexion and extension. Conclusion: The two
special constructs of 3-level hybrid surgery could remain more ROMs of
cervical spine, while has fewer biomechanical effects on the adjacent
segments compared with ACDF. The CDA segments of two special constructs was
safe and effective, but the prosthesis pressure of screws increased.

## 469

## A252: Framingham Cohort Adjacent Segment Biomechanics Following
T10-Pelvis Spinal Fusion: A Computational Study

Christian Rodriguez

1

, Rachit Kumar

1

, and Comron Saifi

1

1

University of Pennsylvania, Department of Orthopaedic Surgery,
Philadelphia, PA, USA

Introduction: Proximal junctional kyphosis (PJK) and failure
(PJF) are challenging complications of long fusion constructs for the
treatment of adult spinal deformity (ASD). Few studies have investigated the
biomechanics of long spinal fusions, none of which accounted for anatomical
variation. This study seeks to use a large cohort to understand the
biomechanical stresses proximal to the upper instrumentation of a T10-pelvis
fusion depending on the type of simulated motion. Material and
Methods: The pre-fusion models were subject-specific
thoracolumbar spine models that incorporate the height, weight, spine
curvature, and muscle morphology measurements of 250 individuals from the
Framingham Heart Study Multidetector CT Study. To create post-fusion models,
the subject-specific models were further modified to eliminate motion
between the intervertebral joints from T10 to the pelvis. Simulated motion
included neutral standing, axial rotation, trunk flexion, and ‘pushing a
force’. Due to an absence of in vivo data on kinematic
changes following long spinal fusion, both increased segmental mobility and
unchanged segmental mobility were modeled for each simulated motion. OpenSim
analysis tools were used to calculate the medial lateral shear force,
anterior posterior shear force, and compressive force on the T9 vertebra
during the simulated motions. A paired sign rank t-test was used to compare
the pre-fusion and post-fusion models. Results: Differences
between pre-fusion and post-fusion T9 biomechanics were consistent between
increased segmental mobility and unchanged segmental mobility conditions.
Unchanged segmental mobility results are reported. During trunk flexion,
compression decreased from 1583 N pre-fusion to 1170 N post-fusion
(t [249] = 36.61, P < .001). Axial
twist had a compression decrease from 889.2 N-735.4 N (t
[249] = 21.28, P < .001). Standing (t
[249] = 9.33, P < .001) and ‘pushing a force’
(t [249] = 29.46, P < .001) motions
also saw significant decreases in compression. Anterior-posterior shear
force significantly decreased from 74.69 N-33.98 N (t [249]
= 22.21, P < .001) during ‘pushing a force’.
Anterior-posterior shear force significantly increased from 23.16 N-204.2 N
(t [249] = 34.99, P < .001) during
trunk flexion and significantly increased from 93.35 N-143.7 N
(t [249] = 18.08, P < .001) during
axial twist. Changes in medial-lateral shear forces were clinically
insignificant for the simulated motions of standing, axial twist, and
‘pushing a force’ due to force changes being less than 1 N. During trunk
flexion, medial lateral shear force significantly increased from 115.8
N-157.1 N (t [249] = 20.92, P < .001).
Conclusion: This computational study provided the first use
of subject-specific models to investigate the biomechanics of long spinal
fusions. Patients undergoing T10-Pelvis fusion were predicted to have
increased shear forces and decreased compressive force at the T9 vertebra,
independent of change in segmental mobility. The results suggest that more
research is needed to understand how shear forces affect vertebral body
integrity. Despite its limitations, this computational model shows potential
for the investigation of spinal fusion biomechanics in order to reduce the
risk of PJK or PJF.

## OP29: Novel Technologies

## 1709

## A253: Comparing Hyper-Lordotic and Less-Lordotic Cages for Achieving
Segmental Lumbar Lordosis During Transforaminal Lumbar Interbody Fusion in
Adult Spinal Deformity Surgery

Justin Mathew

1

, Meghan Cerpa

1

, Nathan Lee

1

, Venkat Boddapati

1

, Gerard Marciano

1

, Zeeshan Sardar

1

, and Lawrence Lenke

1

1

Columbia University Medical Center, New York, USA

Introduction: Transforaminal lumbar interbody fusion (TLIF) is a
posteriorly-based interbody fusion approach used to improve both lower
lumbar segmental sagittal alignment and fusion rates in adult spinal
deformity surgery. The interbody cages used in TLIF procedures have evolved,
with newer hyper-lordotic cages now available, which are assumed to provide
more segmental lordosis; however, the evidence on this remains scant.
Material and Methods: 38 consecutive patients who received
open TLIF procedures performed by a single surgeon between 2017 and 2018
were reviewed. 20 patients had “hyper-lordotic cages” (20°lordosis), while
18 patients had “less-lordotic” cages (6°lordosis). 23 patients had
single-level TLIF procedures and 15 had two level TLIF. Standard
radiographic measurements, including Cobb angles and SLL were assessed
preoperatively, postoperatively, and at one year follow up. Changes in SLL
were compared using Student’s and paired t-tests. Results: In
one and two-level open TLIF, both hyper-lordotic and less-lordotic cages
produced significant improvement in SLL. Among those receiving a one-level
TLIF, SLL increased 9.6° (P = .006) in those with
less-lordotic cages; it increased 9.2° (P = .004) in those
with hyper-lordotic cages. Among those receiving a two-level TLIF, SLL
increased 12.4° (P = .045) in those with less-lordotic
cages; it increased 11.5° (P = .006) in those with
hyper-lordotic cages. However, the improvement in SLL was not significantly
different between the two cage types in either one or two-level TLIF
procedures (P = .907, P = .877). At one
year follow up, there remained no significant difference in the change in
SLL between the hyper-lordotic and less-lordotic cages (P =
.55). Conclusion: Although it is theorized that hyper-lordotic
cages would increase SLL during open TLIF procedures greater than
less-lordotic cages, our data failed to
demonstrate that. As our study examined cases performed by a single surgeon
immediately before and after adoption of these lordotic cages, it is likely
that surgical technique is of equal or greater importance in improving SLL
than the amount of lordosis designed into interbody cages. Hyper-lordotic
cages do not produce significantly more SLL than less-lordotic cages in
posterior open TLIF procedures.

## 1159

## A254: Safe and Improved Bone Removal Using a New Curved Device: Four
Center Experience with 624 Patients

John Peloza

1

, Hani Malone

2

, Larry Khoo

3

, Michael Millgram

4

, Scott Kutz

5

, Richard Guyer

6

, Jean Charles Le Huec

7

, Ely Ashkenazi

4

1

Center For Spine Care, Dallas, TX, USA

2

Scripps Clinic Torrey Pines, La Jolla, CA, USA

3

The Spine Clinic of Los Angeles, Los Angeles, CA, USA

4

Assuta Medical Center, Israel Spine Center, Tel Aviv,
Israel

5

Minimally Invasive Neurosurgery of Texas, Plano, TX, USA

6
Texas Back Institute, Plano, TX, USA, 
7
Bordeaux University School of Medicine, Bordeaux,
France
Introduction: Spinal procedures often require the removal of
bony tissues to prevent nerve compression and reduce pain. In order to reach
difficult-access spinal regions such as the foramen, the surgeon is often
required to remove healthy supporting bone structures, therefore increasing
the risk of spinal instability. This study describes the authors’ experience
with a recently developed, FDA-approved, curved shielded drill, designed to
efficiently remove bone from difficult-access areas. Material and
Methods: 653 patients were treated using the device by six
experienced surgeons in four centers since 2013. Procedures included lumbar,
cervical and thoracic decompressions and fusions, 108 of which were
minimally-invasive. Device-use duration was recorded and surgeon assessment
was obtained using questionnaires. TLIF (transforaminal lumbar interbody
fusion) surgery duration, length of stay and complication rates were
compared with same-institution controls (65 procedures). Data from the
literature and the financial department was used to calculate the estimated
cost reduction due to the use of the device. The rate of device-related
dural tears was calculated and compared with global device-related dural
tear rate associated with the device, calculated from 1417 safety-records of
procedures and with the literature. Results: One device-related
dural tear (< .2%) was reported, a similar rate to the global
device-related dural tear rate of the device (0.2%) and lower than
previously published device-related tear rate of 2.9% associated with the
Kerrison rongeur and high-speed drill. Surgeon satisfaction rate was 99%.
Surgery time reduction was the most common comment in surgeon
questionnaires. Lumbar foraminotomy using the device required, on average, 2
minutes and in some cases enabled the surgeon to avoid a spinal fusion since
the improved access eliminated the need for excessive bone removal. Length
of stay in these cases was shorter by 0.6 and 3.4 days compared with control
decompressions and fusions, respectively. An average of 1.7 device passes
was required for each foramen. Cervical osteophyte removal required on
average 3 minutes and often enabled the surgeons to avoid additional level
surgery. TLIF procedures required, on average, 23 minutes less than control
procedures, after controlling for patient characteristics and procedure year
(P < .01). A 0.5 days reduction in length-of-stay
and a reduction of 55% in complication rates, were also noted. The estimated
cost reduction was approximately $2000/procedure. Conclusion:
The device is safe and effective for performing spinal surgery in various
settings. Procedure time reduction was noted as the most significant
advantage by the surgeons.

## 1801

## A255: Digital and Sensor-Based Training in Spine Surgery-The Future of
Education?

Hans-Jörg Meisel

1 2

, Werner Korb

3

, Philipp Gernerth

3

, Lukas Panzenboeck

4

, Alvaro Cordoba

5

, Oliver Muensterer

6

, Hubertus Feussner

7

, and Christoph Mehren

8

1

BG Klinikum Bergmannstrost Halle, Neurosurgery and Spine Surgery,
Halle, Ger

many

2

Danube University Krems, Krems, Austria

3

Vocationeers, Hallein, Austria

4

Orthopaedic Hospital Vienna-Speising, Spine Surgery, Vienna,
Austria

5

Uruguay British Hospital, Montevideo, Uruguay

6

Ludwig-Maximilians-Universität, Haunersches Kinderspital, Munich,
Germany

7

Technical University Munich (TUM), University Hospital rechts der
Isar, Munich, Germany

8

Schoen Clinic München Harlaching, Spine Surgery, Munich,
Germany

Introduction: New training and simulation concepts need to hold
up with rapidly emerging technologies. To support these steady developments
and the unstoppable digitalization, a new training concept with sensors was
introduced in spine training. In preliminary studies a simulation system was
used and extended with a sensor system. Five medical specialists and five
medical resident medical staff from the area of orthopedic, trauma, and
neurosurgery performed a microsurgical discectomy on this system (cf. Mehren
C: Global Spine Journal, 1-8, 2020). Based on these results a new study was
performed and the web-based technology MySebastian was developed and
analyzed to integrate these sensor data into training. Material and
Methods: Based on the results of the study (Mehren C, 2020), a
cognitive task analysis (ACTA) was performed. For this study a qualitative
research design, based on a guided expert interview, was chosen. As
preliminaries for this study the pains and gains, as well as the specific
difficulties, but also the chances in terms of training in medicine and
surgery were modelled. Based on these results a first version of a
semi-structured questionnaire was drafted. With this first version the first
two experts were interviewed. All interviews were recorded with a handy
recorder and afterwards transcribed with an analytics software. Afterwards
the transcript was analyzed and all relevant statements made by the expert
were collected. Then the first codes were defined inductively and the
collected statements were assigned to the appropriate code. After every
interview the authors discussed the transcripts and the collected statements
to improve the questionnaire. With every interview this process was repeated
and also the codes were in constant change. This circular and iterative
research approach (the Flick-approach) was chosen to retrieve a maximum of
information and do the generation of a first theory. Results:
We derived iteratively five different Code Categories, which include (1)
Issues of Training in Medicine (total: 62; 27,43 %), (2) Tools / Apps /
Social Media in Training (55; 24,34 %), (3) Assessment, Sensor Data and
Benchmarking in Training (44; 19,47 %), (4) Videos in Training (42; 18,58
%), (5) Workflows and Procedures in Training (23; 10,18 %) and in TOTAL
(226; 100,00%). In total this shows that most of the experts agreed on (1)
limited budgets for courses and technologies in education; (2) structural
problems (generation issues, limited research for training/education); and
(3) not enough time for training and limited personnel. As a further result
a first prototype of the web-platform (Beta version) of MySebastian was
developed for surgical training and expertise management: https://beta.mysebastian.at. Conclusion: Based
on the findings we can summarize that training in surgery is insufficient.
Therefore, the path to implement successful educational concepts goes over
the experts more than the trainees. Consequently, a solution (mySebastian
web platform) was developed for the experts that save time and money,
facilitate the training process as well as introduce state of the art
educational concepts. Future work and validation of the software will show
whether this first steps are going into the right direction.

## 375

## A256: Patient perspectives on artificial intelligence in healthcare
decision making

Matthew Parry

1

, Edward DelSole

1

1

Geisinger Health System, Scranton, USA

Introduction: Artificial intelligence (AI), specifically,
machine learning is a powerful tool that can in many cases improve
diagnostic accuracy, treatment decisions, and outcome prediction for
patients presenting with an orthopaedic issue. The goal of this study is to
evaluate patient perspectives on AI in healthcare and seeks to identify
patient characteristics that influence those perspectives. Material
and Methods: A 37-question survey was randomly distributed to
2101 orthopaedic surgery patients in a large integrated health system with
184 patients as the final analytical population. The primary outcome,
average level of comfort with AI, was assessed by thirteen questions using a
Likert scale graded from 1 through 10. Secondary outcomes included
categorical measures of perceived impact of AI in orthopaedic care,
perceived impact of AI on healthcare costs, whether patients would refuse AI
if it increased healthcare costs, and whether patients believe it’s
acceptable for a doctor to sell health data to a third party for the purpose
of building intelligent computers for use in healthcare. Descriptive
statistics were calculated for baseline demographic, education, orthopaedic,
and technology use data as well as on data relating to patients’
perspectives on the use of AI in healthcare. Generalized linear
multivariable regression models were run to predict differences in average
AI comfort level. Bivariate analyses were also performed between the
secondary outcomes and demographic, orthopaedic, and technology use
predictors. Results: The average AI comfort level among the
analytical population was 6.3 (SD: 2.5). Average AI comfort level differed
significantly between age groups (P = .0022), with older
participants having the highest average comfort level and younger patients
with the lowest, (55+ years old, mean 6.9; SD: 2.3, 45-<55 years, mean
6.0; SD: 2.4, 30-<45 years, mean 5.6; SD: 2.6, 18-< 30 years, mean
4.1; SD: 2.1). Comfort level differed as a function of education (P
= .0004), with patients with a graduate degree having the
highest average (mean: 7.4; SD: 2.0) and patients with less than high school
having the lowest average (mean: 2.8; SD: 2.0). Secondary outcomes relating
to patients’ perspectives on AI in healthcare were all significantly
associated with average AI comfort level in the expected directions
(P < .05). In the multivariable model, only
perceived impact of AI in orthopaedic care and survey format remained
significantly associated with average AI comfort level.
Conclusion: Older orthopaedic patients are on average more
comfortable with AI being integrated into their healthcare team, when
compared to younger patients. Similarly, patients with a higher degree of
education were more comfortable with AI incorporation, as compared to
patients with a lower education level. Patients who had a high primary
outcome of average comfort level also saw AI as a positive improvement, felt
AI would decrease the healthcare cost, would not refuse care if AI increased
the cost, and were comfortable with physicians selling data to third parties
to create intelligent computers. These results indicate that younger and
more uneducated patients may be apprehensive to the use of AI in their
healthcare team, while older and more educated patients will likely view the
addition as beneficial.

## 875

## A257: Development of a Non-Opioid Biodegradable Sustained Release
Formulation for Local Postoperative Analgesia

Jasper Steverink

1 2

, Susanna Piluso

1 2

, Jos Malda

1 3

, Marianna Tryfonidou

3

, Raymond Schiffelers

4

, Floris van Tol

1 2

, Bas Oosterman

2

, and Jorrit-Jan Verlaan

1 2

1

University Medical Center Utrecht, Orthopedics, Utrecht, The
Netherlands

2

SentryX B.V., Austerlitz, The Netherlands

3

Utrecht University, Clinical Sciences, Utrecht, The
Netherlands

4

University Medical Center Utrecht, Clinical Chemistry &
Haematology, Utrecht, The Netherlands

Introduction: Instrumented spinal surgery ranks amongst the most
painful surgeries overall. Most pain is likely elicited by local damage and
pressure to the periosteum induced by spinal implants. This severe pain is
conventionally treated systemically with opioids. The frequency and severity
of opioid-related adverse events are actual topics of societal debate and
spark the development of non-opioid alternatives. In this study, a
hydrogel-based biodegradable sustained release formulation (BSRF) is
developed to provide local sustained release of an anesthetic to the
periosteum with minimal systemic effects. Following release, the BSRF is
degraded in situ. The BSRF is co-implanted with pedicle screws during
surgery, providing analgesia at the source of pain. Its robustness and
flexibility ensure excellent adaptation to the bone surface and the BSRF can
be implanted without changing the current surgical workflow. The BRSF aims
to decrease opioid consumption and shorten hospital stay following spinal
surgery. Material and Methods: A gelatin-based biopolymer wa\s
functionalized with photo-crosslinkable chemical moieties and used to
prepare hydrogels by exposure to visible light. Hydrogels were characterized
by swelling measurements, rheometry and dynamic mechanical analysis. The
morphology of the hydrogels was assessed by scanning electron microscopy.
In vitro drug release and drug loading efficiency was
studied for 168 hours and quantified by UPLC. Furthermore, in
vitro cytotoxicity was evaluated using human mesenchymal stem
cells and NIH3T3 mouse fibroblasts by performing Live/Dead and Alamar blue
assays after 24 and 48 hours in culture in standard growth medium.
Hydrolytic and enzymatic degradation was assessed in vitro.
Implantability combined with pedicle screws and in vivo
release was assessed in a sheep model for instrumented spinal surgery.
Results: The hydrogel was sufficiently robust (maximal
compressive force >500 N, elastic modulus ∼300 kPa) to allow implantation
during pedicle screw placement and also displayed self-healing properties.
The hydrogel encapsulated 52.5 mg/mL bupivacaine, and provided >120 hours
of sustained drug release in vitro. Release was
characterized by a slight initial burst, followed by a more linear phase.
The hydrogel did not lead to major in vitro cytotoxicity
(cell viability >80%) and enzymatically degraded within four weeks. The
BSRF released bupivacaine up to 72 hours in vivo.
Conclusion: A BSRF for postoperative analgesia was developed
and displayed promising characteristics, such as sufficient mechanical
robustness, good cytocompatibility and prolonged drug release in
vitro and in vivo. Animal studies are
currently conducted to investigate safety of the BSRF and analgesic
efficacy. The hydrogel could also serve as a platform for other types of
drugs and is easily combined with various other orthopedic implants.

## 1647

## A258: The “Raising Roof” Cervical Expansive Laminoplasty with
Preservation of Bilateral Muscular-Ligament Complex

Yu Sun

1

1

Institute of Spine Surgery, Peking University Third Hospital,
Department of Orthopaedic Surgery, Beijing, China

Objective: To evaluate the clinical outcome of “Raising Roof”
cervical expansive laminoplasty using customized 3D printed artificial
lamina through inter-muscular space with preservation of bilateral
muscular-ligament complex. Method: The current procedures of
cervical expansive laminoplasty like open-door and French-door laminoplasty
have achieved satisfactory outcome in terms of thorough spinal cord
decompression and good neurological recovery. At the meantime, some
complications, such as destruction of muscular ligament complex, limited
enlargement of spinal canal, door re-closing and hinge fracture..., have
existed all the time. Many surgeons developed modified procedures but can
only solved the problems from certain point of view. This procedure takes
the approach through the muscle space between semispinalis cervicis and
capilis. The bilateral laminae are cut through at the junction of laminar
and lateral mass. The lamina is lifted up with all the muscles and ligaments
attached to the lamina and spinal process. The customized 3D printed
artificial lamina are inserted into the gap of cutting edge of laminar and
lateral mass and fixed with screws. The laminar is raised like the roof of
spinal canal. The bilateral muscular ligament complex are well preserved.
Results: 22 cases received this procedure between June and
September 2019. The operation included C4-C6, C3-C6 and C4-C7. The operating
time is 100-180 minutes. The blood lose is 50-300 ml. The post-operative
drainage is 110-150 ml. Patients are encouraged to start neck mobilization
including flexion, extension and rotation. No collar applied. The average
hospital stay is 2.2 days. The JOA score improved 1-3 on discharge. The VAS
for neck pain was 1-3. The spinal canal enlarged significantly. Cervical
spinal cord decompressed thoroughly. Conclusion: The “Raising
Roof” procedure of cervical expansive laminoplasty using customized 3D
printed artificial lamina through inter-muscular space has showed
satisfactory outcome in the early post-operative stage. The muscular
ligament complex have been well preserved with good spinal cord
decompression. This procedure may have the better application prospects in
clinical practice.

## 1635

## A259: Nano Topography is More Important than the Coating Itself: Titanium
Versus CaP Nanocoated Cages

Willems Karel

1

,AmélieWillems

1

1

AZ Delta Roeselare, Orthopaedic Surgery, Roeselare, Belgium

Introduction: Posterior interbody fusion is frequently used to
treat degenerative low back pain. Titanium (Ti) cages are considered the
gold standard, but the more elastic PEEK cage seems to result in better
clinical and radiological outcome. PEEK is an inert material that does not
promote bony ingrowth. A micro surface is created by glas blasting and this
engineered topography is important to orientate cells, to increase the
wettability of the surface to blood, to promote adhesion of cells to the
surface and to facilitate binding of fibrins, matrix proteins, growth and
differentiation factors. Several types of nano coating have been used to
combine the mechanical characteristics of PEEK with a bioactive layer. A
randomized controlled, double blind multicenter parallel three arm study the
clinical and radiographic outcome of posterior lumbar interbody fusion
(PLIF) at one level was assessed for implantations of PEEK cages, with Ti
coating (TSC) or CaP coating (osteoCon) or uncoated (reCreo) cages.
Material and Methods: Patients between 18 and 75 years with
chronic mechanical low back pain with or without radiation into the leg
(>6 months) refractory to pharmacological and non-surgical conservative
treatment scheduled for stabilization and decompression via PLIF approach
utilizing supplemental posterior fixation were randomly assigned to receive
implantation of PEEK cages, with Ti coating (TSC) or CaP coating (osteoCon)
or uncoated (reCreo) cages. The primary radiological outcome was the implant
stability and fusion status assessed with X-ray, standing A/P and lateral
radiographs and CT-scan at 6 and 12 months. The CT-scans were evaluated by
an independent experienced spine radiologist, blinded to the used spacer.
The primary clinical outcome was the evolution from baseline in pain,
disability and quality of life. Clinical evaluation was performed
pre-operatively, and at 6 weeks, 3 months, 6 months and 12 months. Patients
were asked to report pain for the leg and for the back on a 10-point visual
analogue scale (0 no pain and 10 the worst imaginable pain), and to fill out
the Oswestry Disability Index (ODI) and the SF-36 was used pre-operatively
and after 12 months. Results: An engineered surface topography
is important in developing nano coated PEEK cages. The created micro
roughness of the surface is in the micro meter range, and this surface is
covered by a coating layer of 250 nm(with variation of 45 nm). In our
clinical study there is no clinical and no radiographic statistical
difference between thv CaP and Ti nano group. Titanium is more bioactive
than CaP. Conclusion: We conclude that the engineered
topography is the fundamental for nano-coated PEEK cages.

## 1397

## A260: Shape Memory Polymer Added with Monitoring System for the Invention
of Intelligent Brace

Dechun Wang

1

and Weidong Liu

2

1

Qingdao Municipal Hospital, Qingdao, China

2

Jilin University, Changchun, China

Introduction: The shape memory polymer (SMP) can be designed and
used for bracing. The brace wearing situation can be monitored by the
intelligent system composed of force sensor, printed circuit board (PCB) and
PC or mobile phone. Up to seven force sensors could be attached on the inner
surface of the brace to collect the forces being imposed by the brace and
connected to the PCB by thin wires. The force would be transferred to the
cloud storage by the mobile phone app. The thoracolumbosacral orthosis
(TLSO) were usually used to prevent worsening of the condition. Accurately
evaluating the effectiveness and compliance of bracing is an on-going
challenge for physicians. Material and Methods: To better
monitor the effectiveness and compliance of bracing, the platform of the
custom-designed hardware, mobile phone app as well as cloud storage on the
web were developed. The hardware consists of thin and flexible force sensor,
PCB with CPU, Li-ion battery, plug-in software, data storage, Bluetooth etc.
Results: A kind of rigid SMP for brace production was
specially designed to ensure no shrinkage and superior fixation for
increasing the likelihood of comfort. Any part of the SMP brace could be
changed from one shape to another at a low temperature, 75°C. Further, the
SMP had better mechanical properties, such as tensile strength and hardness
etc., which could make the brace thinner and lighter compared with the
normally used materials, for example, polyethylene (PE) and polypropylene
(PP). The intelligent system results demonstrated that it could be able to
accurately detect the real time of brace wear and force imposed by the
brace. Conclusion: SMP provides more opportunities than other
usually used materials to adjust the brace during the treatment. The
intelligent monitoring system establishes a quantitative relation of the
wearing time and the force imposed by brace, which dramatically helps the
physician to monitor and analyze the effectiveness and compliance of
bracing.

## 1799

## A261: Early Minimally Invasive Surgery is Associated with Improved
Clinical Outcomes in Patients with Traumatic Spinal Fractures and Ankylosing
Spondylitis

Fahid Rasul

1

, Mathew Sewell

1

, Fady Sedra

1

, Syed Aftab

1

, Suresh Pushpananthan

1

, Jonathan Bull

1

, Arun Ranganathan

1

, and Alexander Montgomery

1

1

Royal London Hospital, Department of Spinal Surgery, London, United
Kingdom

Purpose: Patients with ankylosing spondylitis (AS) have a high
propensity for spinal fractures following relatively minor trauma. These
fractures are inherently unstable and require surgical stabilisation to
allow early rehabilitation. We report our unit’s experience of managing this
complex patient cohort focussing on the role of early surgery and minimally
invasive surgery (MIS). Methods: Retrospective review of
prospectively collected electronic database. All patients with a diagnosis
of spinal fracture and AS who underwent spinal surgery between December 2017
and July 2020 at Royal London Hospital (RLH) were included. Patient
demographics, radiological fracture characteristics, surgical procedure
details and clinical outcomes were extracted by case note review. Study
methods were compliant with the STROBE checklist. Results: 22
consecutive AS patients with traumatic spinal fractures were admitted to RLH
during the study period. 20 operations were performed and one patient was
managed non-operatively. Male:Female = 20:2. Mean age = 73.1 years (range
45-90 years). Median number of spinal levels fixed = 6 (range 4-14) with one
reported metalwork failure. Mortality at 30 days = 22.7% (5/22) all of which
were related to respiratory complications. 10 patients experienced
post-operative complications (10/20 = 50%). Patient reported back pain
improved following surgery (P < .0001 t-test 95% CI =
4.25-5.62). 5 patients underwent MIS. The MIS subgroup experienced a
statistically significant lower rate of post-operative complications (0 vs
10 P = .0396, Chi-squared), shorter length of inpatient
hospital stay (8 days vs 31 days P = .0148, paired t-test)
and reduced operative time (138.8 mins vs 249.6 mins P =
.0111, paired t-test) compared to the open surgery subgroup. Those patients
who had early surgery (<3 days after admission) experienced less
complications compared to those that waited >6 days prior to intervention
(17.6% vs 80% P = .0207 Chi-squared test).
Conclusion: Spinal fractures in patients with ankylosing
spondylitis are challenging fractures to manage mainly due to associated
medical comorbidities and poor bone quality. Surgical stabilisation at the
earliest opportunity improve chances of recovery and reduces the risk of
complications. Long segment construct and circumferential fusion when
feasible are advised. Minimally invasive techniques are potentially
beneficial and may improve patient’s clinical outcomes.

## OP30: Deformity-Thoracolumbar (Adolescent) 2

## 1097

## A262: Risk Factors for Implant Failure in Spinal Deformity Correction
Surgery. A Cohort Study of 365 Cases

Francisco Javier Alonzo González

1

, Jorge Nuñez Camarena

2

, Rudolf Herrera

1

, Sergio Antonio Castillo Rivera

3

, Salvador Fuster

4

,and Pedro Fernández

5

1

Hospital "Ceibal" Accidentes I.G.S.S., Guatemala, Guatemala

2

Hospital Mútua Terrassa, Terrassa, Spain

3

Hospital Dr. Sótero del Rio, Santiago, Chile

4

Hospital Clínic i Provincial, Barcelona, Spain

5

Hospital La Fe, Valencia, Spain

Introduction: Implant failure (pull out, loosening or breakage)
is a common complication after spinal deformity correction surgery in
pediatric patients that can cause loss of the correction achieved in the
primary surgery or reintervention. The objectives of our study were: 1.
Determine the current incidence of implant failure in pediatric deformity
correction surgery 2. Analyze protective and risk factors for implant
failure in pediatric deformity correction surgery. Material and
Methods: We analyzed 365 patients that underwent surgical
treatment in our center for spinal deformity correction. 15 patients with
radiological or clinical incomplete records were excluded from the study.
All our patients were 18 years old or younger at the time of the
intervention. Retrospective revision of clinical and radiological records
were performed by two orthopaedic spine surgeons. Variables included in the
study were type of scoliosis, Cobb angle (pre-operative and post-operative),
type of surgery, indication for surgery, implant type, number of implants
included in the fixation, implant density, use of iliac screws, and
demographic variables. Results: 365 patients were analyzed.
68.8% of the patients were female. Middle age was 13.1 years (Standard
deviation of 4.3). The overall implant failure rate was of 11.5%. Between
these patients the most common type of failure was the pull out (71.4%).
Risk factors for implant failure were neuromuscular scoliosis and syndromic
scoliosis, higher number of levels included in the fixation, reintervention
with a change of implant choice, use of iliac screws, use of growing rods
and VEPTR. Documented protective factors against implant failure were higher
age and higher density of implants, both presenting with significantly lower
rates of implant failure. Conclusion: Our study showed an
overall rate of implant failure of 11.5% in pediatric deformity correction
surgery, being the implant pull out the most common type of failure.
Protective factors against implant failure were higher patient age and
implant density in the fixation. Risk factors for implant failure were
neuromuscular or syndromic scoliosis, longer fixations, iliac fixation,
reintervention with implant change and the use of growing rods or VEPTR.

## 1173

## A263: Is isolated Pulmonary Function Test (PFT), sufficient to asses the
pulmonary status in scoliosis deformity correction cases?

Jvaghar Jill

1

, Nalli Ramanathan Uvaraj

2

, and Sathish Muthu

3

1

Madras Medical College, Orthopaedic Spine Surgery, Chennai,
India

2

Madras Medical College, Orthopaedic Spine Surgery, Chennai,
India

3

Madras Medical College, Orthopaedics, Chennai, India

Introduction: Scoliosis is a three-dimensional deformative
abnormality of the spine. There is substantial interest in the relationship
between spinal deformity and pulmonary function due to potentially high
rates of morbidity and mortality. The deformed structures compress the lung
parenchyma causing a decrease in lung volume and its compliance. These
changes along with the increased effort to breathe may result in alveolar
hypoventilation, hypercapnia, and hypoxemia leading to cor-pulmonale and
right-sided heart failure. Since poor pulmonary function may lead to a
higher incidence of postoperative pulmonary complications, preoperative
pulmonary function tests (PFT) have commonly been used to predict
postoperative complications concerning the severity of scoliosis. The
objective of this study was to assess whether PFT was sufficient to evaluate
the improvement in pulmonary function pre and post-deformity correction.
Materials and methods: This was a retrospective analysis
among patients with thoracic or thoracic lumbar scoliosis who were admitted
to our institution for deformity correction between June 2014 to June 2019.
The patients enrolled in the study were aged between 10-17 years, had a
preoperative diagnosis of predominant thorasic scoliosis with a
pre-operative PFT available for analysis. All the included patients were
followed up radiographically along with the pulmonary function tests to
measure total lung capacity (TLC), forced vital capacity(FVC), and forced
expiratory volume in one second (FEV1) along with a functional assessment of
the lung capacity. Each test was repeated three times and the single best
effort was recorded. We focussed on percent predicted values of FVC and FEV1
to asses restrictive lung disease. Results: 17 patients were
included in the study, with a mean age of 13.7 (10-17 years) at deformity
correction. 8 patients had congenital scoliosis and 9 had adolescent
idiopathic scoliosis. The mean preoperative FVC was 1.552 and percent
predicted FVC was 63%. After posterior instrumentation corrective surgery,
the mean FVC was 1.803 and percent predicted FVC was 66.5%. At 2years
follow-up, PFT did not show any improvement for the correction of curves
involving 5 levels or more. Patients with severe scoliosis with preoperative
severe restriction showed a significant improvement of percent predicted FVC
from 37% to 59% (P < .05). However, functional
improvement was noted in the rest with significant improvement in right
heart pressure with no significant improvement in PFT.
Conclusion: Despite demonstrating a significant improvement
in their functional status corresponding improvement in their pulmonary
function was not noticed which raises the question that whether these cases
had a lung compromise, to begin with, or whether pulmonary compensation was
established before the surgery. Since PFT was the only measure utilized to
assess the status of the lung, we probably could not essentially establish
the extent of the lung compromise pre-operatively. We recommend additional
measures to asses on going right heart compensation with echocardiography
and pulmonary artery pressure to objectively establish the pre-operative
pulmonary status beforehand.

## 809

## A264: Comparison of Flexibility Assessments in Adolescent Idiopathic
Scoliosis (FLEXIS)

Kenny Yat Hong Kwan

1

, Caglar Yilgor

2

, Ahmet Alanay

2

, and Kenneth Man Chee Cheung

1

1

University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong, Hong Kong

2

Acibadem University School of Medicine, Istanbul, Turkey

Introduction: There is no consensus as to which type of dynamic
radiograph is optimal in predicting the true flexibility of a curve in
adolescent idiopathic scoliosis (AIS) or the final behavior of the curve
post-surgical correction. This study aims to investigate the flexibility
equivalence of different bending methods. Material and Methods:
Patients diagnosed with AIS who had reached the threshold for surgical
correction were prospectively recruited in two centres. Data regarding
demographics, concomitant treatment and curve characteristics were obtained.
Radiographs of standing whole spine, supine side-bending, awake traction,
supine traction under general anaesthesia (STUGA) and fulcrum bending were
performed preoperatively. The following formulae were calculated to
determine which type(s) of flexibility films were most accurate in
predicting the final behavior of the curve post-surgical correction:
Flexibility index (%) = [(Pre-operative Cobb angle - Bending Cobb
angle)/Pre-operative Cobb] x 100% Correction rate (%) = [(Pre-operative Cobb
angle-Post-operative Cobb angle)/Pre-operative Cobb angle] x 100% Correction
index (%) = (Correction rate/Flexibility) x 100%. Results: 132
patients (19 male and 113 female) with a mean age at the time of surgery of
14 ± 1.74 years were recruited from Turkey and Hong Kong. Patients were
analysed according to curve patterns. 90 patients had thoracic major curves.
The correction indices were 508.9 ± 159.2%, 183.0 ± 193.5%, 135.5 ± 97.4%,
153.1 ± 21.1% and 139.6 ± 22.9% for supine, supine side bending, fulcrum
bending, awake traction and STUGA respectively. For lumbar major curves (n =
42), the correction indices were 342.4 ± 209.6%, 138.4 ± 72.3%, 121.5 ±
39.6%, 131.6% and 136.5 ± 67.6% respectively. Conclusion: The
correction index takes into account the inherent curve flexibility, and an
index close to 100% suggests that the instrumentation has taken up all the
flexibility revealed by the dynamic radiograph. This study showed that for
thoracic curves, the fulcrum bending radiograph most accurately predicted
post-operative curve correction, whereas for lumbar curves, all dynamic
radiographs apart from supine films showed similar predictability for curve
correction. Fulcrum bending radiographs can help preoperative planning for
AIS surgeries including the need for intraoperative releases and fusion
level determination, particularly for thoracic curves.

## 975

## A265: Changes in shoulder balance and prediction of final shoulder
imbalance during growing-rod treatment for early-onset scoliosis: a case
series

Ziyang Liu

1

, Tie Liu

1

, and Yong Hai

1

1

Department of Orthopedic Surgery, Beijing Chaoyang Hospital, Capital
Medical University of China, Department of Orthopedic Surgery, Beijing,
China

Introduction: Achieving and maintaining shoulder balance after
the entire growing-rod (GR) treatment is essential for early-onset scoliosis
(EOS) patients. However, few studies have reported the outcomes of shoulder
balance after the entire GR surgery in EOS patients, and the risk factors
for shoulder imbalance after final fusion in EOS patients have been
understudied. This study investigated changes in shoulder balance of
early-onset scoliosis (EOS) patients during the GR treatment, analysed risk
factors for final shoulder imbalance, and evaluated the satisfaction of
patients' parents with shoulder balance after the treatment. Material
and Methods: In total, 24 consecutive 'growing-rod graduates'
were studied. Demographic data, surgical-related factors, and radiographic
parameters were analysed to identify risk factors for final shoulder
imbalance, and shoulder balance changes from GR implantation to last
follow-up after fusion were analysed. The satisfaction of parents was
evaluated by an adapted questionnaire. Results: Early
postfusion shoulder imbalance (odds ratio (OR): 19.500; 95% confidence
interval (CI)=1.777-213.949; P = .015) was identified as an
independent risk factor for final shoulder imbalance at the last follow-up.
Radiographic shoulder height (RSH) was significantly improved after GR
implantation (P = .036), and further improved during the
postfusion period (P = .021). Through the whole treatment,
from GR implantation to the last follow-up after fusion, the value of RSH
showed significant improvement (P = .011). Similar trends
were also found in other parameters, including clavicle angle (CA), coracoid
height difference (CHD), and T1 tilt (T1T). The postimplantation shoulder
balance and imbalance patients had no significant difference in final RSH
(P > .05), while the shoulder balance significantly
improved in patients with prefusion shoulder imbalance after fusion
(P = .045). All parents (100%) were satisfied with the
final shoulder condition and entire treatment. Conclusion: GR
surgery improved shoulder balance. Shoulder balance status after GR
implantation did not determine the final status, but final fusion could
further adjust the shoulder balance of patients with prefusion shoulder
imbalance. For patients with early shoulder imbalance after final fusion,
there was a high probability of shoulder imbalance at the final follow-up.
Postfusion spontaneous adjustment after final fusion significantly improved
shoulder balance.

## 1587

## A266: Should Selective Thoracic Fusion be Reserved for Non-Structural
Compensatory Lumbar Curves? Radiographic and Clinical Results from
Propensity Matched Patients at Minimum 5-Year Follow-Up

Jay Reidler

1

, Scott Zuckerman

1

, Meghan Cerpa

1

, Joseph Lombardi

1

, Peter Newton

2

, and Lawrence Lenke

1

1

Columbia University Medical Center, New York, USA

2

Rady's Children Hospital, San Diego, USA

Hypothesis: Selective thoracic fusion results in worse
radiographic outcomes compared to non-selective fusion for Lenke 1-4C
curves, but similar patient reported outcomes for Lenke 1-2C curves.
Study Design: Retrospective analysis of multicenter,
prospectively collected data. Introduction: For adolescent
idiopathic scoliosis (AIS) Lenke Type 1-4C curves, controversy exists
whether selective thoracic fusion (STF) is sufficient or non-selective
fusion (NSF) should be used to treat the associated lumbar curves.
Methods: A prospective, multicenter database was queried
for Lenke 1-4C curves (min 5-yr follow up). Patients were dichotomized to
STF (fusion L1 or above) vs NSF (fusion below L1). We analyzed two
subgroups: 1) non-structural lumbar curves (1-2C), and 2) structural lumbar
curves (3-4C). After propensity score matching within each subgroup for age
and preop thoracic and lumbar Cobb angles, we conducted within and between
group comparisons of radiographic data and SRS-22 scores.
Results: Of 124 patients with 1-2C curves, 74 matched (37
STF, 37 NSF). At 5 years postop, both STF and NSF led to improvement in main
thoracic (MT) and compensatory lumbar (CL) Cobb angles as well as coronal
balance (C7-CSVL), but NSF values were better than STF (P
< .05). While SRS total and self-image scores improved for
each procedure (P < .05), there were no significant
differences in STF and NSF patient reported outcomes (PROs). Of 95 patients
with 3-4C curves, 36 matched (18 STF, 18 NSF). At 5 years postop, both STF
and NSF led to improvement in MT and CL cobb angles, but again NSF values
were better than STF (P < .05). NSF reported better
total SRS (P < .02) and self-image (P =
.05) scores when compared to STF. Conclusions: In propensity
score matched patients treated for Lenke Type 1-2C curves, STF results in
slightly less radiographic correction but similar patient reported outcomes
as NSF at 5 years. In contrast, matched patients treated for Lenke Type 3-4C
curves with NSF have both better radiographic and patient reported outcomes
when compared to STF. Summary: In this multicenter study with
minimum 5-year follow-up, we performed propensity score matching to compare
patients treated with selective thoracic fusion and non-selective fusion for
Lenke 1-2C curves vs 3-4C curves. We found that selective thoracic fusion
resulted in slightly less radiographic improvement compared to non-selective
fusion for all curves. While STF led to similar patient-reported outcome
scores as NSF for Lenke 1-2C curves, NSF led to better scores for Lenke 3-4C
curves.

## 78

## A267: Fusing to the Pelvis in the Correction of Scoliosis Associated with
Rett Syndrome

Brett Rocos1 and Reinhard Zeller1

1Hospital for Sick Children, Toronto, Canada

Introduction: Rett syndrome is a rare disorder characterised by
severe, C shaped scoliosis in up to 80% of cases. In the past, posterior
spinal fusion has been the mainstay of treatment, most often including the
pelvis. However, fusing to the pelvis has been shown to influence function
of the spinopelvic relationship, which has been hypothesised to reduce the
ability to ambulate in these patients. In this study, we sought to show the
results of the surgical treatment of scoliosis in patients with Rett
syndrome and analyse the impact of fusing to the pelvis on ambulation.
Materials and Methods: A retrospective case series
methodology was used to analyse the radiographic, clinical and functional
outcomes of consecutive patients treated for Rett syndrome associated
scoliosis treated surgically between the ages of 10 and 8 years in a single
tertiary referral paediatric spinal unit. Cases were identified through
departmental and neurophysiological records, and patients were excluded if
the diagnosis of Rett syndrome was not confirmed. Results:
Seven eligible cases were identified. The mean coronal Cobb angle was 90.9°,
mean sagittal Cobb 72.0° and pelvic obliquity 24.5°. The mean post-operative
improvement in coronal Cobb was 53.2° and pelvic obliquity was not
significantly improved. These did not change during a mean follow up of 2.7
years. None showed any post-operative complications and of the 4 patients
fused to the pelvis, only 1 was able to ambulate preoperatively, and this
ability was lost postoperatively. Conclusions: Our data
suggests that with modern technology, severe curves can be safely treated,
and that fusion to the pelvis is not necessary to prevent curve progression,
which may be important in preserving patient mobility post operatively.

## 1618

## A268: Anterior vs Posterior Approach for the Treatment of Lenke 5c Curves
in Patients with Idiopathic Scoliosis; Results from the Swedish Spine
Registry

Anastasios Charalampidis

1,2

, Hans Möller

1,3

, and Paul Gerdhem

1,2

1

Department of Clinical Sciences, Intervention and Technology
(CLINTEC), Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm, Sweden

2

Department of Reconstructive Orthopaedics, Karolinska University
Hospital, Stockholm, Sweden

3

Stockholm Center for Spine Surgery, Stockholm, Sweden

Introduction: Adolescents with severe idiopathic scoliosis may
be treated with anterior or posterior fusion surgery, although there is no
consensus as to which is associated with the best outcome. Moreover, studies
with longer term follow-up are limited. Material and Methods: We used data
from the Swedish spine registry and identified 59 patients with idiopathic
scoliosis treated with fusion for Lenke 5C type curves; 27 patients
underwent anterior surgery and 32 underwent posterior surgery. All patients
had pre- and postoperative radiographic data and postoperative clinical data
at a minimum of 2 year after surgery. Patient reported outcomes measures
included the SRS-22r, EQ-5D-3L, EQ-VAS and VAS for back pain. Radiographic
assessment included measurement of the Cobb angle of the major curve, curve
flexibility, rate of curve correction, any difference in sagittal
parameters, number of fused vertebrae and length of fusion. Results: The
mean age at surgery was 16 years in both groups. The mean follow-up time was
3.8 years. There were no significant differences in the SRS-22r score and
EQ-5D-3L index at follow-up (all P ≥ .1). Postoperatively,
both the anterior and posterior fusion group demonstrated a significant
correction of the major curve (P ≤ .001) with no significant difference of
the correction rate between the groups (P = .4). The
posterior fusion group had shorter operative time (P <
.001) and higher perioperative blood loss (P = .004) while
the anterior group had lower number of fused vertebrae (P
< 0.001). Conclusion: The type of surgical approach for
Lenke 5C curves is not associated with any measurable differences in
health-related quality of life, despite the lower number of fused vertebrae
after anterior surgery.

## 1185

## A269: Effect of Tranexamic Acid Dosing on the Percent of Total Blood Lost
During Adolescent Idiopathic Scoliosis Surgery

Katherine Krenek

1

, Kristen Jones

2

, Christopher Vara

3

, Natalie Scholz

1

, Allison Wolf

1

, and David Polly

, 3

1

University of Minnesota, Department of Orthopaedic Surgery,
Minneapolis, USA

2

University of Minnesota, Department of Neurosurgery, Minneapolis,
USA

3

Shriners Children’s Twin Cities, Department of Orthopaedic Surgery,
Woodbury, USA

Introduction: Posterior spinal fusion (PSF) for adolescent
idiopathic scoliosis is associated (AIS) with significant intraoperative
blood loss. Tranexamic acid (TXA) is an antifibrinolytic agent that is known
to reduce the percent of total blood volume lost during posterior spinal
fusion, however the optimal dosing regimen has not been defined.
Material and Methods: Fifty-three AIS patients underwent
PSF in 2011-2019; 18 received no-TXA, 18 received low dose TXA (10 mg/kg
loading 1 mg/kg/hr infusion), and 17 received high dose TXA (30 mg/kg
loading, 10 mg/kg/hr infusion). We retrieved relevant demographic,
hematologic, intraoperative, and outcomes information from medical records.
The primary outcome was percent total blood volume lost (%TBVL) per level
fused, calculated from estimates of intraoperative blood loss, estimated
total blood volume per patient (via Nadler’s equations), and number of
levels fused. Unadjusted outcomes were compared using standard statistical
tests. Results: The %TBVL per level fused was significantly
lower in the high dose TXA vs no-TXA group (0.9% vs 1.8%; P
= .003) and in the low dose TXA vs no-TXA group (1.1% vs 1.8%;
P = .03). There was no significant difference in %TBVL
per level fused between the high dose TXA and low dose TXA groups (1.1 vs
0.9; P = .75). No patients had documented seizures, DVTs,
or PEs. Conclusion: Both high and low dose TXA significantly
reduced the percentage of total blood volume lost per level fused when
compared to no-TXA in AIS patients who underwent PSF using a standardized
blood loss measure. No significant difference in percentage of total blood
volume lost per level fused was found when comparing high dose TXA to low
dose TXA. There were no documented complications of seizure, DVT, or PE in
any of the patients in the study.

## 1917

## A270: VCR-Based and Non-VCR-Based Surgical Maneuvers in Deformity
Correction for Achieving Spinal Balance in Severe Rigid Scoliosis Patients:
Weighing the Odds

Nicholas Van Halm-Lutterodt

1,2

, Mohamed Kamal Mesregah

1

, Ziyang Ye

3,4

, Krishna Mandalia

1

, Andrew Mecum

5

, Wei-Hsun Huang

2

, Wei-Cheng Chen

6

, Brandon Yoshida

1

, Yu Wang

2

, and Yulun Xu

2

1

University of Southern California, Department of Orthopaedics and
Neurosurgery, Los Angeles, USA

2

Beijing Tiantan Hospital, Department of Neurosurgery, Beijing,
China

3

University of Chicago Graham School of Continuing Liberal and
Professional Studies, University of Chicago, Department of Business and
Analytics, Chicago, USA

4

Wake Forest University, Department of Mathematics and Statistics,
Winston-Salem, USA

5

Emory University, Department of Psychology, Atlanta, USA

6

Beijing Tongren Hospital, Department of Clinical Sciences, Beijing,
China

Introduction: Severe rigid scoliosis defined as Cobb of ≥80° in
spine patients can result in significant neurological deficits,
cardiopulmonary complications as well as psychological and social
stigmatization based cosmetic appearance. When the deformity is severe and
rigid in patients, aggressive surgical approaches are sometimes considered
to achieve desired corrective outcomes. Vertebral column resection
(VCR-based) has the potential of about ≥60 degree of correction while other
surgical osteotomy techniques (non-VCR-based) may range from 15-45° of
correction while attempting to establish spinal balance in these patients.
We evaluated the corrective rates of spinal balance and radiographic
parameters between VCR-based and non-VCR-based surgery in severe rigid
scoliosis patients. Materials and Methods: A comprehensive
literature review was performed from January 2000-December 2019. The
selection criteria for included studies included: average major
curve Cobb angle of ≥80
o
, case series of ≥10 patients, reported
coronal and sagittal parameters with information on both
coronal (CB) and sagittal
balance (SB) at preoperative and final
follow-up, with a 2-year minimum follow-up period. Primary
outcomes compared between the two surgical technique groups included:
baseline averages of demographics, etiological diagnoses, estimated blood
loss (EBL), mean surgery duration, average fusion length (FL), major curve
(MC) Cobb angle, MC apical vertebral translation (AVT), MC flexibility,
thoracic kyphosis (TK), lumbar lordosis (LL), CB and SB. Secondary outcomes
included: final follow-up (FFU) averages of MC Cobb angle, MC correction
rate, MC AVT, MC AVT correction rate, TK, LL, CB, CB correction rate, SB and
SB correction rate. Results: A total 303 patients from 11
retrospective studies and 1 prospective study were observed. Of 303 severe
rigid scoliosis patients observed, 41.25% (n = 125) and 58.75% (n = 178)
were VCR-based and non-VCR-based, respectively. The averages of age: 17.80
years and 21.63 years, female incidence: 58.10% and 68.20%, idiopathic
etiology: 65.24% and 63.50%, congenital etiology: 23.96% and 19.5%,
estimated blood loss: 2943.33 ml and 1125.22 ml, mean operation time: 510.27
mins and 649.78 mins were observed for VCR-based and non-VCR-based patients,
respectively. The baseline average MC Cobb angles of 101.65o and
109.20o were corrected at rates of 64.70% and 60.80% at FFU
for VCR-based and non-VCR-based patients, respectively. The average
correction rates of MC AVTs were 66.18% and 70.70% in VCR-based and
non-VCR-based groups, respectively. The baseline outcomes for CB: 1.52 cm
and 1.42 cm and SB: 1.74 cm and 1.73 cm for respective VCR-based and
non-VCR-based patients were corrected at respective rates of 38.83% and
28.90% for CB and 32.20% and 43.93% for SB. Postoperative cardiopulmonary
complications, were higher in the Non-VCR-based patient group at a rate of
18.63% compared to an incidence rate of 5.10% in the VCR-based group. Other
medical and implant-related complications between the two surgical groups
were comparable. Conclusion: Findings from this study indicate
that both VCR-based and non-VCR-based surgical spinal fusion technique
maneuvers for the correction of severe rigid curves of ≥80 degrees are
equally effective and can achieve correction rates of ≥60% at 2-year
following corrective surgery. VCR-based surgery achieved higher CB
correction rates while non-VCR-based surgery achieved higher SB correction
rates.

## OP31: Surgical Complications 2

## 1269

## A271: Spinal Surgery Complications. An unsolved problem. Is the world
health organization safety surgical Checklist an Useful Tool to Reduce
Them?

Giovanni Barbanti Bròdano

1

, Cristiana Griffoni

1

, Giuseppe Tedesco

1

, Silvia Terzi

1

, Stefano Bandiera

1

, riccardo ghermandi

1

, Gisberto Evangelisti

1

, Marco Girolami

1

, valerio pipola

1

, Carlotta Cavallari

1

, Asdrubal Falavigna

2

, and Alessandro Gasbarrini

1

1

IRCCS Istituto Ortopedico Rizzoli, Oncological and Degenerative
Spine Surgery, Bologna, Italy

2

University of Caxias do Sul, Department of Neurosurgery, Caxias do
Sul, Brazil

Introduction: To face the problem of surgical complications,
which is generally relevant in surgical fields, an intraoperative checklist
(Safety Surgical Checklist, SSC) was elaborated and released by the World
Health Organization in 2008, and its use has been described in 2009 [1]. In
our Institution, the WHO SSC was introduced in 2011. In spinal surgery, many
preventive measures were investigated to reduce complications, but there is
no report on the effectiveness of the WHO checklist in reducing
complications. The aim of this study was to compare the incidence of
complications between the two periods, from January to December 2010
(without checklist) and from January 2011 to December 2012 (with checklist),
in order to assess the checklist effectiveness. Material and
Methods: A retrospective and single center study was carried out
on patients who underwent spinal surgery during the three-year period from
January 2010 to December 2012. Patients were classified according to the
spine pathology and the different presentation of the complication.
According to the pathology treated, there were oncological, degenerative,
traumatic and infectious groups. Complications were divided into seven
categories:(1). post- surgical hematoma. (2). surgical site infection. (3)
cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) leakage or fistula. (4). mechanical complications
(misplaced instrumentation and/or failure). (5). neurological complications.
(6). systemic complications. (7). surgery related death. The complications’
classification and the patients’ inclusion into the categories were
performed by independent investigators, i.e. non-MD clinical researchers (1
research nurse and 1 clinical research assistant) not directly involved in
the care of the patients. The WHO Safety Surgical was introduced for the
first time in our center in 2011. We registered the complications arising in
patients treated from 2010 to 2012 during a 3 years follow up period for
each patient, assessing the possible differences before and after the
checklist's introduction. Results: The sample size was 917
patients, the mean age was 52.88 years. The majority of procedures were
performed for oncological diseases (54.4%) and degenerative diseases
(39.8%). 159 complications in total were detected (17.3%). The overall
incidence of complications for trauma, infectious pathology, oncology, and
degenerative disease was 22.2%, 19.2%, 18.4%, and 15.3%, respectively. No
correlation was observed between the type of pathology and the complication
incidence. We observed a reduction of the overall incidence of complications
following the introduction of the SSC: in 2010 without checklist, the
incidence of complications was 24.2%, while in 2011 and 2012, following the
checklist introduction, the incidence of complications was 16.7% and 11.7%,
respectively (mean 14.2%). Conclusion: Despite the limitations
of the study, in particular the impossibility to carry out a randomized
study,SSC seems to be an effective tool to reduce complications in spinal
surgery. We propose to extend the use of checklist system also to the
pre-operative and post-operative phases in order to further reduce the
incidence of complications.

## References
1. Haynes A.B., Weiser T.G., Berry W.R., et al (2009) Asurgical safety
checklist to reduce morbidity and mortality in a global population. NEngl J
Med 360:491-499.

## 939

## A272: Outcomes in Spinal Surgery During theCOVID-19 Pandemic

Christine Scarsbrook

1

, Maheswaran Archunan

1

, Anand Shah

1

, Nick Steele

1

, Andrew Cook

1

, Lennel Lutchman

1

, Am Rai

1

, and Girish Swamy

1

1

Norfolk and Norwich University Hospital, Norwich, United
Kingdom

Introduction: The COVID-19 pandemic has had a hugely detrimental
impact on hospital services worldwide. There has also been increasing
evidence about the higher patient mortality and morbidity associated with
contracting SARS-CoV-2 in the peri-operative period. This is supported by a
study carried out in China, which revealed that patients in the incubation
phase of COVID-19 had a higher rate of ITU admission and mortality following
elective surgery. A multicentre international cohort study recently
published in the Lancet looked at the outcomes of 1128 patients with
peri-operative COVID-19 infection. The results showed that 51.2% patients
developed pulmonary complications and the 30 day mortality was 23.8%,
highest in male patients aged 70 or over. These increased risks to patients
during COVID-19 have been recognised by the British Association of Spinal
Surgeons (BASS) who produced a COVID-19 information leaflet for patients to
sign. We analysed the risk/benefit ratio of surgery for individual patients,
and we have continued our emergency and urgent spinal operating services.
This study describes the measures and pathways taken in our university
hospital to protect patients and staff, and our outcome measures during
COVID-19. Material and Methods: This is a prospective
single-centre study of all patients who underwent spinal surgery in a four
month period during the pandemic. All spinal surgical patients’ data were
collected to identify demographics, co-morbidities, ASA grade, surgical
indication and procedure, time to surgery, length of stay, need for ITU
admission, COVID-19 swab result, complications and outcomes including
mortality. Hospital theatre systems, intra-operative notes, patient
pathways, both national and local, for elective and emergency patients
[blue, green or yellow] were also reviewed. We compared the outcomes of
patients under each pathway with our historic database over preceding years.
Results: 72 patients underwent spinal surgery during this
four month period; this was significantly lower than the 167 patients in the
equivalent period in 2019 due to bed restrictions to accommodate COVID-19
patients. Emergency operating took up a higher proportion of the workload -
with 37.5% spinal operations being emergency surgery, and 62.5% operations
classified as urgent. None of the patients required ITU admission. There
were 11 complications; 4 dural tears treated intra-operatively with no
sequelae, 4 superficial wound infections, 1 post-operative chest infection
(normal chest x-ray), 1 patient with mild dysphagia (following ACDF) and 1
ongoing urinary dysfunction (following cauda equina compression). None of
the patients contracted COVID-19. There were three mortalities
post-discharge in the community; none were related to surgery or to
COVID-19. Conclusion: There was no variation in clinical
outcomes in patients operated on before and during COVID-19 in our hospital.
This is likely to be in part due to the procedures brought in on our wards
and in our theatre complex as a response to the virus, as well as the new
‘blue’ pathway designed for urgent elective patients. These results should
encourage other departments worldwide to adapt their surgical pathways to
protect their patients and to restart their spinal elective service when
their hospitals have the capacity to do so.

## 1077

## A273: Adverse Events Occurring up to 5-Years After Complex Adult
Deformity Surgery: A Scoli-RISK-1 Analysis

Meghan Cerpa

1

, Scott Zuckerman

1

, Lawrence Lenke

1

, Christopher Shaffrey

2

, Justin Smith

3

, Leah Carreon

4

, Kenneth Man Chee Cheung

5

, Michael Kelly

6

, Michael Fehlings

7

, Christopher Ames

8

, Oheneba Boachie-Adjei

9

, Mark Dekutoski

10

, Khaled Kebaish

11

, Stephen Lewis

7

, Yukihiro Matsuyama

12

, Ferran Pellisé

13

, Yong Qiu

14

, and Frank Schwab

15

1

Columbia University Medical Center, New York, USA

2

Duke, Raleigh, USA

3

University of Virginia, Charlottesville, USA

4

Norton Health, Louisville, USA

5

University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong, China

6

Washington University, St. Louis, USA

7

University of Toronto and Toronto Western Hospital, Toronto,
Canada

8

University of California San Francisco, San Francisco, USA

9

The FOCOS Hospital, Patang West, Ghana

10

Marshfield Clinic Eau Claire Center, Eau Claire, USA

11

Johns Hopkins, Baltimore, USA

12

Hamamatsu University School of Medicine, Hamamatsu, Japan

13

Hospital Universitari Vall d’Hebron, Barcelona, Spain

14

Affiliated Drum Tower Hospital of Nanjing University Medical School,
Nanjing, China

15

Hospital for Special Surgery, New York, USA

Summary: Following complex ASD surgery at 5-years postoperative,
77.9% of patients experienced an adverse event (AE). Of patients with an AE,
20.2% had a severe complication, while 59% of patients that experienced an
AE required surgical treatment. 75.9% of neurologic deficits were transient
and improved over time. Common etiologies for neurologic AEs were nerve root
retraction, compression, direct injury, and distraction. Most common spine
complication in years 2-5 was implant failure, followed by sensory and motor
deficit. Hypothesis: Prospectively evaluate neurologic and
non-neurologic adverse events (AEs) occurring up to 5-yrs postop following
surgical correction of complex ASD. Study Design:
Prospective/multicenter/international/observational, Scoli-Risk-1.
Introduction: Surgical treatment for complex adult spinal
deformity (ASD) is associated with a variety of postop complications. Rates
of perioperative complications following complex ASD surgery are well
established, while reports of long-term postop complications remain unclear.
Methods: 272 ASD pts undergoing surgery from 15 centers
were enrolled. Inclusion criteria: Cobb>80, corrective osteotomy for
congenital or revision deformity, and/or 3-column osteotomy (76% of all
patients). At each follow-up visit any neurologic or non-neurologic AE was
documented & categorized. Results: Of the 272 patients,
follow-up rates were: 271 (99.6%) discharge, 260 (95.6%) 6-weeks, 255
(93.8%) 6-months, 217 (79.8%) 2-year, and 77 (28.3%) at 5-years. By 5-years
postop, 212/272 patients (77.9%) experienced an AE. Of those that
experienced an AE, 20% had a severe AE, 24% mild, and 33% moderate. A total
190/272 (69.9%) experienced a non-neurologic AE & 101 (37%) experienced
a neurologic AE. Of all patients with complications, conservative management
or no action was taken in 87 patients (41%), whereas 125 (59%) of the
patients that experienced AEs required some form of surgical treatment
(either revision spine or other surgery). 3 deaths occurred, none of which
were directly related to surgery: ileus 3.2 months postop, cardiac arrest
9.8 months postop, and suicide 1.2 years postop. Specifically in the 2-to
5-year period, a total of 58 complications occurred that were related or
possibly related to surgery, including: 27 (47%) implant failure, 6 (10%)
sensory deficits, 3 (5%) loss of correction, 3 (5%) cord/motor deficits, and
2 (3%) deep infections. Conclusion: At 5-years postop following
complex ASD surgery with prospective assessment, 77.9% of patients
experienced an AE, with 20% having a severe complication and 59% requiring
surgical treatment either spine or non-spine. 75.9% of neurologic deficits
were transient and improved over time. The most common spine complication in
the 2- to 5-year period was implant failure, followed by motor and sensory
deficits.

## 667

## A274: The influence of hospital type, insurance type, and patient income
on 30-day complication and readmission rates following lumbar fusion

Xiao Chen

1

, Michael Collins

1

, Shane Shahrestani

1

, Alexander Ballatori

1

, Andy Ton

1

, Jeffrey C. Wang

1

, and Zorica Buser

1

1

Keck School of Medicine, University of Southern California,
Department of Orthopaedic Surgery, Los Angeles, USA

Introduction: Several studies have shown that factors such as
insurance type and patient income are associated with different readmission
rates following certain orthopaedic procedures. However, no studies have
investigated how 30-day complication and readmission rates vary by hospital
type, insurance type, and patient median income following lumbar spine
fusion. Material and Methods: A retrospective cohort study was
conducted using the National Readmissions Database (NRD) from 2010-2016
using ICD-9 and ICD-10 codes, which identified 596,568 patients with primary
lumbar fusion. Statistical analysis was conducted in R. Kruskal-Wallis tests
with Dunn’s pairwise comparisons were performed to analyze differences in
30-day readmission and complication rates in patients who underwent lumbar
spine fusion. Complications analyzed included infection, wound injury,
hematoma, neurological injury, thromboembolic event, and hardware failure.
Results: The hospital types analyzed were metropolitan
non-teaching (212,131 patients), metropolitan teaching (364,752 patients),
and rural (19,685 patients). 30-day readmission was significantly higher in
rural and metropolitan teaching hospitals compared to metropolitan
non-teaching hospitals (P < .01). Patients treated at
rural hospitals were also more likely readmitted at 30 days than those
treated at metropolitan teaching hospitals (P < .001).
Compared to those treated at metropolitan non-teaching hospitals, patients
from metropolitan teaching hospitals had significantly higher rates of
infection (P < .0001), wound injury (P
< .0001), hematoma (P = .018), and hardware failure
(P < .002). The insurance types analyzed included
Medicare (213,534 patients), Medicaid (78,520 patients), private insurance
(196,648 patients), and out-of-pocket (45,025 patients). Privately insured
patients were significantly less likely to be readmitted at 30 days than
those paying with Medicare or Medicaid (P < .01).
Infection, hematoma, and hardware device failure rates were significantly
higher in out-of-pocket payers compared to all other groups
(P < .0001). Infection, wound injury, and hematoma
rates were significantly lower in Medicare payers compared to all other
groups (P < .0001). Patient income was separated into
quartiles, with 112,083, 145,755, 156,276, and 147,289 patients placed in
quartiles 1 to 4, respectively. No difference in readmission rates were
found between any of the income groups, although patients in quartile 4 were
significantly more likely to develop hematomas compared to those in
quartiles 1 and 2, and were more likely to experience a thromboembolic event
compared to all other groups. Conclusion: Patients undergoing
lumbar spine fusion at metropolitan non-teaching hospitals and paying with
private insurance had significantly lower 30-day readmission rates than
their counterparts. Complications within 30 days following lumbar spine
fusion were significantly higher in patients treated at metropolitan
teaching hospitals and in patients paying out-of-pocket. However, aside from
a few exceptions, patient income was generally not associated with
differential complication rates.

## 1915

## A275: Endplate Volumetric Bone Mineral Density is a Predictor for Cage
Subsidence Following Lateral Lumbar Interbody Fusion: A Risk Factor
Analysis

Conor Jones

1

, Ichiro Okano

1

, Stephan Salzmann

1

, Erika Chiapparelli

1

, Marie-jacqueline Reisener

1

, Jennifer Shue

1

, Andrew Sama

1

, Frank Cammisa

1

, Federico Girardi

1

, and Alexander Hughes

1

1

Hospital for Special Surgery, New York, USA

Introduction: Lateral lumbar interbody fusion (LLIF) is a common
procedure used for various spinal conditions. One of the common
complications of this procedure is subsidence, which is the sinking of the
interbody device into adjacent vertebrae. Previous work has shown that a
decreased BMD as measured by DXA is a risk factor for subsidence, but
emerging data suggests a lower endplate volumetric BMD (EP-vBMD) as measured
by Quantitative Computed Tomography is a risk factor for subsidence
following standalone LLIF. However, it remains unclear if this is the case
for LLIF with posterior screws. Additionally, there is interest in the role
that patient factors, such as BMI and diabetes status, plays on bone
quality. The purpose of this study is to investigate risk factors for
subsidence following LLIF. Materials and Methods: We reviewed
the data of consecutive patients undergoing LLIF from 2014-2019 at a single
academic institution who radiological imaging between 5 and 14 months after
surgery. We excluded levels with previous instrumentation, previous
fractures, and poor imaging quality. Cage subsidence was measured using the
grading system devised by Marchi et al.1 We collected
preoperative body mass index (BMI) along with diabetes status. We measured
both EP-vBMD and the trabecular volumetric BMD measurement of the vertebral
body (VB-vBMD). EP-vBMD was the average of the upper and lower endplate
vBMDs measured in cortical and trabecular bone with a 5mm region of interest
beneath the cage contacting surfaces. Univariable analysis and multivariable
logistic regression analyses with a generalized mixed model were conducted.
Multivariable analysis included BMI, diabetes status, EP-vBMD, VB-vBMD, and
all trending (P < .20) factors in univariable analyses
as explanatory variables. Ad hoc analysis, including receiver operative
characteristic curve analysis, identified the cut-off values in significant
continuous variables for subsidence. The statistical significance level was
set at P < .05. Results: 567 levels in 347
patients were included in the final analysis. Mean age (±SD) was 61.7 ± 11.1
yrs. 50.3% of the patients were male. 134 (38.7%) patients were overweight,
114 (32.9%) were obese, and 45 (13%) were diabetic. Subsidence with a grade
of at least 1 was observed in 160 levels (28.2%). After adjusting for age,
American Society of Anesthesiologists Physical Status, Charlson comorbidity
index, LLIF level, and VB-vBMD, standalone status (P =
.001) and EP-vBMD (P = .032) were associated with
subsidence. ROC curve analysis demonstrated a cutoff of 211 kg/m2
for EP-vBMD. Ad hoc analysis demonstrated patients with no risk factors had
subsidence at 18.3% of levels, 31.1% of levels with one risk factor, and
44.9% of levels with both risk factors (P < .0001).
Conclusion: A decreased local EP-vBMD and the absence of
posterior screws are risk factors for subsidence following LLIF. When
performing LLIF, the preoperative EP-vBMD measurement should be considered,
and in patients with a low EP-vBMD, the addition of pedicle screws could be
included to limit the risk of subsidence.

## References
1. Marchi L, Abdala N, Oliveira L, Amaral R, Coutinho E, Pimenta L.
Radiographic and clinical evaluation of cage subsidence after stand-alone
lateral interbody fusion. J Neurosurg Spine.
2013;19(1):110-118. doi:10.3171/2013.4.SPINE12319

## 1873

## A276: Severe short-term complications after cerebrospinal fluid leakage
following lumbar spine surgery. A retrospective single-centre study

Michal Krakowiak

1

, Tomasz Szmuda

1

, Justyna Fercho

2

, Zuzanna Maliszewska

2

, and Paweł Słoniewski

1

1

Medical University of Gdansk, Neurosurgery Department, Gdansk,
Poland

2

Medical University of Gdansk, Scientific Circle of Neurology and
Neurosurgery, Gdansk, Poland

Introduction: Cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) leak as a result of an
incidental durotomy is a relatively common complication associated with
spine surgery. It may lead to more serious conditions such as meningitis or
intracranial hypotension. This study aims to assess the severe complication
rate followingCSF leakage. Material and Methods: The authors
conducted a retrospective study on patients who underwent lumbar spine
surgery and were readmitted due to postoperative CFS leak in one of the
Neurosurgery Departments in Poland. The clinical data of spine surgeries
from January 2015-September 2020 was collected from the local hospital
database. Factors included into the analysis were: age, Body Mass Index
(BMI), nicotinism, comorbidities, lenght of hospitalization, initial spine
surgery, dural tear recognition during revision surgery, usage of external
lumbar drainage. Patients treated for emergency spine cases were excluded
from this study. Results: Out of 3080 patients after spine
surgery 73 cases were included. The male-to-female ratio was 50:50. The mean
age was 55 years (range 24-86 years) among women and 58.8 years (range 31-80
years) among men. The overal incidence of CSF leakage was 2.37% of which 12%
had other severe complications. Meningitidis was the most common one (n = 7,
9.5%). No correlation was found between meningitidis and nicotinism, BMI or
previous spine surgery. There was 1 (1.36%) case of pneumocephalus and 1
case of an acute subdural heamatoma (1.36%) induced by intracranial
hypotension. Surgical management of CSF leaks correlated with shorter
hospital stay (P < .05). Conclusion:
Unintended durotomy is a common complication in spine surgery. As presented
in this study, griveous complications may occur due to postoperative CSF
leakage. The surgeon and patient need to be aware of these potentially fatal
conditions in order to reduce them.

## 1793

## A277: Comparison of Implant-Related Complications Between the
Magnetically Controlled Growing Rod and The Spring Distraction System for
the Treatment of Early Onset Scoliosis

Justin Lemans

1

, Casper Tabeling

1

, René Castelein

1

, and Moyo Kruyt

1

1

University Medical Center Utrecht, Orthopaedic Surgery, Utrecht, The
Netherlands

Introduction: Traditional Growing Rod surgery for Early Onset
Scoliosis (EOS) is associated with high complication rates, which are
attributed to the need for frequent re-operations. Although this need can be
mitigated by using the Magnetically Controlled Growing Rod (MCGR), recent
literature shows that complications are still frequent, possibly owing to
MCGRs mechanical complexity. We developed the Spring Distraction System
(SDS), which continuously distracts the growing, scoliotic spine through a
compressed titanium spring that is positioned around a standard growing rod.
Although it offers a theoretical favorable biomechanical stress profile, its
effect on complications has not yet been studied. Therefore, the current
study aims to compare the complication rate and complication profile of the
MCGR and the SDS. Material and Methods: We performed a
retrospective cohort study to compare consecutive EOS patients between 2013
and 2018 who underwent primary implantation with either a hybrid MCGR
construct or the SDS implant. Patient- and disease-related variables were
collected and 2 observers independently scored and graded complications in
all included patients. Complication rate was reported as
complications/patient/year and a Kaplan-Meier survival analysis with the
Log-Rank method was performed to compare the time to complications between
the groups. Results: We included 32 EOS patients, 14 MCGR and
18 SDS patients. Mean age at surgery was 7.9 ± 1.6 and 8.4 ± 1.9 years for
MCGR and SDS respectively. Mean follow-up was 4.1 ± 1.6 (MCGR) and 3.0 ± 0.4
(SDS) years. The MCGR group showed 18 complications (1.3/patient), which
corresponded to 0.31 complications/patient/year. Ten patients (71%) had at
least 1 complication. There were 4 anchor failures, 2 rod fractures and 8
actuator malfunctions in which the MCGR failed to lengthen any further
(after a mean of 3.4 years) and had to be replaced to allow for further
spinal lengthening. In addition, there were 3 cases of proximal junctional
kyphosis and 1 case of post-operative neurological injury. The SDS group
showed 17 complications (0.9/patient), corresponding to 0.31
complications/patient/year. Eleven patients (61%) had at least 1
complication. There were 3 anchor failures, 3 rod fractures, 1 case of rod
slippage, 3 side-to-side connector complications and 2 wound complications
(1 wound dehiscence and 1 deep surgical site infection). There were no cases
where the SDS implant failed to lengthen during the study period. However,
there were 5 cases of implant kyphosis resulting in implant prominence.
Across all patients, median complication survival (i.e. the point where half
of the patients suffered a complication) was 2.8 years. The Kaplan-Meier
analysis showed no significant difference (P = .408) in
median complication survival between the MCGR (3.0 years) and SDS (2.5
years) group. Conclusion: Although complication rate normalized
for follow-up was similar between MCGR and SDS patients (0.31
complications/patient/year), complication profile was different between
groups. In the MCGR group, failure to lengthen occurred in >50% of
patients, while the SDS group showed no patients in whom spring lengthening
stalled during growth. However, SDS patients had a higher rate of implant
kyphosis. The median complication survival for all patients was 2.8 years,
with no differences between the groups.

## 388

## A278: Complication Rates Following Posterior Lumbar Fusion in
Osteoporotic Patients Taking Bisphosphonates

Sidney Roberts

1

, Ryan Murphy

1

, Blake Formanek

1

, Zorica Buser

1

, and Jeffrey C. Wang

1

1

Keck School of Medicine, University of Southern California,
Department of Orthopaedic Surgery, Los Angeles, USA

Introduction: Osteoporosis has been shown to have negative
effects on outcomes of spine surgery and is associated with increased
post-operative complication rates. Bisphosphonates are one of the most
commonly prescribed drug classes for osteoporosis, and the current body of
literature has mixed results with regards to the effect of bisphosphonates
on spinal fusion and post-operative complications. The present study aims to
elucidate the effects of bisphosphonates on complications following
posterior lumbar fusion (PLF) with a large database study. Material
and Methods: The PearlDiver patient record database was queried
to identify adult patients (over 18 years of age) who had undergone
posterior lumbar fusion (PLF) using Current Procedural Terminology (CPT)
codes. Those patient cohorts were divided based on a diagnosis of
osteoporosis prior to surgery and bisphosphonate usage. This yielded three
groups: Osteo+Bisph+,
Osteo+Bisph-, and
Osteo-Bisph-. The surgery groups were matched
according to age, sex, and Charlson Comorbidity Index (CCI). Incidence of
post-operative complications were analyzed and statistical analysis was
conducted using Pearson chi-square analysis. Results: Patients
with osteoporosis (both groups Osteo+Bisph+ and
Osteo+Bisph-) had higher rates of revision surgery
than patients without osteoporosis at 6 months and 1 year but these results
were not statistically significant. Patients with osteoporosis (both groups
Osteo+Bisph+ and
Osteo+Bisph-) also had higher rates of
instrumentation complications and post-operative vertebral fractures with
Osteo+Bisph- having the highest rate of both
complications. These results were also not statistically significant. There
was no statistically significant difference in pseudarthrosis between the
three groups. Osteo-Bisph- had significantly higher
rates of post-operative leg pain than Osteo+Bisph-
(P = .0036) and significantly higher rates of
post-operative back pain than both groups Osteo+Bisph+
and Osteo+Bisph- (P = 0.00349) (Table
1). Conclusion: Patients with osteoporosis had higher rates of
post-operative revision, instrumentation failure and post-operative fracture
than patients without osteoporosis, however these results were not
statistically significant. There was also no significant difference in the
aforementioned complications between osteoporotic patients taking
bisphosphonates and those who did not. Patients without osteoporosis had
higher rates of post-operative back pain and leg pain than patients with
osteoporosis regardless of bisphosphonate usage.

## 1312

## A279: Safety and efficacy of magnetically controlled growing rods in an
early onset scoliosis population

Henry Turner

1

, Patrick Carroll

1

, Robin McManus

1

, Jim Kennedy

1

, Jacques Noel

1

, and Patrick Kiely

1

1

Children's Health Ireland at Crumlin, Trauma and Orthopaedic
Surgery, Dublin, Ireland

Introduction: There has been controversy surrounding the safety
and efficacy of magnetically controlled growing rods (MCGR) for the
treatment of patients with early onset scoliosis (EOS). The primary aim of
our study was to evaluate the efficacy of MCGR in correcting and controlling
spinal deformity progression. The secondary aim was to evaluate the number
of patients that needed additional unplanned surgery in the follow-up
period. Material and Methods: All 88 patients who had MCGR
inserted from 2014 onwards in our institution were included in this study.
This cohort comprised of 41 Females and 47 Males and were sub classified
according to the C-EOS classification system. This revealed 19 Congenital,
23 Idiopathic, 16 Syndromic and 30 Neuromuscular origin patients. The
following outcomes were measured: Pre- and post-operative Scoliosis Major
Cobb (MCA) and Major Kyphosis (MKA) angles, space available for lung ratios
(SALR), T1- T12 heights, rod length changes, additional unplanned surgeries,
and implant failures. Results: (Our data is represented as means with SD in
brackets) The mean age at surgery was 8.14 years (±2.81) and mean follow up
after surgery was 35 months ( ± 15). The pre- and immediate postoperative
MCA’s were 76 (±21)° and 36 (±19)°, respectively. The latest MCA was 44°
(±21). Pre- and immediate postoperative MKA’s were 43 (26) degrees and 28
(±16)°, respectively. The latest MKA was 32 degrees ( ± 17).The preoperative
and latest SALR’s were 86% (±13) and 95% (±9) respectively, an increase of
9%.The pre- and immediate postoperative T1-T12 heights were 168mm (±30) and
193 mm (±30) respectively. The latest T1-T12 height was 209 mm (±33), an
increase of 16mm (8.3%) from the immediate postoperative measurement. The
increase in rod lengths were 17 mm (±10) and 18 mm (±10) for right and left
side rods, respectively. Macroscopic evaluation of implants and radiographic
evaluation revealed bilateral actuator pin failure in 2 patients (2.27%) and
there was no evidence of end cap failure. 24 patients (27%) had additional
unplanned surgery due to infection, inadequate deformity control and rod or
anchor point failure. Conclusion: Our findings suggest that
MCGR can achieve success in controlling significant deformity in the EOS
population over the short to medium term. As with other treatment options,
additional unplanned surgery may be needed and this must be communicated to
the affected individuals and their guardians. Further research continues to
define long term outcomes for the EOS population.

## OP32: Clinical Biomechanics 2

## 1036

## A280: Spine Stability After Treatment of Degenerated Intervertebral Discs
with Percutaneous Cement Discoplasty

chloe techens

1

, sara montanari

1

, Ferenc Bereczki

2

, Peter E. Eltes

2

, Aron Lazary

2

, and Luca Cristofolini

1

1
University of Bologna, Department of Industrial Engineering,
Bologna, Italy, 
2
National Centre for Spinal Disorders, Budapest,
Hungary
Introduction: Low back pain can be caused by nerve compression
due to stenosis of the foramen associated with intervertebral disc
degeneration. Invasive surgical solutions are not suitable for old patients
with comorbidities. A minimally invasive approach, percutaneous cement
discoplasty, has been recently developed for the polymorbid patients [1].
The mechanical impact on the spine stabilization and surrounding tissues
have not been investigated yet. This in vitro study aimed
at: (1) testing the stabilization of human spine segments after discoplasty
by monitoring the disc height and the range of motion (ROM), (2) preventing
complications by assessing the strains on the specimen surface, (3) relating
the surgery quality to the biomechanical stability of the spine segments.
Material and Methods: 27 fresh-frozen human cadaveric
lumbar FSUs were obtained from 15 donors (35-86 y.o., 63-132 kg) after
ethical approval. The soft tissues were removed, leaving the ligaments
intact. The specimens were potted with the intervertebral disc horizontal
and prepared with a water-based white-on-blue speckle pattern in order to
measure surface strains with Digital Image Correlation (DIC) [2]. The
specimens were mechanically tested in flexion and extension under 50% body
weight axial load combined to an offset. The ROM, the stiffness, and the
disc height were measured. Disc surface images were recorded and analysed by
a 3D-DIC system using optimized parameters. Cement distribution within the
disc and surface contact with the endplates were analysed from CT scan
segmentations. The specimens were tested under two conditions: (1) Simulated
degeneration: the intervertebral disc manually emptied through an incision
in the annulus. (2) Discoplasty: after acrylic cement injection (Mendec
Spine, Tecres, Italy). Results: Discoplasty increased the disc
height by 34% in flexion and 35% in extension compared to the degenerated
conditions, thus increasing the width of the foramens. On the contrary,
discoplasty only impacted the ROM in flexion with a 27% reduction with
respect to nucleotomy condition. Discoplasty was associated with a 37%
increase of stiffness in flexion and a reduced neutral zone. The highest
strains were exhibited in the disc after nucleotomy. Cement injection
resulted in a restrained gradient over the disc, with a localization of
compressive strains along the endplates. Conclusion: Similarly
to clinical observations, discoplasty recovered the disc height, thus
rehabilitating the neuroforamen area. The large volumes of cement improved
spine stability in flexion resulting in stiffer segments. Disc tissue
underwent reduced deformations which concentrated on the endplates.

## References
1. Varga et al, Der Ortho, 44:1-8,2015.
2. Palanca et al, MEP, 52: 76-83, 2018.

## Acknowledgements
European Union’s Horizon 2020 Marie Skłodowska-Curie ITN grant SPINNER No.
766012 and the Hungarian Scientific Research Fund (OTKA FK123884).

## Ethical approval
The entire study was approved by the bioethical committee of University of
Bologna, protocol 76497 of 1st June 2018. The specimens were obtained
through ethically-approved International donation programs.

## 1702

## A281: Analysis of the Largest Database of Anthropometric Measurements of
the Occipito-Atlantoaxial Joints

Karim Bayanzay

1

, Matthew Nudelman

2

, and Mayar Abbasi

3

1

Jersey Shore University (Perth Amboy), Internal Medicine, Perth
Amboy, USA

2

Stanford University, Emergency Department, Palo Alto, USA

3

McGill Unviersity, Center for Intelligence Machines, Quebec,
Canada

Introduction: The complex geometrical and biomechanical dynamics
of the occipito-atlantoaxial joints remain unparalleled in the human body.
The atlantal (C1) joint plays a central role in the craniocervical junction,
which is comprised of the occipito-atlantal joint (C0-C1) and the
atlantoaxial joint (C1-C2). Due to complexities related to its anatomy,
there is no consensus on the precise biomechanics of the
occipito-atlantoaxial spine. For further clarification, many anatomists have
endorsed developing a quantitative database measuring key anatomical
landmarks of the cervical spine to provide a better understanding of its
geometry and kinematics. This report presents an analysis of the largest
database describing the atlas' radiographic measurements and their
relationship to surrounding structures. Material and Methods:
KKT Orthopedic Spine Centers provide wave treatments to manage chronic back
and neck pain. As part of their treatment process, three x-ray images
(lateral, frontal, and top skull) of the patient's cervical spine are
obtained in a uniform manner and stored in a centralized database. The data
is then analyzed by a proprietary software, Spinalytics®, which
calculates distances and angles between key landmarks on the cervical spine
x-rays. This study included all patients visiting any of the KKT Orthopedic
Spine Centers with x-rays analyzed by Spinalytics® between
November 2006 and June 2019. Data regarding the occipito-atlantal angle,
atlas angle, antlanto-cervical angle, and atlas rotation were extracted from
the database and included in this study. The occipito-atlantal angle
describes the angle between the skull line and the true vertical through the
atlas midpoint. The atlas angle is the acute angle formed between the
mastoid line and the true horizontal line through the atlas midpoint. The
atlanto-cervical angle is between the spinal line and true vertical through
the atlas midpoint. The atlas rotation is the angle between the vertical
line and the lateral mass line on the side of the atlas' acute angle on the
top skull X-ray. Results: This study included 49,937 patients
in 25 centers in 14 countries. The average patient age was 45
(SD: 16) years old, with 49% male. The mean deviation
of the occipito-atlantal angle is 2.37o to the right, the mean
atlas angle is 1.86o to the right, and the mean atlanto-cervical
angle deviation is 2.20o to the left. The average atlas rotation
angle is tilted 87.86o anteriorly. Linear regression models
suggest that the atlas influences the angles between the skull and cervical
spine, bi-directionally. However, deviations in the skull do not impact the
cervical spine and vice versa. Conclusion: This study's results
show a clockwise rotation of the axis with a higher degree of rotation in
the occipito-atlantal angle than the atlanto-cervical angle. The atlas angle
appears to influence deviations in occipito-atlantal and atlanto-cervical
angles; therefore, deviations' primary foci appear to be the atlas. Further
studies amongst healthy volunteers and correlation with clinical data are
required to clarify the clinical significance of these anthropometric
measurements.

## 1625

## A282: A Simple Biomechanical Study, Reveals that a Reversal in Direction
of Compression, Could Greatly Improve Restoration of Lordosis in Lumbar
Fusion

Shay Menachem

1,2

, and Kevin Seex

1,2

1

Macquarie University, Department of Clinical Medicine, Faculty of
Medicine, Health and Human Sciences, Sydney, Australia

2

Macquarie University Hospital, Macquarie Neurosurgery, Sydney,
Australia

Introduction: Lumbar lordosis is usually lost in the
degenerative process, and when lumbar fusion is required, restoration of the
correct shape of the spine is one of the modern metrics of a successful
operation. However, operations regularly fail to achieve adequate lordosis
and one of the reasons why, is one that is rarely discussed, namely that
achieving lordosis can be difficult. We sought to investigate this. Study of
the anatomy, normal vertebral motion, and current techniques, led to the
hypothesis that simply changing direction of compression during surgical
fusion, would gain more lordosis. Method: Using a
biomechanically validated Sawbones ™ model we inserted standard polyaxial
pedicle screws (Nuvasive™, ‘Reline’) from S1-L4 in a surgically correct,
well aligned position. A standard lordotic rod was placed in the screws
without requiring rod reduction, and the caps attached but left unlocked.
Markers were attached to L4 and S1 spinous processes to allow photographic
analysis of lordosis. Two techniques of compression were compared.
A-Standard, whereby caudal screws were locked first and compression
proceeded sequentially in a cranial direction prior to locking. B-Alternate,
whereby cranial screws were locked first and compression proceeded caudally.
A standard parallel compressor was used. Both methods were repeated to
confirm consistent reproducibility, and after increasing levels of surgical
invasiveness; intact, add interbody cage, add inferior facet resection, add
Ponte resection. Standardised photographs were analysed to measure change of
lordosis with each technique. The methodology was also tested for accuracy
against a previously validated digital multicamera system similar to image
guidance systems. Compression was done by the same surgeon to the same
‘white knuckle’ force. Results: There was an increase in the
lordosis gained using method B of 300% for an intact model, 195% after a
cage insertion, 60% after adding inferior facet resection and 33% for a full
Ponte osteotomy. Statistical analysis of the results demonstrated a
significant difference (P = .002) between the two methods
for all levels of model integrity. Conclusion: In this
biomechanical model, locking the top screws first was a consistently
superior method of compression to gain lordosis. If confirmed clinically,
without changing instrumentation, surgeons should consider reversing
direction of compression to a “Top down” technique. No previous literature
regarding this matter was found. Our pre-experiment hypothesis was that
intact and possibly inferior facet resection would favour technique B. This
was based on the following observations; the initial locking of one tulip
also fixes the position of the rod and so the moving tulip has to follow
this rod, the alignment of the normal facet joints forms about a 90 degree
angle with moving superior screw, while the moving inferior screw forms
about a 45° angle. The moving superior screw could thus be expected to block
earlier i.e. produce less lordosis than a moving inferior screw. What was
unexpected was that “Top Down” was superior after Ponte resection, (i.e.
total facet resection) indicating additional unknown factor(s) were
dictating the results.

## 92

## A283: Biomechanics of the Active Apex Correction Technique of Early Onset
Scoliosis: A Parametric Finite Element Study Simulating 6-Month
Growth

Daksh Jayaswal

1

, Aakash Agarwal

1

, Alaaeldin Ahmad

2

, Amey Kelkar

1

, Manoj Kodigudla

1

, and Vijay Goel

1

1

University of Toledo, Toledo, USA

2

Annajah Medical School, Nablus, Palestine

Summary: The active apex correction (APC) technique demonstrates
the possibility of effective remodulation of the wedging at the apex using a
modified SHILLA approach. This may in turn nullify the complications
inherent with SHILLA by avoiding apical fusion. The current finite element
(FE) study explores the parametric effect of compression during APC with a
6-month follow up. Results show the magnitude of the initial compressive
force dictates the degree of correction, while maintaining the correction.
Hypothesis: Clinical outcome of implant constructs with
different materials could impact surgical planning for surgeons using the
APC technique. Study Design: Finite element study simulating
APC with a 6-month follow-up period. Introduction: Newer,
modified techniques like the active apex correction (APC), aim to nullify
the complications inherent with SHILLA by avoiding apical fusion. This study
evaluates the effect of the correction achieved by the APC technique (or
APC). Additionally, we explored the effect of the compression force applied
during the surgery. Methods: A FE model simulating coronal
(T5-T11 cobb angle: 44° & T11-L1 secondary curve) of 36° and sagittal
deformity (T4-T12 kyphosis: 36° & L1-S1 lordosis: 46°) was compressed. 3
models with the APC construct were simulated with compression varying from 1
mm-5 mm displacement (6-30N) applied between screws proximal and distal to
the apex(T8). The model simulated the effect of gravity and muscle forces
and 6-month epiphyseal spinal growth (Figure 1). The clinical output
parameters were measured and compared for these models at various time
points. Results: Compared to the base model with no
instruments, the instrumented models achieved a reduction in the coronal and
sagittal angles, apical vertebral translation and wedging at the end of the
6-month growth period, across the different compressive force cases (Table
1). Conclusion: The output parameters showed consistent
maintenance of the correction achieved by the APC, with the magnitude of the
initial compressive force dictating the degree of correction. Take
Home Message: The results show that tethering through a posterior
approach, which is the gold standard for spine surgeons tackling EOS, we can
perform this active apex correction technique to get excellent results.
Figure 1. Schematic showing the modified SHILLA approach with active apex
correction used in this study
Table 1. Output parameters from the finite element model simulating the
Active Apex Correction technique with different compressive force cases

## 640

## A284: Update on the Biomechanics of the Transverse Atlantal Ligament in
the Elderly

Basem Ishak

1

, Emre Yilmaz

2

, Alexander von Glinski

2

, Rod Oskouian

3

, and Jens Chapman

3

1

Heidelberg University Hospital, Department of Neurosurgery,
Heidelberg, Germany

2

BG University Hospital Bergmannsheil, Department of Trauma Surgery,
Bochum, Germany

3

Swedish Neuroscience Institute, Complex Spine Surgery, Seattle,
USA

Introduction: The transverse ligament is the strongest ligament
of the craniocervical junction and therefore, plays a critical role in
atlanto-axial stability. However, several clinical studies have questioned
this ligament’s strength in the elderly. The goal of this biomechanical
study was to reevaluate the force required for the transverse ligament to
fail in a more physiological biomechanical model in elderly specimens.
Material and Methods: Twelve C1-2 specimens were harvested
from fresh-frozen Caucasian cadavers with a mean age at death of 81 years
(range 68-89 years). Only the transverse ligament was preserved, and the
bony C1-2 complex was left intact. The dens was pulled away from the
anterior arch of C1 using a strength test machine that applies controlled
increasing force. After testing, the axis was split in half to check for
hidden pathologies and osteoporosis. The differences in the failure force
between sex and age groups (group 1: < 80, group 2: > 80 years) were
compared. Results: The mean force required for the transverse
ligament to fail was 236.2 ± 66 N (range 132-326 N). All but two specimens
had significant osteoporotic loss of trabecular bone. No significant
differences between sex and age groups were found. Conclusion:
The transverse ligament’s failure in elderly specimens occurred at an
average force of 236 N, which was lower than that reported in the previous
literature. The ligament’s failure force in younger patients differs and may
be similar to the findings published to date.

## 974

## A285: Influence of Pelvic Incidence on the Segmental Lordotic Parameters
in Normal Adults

Kalyan Kumar Varma Kalidindi

1

, Gururaj Sangondimath

1

, and Kuldeep Bansal

1

1

Indian Spinal Injuries Centre, New Delhi, India

Introduction: We performed this study to understand the spectrum
of sagittal spino-pelvic parameters, segmental lumbar parameters and the
location of lumbar apex in asymptomatic adult population and analyse their
correlations with each other. Materials and Methods: Hundered
asymptomatic adult volunteers (Mean age of 29.1 (±7.9) years; 69 males, 31
females) who satisfied the selection criteria were enrolled for the cross
sectional study. Standing antero-posterior and lateral whole spine and
pelvis X-rays were performed and the radiographic parameters were analyzed.
We introduced a “segmentation line” bisecting the apical vertebra/disc to
divide the ULL (upper arc of lumbar lordosis) &LLL (Lower arc of lumbar
lordosis). Results: The mean PI (Pelvic incidence) was 48.02,
ULL was 29.12, LLL was 16.02, TLL (Total lumbar lordosis) was 45.14, LTA
(Lumbar tilt angle) was4.73 and LLA (Location of lumbar apex) was 4.11. As
the PI increases, the location of the lumbar apex moved higher. The PI had a
significant positive correlation with the LLL(r = .582, P
< .001) and TLL(r = .579, P < .001) but
not with the ULL(r = .196, P = .05). The LLA is strongly
correlated positively with the ULL(r = .349, P < .001),
negatively with the LLL(r= -0.63, P <.001) and not
correlated with the TLL(r=-0.177, P = .078).
Conclusions: The PI influences the location of the lumbar
apex, the lower arc of lordosis and the total lordosis but not the upper arc
of the lordosis. The location of lumbar apex does not influence the total
amount of lumbar lordosis but the segmental lordosis is strongly influenced
by its location.

## 863

## A286: Novel Biomechanical Model for Proximal Junctional Kyphosis

Timothy OConnor

1

, Mary O'Hehir

1

, Jennifer Mao

1,2

, Brandon Mariotti

1

, Daniel Rathbone

3

, John Pollina

1

, Munish Gupta

4

, David Polly

5

, Asham Khan

1

, Sigurd Berven

6

, and Jeffrey Mullin

1

1

University at Buffalo Neurosurgery, Neurosurgery, Williamsville, NY,
USA

2

Rothman Orthopaedics, Philadelphia, PA, USA

3

Jacobs Institute, Buffalo, NY, USA

4

Washington University Physicians, Orthopaedics - Back and Spine,
Saint Louis, MO, USA

5

University of Minnesota Medical School, Orthopedic Surgery,
Minneapolis, MN, USA

6

University of California San Francisco, Orthopaedic Surgery, San
Francisco, CA, USA

Introduction: A biomechanical model was created to evaluate
repetitive fatigability testing on long thoracolumbar constructs.
Material and Methods: An explanted spine was instrumented
from T3-Sacrum and secured to a rigid frame constructed from aluminum t-slot
extrusion. A 20 cm rod was attached to bilateral pedicle screws placed on
the level immediately rostral to the upper instrumented vertebrae of
interest (UIV+1), and spectra cord was secured to the rod. The explanted
spine was oriented in a lateral position to avoid unintended moment applied
by the remaining rostral spine. The rostral aspect of the spine was then
suspended from above to allow largely unrestricted movement in the medial
plane. The cord was deflected by a pulley 90 degrees to run vertical to the
floor and secured to a water-filled container that could be filled or
emptied to adjust the load applied. A pneumatic actuator raised and lowered
the loading weight to cyclically flex the spine, while a counterweight
provided a constant extension force of 5 N. Circular markers were placed on
separate metal rods secured to the pedicles of the UIV and UIV+1 to allow
measurements of change in angle. A python script using the Hough Circle
Transformation tracked the circular markers via a Logitech webcam and used
the marker positions to calculate change in angle between UIV and UIV+1. To
evaluate the reliability of the tracking script, a series of measurements
were taken without moving the markers and the standard deviation of these
measurements were assessed. An electrical solenoid valve allows programmable
control of repeated loading cycles. Results: This biomechanical
model was able to successfully apply repetitive forces with a variety of
moment arms and shear forces that can be increased independently from one
another. Moment can be increased independent of shear force by increasing
the rod length attached to the UIV + 1; adjusting the water level in the
loading weight will modulate moment and shear in tandem. The Python angle
measurement script was able to successfully interact with a commonly
available Logitech webcam to act as an optical tracker, and successfully
record the relative angles of the UIV and UIV + 1 endplates. Evaluation of
46 measurements of the same marker position showed a standard deviation of
0.16 degrees suggesting that this method is adequate for measuring angle
changes less than half a degree. Conclusion: This is the first
description of a novel biomechanical model that can successfully test long
thoracolumbar constructs with repetitive flexion and accurately measure the
relative change of angles of individual endplates. This model can be used to
provide information regarding optimal tension parameters in junctional
tethers, as well as fatigability testing for a variety of spine
applications.

## 899

## A287: Association of Facet Tropism at the Last Mobile Segment with
Sacralisation of the L5 Vertebrae

Sasidharan M D S

1,2

, and Davis John Thelekatt

1

1

KMC Manipal Hospital, Spine Surgery, Mangaluru, India

2

Apollo Hospital, Spine Surgerty, Chennai, India

Introduction: An association between asymmetry of the lumbar
facet joints and disc pathology has been studied previously. Researchers
have shown a relationship between facet tropism and disc herniation. The
present study aims at finding an association between facet tropism at the
last mobile segment with sacralisation of L5 vertebrae. There have been many
literatures on facet joint degeneration at the L5 vertebrae as well as
sacralisation of L5 vertebrae but limited knowledge on its association with
the mobile segment or transition segment of a sacralised L5 and facet joint
asymmetry. Materials and Methods: The sampling was done by
dividing the total study group into two on the basis of the MRI findings.
Group A included patients with sacralisation of the lumbar vertebrae (L5)
and Group B included the patients with normal lumbosacral vertebral
morphology, all who had low back pain. The sample study included 230
patients and divided into 115 patients in each group. Analysis is done by
using Chi square test, Odds Ratio, Kappa ratio and Student’s t test. A
statistical analysis is conducted using IBM, SPSS 17.0 and P
< .05 is considered as significant. Results:
Among the 230 patients selected for the study 53% of the patients were males
and 47% were females. Among the females in the study 65.4% of them had
sacralised vertebrae and 36.5% males had sacralised vertebrae. 27% of the
total patients suffered from both low back pain and sciatica. 70% of the
total patients suffered from disc degeneration. All patients in the age
group 30-40 years who presented with low backpain were found to have facet
tropism. 90.9 % of the total study group who had facet tropism in the
sacralised vertebrae were in the age group less than 40years. In the group
B, the patients who had sacralised vertebrae 83 % of them had developed disc
degeneration, but facet tropism was found to be 79% of the total study
group. The association of facet tropism with sacralisation using chi square
test of independence was found to be highly significant at X2 (1,
N = 230) = 53.010 P < .001. The association of facet
tropism with disc degeneration and age was also found to be significant.
Conclusion: This study showed significant association of
facet tropism at last mobile segment with sacralisation of L5 vertebrae. The
statistical analysis shows that facet tropism is eight times more likely to
be seen in sacralised vertebra when compared with non sacralised vertebra.
The age group less than 40 years who had low back pain showed higher
incidence of facet tropism and disc degeneration. Similar to literature, our
study also found significant association between facet tropism and
transitional vertebra with disc degeneration. Using regression coefficient
the study also found to have statistical significance for transitional
vertebra to predict disc degeneration. Patients with sacralised vertebrae
showed early disc degenerative disease when compared with patients who did
not have sacralisation of L5 vertebrae.

## 1726

## A288: Implant Surface Functionalization Technologies and the Need af a
Transparent Quality Evaluation System

Dietmar Schaffarczyk

1

and Helmut Cölfen

2

1

surgeSupply GmbH, Research, Regulatory and Quality Assurance,
Kreuzlingen, Switzerland

2

University of Konstanz, Physical Chemistry, Konstanz,
Germany

Introduction: For bone implants, osseointegration resulting in a
good and fast bone-implant contact is of primary importance to secure a
proper implant function and to avoid implant loosening or inflammation
resulting in necessary revision surgeries causing pain to the patients and
immense costs. Especially Polyetheretherketone (PEEK) is a promising implant
material due to the close mechanical properties to bone but it is completely
bio-inert hindering osseointegration and making surface functionalization
necessary. Many different surface functionalization technologies have been
reported both of physical and chemical nature. The same is true for the
other prominent implant materials titanium and ceramics although they
already have a naturally better osseointegration than PEEK but are much
harder and stiffer than bone and brittle in case of ceramics. Surface
functionalization, which can be subdivided into surface coating and material
modification needs to be judged from a quality and safety viewpoint.
Material and Method: However, a literature research
resulted in the fact, that no quality standard yet exists for implant
surface functionalization. This makes it difficult to impossible to compare
the safety and performance of different surface functionalized bone implants
clearly showing the need to establish a transparent quality evaluation
system for bone implants. Results: In this perspective article,
we give the state of the art and then develop a quality evaluation system,
which is based on 6 main categories as important benchmarks for the quality
of a surface functionalized bone implant material. A simple catalogue of
questions can be answered and from the resulting scores, the Safety
Performance Evidence Level (SPEL) representing the safety and quality of a
given implant can be calculated in %. This simple SPEL system allows an easy
and transparent judgement and comparison of bone implants, which will
hopefully assure the easy identification of safe and well performing
high-quality bone implants in the future. Keywords: bone
implant, polyetheretherketone (PEEK), surface functionalization, quality
evaluation, safety and performance evaluation level (SPEL)

## OP33: Robotics, Navigation and VR

## 1310

## A289: Learning Curve in Pedicle Screw Insertion Using an Intraoperative
Computertomography (ICT) Guided Navigation

Benedikt Trnovec

1 2

, Bastian Stemmer

3

, Heiko Mueller

3

, Svorad Trnovec

4

, Ehab Shiban

3

, Kamil Kolejak

1

, and Volkmar Heidecke

3

1

University Hospital Bratislava Ruzinov, Neurosurgical department,
Bratislava, Slovakia

2

National Institute of Children's Diseases, Neurosurgical department,
Bratislava, Slovakia

3

Universitätsklinikum Augsburg, Neurosurgical department, Augsburg,
Germany

4

University Rostock, Neurosurgical department, Rostock,
Germany

Introduction: iCT navigation guided screw placement has an
extraordinary low misplacement rates. There is a lack of evidence concerning
the learning curve in this technique. Aim of this single center
retrospective study is to show the effect of learning curve in the first
year of use. Methods: A retrospective analysis of all patients
undergoing pedicle screw instrumentation within the first year (October 2015
and December 2016) of introducing iCT navigated spinal instrumentation was
done. In each surgery, an intraoperative CT scan for referencing the
navigation was performed and subsequently one or more CT scans for
intraoperative control of screw placement accuracy where performed. The
cases were divided into three equal intervals for analysis.
Results: Sixty five patients were identified. There were
55.4% female and 44.6 male patients. Median age of 68 years. According to
the Gertzbein and Robbins classification grades, there was proper placement
(A + B grade) in 85,5%, 88.8% and 87%in the first, second and third time
interval, respectively. The intraoperative revision rate was 10.5%, 6.5% and
5.8% in the in the first, second and third interval, respectively. None of
the patients required secondary surgery caused by screw misplacement or had
any neurovascular damage. Conclusion: The learning curve for
iCT was evident after 3 months. There was no difference in
accuracy or revision rates between the second and third interval.

## 852

## A290: The trends in robot-related complications, operative efficacy,
radiation exposure, and clinical outcomes after robot-assisted spine
surgery: a multicenter study of 722 patients and 5,005 screws from 2015 to
2019

Nathan Lee

1

, Ian Buchanan

1

, Venkat Boddapati

1

, Justin Mathew

1

, Paul Park

1

, Eric Leung

1

, Avery Buchholz

2

, John Pollina

3

, Ehsan Jazini

4

, Colin Haines

4

, Thomas Schuler

4

, Christopher Gooed

4

, Joseph Lombardi

1

, and Ronald A. Lehman

1

1

The Och Spine Hospital at New York-Presbyterian, New York,
USA

2

University of Virginia Health System, Charlottesville, USA

3
State University of New York, Buffalo, USA, 
4
Virginia Spine Institute, Reston, Reston, USA
Introduction: With the arrival of robot-assisted spine surgery
nearly twenty years ago, there has been a growing amount of literature that
suggests robots are safe and can achieve comparable outcomes to conventional
techniques. However, much of this literature is limited by small sample
sizes and single-surgeon or single center series. Furthermore, it is unclear
what the impact of robotic technology has made on operative and clinical
outcomes over time. This is the first and largest multicenter study to
examine the trends in outcomes and complications after robot-assisted spine
surgery over a five-year period. Material and Methods: We
included adult (≥18 years old) patients who underwent robot-assisted (Mazor
Renaissance, X, and Stealth) spine surgery from 2015-2019. Several
perioperative factors were compared across the years of surgery. Outcomes of
interest included operative efficiency (robot time per screw), radiation
exposure (fluoroscopy time per screw), robot complications (e.g. screw
exchange, robot abandonment), and clinical outcomes (e.g., length of stay,
90-day reoperations). The minimum follow-up was 90 days after the index
surgery. Chi-square/fisher exact test and t-test/ANOVA were used for
categorical and continuous variables, respectively. The Cochran-armitage
test was used to examine statistically significant trends.
Results: A total of 722 adult patients were included in
this study (117 Renaissance, 477 X, 128 Stealth). The mean (standard
deviation) Charlson comorbidity index was 1.5 (1.5) and 54.4% of patients
were female. The most common diagnoses included high grade spondylolisthesis
(40.6%), degenerative disc disease (18.4%), and degenerative scoliosis
(17.6%), and the mean number of instrumented levels was 3.8 (3.4). Most
patient and operative factors (e.g. gender, smoking status, total
instrumented levels, and pelvic fixation,) were similar across the years.
From 2015 to 2019, the mean robot time per screw decreased from 7.2 minutes
to 5.5 minutes (P = .004, R2 = .65) and the mean
fluoroscopy time per screw decreased from 15.2 seconds-9.4 seconds
(P = .002, R2 = .83). Similarly, the rates
of both intraoperative screw exchange for misplaced screw (P
= .0115, R2 = .13) and robot abandonment (P
= .011, R2 = .22) improved significantly over time.
The incidence of other intraoperative surgical complications (e.g., dural
tear, loss of motor/sensory function, blood transfusion) remained
consistently low, but similar between years. The length of stay decreased by
nearly 1 day from 2015-2019 (P = .007, R2 =
.78), even though the mean Charlson comorbidity index worsened with time
(P = .036). The 90-day reoperation rate did not change
significantly over the last five years. Conclusion: Current
trends demonstrate that robot screw accuracy, reliability, operative
efficiency, and radiation exposure have improved significantly over the last
five years. This is likely the result of increased surgeon experience with
robots and the recent advances in robotic technology. The 90-day surgical
complication rates remain consistently low and the mean length of stay has
reduced significantly with time. These findings further validate continued
usage of robot-assisted spine surgery and the potential path toward improved
value-based care.

## 1301

## A291: The iliac kickstand screw: a novel pelvic screw for correction of
coronal spinal imbalance

James Lin

1

, Jun Kim

2

, Joseph Lombardi

2

, Meghan Cerpa

2

, and Lawrence Lenke

2

1

Mount Sinai, New York, USA

2

Columbia University Medical Center, New York, USA

Summary: The “iliac kickstand screw” is a novel pelvic screw
that facilitates correction of coronal spinal imbalances. It has a uniquely
lateral starting point which creates a longer lever arm for distraction. It
was placed in 24 consecutive patients using the free hand technique with no
neurovascular or visceral complications. The mean starting point is 6cm
lateral to midline on the iliac crest. The screw trajectory is approximately
10 degrees of lateral angulation and 60 degrees cephalocaudal angulation.
Hypothesis: The iliac kickstand screw can be placed safely
and reliably. Study Design: Retrospective radiographic study.
Introduction: The goal of spinal deformity surgery is to
restore spinal alignment in both sagittal and coronal planes. While there
has been significant emphasis placed on sagittal plane correction, coronal
imbalance can also be debilitating. However, correction of large coronal
deformities is challenging. We recently described the “kickstand rod”
technique for correction of coronal imbalance. This technique utilizes
powerful “construct-to-construct” distraction between a fixed multi-screw
thoracic construct and the ilium, facilitated by a novel “iliac kickstand
screw”. The technique for freehand placement of the “iliac kickstand screw”,
as well as screw trajectories and parameters, have not been previously
described. Methods: Consecutive adult patients who underwent
spinal deformity surgery and coronal imbalance correction using the
“kickstand rod” by the senior surgeon were identified. All screws were
placed using the free hand technique. The starting point for the screw is
near the most cephalad surface of the iliac crest, approximately 6cm lateral
to midline. Screw accuracy was assessed using intraoperative O-arm imaging
and screw trajectories and breaches were analyzed using 3D visualization
software. Results: Twenty four consecutive screws were
analyzed. The mean patient age was 50.1 years. 20 were female. 12 were left
sided screws and 12 were right sided screws. The mean starting point was
59.5 mm lateral to midline. The mean horizontal angle was 10.8°, and the
mean caudal angle was 57.9 . The mean screw size was 7.88 mm (range
7.5-8.5mm) and screw length was 74.2mm (range 70-90mm) 6 of 24 screws had
cortical breaches, 5 of which perforated medially and 1 of which perforated
inferiorly. There were zero clinically notable neurovascular or visceral
complications. Conclusion: The “iliac kickstand screw” is a
novel pelvic screw that facilitates correction of coronal spinal imbalances.
It was placed in 24 consecutive patients using the free hand technique with
no neurovascular complications. Take Home Message: We describe
a novel “iliac kickstand screw” which facilitates correction of coronal
imbalance.

## 338

## A292: The “Unfair Advantage” of Mixed-Reality Simulation for Percutaneous
Pedicle Screw Placement Makes it as Effective as Cadaver Training: a
Prospective Randomized Study with Novice Volunteers

Simon Weidert

1

, Jonathan Bischoff

1

, Becker Christopher

1

, Kammerlander Christian

1

, Greiner Axel

1

, Mayr Matthias

1

, and Böcker Wolfgang

1

1

Ludwig Maximilians Universität Munich, Dpt. for General, Trauma and
Reconstructive Surgery, München, Germany

Introduction: Becoming proficient in percutaneous pedicle screw
placement requires training several skills such as correct c-arm adjustment,
determining an ideal entry point and advancing the trocar using the
projection images. The recommended gold standard training model is the
cadaver. Its disadvantages are availability, cost and radiation dose. A
hybrid simulator co-developed at the LMU Munich uses a clever combination of
3D printed specimens with virtual imaging and guidance to train these
skills. This study will investigate the hypothesis that a mixed-reality
simulator can be used to train the skill of percutaneous pedicle screw
placement as effectively as with the cadaver and real C-arm imaging.
Material and Methods: The mixed-reality simulator consists
of a torso with an exchangeable spinal segment (lumbar and thoracic models
were used). All instruments are electromagnetically tracked and the software
can generate x-rays in all projections as well as CT and 3D rendering images
in real-time. The study design is a randomized prospective study with a
simulator group and a control group training on cadavers. The study is
divided into a training day followed by a test day. Initially, theoretical
training was given in a common seminar format. While the control group was
then intensively trained in teams of two on the cadaver itself by an
experienced surgeon for > 1 hour per individual trainee, the simulator
group initially received only peer-teaching by a trained student on the
simulator. On the test day, the simulator group participants were
individually trained by the expert for 30 minutes before the test. All
participants then implanted 2 percutaneous pedicle screws on the cadaver
without further assistance. After each session, a CT was performed and the
screw positions were evaluated. Time, number of images and radiation dose
were recorded. Results: 12 medical students were equally
randomized to both groups. All participants completed the training and test
day. The main outcome parameter quality of pedicle screw placement was
evaluated on CT according to Gertzbein-Robbins (GR). The simulator group
achieved GR grade A or B (under 2 mm pedicle breach) in 93% of cases, the
control group only in 58%. The stat. significance was slightly missed with
P = .059. With regard to time, there was a tendency
towards superiority of the simulator group that further showed a
significantly reduced radiation personal dose over both days.
Conclusion: The simulator group showed no inferiority but a
clear tendency towards superior performance. Especially compared to day 1 of
the control group, a strong effect of the simulator on skills is measurable.
This is probably due to the “unfair advantage” of the constant availability
(training immediately before the “real intervention” is possible), the
repeatability as well as the visualization (to train projection thinking)
and realistic haptics of the simulator. At least for the learning of
percutaneous pediculation, the simulator shows excellent transfer learning
and is at least an equivalent substitute for cadaver training.

## 1214

## A293: Procedural Metrics for Minimally Invasive Lumbar Stenosis
Decompression Using a Lumbar Astenosis Simulation Model to Improve the
Skills and Accelerate the Learning Curve in Orthopedic and Neurosurgical
Trainees

Carolin Melcher

1

, Andreas Korge

2

, Kevin Foley

3

, Rodrigo Navarro- Ramirez

4

, Ibrahim Hussain

5

, and Roger Härtl

5

1

University Hospital Ulm, Department of Orthopedic Surgery (RKU),
München, Germany

2

Schoen Klinik Harlaching, Wirbelsäulenzentrum, München,
Germany

3

University of Tennessee, Semmes-Murphey Neurologic and Spine
Institute, Memphis, USA

4

McGill University Health Centre, Neurosurgery, Montreal,
Canada,

5

Weill Cornell Medical College, New York Presbyterian Hospital,
Center for Comprehensive Spine Care, New York, USA

Introduction: Surgical training as a resident or fellow as well
as during specialization on master level depends on theoretical knowledge as
well as the manual ability to perform a specific task skillfully, reliable
and safely. Many experienced surgeons who expertly perform a specific
procedure are able to identify and agree on the essential “steps” to be
completed and “ errors” to be avoided, whereas they rarely think about the
procedures they perform with the level of detail needed to identify those
key features. Previous studies demonstrated that repetition of surgical
tasks and using real surgical instruments while training on a simulator can
help trainees to improve their surgical skills, performance and level of
comfort during surgery. This might even be enhanced by a step-by-step guide
performance metrics for a minimal invasive unilateral laminotomy for
bilateral decompression (ULBD) of lumbar spinal stenosis with and without
spondylolisthesis were defined in an earlier study. Material and
Methods: In a prospective two-armed comparative study
simultaneously performed at 2 centers, one in the US (Neurosurgery) and one
in Germany (Orthopedic surgery) 6 trainees from each center performed three
identical decompression procedures on a spinal simulator using the metrics
for ULBD. The learning curve was evaluated regarding technical
skills, timing and occurrence of errors and sentinel errors using the
metrics sheet as well as instructor and personal surveys and a gap analysis.
Furthermore, video recordings of all procedures were rated by 3 individual
experts using a global rating scale and a video specific checklist.
Results: Within all residents the quantity of errors and
sentinel errors were significantly reduced from procedure 1 to procedure 3
with a concomitant reduction of surgical time and skipped steps. Not only
did the participants report progress in subjective perception with the
personal survey, but the improvement of the surgical skills with better
surgical outcome, higher economy of motion and instrument use was accredited
by all evaluation tools (instructor survey, gap analysis, video analysis)
and within all levels of experience. Conclusion: Procedural
metrics for ULBD in combination with a surgical simulator can be
successfully used in surgical training to improve the surgical skills of
surgeons of all levels.

## 1907

## A294: Evolution of image guidance in minimally invasive transforaminal
lumbar interbody fusion (MI-TLIF): comparing the learning curves of
fluoroscopy, navigation and robotics

Avani Vaishnav

1

, Jung Kee Mok

2

, Hikari Urakawa

1

, Kosuke Sato

3

, Ryan Lee

4

, Chirag Chaudhary

1

, Catherine Himo Gang

1

, and Sheeraz Qureshi

1

1

Hospital for Special Surgery, New York, USA

2

Weill Cornell Medical College, New York, USA

3

University of Tsukuba, Tsukuba, Japan

4

George Washington University School of Medicine, Washington, DC,
USA

Introduction: Intra-operative image-guidance has undergone
tremendous advancements in recent years, evolving from two-dimensional
modalities such as 2D fluoroscopy or serial radiography to 3-dimensional
computer assisted navigation, and more recently robotics. Despite these
advances, concern regarding the learning curve of new technologies remains a
deterrent to greater adoption. Thus, the purpose of this study was to
evaluate the learning curve of fluoroscopy, intraoperative navigation (ION)
and robotic navigation for minimally invasive TLIF (MI-TLIF). Material
and Methods: A retrospective review of prospectively collected
data on consecutive patients who underwent single-level MI-TLIF by a single
surgeon using fluoroscopy, intra-operative navigation or a robot was
performed. Outcomes of interest were operative time, estimated blood loss,
intra-operative complications, radiation exposure, length of stay (LoS) and
reoperations. Chronologic case number for each modality was plotted against
each outcome of interest. The derivative of a nonlinear association or
dissociation curve fit to the dataset was solved for the point at which the
slope of the curve equaled the linear slope. At this point, average rate of
change equals the instantaneous rate of change on the nonlinear curve.
Therefore, rate of change after this case will be less than the average rate
of change, suggesting a plateau in learning had occurred.
Results: Of the 225 patients included, 109 underwent
MIS-TLIF using fluoroscopy, 77 using ION and 39 using robotic navigation.
There was no learning curve for estimated blood loss, length of stay or
operative complications in any cohort. Fluoroscopy. Median operative time
was 112 minutes, fluoroscopy time 144seconds and radiation dose was 62.7
mGy. There were no intra-operative complications; 11(10.0%) patients
required reoperation (2 epidural hematoma, 2 failed hardware, 2
pseudarthrosis, 2 recurrent stenosis, 3 ASD).Operative time: Proficiency: 38
cases (Before vs after proficiency = 137 vs 104minutess, P
< .0001). Fluoroscopy time: Proficiency: 51 cases (Before vs
after proficiency = 168 vs 126 seconds, P < .0001).
Radiation dose: Proficiency: 51 cases (Before vs after proficiency = 72.05
vs 53.95 mGy, P = .008). Reoperations: Proficiency: 43
cases. (Before vs after proficiency = 18 vs 5%; P = .023).
Intra-operative 3D Navigation. Median operative time was 88minutes,
fluoroscopy time 25seconds and radiation dose 47 mGy. There were no
intra-operative complications; 5(6.5%) patients required a repeat spin
intra-operatively and 7(9.1%) underwent a reoperation (1 each - SSI, screw
repositioning, cage displacement, superficial hematoma, ASD, recurrent
stenosis, pseudoarthrosis with painful hardware). Operative time:
Proficiency: 31 cases (Before vs after proficiency = 95 vs 80 minutes,
P < .0001) Fluoroscopy time, radiation dose, repeat
spin and reoperations: No learning curve. Robotic Navigation. Median
operative time was 103 minutes, fluoroscopy time 18seconds and radiation
dose 38.1 mGy. There were no intra-operative complications; the first
patient required intra-operative manual repositioning of one screw (2.6%),
and 1 (2.6%) required a revision surgery for residual stenosis. Operative
time, fluoroscopy time and radiation dose: No learning curve.
Intra-operative screw repositioning and reoperations: Could not be assessed
due to low incidence. Conclusion: Our results suggest that
newer intra-operative image-guidance modalities have the potential to reduce
or even eliminate the learning curve for minimally invasive procedures and
may thus allow for greater adoption of these techniques.

## 856

## A295: Does Robot-Assisted Spine Surgery Achieve Better Patient - Reported
Outcomes than Freehand Techniques?

Nathan Lee

1

, Ian Buchanan

1

, Venkat Boddapati

1

, Justin Mathew

1

, Paul Park

1

, Eric Leung

1

, Joseph Lombardi

1

, and Ronald A. Lehman

1

1

The Och Spine Hospital at New York-Presbyterian, New York,
USA

Introduction: It is well-known that robot-assisted spine surgery
can achieve similar pedicle screw accuracy as conventional freehand
techniques. However, the literature comparing the patient-reported outcomes
remains relatively sparse. Material and Methods: We included
adult (≥18 years old) patients who underwent robot-assisted spine surgery
from 2016 to 2018. The minimum follow-up was 2-years after the index
surgery. Patients with missing values were excluded. A propensity-score
matching algorithm accounted for several perioperative factors (gender,
Charlson comorbidity index, preoperative diagnoses, instrumented levels,
interbody fusion, and pelvic fixation) to control for the potential
selection bias between freehand and robot-assisted surgery. Patient reported
outcomes were measured using the Oswestry Disability Index (ODI). The
minimum clinically important difference (MCID) rates between groups were
assessed at each follow-up period (6-weeks, 6-months, 1-year, and 2-years).
Chi-square/fisher exact test and t-test/ANOVA were used for categorical and
continuous variables, respectively. Results: After propensity
score matching, a total of 70 patients remained. The mean (standard
deviation) Charlson comorbidity index was 1.4 (1.0) and 57% of patients were
female. The most common diagnoses included degenerative disc disease
(37.1%), degenerative scoliosis (27.1%), and high grade spondylolisthesis
(19%), and the mean number of instrumented levels was 4.6 (4.4). Rates for
intraoperative complications, postoperative complications, and any
reoperation within 2 years after surgery were low and similar between
groups. The baseline ODI scores were similar between freehand (39.1) and
robot-assisted surgery (40.5, P-value = .736). By two
years, substantial improvements in both groups (mean ODI - freehand: 4.6,
robot-assisted: 1.5; and MCID% - freehand:77.1%, robot-assisted: 82.9%) were
achieved, but not significantly different. Similarly, no differences were
observed for the other follow-up periods. When comparing individual
component scores, the robot-assisted group scored higher in “Lifting,”
“Sitting,” and “Standing;” however, the magnitudes of these differences were
less than 1 point. Conclusion: In this single-surgeon series,
robot-assisted spine surgery can achieve excellent and similar
patient-reported outcomes to conventional freehand techniques. Future
studies should include large, prospective randomized controlled trials as
well as the inclusion of other patient reported outcome measures.

## 1199

## A296: Clinical Outcomes and Complications of Computer Navigated Minimal
Invasive Postero-Lateral Sacro-Iliac Joint Fusion Using a Threaded Bolt
System

Carlos De La Torre

1

and Khai Lam

1

1

London Bridge Hospital, London, United Kingdom

Introduction and Purpose: We report the clinical and
radiological outcomes or a retrospective case series (novel postero-medial
approach) to perform a minimal invasive SIJ fusion using a threaded bolt
system performed under computer navigation. Materials and
Methods: Between September 2017 and August 2020, we identified 27
consecutive patients undergoing SIJ fusion. The diagnosis of SIJ pain was
made following a detailed clinical history, examination, CT and MRI scans,
followed by positive diagnostic injections. Patient related outcome measures
(PROMS) were collected preoperatively, 3 months, and 6 months
postoperatively. PROMS included Oswestry Disability Index (ODI), SF-36,
EQ5-D, Visual Analog Scale (VAS) for both back (BP) and leg pain (LP). We
collected estimated blood loss (EBL), duration of surgery (DOS) and length
of hospital stay (LOS). Technique: In a prone position, a 2 cm skin incision
is made 2 cm lateral and superior to the postero-superior iliac crest. Then
2 implants were threaded across the SIJ via a postero-medial ‘tubular’
approach under 3D computer navigation, aimed parallel to the S1 endplate or
pointed toward the sacral promontory, and crossing just proximal to the SIJ
sulcus into the subchondral bone. Appropriate length threaded hollow bolts
that was packed with local bone autograft and allograft (human DBM) before
final insertion through the pilot hole. Results: There were 77%
female and 23% male with mean age 53 (24-85) years, average LOS 2.1 days
(range 1-3), mean EBL <20 ml, and DOS 60 minutess (range 40-120). For
ODI, statistically significant mean improvements from pre-operative at 3 and
6 months follow-up were 11.9 ± 9.1 (P < .001) and 18.2 ±
13.7 (P < .001) respectively. For VAS BP, similar
significant mean improvements of 2.6 ± 2.1 (P < .0001)
and 3.5 ± 2.2 (P < 001), and for VAS LP of 2.8 ± 2.8
(P < .0001) and 3.3 ± 2.5 (P <
.0001). The PCS and MCS domains of SF-36 and EQ-5D will be presented at the
congress. 14 patients had history of previous lumbar spine surgery.Based on
a previous study 1 the percentage of patients that met the MCID at 6 months
for ODI, VAS BP and VAS LP were 66%, 85% and 77% respectively. No serious
adverse events occurred, and no one required a return to the operating
theatre for revision surgery. Conclusions: Surgery using this
threaded Titanium hollow bolt system performed via a novel postero-medial
approach under 3D computer navigation allows for a truly safe minimal
invasive surgery to fuse the SIJ. The technique results in minimal blood
loss, rapid patient mobilization and early discharge home within 48 hours.
Early 6 months results show statistically significant improvements in all
aspect of PROMS and MCID. Further follow-up at 1 and 2 years will continue
to confirm the durability of this technique.

## 1128

## A297: First Experiences With a Reinforced Lumbopelvic Fixation Technique
with 6 Months Follow-Up

Schippers Philipp

1

, and Jacques Dominik Müller-Broich

1

1

Orthopedic University Hospital Friedrichsheim, Frankfurt am Main,
Germany

Introduction: Lumbopelvic fixation is a common procedure in
primary and revision spinal surgery but leads to high biomechanical stress
on adjacent segments and the SIJ, resulting in implant failure such as
breakage and loosening and pain. This frequently results in further surgery.
For patients showing clinical and radiological signs of SIJ
affection/arthrosis who fail conservative therapy, lumbopelvic fusion may be
considered. The Bedrock™ technique has been described as a new option for
reinforced lumbopelvic fixation, fusing the SIJ with additional triangular
titanium implants, thereby reducing biomechanical loads off the S2AI screws.
We share our first experiences with this new technique with a mean follow-up
of 6.6 (SD = 6.6) months. Materials and Methods: Six patients
suffering from persisting low back pain (LBP) with indication for reinforced
lumbopelvic fixation and SIJ fusion were treated with this new technique.
All surgeries were carried out by a single surgeon at our orthopedic
university hospital. Data was gathered retrospectively.
Results: Since January 2019, six patients (3f, 3m) were
treated with reinforced lumbopelvic fixation and SIJ fusion with a mean
follow up of 6.6 months (SD = 6.6). Walking distance was reduced to an
average < 100 m. Standard treatment involved S2AI screws and triangular
titanium implants (SIBone, iFuse 3D™) Five patients had prior lumbar or
lumbosacral fusion but persistent LBP and significant SIJ arthrosis. Three
patients had screw loosening and/or low grade infection of the screws. One
patient suffered from multisegmental osteochondrosis/SIJ arthrosis. Mean age
was 72.5 years (SD = 10.2), mean length of stay in hospital was 15.7 days
(SD = 9.4). Average number of fused lumbar/thoracic segments 3.8 (SD = 2.1).
Sagittal balance improved from (PI-LL) pre-OP 32.2° (SD = 22°) to post-OP
20.6° (SD = 11.5°). Average implant length was 65 mm bilaterally. There were
no intraoperative or implant associated adverse events (AE) or serious
adverse events (SAE). Postoperative imaging demonstrated good implant
positioning and function. At time of article submission, all patients
regained walking ability for distances > 1000 m and were satisfied with
the result. All patients reported significant reduction of SIJ pain. One
revision case had prior suspicion of infection that was treated
conservatively via i.v. and oral antibiotics. One dural tear occurred at the
lumbar level. One patient had a L5 screw misplacement requiring revision
surgery six months later. Conclusion: We report our results of
six patients with a new reinforced lumbopelvic fixation and fusion by S2AI
screws augmented by one parallelly placed triangular titanium implant fusing
the SIJ bilaterally with a mean follow-up of 6.6 months. Intra- and
postoperatively we experienced no implant associated adverse event. Patients
regained significant walking ability and significant reduction of SIJ pain.
Radiologically no signs of implant loosening or failure were detected at the
end of follow-up. Our first results seem to demonstrate a safe and
efficacious surgical technique for reinforced lumbopelvic fixation with
fusion of SIJ with significant improvement of the health care related
quality of life. Further studies need to be conducted in order to obtain
additional evidence.

## OP34: Trauma-Cervical

## 1080

## A298: Long Term Proms (Patient Reported Outcome Measures) for the
Non-Operative Management of Odontoid Peg Fractures in the Elderly

Andreas Demetriades

1

and Henry Searle

2

1

Royal Infirmary Edinburgh, Department of Neurosurgery, Edinburgh,
United Kingdom

2

Edinburgh University Medical School, Edinburgh, United
Kingdom

Objectives: Controversy persists on the best management of
C2-peg fractures in the elderly. The aim of this study was to investigate
the effect of conservative treatment with a neck brace using
patient-reported outcome measures. Design: This was a
questionnaire-led, prospective cohort study. Subjects: Elderly
patients with a type II C2-peg fracture who were managed in a brace for
three months between June 2015 and March 2019 were divided into three age
groups: 65-75, 75-85 and >85. Methods: Participants were
invited to complete COMI and NDI questionnaires. Results were collated,
stored on a database and analysed using descriptive statistics. Means are
reported with standard deviation, and medians with interquartile range.
Results: 110 patients completed the NDI and 107 patients
completed the COMI. The mean age for the COMI and NDI was 78.3 (±8.0) and
78.2 (±8.1) years. The median examination interval was 6.4 (5.3) and 6.3
(4.0) months for the COMI and NDI respectively. Whilst 29% of the whole
cohort reported no problems, 50% reported some neck pain but only 15%
describing this pain as severe. 34% reported no pain. 77% experienced nil,
slight or infrequent headaches. 62% had sleepless nights only lasting 0-2
hours. Mean neck pain was rated 3.5 (±2.9)/10, with mean arm/shoulder pain
rated 2.4 (±2.9) /10. Pain decreased as examination interval increased in
groups 65-75 and 75-85, but not in those aged >85 where pain slightly
increased. Overall 75% described their quality of life (QoL) as very good,
good or moderate. These results were maintained across all age groups, with
50% aged >85 experiencing no pain and 69% rating their QoL as very good,
good or moderate. Conclusion: Neck brace management of C2-peg
fractures for three months avoids the risks of surgery and has a clear
benefit with a good patient-reported QoL and minimal effect on the
functional aspects of patients’ lives.

## 316

## A299: Variation in Global Treatment Practices of Subaxial Cervical Facet
Fractures

Brian Karamian

1

, Gregory Schroeder

1

, Jose Canseco

1

, Martin Holas

2

, Andrei Joaquim

3

, AO Spine Knowledge Forum Trauma

4

, Cumhur Oner

5

, Christopher Kepler

1

, and Alexander Vaccaro

1

1

Rothman Orthopaedic institute, Philadelphia, USA

2

Teaching Hospital F. D. Roosevelt, Banská Bystrica,
Slovakia

3

Neurosurgery Division, Department of Neurology, State University of
Campinas, Campinas-Sao Paulo, Brazil

4
AO Foundation, Davos, Switzerland, 
5
University Medical Center, Utrecht, Utrecht, The
Netherlands
Introduction: The management, including the workup and
treatment, of unilateral subaxial facet fractures remains controversial.
Given this uncertainty, it is important to understand the effects of
regional bias on the treatment of facet fractures and elucidate what surgeon
characteristics influence treatment preferences. The goal of this study,
therefore, is to determine the variation in the global treatment practices
for unilateral facet fractures, and to determine how surgeon experience,
practice setting, and subspecialty affect the work-up and treatment of
subaxial cervical spine facet fractures. Methods: A 22-question
survey was sent to 272 members of the AO Spine Cervical Classification
Validation Group. These spine surgeons represent six world regions: North
America, Latin and South America, Europe, Africa, Asia, and the Middle East.
Clinical vignettes consisted of fracture types F1-F3 with various associated
neurologic injuries (N0-N2) classified using the AO Spine Subaxial Cervical
Classification System. Questions surveyed surgeon preferences with regards
to diagnostic workup and management. Results: A total of 161
responses were received. The AO Spine Subaxial Classification system remains
the most widely used classification system among surgeons globally,
preferred by 71.9% of all surgeons, with no statistically significant
differences between world regions, surgeon experience, practice setting, or
surgical subspecialty. Academic surgeons use the facet portion of the AO
Spine classification system less frequently (61.6%) compared to hospital
employed and private practice surgeons (81.1% and 81.8%, respectively)
(P = .029). The overall consensus was for the operative
treatment of any facet fracture with radicular symptoms and for any
fractures categorized as F2N2 and above (ie F3N0, F3N1, F3N2). For F3N0
fractures, significantly less surgeons from Africa/Asia/Middle East (49%)
and Europe (59.2%) chose operative treatment than from North/Latin/South
America (74.1%) (P = .025). For F3N1 fractures,
significantly less surgeons from Africa/Asia/Middle East (52%) and Europe
(63.3%) recommended operative treatment than from North/Latin/South America
(84.5%) (P = .001). For fractures treated non-operatively,
the preferred method by the majority of surgeons was immobilization in a
hard collar. No consensus could be made regarding anterior versus posterior
surgical approach for operative management. Greater than 95% of surgeons
included CT in their work-up of facet fractures, regardless of type. No
statistically significant differences were seen in the need for MRI to
decide treatment. Conclusion: This is the first study to
evaluate global variation in the management of subaxial facet fractures.
This study demonstrates considerable agreement between surgeon preferences
with regards to facet fracture management despite differences in geographic
region, surgeon experience, practice setting, or subspecialty with few
exceptions.

## 522

## A300: Posterior Atlantoaxial Fusion: Technique and Retrospective Case
Series

Andrew Platt

1

, Mena G. Kerolus

2

, Brian T. David

2

, and Vincent C. Traynelis

2

1

University of Chicago, Chicago, USA

2

Rush University Medical Center, Chicago, USA

Introduction: The most common indications for posterior
atlantoaxial fusion are trauma and degeneration, which can encompass a
spectrum of pathologies including atlantoaxial arthrosis and atlantoaxial
instability. This study is a description of technique with accompanying
operative video and retrospective case series of patients undergoing
posterior atlantoaxial fusion. Material and Methods: All
patients who underwent atlantoaxial posterior fusion by one surgeon at an
academic medical center between 2010 and 2018 were included. Primary outcome
measures included number of levels instrumented, estimated blood loss (EBL),
complications, reoperations, length of stay, destination upon discharge, and
rate of postoperative fusion which was assessed by computed tomography (CT)
at the 12 month postoperative visit. Patient reported outcomes,
prospectively collected and retrospectively analyzed, including Short Form
Survey (SF-12), Modified Japanese Orthopedic Association Scale (mJOA), Neck
Disability Index (NDI), and Visual Analogue Scale (VAS) were also assessed.
Results: The key aspects of the employed operative
technique include: positioning of the patient under live fluoroscopic x-ray
to ensure adequate visualization of C1 and C2, coagulation and division of
the C2 nerve roots proximal to the ganglion, placement of bilateral machined
cortical allografts into the C1-2 facet joint space, placement of
bi-cortical guide holes into each C1 lateral mass using a 0.63mm K-wire and
drill prior to placement of C1 lateral mass screws, passage of a suture
beneath the lamina of C1 tied to an Atlas cable that is then looped around
the spinous process of C2 and used to tightly secure a rib graft in place.
Forty-seven patients (mean age 65.4 ± 15.8 years) were included in analysis
following C1-2 fusion with mean follow-up 13.8 ± 11.4 months. The most
common surgical indications were C1-2 instability, C1-2 arthrosis, and type
II odontoid fracture. The mean total number of instrumented levels was 2.6 ±
1.2. Mean estimated blood loss was 351.1 ± 390.4cc. The minor complication
rate was 12.8%, with the most common complication being postoperative
hyponatremia, and major complication rate was 2.1%, a single postoperative
mortality related to multisystem organ failure. The reoperation rate was
8.5% and the average time to reoperation was 436.3 ± 576.5 days. Average
length of stay was 7.6 ± 9.1 days. Seventy-four percent of patients were
discharged to home. The postoperative fusion rate was 81%. Postoperatively,
SF-12 mental health and physical health scores increased from 40.8 ± 11.3
and 33.8 ± 9.9 to 48.1 ± 10.3 and 36.0 ± 11.1, respectively. The increase in
the SF-12 mental health was statistically significant(P =
.002). NDI decreased from 43.4 ± 16.4 to 38.5 ± 24.3. VAS-neck scores
significantly decreased from 6.4 ± 2.5 to 4.2 ± 2.8 (P =
.002). There were no significant changes in mJOA or VAS-arm scores.
Conclusion: The above technique for C1-2 fusion has shown
to be safe with a major complication rate of 2.1% and reoperation rate of
8.5% and effective with a high rate of postoperative fusion (81%) likely
related to the fastidious operative technique. During the course of the
study patients showed significant improvements in SF-12 mental health and
VAS-neck scores. Although there was a decrease in NDI postoperatively, the
difference was not statistically significant.

## 1172

## A301: Risk Factors Associated with 90-Day Readmission Following Odontoid
Fractures - A Nationwide Readmissions Database Study

Alexander von Glinski

1

, Christopher Elia

1

, Tye Patchana

1

, Ariel Takayanagi

1

, Varun Arvind

1

, Clifford Pierre

1

, Basem Ishak

1

, Jens Chapman

1

, and Rod Oskouian

1

1

Swedish Neuroscience Institute, Seattle, USA

Introduction: Hospital readmissions represent a large financial
burden upon our healthcare system. Management of odontoid fractures, which
are the most common isolated spine fracture in the elderly, continues to be
debated. We used the Nationwide Readmission Database (NRD) to identify
readmission rates and factors related to readmission after surgical and
non-surgical management of odontoid fractures. Methods: A
retrospective study was performed using the 2016 Healthcare Utilization
Project (HCUP) NRD. Demographic information and factors associated with
readmission were collected. Readmission rates, complications, length of
hospital stay were collected. Patients treated operatively, non-operatively,
and patients who were readmitted or not readmitted were compared.
Statistical analysis was performed using open source software SciPy (Python
v1.3.0) for all analyses. Results: We identified 2,921 patients
who presented with Type II dens fractures from January 1st 2016 to September
30th 2016, 555 of which underwent surgical intervention. The readmission
rate in patients who underwent surgery was 16.4% (91/555) and 29.4%
(696/2366) in the non-operative group. Hospital costs for readmitted and
non-readmitted patients were $353,704 and $174,922, and $197,099 and $80,715
for non-operatively managed patients, respectively. Medicaid and Medicare
patients had the highest readmission rate in both groups. Charlson and
Elixhauser comorbidity indices were significantly higher in patients who
were readmitted (P < .0001). Conclusion: We
report an overall 90-day readmission rate of 16.4% and 29.4%, in operative
and non-operative management of type II odontoid fractures, respectively. In
the face of a rising incidence of this fracture in the elderly population,
an understanding of the comorbidities and age-related demographics
associated with 90-day readmissions following both surgical and non-surgical
treatment are critical.

## 1263

## A302: Diagnostic Imaging in Subaxial Discoligamentous Injury - Is CT
Sufficient?

Svorad Trnovec

1

, Benedikt Trnovec

2

, Christian Henker

1

, Steffen Sola

1

, Kamil Kolejak

2

, and Thomas Freiman

1

1

Universitätsmedizin Rostock, Neurosurgery, Rostock, Germany

2

Slovak medical university, University hospital Bratislava,
Neurosurgery, Bratislava, Slovakia

Introduction: Traumatic injuries of the cervical spine can be
accompanied by significant neurological deficits and an impaired prognosis.
Choosing the best therapy and prevention of secondary injuries relies on an
adequate and reliable diagnostic. Discoligamentous injuries are often
concomitant to cervical fractures or can appear as solitary lesions and
still are diagnostic challenging. The aim of our study was to assess the
sensitivity and specifity of CT and MR imaging for diagnosis of
discoligamentous injuries. Methods: In this retrospective
study, only patients after subaxial cervical spine injuries with abnormal
findings on initial CT or MR imaging were included. Vertebral body burst
fractures and luxation injuries were excluded. Clinical data was extracted
from in-house medical charts. Results: In this retrospective
study, a total of 34 patients, treated between 2010 and 2018 at our
department, were included. 31 cases were examined with initial CT and
followed MRI scan, 3 cases had only an MRI scan. Neurological status was
unaffected within 13 patients, 8 showed injuries of cervical nerve roots,
incomplete tetraplegia was observed in 10 patients, complete
paraplegia/tetraplegia in 2. Primary CT was suspicious for discoligamentous
injuries in 24 cases, MRI scan was followed in all these patients. Within 3
of these, no lesion was detected within MRI and flex/ext. x-ray films. In 7
cases, CT finding was primary negative, but MRI was performed due to
neurological deficits, radicular pain or severe neck pain. In all of these
cases, MRI revealed a discoligamentous injury. A total of only one MRI was
confirmed false negative with gross instability in flex/ext. x-ray films and
complete disc rupture shown during surgery. 3 CT scan were rated false
positive and another 6 as false negative. 29 cases were treated surgically,
one with external bracing and 4 patients with conservative therapy.
Conclusions: Beside an accurate diagnostic quality of CT
for bony injuries of the cervical spine after trauma, for the detection of
discoligamentous injuries MRI is still superior. Despite the higher
sensitivity of MRI, some cases will still need a further clinical evaluation
or dynamic motion studies via flexion-extension X-ray films. A clinical
neurological symptomatic, also pain too, should be indication for MRI.

## 1259

## A303: Traumatic Cervical Spine Injuries in Rugby Players: A South
American Trinational Case Series

Juan José Zamorano

1

, Ratko Yurac

1

, Alfredo Guiroy

2

, Juan Pablo Guyot

3

, Fernando Nin

4

, and Marcelo Alejandro Valacco

5

1

Clínica Alemana de Santiago, Spine Unit-Department of Orthopedics
and Traumatology, Santiago, Chile

2

Hospital Español de Mendoza, Department of Orthopedics, Mendoza,
Argentina

3

Fundación Favaloro, Buenos Aires, Argentina

4

Medica Uruguaya, Montevideo, Uruguay

5

Sanatorio Finochietto, Buenos Aires, Argentina

Introduction: Traumatic cervical spine injuries may carry
catastrophic consequences to patients and their families. Although
infrequent, their incidence after rugby-related trauma has increased in
recent years, as reported mainly in literature from the UK, France and New
Zealand. Until the year 2000, most of these lesions were produced by
traumatic mechanisms to the cervical spine occurring during a scrum, leading
to modifications in scrumming regulations, which helped to reduce the injury
risk in forwards. Recent literature has reported a higher incidence of
injuries among backs and during tackling. There is still no consensus
regarding return to rugby practice after a traumatic cervical spine injury.
We describe a case series of rugby players from three Latin American
countries with traumatic cervical spine injuries due to game-related trauma,
focusing on injury mechanism, treatment modality and return to play.
Material and Methods: Retrospective, descriptive case
series. We collected cases of rugby-related traumatic cervical spine
injuries using the authors’ network of spine surgeons in Argentina, Chile
and Uruguay. We used an electronic spreadsheet format to collect several
variables (demographics, player position, injury mechanism and type,
diagnostic study, treatment and return to sport, particularly return to
rugby). The information was filled in by the collaborating spine surgeons
and all the collected data was pooled into one file for statistical
analysis. Results: We collected a total of 38 male patients
(63.2% from Argentina, 21% from Chile and 15.8% from Uruguay), injured
between 1993 and 2019. Mean age 22 years (range 15-35 years) and 57.9% were
backs. Regarding the mechanism, 52.6% of the patients were injured during
tackles (even distribution of tacklers and tackled players), 28.9% in scrums
and 18.4% during other formations. All the patients presented single-level
injuries, with fracture-dislocations as the most frequent type of lesion
(57.9%), followed by fractures (26.3%) and traumatic cervical disc
herniations (15.8%). The most affected levels were C5-C6 and C6-C7 (23.7%
each). Under one third of the patients (31.6%) was able to continue playing
after the injury and 55.3% presented some type of neurological impairment,
ranging from complete tetraplegia (7.9%) to transient radicular symptoms.
Thirty-one patients (81.6%) required surgical treatment, mainly in the form
of an anterior cervical discectomy and fusion (45.2%), while 25.8% required
a combined anterior/posterior approach. Regarding return to sports, 73.7%
was able to resume some type of sport, while 78.6% of them (22/28 patients)
returned to rugby, with a median of 314 days after the accident (range
55-609 days). Conclusion: Traumatic cervical spine injuries
must be ruled-out in rugby players presenting neck pain and/or neurological
symptoms after a game-related trauma. In line with recent literature, in our
case series the incidence was higher among backs and during tackling and
their treatment usually required surgery. Although over 50% was able to
return to rugby, there is still no consensus regarding this topic.

## 604

## A304: Regional and Experiential Differences in Surgeon Preferences for
the Treatment of Cervical Facet Injuries

Jose Canseco

1

, Gregory Schroeder

1

, Brian Karamian

1

, Parthik Patel

1

, Giovanni Grasso

2

, Michael Chang

1

, Frank Kandziora

3

, Emiliano Vialle

4

, Cumhur Oner

5

, Klaus Schnake

6

, Marcel Dvorak

7

, Jens Chapman

8

, Lorin Michael Benneker

9

, Shanmuganathan Rajasekaran

10

, AO Spine Cervical Classification Validation Group

11

, Christopher Kepler

1

, and Alexander Vaccaro

1

1

Rothman Orthopaedic institute, Philadelphia, USA

2

Neurosurgical Unit, Department of Biomedicine, Neurosciences and
Advanced Diagnostics, University of Palermo, Palermo, Italy

3

Center for Spine Surgery and Neurotraumatology, BG Unfallklinik
Frankfurt am Main, Frankfurt, Germany

4
Department of Orthopaedics, Catholic University of Parana,
Curitiba, Brazil, 
5
University Medical Center, Utrecht, Utrecht, The
Netherlands

6

Center for Spinal Surgery, Malteser Waldkrankenhaus St. Marien,
Erlangen, Germany

7

Department of Orthopaedics, Vancouver General Hospital, Vancouver,
Canada

8

Swedish Neuroscience Institute, Swedish Medical Center, Seattle,
USA

9

Spine Service, Orthopaedic Department, Sonnenhofspital, Bern,
Switzerland

10

Department of Orthopaedics, Trauma and Spine Surgery, Ganga
Hospital, Coimbatore, India

11

AO Foundation, Davos, Switzerland

Introduction: The management of cervical facet dislocation
injuries remains controversial. There is persistent debate among surgeons
regarding imaging modalities, the appropriateness of nonoperative
management, as well as surgical approach. The main purpose of this
investigation was to identify whether a surgeon’s geographic location or
years in practice influences their preferred management of traumatic
cervical facet dislocation injuries. Methods: A 25-question
survey was sent to 272 AO Spine members located in six different geographic
regions (Africa, Asia, Europe, Latin/South America, the Middle East and
North America) with various years of practice experience. The survey
included clinical case scenarios of cervical facet dislocation injuries and
asked responders to select preferences among various diagnostic and
management options. Results: A total of 189 complete responses
were received. Over 50% of responding surgeons in each region elected to
initiate management of cervical facet dislocation injuries with an MRI, with
6 case exceptions. Overall, surgeons that chose operative management were
more likely to intervene with an anterior cervical discectomy and fusion
(ACDF) for either bilateral (43.3%) or unilateral (46.0%) jumped facets
status post-reduction. There was considerable agreement between American and
European responders regarding management of these injuries, with only 3
cases exhibiting a significant difference. Additionally, results also
exhibited considerable management agreement between those with ≤ 10 and >
10 years of practice experience, with only 2 case exceptions noted.
Conclusion: More than half of responders, regardless of
geographical location or practice experience, identified MRI as a screening
imaging modality when managing cervical facet dislocation injuries,
regardless of the status of the spinal cord and prior to any additional
intervention. Additionally, a majority of surgeons would elect an anterior
approach for the surgical management of these injuries. The study found
overall agreement in management preferences of cervical facet dislocation
injuries around the globe.

## 1420

## A305: Unstable Jefferson Burst Fractures: Intraoperative Stability
Testing After Posterior Atlas Ring Osteosynthesis (C1-Ro) Regardless of
Dickman Type Transverse Atlantal Ligament (Tal) Lesion Allows Determination
of The Extent of the Surgical Procedure

Andy Ottenbacher

1

, Rizk Ahmed

1

, and Bettag Martin

1

1

Krankenhaus der Barmherzigen Brüder Trier, Neurosurgery, Trier,
Germany

Introduction: Atlas ring osteosynthesis (C1-RO) is a motion
preserving operative option in unstable Jefferson burst fractures (JBF).
Dickman type II transverse atlantal ligament (TAL) lesion is a commonly
accepted indication for C1-RO. There is one biomechanical and one clinical
report that Dickman type I TAL lesions may also be treated with C1-RO. In
2017, we introduced an intraoperative stability test to assess
craniocervical and C1-C2 stability in posterior C1-RO. The objective of this
work is to present mid-to longterm results of posterior C1-RO vs C1-C2
stabilization in unstable JBF based on the results of the intaoperative
stability test after C1-RO -regardless of Dickman type TAL lesion.
Material and Methods: The clinical findings (pain and
clinical ability to rotate the head) and radiological results (CT-scan and
flexion-extension-views postoperatively and at last observation) of 5
consecutive cases (47-75 years age, mean age 61) with unstable JBF (two
Dickman type I, three Dickman type II lesions) from 2017-2019 with posterior
C1-RO or C1-C2 osteosynthesis with therapy decision after reduction, C1-RO
and intraoperative stability test, were retrospectively analyzed.
Results: Surgical procedures were completed as C1-RO in 4
patients, as sufficient stability could be assessed intraoperatively. One
C1-RO (a JBF with a Dickman Type II lesion) was converted intraoperatively
to a C1-C2 osteosynthesis with a cross connector because of assessment of
significant instability C1-C2 in the intraoperative stability test by means
of tilting C1 over C2. In all cases of C1-RO, bony stabilization of the
atlas ring could be demonstrated during the follow-up period (3.5-21 months
postoperatively). No morbidity was observed. The anterior atlanto dental
interval (AADI) in the flexion-extension x-ray views did not increase during
follow-up period (mean 12 months postoperatively) and all patients were free
of significant pain. Therefore, no case with C1-RO had to undergo further
surgical stabilization procedure. Conclusion: The
intraoperative stability test in treatment of unstable JBF by means of
posterior C1-RO with reposition enables the determination of the extent of
the surgical procedure. Dickman type I TAL lesions may also be treated with
C1-RO, if found stable in the test after lifting up C0 and restoring
longitudinal stabilizers, as the assessed intraoperative stability remains.
Furthermore, we suggest that any attempted posterior C1-RO in unstable JBF
should undergo intraoperative stability testing after initial C1-RO to
assess individual resulting stability. Hence we think that the ability to
test stability intraoperatively is an advantage of the posterior over the
anterior C1-RO.

## 1807

## A306: Isolated C1 Fixation for Traumatic Jeffersons Fractures Using a
Novel Surgical Technique

Fahid Rasul

1

, Thomas Doke

1

, Amy Macneil

1

, and Jonathan Bull

1

1

Royal London Hospital, Royal London Hospital, E1 1FR, United
Kingdom

Introduction: Isolated C1 fractures are commonly managed
non-operatively. Patients report severe neck pain and often treatment
involves prolonged use of a hard collar for immobilisation. The traditional
operative approach for unstable C1 fractures involved a C1-2 fixation
causing significant reduction in patient’s rotational movement of the neck.
Here the authors describe their novel technique of C1 fixation and report
the clinical outcomes in our cohort of patients. Material and
Methods: Retrospective review of prospectively collected
electronic database. All patients with a diagnosis of C1 fracture who
underwent spinal surgery between January 2017 and July 2020 at Royal London
Hospital (RLH) were included. Patient demographics, radiological fracture
characteristics, surgical procedure details and clinical outcomes were
extracted by case note review. Study methods were compliant with the STROBE
checklist. Results: 11 consecutive patients with traumatic C1
fractures underwent surgery using our novel technique at RLH during the
study period. Male:Female = 9:2. Mean age = 59.1 years (range 23-84 years).
Patient reported neck pain improved significantly following surgery
(P = .0008 95% CI = 1.74-4.26; paired t-test). One
patient returned to theatre for re-positioning of metalwork. All patients
maintained their neurological function post-operatively. Mean length of
inpatient hospital stay = 8.25 days (range 1-30 days). Rotational movement
was generally well preserved. Conclusion: We report a novel
technique of C1 fixation that allows early removal of a collar and effective
fracture reduction thereby facilitating fusion. We report good clinical
outcomes with patients maintaining functional rotational movement and
improvements in pain scores following surgery. Our series suggests that in
carefully selected cases isolated C1 fixation may be used to treat traumatic
C1 fractures effectively.

## OP35: Arthroplasty-Cervical

## 1032

## A307: Preoperative Ossification and Range of Motion were Risk Factors for
High-Grade Ossification

Han Wang

1

, and Hao Liu

1

1

West China Hospital, Sichuan University, Department of Orthopaedic
Surgery, Chengdu, China

Introduction: Heterotopic ossification (HO) was one of the main
postoperative complications following TDR, however, the etiology of HO
remains unclear. As we all know, mild HO such as McAfee I or II was
considered not clinically relevant, but severe HO which grades III or IV was
of great clinical significance. Although it was widely accepted that HO will
progress as times goes by, direct studies about risk factors for high-grade
HO are still limited. Additionally, the impact of HO on clinical outcomes
remains controversial. The present study included the largest sample size
among any known HO studies and the objective of this study was to explore
the risk factors for HO and high-grade HO, as well as their effect on
clinical outcomes. Material and Methods: Overall, 286 patients
with TDR or hybrid surgery were involved in the present study. The sex, age,
clinical symptoms, surgical procedures, involved levels, follow-up period,
preoperative ossifications, and preoperative operative range of motion of
replacement level were collected as the potential risk factors for HO. The
JOA, NDI, VAS scores and range of motion of replacement levels and the
cervical spine were collected to evaluate the impact of HO on clinical
outcomes. Preoperative ossifications including (1) ossification of
anterior/posterior longitudinal ligament; (2) bubble osteophytes; (3)
ROM-limiting osteophytes; (4) ligamentum nuchae ossification.
Results: There were 125 patients with single-level TDR, 21
patients with double-level TDR, 72 patients with double-level hybrid surgery
and 68 patients with three-level hybrid surgery involved in this study. HO
was found in 186 (65.03%) patients while high-grade HO was observed in 26
(9.09%) patients. The preoperative ossification signs (P
< .001, OR: 2.991, 95%CI: 1.759-5.085) and ROM of
replacement levels (P = .017, OR: .934, 95%CI: .884-.988)
were shown to be significant factors of HO occurrence in logistic
regression. No significant differences were found in JOA(P
= 0.123), NDI(P = 0.925) and VAS(P
= .074) scores between patients with and without HO. Although
more ROM was found in patients without HO, no statistical differences were
found between them at the final follow-up. And the logistic regression
showed that the preoperative ossification signs (P = .022,
OR: 3.282, 95%CI: 1.183-9.108) and ROM of replacement levels (P
= .005, OR: .830, 95%CI: .729-.944) were risk factors for
high-grade HO. The ROM of replacement levels in high-grade HO group were
significantly lower than those without high-grade HO (3.96° vs 10.06°,
P < .001), as well as the ROM of C2-7 (44.44° vs
52.43°, P = .004). Conclusion: Preoperative
ossification signs and preoperative ROM of replacement levels were
considered as the risk factors of HO and high-grade HO. No differences were
observed on clinical outcomes and postoperative ROM between patients with
and without HO. However, the ROM of replacement levels and the cervical
spine were significantly limited in patients with high-grade HO. The results
of this study might provide more evidence that HO is likely a reflection of
the patients’ own characteristics rather than an unnatural phenomenon and
unpredictable postoperative complication.

## 1001

## A308: Comparison of Two Anterior Hybrid Techniques for Three-Level
Cervical Degenerative Disc Disease

Han Wang

1

, Hao Liu

1

1

West China Hospital, Sichuan University, Department of Orthopaedic
Surgery, Chengdu, China

Introduction: In recent years, novel hybrid surgery that
incorporate anterior cervical discectomy and fusion, and total disc
replacement has clinically been widely in use. Based on the number of the
implanted disc, three-level hybrid surgery is categorized into two groups
including, single fusion combined double replacement (1F2R) and single
replacement combined double fusion (1R2F). Previous studies have primarily
focused on fusion versus hybrid or replacement versus hybrid. However,
limited studies have directly compared the clinical characteristics of
different hybrid techniques. Herein, we aimed to compare the clinical and
radiological outcomes between the two groups and assess the characteristics
and benefits of both operations. Material and Methods:
Sixty-four consecutive patients who underwent three-level hybrid surgery by
single fusion combined with double replacement or single replacement
combined with double fusion were retrospectively evaluated. The clinical
outcomes such as VAS, JOA score, and JOA recovery rate was collected. And
radiological evaluation including range of motion and cervical lordosis were
analyzed. Heterotopic ossification was assessed according to the McAfee
classification and dysphagia was quantified using Bazaz scoring system. The
reoperation rate and other complications were all collected.
Results: In total, 32 patients were involved in 1F2R group
and 32 patients in 1R2F group, and all the patients had a satisfactory
clinical outcome. The JOA recovery rate of 1F2R and 1R2F group was 76.47%
and 76.09%, respectively. And no significant differences were observed on
VAS scores between two groups at the last follow-up. The C2-7 cervical
lordosis was similar between two groups at the last follow-up, however,
there was a statistical difference in the 1R2F group when compared to the
preoperative level (pre 6.48° vs last 10.12°, P = .003).
The range of motion decreased in both two groups, but 1F2R group showed a
better range of motion at the final follow-up (38.25° vs 29.17°, P
= .001). Heterotopic ossification was observed in 10 segments
(15.63%) in 1F2R group and 17 levels (53.13%) in 1R2F group, but severe
heterotopic ossification was only observed in 2 and 1 patients in 1F2R and
1R2F group, respectively. Additionally, one patient underwent the
re-operation for the fourth level in 1F2R group and no spinal cord injury,
wound infection or hoarseness were observed. Conclusion: This
study indicated that the two kinds of hybrid surgery incorporating fusion
and non-fusion are safe and effective in the treatment of three-level CDDD.
The 1R2F operation was better in correcting the cervical lordosis
irrespective of higher incidence of HO. On the other hand, 1F2R operation
was superior in maintaining cervical ROM. However, the biomechanical
characteristics for different HS were complex. Therefore, further randomized
controlled studies on HS groups are indispensable.

## 287

## A309: The Impact of Physical Therapy After Cervical Spine Surgery for
Degenerative Spine Disorders: A Systematic Review

Justin M. Lantz

1

, Aidin Abedi

2

, Frances Tran

1

, Rafael Cahill

1

, Kornelia Kulig

1

, Lori Michener

1

, Raymond Hah

2

, Jeffrey C. Wang

2

, and Zorica Buser

2

1

University of Southern California, Division of Biokinesiology and
Physical Therapy, Los Angeles, USA

2

University of Southern California, Department of Orthopedic Surgery,
USC Spine Center, Los Angeles, USA

Introduction: Cervical spondylosis is a chronic degenerative
disorder affecting both the discs and joints of the cervical spine which can
result in a combination of neck pain, cervical radiculopathy, and/or
cervical myelopathy. Once symptoms become recalcitrant to conservative
management or there is progressive deterioration of neurological status,
surgical intervention may be indicated. There is paucity of evidence
concerning post-operative management of these patients, specifically the use
of physical therapy (PT). Physical function deficits can be present up to 14
years after cervical surgery. It is important to determine if the literature
indicates a need for post-operative PT, that may improve patient outcomes
and decrease healthcare costs. The aim of this systematic review was to
identify the impact of PT after cervical spine surgeries regarding
complications, patient-reported outcomes (PROs), physical function and
cost-effectiveness. Material and Methods: The following
bibliographic databases were searched electronically from the date of
inception until July 2019: PubMed, Embase, Cochrane Central Register of
Controlled Trials (CENTRAL), Physiotherapy Evidence Database (PEDro), and
the Web of Science. Four reviewers independently reviewed the titles,
abstracts and full texts of identified records based on the eligibility
criteria. Inclusion criteria: peer-reviewed, English language, at least ten
adult patients (diagnosed with degenerative spine disorders) who had
undergone cervical spine surgery with post-operative PT. Exclusion criteria:
poorly defined surgical/PT protocols, outcome measures, trauma, cancer or
infection. The Revised Cochrane risk-of-bias tool for randomized trials (RoB
2) assessed risk of bias. Meta-analysis was not performed due to study
heterogeneity and limited data for comparisons. The findings were described
narratively and the GRADE approach was used to define the certainty of
evidence. Results: 10,743 studies were screened on the title
and/or abstract level. Twenty studies were selected for full-text review and
six studies met the inclusion criteria, including two randomized controlled
trials (RCTs) None of the RCTs or longitudinal studies had a lone surgical
comparator group. Both RCTs were at moderate risk of bias overall.
Methodological concerns included potential for bias in the outcome
measurement and lack of blinded assessment for PROs. RCTs included 63 and
201 patients with cervical radiculopathy. Surgeries included 1-3 level
anterior cervical discectomy and fusion or posterior foraminotomy with or
without laminectomy. Post-operative PT consisted of exercise, cognitive
behavioral therapy and optional vestibular rehabilitation. PROs: studies
demonstrated reduction in Neck Disability Index, Visual Analog Scale for
pain and improvement in the Global Assessment, EuroQol-5D, and Modified Odom
Scale. Physical function: studies demonstrated improvement in cervical
active range of motion, manual dexterity, hand strength, and neck muscle
endurance. Between-group comparisons were generally insignificant. No
studies reported complications, adverse events or cost-effectiveness
relating to PT with or without surgery. Conclusion: PT after
cervical surgery for spondylosis appears to be tolerated without notable
adverse effects and may lead to improvements in pain, disability, and
physical function. However, due to limited availability of studies,
heterogeneity in study design and lack of lone surgical control groups in
current literature, it is difficult to determine the true effect of the
addition post-operative PT to cervical surgery.

## 1358

## A310: Assessment of the Self-Reported Dysphagia in Patients Undergoing
One-Level Versus Two-Level Cervical Disc Replacement with the Prestige-LP
Prosthesis

Haimiti Abudouaini

1

and Hao Liu

1

1

West China Hospital, Sichuan University, Orthopedics, Chengdu,
China

Introduction: Incidences of dysphagia in cervical disc
replacement (CDR) are lower than those reported in anterior cervical
discectomy and fusion (ACDF). Surgical CDR is has a clinical importance due
to its complicated outcomes. It has been documented that surgery may lead to
high dysphagia rates in ACDF. There is paucity of documented information on
the differences in post-operative dysphagia of CDR between one-level and
two-level CDR. This paucity, therefore, necessitated this retrospective
study on post-operative dysphagia after one- and two-level CDR.
Material and Methods: The prevalence and severity of
post-operative dysphagia between one-level and two-level CDR was evaluated
by the Bazaz grading system during the follow-up time. Regression analyses
were done to identify confounding factors associated with post-operative
dysphagia after CDR. Results: One hundred and fourteen patients
in one-level CDR group and forty eight patients in two-level CDR group were
recruited. The overall dysphagia occurrences in the one- and two-level CDR
groups were 17.54% and 35.41% at week one, 12.28% and 25% after one month,
9.65% and 18.75% after three months, 6.14% and 14.58% after six months,
4.39% and 6.25% after one year, and 3.51% and 4.17% at the final follow-up,
respectively. The identified risk factors for dysphagia after CDR were
advanced age, C4/5 surgery, two-level surgery, dC2-C7 angle ≥ -5° and ≥ 6 mm
changes in the prevertebral soft tissue swelling (dPSTS).
Conclusion: It was revealed that patients who experienced
two-level CDR may have weak swallowing functions in the early post-operative
term. However, after mid-to-long-term follow-ups, these patients exhibited
better improvements in post -operative swallowing compared to those who had
undergone one-level CDR.

## 1968

## A311: Management of Cervical Spondylotic Myelopathy with Total Cervical
Disc Replacement: Analysis of Patients with Clinical and Radiological Signs
of Cervical Myelopathy

Christoph Mehren

1

, Franziska Heider

2

, and Tuna Pehlivanoglu

3

1

Schön Klinik München Harlaching, Spine Center, Munich,
Germany

2

Schön Klinik München Harlaching, Spine Center, München,
Germany

3

Sağlık Bilimleri Universitesi Istanbul, Istanbul, Turkey

Introduction: Over the past decade, total cervical disc
replacement (cTDR) has been established as a viable treatment option for
cervical degenerative disc disease. Especially patients with radiculopathy
due to certain disc pathologies have been treated successfully with
excellent clinical long-term results in the past. The aim of this study was
to question the clinical and radiographic efficacy of Pro Disc Vivo cervical
disc arthroplasty in patients with clinically and radiographically
documented myelopathy due to degenerative changes at the index level.
Material and Methods: 18 consecutive patients (10 males, 8
females) with documented clinical and radiological signs of myelopathy, as
part of an ongoing prospective non-randomized single center study, were
included in this investigation. All of the patients underwent the same
procedure through an anterior cervical approach and a ProDisc Vivo cervical
disc prosthesis was inserted within strict inclusion criterias (e.g. no
instability, no kyphotic deformity, residual motion of the index segment, no
distinct bony osteophytes, no osteoporosis). MRIs were taken routinely to
confirm the diagnosis of spinal stenosis with myelopathy. Conventional
x-rays of the cervical spine were taken in ap and lateral as well as in
flexion/extention to determine the global lordosis as well as the range of
motion (ROM). Patients without radiographic (MRI) evidence of myelopathy
were excluded. Enrolled patients were calculated Nurick grade together with
VAS, NDI and JOA scores preoperatively and also during the follow-up
appointments. Results: The study population had a mean age of
52.4 years and a follow up period of 20.3 months in average(range 3-48
months). Cervical disc arthroplasty was performed in 15 patients for one, in
2 patients for two and one patient for three levels. The mean range ROM of
the index level stayed consistent with 9.4° preoperatively and 9.6°
(P = .637) at the last follow up, the global lordosis
in neutral position changed from 5.8° to 14.2° significantly (P
= .002). The JOA score improved from 11.3 (Grade I: 9 patients,
Grade II: 9 patients) to 16.62 (all patients: Grade I) (P
< .001/P = .003) as well as the NDI 36.71
(73.43%) to 10.3 (P < .001) and the VAS score from
5.71/6.07 (arm/neck) to 1.3/2.0 (P < .001/P
< .001). The mean Nurick grade was 1.33 pre-operatively and
dropped down in all cases to Nurick grade of 0 (P <
.001). At the latest follow-up visit all patients were highly satisfied by
means of social functioning and pain. They were all able to return to work,
daily activities and recreational sports. Conclusion: This
study proved that Pro Disc Vivo cervical disc arthroplasty was a viable
treatment option with excellent outcomes even in management of cervical
myelopathy with regard to pain scores (VAS) and neck disability index by
improving the neurologic deficit, arm pain and local neck symptoms together
with scores of functional outcome (JOA and NDI scores). Considering the
Nurick grades our clinical results revealed that, anterior decompression and
implantation of cTDR could improve the severity of myelopathy within strict
inclusion criterias as well. This study also concluded that cTDR was
improving the pre-operative ROM and lordosis with great statistical
significance.

## References
1. Kim YJ, Bridwell KH, Lenke LG, et al. Pseudarthrosis in primary fusions
for adult idiopathic scoliosis: incidence, risk factors, and outcome
analysis. Spine. 2005; 30: 468-474.
2. Shaffer AD, Shonuga OA, Hirsch BP, et al. Sclerostin antibody enhances
spine fusion in a rat posterolateral transverse process fusion model:
preliminary results. Proc 33rd Annual Meeting of the American Society for
Bone and Mineral Research, San Diego, CA, 2011, p S517 (Abstract
MO0461).
3. Boden SD, Schimandle JH, Hutton WC. An experimental lumbar intertransverse
process spinal fusion model. Radiographic, histologic, and biomechanical
healing characteristics. Spine (Phila Pa 1976). 1995 Feb
15;20(4):412-20.

## 1119

## A312: Effect of Changes in Postoperative Intervertebral Space Height on
Clinical and Radiological Outcomes After Cervical Disc Replacement

Haimiti Abudouaini

1

and Hao Liu

1

1

West China Hospital, Sichuan University, Orthopedics, Chengdu,
China

Introduction: Narrowing of intervertebral space height (ISH) is
an important pathological change in degenerative spinal disease, and ideal
intraoperative distraction and postoperative intervertebral space
maintenance is one of the most expectant goals pursued by spinal surgeons.
It has been reported that the distraction of intervertebral space height has
a close association with axial symptoms, adjacent segment degeneration, and
neurologic recovery after cervical surgery. However, compared with cervical
intervertebral space distraction, which has received considerable attention
in previous studies, limited studies analyse the relationship between the
maintenance of ISH and clinical and radiological outcomes after CDR.
Material and Methods: In this study, the height variation
and general trend of postoperative ISH in all patients were analysed. The
patients were divided into three groups based on the change of postoperative
intervertebral space height (ISH); group A (ISH < 2 mm), group B (ISH 2-4
mm), and group C (ISH >4mm) and the clinical and radiographic results
compared among the three groups. A total of 120 consecutive patients with
symptomatic cervical disc disease were included in this study.
Results: The results showed that the mean ISH increased
significantly from 0.729 mm before surgery to 1.143 mm at one week, then
gradually decreased to 1.032 mm at three months, 0.980 mm at six months,
0.760 mm at one year, and 0.750 mm at the final follow-up. The average
postoperative Neck Disability Index (NDI) was 19.73 ± 0.81, 13.74 ± 4.94,
17.19 ± 4.22 in the three groups at one year after surgery and the average
range of motion (ROM) was 5.44 ± 3.85° in group A, 9.34 ± 4.38° in group B
and 6.51 ± 4.38° in group C. The mean diameter of the intervertebral foramen
(IVF) was 6.54 ± 1.86 mm in group A, 9.63 ± 2.38 mm in group B and 9.31 ±
.68 mm in group C. Degeneration at the superiorly adjacent disc level was
observed in 13.51% patients in group A, 9.37% in group B and 21.05% in group
C. Degeneration at the inferiorly adjacent level was radiographically
identified in 21.62% in group A, 14.06% in group B, and 26.32% in group C.
Conclusion: This study revealed that cervical disc
replacement cannot maintain the intervertebral disc height obtained
immediately after surgery. There is no obvious correlation between the
change in intervertebral space height and clinical efficacy in the early
postoperative stage. However, the intervertebral disc height may affect the
NDI index one year after surgery. If the postoperative intervertebral space
height change can be maintained at 2-4 mm in a year, satisfactory ROM,
intervertebral foramen diameter, and relatively low ASD may be obtained
after cervical disc replacement.t

## 1026

## A313: Effect of disc height and degree of distraction on heterotopic
ossification after cervical disc replacement

Xiaofei Wang

1

, Han Wang

1

, and Hao Liu

1

1

West China Hospital, Sichuan University, Department of Orthopaedic
Surgery, Chengdu, China

Introduction: Heterotopic ossification (HO) is a potential and
severe complication of cervical disc replacement (CDR). However, the
underlying mechanism of CDR and its association with preoperative disc
height loss (DHL) and postoperative degree of distraction (PDD) remain
unclear. We hypothesized that DHL and PDD could predict HO after CDR.
Material and Methods: Data were obtained from 127 patients
who underwent single-level CDR with a minimum follow up of two years. DHL
and PDD were obtained from lateral radiographs and HO was evaluated at the
last follow up appointment. Receiver operating characteristic (ROC) curves
were calculated to verify the diagnostic value of DHL and PDD in predicting
HO. Results: Both DHL and PDD were significantly larger in the
HO group than the non-HO group (P < .05). DHL ≥ 24.97%
increased the risk of HO by 5 times (P = .003, 95% CI:
1.62-15.49), and PDD ≥ 36.67% increased the risk of HO by 3.87 times
(P < .001, 95% CI: 1.81-8.27). A combined DHL and
PDD (combined parameter) cut-off of 60.36 had a sensitivity of 87.18%,
specificity of 67.35%, and area under the curve of 0.77 for predicting HO.
Conclusion: DHL and PDD are associated with the development
of HO after CDR. The cut-off value of DHL may narrow criteria for CDR with
the aim of reducing HO formation. The combined parameter may help surgeons
to select the most suitable implant height to reduce the prevalence of
HO.

## 1356

## A314: Outcomes Following Cervical Disc Replacement vs Anterior Cervical
Discectomy and Fusion in Patients with Predominantly Neck Pain
Complaints

Andre Samuel

1

, Catherine Himo Gang

1

, and Sheeraz Qureshi

1

1

Hospital for Special Surgery, New York, USA

Introduction: Although cervical disc replacement (CDR) continues
to increase in popularity for the treatment of cervical radiculopathy, the
presence of preoperative neck pain is often cited by surgeons as a reason
for choosing anterior cervical discectomy and fusion (ACDF)
instead.1 The origin of neck pain is often multifactorial and
there is some literature that suggests comparable results between CDR and
ACDF in patients who have both neck pain and upper extremity
radiculopathy.2-5 The purpose of our study was to compare
outcomes between CDR and ACDF in patients who presented with predominantly
neck pain complaints. Methods: A retrospective review of
prospectively collected data was performed on patients undergoing one or
two-level CDR or ACDF by three surgeons at a single academic institution.
Patients who had presented with predominant complaints of neck pain (pNP;
VAS-neck>VAS-arm) were initially identified and subsequently stratified
into two cohorts by procedure: CDR (n = 41) and ACDF (n = 83). Outcome data
was collected at preoperative visits and at each of the following
postoperative visits: 2 weeks, 6 weeks, 12 weeks, 6 months, 1 year, and 2
years. The following MCID-threshold values were used, based on previous
studies in the literature: NDI: -15.0, VAS-Neck: -2.5, VAS-Arm: -2.5, SF-12:
PCS +8.1, SF-12 MCS: +4.6. Differences in PROMs were analyzed with
Wilcoxon-Signed-Ranks-Tests within each cohort and Mann-Whitney-U-Tests to
compare PROMs between groups. Rates of MCID achievement were analyzed for
each PROM with Fischer’s-Exact-Tests. Results: 124 total
patients presenting with pNP were included (mean age: 49.93 ± 11.73 years,
mean BMI: 26.65 ± 4.05 kg/m2). In those with minimum six-month
follow-up, both the CDR (median follow-up: 336.5 days) and ACDF (median
follow-up: 336.5 days) cohorts demonstrated significant improvements in NDI
(P < .001), VAS-neck (P < .001),
and SF-12 PCS (P < .001). While both cohorts
demonstrated improvements postoperatively in these three PROMs, the degree
of improvement was not significantly different between the two cohorts in
any PROM (all P ≥ .185). In addition, the CDR cohort
demonstrated significant improvement in SF-MCS (P = .022).
There were no significant differences in any of the final PROMs (all
P ≥ .320) between CDR and ACDF patients with a minimum
six-month follow-up. When comparing cumulative percentages of patients
achieving MCID at each post-operative time point, no significant differences
were observed between the two cohorts at any time point (all
P ≥0.236) with 90.2% (n = 37) of CDR patients and 84.1%
(n = 69) of ACDF patients achieving MCID in ≥1 PROM by the 2-year follow-up.
Discussion and Conclusion: Historically, surgeons have
favored ACDF in patients presenting with a primary complaint of neck pain in
the setting of cervical radiculopathy. While the presence of neck pain and
significant radiographic facet arthritis should continue to be a
contraindication to CDR, our findings suggest that disc replacement may be a
viable surgical option in an appropriately indicated subset of patients who
present with a predominant.

## 1018

## A315: Cervical Sagittal Alignment After Prestige Lp Cervical Disc
Replacement: Radiological Results and Clinical Impacts

Xiaofei Wang

1

, Han Wang

1

, and Hao Liu

1

1

West China Hospital, Sichuan University, Department of Orthopaedic
Surgery, Chengdu, China

Introduction: Cervical disc replacement (CDR) has been widely
used to treat one- and two-level cervical degenerative disc disease. Studies
have shown the effectiveness of CDR in preserving range of motion (ROM) and
delaying adjacent segment degeneration (ASD). Cervical sagittal alignment is
an important factor affecting favorable clinical outcomes in cervical spine
surgery. This study aimed to explore whether cervical sagittal alignment can
be maintained after CDR and to identify the impact of cervical sagittal
alignment on outcomes after CDR. Material and Methods: This was
a single-center, retrospective study. 132 patients who underwent one-level
CDR were included. Cervical sagittal alignments, including cervical lordosis
(CL), segmental alignment (SA), sagittal vertical axis (SVA), T1 slope
(T1s), and T1s minus CL (T1s-CL), were measured. The effects of cervical
sagittal alignment on the CDR outcomes were analyzed. Patients were divided
into the heterotopic ossification (HO) group and ASD group to determine the
potential impacts of cervical sagittal parameters. Results: The
cervical sagittal alignment parameters, except for the SVA, were
significantly improved after CDR and showed decreasing trends at the last
follow-up. Significantly higher CL and T1s were found in patients with
better ROM after CDR. SVA ≥ 20 mm increased the risk of anterior HO (odds
ratio = 2.945, P = .007). Significantly kyphotic SA and
lower T1s values were found in the ASD patients than in the non-ASD patients
(P < .05). Patients with ASD at the inferior level
showed significantly worse CL (P < .05).
Conclusion: CDR had limited function of improving cervical
sagittal alignment. Poor cervical sagittal alignment after CDR was
associated with HO, ASD, and less ROM.

## OP36: Spinal Tumor Surgery 2

## 597

## A316: Analysis of unplanned hospital readmissions up to two-years after
metastatic spine tumour surgery

Andrew Thomas

1

, Sirisha Madhu

1

, Miguel Rafael Ramos

1

, Liang Shen

2

, Yong Hao Joel Tan

3

, and Naresh Kumar

3

1

National University Health System, Singapore, Singapore

2

National University of Singapore, Biostatistics unit, Singapore,
Singapore

1

National University Health System, Singapore, Singapore

Introduction: Unplanned hospital readmissions (UHR) after
discharge following metastatic spine tumour surgery(MSTS) adversely affect
quality of life of these patients. Majority of studies on UHR focus on
assessment of readmissions within 30 days following index-discharge. The aim
of this study was to investigate rates, causes, and risk factors of UHR
within 30 days, 90 days, 1 year and 2 years after MSTS to augment
multi-disciplinary treatment planning and improve patient education.
Materials and Methods: We retrospectively reviewed
272-patients (age ≥18 years) who underwent MSTS between 2005-2016 with a
follow-up for minimum two-years or until their demise, whichever was
earlier. Institutional review board approval was obtained prior to
commencement of study. Hospital records were utilised to obtain
demographics, oncological and procedural details, and postoperative
outcomes. All UHR within 2years were reviewed. UHR were defined as
unscheduled hospitalisations after index-discharge and did not include
planned follow-up/readmissions for radiotherapy/chemotherapy. Primary
outcomes were rates and causes of UHR. Four-time frames were considered with
regards to UHR: (1 < 30 days, (2) 30-90 days, (3) 90days-1year, and (4)
1-2years. UHR rate was calculated as number of patients being readmitted
divided by total number of surviving patients within each timeframe. Risk
factors for UHR were evaluated using multivariate logistic regression
analysis. Results: A total of 204-patients were included in the
final analysis. The mean age was 60+12 years; 49% were females. An Eastern
Cooperative Oncology Group Performance Status (ECOG-PS) score of 0-2 was
noted in 88% of patients. Median Charlson Comorbidity Index (CCI) and
Tokuhashi scores were 7 and 8, respectively. Most common primary tumour type
was lung (24.5%), followed by breast (19.1%). Majority underwent open
surgery (72.1%). Overall, perioperative complication rate was 46%. A total
of 425-UHR occurred across all four studied timeframes in 151-patients.
Thirty-day, 90-day, 1year, and 2year UHR-rates after MSTS were 17.2%, 31.1%,
46.2%, and 52.7%, respectively. Majority of patients had their first UHR
between 30-90days (32.5%). The highest number of readmission-events occurred
after one year from discharge (n =153/425). Lung cancer primaries had the
highest UHR-events (24.7%) whilst renal/thyroid displayed the least (6.6%).
Disease-related causes (16.2%) were the most common reason for readmissions
across all timeframes, followed by respiratory (13.7%) and progression of
metastatic spine disease (12.7%). Urological conditions accounted for
majority of readmissions within 30days (25%); disease-related causes
(27.9%), symptomatic spinal metastases (16.7%), and respiratory conditions
(19.6%) represented the most common causes at 30-90 days, 90 days-1year, and
1-2 years, respectively. An ECOG >1 (P = 0.057), CCI
>7 (P = .01), and primary lung tumour (P
= .02) significantly increased UHR-risk on multivariate
analysis. Conclusion: Our study findings offer useful insights
into UHR during the overlooked timeframe of beyond 90days. Overall, 74% of
patients had at least one UHR within 2years of MSTS and majority were
secondary to disease-related causes. Majority of first UHR occurred between
30-90 days after surgery. Local disease progression and overall disease
progression accounted for the highest UHR-events at 90 days-1 year and 1-2
year timeframes, respectively. This information allows clinicians to
anticipate causes of UHR within specific timeframes, thereby enabling better
surveillance and prevention of MSTS-related morbidity.

## 736

## A317: Symptomatic Ventriculus Terminalis in a 64-Year-Old Female: A Case
Report

Mahmoud Ben Messaoud

1

, Kais Maamri

1

, Nessrine Nessib

1

, Mohamed Boukhit

1

, ines cherif

1

, Maher Hadhri

1

, Souheil Khalfaoui

1

, Atef Ben Nsir

1

,and Mehdi Darmoul

1

1

Neurosurgery department, Fattouma Bourguiba University Hospital,
Monastir, Tunisia

Introduction: Ventriculus terminalis (VT) or the "fifth"
ventricle is an embryological remnant consisting of an ependyma-lined cavity
located in the conus medullaris. VT is extremely rare in adults and
asymptomatic in the vast majority of cases; but may occasionally become
symptomatic if cystic dilation occurs. Surgical treatment is still matter of
debate. Material and Methods: We report a case of 64-year-old female.
Results: We report the case of a 64-year-old female, who
was referred to our department with a 6 months history of sphincter
dysfunction made of urinary incontinence and chronic constipation. On
physical examination, muscle strength was normal in both lower limbs, deep
tendon reflexes were weak with bilateral Babinski sign. Magnetic resonance
imaging (MRI) of the spine showed a cystic lesion at D10-D12. (length: 4 cm;
volume 4.5 cm3) similar to CSF in both T1 and T2-weighted images
with no contrast enhancement which then was reported as VT. This lesion was
associated to a 3 mm large hydromyelia extending from D2 to D8. Decision was
to address the VT with posterior approach, D9-D12 laminectomy, myelotomy and
cyst fenestration. Post-operative course was uneventful and the patient was
discharged three days following surgery. Six-months control MRI showed
significant cyst size reduction and a marked improvement in sphincter
dysfunction was noted starting 9 months after surgery. Conclusion:
Microsurgical fenestration is a safe and effective treatment strategy for
symptomatic VT and can be associated with a good clinical outcome even in
elderly patient.

## 1367

## A318: Clinical Outcomes in 91 Patients Treated with Hybrid Spinal Surgery
for Metastatic Renal Cell Carcinoma

Ibrahim Hussain

1

, Jacob Goldberg

1

, Joseph Carnevale

1

, Samuel Hanz

2

, Anne Reiner

1

, Yoshiya Yamada

1

, Ilya Laufer

1

, Mark Bilsky

1

, and Ori Barzilai

1

1

Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center, New York, USA

2

Weill Cornell Brain and Spine Center, New York, USA

Introduction: The management of renal cell carcinoma (RCC)
spinal metastases is controversial in regards to extent of resection and
adjuvant radiation dosing. We present outcomes of patients with RCC spinal
metastases treated by hybrid spinal surgery which consists of an initial
posterior transpedicular approach for circumferential decompression of the
neural elements plus instrumented stabilization, followed by adjuvant
radiation therapy. Methods: A retrospective study of a
prospectively collected cohort of patients undergoing hybrid surgery for
pathology-proven spinal metastases from renal cell carcinoma between 2003
and 2017 was performed. Radiation therapy was either single fraction,
hypofractionated with high dose per fraction, or hypofractionated with
low-dose per fraction. Patient demographic, clinical, and surgical data were
collected. The degree of systemic disease was at time of surgery was divided
into solitary metastasis, oligometastatic disease (2-5 metastatic lesions
regardless of organ system involved), or widespread metastatic disease
(greater than 5 metastatic lesions regardless of organ system involved).
Complications were divided into major and minor complications, with major
complications requiring invasive measures or those resulting in permanent
disability or death. Results: A total of 91 patients were
included (84% male). Median age was 62.2 years old. 89% involved the
thoracolumbar spine. 56% of patients had widespread disease, 33% had
oligometastatic disease, and 11% had a solitary metastasis. Median operative
time and blood loss were 162 minutes and 1000 mL, respectively. 25 patients
received SRS in a single fraction. 56% of patients had hypofractionated PORT
with high-dose per fraction (3 fractions with 800-900 cGy per fraction). 15
patients had hypofractionated with low-dose per fraction (5 fractions with
600-900 cGy per fraction). 16 patients had complications related to
treatment, of which 11 were major. The median length of stay was 5 days and
87% of patients were discharged home. There was an overall 92% PFS rate. The
median time to POD requiring treatment was 422 days. At 12-month follow-up,
44% of patients had died, with 44% demonstrating ECOG scores ranging from
0-2. The mean overall survival for the cohort was 686 days. For patients
still alive, median time to last follow-up was 1163 days. For patients that
died during the study, mean survival was 543 days. When stratifying patients
by degree of systemic disease, there was an expected increased risk of death
(1.09x) and progression (1.21x) with widespread disease. Patients with a
solitary metastasis received a higher median dose of PORT (2850 cGy).
Patients with oligometastatic disease were 11% less likely to die and 9%
less likely to progress than patients with a solitary metastasis. There was
increasing risk of POD with hypofractionated regimens (1.5x for high-dose,
and 5x with low-dose). Conclusion: Patients treated with hybrid
spinal surgery for metastatic RCC demonstrate a PFS rate of 92%, mean OS of
686 days, and 12% risk of major complications. The median time to POD
requiring treatment was 422 days. There was a 1.5-5x increased risk for POD
with for hypofractionated regimens. Patients with widespread disease at the
time of surgery had a 1.1-1.2x increased risk for POD and death.

## 723

## A319: Neurological Outcome and Respiratory Insufficiency in
Intramedullary Tumors of the Cervical Spine

Vicki Butenschön

1

, Jens Gempt

1

, Bernhard Meyer

1

, and Maria Wostrack

1

1

Technical University Munich, Department of Neurosurgery, Munich,
Germany

Objective: Intramedullary tumors of the upper cervical spine are
challenging entities with a high risk of postoperative neurological
deterioration. As the levels above C4 are responsible for volitional
ventilatory control, patients are at risk of permanent respiratory
dysfunction with the need of long-term ventilation. Methods: We
retrospectively reviewed all patients treated for intramedullary lesions
including the upper cervical spinal cord above the C4 level in our
neurosurgical department from January 2008-December 2019. Patient’s
demographics, pre- and postoperative clinical status as well as operative
technique and complications were extracted and analyzed.
Results: In total, 34 patients underwent a surgical
treatment for intramedullary lesions including or above the C4 level from
2008 to 2019. Median age was 44 years, and 56% of the patients were male.
The most common entity was ependymoma (n: 22, all WHO II), 7 patients were
treated for intramedullary glioma (WHO I-IV) and 5 patients for a
hemangioblastoma. In total, 22 patients presented with neurological deficits
preoperatively (65%). Respiratory dysfunction was observed in only one
patient requiring tracheotomy (2.9%). Postoperative neurological worsening
was observed in 56% (motor function deterioration in 35% of the cases,
sensory deficits in 50%), but the majority of patients recovered, and was
independent at follow-up (median McCormick grade 2, 76.7% of the cases with
McCormick grade 1 or 2). Conclusions: Intramedullary tumors of
the upper cervical spine remain challenging neurosurgical entities. Despite
its high-risk location, respiratory insufficiency seems to remain a rather
are complication, while transient postoperative neurological deterioration
is observed in more than half of the cases.

## 1750

## A320: Apolipoprotein E4 (rs429358) Variant Genotype: A Risk Gene
Associated with Higher Serum Lipid Profile and Spine-Related Neck or Back
Pain

Nicholas Van Halm-Lutterodt

1,2

, Krishna Mandalia

2,3

, Ziyang Ye

4.5

, Wei-Cheng Chen

6

, Mohamed Kamal Mesregah

2

, Brandon Yoshida

2

, Andrew Mecum

7

, Wei-Hsun Huang

1

, Wenxin Lei

8

, Mercy Bartels-Mensah

9

, Yu Wang

1

, and Yulun Xu

1

1

Beijing Tiantan Hospital, Department of Neurosurgery, Beijing,
China

2

Keck Medical Center of University of Southern California (USC),
Department of Orthopaedics and Neurosurgery, Los Angeles, USA

3

University of Southern California, Dornsife College of Letters, Arts
and Sciences, Los Angeles, USA

4

Wake Forest University, Department of Mathematics and Statistics,
Winston-Salem, USA

5

University of Chicago Graham School of Continuing Liberal and
Professional Studies, University of Chicago, Department of Business and
Analytics, Chicago, USA

6

Beijing Tongren Hospital, Department of Clinical Sciences, Beijing,
China

7

Emory University, Department of Psychology, Atlanta, USA

8

Melbourne University, Department of Mental Health Nursing,
Parkville, Australia

9

University of Debrecen, Department of Clinical Sciences, Debrecen,
Hungary

Introduction: The apolipoprotein E (ApoE) gene that is
implicated in regulating serum metabolic and lipid species is also
reportedly associated with vertebral column and neurological degeneration.
Increasing ApoE genetic polymorphic studies indicate that the wild-type (WT)
genotypes of apolipoproteins Eε2 and Eε4 specifically hold metabolic
health and risk gene properties,
respectively. Nevertheless, as to whether their variant (VT) genotypes carry
the same functional properties in the transportation and regulation of serum
lipids in spine patient outcomes remain elusive. To this end, we evaluated
the relationship(s) between WTs and VTs of ApoEε2 and ApoEε4 genotypes on
serum lipid profile as well as the associated clinical outcomes in spine
patients perioperatively. Materials and Methods: Following
approval by the institutional review board (IRB) of Beijing Tiantan
Hospital-Affiliated Capital Medical University, a prospective clinical study
of 336 adult (≥18 years) intradural spinal cord tumor (ID-SCT) patients who
underwent surgical treatment without any prior primary therapy were
assessed. Patients within each ApoE2 and ApoE4 categories were then
dichotomized into homozygosity-wild type (WT) and
heterozygosity-variant type (VT). We compared patient outcomes
of ApoEε2-(rs7412) [WT (
C/C
)] versus ApoEε4-(rs429358) [WT (
T/T
)] and ApoEε2-(rs7412) [VT (
C/T
)] versus ApoEε4-(rs429358) [VT (
C/T
)]. The impact of WT and VT genotypes on serum metabolic and lipid
profiles associated with perioperative clinical outcomes were evaluated. Key
primary outcomes comprised of demographics, daily dietary outcomes, and
serum metabolic panel. Secondary outcomes compared neurological and PROs
between the genotypes at baseline and at 2-year postoperative for patient
self-reported outcomes that included: visual analogue scale (VAS), Neck
Disability and Oswestry Disability Indices (NDI or ODI), Chinese national
daily foods frequency questionnaire (FFQ). Functional measures included:
McCormick’s classification and the RAND-36 [Short-Form 36 (SF-36)]
health-related quality of life (HRQoL) assessment. Laboratory measures
included: Serum glucose, lipids, and protein profiles. Univariate and
multivariate analyses were carried out by student t-test, Pearson’s
Chi-squared test, Mann-Whitney U test and general linear model (GLM),
respectively, with age, gender, body mass index (BMI), and multivitamin
intake considered as covariates. Statistical significance was set at
(P < .05). Results: Of the 336 ID-SCT
patients, approximately 85.4% vs 81.2% were ApoEε2-(rs7412)-WT vs
ApoEε4-(rs429358)-WT and 14.6% vs 18.8% were ApoEε2-(rs7412)-VT vs
ApoEε4-(rs429358)-VT carriers, respectively. At baseline, the
ApoEε4-(rs429358)-VT carriers showed significantly higher average serum
total cholesterol (TC), low-density lipoprotein (LDL-c), LDL-c/HDL-c ratio,
cholesterol ratio (CR), and apolipoprotein B (Apo-B) than ApoEε2-(rs7412)-VT
carriers. The ApoEε4-(rs429358)-VT carriers also demonstrated 390% increase
in Neck or Back Pain incidence and 390% increased Neck or Back Pain
intensity compared to the ApoEε2-(rs7412)-VT carriers at baseline (P
< .05). Conclusion: Findings from this study
indicate that the WTs of both ApoEε2 and ApoEε4 genotypes were potentially
comparable at regulating serum lipid species. ApoEε4-(rs429358)-VT genotype
was a risk gene and associated with potential lipid-induced systemic
inflammation and significantly increased neck or back pain incidence and
intensity preoperatively. Further studies are encouraged to assess how the
ApoEε4-(rs429358)-VT genotype impacts preoperative prescriptions of pain
medications including opioids and to extrapolate the potential impact(s) of
this gene is affecting opioid dependency and crisis following surgical
treatment in spine patients.

## 614

## A321: Responder-analysis of pain relief after surgery for the treatment
of spinal metastatic tumors
Robert Rothrock1,2,3, Anne Reiner4, Ori
Barzilai2, Shahiba Ogilvie2, Eric Lis5,
Yoshiya Yamada6, Mark Bilsky2, and Ilya
Laufer2

1

Mount Sinai Icahn School of Medicine, Neurosurgery, New York City,
USA

2

Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center, Neurosurgery, New York City,
USA

3

University of Miami Miller School of Medicine, Neurosurgery, Miami,
USA

4

Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center, Biostatistics, New York
City, USA

5

Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center, Radiology, New York City,
USA

6

Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center, Radiation Oncology, New York
City, USA

Introduction: The current analysis focused on the patient pain
experience after surgery for the treatment of spinal metastatic tumors.
Responder analysis was carried out to capture patient-level pain experience
and to study the variability of pain improvement. Materials and
Methods: The patient population included 174 patients who
underwent surgery for the treatment of metastatic spine tumors. Brief Pain
Inventory (BPI) and MD Anderson Symptom Inventory-Spine Tumor (MDASI-SP)
instruments were used to measure patient reported outcomes. Logistic
regression modeling was used to associate preoperative characteristics with
“treatment success” defined as rating the BPI worst pain item 0-4. Linear
regression modeling was used to associate preoperative characteristics with
minimal clinically important improvement (MCI) in physical functioning
defined by distribution as a one-point decrease in the BPI Interference
Construct score from preoperative (baseline) to 6 months postop.
Results: Patient-level analysis of pain response revealed
that 60% of patients experienced at least a minimally important decrease in
pain. At least one-third of the patients experienced a substantial reduction
in pain and twelve percent experienced complete resolution of pain. At least
half of the patients experienced a decrease in pain sufficient to result in
minimal clinically important improvement in physical functioning, evidenced
by a 1-point decrease in the BPI Pain Interference construct. Cutpoint
analysis revealed that 48-49% were classified as responders based on the
change from more severe to less severe pain categories in the Worst Pain BPI
and Average Pain BPI items and BPI Pain Severity Construct. Increasing
scores on all of the preoperative pain intensity BPI items, the MDASI Core
Symptom Severity, the MDASI Spine Tumor Specific Construct and the presence
of preoperative neurologic deficits were associated with lower probability
of pain treatment success. Postoperative complications were also associated
with decreased probability of pain treatment success. On the other hand,
increasing severity in all BPI pain items and MDASI constructs was
associated with increased probability of a minimal clinically important
improvement in physical function. Conclusions: The current
analysis confirms that a significant proportion of patients experience
significant and clinically important pain relief after surgery for the
treatment of spinal metastatic tumors. Patients with milder preoperative
symptoms are more likely to reach a “low pain” or pain treatment success
outcome after surgery, suggesting that earlier intervention may lead to
improved postoperative outcomes. However, patients with higher preoperative
symptom severity also benefit from surgery through the attainment of
adequate pain relief to achieve an improvement in physical function.

## 1296

## A322: Clinical Outcomes of Symptomatic Spinal Metastases Treated with
Hybrid Therapy (Separation Surgery Followed by Radiosurgery) for Colorectal
Adenocarcinoma

Benjamin Schachner

1

, Anubhav Amin

1

, Yoshiya Yamada

1

, Ilya Laufer

1

, Mark Bilsky

1

, and Ori Barzilai

1

1

Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center, New York, USA

Introduction: Twenty-seven percent of patients with colorectal
cancer (CRC) develop bone metastasis. There is a paucity of evidence
regarding the outcomes of patients who undergo surgery for spinal metastasis
from colorectal origin. Treatment of symptomatic spinal metastases is
palliative and achieved through surgery, radiotherapy, or a combination of
both. Over the past decade, Hybrid therapy (i.e., separation surgery
followed by radiosurgery) has become a widely accepted treatment paradigm
for metastatic spine disease regardless of histologic subtype. Understanding
histology specific outcomes facilitates informed decision making in a
rapidly evolving field of multimodality therapies including targetable
mutations. This study evaluates outcomes of CRC patients who underwent
hybrid therapy for spinal metastases. Material and Methods: A
retrospective chart review of all patients at a single institution who
underwent surgery for spinal metastasis followed by SRS with a confirmed
diagnosis of CRC was performed. Fifty CRC patients were identified. Data
collected for this study included patient demographics, tumor histology,
type and extent of spinal intervention, radiation data including treatment
dose and field, molecular diagnostic pathology (EGFR exon 19, Her2, KRAS,
tp53, and APC exon 16) and outcomes were measured and evaluated included
survival, local control, complications including reoperations, repeat
irradiation, and/or postoperative kyphoplasty at previously treated level.
Results: Fifty CRC patients were identified with 32 male,
18 female patients with a mean age of 55.06 (25-83). Fifty-five of these
patients were treated with open decompression and stabilization, and 2 were
treated with minimally invasive surgery. Average survival from the time of
surgery was 288 days (31-1422). Ten patients (20%) had local progression of
disease with an average time to progression of 365 days (30-840). Twelve
patients (24%) required a reoperation; 6 for local tumor recurrence, 1 for
tumor progression at an adjacent level, 3 for wound complication and 1 for
progressive spinal instability. Tumor mutations (exon 19, her2, KRAS, TP53,
APC exon 16) had no impact on local control. Twenty-one patients (42%) had
progression of disease to other spinal levels. Of note, those who survived
over 1 year from the day of surgery (DOS), the odds of local progression of
disease needing reoperation, RT, and/or kyphoplasty was markedly increased
(OR 28.5. 95% CI: 4.2487-191.1784) and statistically significant
(P = .0006). Conclusion: Hybrid therapy
provides a safe and effective therapy for treatment of symptomatic spine
metastases for CRC patients. Local control rates of 80%, lower than
previously reported for other histologies, suggest a more challenging
disease to treat in the context of spinal cord compression. These outcomes
were not significantly affected by the genomic landscape of the primary
cancer. Patients surviving beyond one year after surgery had higher odds of
requiring further interventions for local progression.

## 1297

## A323: Outcomes of Surgery Followed by Radiosurgery for Treatment of
Spinal Metastases from Non-Small Cell Lung Cancer: Do Targetable Mutations
Matter?

Benjamin Schachner

1

, Anubhav Amin

1

, Yoshiya Yamada

2

, Ilya Laufer

1

, Mark Bilsky

1

, and Ori Barzilai

1

1

Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center, Neurosurgery, New York,
USA

2

Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center, Radiation Oncology, New
York, USA

Introduction: Spine metastases occur in 30-40% of all patients
with cancer. Because of their relative resistance to radiation, non small
cell lung (NSCLC) metastases causing epidural spinal cord compression are
challenging to treat. Over the past decade, Hybrid therapy (i.e. separation
surgery followed by radiosurgery) has become a widely accepted treatment
paradigm for metastatic spine disease regardless of histologic subtype.
Understanding histology-specific outcomes is key to informed decision-making
in a rapidly evolving field of multimodality therapies including targetable
mutations. The advent of new biologics and small molecules that target
specific mutations has extended overall survival for multiple cancers and is
a rapidly changing landscape. This study evaluates patients who underwent
hybrid therapy for NSCLC spinal metastases to determine if targetable
mutations affect outcomes. Material and Methods: A
retrospective chart review of patients who underwent surgery followed by
stereotactic body radiation therapy (SBRT) for symptomatic spinal metastases
from NSCLC at a single, tertiary, cancer center was performed. One hundred
and five NSCLC patients were included in this analysis. Data evaluated
included patient demographics, surgical details, radiation data including
dose and fractionation, adjuvant chemotherapy, molecular diagnostic
pathology, targeted therapies (immunotherapy, targeted small molecule
therapy, and chemotherapy), and outcomes including overall survival (OS),
progression free survival (PFS), local tumor control, reoperations, repeat
irradiation, and/or postoperative kyphoplasty at previously treated level.
Results: One hundred and five NSCLC patients were
identified with 56 male, and 49 female patients with a mean age of 65
(32-85.4). This cohort had an average SINS score of 9.5 (5-15), and a
construct length of 5.9 (3-12) with an average of 2.6 levels decompressed
(1-6). Ninety-four of these underwent open decompression and stabilization,
while 11 were treated with minimally invasive surgery. Average survival from
the time of surgery was 414.7 days (30-2572). Local control was obtained in
89.5% of patients. 11 patients had local progression of disease; the average
time to progression was 366 days (26-2305). Sixteen patients returned to the
OR: 4 for tumor recurrence at the index level, 4 for progression at adjacent
levels, 2 wound complications, 5 for pathological fracture or hardware
failure, and 1 for hematoma evacuation. Twenty-nine of the 105 patients
received PD-1 immunotherapy (28%), 35 out of 105 received VEGF immunotherapy
(33%), 81 out of 105 received anti-neoplastic agents (77%), and 40 out of
105 received small molecule therapy in the form of kinase inhibitors (38%).
Exon 19 mutation significantly increased the odds of local progression (OR
4.8,4 95% CI: 1.08-21.74, P = .04). Average pack years for
this cohort was 22.1 (0-102); current smoker status at time of surgery and
SBRT significantly increased the risk of PFS and OS.
Conclusion: Hybrid therapy is a safe and effective method
for treatment of symptomatic spine metastases from NSCLC origin providing
durable local control with low complication profiles. Our data demonstrate
that EGFR exon 19 mutations increase the odds of local progression of
disease. These data provide initial insight to the possible role of
mutational analyses for prognostication and informed decision making in the
management of spinal metastases.

## 1295

## A324: Spinal Cord Compression and Spinal Instability in Multiple Myeloma
- A Shifting Paradigm Towards Non-Operative Management

Nikki Shah

1

, Roozbeh Shafafy

1

, Susanne Selvadurai

1

, Adam Benton

1

, Jan Herzog

1

, and Sean Molloy

1

1

The Royal National Orthopaedic Hospital NHS Trust , Spinal Surgical
Unit, Stanmore, United Kingdom

Introduction: Patients with metastatic spinal cord compression
(MSCC) or unstable spinal lesions warrant early surgical consultation. In
multiple myeloma, chemotherapy and radiotherapy have the potential to
decompress the spinal canal effectively in the presence of epidural lesions.
Mechanical stability conferred by bracing may potentiate intraosseous and
extraosseous bone formation, thus increase spinal stability. With this in
mind, this study aims to review the role of non-operative management in
myeloma patients with a high degree of spinal instability, in a Specialist
Tertiary Centre. Material and Methods: Retrospective analysis
of a prospectively collected database of 83 patients with unstable
myelomatous lesions of the spine, defined by a Spinal Instability Neoplastic
Score (SINS) of 13-18. Data collected include patient demographics, systemic
treatment, neurological status, radiological presence of cord compression,
most unstable vertebral level and presence of intraosseous and extraosseous
bone formation. Post-treatment scores were calculated based on follow-up
imaging which was carried out at 2 weeks for cord compression and 12 weeks
for spinal instability. A paired t-test was used to identify any significant
difference between pre- and post-treatment SINS and linear regression was
used to assess the association between variables and the change in SINS.
Results: A significant reduction in SINS was observed from
a pre-treatment average score of 14 to a score of 9, following treatment for
myeloma (P < .001). A higher initial score and a younger
age were associated with a larger overall reduction in SINS (P
< .001 and P = .02 respectively). Not one
particular variable (bisphosphates, chemotherapy, radiotherapy and steroids)
had a significant association in SINS reduction. 25 (30%) patients had
spinal cord compression, all of which showed radiological resolution of cord
compression at 2 weeks. No patients developed neurological deterioration
during treatment and all patients had an improvement in their pain scores.
64 (77%) patients had evidence of intraosseous and/or extraosseous bone
formation on their follow-up scan. Conclusion: Non-operative
management in the form of bracing and systemic therapy is a safe and
effective treatment for spinal instability and spinal cord compression in
myeloma. The decision to adopt a non-operative approach in this cohort of
patients should be made in a tertiary centre with expertise in multiple
myeloma and in a multidisciplinary setting.

## OP37: Surgical Complications 3

## 592

## A325: Human lumbar Discs are not Sterile! - Defining the Normal
Intervertebral Disc Microbiome

Shanmuganathan Rajasekaran

1

, Dilip Chand Raja Soundararajan

1

, Chitraa Tangavel

2

, Sri Vijay Anand KS

1

, Monica Steffi Matchado

2

, and Sharon Miracle Nayagam

2

1

Ganga Medical Centre and Hospitals Pvt Ltd, Spine Surgery,
Coimbatore, India

2

Ganga Research Centre, Biotechnology, Coimbatore, India

Introduction: Traditionally, Central Nervous System, spinal
cord, eye, fetus and Intervertebral Disc were considered to be to be sterile
and immune privileged. With the advent of 16SrRNA sequencing, it has been
proved that each of the above have a microbiome which plays an essential
role in maintaining homeostasis. With increasing reports of sub-clinical
infection as an etiology of disc degeneration and Modic changes, it remains
unknown, whether lumbar discs are truly sterile. The primary aim of the
study was to investigate the presence of Disc microbiome and its microbial
composition. Materials and Methods: In order to obtain true
normal controls, intervertebral discs were collected from MRI normal
brain-dead voluntary organ donors with no history of back pain. The study
was performed after the approval of IRB. The discs were dissected in
surgical sterile conditions and were snap frozen immediately to -160 C and
the processed samples were subjected to total DNA extraction using
QIAamp® DNA Mini Kit and enrichment using NEBNext® Microbiome
DNA Enrichment Kit (Cat # E612S/L; New England BioLabs, Ipswich, MA). The
purified DNA was amplified using v1-V9 specific primers and the sequencing
was performed using Illumina MiSeq platform. Raw data was analysed using
Bioinformatic tools such as Greengenes database and kraken2. Proteomic
analysis was also performed to confirm bacterial presence.
Results: All the eight normal disc samples had bacteria.
42.75% OTUs were classified at the Kingdom level, 44% at Phylum level,
22.62% at Genus level and 5.5% at Species level. A total of 355 bacterial
species were identified in normal discs which were distributed under five
major phyla- Proteobacteria, Parcubacteria, Firmicutes,
Cyanobacteria and Actinobacteria. 21 abundant
genera including Pseudomonas, Acinetobacter, Anoxybacillus,
Sphingomonas, Bordetella, and Brevundimonas were identified. At
species level, the five most abundant bacteria identified were
Anoxybacillus kestanbolensis, Acinetobacter lwoffii,
Sphingomonas yabuuchiae, Stenotrophomonas acidaminiphila and
Pseudomonas veronii. The much-discussed
Propionibacterium acnes ranked ninth in abundance in
the normal discs. Bacterial presence was confirmed through proteomics data
by identification of bacteria specific proteins and vital enzymes.
Conclusion: This is the first metagenome study in world
literature to document the entire microbiome of MRI normal disc. The results
of this study prove that lumbar discs are not sterile structures as
traditionally thought. This brings out the question of what spectrum of
organisms could invoke sub-clinical infection and disc degeneration. In
addition, the presence of Propionibacterium acnes in normal disc samples
raises a doubt in its etiopatholgical role in disc degeneration. It would be
interesting to analyze the microbiome of degenerated discs to analyze
whether a differential microbial composition is associated with disc
degeneration.

## 884

## A326: Highly Concentrated Bupivacaine Does not Lead to Increased Local
Toxicity Following Skeletal Surgery: a Proof of Concept

Jasper Steverink

1,2

, Floris van Tol

1,2

, Suzanne Bruins

2

, Andre Smorenburg

2

, Marianna Tryfonidou

3

, Bas Oosterman

2

, and Jorrit-Jan Verlaan

1,2

1

University Medical Center Utrecht, Orthopedics, Utrecht, The
Netherlands

2
SentryX B.V., Austerlitz, The Netherlands, 
3
Utrecht University, Clinical Sciences, Utrecht, The
Netherlands
Introduction: Skeletal surgeries are generally perceived as
exceptionally painful. Currently, postoperative pain is treated in a
multimodal fashion with a prominent role for opioids. The recent societal
debate regarding opioids and their frequent adverse effects have sparked the
development of non-opioid alternatives. A number of non-opioid analgesics
aim to provide a local, sustained release of the amino-amide anesthetic
bupivacaine. To obtain extended pain relief, incorporation of a high
bupivacaine dose is necessary. The local toxicity induced by high
concentrations of bupivacaine is unknown. This study describes local
toxicity thirty days following infusion of ascending concentrations of
bupivacaine in a rat model of spinal and femoral surgery. Material and
Methods: Wistar rats (n = 16) underwent either spinal or femoral
implantation of a screw using established approaches. A custom-made cannula
for bupivacaine infusion was attached under the screw-head close to the
periosteum. Next, either the clinically used concentration of 0.5%, or
higher concentrations of 2.5% or 5% bupivacaine was administered, leading to
cumulative doses of .67, 3.3 and 6.7 mg/kg bupivacaine, respectively. Half
of the rats received the complete dose as bolus infusion. immediately to
simulate a dose-dumping scenario. The other half received the dose over 72
hours of pump-controlled infusion, resulting in 12 different treatments.
Body weight, leukocyte and creatinine kinase (CK) levels were monitored
during the postoperative period. Thirty days after surgery, rats were killed
and the implantation site was collected. Hematoxylin-eosin slides were
assessed by a blinded pathologist for signs of inflammation, fibrosis, bone
reaction, periosteal reaction, osteoclast activity, necrosis and muscle
damage. A cumulative histology toxicity score was calculated. Data were
analyzed using a multivariate regression analysis. Results: All
but two rats recovered uneventfully. Weight, leukocyte counts and CK-levels
normalized in all rats during the postoperative period. Bupivacaine
concentration, implantation location and speed of administration did not
affect postoperative weight gain, leukocyte counts and CK-levels. No
difference in histology toxicity score between bupivacaine concentrations
was observed, non between administration speeds. Histology toxicity score
was significantly higher for spinal implantation compared to femoral
implantation, probably corresponding to the more invasive dissection during
the procedure. Conclusion: This animal study found no
concentration-dependent local toxicity of bupivacaine for skeletal surgery.
The toxic effects of even the highest bupivacaine concentration used appear
minor/negligible in light of the surgical intervention sustained. The
current results might facilitate orthopedic application of sustained-release
formulations, containing high concentrations of bupivacaine.

## 1102

## A327: The influence of frailty on the outcomes of spine surgery; a
systematic review

Jamie Wilson

1,2

, Vivien Chan

2

, Jetan Badhiwala

2

, Robert Ravinsky

3

, Albert Yee

2

, Jefferson Wilson

2

, and Michael Fehlings

2

1
University of Nebraska medical center, Omaha, USA, 
2
University of Toronto Spine Program, Toronto, Canada, 
3
University of Arizona College of Medicine, Orthopedics,
Phoenix, USA
Introduction: With an aging population, there is an increasing
number of elderly patients undergoing spine surgery. Recent literature in
other surgical specialties suggest frailty to be an important predictor of
outcomes. The aim of this review was to examine the association between
frailty and outcomes after spine surgery. Material and Methods:
A systematic review was performed registered with PROSPERO (ID:129928).
Search strategies 1946 to 2020 with subject headings and keywords for
“frailty”, “elderly” and “spine surgeries” and conditions of interest were
defined for three databases (Ovid Medline and Epub Ahead of Print,
In-Process & Other Non-Indexed Citations, Ovid Embase Classic + Embase
and Ovid Cochrane Central Register of Controlled Trials). Filters for human
studies were used, and were not limited by date or language. The search
results were filtered by abstract, and relevant articles were then graded by
3 authors independently. Articles were grouped by index applied, and where
possible classified into disease-specific partitions. The primary outcome
measure reported was adverse events. Secondary outcomes included other
measures of morbidity, mortality, and patient outcomes. Sample size, mean
age, age limitation, data source, study design, primary pathology, surgical
procedure performed, follow-up period, assessment of frailty used, surgical
outcomes, and impact of frailty on outcomes were extracted from eligible
studies. Quality and bias was assessed using the PRISMA 27-point item
checklist and the QUADAS-2 tool. Results: Initial search
returned 4727 results, which were narrowed to 189 after screening by
abstract. 30 full text articles were graded and included in the final
analysis (total of 127 813 patients). The measure most frequently cited was
the 11-point Modified Frailty Index (n = 18), calculated from inpatient
diagnostic codes. The most common pathology was degenerative disease
followed by adult spinal deformity (ASD), metastatic disease and
trauma/spinal cord injury. Pooled quantitative analysis was possible for
only 2 articles (ASD). Frailty was universally associated with increased
perioperative complications, mortality, length of stay and non-home
discharge destination. Only ASD showed correlation with long-term
patient-reported outcomes. Morphometric analysis has suggested that measures
of sarcopenia may have better acuity for predicting complications compared
to frailty. Conclusion: There is strong evidence that frailty
is associated with increased risk of morbidity and mortality in patients who
received spine surgery. However, it remains inconclusive whether frailty
impacts patient outcomes and quality of life after surgery.

## 1181

## A328: Pedicle Screw Stacking: A Technical Note on Instrumentation of
Lumbar Spine with a Broken Pedicle Screw

Jvaghar Jill

1

and Nalli Ramanathan Uvaraj

1

1

Madras Medical College, Orthopaedic Spine Surgery, Chennai,
India

Introduction: With a substantial increase in the number of
pedicle screw breakage in failed spine surgeries, it becomes imperative to
instrument the involved level to attain maximum stability to enhance fusion
following revision surgeries. We present a novel, feasible bailout procedure
called Pedicle Screw Stacking (PSS) to instrument lumbar pedicles with a
broken screw inside them. Materials and Methods: Five patients
with nine broken pedicle screws at the screw-shaft junction were
preoperatively assessed to determine the position of the broken screw within
the pedicle. Based on location, they were classified into Type I, Type II,
and Type III when they occupied superior, middle, and inferior zones in the
pedicle respectively. Stack screws were inserted inferiorly in Type I,
superiorly in Type III, and by a tricortical method in Type II.
Results: One inferior stack screw at L5 (Type I), five
superior stack screws at S1 (Type III), and three tricortical pedicle screws
at L5 (Type II) were placed in five patients during revision surgeries. All
patients had improvement in functional scores without post-operative
neurological deficit or implant failure or screw related complications at a
follow-up of not less than two years. Conclusion: PSS is a safe
method to instrument the index level, without removal of the broken screw
while revising a failed lumbar spine surgery. This technique potentially
avoids the instrumentation of additional segments and improves the stability
of the revision construct. However, meticulous pre-operative assessment of
anatomy is needed to assess the feasibility of the technique based on
pedicle anatomy on a case-to-case basis.

## 1137

## A329: Tranexamic Acid in Elective Spine Surgery: A Randomised Controlled
Trial Analysing the Efficacy of Intravenous, Local Infiltration and Topical
Administration of Tranexamic Acid

Viswanadha Arun-Kumar

1

and J Naresh-Babu

1

1

Mallika Spine Centre, Deparment of Spine Surgery, Guntur,
India

Introduction: Intravenous tranexamic acid (ivTXA) has almost
become a standard for bleeding management in spine surgery. However, the
systemic complications associated with it may be rare but not uncommon. To
negate these effects, topical application of tranexamic acid (tTXA) has been
used recently with good amount of success. Although local infiltration of
tranexamic acid (loTXA) has been used in trauma related haemorrhages, till
date there is no literature available examining its efficacy in spine
surgery. The purpose of the study is to evaluate the safety and efficacy of
tranexamic acid administered through various routes in instrumented spine
surgeries. Material and Methods: 104 people undergoing
instrumented spine surgery were randomly assigned to 4 groups. Groups
included (1) ivTXA-intravenous administration of TXA one hour prior to
surgery. (2) loTXA-local infiltration of TXA bilaterally into the paraspinal
musculature prior to incision. (3) tTXA-Topical application of TXA just
before wound closure. (4) Control group. Outcome measures include
intraoperative blood loss, post-operative blood loss, need for blood
transfusion, length of hospital stay, blood parameters.
Results: All the three groups with different modes of TXA
administration were found to be effective in reducing blood loss compared to
control group. Intra-operative blood loss was significantly reduced in
ivTXA(223.6 ± 40.1 ml, P-< .0001) and loTXA (256.07 ±
119 ml, P-0.0039) groups when compared to controls(344 ±
88.5 ml).Whereas, the post-operative blood loss was least in tTXA followed
by ivTXA, loTXA and controls. There was 67% reduction in need for blood
transfusion in tTXA group, 55.5% reduction in ivTXA group, and 33% reduction
in loTXA group when compared to control group. Conclusion: In
instrumented spine surgery, ivTXA and loTXA were found to be equally
effective in reducing the intra-operative blood loss. Whereas, the tTXA has
better post-operative blood conserving effects. This is the first study to
detail about safety and efficacy on local infiltration of TXA in spine
surgery, which is an effective and safe method for reducing intra-operative
blood loss.

## 1125

## A330: Risk Factors for Post-Operative Venous Thromboembolic Events in
Patients Undergoing Thoracic Spine Surgery

Wesley Cooperman

1

, Blake Formanek

1

, Jeffrey C. Wang

1

, and Zorica Buser

1

1

Keck School of Medicine, University of Southern California,
Orthopaedic Surgery, Los Angeles, USA

Introduction: Venous thromboembolic events (VTEs), including
pulmonary embolism and deep vein thrombosis, are preventable postsurgical
complications that are associated with high morbidity and mortality in
addition to increased hospital costs and prolonged hospital stays. There is
a need for preoperative criteria to identify risk factors for postoperative
thromboembolism in patients undergoing thoracic spine orthopedic procedures.
This study aimed to elucidate the relative rates and temporal trends of VTEs
after various thoracic spine procedures, and the comorbidities and
demographics that were independent predictors of VTE. Material and
Methods: This is a retrospective study utilizing the PearlDiver
insurance database to identify patients who underwent primary single- or
multilevel thoracic spine surgery from 2010-2018. Procedures evaluated
included fusion, laminectomy/decompression, corpectomy, osteotomy, and
kyphoplasty/vertebroplasty. Patients undergoing these procedures were
identified using Current Procedural Terminology (CPT) codes. International
Classification of Diseases (ICD), Ninth and Tenth Revision diagnosis codes
were used to determine the incidence of postoperative VTEs and identify
patient comorbidities. Complication codes for VTEs were queried at
postoperative day (POD) 0, 1, 7, 30, and 90. Summary statistics, including
VTE incidence rates and odds ratios (ORs), were calculated for patient risk
factors and demographics. Results: A total of 41,689 patients
who underwent thoracic spine surgery from 2010-2018 were identified (52.0%
female). Within the entire patient population, the incidence of VTE was
1.40% within a 90-day follow-up period, with an incidence of thromboembolism
of 0.21%, 0.46%, and 1.06% by POD 1, 7, and 30, respectively. Patients aged
70-74 represented the most common age group to undergo thoracic spine
surgery (17.7%) and experienced the greatest incidence of VTE of any age
group (1.79%). Males had an increased incidence of VTE compared to females
(1.43% vs 1.38%). Fusion was the most common procedure performed (59.4%) and
was associated with the greatest incidence of VTE (1.52%). Osteotomy and
laminectomy were associated with VTE incidence rates of 1.40% and 1.34%,
respectively. Among individuals with one or more of the queried risk
factors, the incidence of VTE was 1.79%, compared with an incidence of 1.20%
in individuals without these factors. Risk factors associated with the
highest incidence of postoperative VTE were extremity paralysis (7.25%),
central venous lines (3.84%), heart failure (3.36%), arrhythmia (3.34%), and
hypertension (1.88%). The lowest incidence of VTE was seen in patients with
a history of tobacco use (1.25%). Conclusion: Our preliminary
data suggests there are identifiable risk factors associated with increased
risk of postoperative VTE in patients undergoing thoracic spine surgery. The
highest incidence of VTE was observed following fusion. Patients aged 70-74
experienced the highest rate of VTE, and males had a higher incidence of VTE
than females. Individuals with one or more queried risk factors had a higher
incidence of VTE than those without any factors. These findings regarding
the incidence and timing of VTEs have the potential to guide clinician
assessment of patient risk and screening practices prior to thoracic spine
surgery.

## 395

## A331: Post-Operative Complications Following Sacroiliac Joint Fusion to
Treat Sacrum Pain, Sacroiliitis, Sacral Instability, or Spondylosis

Alexander Ballatori

1

, Shane Shahrestani

1

, Andy Ton

1

, Xiao Chen

1

, Zorica Buser

1

, and Jeffrey C. Wang

1

1

Keck School of Medicine, University of Southern California,
Department of Orthopaedic Surgery, Los Angeles, USA

Introduction: The sacroiliac joint has been implicated as a
source of chronic low back pain. Many have turned to sacroiliac joint fusion
after failure of conservative care to relieve symptoms. However, identifying
patients who will respond positively from the sacroiliac joint fusion is
still unclear. This study examines the postoperative outcomes of sacroiliac
joint fusion based on the primary diagnoses of sacrum pain, sacroiliitis,
sacral instability, or spondylosis. Material and Methods: Using
the 2016 National Readmission Database, we conducted a retrospective cohort
analysis of 1,272 patients who received a sacroiliac joint fusion for
diagnosed sacrum pain (n = 288), sacroiliitis (n = 536), sacral instability
(n = 135), or spondylosis (n = 155) using ICD-10 coding. We then collected
all of the individuals that had a non-elective readmission, separated them
by their primary diagnosis, and analyzed for postoperative complications
including infection, urinary tract infection, pain, osteomyelitis,
thromboembolisms, sepsis, pneumonia, pseudoarthrosis, novel lumbar
pathology, nervous system complications, and need for revision surgery.
Statistical analysis was conducted in R. Tukey multiple comparisons of means
was used to compare complications by diagnosis. Results:
Sacroiliitis had the highest rate of non-elective readmissions (17.1%),
followed by those diagnosed with sacrum pain (14.2%), spondylosis (11.6%),
and sacral instability (9.6%), but these rates were not significant between
any groups on pairwise comparison. However, those with a primary diagnosis
of sacroiliitis had a significantly higher average number of readmissions
(1.80 ± 1.16 readmissions) than those with a primary diagnosis of sacrum
pain (1.24 ± 0.58 readmissions, P = .013), but no
differences existed between other groups. After comparing the different
categories of postoperative complications, significant differences in
postoperative infection rates were noted between patients with a primary
diagnosis of sacroiliitis and those with a primary diagnosis of sacrum pain
(P = .008). Conclusion: Patients diagnosed
with sacroiliitis had the highest rate of non-elective postoperative
readmissions following sacroiliac joint fusion, and patients diagnosed with
sacral instability had the lowest rates of non-elective postoperative
readmission. The reasons for readmission were not significantly different
across each group, except for infection rates of those with a primary
diagnosis of sacroiliitis being significantly higher than those diagnosed
with sacrum pain.

## 1861

## A332: Short Term Complications Related to the Lumbar Interbody Fusion
Approach

Mouadh Nefiss

1

, Ayari Sakr

1

, Bousrih Anis

1

, Ben Ayed Mehdi

1

, Ezzaouia Khelil

1

, Bouzidi Ramzi

1

, and Tborbi Anis

1

1

Mongi Slim Hospital, Orthopedic Surgery Department, La Marsa,
Tunisia

Introduction: Lumbar interbody fusion is a therapeutic option
that has demonstrated its efficacy in the treatment of various degenerative
discal pathologies. However, this technique requires a learning curve and,
in some cases, a longer operating time, which may expose the patient to
complications that differ depending on the technique chosen. The main
objective of our work was to study the rate and type of short term
complications related to the lumbar interbody fusion approach.
Material and Methods: We conducted a retrospective study of
42 lumbar interbody fusions operated in our department. We used the
Eurospine “Spine Tango” form for the fellow, the collection of clinical and
epidemiological data. All patients underwent standard pre-operative
radiological explorations with magnetic resonance imaging (MRI).
Complications were divided into non-specific such as non-fusion, recurrence
of clinical symptoms and surgical site infection; specific complications
related to the approach such as meralgia for the anterolateral approach.
Risk factors for complications were analyzed using SPSS version 20.
Results: The average age of our patients was 53 years with
a female predominance (sex ratio of 3.6). The main pathologies were
degenerative disc disease (38%), degenerative spondylolisthesis (29%) and
lumbar spinal stenosis (26%).23 patients were operated by posterior approach
(12 PLIF and 11 TLIF) and 19 patients were operated by anterior or
anterolateral approach (4 ALIF and 15 OLIF). The operating time was between
2 and 3 hours in 60% of cases. Blood loss was estimated between 100 and
500ml in 66% of cases. An intraoperative transfusion was performed for 2
patients. The overall complication rate was 28,6%. For the posterior
approach, we found one case of dural tear which was sutured, one case of
spondylodiscitis which was treated with debridement washing and antibiotics
with no post-operative clinical impact and 4 cases of clinical recurrence of
sciatica. For patients who had an anterior approach, 5 presented a
post-operative meralgia and 1 patient with hypoesthesia around the approach.
There were no cases of non-fusion or instability. No patient presented a
thromboembolic complication. Conclusion: The advantages of
lumbar interbody fusion compared to the classical posterolateral fusion
technique are well known. However, the complication rate of this technique
remains high and must be considered during decision making regarding the
approach choice.

## 1727

## A333: Comparing Clinical Outcomes from Pedicle Screw Insertions with
Robotic Guidance vs Freehand vs Computer Navigated Techniques: A Systematic
Review

Joachim Starup-Hansen

1

, Sherief Elsayed

2,3

, and Roozbeh Shafafy

4

1

Brighton Sussex Medical School, Brighton, United Kingdom

2

Brighton and Sussex University Hospitals, Brighton, United
Kingdom

3

NMC Spine, Dubai, United Arab Emirates

4

Royal National Orthopaedic Hospital, Stanmore, United
Kingdom

Introduction: The placement of pedicle screws is now common
practice in spinal surgery. The freehand method (FH) is a well-established
technique of screw insertion where anatomical landmarks and surface
topography of the posterior spine are used in order to safely instrument the
spine with pedicle screws. Due to the proximity of the pedicle to the neural
elements as well as the arrangement of vascular structures adjacent to the
spine, inaccurately placed screws can result in significant neurological and
vascular complications. Accurate screw placement using the FH method is
therefore reliant on the skill and experience of the surgeon. In recent
years, significant effort has been placed into the development of surgical
tools such as image guided spinal navigation (NV) and more recently robotic
assisted guidance (RG) in order to improve the accuracy of screw placement.
Whilst the literature thus far has shown that RG improves the accuracy of
pedicle screw placement, it remains unclear whether this translates into
improved clinical outcomes for patients. We aimed to provide a systematic
review of the available literature, comparing clinical outcomes from pedicle
screws placed via RG versus NV versus the conventional FH approach.
Material and Methods: The Preferred Reporting Items for
Systematic Reviews and Meta-Analyses (PRISMA) guidelines were followed. A
literature review was conducted in the Medline, Embase, SCOPUS and Cochrane
databases from the year 2000 onwards using predetermined search terms. All
peer reviewed English language human studies were included. Both prospective
and retrospective studies were eligible for analysis. The primary outcome
was the rate of post-operative revision surgeries due to misplaced screws.
Secondary outcomes were intra-operative screw revision rates, radiation
exposure, length of hospital stay, operation duration, blood loss, changes
in leg and back pain, changes in disability and complication rates.
Results: Among 19 studies, intraoperative revision rates,
post-operative revision rates, blood loss and radiation exposure were
improved by RG compared to the FH approach. Complication rates, neurologic
injury rates, length of hospital stay, length of operations, changes in
disability and changes in pain were equivalent between RG and the FH
approach. There is lack of available literature comparing RG to NV
techniques. Conclusion: Based on the available literature, RG
has the potential to minimize the incidence of clinically important adverse
events compared to the FH technique. Given the evidence, RG may reduce
intra-operative screw revision and the need for post-operative revision.
Additionally, RG is associated with reduced blood loss compared to FH,
likely due to its minimally invasive nature. Radiation exposure is also
reduced with RG compared to FH, yet it should be noted that in cases of
osteolytic spinal disease, the benefit in this domain may be limited.
Overall, although it is clear that RG does provide benefit across multiple
domains compared to the FH approach, it remains questionable whether the
size of these benefits is clinically significant. Future research should
evaluate whether the improved patient outcomes can justify the costs
associated with RG systems.

## OP38: Cervical Trauma

## 1522

## A334: Comparing Outcomes of Subaxial and Alantoaxial Trauma in Elderly
Patients

Catherine Carlile

1

, Jacob Schultz

2

, Andrew Rees

2

, and Byron Stephens

1

1

Vanderbilt University Medical Center, Department of Orthopedic
Surgery, Nashville, USA

2

Vanderbilt University School of Medicine, Nashville, USA

Introduction: In contrast to younger patients, the elderly are
more likely to sustain severe cervical spine trauma from relatively low
energy mechanisms of injury. The presence of pre-existing spine pathology
such as osteoporosis, cervical stenosis, ankylosis, spondylosis, and
degenerative changes can predispose elderly patients to fractures and
neurologic injury. To date, there has been little research comparing
outcomes and mortality rates of patients with upper cervical (occiput-C2)
versus subaxial (C3-C7) cervical spine injuries. Given this paucity of data
on this subject, we sought to compare mortality rates and outcomes between
using our prospective trauma database. Materials and Methods:
All elderly trauma patients (65+) with cervical spine injuries who presented
to a single, high-volume, level I trauma center between 2010-2019 were
identified via an institutional trauma database. Retrospective chart review
was performed to assess treatment rendered, complication, and outcome
measures and then stored in a deidentified database. Imaging characteristics
of patients including psoas index (a marker for sarcopenia) and L3
Hounsfield Unit (an indicator of osteoporosis) were calculated using
standard technique and recorded. Patients were sorted into upper cervical
(occipital condyle, C1, and C2 vertebral fractures and ligamentous injuries)
and subaxial (C3-7) cohorts and by treatment (operative vs non-operative
management). Surgical and medical morbidity variables recorded include
surgical site infection, pneumonia, STEMI, DVT/PE and stroke. Pearson's
Chi-squared tests were used to compare rates of mortality and complications
between groups. Results: A total of 922 patients were
identified, with 545 upper cervical (59%), and 377 subaxial (41%) trauma
patients. Patients with upper cervical spine trauma were significantly older
(P < .001), more sarcopenic (P =
.002), osteoporotic (P = .002), and had higher rates of
dementia (P = .003). There was no significant difference in
cardiac or pulmonary comorbidities between the two groups (P
= .7). Patients with subaxial injuries had a higher injury
burden, with significantly higher Injury Severity Scale (ISS) scores
(P = .008), non-contiguous spine injuries (P
= .016), closed head injury (P = .04), and
pelvic fractures (P = .04). Comparing operative cohorts,
there was a higher proportion of medical and surgical complications in the
upper cervical group (P = .006), and specifically higher
incidence of pneumonia (P = .009). There was also found to
be higher overall mortality in all upper cervical injuries both operative
and nonoperatively managed as compared to the subaxial cohort (P
= .015). There was no significant difference in in-hospital
mortality between the two groups (P = .25).
Conclusion: Although patients with subaxial injuries were
found to be more severely traumatized with higher energy mechanisms and more
severe associated injuries, our data demonstrates that patients with upper
cervical trauma are at higher risk for medical and surgical complication and
mortality, regardless of need for operative intervention. This is likely
secondary to poor reserve given their older age, advanced sarcopenia, and
increased morbidity associated with both operative management and
nonoperative immobilization. In conclusion, we have demonstrated in the
largest study to date that patients with upper cervical injuries, although
less severely traumatized, should be critically evaluated given their
increased risk for morbidity and mortality, especially during discussions
with the patient and family about expected outcomes and functional
status.

## 1552

## A335: Complications of Anticoagulation Therapy for Thromboembolic Event
Prophylaxis in Patients with Cervical Spine Fractures

Michael Faloon

1

, Jennifer Kurowicki

1

, Stuart Changoor

1

, Conor Dunn

1

, Charles Long

1

, Kumar Sinha

1

, Ki Hwang

1

, and Arash Emami

1

1

St. Joseph's University Medical Center, Paterson, NJ, USA

Introduction: The role and timing of anticoagulation (AC)
therapy for thromboembolic event (TEE) prophylaxis in patients with cervical
fractures is an ongoing debate in the literature with poor evidence
dictating guidelines specific to these injuries. The risk of TEE must be
weighed against the risk of bleeding complications from the therapy itself.
Patients with cervical fractures may be at greater risk of bleeding
complications. Therefore, the purpose of this study was to evaluate
comorbidity burden, rate of thromboembolic events, rate of anemia and
transfusion events, and utilization rates of various forms of pharmacologic
prophylaxis following cervical spine fracture. Material and
Methods: A retrospective review of the Humana insurance database
from 2007 to 2016 was performed to identify patients with cervical spine
fractures. Patients were subdivided by AC therapy prescribed within 6 months
of cervical spine fracture. Each cohort was longitudinally tracked for
incidence of thromboembolic events, anemia, or transfusion at 2 weeks, 4
weeks, 12 weeks, and 6 months following cervical fracture. Demographics
analysis and Charleston Comorbidity Index (CCI) was recorded. Sub-analysis
by comorbidity was performed between cohorts. Chi-squared test was used to
determine significance and compound annual growth rate was used to analyze
utilization. Results: Five thousand eight hundered and seventy
one patients were identified as having AC therapy with
aspirin/anti-platelet, heparin/LMWH, warfarin or factor Xa inhibitors within
6 months of cervical spine fracture. Patients on aspirin/anti-platelet
therapy were the least likely cohort to have any TE (2.1%,
P < .5), particularly DVT (1.3%) and PE (0.6%).
There was no difference found between cohorts in regards to incidence of
stroke, proportion of transfusion, and anemia. Conclusion:
Aspirin and anti-platelet anticoagulation therapy after cervical fracture
had the least number of thromboembolic events when used within 6 months
compared to other common forms of anticoagulation. Further research is
needed to better understand the relationship between timing of specific
anticoagulation therapy with the risks of the specific patient (cervical
fracture pattern, medical comorbidities, etc.) and these significant
complications to create a more individualized protocol.

## 1964

## A336: Results in Dorsal Percutaneous C1/C2-Screw-Osteosynthesis in
Instable Odontoid Fracture Type Anderson 2 and Combined Facture C1/C2 in the
Elderly

Stefan Hauck

1

1

Trauma Center Murnau, Spine Surgery, Murnau, Germany

Question: For the surgical treatment of unstable odontoid
fractures or combined fracture of C1/C2 (“unhappy triad”) in old age several
surgical procedures are possible:(1) direct anterior screw fixation of the
odontoid, (2) dorsally by C1/C2-screw-osteosynthesis, open with iliac crest
bone graft and cerclage (n.Gallie) or, (3) dorsally by
C1/C2-screw-osteosynthesis percutaneously with two C1/C2-screws. The
anterior direct screw osteosynthesis in osteoporotic bone metabolism is not
successful, the dorsal C1/C2-screwing in open technique with iliac crest
bone graft and cerclage is very stressful for the elderly. The percutaneus
C1/C2-screw-osteosynthesis can lead to healing of the odontoid fracture;
after completion of the fracture healing the screw fixation can be removed.
Methodology: In a prospective study 32 patients with
unstable odontoid fracture and an age over 60 years were stabilized with
percutaneous posterior dorsal screw fixation C1/C2. The surgery was
performed with 3D image converter for documentation of the reposition
preoperatively and postoperatively to control the screw position.
Intraoperative the percutaneous approach was documented with the exact image
converter in two planes, ap and strictly laterally. Postoperative clinical
controls were performed and CT inspection to document the stability and he
healing of the fracture of the odontoid within a year. Results:
In the period from January 2007 to December 2012 was carried out in 32
patients with unstable odontoid fractures with percutaneous screw fixation
C1/C2 posterior stabilization. 17 women, 15 men with a mean age of 81.8
years / - 7.5 (median 84, min 57, max 91) were stabilized. The mean OR-time
was 50.0 min / - 24.3 (median 44.5, Min 16, Max 123). In the mean follow-up
of 117 days / - 244 (median 29.5), all patients had a stable course. In
12/32 patients the healing of the fracture could be demonstrated by CT, in
3/32 the metal was removed. Conclusions: The C1/C2 dorsal
percutaneous screw fixation of unstable odontoid fractures is a safe and
promising, the patient little burdensome procedure. With the help of
3D-imaging operating profit can be improved. Especially the older patients
benefit from this supply strategy with high healing rate of the fractures.
The metal removal can be effected by fracture healing of the odontoid, and
thus the C1/C2-joint can be given free again.

## 1764

## A337: Timing of Surgery and Pre-Operative Physiological Parameters as
Clinical Outcomes in Traumatic Subaxial Cervical Spine Fractures and
Dislocations

Aman Khanna

1

, and Hari Menon

1

1

New Civil Hospital Surat, Orthopaedics, Surat, India

Introduction: The burden of disability and rehabilitation with
Spinal Cord Injury is immense and increasing with the advent and easier
availability of high-speed vehicles in developing countries. Primary insult
to spinal cord caused by compression due to dislocation or burst is
irreversible. This injury further leads to progressive and continuous
compression leading to hypoperfusion of the injured segment increasing the
oedema and cord contusion. Pre-clinical studies have suggested direct
co-relation between the period of compression of the cord and the extent of
the structural irreversible damage to the cord. This finding has led spine
surgeons to offer early surgical intervention to mitigate the damage and
promote neurological recovery in such patients. An early surgical
decompression targets to attenuate a secondary hit mechanism cascade
including ischemia which ultimately leads to permanent loss of function for
spinal cord. Despite the world-wide use of early decompression in patients
with sub axial cervical fracture dislocation as a standard, it’s role in
improving neurology and decreasing mortality/morbidity remains
controversial. There is a lacunae in the data of the surgical and functional
outcomes of sub axial cervical spine fractures and dislocations in terms of
patient’s pre-operative physiological profile and surgical timing. Also
there has been a considerable difference in the studies performed in the
developing world and the developed world with respect to the surgical and
functional outcomes, disability and mortality. This may be due to
constraints of resources, sporadic health infrastructure, disregard for
aggressive rehabilitation of the patients with permanent disabilities, lack
of research funding and prioritization of other communicable and curable
diseases with respect to the spinal cord injuries in developing countries.
In this study, we have aimed to evaluate the risk factors associated with
sub axial cervical spine fractures and dislocations in terms of patient’s
pre-operative physiological parameters and surgical timings. Material
and Methods: Twenty six patients with sub axial cervical spine
fractures and dislocations were enrolled. Demographic data of patients,
appropriate radiological investigation and physiological parameters like
respiratory rate, blood pressure, heart rate, PaO2 and ASIA impairment scale
were documented. They were divided pre-operatively into 2 groups. Group U
with patients having abnormal physiological parameters and Group S including
patients having physiological parameters within normal range. They were
further sub divided into early and late groups according to the timing of
surgery as Uearly, Ulate, Searly and
Slate. All the patients were called for follow up at 1, 6 and
12 months. Results: Patients in Group S had neurological
improvement by one ASIA grade and a good outcome irrespective of the timing
of surgery. Patients in Group U having unstable physiological parameters and
undergoing early surgical intervention had poor outcomes.
Conclusion: This study concludes that early surgical
intervention in physiological unstable patients had strong association as a
risk factor in the final outcome of the patients in terms of mortality and
morbidity. Also, no positive association of improvement in physiological
stable patients with respect to timing of surgery could be established.

## 1676

## A338: YouTube as a Source of Patient Information on Cervical Spine
Fractures: A Content-Quality and Optimization Analysis

Michal Krakowiak

1

, Justyna Fercho

2

, Zuzanna Maliszewska

2

, Shan Ali

2

, Tomasz Szmuda

1

, and Paweł Słoniewski

1

1

Medical University of Gdansk, Neurosurgery Department, Gdansk,
Poland

2

Medical University of Gdansk, Scientific Circle of Neurology and
Neurosurgery, Gdansk, Poland

Introduction: Due largely to its convenience, the internet
allows patients to search the web for health information. For this reason,
it is critical to check the quality and adequacy of information published
online. In this paper, we evaluated the information available on YouTube
concerning cervical spine fractures. Material and Methods: The
first 35 videos for each of the following search terms were considered for
analysis: cervical spine fracture, cervical spine injury, broken cervical
spine, broken neck, neck trauma and c spine trauma. All the videos were
searched on October 4, 2020. The search was conducted under the default
“relevance” sorting in “incognito mode” without being logged to any personal
browser account. Videos were assessed by two independent evaluators using
the DISCERN scoring system, the Journal of the American Medical Association
(JAMA) score and the Global Quality Score (GQS). “VidIQ Vision for YouTube”
plugin was used to investigate the quantitative information the analysed
videos. The discrepancy between individual videos and the 2 evaluators (a
6th year medical Student and a 4th year neurosurgery resident) was
statistically evaluated and compared. Non-English videos, videos greater
than 60 minutes and videos containing irrelevant information (e.g., music
videos and pranks) were excluded. Results: Out of the 210
videos considered, only 65 (31%) met the inclusion criteria. The DISCERN
score ranged from 18 to 53 while the mean between the raters was 32 points
which indicates an overall poor quality of videos on cervical spine
fractures. Qualitative analysis showed that the vast majority of videos had
clear information (n = 59, 90.77%). Most of the videos included anatomy (n =
44, 67.69%), mechanisms of injury (n = 43, 66.15%) and symptoms of cervical
trauma (n = 34, 52.31%). 66.15% (n = 43) of videos had a doctor speaking.
Most videos were uploaded by physicians (27.69%). The absolute agreement for
the intraclass correlation coefficient was .97 for DISCERN, .86 for JAMA and
0.74 for GQS. Videos explaining cervical spine anatomy, treatment options,
treatment procedures and risks had a statistically significant higher
DISCERN, GQS and JAMA score. Videos containing: clear information,
radiographs, diagrams and a doctor speaker had a higher DISCERN, GQS and
JAMA score. Patient speakers correlated with lower video scores. No
correlation was found between the length of video, words per minute or the
number of likes, animation and the JAMA/GQS/DISCERN scores. Videos uploaded
by patients had a statistically significant lower scores in all three
scales. Conclusion: The quality of cervical spine fracture
videos on YouTube is poor. Considering the extent to which patients rely on
YouTube as a source of information, the educational quality of videos on
this topic can be much improved. We have highlighted specific topics that
are commonly omitted so that future content creators may use it as a guide
to make more robust educational videos.

## 544

## A339: Epidemiological and Surgical Aspects of Post-Traumatic
Syringomyelia in A Rehabilitation Hospital

Vitor Viana Bonan de Aguiar

1

, Giovani Rodrigues Batista

1

, ricardo de amoreira gepp

1

, and Asdrubal Falavigna

2

1

Sarah Network of Rehabilitation Hospitals, Brasilia, Brazil

2

Universidade de Caxias do Sul, Caxias do Sul, Brazil

Introduction: Patients who are victims of traumatic spinal cord
injury (SCI) may develop late neurological signs and symptoms directly
related to the initial trauma, or even worsening of the pre-established
neurological symptoms. In these cases, differential diagnoses should be
investigated including syringomyelia. Post-traumatic syringomyelia (PTS) is
the development of a spinal cord cyst caused by changes in the CSF flow. The
incidence of symptomatic PTS is observed in 4-40% of cases of SCI, but the
literature is heterogeneous and scarce. The objective of this study is to
analyze the cases of PTS in terms of prevalence, prognostic factors and
results of surgical therapy. Material and Methods: A
retrospective study was carried out using electronic records from the
hospital database of patients with PTS. Clinical and radiological data were
extracted from January 2000-December 2018. Prevalence, patient demographic
data, information about the traumatic event, clinical and radiological
factors, and the impact of different surgical techniques adopted for the
treatment of PTS were analyzed. Results: A total of 920
patients diagnosed with SCI were recorded and 85 patients met the inclusion
criteria for diagnosis of PTS. Traffic accidents were the most common cause
(N = 58; 68.2%), the thoracic segment was the most affected (N = 56; 65.9%)
and upper limb paresis was the most common clinical alteration that
motivated surgery (N = 27; 45%). Surgical treatment was indicated in 48
patients distributed among the following types of surgery: syringo-pleural
shunt (N = 29; 60.4%), adhesiolysis (N = 17; 35.4%) and syringo-subarachnoid
shunt (N = 2). The prevalence of PTS in the hospital was 9%, being more
frequent in ASIA A patients. The majority of patients with PTS (63 patients;
74.1%) were operated in the first SCI approach. Specific surgical treatment
for syringomyelia significantly reduced the cyst, both in the number of
levels (P = .05) and by reducing a large part of the cyst
(P = .001). The reoperation rate after using the
adhesiolysis technique was 47%, while the cyst derivation technique showed a
rate of 38%. Conclusion: The follow-up and monitoring of
patients with spinal trauma are important for the diagnosis of
syringomyelia, especially the late neurological symptoms. Surgery has a
positive impact on the radiological reduction of the syringomyelia cyst.

## 1601

## A340: Standard Set of Network Outcomes for Traumatic Spinal Cord Injury:
A Consensus-Based Approach Using the Delphi Method

Martin Pouw

1,2

, Thomas van Schaik

1

, Henk van de Meent

3,4

, Armin Curt

5

, Ilse van Nes

3

, Allard Hosman

1

, Marinus De Kleuver

1

, Helma Bongers-Janssen

3

, Marije Vos-van der Hulst

3

, and Miranda van Hoff

1 6

1

Radboud University Medical Center, Orthopaedic Surgery, Nijmegen,
The Netherland

2

Sint Maartenskliniek, Orthopaedic Surgery, Nijmegen, The
Netherlands

3

Sint Maartenskliniek, Rehabilitation Medicine, Nijmegen, The
Netherlands

4

Radboud University Medical Center, Rehabilitation Medicine,
Nijmegen, The Netherlands

5

Balgrist University Hospital, Spinal Cord Injury Center, Zurich,
Switzerland

6

Sint Maartenskliniek, Research, Nijmegen, The Netherlands

Introduction: In the acute care for patients with traumatic
spinal cord injury (t-SCI), the primary focus is to prevent and reduce
secondary damage. The focus during the rehabilitation phase is to regain the
best level of participation. At the moment, large practice variation in
treatment exists in level one-trauma centers and in rehabilitation centers.
To understand and reduce practice variation, standardization of treatment
outcomes is warranted. With systematic and continuous outcome monitoring
during both the clinical and rehabilitation phase, it is possible to assess
the value of provided care. The data can be used to describe care patterns,
including suitability of care and inequalities in care provision. Purpose:
to define a standardized (network) outcome set for t-SCI, including
patient-relevant outcomes, adequate measurement instruments, as well as
case-mix and risk factors. Material and Methods: Based on
peer-reviewed literature and (inter-)national databases as the EMSCI
(European Multicenter Study about Spinal Cord Injury) and the Dutch SCI
database (Nederlandse Dwarslaesie Database; NDD), a preliminary set of
outcomes, casemix and risk factors, and adequate measurement instruments was
composed. A multidisciplinary panel participated, consisting of 19
health-care professionals (orthopaedic and neurosurgeons, rehabilitation
physicians, physiotherapists, occupational therapists, psychologists,
nurses) with experience (average 14 years) in t-SCI management. A modified
Delphi method was performed to reach formal consensus and consisted of two
web-based surveys and one face-to-face meeting (threshold for consensus:
70%). Results: In the first two Delphi rounds, 18/19 invited
panelists (94.7%) responded and 10 panelists participated in the final
meeting. The prefinal set was confirmed by all panelists. The standard set
encompasses the three-tiered outcome hierarchy and consists of
patient-reported and clinician-reported outcome domains, covering the
surgical and rehabilitation phase. It includes survival (survival rate,
trauma severity), degree of health or recovery (functional status;
neurological status [ASIA], walking ability [e.g. SCIM-III, 10MWT, WISCI],
quality of life [EQ5D5L, AOSpine PROST]), time to recovery and to return to
normal activities (time of injury, admission, surgery, rehabilitation and
discharge), disutility of care or treatment process (operative mortality,
re-operations, adverse events), sustainability of health and nature of
recurrences (participation, caregiver burden), and long-term consequences of
therapy (pneumonia, decubitus, surgical interventions). The panelists
reached consensus on a measurement schedule (acute [<72 hours], sub-acute
and chronic [1, 3, 6 and 12 months] phase) and on the proposed casemix and
risk factors, including demographics (e.g. age, gender), clinical status
(e.g. physical status, co-morbidities), and treatment process
((non-)surgical treatment and rehabilitation program).
Conclusion: A standard set for network outcomes is
developed and can be implemented in hospitals and rehabilitation centers
involved in the treatment of t-SCI. The set facilitates pooling of data and
can be used to compare casemix and risk-adjusted outcomes across regions,
studies, and registries in order to improve the quality in clinical practice
in t-SCI. Using the standard set, prognostic prediction of outcomes of
treatment is feasible, so each patient receives the right care at the right
time in the right place. In future, this supports patient-specific
decision-making, and ultimately improved outcomes and value of care for
patients with t-SCI.

## 13

## A341: Pedicle Screw in Lower Cervical Spine

Pashupati Chaudhary

1

, Raju Rijal

1

, Dipendra Mishra

1

, and Pramod Baral

1

1

BPKIHS, Dharan, Nepal

Background: Pedicle screw fixation of lower cervical spine is a
new technique that provides an alternative to posterior lateral mass
plating. Although biomechanical studies suggest the use of pedicle screws to
reconstruct the cervical spine, placing screw in small cervical pedicle
poses a technical challenge. Penetreation of screw in pedicle is a primary
complication associated with screw insertion in the lower cervical spine.
Aim and Objective: To manage the cervical spine injuries by
pedicle screw presented to department of Orthopaedics, BPKIHS, Dharan.
Materials and methods: This is retrospective interventional
study done at the department of Orthopaedics,B.P.Koirala Institute of Health
Sciences, Dharan, Nepal over a period of 7 years from March 2012-April 2019.
A total of 55 patients with cervical spine injuries were treated by pedicle
screw. The patient’s age ranged from 20 to 60 years and the mean follow-up
was 12 weeks. Results: The study comprised of 55 patients with
cervical spine injuries were treated by pedicle screw The age incidence in
this series ranged from 20 years-60 years. 40 patients were males and 20 was
female. All had fractures or fracture dislocation at different levels of
lower cervical spine.The mechanism of injury included falls from height
(80%), motor vehicle accidents (18%) and sports related injury (2%).
Discussion: Pedicle screw insertion into the
pedicles in the lower cervical spine is technique that requires
a solid knowledge of 3-dimensional anatomy of cervical spine and experience
of pedicle screw fixation in thoracolumbar spine. The biomechanical
advantages of pedicle screw fixation in cervical spine is obvious, but data
are limited. However, safety and role of pedicle screw fixation in
reconstruction in the lower cervical spine have not been defined.
Conclusion: It is indicated in patients with osteoporotic
bone or when rigid internal fixation can not be achieved by conventional
techniques. Keywords: Cervical pedicle screw, lower cervical
spine, lateral mass

## 499

## A342: Modern Guerilla Warfare and Penetrating Missile Injuries of the
Cervical Spine: Characteristics of Penetrating Missile Injuries to the
Cervical Spine in a Large War Time Cohort of Modern Guerrilla
Warfare

Thamer Hamdan

1

, Bisola Ajayi

1

, Mohsen Raza

1

, Angelo Fragkakis

1

, Timothy Bishop

1

, Jason Bernard

1

, and Darren Lui

1

1

St George's Hospital, Complex spine surgery, London, United
Kingdom

Introduction: Missile injuries are very serious injuries
particularly in the cervical region. They are classified into high and low
missile injuries when it involves the cervical spine. In modern guerrilla
warfare, one must be aware of ballistic pathology with bullets as well as
from explosives. In particular, improvised explosive devices commonly known
as IED's play a new and important pathophysiology whether they are suicided
vests or roadside bombs. They usually produce severe or lethal injuries and
serious neurovascular deficit is frequent. We present the details of 40
patients with local experience on how to handle serious penetrating cervical
missile injuries. Methods: All cases were collected from the
record of Basrah University Hospital, Iraq. Healthy military gentlemen with
ages ranging between 20-35 years were included. Results: 11
patients had bullet injuries and 29patients had fragments of shell injuries.
The sites of injuries were 9: C2-C3, 12: C5-C6,12: C4-C5 and 7: C7-T1.
Bullet entrance was anterior in 23 patients, posterior in 7 patients and
lateral in 10 patients. The cervical vertebrae were injured in 37 patients
at body or lamina level while in 3 patients it was only neural tissue
injuries. Missiles were retained in 13 patients. All injuries showed some
degree of neurological deficit with quadriplegia in 26 patients. 9 patients
presented with very serious injuries. No relation was found between the size
of the missile and the extent of damage. Outcome of treatment in all
patients was poor. Conclusion: Gunshot wounds only account for
approximately one third of penetrating missile injuries in patients who
survive and are well enough to receive medical treatment. 62% of patients’
cohort were from explosive devices, consistent with data from 2010, where
58% of fatalities were from IED's occurring in foreign soldiers in
Afghanistan. We discuss the importance of general supportive measures,
generous wound excision, removal of the retained missiles and heavy cover of
antibiotics.

## OP39: Minimally Invasive Spine Surgery

## 384

## A343: Minimally Invasive vs Open Surgery for Lumbar Spinal Stenosis in
Patients with Diabetes - A CSORN Study

Kalpesh Hathi

1

, Erin Bigney

2,3

, Eden Richardson

2,3,4

, Dana El-Mughayyar

3

, Amanda Vandewint

3

, Tolu Alugo

1,5

, Neil Manson

1,3,6

, Edward Abraham

1,3,6

, CSORN Investigators

4

, Najmedden Attabib

1,3,7

1

Dalhousie Medicine New Brunswick, Saint John, New Brunswick,
Canada

2

Horizon Health Network, Saint John, New Brunswick, Canada

3

Canada East Spine Center, Saint John, New Brunswick, Canada

4

Canadian Spine Outcomes and Research Network, Markham, Ontario,
Canada

5

Saint John Regional Hospital, Anesthesiology and Pain, Saint John,
New Brunswick, Canada

6

Saint John Orthopaedics, Saint John, New Brunswick, Canada

7

Saint John Regional Hospital, Neurosurgery, Saint John, New
Brunswick, Canada

Introduction: Patients with diabetes experience worse outcomes
following spine surgery. It is important to optimize the outcomes of
patients with diabetes as they are at greater risk of complications and
comorbidities. Studies comparing MIS vs OPEN spine surgery for patients with
diabetes are lacking. This study compares the outcomes of patients with
diabetes undergoing MIS vs OPEN surgery for lumbar spinal stenosis (LSS).
Material and Methods: This is a multi-center retrospective
cohort study. Baseline, surgical, 6-12 week and 12 month follow-up data were
obtained for patients with diabetes diagnosed with LSS from the Canadian
Spine Outcomes and Research Network (CSORN) registry. Exclusion criteria
were American Society of Anesthesiologists (ASA) scores >3 or >3
levels operated on. Primary outcomes of interest were blood loss, length of
hospital stay, adverse events, modified Oswestry Disability Index (ODI) and
the Numerical Rating Scales (NRS) for leg and back pain. Two separate
analyses were run to compare the effects of MIS vs OPEN surgery for two
treatment cohorts: (1) patients undergoing decompression without fusion (N =
116; MIS n = 58; Open n = 58), (2) patients undergoing decompression with
fusion (N = 108; MIS n = 54; Open n = 54). A 2 (MIS vs OPEN) x 3 (baseline;
6-12 weeks; 12 months) mixed measures analysis of co-variance (ANCOVA) with
ASA scores as a co-variate were run for each cohort. Categorical variables
were analyzed with 2x2 chi-square tests and continuous variables were
analyzed with t-tests. Significance was set at P < .05
and mean differences were compared against published values for minimal
clinical important difference (MCID). Results: All patients had
significant improvements on ODI and pain scores from baseline to 6-12 weeks
and 12 months which met MCID, regardless of surgical technique. There was no
significant difference between MIS and OPEN surgery on long-term outcomes in
the decompression without fusion cohort. The MIS group who underwent
decompression with fusion had significantly lower ODI (mean difference
14.25; P < .001) and back pain (mean difference 1.64;
P = .002) compared to OPEN surgery at 12 months
post-operation, the difference exceeded the MCID. The MIS groups in both
cohorts had significantly less blood loss (without fusion mean difference
99.77 ml, P = .002; with fusion mean difference 244.23 ml,
P < .001) and significantly shorter length of stay
in hospital (without fusion mean difference 1.15 days, P =
.008; with fusion mean difference 1.23 days, P = .026).
There were no statistical differences in adverse events for either cohort
(without fusion P = .485; with fusion P =
.079). Conclusion: Patients with diabetes benefit long-term
from decompression with and without fusion for LSS regardless of surgical
technique. MIS surgery for LSS is associated with significantly less blood
loss and shorter length of hospital stay. MIS decompression with fusion for
LSS provides patients with diabetes with less disability (ODI) and back pain
one year post-operation compared to OPEN procedures. To optimize outcomes,
MIS approaches should be promoted for patients with diabetes undergoing
decompression with fusion for LSS.

## 1342

## A344: Patient Reported Outcomes of Patients that Fail to Reach Minimum
Clinically Important Differences: Comparison of MIS to Open TLIF

Oliver Ayling

1

, Nicolas Dea

1

, and Charles Fisher

1

1

University of British Columbia, Spine Surgery, Vancouver,
Canada

Introduction: Treatment of degenerative lumbar diseases has been
shown to be clinically effective with open or minimally invasive
transforaminal lumbar interbody fusion (TLIF), with equivalent clinical
outcomes between the two modalities. Despite this, a substantial proportion
of patients will not meet minimal clinically important differences (MCID) on
patient reported outcomes (PROs). Previous studies have not compared subsets
of patients that fail to reach MCIDs after open (O-TLIF) or minimally
invasive (MIS-TLIF) TLIF in order to identify clinical variables associated
with poor outcome. Material and Methods: Patients undergoing
O-TLIF or MIS-TLIF for lumbar degenerative disorders enrolled in the
Canadian Spine Outcomes and Research Network prospective registry. The
outcomes of patients not meeting MCID on the Owestry Disability Index (ODI
of 15) at 2 years post-operatively were analyzed at 24 months
post-operatively on the ODI, SF-12 Physical (PCS) and Mental (MCS) scales,
numeric rating scale (NRS) leg and back pain, and Euroqol-5D (EQ5D).
Results: 41.4% (181 of 437) and 42.1% (53 of 126) of
patients in the O-TLIF and MIS-TLIF, respectively, did not reach a MCID of
15 on the ODI at 2 years. Patients undergoing MIS-TLIF were younger (55.0 ±
14.9 vs 59.7 ± 13.0, P = .041) but otherwise had similar
demographic characteristics. Operative time was similar between the groups
(P = 0.16), however blood loss was significantly
greater in the O-TLIF cohort (635.0 ± 625.5 ml vs 179.3 ± 159.44 ml,
P < .001). There were no significant differences
between any baseline PROs. The 2-year post-operative NRS-leg scores were
significantly lower in each group than the baseline scores (O-TLIF: 7.12 ±
2.06 vs 2-year, 4.84 ± 3.09; MIS-TLIF: baseline, 6.45 ± 2.73 vs 2-year, 4.38
± 3.17, < .001), however, the proportion of patients meeting MCID on the
NRS-leg at 2 years was significantly higher in the O-TLIF group (75.63% vs
56.52%, P = .015). On the NRS back pain scale, 2-year
post-operative scores were significantly lower than baseline in both groups
(P < .001) but the proportion of patients reaching
MCID was not different (48.62% and 47.06%, P = .99). The
2-year scores and rates of reaching the MCID on the EQ5D, PCS, and MCS were
not different. Multivariable regression analysis for the MIS-TLIF cohort
demonstrated higher baseline back pain scores were independently associated
with worse ODI (P = .0096). In the O-TLIF cohort, higher
baseline back pain scores, symptom duration > 6 months, and increasing
blood loss (in millilitres) were associated with worse ODI scores (P
< .0001, P = .036, P =
.039). Single level fusion operations were independently associated with
improved ODI scores (P = .001). Conclusion:
Similar rates of patients fail to reach MCID at 2-years on the ODI after
open or MIS TLIF (∼40%). Of these patients, MIS-TLIF operations were
associated with significantly fewer patients achieving MCID on NRS leg pain
scores at 2 years. Higher baseline back pain, longer symptom duration, and
increasing blood loss were independently associated with worse ODI scores
after open TLIF while higher baseline back pain was an independent predictor
of worse ODI scores after MIS TLIF. These data provide novel insights into
patient counseling as well as surgical selection when deciding which
patients will derive the most benefit from MIS or open operations.

## 1586

## A345: Open vs Minimally Invasive Transforaminal Lumbar Interbody Fusion:
A Matched Cohort Analysis with Five-Year Follow-Up

Daniel Coban

1

, Stuart Changoor

1

, Conor Dunn

1

, Michael Pompliano

1

, Kumar Sinha

1

, Ki Hwang

1

, Michael Faloon

1

, and Arash Emami

1

1

St. Joseph's University Medical Center, Paterson, NJ, USA

Introduction: Transforaminal lumbar interbody fusion (TLIF) is a
widely performed procedure that has evolved as a treatment option for
addressing conditions such as spinal stenosis, disc herniation and
spondylolisthesis of the lumbar spine. With the advent of new minimally
invasive techniques, minimally invasive TLIF (MI-TLIF) has gained popularity
as a surgical option and offers potential advantages of reduced tissue
trauma, blood loss, medication use and cost. Despite numerous reports on
short-term outcomes comparing the open versus the minimally invasive
technique, a paucity of literature exists comparing outcomes with long-term
follow-up of matched cohorts. Therefore, the purpose of this study was to
determine the overall revision rates, rates of fusion, and functional
clinical outcomes of open versus MI-TLIF with five-year follow-up.
Material and Methods: A retrospective review was performed
to identify all patients between 2012-2015 with at least 5-year follow-up
who underwent single-level open or minimally invasive TLIF. Each cohort was
matched for age, sex, BMI and levels operated. Revision rates, time to
revision, graft subsidence and fusion rates in each group were compared.
Graft subsidence was defined as cage migration into one vertebral endplate
>3 mm on plain radiographic measurement. Bony fusion was defined as the
absence of a radiolucent gap between the cages and endplates and the
presence of trabeculation and bony bridging between cages and adjacent
endplates. Functional outcomes were assessed with ODI, VAS-l and VAS-b
measurements at follow-up visits. Standard binomial and categorical
comparative analyses were performed. Results: A total of 90
patients were included in this study, 45 in the open TLIF cohort and 45 in
the MI-TLIF cohort. Mean follow-up of the open and MI-TLIF cohorts were 90.3
and 97.9 months, respectively. The overall revision rates were 13.3% for the
open TLIF group and 15.6% for the MI-TLIF group (P = .764).
Mean time to revision was 1,281.3 and 718.1 days for the open and MI-TLIF
groups, respectively (P = .015). The most common reason for
revision surgery was pseudarthrosis (57.1%) in the MI-TLIF cohort and
hardware failure with accompanying adjacent segment degeneration (33.3%) in
the open TLIF cohort. At the 5-year mark postoperatively, 11.1% of patients
in the open TLIF group and 8.9% of patients in the MI-TLIF group had
radiographic signs of subsidence (P = .725). Successful
spinal fusion at 5 years was 89.1% and 91.1% in the open and MI-TLIF
cohorts, respectively. There were 18 females and 27 males in each cohort
matched for age, sex, BMI and levels operated (1: L3-4, 28: L4-5, 16:
L5-S1). Average blood loss was 235.6 ± 40.1 and 83.2 ± 28.1 ml in the open
and MI-TLIF groups, respectively (P = < .001). Both
groups experienced significant improvements in their functional outcome
scores (ODI, VAS-leg, VAS-back) compared to their pre-operative values.
Conclusion: MI-TLIF is a safe and effective alternative to
the open transforaminal approach in the treatment of single-level lumbar
spinal disease, demonstrating long-lasting benefit. After five-year
follow-up, MI-TLIF demonstrated similar improvements in functional outcome
scores without increased rates of revision or subsidence. Larger,
prospective studies are required to corroborate these findings.

## 1002

## A346: Minimally Invasive Scoliosis Surgery with Trans-Kambin Posterior
Oblique Lateral Lumbar Interbody Fusion: Single Surgeon Feasibility
Study

Hamid Abbasi

1

1

Inspired Spine, Neurosurgeon, Burnsville, USA

Introduction: Degenerative deformities of the spine have
traditionally been treated with extensive open surgeries. However, these
open procedures are associated with a high degree of surgical morbidity. In
this study, we explore whether clinical improvement in patients with spinal
deformities can be achieved using a new minimally invasive surgery (MIS)
called oblique lateral lumbar interbody fusion (OLLIF). OLLIF is a MIS
single surgeon procedure in which the disc is approached through Kambin’s
triangle. OLLIF can achieve correction of spinal deformities through careful
cage placement. Material and Methods: This study is a
retrospective review of 37 OLLIF surgeries in 36 patients with symptomatic
degenerative spinal deformity. Collected perioperative data included surgery
time, blood loss, and hospital stay. Follow-up was conducted at least 150
days post surgery. We recorded complications and patient reported outcomes
such as Oswestry Disability Index (ODI) and pain scale. Imaging was
conducted pre- and post-surgery. Fusion rates and changes in Cobb angle were
also measured. Results: A total of 37 surgeries that treated
100 vertebral levels were performed. For two and three level procedures,
respectively, the mean blood loss was 83 and 178 ml, the average surgery
time was 74 and 158 minutes and the average hospital stay was 2.6 and 3.3
days. The patients ambulated within 24 hours in all but two cases. The
patients reported pain improvements on the ten-point pain scale from 8.3 to
3.7 (P < .001) and on the ODI from 53% to 32%. Cobb
angles decreased from 16° to 9.3° (P < .001), amounting
to 2.5° of correction per level of surgery. Detailed imaging was reviewed by
independent radiologists for 24 cases and 100% interbody fusion was achieved
along with 71% right posterolateral and 74% left posterolateral fusion.
There were three cases of mild nerve irritation/neuropraxia and no
infections. Conclusion: OLLIF is a safe and effective MIS
technique to correct adult degenerative scoliosis. Unlike alternative
procedures, OLLIF is technically less complex than comparable procedures and
can safely be used from the thoracolumbar junction to S1.

## 765

## A347: Minimally invasive versus open transforaminal lumbar interbody
fusion in obese patients: a propensity score matched study on perioperative,
functional and subjective outcomes

Graham Goh

1

, Adriel Tay

1

, Reuben Soh

1

1

Singapore General Hospital, Singapore, Singapore

Introduction: The perioperative benefits of minimally invasive
surgery in obese patients have been described. However, there is a paucity
of literature on the patient-reported outcomes (PROs), satisfaction and
return to work following minimally invasive transforaminal lumbar interbody
fusion (MIS TLIF) and Open TLIF in this subgroup of patients. This study
aimed to compare the clinical outcomes of obese patients undergoing MIS and
Open TLIF. Materials and Methods: Patients who were obese (BMI
≥30.0 kg/m2) and underwent a primary, one- to two-level TLIF were
retrospectively reviewed and stratified into two cohorts: Open TLIF and MIS
TLIF. The cohorts were matched in a 1:1 ratio for age, sex, body mass index,
comorbidity burden, number of levels fused and preoperative PROs using
propensity scoring. Operative time, length of stay and perioperative
outcomes were recorded. Differences in PROs, including Oswestry Disability
Index (ODI), 36-Item Short-Form Physical Component Score (SF-36 PCS), Mental
Component Score (SF-36 MCS), Visual Analogue Scale (VAS) back pain, and VAS
leg pain, at each postoperative time point were compared between the cohorts
using independent sample t-tests. Achievement of minimal clinically
important difference (MCID), patient satisfaction assessed using the North
American Spine Society questionnaire, and return to work were compared using
Chi-square analysis. Revision procedures were recorded at mean follow-up of
10 ± 3.3 years. Results: In total, 236 obese patients were
included: 118 Open TLIF and 118 MIS TLIF. The two cohorts were closely
matched in terms of demographics, perioperative variables and preoperative
PROs. Length of stay was longer in the Open TLIF cohort (7.0 ± 5.2 vs 4.4 ±
2.5 days, P < .001) and there was a trend towards a
higher complication rate (14.4% vs 8.5%, P = .075).
However, there was no difference in operative time, transfusions or
readmissions. Patients who underwent Open TLIF reported worse ODI (P
= .043) and VAS leg pain at 2 years, although the latter did
not reach statistical significance (P = .095). Achievement
of MCID for each PRO, patient satisfaction and return to work were
comparable between the cohorts. A total of 8 Open TLIFs and 6 MIS TLIFs were
revised (P = .582). Conclusion: Obese patients
who underwent MIS TLIF had less perioperative complications, shorter length
of stay and improved functional disability compared to a matched group who
underwent Open TLIF. However, a similar proportion achieved a clinical
meaningful improvement. Patient satisfaction and return to work were also
comparable at 2 years.

## 579

## A348: Percutaneous Kyphoplasty Vs Percutaneous Vertebroplasty for
Neurologically Intact Osteoporotic Kümmell’s Disease: A Systemtic Review and
Meta-Analysis

Baoliang Zhang

1

, Zhongqiang Chen

1

, and Guanghui Chen

1

1

Peking University Third Hospital, Beijing, China

Introduction: Kümmell’s disease (KD) is a relatively rare entity
secondary to vertebral compression fracture (VCF), characterized by delayed
vertebral collapse and kyphosis. Percutaneous vertebroplasty (PVP) and
percutaneous kyphoplasty (PKP) are widely-used minimally invasive techniques
for the treatment of neurologically intact osteoporotic KD, but which one is
preferable choice remains controversial. Therefore, a systematic review and
meta-analysis should be performed to shed light on the facts regarding the
efficacy and safety of both procedures for neurologically intact KD,
providing evidence-based medical support for clinical decision-making.
Material and Methods: The PubMed, Embase, Web of Science,
Cochrane library, Wanfang, CNKI were searched from inception to September 1,
2020, for all randomized controlled trials or cohort studies that compared
PVP and PKP in treating KD patients without neurological deficits. All
eligible studies were selected based on predesigned screening criteria. Two
investigators independently conducted the quality assessment and extracted
the data. Fixed-effect and random-effect models were used for pooled
analysis according to the heterogeneity. All statistical analysis was
performed by Stata software 14.0. Results: Eight eligible
studies with a total of 438 KD patients (195 undergoing PKP and 243
undergoing PVP) were included in the final analysis. Patients were followed
up for at least one year. Pooled results showed no difference between PKP
and PVP in clinical outcomes (short-term and long-term visual analogue scale
and Oswestry disability index) and perioperative complications (overall
complications, bone cement leakage and new vertebral fracture). Regarding
radiographic outcomes, PVP was associated with better improvement in
short-term and long-term Cobb’s angle compared to PKP [SMD = -.37, 95% CI
(-.64, -.10), P = .007; SMD = -0.34, 95%CI (-.61, -.07),
P < .012]. Even though the restoration of vertebral
height in PKP group was slightly better than PVP group in the short run [SMD
= 0.43, 95%CI (0.14, 0.71), P = .003], there were no
significant differences between two groups at the final follow-up (P
= 0.186). In addition, PKP required more consumption, including
bone cement injection volume [SMD = .50, 95%CI (.27, .73),
P < .001], operating time [SMD = 1.80, 95%CI (.67,
2.93), P < .001], fluoroscopy times [SMD = 1.02, 95%CI
(1.62, 1.43), P < .001], intraoperative blood loss [SMD
= 0.96, 95%CI (.41, 1.91), P < .001] and operation cost
[SMD = 31.12, 95%CI (1.48, 60.77), P < .040].
Conclusion: This study demonstrated that PVP was as similar
as PKP in clinical outcomes and perioperative complications, which indicated
both procedures are effective and safe for treating neurologically intact
osteoporotic KD. In addition, PVP could provide better correction of spinal
kyphosis and less consumption. Based on the current evidence, we recommended
PVP as the superior technique. The future directions of KD treatment relies
on the results of randomized controlled trials with higher quality and
larger sample sizes.

## 1700

## A349: Prospective Comparative Study of Functional Outcome in Open vs
Minimally Invasive Tubular Discectomy for Lumbar Disc Herniation

Akash Shakya

1

1

Dr BAM Hospital, Orthopaedics and Spine Surgery, Mumbai,
India

Aim: Aim of the study was to compare the functional outcome of
open vs minimally invasive tubular discectomy for lumbar disc herniation.
Material and Methods: All patients undergoing discectomy
for lumbar disc herniation were prospectively followed for one year. VAS
(Visual analogue score), ODI (Oswestry Disability Index) were used to
analyse the functional outcome at post-operative period day one, two weeks,
One month, three months, Six months and one year. Data was divided into open
and minimally invasive group (MIS) and analysed. Result: 218
patients were included in the final analysis. 82 were from MIS group and 136
underwent open discectomy. While pre-operative mean VAS scores were
comparable for both the groups, follow up VAS scores were significantly
better for MIS group at post-operative day one(P = .001),
two weeks(P = .001), One month(P = .001),
three months(P = .003) and six months (P =
.023). Similarly ODI scores were also significantly better for MIS group at
post-operative day one(P = .004), two weeks(P
= .001) and one months(P = .003). No
significant difference was found between one year VAS scores and ODI scores
between the two groups (P > .05). Incidence of dural
tear was significantly less (6%) in minimally invasive group compared to
open surgery (13.9%) (P = .001). Conclusion:
Functional outcome of minimally invasive tubular discectomy for lumbar disc
herniating are comparable with open discectomy with significantly improved
VAS scores up to 6 months and significantly better ODI scores up to one
month and with significant less chances of dural tear.

## 1265

## A350: Stable Low Grade Spondylolisthesis Does not Compromise Clinical
Outcomes of Minimally Invasive Tubular Decompression in Patients with Spinal
Stenosis

Morsi Khashan

1

, Gilad Regev

1

, Dror Ofir

1

, Khalil Salame

1

, and Zvi Lidar

1

1

Tel Aviv Medical Center, Tel Aviv University, Tel aviv,
Israel

Background: Surgical decompression has been shown to be superior
to conservative management in lumbar spinal stenosis (LSS) patients. The
purpose of the present study is to compare the clinical outcome and
complication rates following minimally invasive (MIS) tubular decompression
without arthrodesis in patients suffering from LSS with or without
concomitant stable low grade degenerative spondylolisthesis.
Methods: Ninety six consecutive patients who underwent
elective MIS lumbar decompression with a mean follow-up of 27.5 months were
included in the study. The data was collected prospectively to our data
base. The spondylolisthesis (S) group comprised 53 patients who suffered
from LSS with stable degenerative spondylolisthesis, and the control (N)
group included 43 patients suffering from LSS without spondylolisthesis.
Outcome measures included complications, and revision surgery rates. Pre-
and post-operative visual analog scale (VAS) for both back and leg pain was
analyzed, and theOswestryDisability Index (ODI) was used to evaluate
functional outcome. Results: The two groups were comparable in
most demographic and preoperative variables. VAS for back and leg pain
improved significantly following surgery in both groups. Both groups showed
significant improvement in their ODI scores, one and two years
postoperatively. The average length of hospital stay was significantly
higher in patients with spondylolisthesis (P-value<
.01). There was no significant difference between the groups in terms of
post-operative complications and revision surgeries.
Conclusions: Our results indicate that MIS tubular
decompression may be an effective and safe procedure for patients suffering
from LSS, with or without degenerative stable spondylolisthesis.

## 769

## A351: Lumbar Interbody Fusion in Adult Isthmic Spondylolisthesis: Does
Minimally Invasive Surgery Benefit Patients Compared with Open
Surgery?

Graham Goh

1

and Reuben Soh

1

1

Singapore General Hospital, Singapore, Singapore

Introduction: Isthmic spondylolisthesis is common in younger
patients and can be treated with Open or Minimally Invasive transforaminal
interbody lumbar fusion (MIS TLIF). While technical and approach-related
considerations have received much attention for this pathology, few studies
have directly compared the clinical effectiveness between Open and MIS TLIF.
This study aimed to compare the patient-reported outcomes (PROs),
satisfaction and return to work in patients following Open and MIS TLIF for
isthmic spondylolisthesis at minimum 2-year follow-up. Materials and
Methods: Patients who underwent a primary single-level TLIF for
low-grade isthmic spondylolisthesis were retrospectively reviewed and
stratified into two cohorts: Open TLIF and MIS TLIF. The cohorts were
matched in a 1:1 ratio for age, sex, body mass index, comorbidity burden and
preoperative PROs using propensity scoring. Operative time and length of
stay were recorded. Differences in PROs, including Oswestry Disability Index
(ODI), 36-Item Short-Form Physical Component Score (SF-36 PCS), Mental
Component Score (SF-36 MCS), Visual Analogue Scale (VAS) back pain, and VAS
leg pain, at each postoperative time point were compared between the cohorts
using independent-sample t-tests. Achievement of minimal clinically
important difference (MCID), patient satisfaction assessed using the North
American Spine Society questionnaire, and return to work were compared using
Chi-square analysis. Results: In total, 136 patients were
included: 68 Open TLIF and 68 MIS TLIF. The two cohorts were closely matched
in terms of demographics, perioperative variables and preoperative PROs.
Operative time was similar, but the MIS TLIF cohort had a shorter length of
stay (3.3 ± 1.2 vs 5.4 ± 3.0 days, P < .001). There was
no difference in PROs between the cohorts at all time points. The Open TLIF
cohort had a higher rate of MCID achievement for SF-36 PCS at 24 months
(83.8% vs 64.7%, P = .018), but both cohorts demonstrated
similar achievement of MCID for ODI, VAS back pain, VAS leg pain. Patient
satisfaction and return to work were also comparable. The Open TLIF cohort
took 82.8 ± 66.7 days to return to work while the MIS TLIF cohort took 89.2
± 76.8 days (P = .695). Conclusion: Patients
with low grade isthmic spondylolisthesis who underwent MIS TLIF had a
shorter length of stay. However, both MIS and Open techniques produced
similar improvements in pain, disability and quality of life. Patient
satisfaction and return to work was also comparable at 2 years.

## OP40: Deformity-Thoracolumbar (Adolescent) 3

## 1778

## A352: The Analysis of Progression of Disc Degeneration in the Unfused
Segments in Post-Operative Adolescent Idiopathic Scoliosis - A 10 Year
Follow-Up MRI-Based Study

Ajoy P Shetty

1

, Sridhar J

2

, Rishi Kanna

2

, and Shanmuganathan Rajasekaran

1

1

Ganga Medical Center and Hospitals, Coimbatore, India

2

Ganga Medical Center and Hospitals, Spine Surgery, Coimbatore,
India

Introduction: The impact of long-segment fusions on the distal
mobile vertebral segments is of major concern. There is currently a paucity
of literature on the progression of disc degeneration in the distal un-fused
segments in patients with strategic pedicle screw instrumentation. The
current retrospective study was thus planned to analyse the progression of
the Pfirrmann’s grade in the distal un-fused lumbar segments in
postoperative Adolescent Idiopathic Scoliosis (AIS). Methods: A
total of 58 patients who underwent surgery for AIS with minimum 6.5-year
follow-up (5-15) were included. Coronal Cobb’s angle (CCA), apical
translation, lower instrumented vertebra tilt (LIV tilt), lower instrumented
vertebra-sacral angle (LIV-Sacral angle), sagittal spinal parameters
[Thoracic kyphosis (TK) and lumbar lordosis (LL)]; and pelvic parameters
were measured. Disc health was assessed in Magnetic Resonance Imaging (MRI)
by Pfirrmann’s grading, Total endplate score (TEPS) and facet degeneration
were measured by Fujiwara’s grading. Functional evaluation was performed
using SRS 22 score. Results: A total of 58 patients were
included in the study. The mean follow-up was 10 years. Based on MRI scan,
43 were included in Pfirrmann’s grade static (PGS) group and 15 in
Pfirrmann’s grade progressed (PGP) group. Of the15 patients in PGP group,
LIV was L4 in 8, L3 in 3, L1 in 3 and L2 in 1. Fifteen patients in our
cohort had a progression of Pfirrmann’s grade. Among these patients, 11
(73.3%) progressed from grade 1 to grade 2; but in 4 patients (26.6%),
Pfirrmann’s grade progressed to more than 3. The progression of degeneration
did not significantly correlate with the preoperative and postoperative TEPS
score, coronal or sagittal parameters. Conclusion: The analysis
of progression of the Pfirrmann’s grade in distal un-fused segments did not
show any significant correlation with the pre-operative and post-operative
coronal or sagittal parameters and the number of unfused segments.

## 1250

## A353: Studies on the Influence of Growth Friendly Implants Used in Eos
Treatment on Titanium Ion Release into the Tissue

Anna Danielewicz

1

and Michał Latalski

1

1
Medical University, Childrens' Orthopeadic, Lublin,
Poland
Introduction: The long-term cumulative effects of the presence
of implants after surgical treatment of Early-Onset Scoliosis (EOS) may be
harmful.The aim of the study is to evaluate the influence of different
growth-friendly systems used for surgery in EOS on the level of titanium
ions (Ti) in samples tissues taken intraoperatively. Material and
Methods: The study group included 77 patients (mean 13,5 yo) who
were surgically treated with implants made of Ti-6Al-4V titanium alloy. The
stabilization covered on average 11 segments. Mean observation time was 3,25
± 1,14 years. Patients were divided into 5 groups: traditional growing rods
(TGR), guided growth system, VEPTR, revision group (patients who had a
fracture of the implant) and a control. The concentration of Ti was examined
on Inductively Coupled Plasma Optical Emission Spectrometry.
Results: There was a higher content of Ti in clean tissue
and in the blood in boys vs girls (0.0068 mg/g vs 0.0035 mg/g and 4, 1962
μg/L vs 3.6465 μg/L respectively). Ti in contaminated tissue was the highest
in the GGS group than VEPTR, revision group and TGR (3.855 mg/g, 1.456 mg/g,
1.022 mg/g and 0.52 mg/g respectively). Ti in the blood increases was the
highest in the GGS group than VEPTR, revision group and TGR (14.12 ± 0.12
μg/L, 8.875 ± 3.65 μg/L, 4.435 μg/L and 3.454 μg/L respectively). There was
no correlation with the number of implanted anchors and the observation
time. Conclusion:(1). Movement between implants affects the
number of Ti released. (2). The duration of implants in the child's body
doesn’t affect the content of Ti, putting this aspect of treatment among
arguments for not delaying the start of surgical treatment of patients with
EOS. (3). Mechanical failure to the implant has no significant effect on
increasing the content of Ti.

## 1015

## A354: What a Stranded Whale with Scoliosis can Teach us About Human
Idiopathic Scoliosis

Steven de Reuver

1

, Lonneke IJsseldijk

2

, Jelle Homans

1

, Dorien Willems

3

, Stefanie Veraa

3

, Marijn van Stralen

4

, Marja Kik

2

, Moyo Kruyt

1

, Andrea Gröne

2

, and René Castelein

1

1

University Medical Center Utrecht, Department of Orthopedic Surgery,
Utrecht, The Netherlands

2

Utrecht University, Division of Pathology, Department of
Biomolecular Health Sciences, Faculty of Veterinary Medicine, Utrecht,
The Netherlands

3

Utrecht University, Division of Diagnostic Imaging, Department of
Clinical Sciences, Faculty of Veterinary Medicine, Utrecht, The
Netherlands

4

University Medical Center Utrecht, Imaging Division, Utrecht, The
Netherlands

Introduction: Scoliosis is a deformation of the spine that may
have several known causes, but only humans can develop scoliosis without any
obvious underlying cause. This is called ‘idiopathic’ scoliosis and is the
most common type. Recent observations showed that human scoliosis,
regardless of its cause, has a uniform three-dimensional anatomy. We
hypothesize that scoliosis is a universal compensatory mechanism of the
spine, independent of cause and/or species. Material and
Methods: We had the opportunity to study the rare occurrence of
scoliosis in a whale that stranded in July 2019 in the Netherlands. A
multidisciplinary team of biologists, pathologists, veterinarians,
taxidermists, radiologists and orthopedic surgeons conducted necropsy and
CT-imaging analysis. In areas of the spine that did not show underlying
anatomical changes, we analyzed the compensatory curves in 3D and compared
the morphology with the non-scoliotic spine of 10 control whales.
Results: The stranded animal was a common minke whale
(Balaenoptera acutorostrata) and was a 403 cm long, 530 kg female juvenile,
with an estimated age between 0.5-4 years. The most likely cause of death
was considered to be acute recent blunt trauma. Visual inspection showed
epiphysiolysis at the left-side of the lower endplate of vertebra L3, a
burst upper endplate at the right-side of vertebra L4, fractured spinous
processes of vertebrae L1 to L6, severely wedged vertebrae T11 and T12 and
detachment of the transverse processes at multiple levels. Two traumatically
deformed vertebrae had led to an acute post-traumatic scoliosis, which had
initiated the development of compensatory curves in regions of the spine
without anatomical abnormalities. The 3D analysis of the compensatory curves
showed a rotation of the vertebral bodies in the transverse plane into the
convexity of the curve. The mean anterior-posterior length discrepancy (AP%)
of the total compensatory curvature was +9.4% in the whale, indicating a
lordosis. This is significantly different from the kyphosis in the same part
of the spine in the non-scoliotic control group, with a total AP% of -2.1 ±
0.4% (P < .001). On the contrary, the bony morphology of
the vertebral bodies was similar to the controls; the vertebral body AP% of
the whale was -2.5%, which was comparable to the kyphotic shape of the
vertebral bodies in controls with -1.8 ± 0.8% (P = .429).
Almost all anterior lengthening was present in the intervertebral discs, as
the disc AP% in the compensatory curvature of the whale was +99.5%, which
meant a lordotic shape of the intervertebral discs with an anterior length
almost twice the posterior length. This is in sharp contrast to the kyphosis
in the discs of controls with -4.6 ± 5.0% (P < .001).
Conclusion: Three-dimensional analysis of these
compensatory curves showed strong resemblance with different types of human
scoliosis. This indicates that any decompensation of spinal equilibrium can
lead to a uniform response, regardless of underlying cause or species. The
unique biomechanics of the upright human spine, with significantly decreased
rotational stability, explains why only in humans this universal mechanism
of scoliosis can occur in an ‘idiopathic’ way.

## 1116

## A355: Management of Progressive Neuromuscular Scoliosis and Respiratory
Distress in a Child with Nemaline Rod Myopathy

Balamurugan Thirugnanam

1

, Ajay Kumar Shetty Papanna

1

, and Vidyadhara Srinivasa

1

1

Manipal Hospitals, Spine Care, Bengaluru, India

Introduction: Nemaline Rod Myopathy (NRM) is the commonest among
non-dystrophic congenital myopathies. Clinical presentation is highly
variable due to variable mutations in large number of genes. Variable
clinical presentations ranging from normal lifespan with mild symptoms to
neonatal death have been reported. Children with NRM have generalized muscle
weakness with predilection to neck, face, axial and proximal extremity
muscles. Respiratory muscle weakness is the most prominent feature and
affects the overall prognosis and survival. Even ambulant and mildly
affected patient may develop unsuspected hypoxia especially during night and
hence requires assisted mechanical ventilation. Materials and
Methods: Eleven-year-old wheelchair bound girl presented with
progressive breathing difficulty, deformity of back, and worsening sitting
balance of 2 years duration. Following an uneventful normal delivery to a
non-consanguineously married couple, the parents had noticed the child to
grow normally except for delayed motor milestones. The child from the age of
3-years started developing repeated respiratory difficulties and was started
on nocturnal BiPAP ventilator support. In view of generalized motor weakness
and respiratory difficulty, the muscle biopsy done revealed NRM. The child
had multiple episodes of respiratory worsening and admission to ICU. The
child presented to Spine Care for the management of progressive spinal
deformity affecting the sitting balance on wheel chair.
Results: We corrected the rigid right Thoracolumbar
Scoliosis T3-L1 (Cobb angle 87°) successfully using multi-modal
intra-operative neuromonitoring with multiple Ponte osteotomies and
instrumented fusion T2-ilium. Following surgery she was able to sit
independently, able to breathe better and requiring less BiPAP support. At
2-years follow up, her breathing reserve improved significantly and not even
requiring nocturnal ventilator support. Conclusion: To the best
of our knowledge this is the first reported case of a
severe rigid scoliosis in a child with NRM managed surgically successfully.
Surgical management of these patients requires multidisciplinary approach
for successful outcome in view of respiratory failure. Deformity correction
will improve the respiratory reserve of child and may even obviate the need
of nocturnal mechanical ventilation support.

## 1213

## A356: Leaving Out Often Difficult to Place Proximal Thoracic Concave
Apical Screw(S) in Adolescent Idiopathic Scoliosis: Are these Screws
Necessary?

Joseph Osorio

1

, Meghan Cerpa

2

, James Lin

3

, Simon Morr

2

, Griffin Baum

4

, Scott Zuckerman

2

, and Lawrence Lenke

2

1

University of California San Diego, San Diego, USA

2

Columbia University Medical Center, New York, USA

3

Mount Sinai, New York, USA

4

Northwell Health, New York, USA

Summary: Proximal thoracic (PT) concave apical screw placement
in AIS patients are challenging due to pedicle morphology, wound depth,
concavity trajectory and spinal cord location directly adjacent to the
medial pedicle wall. We evaluated 40 patients with Lenke Type 1-2 AIS
curves, 63% of which had PT concave apical screw(s) purposely left out. The
most common levels left out were T5 (30%) and T6 (53%). No difference in
correction of PT (P = 0.44) and main thoracic(MT)
(P = .93) curves between groups was seen.
Hypothesis: Proximal thoracic (PT) concave apical screw(s)
in AIS patients are often difficult to place, carries high neurologic risk,
and adds operative time with little to no benefit seen in deformity
correction. Thus these screws can be left out of AIS constructs involving
the PT region. Study Design: Retrospective, single-institution.
Introduction: In AIS patients, the concave PT pedicles are
often small (Type C or D) and rotated, making placement challenging. The
spinal cord is also draped along the concave pedicle-vertebral body junction
thus rendering even a slight medial trajectory/breach a potential neurologic
complication. Additionally, concave PT curve correction occurs with
distraction distributed away from the apex, making the apical screw
unnecessary. We sought to evaluate whether leaving these concave apical PT
screw(s) out affected overall curve correction. Methods: AIS
patients with Lenke Type 1-2 curves with UIV of T4 or cephalad were
identified. Mean age was 15.3 yrs, 27 (68%) had Type 1 curves, and 13 (33%)
had Type 2. The UIV was T1 in 1 (3%), T2 in 11 (28%), T3 in 14 (35%), and T4
in 14 (35%) pts. The levels where PT apical screws were left out were
analyzed using Cobb angles for PT and main thoracic (MT) curves (pre- and
postop standing radiographs). Results: Of 40 AIS patients, 25
(63%) had PT concave apical screw(s) left out: 59% of Type 1, and 69% of
Type 2 curves. Screws were left out at the following levels: T4-15%, T5-30%,
T6-53%, T7-3%. Preoperative PT and MT Cobb angles of both groups were
similar preoperatively. Postoperative PT correction was similar between both
groups: screws left out 10° (2-26) vs all screws 9° (3-23), P
= .44. Postoperative MT correction was also similar between
both groups: screws left out 10° (1-31) vs all screws 10° (1-18), P
= .93). Conclusion: Leaving out the proximal
thoracic concave apical pedicle screw(s) in Lenke Type 1-2 AIS showed no
difference in correction compared to all levels instrumented. Leaving out
screws theoretically minimizes risk of neurologic complications and
decreased OR time to place these challenging screws without sacrificing
coronal correction. Take Home Message: Leaving out the PT
concave apical pedicle screw(s) in Type 1/2 AIS patients has no effect on
coronal correction while avoiding unnecessary risks of these challenging and
neurologically risky screws.

## 69

## A357: The Use of 3 Rods in Correcting Severe Scoliosis

Brett Rocos

1

, Eliane Rioux-Trottier

1

, Masayoshi Machida

1

, Amit Sigal

2

, Jim Kennedy

3

, David Lebel

1

, and Reinhard Zeller

1

1

Hospital for Sick Children, Department of Orthopaedic Surgery,
Toronto, Canada

2

Dana Children's Hospital, Tel Aviv, Israel

3

Children's Health Ireland at Crumlin, Dublin, Ireland

Introduction: The three rod technique, utilising a short apical
concavity rod is an option to achieve controlled correction in severe
scoliosis. We describe this technique, the complications encountered, and
the long term outcomes. Materials and Method: All paediatric
patients who underwent corrective surgery for scoliosis ≥ 100° using 3
parallel rods were included. Radiographs were assessed to evaluate the
correction and clinical records examined for any loss of correction,
complications, revision procedures or neuromonitoring events.
Results: 27 patients met the inclusion criteria. All
underwent posterior instrumented fusion, 5 underwent a circumferential
fusion to prevent crankshaft phenomenon and 3 underwent preoperative
halogravity traction. The main thoracic curve (MT) measured 112° (100-
145°), the proximal thoracic (PT) 48° (20- 75°) and thoracolumbar (TL) 22°
(2- 97°). 4 patients with an MT not significantly different to the remainder
of the group (P = 0.73) underwent anterior fusion. Eleven
patients showed loss of motor evoked potentials, all of which returned to
within 25% of baseline. All patients had normal postoperative neurology. One
patient underwent removal of hardware for late infection. The cohort showed
a 47% (95% CI 42-53%) correction of their MT. PT was corrected by 15° (95%
CI 10- 19) and TL 23° (95% CI 16- 31°). There was no significant loss of
correction at 2 years. Conclusion: Our series suggests that
three rod constructs lead to a 50% correction of severe curves, that three
column osteotomies may not be necessary, and that the technique is safe and
effective for the correction of severe scoliosis.

## 28

## A358: Development of Thoracic Kyphosis After High Implant Density
Posterior Correction and Fusion for Adolescent Idiopathic Scoliosis

Peter Obid

1

, Andreas Conta

2

, Philipp Drees

3

, and Thomas Niemeyer

1

1

Asklepios Paulinen Klinik, Spine and Scoliosis Center, Wiesbaden,
Germany

2

University of Mainz, Mainz, Germany

3

University of Mainz, Department of Orthopaedics and Traumatology,
Mainz, Germany

Introduction: Posterior correction and fusion provides good
results in the coronal plane. But pedicle screw based instrumentations tend
to flatten the spine. Previous studies on thoracic kyphosis (TK) restoration
have produced mixed findings on the ability of posterior instrumentations to
achieve that goal. With derotation the anterior column is lengthened which
sacrifices kyphosis. Although there is a paucity of evidence to prove that
this affects long-term outcome and quality of life, it is logical to assume
that TK restoration may optimize global sagittal alignment and slow down
lumbar and cervical disc degeneration. Material and Methods:
Radiographs of 100 consecutive patients that underwent posterior correction
and fusion for adolescent idiopathic scoliosis (AIS) at a single center were
analyzed. 5.5 mm titanium or cobalt chromium rods were used. Thoracic
Kyphosis (TK) was measured preoperatively and two years postoperatively for
the whole group, and separately for hypo-, normo- and hyperkyphotic patients
(according to the Lenke classification). A one-sided one-sample t-test was
performed to compare pre- and postoperative values. Results:
For all patients mean TK significantly decreased by 3.8° ± 3.4 (P
= .005). For hyperkyphotic patients (n = 9) mean TK
significantly decreased by 18.9° ± 3.8 (P = .006). For
normokyphotic patients (n = 75) mean TK significantly decreased by 3.9° ±
3.2 (P = .001). For hypokyphotic patients (n = 16) mean TK
significantly increased by 4.9° ± 2.4 (P = .005).
Conclusion: The results are ambivalent which is consistent
with the literature. Except for the hyperkyphotic group the differences are
within or close to the range of a measurement error. The main conflict of
implant stiffness versus lengthening the anterior column with derotation
remains unsolved. Additionally, it is difficult to define an optimal TK for
any given patient. TK restoration remains a challenge. Even with translation
maneuvers and the use of cobalt chromium rods, creation of kyphosis is
difficult. However, in patients that are already hypokyphotic it is possible
to achieve good coronal correction without sacrificing additional
kyphosis.

## 1274

## A359: How Close are We to “Complication Free” Adolescent Idiopathic
Scoliosis Fusion Surgery?

Jay Reidler

1

, Meghan Cerpa

1

, Joseph Lombardi

1

, Zeeshan Sardar

1

, and Lawrence Lenke

1

1

Coluia University Medical Center, New York, USA

Summary: This study examines recent rates of complication and
readmission following posterior spinal fusion for adolescent idiopathic
scoliosis (AIS). We observed no readmissions, reoperations, or major medical
or surgical complications in this series of 76 consecutive cases.
Hypothesis: We hypothesized that posterior spinal fusion
for treatment of AIS currently has lower complication and readmission rates
than previously reported. Study Design: Consecutive single
surgeon series. Introduction: Historically, rates of
complication associated with posterior spinal fusion for AIS have been
reported to range between 5 to 10%, with 30-day unplanned readmission rates
around 3%. With the development of improved intraoperative techniques and
perioperative care protocols, one would expect these rates to have improved
in recent years. Yet, little is known about current rates of complication
and readmission. Methods: We collected surgical and
postoperative data on 76 consecutive cases of posterior spinal fusion for
AIS using pedicle screw constructs in patients aged 11-18 years who
underwent surgery between 2015 and 2019. All surgeries were performed in a
tertiary children’s hospital (43%) or in a tertiary spine-focused hospital
(57%) by a single surgeon with greater than 25 years experience in deformity
surgery. Results: Mean age was 15.8 ± 1.8 yrs and time since
surgery was 2.1 ± 1.2 yrs. An average of 11 ± 2 levels were
instrumented/fused per case and the distribution of Lenke classification
types was: 1 = 39%, 2 = 26%, 3 = 12%, 4 = 1%, 5 = 12%, 6 = 9%. The mean
surgical time was 4.3 ± 0.8 hour, estimated blood loss was 565 ± 291 cc, and
length of stay was 3.6 ± 0.8 days. The rates of readmission and/or
reoperation were 0%, with up to 4 year follow up for the earliest patients.
There were no major medical or surgical perioperative complications. There
were two minor complications (3%) including 1 durotomy and 1 transient
postoperative ileus. Seventeen patients (22%) received blood transfusions.
In 4 cases (5%), there were concerning neuromonitoring changes that resolved
following corrective maneuvers and there were no postoperative neurologic
deficits. Conclusion: In this consecutive series of AIS spinal
fusion patients over a 4 year period, we observed no readmissions,
reoperations, or major medical or surgical complications. This current state
of the art information will be important for patient counseling and
comparison as newer techniques, such as non-fusion options, become
available. Take Home Message: Surgeons can potentially achieve
extremely low complication rates when treating AIS with posterior spinal
fusion. This must be considered as alternatives to this gold-standard
treatment are investigated in the future.

## 729

## A360: Radiographic Outcomes of 3-D Alif Stand-Alone Cages Implementation
for Ads Patients (Retrospective Study)

Anton Denisov

1

, Dmitry Ptashnikov

1 2

, Nikita Zaborovskii

1

, Sergei Masevnin

1

, and Dmitry Mikhaylov

1

1

National Medical Center of Traumatology and Orthopaedics n.a. Vreden
R.R, Bone oncology and spinal surgery, Saint-Petersburg, Russian
Federation

2

North-Western State Medical University named after I.I. Mechnikov,
Traumatology and Orthopaedics, Saint-Petersburg, Russian
Federation

Introduction:Is well known that the usage of minimal invasive
surgery (MIS) techniques for adult degenerative scoliosis (ADS) require
correct placement of interbody cages.For the purpose of improving segmental
and total lordosis were invented interbody cages with certain lordotic
angles which contribute not only to appropriate correction degree but
although to indirect decompression by increasing of intervertebral heights.
Implementation of 3D printing in nowadays practice has allowed more
individualize preoperative planning and implant preparation for achieving
definite goals of spinal surgery. In case of ADS, asymmetric lordotic
titanium cages could help not only in sagittal but in frontal balance
correction that can improve radiographic outcomes. The goal of this study is
to evaluate changes of radiographic parameters at patients with ADS whom
performed anterior correction with asymmetric titanium lordotic cages.
Material and Methods:This is a single center retrospective
study of 50 patients (19 men, 31 women) who underwent oblique and anterior
interbody fusion using titanium custom asymmetric lordotic cages for ADS
correction. Were formed 2 groups according to SRS-Schwab classification
(2012): first group 25 patients with PI-LL mismatch moderate and second
group 25 patients with PI-LL mismatch severe.Period of observation from
april 2018 to august 2020. Standing full spine and conventional radiographs
at pre-op and 1-6-12-mounth follow-up were performed. Observed radiographic
parameters: SVA, LL, PT, central line and Cobb angle for frontal
deformation. Intragroup results were compared using t Student test. And
intergroup results were evaluated with U Mann-Whitney test.
Results:21patients underwent 3-level MIS ALIF, OLIF, and 29
underwent 2-level. The mean age was 58 years, with prevalence of 64% women.
In both groups, frontal deformation correction was achieved. Was found
statistical difference between pre-op and post-op radiographic parameters in
first (P = .019,P <.05) and the second
(P = .042,P <.05) group. Comparing
results entre groups we found that mean post-op values of SVA, PT, LL were
significantly higher in the first group (mean SVA1= 25 ± 8 mm,
mean SVA2= 87 ± 19 mm,P = .018; mean
PT1=14 ± 30, mean PT2= 28 ±
40,P = .032; mean LL1=47 ±
20mean LL2=31 ± 10,P =
.024). In addition, 74% of patients of the second group
subsequently required posterior transpedicular fixation and Smith-Peterson
Osteotomy (SPO) performing for achieve full sagittal correction. Wherein in
the first group only 18% patients were held second stage surgery.
Conclusion:Titanium custom asymmetric lordotic
cagesprovided significant increase in sagittal balance correction among
patients with moderate deformity (first group), instead of the second group
where the majority of patients with severe deformations for reasons of
non-achieved significant improvement of correction required additional
surgery.

## References
1. Kim YJ, Bridwell KH, Lenke LG, et al. Pseudarthrosis in primary fusions
for adult idiopathic scoliosis: incidence, risk factors, and outcome
analysis. Spine. 2005; 30: 468-474.
2. Shaffer AD, Shonuga OA, Hirsch BP, et al. Sclerostin antibody enhances
spine fusion in a rat posterolateral transverse process fusion model:
preliminary results. Proc 33rd Annual Meeting of the American Society for
Bone and Mineral Research, San Diego, CA, 2011, p S517 (Abstract
MO0461).
3. Boden SD, Schimandle JH, Hutton WC. An experimental lumbar intertransverse
process spinal fusion model. Radiographic, histologic, and biomechanical
healing characteristics. Spine (Phila Pa 1976). 1995 Feb
15;20(4):412-20.