4063jacsauJACS AuJACS AuAmerican Chemical SocietyPMC1030167910301679103016793738870010.1021/jacsau.3c00195Uncovering the Kinetic
Characteristics and Degradation
Preference of PROTAC Systems with Advanced Theoretical Analyses
TangRongfan WangZhe XiangSutong WangLingling YuYang WangQinghua DengQirui HouTingjun SunHuiyong †Department
of Medicinal Chemistry, China Pharmaceutical
University, Nanjing 210009, Jiangsu, P. R. China‡Innovation
Institute for Artificial Intelligence in Medicine of Zhejiang University,
College of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Zhejiang
University, Hangzhou 310058, Zhejiang, P. R. China*E-mail: tingjunhou@zju.edu.cn.
*Email: huiyongsun@cpu.edu.cn.
5620233617751775–17892962023© 2023 The Authors. Published by American Chemical SocietyPermits non-commercial access and re-use, provided that author attribution and integrity are maintained; but does not permit creation of adaptations or other derivative works (https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/).

## Abstract
 Proteolysis-targeting chimeras (PROTACs), which can selectively
induce the degradation of target proteins, represent an attractive
technology in drug discovery. A large number of PROTACs have been
reported, but due to the complicated structural and kinetic characteristics
of the target-PROTAC-E3 ligase ternary interaction process, the rational
design of PROTACs is still quite challenging. Here, we characterized
and analyzed the kinetic mechanism of MZ1, a PROTAC that targets the
bromodomain (BD) of the bromodomain and extra terminal (BET) protein
(Brd2, Brd3, or Brd4) and von Hippel-Lindau E3 ligase (VHL), from
the kinetic and thermodynamic perspectives of view by using enhanced
sampling simulations and free energy calculations. The simulations
yielded satisfactory predictions on the relative residence time and
standard binding free energy (rp >
0.9)
for MZ1 in different BrdBD-MZ1-VHL ternary complexes. Interestingly,
the simulation of the PROTAC ternary complex disintegration illustrates
that MZ1 tends to remain on the surface of VHL with the BD proteins
dissociating alone without a specific dissociation direction, indicating
that the PROTAC prefers more to bind with E3 ligase at the first step
in the formation of the target-PROTAC-E3 ligase ternary complex. Further
exploration of the degradation difference of MZ1 in different Brd
systems shows that the PROTAC with higher degradation efficiency tends
to leave more lysine exposed on the target protein, which is guaranteed
by the stability (binding affinity) and durability (residence time)
of the target-PROTAC-E3 ligase ternary complex. It is quite possible
that the underlying binding characteristics of the BrdBD-MZ1-VHL systems revealed by this study may be shared by different
PROTAC systems as a general rule, which may accelerate rational PROTAC
design with higher degradation efficiency.
Keywords: PROTAC, Binding Free Energy Calculation, Residence
Time, Umbrella Sampling, Random Accelerated Molecular
Dynamics

statusreleaseddisplay-pdfyesis-olfnois-manuscriptnois-preprintnois-journal-matternois-scannednois-retractednoReceived 2023 Apr 18; Accepted 2023 May 16; Revised 2023 May 16; Collection date 2023 Jun 26.

## Introduction
Targeted protein degradation (TPD) is
an emerging technique in
which drugs use the cell’s own proteasome system (UPS) or lysosome
for target protein degradation. − Proteolysis-targeting chimera
(PROTAC) proposed by Crews et al. has become one of the fastest developing
targeted protein degradation technologies, which has made it possible
to regulate proteins that were once considered undruggable. , − PROTACs in clinical trials represented by ARV-110
and ARV-471 have shown significant effects in cancer therapy by targeting
the degradation of the androgen receptor (AR) and estrogen receptor
(ER), respectively. And the first PROTAC
(LC-2) targeting degradation of KRASG12C shows high efficiency
in attenuating the carcinogenic KRAS levels and downstream signaling
in cancer cells. Therefore, PROTACs have
attracted wide interest and applications in the field of drug discovery
in recent years. 
Typically, PROTACs
are a class of bifunctional molecules, which
are composed of an E3 ligase ligand (E3 ligand), a (warhead) ligand
targeting the protein of interest (POI), and a linker connecting the
above two ligands. Compared with traditional chemical drugs, PROTACs
exert their drug activity through an “event-driven”
rather than “occupation-driven” way, which means that
the degradation activity of a PROTAC is not solely dependent on the
binding affinity between the drug and the target, but closely related
to the occurrence of ubiquitination labeling on the POI. , In general, ubiquitination is dependent on the formation of POI-PROTAC-E3
ligase ternary complex induced by the PROTACs. The duration of the
ternary complex only needs to ensure the occurrence of ubiquitination
on the POI. Once the POI is degraded, the PROTAC dissociates and forms
a new ternary complex again with another POI for the next round of
degradation. In this process, the stability of the ternary complex
is critical to the degradation efficiency; that is, PROTACs with relatively weak interactions to the POIs may
still achieve high target degradation efficiency since their ternary
complexes are stable enough to induce the ubiquitination of the POIs
(namely the “event-driven” case). For instance, the
binding affinity of foretinib, a p38α kinase inhibitor, only
achieves the micromolar level; however, the PROTAC designed based
on foretinib can effectively degrade p38α kinase at the nanomolar
level. 
Medicinal chemists usually
carry out reasonable PROTAC design based
on the high-affinity ligands of the E3 ligases and POIs. The traditional
method is to separately design the E3 ligase ligand, the POI ligand
and the proper linker. The design of the first two parts of a PROTAC
is similar to that of the traditional small molecular drugs, while
design of the linker needs to ensure that the PROTAC can induce the
formation of a stable POI-PROTAC-E3 ligase ternary complex with proper
interaction orientation between the POI and the E3 ligase, which makes
the design of PROTACs more challenging than the design of traditional
drugs. At present, only <5% of E3 ligases have been used for the
PROTAC design, and POIs achieving targeted
degradation mainly include the tyrosine kinases, hormone receptors,
and BET family proteins. , In addition, due to
the complicated structure and dynamic characteristics of the ternary
PROTAC systems, the design of PROTACs remains a great challenge. Therefore,
this study expects to reveal general rules responsible for the dynamic
and thermodynamic characteristics of the PROTAC ternary systems by
using in silico techniques, so as to accelerate the
rational design of PROTACs.
In the field of in silico computations, there
have been advances in predicting the drug-target binding affinity. − However, a full understanding of the drug binding kinetics is also
critical to improve drug efficacy and safety. − Generally, calculating the dissociation constant
(koff) or residence time (τ = 1/koff) is more time-consuming than determining
the binding affinity, because it requires sufficient sampling of the
conformational space of the drug-target dissociation process. Fortunately,
Wade and co-workers proposed to use τ-random accelerated molecular
dynamics (τ-RAMD) to effectively explore dissociation pathways
and predict the relative residence time of drugs to their targets, , which provides us a great number of details about the (un)binding
kinetics of various biological systems. − 
Compound MZ1, made up of the pan-BET
inhibitor JQ1 (the warhead ligand), a
specific VHL ligand VH032 (the E3-ligase ligand), , and a three-unit PEG linker ( B), is the first PROTAC achieving degradation of the
BET protein family by recruiting substrate recognition subunits von
Hippel-Lindau protein (VHL). It shows selectivity for the degradation
of different bromodomains (BDs) of the BET family proteins Brd2, Brd3,
and Brd4 in the experiments, and a number
of experimental data has been deposited in this system (BrdBD-MZ1-VHL), facilitating one to investigate
the general mechanism of formation/disintegration of the POI–PROTAC-E3
ligase ternary complex. Therefore, in this study, we carried out enhanced
sampling simulations based on RAMD and umbrella sampling (US) simulations
to study the binding/disintegration characteristics, the stabilization
mechanism and the protein–protein interaction (PPI) features
of the PROTAC systems. The results show that the residence time of
PROTACs can be effectively predicted by the τ-RAMD simulation,
where MZ1 tends to remain on the surface of VHL, while the BDs prefer
to dissociate from the surface of VHL without a specified dissociation
direction, implying that MZ1 usually prefers more to form a binary
complex with VHL before recruiting the BDs to form the PROTAC ternary
complex. In addition, the underlying mechanism of MZ1 exhibiting higher
degradation efficiency in the Brd4BD2-MZ1-VHL system than
the Brd4BD1-MZ1-VHL system also revealed that MZ1 forms
a more stable ternary complex and a more appropriate orientation in
the Brd4BD2-MZ1-VHL system to increase the lysine exposure
of the POI (BD) for higher degradation efficiency.
 

## Materials and Methods

## Structure Preparation
The crystal structure of the
second BD of Brd4 (Brd4BD2), MZ1 (a PROTAC molecule), and
the von Hippel-Lindau E3 ligase (VHL) ternary complex (Brd4BD2-MZ1-VHL, PDB ID: 5T35( )) was employed for the analyses. The
repeating units and water molecules were removed, and the missing
flexible loops were repaired by the Prepare Protein module in Discovery Studio/2019 with the default parameters. Due
to the lack of the crystal structures of MZ1 complexed with VHL and
other BDs, the crystal structures of 3MXF, 3S92, 3S91, 3ONI, and 2YEK that contain
different BDs and similar small molecules to MZ1 were used as the
building blocks for other BrdBD-MZ1-VHL system construction.
The above five crystal structures were processed with a same way as
that of the Brd4BD2-MZ1-VHL complex, and then the five
complexes with different ligand-BD were overlapped with the complex
of Brd4BD2-MZ1-VHL to construct the other BrdBD-MZ1-VHL complexes. Besides, we treated the MZ1-VHL complex as the
binary system for simulation after removing the BD protein in the
Brd4BD2-MZ1-VHL complex. All the modified parts of the
systems were relaxed by geometry refinement and CHARMm force field
optimization to clean the potential unfavorable contacts in the systems.
A total of seven PROTAC systems (six BrdBD-MZ1-VHL ternary
systems and one MZ1-VHL binary system) were used for the following
study.

## Simulation System Setup
Considering the large molecular
weight of a PROTAC molecule, AM1-BCC atomic charge was used to handle MZ1 by using the antechamber module in AMBER/20. In the system preparation, the PROTAC molecule and protein
were parametrized with the general amber force field (gaff, version 1.81) and the ff14SB force
field, respectively. The ternary complexes
were embedded in a TIP3P water box extended
10 Å out of the solute in each direction. Counterions of Na+ or Cl– were added to neutralize the redundant
charges of the systems. All the topology structures and coordinates
of the PROTAC systems were built with the tleap module
in AMBER/20.

## Molecular Mechanics (MM) Minimization and MD Simulation
Before MD simulation, the prepared systems were applied for a four-step
MM minimization to further optimize the unfavorable bonds or local
conformations of the initial structures. In the first step, all the
heavy atoms were restrained by 5 kcal/mol·Å2 with
the hydrogen atoms free for moving; then, the heavy atoms (oxygen)
in water molecules and the counterions were allowed to move; subsequently,
only the backbone atoms in the proteins were restrained with 5 kcal/mol·Å2; and finally, the whole system was set free for the full
minimization. Here, 5,000 steps of steepest and conjugate descent
minimizations were applied to the first three steps of MM minimization,
while 10,000 and 20,000 steps of steepest and conjugate descent minimizations
were conducted in the fourth step of MM minimization, respectively.
The real space nonbonded cutoff was set to 10 Å and the long-range
electrostatic interaction was handled with the Particle Mesh Ewald
(PME) algorithm. The optimized structures
were used for the following MD simulation.
In the phase of conventional
MD (cMD) simulation, the covalent bonds containing hydrogen atoms
were constrained by the SHAKE algorithm
and the Langevin algorithm was used to control the temperature of
the system, where the collision frequency was set to 2/ps. The three-step
protocol was applied to the MD simulation. First, each system was
heated from 0 to 300 K during 50 ps in an NVT ensemble with the backbone
atoms in the proteins restrained at 2 kcal/mol·Å2; then each system was equilibrated for another 50 ps in an NPT ensemble
with the target temperature and pressure set to 300 K and 1 atm, respectively,
and the heavy atoms of the proteins restraining at 2 kcal/mol·Å2 as well; finally, 100 ns cMD simulation was performed (T = 300 K and P = 1 atm) without any restraints.
The time step was set to 2 fs, and the coordinates of the systems
were recorded every 50 ps, so that a total of 2000 frames was collected
in one cMD trajectory for the following analysis. All the MM minimizations
and cMD simulations were performed with AMBER/20.

## τ-Random Acceleration Molecular Dynamics (τ-RAMD)
Simulation
RAMD has been widely applied in the exploration
of potential dissociation pathways of drugs. − τ-RAMD, an extension application of RAMD, is
regarded as one of the computationally efficient approaches for the
prediction of drug-target residence time that plays an important role
in drug efficiency. , , At present, a number of MD sampling algorithms, such as metadynamics, − weighted ensemble (WE), − and Gaussian accelerated molecular dynamics (GaMD), , etc., have been used to predict the drug-target residence time,
but the effective prediction of these methods requires either the
custom parameters or very long simulation time, which undoubtedly
increase the difficulty in practically characterizing the kinetic
characteristics of the system. Nevertheless, RAMD simulation requires
no prior knowledge of the ligand’s dissociation pathway, and
the only parameter needing to be customized is the range of the random
force. Thus, when an appropriate random force is set, the calculated
relative residence time usually goes in a reasonable range. In the
spirit of RAMD simulation, an artificial force is applied to the selected
part of a system (usually a ligand) with a random direction to probe
whether the biased part can shift a predetermined threshold distance
(rmin, e.g., 0.025 Å in default)
along the given direction under the action of the external force within
a given simulation time (e.g., 0.1 ps in default). If the biased part
of the system moves enough distance in the given simulation time,
the same oriented force will be continued to the subsequent simulations;
otherwise, the direction of the force will be changed randomly. And
when the center of mass (CoM) of the biased part of the system dissociates
a certain distance from the original position, the simulation terminates.
Herein, considering that a large simulation space may be sampled
in the disintegration process of the PROTAC system, all the systems
were simulated with the generalized Born implicit solvent (GBIS) model
in the RAMD simulations. − Since there is no long-range
electrostatic calculation in the GBIS model, the real-space nonbonded
cutoff was set to 16 Å. The concentration of the implicit ions
was set to 0.2 M. Before RAMD simulation, each system was minimized,
heated, and equilibrated in the same way as that conducted in the
explicit-solvent simulations, whereas NAMD/2.14 in the implicit solvent model was used to facilitate the
following RAMD simulations. Each system was simulated for five times
to reduce the random impact on the resulted structures, and the last
conformations in each system (five/system) were used as the starting
points for the RAMD simulations.
In the RAMD simulation, MZ1
and BDs were defined as ligands in
the six ternary systems, while MZ1 alone was set as the ligand in
the binary system, with VHL used as the receptor for all the systems.
To prevent drifting of the system, residues within three regions of
VHL, including I147-N150, K159-L169, and E199-Q209, were constrained
with 5 kcal/mol·Å2, which are located distant
from the binding surface of MZ1 and BDs and will not affect the dissociation
of the ligand. An artificial force of 2.1 kcal/mol·Å was
used for the RAMD simulation, which showed robust results in our prior
testing. The threshold distance (rmin)
and RAMD time interval was set to 0.025 Å and 0.1 ps (50 steps),
respectively, which means that if the defined ligand can move along
the given force for 0.025 Å within 0.1 ps, the direction of the
force will be continued in the next round of RAMD simulation; otherwise,
a random direction will be generated in the force to bias the ligand
to go through other directions. The terminal distance was set to 70
Å to fully dissociate the ligand. For each starting point of
the systems, 15 RAMD repeats were conducted, namely a total of 75
trajectories (5 MD repeats × 15 RAMD repeats for each system)
were collected for each system for the residence time calculation
and disintegration mechanism analysis. All the RAMD simulations were
conducted with NAMD/2.14.

## Residence Time Calculation
Theoretically, the disintegration
of a biological system (rare event) follows the Poisson process, and
one can estimate the effective residence time with the Poisson process
to avoid influence of outlier points to the statistical result. , To characterize the Poisson process of the disintegration of a PROTAC
system, the cumulative distribution function (CDF) can be used to
describe the probability of observing at least one disintegration
event within time t according to , where τ denotes the effective
disintegration time estimated from several independent RAMD simulations.
1 Moreover, in order to check the sampling
quality of the RAMD simulations, the two-sample Kolmogorov–Smirnov
(KS) test was used to compare the empirical cumulative distribution
function (ECDF) derived from the RAMD simulations and its theoretical
cumulative distribution function (TCDF, that is fitted from the ECDF
with the minimum variance). A large p-value (e.g., > 0.05) means no statistical difference
between
the ECDF and TCDF, and the statistics of the samples obeys the Poisson
process. Here, the computation of residence time was mainly according
to the protocol proposed by Wade. We
conducted the KS test by using samples in each replica of the five
initial structures, which shows a higher p-value
in the KS test, and averaged the results to represent the estimated
residence time. The detailed KS test results can be found in Figure
S1 in the Supporting Information.

## Umbrella Sampling
Umbrella sampling (US) has shown
efficiency for studying binding free energy and kinetic details in
exploring drug binding/dissociating pathways. − Here, in order
to fully capture the thermodynamic and kinetic characteristics of
a PROTAC interacting with the POI and E3 ligase, US was performed
on the seven PROTAC systems based on the disintegration trajectories
of the RAMD simulations.
In the spirit of US simulation, an
external potential is employed to bias the system from one thermodynamic
state (e.g., bound-state system) to another (e.g., free-state system)
along a predefined reaction coordinate (RC). In practice, the RC is usually divided into a series of pieces (named
windows) to speed up the convergence of the sampling, where harmonic
potential (ω) with equal or different force constant (K) is usually applied to each window to bias the sampling
( ), with ωi(ξ) and ξiref representing the biasing potential at a certain
position (ξ) of the RC and the reference position in window i, respectively.
2 In this study, several dissociation
pathways revealed by the RAMD
trajectories were employed for the US simulation in each system (5–6
trajectories for each system). A similar definition of the ligand
as that of the RAMD simulation was applied in the US simulation, with
the CoM distance between the heavy atoms of the ligand and the Cα
atoms of residues within 5 Å of MZ1 (a part of ligand) defined
as the RC. The RC position derived from each frame of the RAMD trajectory
was used as the reference position for the US simulation. We took
the last frame of the equilibrated phase MD simulation (before the
RAMD simulation) as the initial structure for the US simulation, and
then the frame whose distance was closest to the expected distance
in the RAMD trajectory was used as the initial structure for the next
window US simulation. Here, an average of ∼1.0 Å interval
along the RC was set between two adjacent windows (Table S1), with the interval closer to each other at the beginning
of the ligand’s dissociation (∼0.5 Å/interval,
bound-state), while farther from each other as the ligand dissociates
to the solvent (∼2.0 Å/interval, free-state). Meanwhile,
the root-mean-square deviation (RMSD) between two adjacent windows
of the initial conformations of the ligand was kept within 3 Å
to prevent too much conformational change of the ligand. For sufficient
convergence of the system, 10 cycles of 1 ns-US simulation were conducted
for each window (namely, 1 ns × 10 cycles × ∼45 windows
for each RAMD trajectory). The weighted histogram analysis method
(WHAM) , was applied to calculate the potential of
mean force (PMF) by converting the biased probability distribution
to a normal one along the RC. The detailed window information on the
US simulation can be found in Table S1.
All the PMF curves were shifted with the minimum RC point at zero.
The average PMF was estimated based on the 6–10 rounds of US
samples with the last 10 Å of the PMF used for the PMF depth
calculation. The standard deviation was estimated based on the 6–10
rounds of PMFs with the last 10 Å of the PMF as well. All the
US simulations were performed with the pmemd.cuda module in AMBER/20.
To calculate the standard binding free
energy (ΔGUS°) of
the system, here, we applied Henchman’s scheme to correct the PMF depth (ΔPMFUS) of the
PMF curve without using additional constraints ( ): , 
3 4 where the second term of is associated with the standard volume (V° = 1661 Å3), the cross-sectional
area (Au) detected by the unbound ligand
(calculated by πR2 with R = 20 and 10 Å for BD and MZ1, respectively), and
the bound length (Lb) calculated by the
configurational integrals of the PMF curve along the ligand-bound
region of the RC ξ ( ).

## Bound-State and Kinetic-State Analyses Based on MM/GBSA Calculation
Here, Molecular Mechanics/Generalized Born Surface Area (MM/GBSA)
was used to analyze the binding characteristics of the cMD and US
trajectories, which has been widely applied in various biological
systems, such as protein–ligand, − protein–protein/peptide, , and protein–RNA systems. The
calculation of MM/GBSA binding free energy follows the below formulas:
5 6 7 8 9 where ΔGbind represents the binding free energy that is numerically equal to
the energy difference between the protein–ligand complex (bound
state) and the protein/ligand individuals (free state) ( ). Based on the second law of thermodynamics,
the binding free energy can also be expressed by the enthalpy and
entropy changes upon protein–ligand interactions as shown in . Because of the high computational
cost of the entropy (−TΔS) calculation for the ternary system, here we did not try to take
entropy into consideration. The enthalpy part (ΔH) is appropriately equal to the sum of the molecular mechanics energy
change (ΔEMM) and the solvation
free energy change (ΔGsol) of the
system ( ), where
ΔEMM consists of the bonded energies
(ΔEint including the bond, angle,
and dihedral energies) that can be canceled out here since the single
MD trajectory protocol was applied for the end point binding free
energy calculation due to the convergence issue, and the nonbonded electrostatic (ΔEele) and van der Waals (ΔEvdW) interactions ( ). What is noteworthy is that ΔEMM only represents the energy of a system in vacuum and thus
the introduction of the solvation energy (ΔGsol) into the total free energy change makes the calculated
energy closer to one in the physiological state. The solvation free
energy can be decomposed into the polar (ΔGGB) and nonpolar (ΔGSA) parts ( ), in which
the former can be estimated by a number of algorithms, represented
by the Poisson–Boltzmann (PB) equation and the Generalized Born (GB) model, and the latter can usually be fitted by a linear equation to the
solvent accessible surface area (SASA) ( ). Here, we applied Onufriev’s
GB model for the polar solvation energy
calculation with the interior (solute) and exterior dielectric (solvent)
constants set to 1 and 80, respectively, and used the LCPO algorithm for the ΔA estimation
with the parameters of γ and b set to 0.0072
and 0, respectively. All the calculations were performed by the MMPBSA.py module in AMBER/20.
Moreover, since the thermodynamic information on the ligand in
microenvironment during the binding/dissociating process is beneficial
to further understand the mechanism of action, here the kinetic energy
information on the PROTAC system was characterized by the pathway
analyzing method Kinetic Residue Energy Analysis (KREA), which maps the energetic profile into individual
residues along the dissociation pathway through MM/GBSA decomposition.
Here, all the US snapshots were mapped according to the US RC with
the energy terms ΔEvdW, ΔEele, and ΔGGB calculated by the above MM/GBSA protocol, and ΔGSA estimated by the ICOSA algorithm. 

## Solvent Accessible Surface Area (SASA) Analysis of the Protein
Surface
The SASA of the system was estimated
by the Shrake-Rupley algorithm in PYMOL.
To calculate the buried surface areas (BSA) of lysine on POI in the
formation of the ternary complex, the POI in the ternary complex was
separated, and the change of SASA between the individual
POI and the POI in ternary complex was calculated for each lysine
residue. 

## H-Bond Frequency Computation
In this study, an H-bond
was defined with the donor–acceptor (D-A) distance ≤3.0
Å and the angle of D-H-A ≤ 20°. The number of H-bonds
were counted throughout the RAMD trajectories to calculate the H-bond
frequency. All of the analyses were performed with the Hydrogen
Bonds plugin (version 1.2) in VMD/1.9.2. 

## Results and Discussion

## Kinetic Details of the Degradation Mechanism of the PROTAC System

## Predicting the Relative Residence Time during Disintegration
of the PROTAC System
The disintegration trajectories generated
by the RAMD simulations were used to compute the residence time of
the BrdBD-MZ1-VHL ternary systems and the MZ1-VHL binary
system. As shown in , a remarkable correlation (Pearson R = 0.92)
is shown for the predicted residence time and the experimental data
(log10(1/koff)), indicating
that the τ-RAMD simulation is capable of characterizing the
relative residence time and dissociation trend of a PROTAC in the
ternary complex, and the trajectories are reliable for subsequent
analyses. Nevertheless, it is noteworthy that the difference of the
predicted relative residence time is within the standard deviation
because of the too close experimental data of the systems. Therefore,
we mainly compared the systems with the longest (e.g., Brd4BD2-MZ1-VHL) and shortest (e.g., Brd4BD1-MZ1-VHL) residence
time in the following study.
 

## MZ1 Tends to Retain on the Surface of VHL during the Disintegration
Process of the Ternary Complex
Whether MZ1 dissociates with
the BDs during disintegration of the BrdBD-MZ1-VHL ternary
complex is of great interest since it determines which protein MZ1
prefers to bind at first (BD or VHL) to form the binary complex during
the formation of the BrdBD-MZ1-VHL ternary structure. Therefore,
exploring the disintegration characteristics of the PROTAC systems
can provide dynamic basis for the rational design of PROTACs.
First, we conducted 100 ns cMD simulations on the six ternary PROTAC
systems and monitored the binding free energy of MZ1 to the two proteins
(BD and VHL). As shown in , MZ1 exhibits stronger MM/GBSA binding affinity to
VHL in all the systems (ΔGMZ1-VHL<ΔGMZ1-BD), indicating
that MZ1 is more favorable in binding with VHL in the solution environment.
Next, the 75 RAMD trajectories in each ternary system were grouped
depending on whether MZ1 has dissociated together with BD (inner panel
in ). The result
shows that the proportion of RAMD trajectories involving codissociation
of MZ1 and BD are 29/75 (Brd4BD2), 16/75 (Brd4BD1), 21/75 (Brd3BD2), 26/75 (Brd3BD1), 24/75
(Brd2BD2), and 31/75 (Brd2BD1) in the six PROTAC
systems, accounting for a relatively small proportion, implying that
MZ1 favors more in binding with VHL and tends to retain on VHL during
the disintegration of the ternary structure, which is consistent with
the bound-state MM/GBSA binary interaction result ( ). Furthermore, six representative
trajectories among the 75 RAMD trajectories in the Brd4BD2-MZ1-VHL system were randomly selected to investigate the structural
and interacting features of the different dissociation directions
of the BD. As shown in A3–C3, when Brd4BD2 dissociates from the
surface of VHL, MZ1 gradually disperses and extends to all the directions,
with the PEG linker responsible for the high flexibility of MZ1 during
the dissociation. However, the conformation of the E3-ligand part
(VH032) of MZ1 targeting VHL remains relatively stable throughout
the dissociation process, confirming why MZ1 tends to retain on the
surface of VHL protein. And this hypothesis is further confirmed by
monitoring the H-bond between MZ1 and VHL in the representative disintegration
trajectories ( D), where MZ1 exhibits many H-bonds with Y98, S111, R107, H115 and
H110 of VHL, while shows few H-bonds with Brd4BD2 (mainly
with N433). Therefore, it is suggested that MZ1 prefers more to retain
on VHL in most cases due to the strong H-bond interactions with VHL,
and in turn indicating that MZ1 may prefer more to form binary complex
with VHL at first before recruiting BD to form the ternary complex
to achieve the target protein degradation.
 

## BD Does Not Show Preferred Dissociation Direction during the
Disintegration Process of the Ternary System
As shown in , the 75 RAMD trajectories
for each ternary system were plotted according to the RMSD of BD and
the dihedral angle between BD and VHL. It is noteworthy that there
shows no specific dissociation direction when the BD dissociates alone
from the ternary complex, whereas its dissociation direction is limited
to a certain range (red dots in each inner panel of ) when BD dissociates together
with MZ1. This phenomenon has also been verified structurally. As
shown in A1- B3, with the increase of dissociation distance between
Brd4BD2 and VHL and the conformational change of MZ1, Brd4BD2 gradually dissociates from the surface of VHL in all directions.
As a result, Brd4BD2 does not show an obvious preferred
dissociation direction, which may be limited by the large volume of
Brd4BD2 and its protein–protein interactions (PPIs)
with VHL. Once Brd4BD2 breaks the strong interactions with
MZ1, it slowly dissociates from the surface of VHL ( C1–C3).
Further
comparison of the H-bond interactions between MZ1 and the two proteins
shows that in the trajectories involving codissociation of MZ1 and
Brd4BD2, namely the RAMD ID of 8 and 14, a relatively higher
frequency of the H-bond is shown between MZ1 and N433 on Brd4BD2 compared with other trajectories ( D). Moreover, the result also shows that
MZ1 needs to try its best to prolong the interaction with Brd4BD2 to maintain the stability of the ternary complex during
the disintegration process. Therefore, based on the above characteristics
of MZ1, we speculate that the dissociation characteristics are an
important factor affecting the dissociation directions of the BD protein.

## The Codissociation of MZ1 with BD Limits the Dissociation Direction
of BD
Furthermore, we explored the dissociation details of
MZ1-VHL binary system to reveal the mechanism of its influence on
BD dissociation. Compared with the ternary systems, the dissociation
direction of the binary system (MZ1-VHL) is more significant. As shown
in , with the
dissociation of MZ1, the dihedral angle between MZ1 and VHL exhibits
two distinct trends, meaning that the dissociation of MZ1 may favor
a certain of directions. Since there is no BD binding with the PROTAC
molecule, the parts of warhead ligand targeting BD and the linker
in MZ1 are both exposed to the solvent and show a high degree of flexibility
throughout the dissociation process. Consistent with the ternary systems,
the stability of the binary complex mainly depends on the H-bond between
MZ1 and S111, R107, H115 and H110 of VHL, implying that the E3 ligase
ligand part (VH032) of MZ1 does not change its binding pattern with
VHL during the formation of the ternary complex. This result also
suggests the importance of choosing a proper linker for PROTAC design.
 At the beginning of dissociation, the strong H-bonds
between MZ1
and VHL maintain the binding mode and stabilize the conformation of
VH032 in MZ1, although the flexible part of MZ1 extends to all directions.
With further dissociation, MZ1 gradually overcomes the strong interactions
with VHL and then dissociates along the β-folded plane in all
directions. However, it is worth noting that the dissociations of
MZ1 are all on the β-fold side space on the same side as β2,
β3 and β4 ( B1–B3). The main reason may be that MZ1 binds to VHL
at the β-fold, and therefore it is hard for it to dissociate
from the opposite side of the β-fold due to its large structure.
In addition, most part of the skeleton of MZ1 is exposed to the solvent
region and there is no significant interaction to constrain its action
in the dissociation process, therefore there is no specific dissociation
pathway for MZ1 in the binary system as well. The above inference
is also confirmed by the observation of the codissociation trajectories
of the ternary systems (MZ1 dissociates together with BD), that is,
basically all the BDs prefer to dissociate along the β-fold
side space on the same side as β2, β3, and β4 in
VHL because, to some extent, the strong interaction between MZ1 and
BDs limits the dissociation direction of BDs, implying that, compared
with the case of the MZ1-VHL binary complex interacting with BD to
form the ternary complex (where no binding direction should be chosen
before MZ1-VHL binding to BD), the recruitment of VHL by the MZ1-BD
binary complex may be limited since an appropriate binding direction
should be chosen at first for MZ1-BD to smoothly bind with VHL.

## Influence of the Distinct Formation/Disintegration Mechanisms
of Ternary Complex on the Degradation Efficiency
Based on
the above results, we speculate that if MZ1 forms a binary complex
with VHL at first during the process of forming the ternary PROTAC
complex, it may be more conducive to the improvement of the degradation
efficiency. This is because, on one hand, it can shorten the formation
period of the next ternary PROTAC complex after BD is ubiquitinated
and degraded since MZ1 prefers more to bind with VHL, and on the other
hand, it may improve the path searching efficiency for the formation
of ternary complex with BD, as the MZ1-VHL binary complex recruits
BDs in a wider range of ways compared with the MZ1-BD binary complex
binding to VHL, where the latter is usually limited by a certain directions
to bind with VHL.

## Thermodynamic Details of the Degradation Mechanism of the PROTAC
System

## Predicting Binding Free Energy of the PROTAC Systems during
the Disintegration Process
After the initial exploration
of the kinetic characteristics of the PROTAC systems, thermodynamic
characteristics represented by binding free energy was also investigated
for the representative RAMD trajectories, where conformations of the
representative RAMD trajectories were extracted according to the dissociation
distance between the defined ligand and receptor in each PROTAC system
for US simulation. The potential of mean force (PMF) of each trajectory
in each system was calculated (namely, 5–6 representative trajectories
× 7 systems) based on 10 rounds of US simulations to guarantee
the convergence of the PMF curves (namely 1 ns × ∼45 windows
× 10 rounds for each RAMD trajectory). As shown in , although a variety of dissociation
pathways can be sampled by the RAMD simulation, the resulting binding
free energy may be different since RAMD trajectories with different
disintegration direction were selected for the investigation that
may involve trajectories with high disintegration energy. Therefore,
the trajectory with the lowest PMF in each system that represents
the minimum free energy path (MFEP) was identified as the dominant
dissociation path for the following analysis. The convergence of the
MFEP PMFs can be found in Figure S2 in the Supporting Information.
 As shown in , the Pearson correlation was calculated between the
standard binding
free energy (ΔGUS°) derived from the PMF of the MFEP
for each system and the experimental data, which shows a good correlation
(R = 0.92), indicating that the MFEP is suitable
for representing the dominated dissociation process of the PROTAC
system. Therefore, detailed analyses were conducted on the corresponding
trajectories to reveal the difference of the degradation efficiency
in different PROTAC systems. Considering that the experimental data
of the seven PROTAC systems are mostly on the same level, two representative
systems, Brd4BD2-MZ1-VHL and Brd4BD1-MZ1-VHL
that represent systems with higher and lower BD degradation efficiencies, were employed for the following analyses. The
binding mechanisms and conformational changes of the dissociation
process of the system were monitored.
 

## Stable Ternary Structure Contributes Closely to the Degradation
Efficiency of the PROTACs
The lowest point of the PMF curve
corresponds to the most stable bound-state of the system. Thus, we
at first extracted the structure corresponding to point A1 in the
PMF curve ( A) from the US trajectory of the Brd4BD2-MZ1-VHL system.
Since a crystal structure (PDB ID: 5T35) has been reported for this system, we
compared the RMSD difference of the PROTAC in the two ternary complexes
to check whether the US simulation could explore the stable binding
conformation of the PROTAC system. The result shows that the RMSD
between the backbone atoms of MZ1 in the two molecules is 1.79 Å,
indicating that the US simulation could explore the stable ternary
complex conformation of the PROTAC systems. Based on the above analysis,
we also obtained the most stable ternary structure of Brd4BD1-MZ1-VHL (point A2 in A).
 By comparing the stable ternary complexes of the
two systems (Brd4BD2-MZ1-VHL and Brd4BD1-MZ1-VHL),
we found that the amino acid composition of the PPI interface in the
above two systems exhibits a certain similarity. The shared residues
located at the PPI interface of VHL in the two systems are P71, P86,
W88, F91, Y98, P99, R107, R108, I109, H110, S111, Y112, H115, and
W117 (orange stick model in B and C), while the common residues forming the PPI
interface on the BD of the two systems only contain W374/W42 (W81/W42)
and D381/D49 (D88/D49) (pink stick model in B and C), with the former and latter denoting
the aligned residue positions in the real and simulated sequences,
respectively ( A). The similarity of the protein-binding interface between the two
systems further indicates that MZ1 does not change its mode to bind
with VHL when inducing different BDs to form the ternary complexes,
and the difference in degradation efficiency of MZ1 in different systems
may arise from the difference of the binding stability between BDs
and MZ1. Further monitoring of BrdBD-MZ1-VHL interface
interaction ( B and C) shows that three H-bonds form between VHL and BD in both
systems, but in the system of Brd4BD2-MZ1-VHL, MZ1 forms
one additional H-bond with Brd4BD2. However, no additional
H-bond is formed between MZ1 and Brd4BD1 in the system
of Brd4BD1-MZ1-VHL. We speculate that the stronger H-bond
interaction between MZ1 and Brd4BD2 makes MZ1 prefer to
bind with Brd4BD2 than with Brd4BD1 and thus
resulting in a more stable Brd4BD2-MZ1-VHL ternary complex
to enhance the degradation efficiency. To further verify our speculation,
we calculated the MM/GBSA binding free energy of the stable ternary
structure of the two systems and found that MZ1 exhibited stronger
binding affinity to Brd4BD2 compared with Brd4BD1 (−33.57 versus −29.60 kcal/mol).
 

## Capability of Maintaining the Stability of the Ternary Structure
Contributes to the Degradation Efficiency of the PROTACs
The PMFs of BDs dissociation from the Brd4BD2-MZ1-VHL
(pink line) and Brd4BD1-MZ1-VHL (cyan line) systems are
shown in A, where the vital states upon ligand unbinding
are labeled on the PMF curves with the corresponding representative
structures shown in C–E and B, respectively, for the two systems. Moreover,
the dynamic change of the interactions between MZ1 and the hot spot
residues on VHL and BDs during the dissociation process were also
illustrated in F (namely, the kinetic residue energetic analysis, KREA ), where the residues whose interaction with
MZ1 is stronger than −4.0 kcal/mol during the dissociation
process were defined as hot spot residues. It is shown in A that the tendency
of the binding free energy depths (ΔPMFUS) obtained from the PMF curves (−14.85 ± 2.73
kcal/mol versus −6.76 ± 1.83 kcal/mol) is consistent with
the experimental result that the Brd4BD2-MZ1-VHL ternary
complex is more stable than the Brd4BD1-MZ1-VHL ternary
complex ( ).
Therefore, the formation/disintegration process of the ternary complex
can be analyzed in detail.
As shown in A, comparing the two PMFs shows that the disintegration
of the Brd4BD2-MZ1-VHL complex involves more transitional
states than
that of Brd4BD1-MZ1-VHL, indicating that breaking the stability
of the Brd4BD2-MZ1-VHL ternary complex may require stepping
over several energetic barriers of the transition states, while the
dissociation of the Brd4BD1-MZ1-VHL complex is achieved
more smoothly, consistent with the experimental evidence that MZ1
is able to maintain the ternary complex of Brd4BD2-MZ1-VHL
for a longer residence time ( ), thus demonstrating a stronger degradation efficiency.
Furthermore, in turn for the binding process, Brd4BD2 may
sense the MZ1-VHL binary complex within a longer distance (∼15
Å, A)
and form a more stable ternary complex (ΔPMFUS =
−14.85 kcal/mol) compared with Brd4BD1 (∼10
Å and ΔPMFUS = −6.76 kcal/mol).
We further investigated the transition states of the two systems
structurally. In the Brd4BD2-MZ1-VHL system, before the
complete disintegration of the ternary complex (point E), MZ1 interacts
with both VHL and Brd4BD2 to maintain the stability of
the ternary complex, especially in the point of state C, where MZ1
maintains not only the interaction with VHL but the important H-bond
with Brd4BD2 ( C). In terms of energetic contributions, MZ1 also exhibits
stronger interactions with multiple residues on VHL and Brd4BD2, such as P71 (−4.16 kcal/mol), W88 (−6.70 kcal/mol),
and Y112 (−3.65 kcal/mol) on VHL and L385 (−6.41 kcal/mol)
and V439 (−3.35 kcal/mol) on Brd4BD2 ( F). Although MZ1 does not maintain
the important H-bond with Brd4BD2 in transition state D
( D), it still
maintains the interactions with Brd4BD2 to some extent,
such as W374 (−0.80 kcal/mol) and L385 (−1.26 kcal/mol)
on Brd4BD2. The disintegration of the Brd4BD2-MZ1-VHL ternary complex basically reaches equilibrium in transition
state E, where MZ1 remains on the surface of VHL while Brd4BD2 dissociates alone from the ternary complex ( E). While for the system of Brd4BD1-MZ1-VHL, the stable ternary complex disintegrates at the first transition
state (transition state B), where MZ1 does not exhibit a strong interaction
with Brd4BD1 ( B). Based on the KREA, the energetic contribution of
each residue in Brd4BD1 to MZ1 is near 0 kcal/mol ( F), meaning that
the structure of Brd4BD1-MZ1-VHL ternary complex is broken
in the state of B.
To further investigate the difference in
degradation efficiency
of the PROTAC system, we compared the conformation of MZ1 in the two
systems during the system disintegration. Specifically, the conformation
of MZ1 changes in a relatively large way in the system of Brd4BD2-MZ1-VHL, with the RMSD of MZ1 in transition states C, D,
and E of 8.58, 6.58, and 8.04 Å, respectively, compared to that
in its bound state (point A1). Further investigation shows that the
PEG linker in MZ1 is in a fully extended state in the transition states
( C–E)
compared to its bowl-shaped conformation in the bound state ( B), which seems to
be a conformational adjustment of the PROTAC in response to the dissociation
of Brd4BD2 (namely, the case that the PROTAC tries to maintain
its interaction with Brd4BD2 to stabilize the ternary structure
as long as possible). However, in the system of Brd4BD1-MZ1-VHL, MZ1 almost keeps in its original bowl-shaped conformation
during the Brd4BD1 dissociation process. Taking the most
stable state A2 as the reference, the RMSD of state B is 5.64 Å,
with the PEG linker folded in the whole process ( B), indicating that the relatively
weak binding affinity between Brd4BD1 and the POI-ligand
part of MZ1 may leave the MZ1-VHL binary complex unable to fully participate
in grasping (or binding with) the POI when the ternary complex disintegrating
(or forming).

## PROTAC with Higher Degradation Efficiency Needs to Ensure Its
Appropriate Binding Orientation for Adequately Exposing Lysine on
the Surface of the Target Protein
Moreover, numerous studies
have shown that PROTAC inducing degradation of POIs depends on the
ubiquitin labeling of lysine on the surface of POIs by the E3 ligase,
implying that the POI needs to expose more (if not specific) lysine
in the ternary structure to improve the degradation efficiency. Thus,
we measured the total lysine SASA on the BD of the most stable Brd4BD2-MZ1-VHL and Brd4BD1-MZ1-VHL ternary complexes
obtained from US simulation (corresponding to the minimum energetic
point of the PMF curve), showing that the lysine SASA on the BD of
the former is larger than that of the latter (1811.68 versus 1582.46
Å2). Besides, the buried surface area (BSA) of lysine
during the formation of the ternary complex was also calculated, in
which the BSAs of BD for Brd4BD2-MZ1-VHL and Brd4BD1-MZ1-VHL are 50.83 and 91.53 Å2, respectively. The
difference of the BSA between the two systems indicates that binding
of MZ1 to the Brd4BD2-MZ1-VHL system tends to leave more
lysine exposed (or reduce the BSA of lysine), making the system easier
to be ubiquitin-labeled by the E3 ligase. The above result is consistent
with the experimental result that the degradation efficiency of Brd4BD2 targeted by MZ1 is higher than that of Brd4BD1. 

## Conclusion
In this work, by using enhanced sampling
methodologies (mainly
RAMD and US), we systematically interpreted the underlying formation/disintegration
mechanism of a representative PROTAC system (BrdBD-MZ1-VHL)
from the kinetic and thermodynamic perspectives of view. Overall,
the employed methods are reliable to predict both the kinetic (relative
residence time) and thermodynamic (standard binding free energy) properties
of a PROTAC system (with Pearson R > 0.9 in both
aspects), providing us a solid basis for capturing the kinetic characteristics
of the PROTAC system.
During the disintegration of the BrdBD-MZ1-VHL ternary
systems, MZ1 tends to remain on the surface of VHL, indicating that
the PROTAC usually forms a stable binary complex with the E3 ligase
(VHL) and then recruits BDs to form the ternary complex for the protein
degradation. In general, the BD usually dissociates alone from the
ternary complex without a specific dissociation direction, but when
MZ1 dissociates together with BD, the dissociation direction of the
BD will be limited to a certain extent, indicating that if the formation
of the POI and PROTAC happens at first, it may, to a certain extent,
limit the way to form the ternary complex. This is a good phenomenon
since it indicates that the stable formation of the PROTAC-E3 ligase
binary complex may facilitate it to capture the POIs and improve the
degradation efficiency, where the PROTAC will always bind with the
E3 ligase whether the POI is complete or degraded, which may save
much time for the case that the PROTAC needs to seek another POI for
the next round of degradation because it binds more stably with the
POI compared with the E3 ligase ( ).
 In addition, the mechanism for the difference in
the degradation
efficiency of PROTACs was revealed in terms of structure and binding
affinity. Whether a PROTAC can induce the formation of a stable POI-PROTAC-E3
ligase ternary complex plays an important role in its degradation
capability. An efficient PROTAC should exhibit tight binding affinities
to both the POI and the E3 ligase to induce them into a stable interaction
complex (the ternary complex). Moreover, the interaction orientation
of the POI and E3 ligase is also very important for the degradation
efficiency of the POI since the formation of a ternary complex should
avoid affecting more of the lysine exposure on the surface of a POI,
which is necessary for the ubiquitination labeling. This speculation
can also be supported by the clinically trialed ARV-110 and ARV-471
that were both designed with a rigid linker between the warhead ligand
and the E3 ligase ligand to maintain an efficient interaction mode
of the POIs and the E3 ligase for high efficiency degradation. − Besides, in the kinetic process of maintaining the stability of
the ternary complex, a PROTAC with higher degradation efficiency may
constantly adjust its conformation to prolong the stabilization time
of the ternary complex, which also helps to degrade POIs with high
efficiency. In summary, the proposed mechanism in this study may be
helpful for the rational design of PROTACs with higher degradation
efficiency.

## Acknowledgments
This work
was supported by the National Key R&D Program
of China (2021YFE0206400), the National Natural Science Foundation
of China (81603031), Natural Science Foundation of Zhejiang Province
(LQ21H300007), and the Young Elite Scientists Sponsorship Program
by CPU (131810011 and 1132010013).

## Supporting Information Available
The Supporting Information
is available free of charge at https://pubs.acs.org/doi/10.1021/jacsau.3c00195.
Details of the KS test of predicted residence time,
convergence of MFEP PMFs, and simulation windows of US (PDF)

## Author Contributions
§ R.T. and Z.W. contributed equally to this
work. Conceptualization,
H.S. and T.H.; methodology, R.T., Z.W., and H.S.; analysis, R.T.,
Z.W., S.X., L.W., Q.W., Y.Y., Q.D., and H.S.; writing, R.T. and H.S.;
supervision, H.S. and T.H.

The authors
declare no competing financial interest.

## Supplementary Material
au3c00195_si_001.pdf

## References
 

## Associated Data

## Supplementary Materials
au3c00195_si_001.pdf