2548gpbGenomics, Proteomics & BioinformaticsGenomics Proteomics BioinformaticsOxford University PressPMC1002576910025769100257693649403410.1016/j.gpb.2022.11.008Machine Learning Modeling of Protein-intrinsic Features Predicts Tractability of Targeted Protein Degradation
ZhangWubing Roy BurmanShourya S ChenJiaye DonovanKatherine A CaoYang ShuChelsea ZhangBoning ZengZexian GuShengqing ZhangYi LiDian FischerEric S TokheimCollin Shirley LiuX 1Department of Data Science, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Boston, MA 02215, USA2Department of Biostatistics, Harvard T.H. Chan School of Public Health, Boston, MA 02115, USA3Department of Cancer Biology, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Boston, MA 02215, USA4Department of Biological Chemistry and Molecular Pharmacology, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02115, USA5Department of Biomedical Informatics, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02115, USA6Center of Growth, Metabolism, and Aging, Key Laboratory of Bio-resource and Eco-environment, Ministry of Education, College of Life Sciences, Sichuan University, Chengdu 610064, China7Research Scholar Initiative, Graduate School of Arts and Sciences, Harvard University, Cambridge, MA 02138, USA⁎Corresponding authors. Eric_Fischer@dfci.harvard.educollintokheim@gmail.comxsliu.res@gmail.com
#Equal contribution.
6122022205882882–8982132023© 2022 The AuthorsThis is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/).

## Abstract
Targeted protein degradation (TPD) has rapidly emerged as a therapeutic modality to eliminate previously undruggable proteins by repurposing the cell’s endogenous protein degradation machinery. However, the susceptibility of proteins for targeting by TPD approaches, termed “degradability”, is largely unknown. Here, we developed a machine learning model, model-free analysis of protein degradability (MAPD), to predict degradability from features intrinsic to protein targets. MAPD shows accurate performance in predicting kinases that are degradable by TPD compounds [with an area under the precision–recall curve (AUPRC) of 0.759 and an area under the receiver operating characteristic curve (AUROC) of 0.775] and is likely generalizable to independent non-kinase proteins. We found five features with statistical significance to achieve optimal prediction, with ubiquitination potential being the most predictive. By structural modeling, we found that E2-accessible ubiquitination sites, but not lysine residues in general, are particularly associated with kinase degradability. Finally, we extended MAPD predictions to the entire proteome to find 964 disease-causing proteins (including proteins encoded by 278 cancer genes) that may be tractable to TPD drug development.
Keywords: Targeted protein degradation, Degradability, Protein-intrinsic feature, Ubiquitination, Machine learning

statusreleaseddisplay-pdfyesis-olfnois-manuscriptnois-preprintnois-journal-matternois-scannednois-retractednoReceived 2022 Jul 15; Revised 2022 Oct 25; Accepted 2022 Nov 4; Issue date 2022 Oct.

## Introduction
The dominant pathway for selective protein degradation in eukaryotic cells is the ubiquitin–proteasome system (UPS), which degrades proteins that are covalently modified with ubiquitin . Ubiquitination is carried out in a three-step enzymatic cascade. First, ubiquitin is activated by covalent attachment to the active site of an E1 ubiquitin-activating enzyme. Second, the activated ubiquitin is transferred from the E1 enzyme to an E2 ubiquitin-conjugating enzyme. Finally, E3 ubiquitin ligases facilitate the conjugation of ubiquitin to a substrate. For the majority of ubiquitin ligases, this process does not involve a covalent intermediate comprising a ubiquitin–E3 complex, but rather the proximity induced by an E3 ubiquitin ligase selectively binding to a substrate allows for the transfer of ubiquitin from the E2 enzyme to a lysine residue on the substrate. After repeated rounds of this process, a poly-ubiquitin chain can be formed, which often directs the substrate for degradation by the 26S proteasome .
Targeted protein degradation (TPD) is a novel pharmacologic modality that induces the degradation of a protein of interest (POI) by chemically repurposing the UPS . The TPD molecules (degraders), epitomized by the molecular glues and proteolysis targeting chimeras (PROTACs) , typically induce the de novo ternary complex formation between an E3 ligase and a POI, leading to the ubiquitin transfer to available lysines and subsequent degradation of the POI . Unlike traditional inhibitors that target the catalytic binding site on a POI, degraders can induce protein degradation by binding to non-catalytic sites . Therefore, previously undruggable proteins, such as transcription factors (TF), can be targeted by degraders . For example, the United States Food and Drug Administration (FDA)-approved immunomodulatory drugs (IMiDs) thalidomide, pomalidomide, and lenalidomide induce degradation of TFs IKZF1 and IKZF3 by recruiting them to CRBN , , the substrate recognition subunit of the E3 ubiquitin ligase complex CUL4-RBX1-DDB-CRBN. Over the last two decades, the TPD field has grown dramatically, with thousands of publicly available degraders developed for over 100 human protein targets [PROTAC-DB   and PROTACpedia (https://protacdb.weizmann.ac.il/ptcb/main)]. Notably, degraders targeting the androgen receptors (ARs)  , estrogen receptor (ERs)  , BCL-XL  , Ikaros/Aiolos (IKZF1/3)  , Helios (IKZF2) , GSPT1 , BTK , and IRAK4 have entered into clinical trials , and degraders targeting STAT3, BRD9, or TRK will also be tested in patients soon . Despite these advances, it remains challenging to predict which proteins are susceptible and which may be resistant to the TPD approaches.
Chemoproteomic profiling approaches have emerged as a systematic approach to survey protein degradability. Rather than profiling the expression of a single protein in response to a selective degrader, these approaches use mass spectrometry to assess the proteome-wide response to treatment with pan-targeting degraders  , , , . For example, our recent study profiled 91 multi-kinase degraders to assess the degradability of more than 400 protein kinases, identifying more than 200 kinases as degradable  . Using a library of degraders targeting histone deacetylases (HDACs), Xiong et al. investigated the degradability of zinc-dependent HDACs  . Together, these broad-targeted degrader profiling experiments have greatly expanded the known degradable proteome. Unfortunately, chemoproteomic approaches to map degradability are inapplicable for most proteins due to the absence of ligands required for target recruitment to the ligase machinery. Thus, computational prediction of protein degradability offers a potentially practical alternative.
It is widely believed that defined ternary complexes are associated with effective and selective target degradation  , . A series of computational methods have been introduced to model PROTAC-mediated ternary complex formation  , , , which have facilitated the rational and efficient optimization of PROTACs  , . However, several studies have reported that although some level of binary target engagement and ternary complex formation is necessary for target recruitment and ubiquitin transfer, they are not always sufficient for TPD  , . We propose that rather than drug–target interactions alone driving degradability, features intrinsic to the protein targets also heavily influence the degradability of specific targets. For instance, although ubiquitination is the initiation signal for proteasomal degradation  , the association between protein degradability and known or potential ubiquitination sites (Ub sites) in the target protein is poorly understood.
In this study, we developed a machine learning model, model-free analysis of protein degradability (MAPD), to predict degradability from protein-intrinsic features ( ). MAPD shows promising performance in predicting degradable kinases by multi-kinase degraders and previously reported targets of PROTAC compounds. We found that a protein’s endogenous ubiquitination potential contributes the most to the degradability predictions. Structural analysis via protein–protein docking revealed the particular importance of E2-accessible Ub sites in determining degradability. Using MAPD, we have expanded our predictions to the human proteome to map protein tractability to TPD approaches. Our results are available at https://mapd.cistrome.org/, which could be a valuable resource for guiding target prioritization toward tractable TPD targets.
 

## Results

## Kinase degradability is associated with features intrinsic to the target
Substantial efforts have been invested in the optimization of degraders for any particular target with no guarantee that a successful compound will be found  , . Numerous reports indicate that stable ternary complex formation is one of the main factors that influence the effectiveness and selectivity of induced protein degradation  , , , . However, our previous chemoproteomic study of the protein kinome indicates that drug–target engagement is insufficient by itself to predict which kinases can be degraded  , suggesting that unexplained factors influence protein degradability. In this study, we explored factors intrinsic to POIs that may influence their degradability by comparing kinases that all have drug–target engagement, but differ in multi-kinase degrader-induced degradation. We first selected highly and lowly degradable kinases based on the number of multi-kinase degraders found to degrade each POI ( A), with an additional requirement of a high frequency of detection in the underlying global proteomic experiments ( A; ). We next collected protein features that may be predictive of kinase degradability, including post-translational modifications (PTMs), protein stability, and protein–protein interactions (PPIs) ( ). Since the cellular context might influence selective protein degradation and the underlying degradability experiments were conducted mostly in the MOLT4 cell line, we collected relative protein abundance, mRNA expression, and H3K27ac regulatory potential from the MOLT4 cell line  . Due to the lack of protein stability in the MOLT4 cell line, we collected protein half-life and global protein stability (GPS) data from immune cells and other cell types  , , , , , , which resemble each other ( B). Among all these features, features within a category are highly correlated with each other, while features between categories tend to provide independent information ( B).
 To identify features associated with protein degradability, we compared highly and lowly degradable kinases using a Wilcoxon rank-sum test. Compared to lowly degradable kinases, the highly degradable kinases have a significantly higher proportion of lysine residues that have reported ubiquitination events in PhosphoSitePlus  and PLMD database  (hereafter referred to as ubiquitination potential) ( C, B and C). The ubiquitination potential likely reflects a protein’s endogenous capacity to be ubiquitinated since the ubiquitination events are from cell lines in the absence of degrader treatment  . Notably, the percentage of lysine residues on POIs does not vary significantly ( D). We also observed an enrichment of proteins with a lower half-life in the highly degradable group ( C, E). Given that protein half-life was not correlated with ubiquitination potential ( F), this indicates an independent signal for predicting protein degradability, although the underlying mechanism by which protein half-life influences protein degradability requires further study. Furthermore, protein degradability is positively associated with mRNA expression of a POI in the assayed cell lines ( C, G), which may imply that the absolute POI expression is associated with the detection of protein degradation. Profiling the protein degradability in more cell contexts might be advantageous for further understanding of the observed association. Despite there being an incomplete understanding of the exact mechanisms that give rise to the observed associations, these results support the valid use of some of these individual features in selecting degradable targets for TPD drug development.

## Development of MAPD
We next sought to build a machine learning model, named MAPD, to combine multiple features associated with protein degradability into a single score. Toward this end, we tested six commonly used machine learning methods, including naive Bayes (NB), k-nearest neighbor (KNN), logistic regression (LR), linear-kernel support vector machine (svmLinear), radial-kernel support vector machine (svmRadial), and random forest (RF). Because of the redundancy of protein-intrinsic features, we performed forward feature selection for each method, which iteratively selects the best performing features ( ) until the model performance plateaus. We evaluated the performance of these methods using cross-validation, and found that the RF model outperformed other models with an area under the precision–recall curve (AUPRC) of 0.759 ( A) and an area under the receiver operating characteristic curves (AUROC) of 0.775 ( A). Therefore, all further analyses are based on the RF model implementation.
 Five protein-intrinsic features were identified as important in the MAPD model, including ubiquitination potential, phosphorylation potential, protein half-life, acetylation potential, and protein length ( B), in order of importance. Next, we compared the performance of MAPD to models that were trained on each individual feature using cross-validation. Consistent with the highest importance of ubiquitination potential in MAPD, the model trained on the ubiquitination potential showed the highest AUPRC (0.584) and AUROC (0.62) among all other single-featured models ( B, C). Interestingly, the combination of the three PTM features (ubiquitination, acetylation, and phosphorylation potential) seems to achieve higher AUPRC (0.659) and AUROC (0.753) than ubiquitination potential alone (P = 0.058, Delong’s test) ( B, C). Like ubiquitination, acetylation occurs mainly on lysine. More than 39% of PhosphoSitePlus acetylation sites also have reported ubiquitination events ( D), suggesting that acetylation sites also serve as ubiquitination sites. Hence, the acetylation potential might compensate for the lack of Ub site data and improves the model. Unlike ubiquitination and acetylation, phosphorylation occurs mainly on serine, threonine, and tyrosine residues. It has been demonstrated that phosphorylation can impact protein degradation, and phosphorylation of evolutionarily conserved proteins often accelerates proteasomal degradation  . The observed association between phosphorylation potential and POI degradability suggests that phosphorylation might also regulate compound-induced protein degradation, of which the mechanism requires further investigation.

## MAPD shows good performance in predicting kinase degradability
To evaluate the robustness of MAPD, we assessed the degradability of the kinome, with the predictions for training kinases collected from 20-fold cross-validation to avoid inflating the performance assessment. We first examined the degradability of kinases profiled in the study by Donovan et al.  and found significantly higher MAPD scores of degradable kinases than other kinases engaged by multi-kinase degraders ( A). This trend is also consistent for specific degraders, such as TL12-186 and SK-3-91 ( A), although with less significance due to the smaller number of POIs in these datasets. Using a threshold with the best cross-validation accuracy, MAPD identified 382 highly degradable kinase/kinase-related proteins, covering 78.8% (171/217) of experimentally degradable kinases ( A). Consistent with the low MAPD scores, the remaining 21.2% of kinases have a low frequency of degradation ( B). Furthermore, within all experimentally degraded kinases, MAPD scores show considerable Spearman’s correlation with their frequencies of degradation by multi-kinase degraders (P = 5.51E–06) ( B), suggesting the ability of MAPD in prioritizing highly degradable targets. We next collected an independent set of PROTAC targets reported in databases [PROTAC-DB and PROTACpedia (https://protacdb.weizmann.ac.il/ptcb/main)], and examined their overlap with degradable targets from MAPD predictions. Although some PROTAC targets were missed ( ), MAPD successfully identified 77% (50/65) of kinase targets ( A), supporting its ability in distinguishing degradable kinases from other kinases. In addition, MAPD recovered 14 known PROTAC targets that were not identified by Donovan et al.  ( A), which highlights how computational methods can be complementary to high-throughput experimental approaches.
 A binder of the target protein is required in the design of TPD molecules, so the propensity of a POI to be bound by a small molecule, also called ligandability, is relevant to the tractability of the POI by TPD molecules. Here, we leveraged knowledge of existing small molecules to refine MAPD predictions. A protein is considered ligandable if it has at least one ligand reported in PROTAC-DB , PROTACpedia (https://protacdb.weizmann.ac.il/ptcb/main), DrugBank  , ChEMBL  , or SLCABPP (ligandable cysteine database)  ( D). Out of the 519 ligandable kinases, MAPD identified 350 degradable kinases, including 74% (253/342) PROTACtable targets and 97 targets specifically identified by MAPD ( C). PROTACtable was introduced in a recent perspective article  that qualitatively assigned tractable TPD targets based on ligand records in ChEMBL and a rule-based approach that only considers whether certain protein annotations are available. We observed a significantly lower ubiquitination potential of PROTACtable-specific targets than MAPD-specific targets ( D). For example, MAP3K4, a PROTACtable-specific target, has only one reported Ub site despite being a particularly long protein with 103 lysines  ( E). In contrast, the MAPD-specific target, AGK, is extensively ubiquitinated despite its short length ( E). Experimental data showed that AGK was degraded sufficiently by multi-kinase degraders  while MAP3K4 was not despite its strong target engagement by a multi-kinase degrader  . These examples highlight a potential advantage of MAPD by quantitatively assessing protein degradability.
In total, MAPD identified 132 disease-relevant kinase targets, including kinases encoded by 72 cancer genes in OncoKB and 60 kinases associated with other diseases reported in the ClinVar database  , ( E). These kinases could be prospective targets for degrader development ( ). The most degradable kinases include PROTAC targets in PROTAC-DB  and PROTACpedia (https://protacdb.weizmann.ac.il/ptcb/main), such as CDK2, PLK1, CSNK1A1, CDK6, CDK9, and CDK4, and other promising targets, such as TK1, CHEK1, MAPK8, and AURKB that are degraded by multi-kinase degraders  , ( F).

## MAPD predicts proteome-wide degradability
We hypothesized that MAPD might also predict the degradability of non-kinase proteins. To test this, we collected 65 non-kinase targets with publicly available degraders reported in PROTAC databases [PROTAC-DB  and PROTACpedia (https://protacdb.weizmann.ac.il/ptcb/main)]. These PROTAC targets had significantly higher MAPD scores than other drug targets from DrugBank  ( A). To further corroborate this finding, we collected a list of TFs (such as IKZF1 and IKZF3) that are frequently degraded by thalidomide analog (IMiD)-based degraders  . The MAPD scores of the IMiD targets showed a notable correlation with their observed frequencies of degradation (P = 0.0223) ( B). Additional TFs have also been targeted by TPD molecules such as degraders for ARs  , and ERs  that have entered into clinical trials. With the exception of BCL6 which has few reported Ub sites, MAPD correctly predicted the high degradability of most TF PROTAC targets ( C). Taken together, these results indicate that MAPD could be generalizable to POIs outside of the kinome.
 Given the robust performance of MAPD, we next applied MAPD proteome-wide to systematically score all proteins outside of the kinome. MAPD predicted 2648 degradable targets out of 4137 ligandable non-kinase proteins ( A and B), which was twofold more than PROTACtable ( D). The MAPD-specific targets again had significantly higher levels of ubiquitination potential than the PROTACtable-specific targets ( E). We further identified 832 disease-relevant non-kinase targets that are amenable to TPD ( C; ). Of these, 206 proteins are considered to be encoded by oncogenes by OncoKB, and 626 proteins are associated with other human diseases reported in the ClinVar database , ( C). The top predicted degradable targets include known PROTAC targets, such as MDM2 and BCL-XL (BCL2L1), and other potentially degradable targets. DHFR, one of the top-ranking targets, has been successfully degraded by the 2-(4-carboxyphenyl)-4,4,5,5-tetramethylimidazoline-1-oxyl-3-oxide (PTIO) in a ubiquitination-dependent manner . RHOA, RHOB, and RHOC are also predicted to be degradable, which have been previously reported to be degraded by F-box-intracellular single-domain antibodies  . These results suggest potential opportunities for future TPD efforts ( F).

## The E2 accessibility of Ub sites is associated with protein degradability
Given that ubiquitination potential was the most important feature in MAPD, we hypothesized that structural properties of Ub sites could be informative of protein degradability. To test this hypothesis, we first calculated the proportion of lysine/Ub sites that had certain structural properties ( ), such as secondary structure, relative solvent accessibility, or flexibility (as defined by B-factor). We then statistically assessed the differences of these properties between highly and lowly degradable kinases (Wilcoxon rank-sum test). Consistent with our previous results for lysine residues in general, lysine sites stratified by any of the structural properties did not show a consistent association with protein degradability ( A–C). Notably, the proportion of solvent-accessible lysine sites, defined based on either experimental structures or AlphaFold predicted structures , did not show a significant difference between highly and lowly degradable kinases ( D and E). Among annotated secondary structures, the Ub sites in loop regions showed a modestly higher association with protein degradability than total Ub sites ( A). However, neither relative solvent accessibility nor flexibility of Ub sites seemed to improve the association with protein degradability ( B and C). These data suggest that the local structural properties of a Ub site provide limited information for predicting protein degradability.
We next investigated the property of Ub sites that facilitates the transfer of ubiquitin from the attached E2 enzyme to the POI in degrader-mediated ternary complexes. We reasoned that Ub sites accessible to the E2 enzyme might be relevant to protein degradability. To quantify the accessibility of Ub sites to the E2 enzyme, we first modeled the PROTAC-induced ternary complex using a computational docking method ( A and B). We benchmarked the method using distinct experimental complex structures involving five protein targets and two E3 ligases. For each case, we docked the complex structure of a protein target and its chemical ligand to an E3 ligase without specifying a PROTAC and selected the 200 top-scoring and feasible docked models for examination ( A and B). In all cases, the docking method captured near-native binding modes ( A), including two distinct conformations of BRD4BD1 with CRBN in particular ( ). As the multi-kinase degraders were based on several different parental kinase-binding moieties, we eliminated target ligands from the docking method and further examined their performance. In all but one case, near-native models were still captured ( ; B). We then computationally docked 251 target kinases with experimental structures onto CRBN–IMiD and examined the accessibility of Ub sites to the E2 enzyme, of which the position is estimated by using an RBX1 fragment ( A–C). Since the CUL4 arm is highly flexible, the bound E2 can transfer ubiquitin to any site in a broad ubiquitination zone  , hence all Ub sites in the spatial quadrant facing the E2 can be considered accessible to the E2 ( A, C). We then defined E2 accessibility as the fraction of top-scoring models in which the Ub site was accessible to the E2 enzyme ( A, C; ). In comparison to the total number of Ub sites in the structure of the POI, the E2-accessible Ub sites showed a more significant positive association with protein degradability ( B, A). In contrast, the number of E2-accessible lysine residues on the POIs did not show a significant association with POI degradability ( A and B). To further assess whether E2 accessibility is independently useful, we randomly shuffled reported Ub sites among all available lysine residues within a protein. Consistent with our initial finding, E2-accessible Ub sites were significantly more associated with protein degradability than expected based on the total number of Ub sites in each protein (P = 0.0064; C).
 We observed an overall positive correlation between the total number of Ub sites and E2-accessible Ub sites on kinases ( D) and noticed some POIs with outlier levels of E2-accessible and total Ub sites. For example, CDK1 had a high fraction of E2-accessible Ub sites ( D, C), consistent with its frequent degradation by multi-kinase degraders . Therefore, we hypothesize that similar proteins, such as GRK2, GRK6, and STK26, are promising targets for developing future TPD drugs if they had drug–target engagement ( D). In contrast, some kinases, such as VRK1, ZAP70, NEK7, and MAPK14, had a low number of E2-accessible Ub sites, despite having a high number of total Ub sites ( D). As expected, these kinases have a significantly lower frequency of degradation by CRBN-recruiting multi-kinase as measured by Donovan and colleagues ( E).
Finally, we created an interactive web platform (https://mapd.cistrome.org) to present protein-intrinsic features, protein ligandability, disease associations, and MAPD predictions. We also incorporated the E2 accessibility of Ub sites in kinases with experimental structures. This platform could enable rational prioritization of degradable targets for developing degraders by the TPD community. Moreover, we implemented MAPD as an R package (https://github.com/liulab-dfci/MAPD), allowing researchers to extend our analysis when more chemoproteomic profiling data and/or protein features are available in the future.

## Discussion
Despite the growing number of small molecule degraders, it remains challenging to predict which proteins are tractable to this approach. In this study, we investigated the degradability of kinases and their correlation with features intrinsic to protein targets. By developing a machine learning model, MAPD, we identified five features predictive of kinase degradability, including the ubiquitination potential, acetylation potential, phosphorylation potential, protein half-life, and protein length. Systematic benchmarking indicates that MAPD can predict kinase degradability and is potentially applicable to proteins outside the kinome. By integrating MAPD predictions and ligand information of POIs, we prioritized disease-associated degradable proteins as TPD drug targets.
Ternary complex formation is thought to be the most important factor in determining the degradability of protein targets. However, our analysis found that protein degradability can also be heavily influenced by protein-intrinsic features, especially the protein’s endogenous ubiquitination potential. By modeling the structural relationship between target proteins and the E2 enzyme, we found that protein degradability is highly correlated with the availability of E2-accessible Ub sites. Although much remains to be understood about how the E2-accessible Ub sites influence TPD, our observations suggest that considering the protein-intrinsic features can help in assessing protein targets before a TPD drug discovery project.
Our study has several limitations. First, due to the high importance of ubiquitination potential in predicting protein degradability, inaccurate quantification of ubiquitination potential can potentially bias the prediction. For instance, BRD4, a well-known PROTAC target (https://protacdb.weizmann.ac.il/ptcb/main), has incomplete Ub site annotation, with reported Ub sites enriched in the BRD4-BD1 domain ( ). Quantifying the ubiquitination potential of BRD4 at a full-protein basis leads to its low ubiquitination potential and thus a low MAPD prediction score. Second, the nature of the ubiquitin modification (mono-ubiquitination or poly-ubiquitination with varying topologies) is critical for the fate of a protein, yet this information is absent from di-Gly-based proteomics datasets  . Although this can be a limitation, it could also be a potential strength since what ubiquitination potential quantifies is the principal potential to be ubiquitinated, which in the case of processive ligases such as CRL4CRBN, may lead to poly-ubiquitin chains on lysines that endogenously would be mono-ubiquitinated. Third, the activity of deubiquitinating enzymes (DUBs) that remove ubiquitin from a protein could be important for determining degradability, although existing systematic datasets were not yet sufficient to improve prediction ( A–E). Lastly, the lack of data, including matching protein-intrinsic features from the same cell lines and experimental protein structures, limits machine learning and computational docking, thereby limiting the prediction. To summarize, careful consideration of the feature data is important when interpreting the prediction results. More extensive proteomic profiling of protein-intrinsic features and induced protein degradation by multi-target degraders in disease-relevant cell lines or tissues could offer better opportunities to address these problems in the future.
Our study also reveals several future research directions to advance the field. First, computational and experimental studies investigating why certain lysines seem more susceptible to ubiquitination than others could improve the predictions for degradability by MAPD. Second, a more thorough investigation of structural features using AlphaFold predicted structures could facilitate understanding the relationship between Ub sites and induced protein degradation and further guide the selection of rational protein targets and E3 ligases to develop TPD drugs. Finally, we envision that future computational methods will not only improve the prediction of protein degradability but also predict the functional consequence of the degradation of disease-causing proteins.

## Materials and methods

## Kinase degradability data
We collected 151 quantitative proteomic datasets measuring the changes of protein abundance in response to the treatment of 85 unique multi-kinase degraders (degraders with allosteric linkers are excluded)  . We used the limma package to perform differential protein expression analysis comparing the degrader-treated samples with the samples treated with dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO). For each protein, we calculated the frequency of degradation as the number of experiments in which the protein is significantly down-regulated [fold change (FC) > 1.25 and P < 0.01]. Furthermore, to aggregate the results of multiple replicates for each degrader, we aggregated log2 FC from replicate experiments using Stouffer’s Z-score and corresponding P values using Fisher’s method. We used a threshold of Stouffer’s Z-score < log2 1.5 and Fisher’s P < 0.01 to identify significantly down-regulated proteins as degradable proteins and then counted the number of unique degraders that can degrade each protein. We collected 5 KiNativ profiling data and 2 KinomeScan data from published studies  , , which profiled the target engagement of five multi-kinase degraders, including TL12-186, SK-3-91, SB1-G-187, DB0646, and WH-10417-099  , . A KinomeScan score < 15 or a KiNativ score > 35 indicates strong drug–target engagement.

## Definition of highly and lowly degradable kinases
We defined highly degradable kinases as those degraded by at least five different multi-kinase degraders (50 kinases), and lowly degradable kinases that were engaged by at least one multi-kinase degrader, quantified in more than 10% underlying global proteomic experiments, but not degraded (76 kinases). The highly degradable kinases and lowly degradable kinases are used throughout the study to investigate the association between protein degradability and protein-intrinsic features.

## Protein-intrinsic features
We built more than 42 protein-intrinsic features spanning PTMs  , protein stability generated from GPS profiling  , , , protein half-life  , , , PPIs  , protein expression, protein detectability, protein length, and others.

## PTM features
We collected all available PTM sites from the PhosphoSitePlus database (accessed on February 17, 2021) . We also collected ubiquitination sites from PLMD database . For each type of PTM, such as ubiquitination, we estimated the potential of proteins being modified by calculating the fraction of relevant amino acid residues in a protein (e.g., lysine residues) that have a corresponding reported PTM site (e.g., Ub site). We also included the fraction of each likely modified amino acid as additional features, such as LysRatio indicating the fraction of lysine residue in a protein.

## Protein half-life and protein stability features
We downloaded protein half-lives in seven different cell types (B cells, NK cells, monocytes, hepatocytes, neurons, HeLa, and NIH3T3) from published studies  , , . We additionally collected seven GPS profiling data from three studies  , , , which include the stability of full-length proteins in HEK293T cell lines treated with DMSO, MLN4924, dominant-negative CRL4, or dominant-negative CRL3 and stability of N-terminome and C-terminome peptides of the human proteome. All protein half-life data and GPS data were cross-referred for imputing the missing data. The imputation was done by using the impute.knn function (KNN) with default parameters in the impute R package.

## PPI and protein complex
We downloaded PPIs from the STRING database and retrieved the high-confidence PPIs using an arbitrary cutoff of experimental score > 100 and combined score > 200. The degree of each protein in the PPI network was calculated as an estimation of the likelihood of the protein interacting with others. Additionally, curated protein complex annotations were downloaded from the CORUM database and the number of distinct protein complexes associated with each protein was taken as the estimation of the likelihood of a protein being complexed in vivo.

## Gene and protein expression data
We downloaded RNA-seq data of MOLT4 from the Gene Expression Omnibus (GEO: GSE79253) . RNA expression values were normalized as logarithm transcripts per million (TPM). We retrieved quantitative proteomic data of MOLT4 cell lines from a previous study by Donovan and colleagues . Relative protein abundances were logarithm normalized and centered with a median value of zero per sample. The missing values in the proteomic data were imputed using the impute::impute.knn function (KNN) with Cancer Cell Line Encyclopedia (CCLE) proteomic data as reference .

## Protein detectability
We took the frequency of detection of proteins in the proteomic datasets from the study by Donovan et al. as the estimation of protein detectability by mass spectrometry.

## Other features
We retrieved 20,381 reviewed human protein sequences and their length from the UniProtKB database (accessed in January, 2021). We downloaded intrinsically disordered regions (IDRs) from the MobiDB database , which includes manually curated annotations and predicted disorder regions. We ranked the IDR annotations based on the four types of evidence, including curated-disorder-priority, derived-missing_residues-th_90, derived-mobile_residues-th_90, and prediction-disorder-mobidb_lite. For each protein, duplicate IDRs were removed for downstream analysis.

## Pairwise correlation of protein-intrinsic features
We computed pairwise Spearman’s correlation of protein-intrinsic features and clustered the features based on the correlation matrix using hierarchical clustering with Euclidean distance measure and complete linkage. The data are visualized using the ComplexHeatmap R package .

## Association between protein degradability and features intrinsic to protein targets
We tested each feature’s difference in 50 highly degradable kinases and 76 lowly degradable kinases using the wilcox.test function in R and computed the Z-statistics using the wilcoxonZ function in the rcompanion R package. We used the same method to test the association between protein degradability and protein-intrinsic features in each kinase family.

## Development of MAPD model
We sought to build a classification model to predict protein degradability from intrinsic protein features. We tried six different machine learning models, including NB (naivebayes), KNN, LR (LiblineaR), svmLinear (kernlab), svmRadial (kernlab), and RF (randomForest). For each model, we performed feature selection and then selected the best model trained on a set of best performing features.

## Forward feature selection
We performed recursive forward feature selection for six machine learning methods separately. In each iteration, we add a feature that improves the model performance most. The performance is computed as AUPRC based on 20-fold cross-validation. This process is stopped when the addition of a new feature does not further improve the performance.

## Feature importance
We evaluated the importance of features in MAPD using the varImp function in the caret R package, which computes the feature importance on permuted out-of-bag samples based on the mean decrease in the accuracy.

## Performance evaluation
To evaluate the performance of each model involved in the study, we collected prediction scores of all proteins from cross-validation and computed the AUROC using the roc function from the pROC package and AUPRC using the pr.curve from the PRROC R package.

## Single feature evaluation
For each individual feature, we trained a LR model. For the combination of features, we trained RF models. Finally, we compared the model performance based on 20-fold cross-validation.

## Final model training for predictions outside of the kinome
We used the caret package for parameter tuning and final model training. We evaluated the model tuning parameters based on leave-one-out cross-validation (method = “LOOCV” in the trainControl function), with the F1 score as performance metric (metric = “F” in the train function, summaryFunction = prSummary in the trainControl function). With the optimal parameters (mtry = 2), we trained a final RF model including 20,000 trees (ntree = 20,000) with 5 minimum node sizes (nodesize = 5).

## Prediction
We predicted the degradability of all human proteins using the final RF model. For kinases included in the training, we took the average prediction scores collected from three repeated 20-fold cross-validation. Based on the cross-validation, we chose a cutoff (0.2327) that leads to the highest F1 score. A protein is predicted to be degradable if it has a MAPD score greater than the cutoff. To account for potential biases from missing feature data, we scored the feature completeness for each protein using a weighted sum score with the formula: . The variable represents the feature set, and represents each feature in the feature set. The function denotes the scaled feature importance of and the indicator function denotes whether is from actual data (1 = actual, 0 = imputed). The represents the feature completeness, with a 0–1 range. A score of 1 indicates all features are from actual data, and a score of 0 indicates all features are imputed.

## Degradable proteins
We collected PROTAC targets with reported degraders in the PROTAC-DB (accessed on May 27, 2021) and/or the PROTACpedia (accessed on July 8, 2021; https://protacdb.weizmann.ac.il/ptcb/main). For evaluation purposes, the targets from the study by Donovan and colleagues  were removed from the PROTAC databases (including PROTAC-DB and PROTACpedia). This resulted in 65 kinases and 65 proteins outside of the kinome. From the study by Donovan and colleagues, we collected 217 kinases degraded by at least one multi-kinase degrader as ‘degraded’ and all the others detected in the same datasets as ‘not degraded’  . We collected 1336 PROTACtable targets, including the clinical precedence targets, discovery opportunity targets, and literature precedence targets from the PROTACtable genome  . We collected 24 IMiD targets from published studies  and assessed their frequencies of degradation by 68 CRBN-recruiting multi-kinase degraders from the study by Donovan and colleagues  .

## Protein family
We downloaded the human kinase/kinase-related proteins from four different resources, including KinMap , KinBase, a study by Donovan et al. , and a review article . We collected 1626 human TFs from a review article .

## Protein ligandability
We downloaded the cysteine reactivity data from the SLCABPP  and assessed protein ligandability using the number of compounds with a competition ratio greater than 4. Besides, we collected protein ligands from the ChEMBL (accessed on July 23, 2021) and DrugBank databases  , . For any proteins degraded by a multi-kinase degrader or with a ligand recorded in ChEMBL (accessed on July 23, 2021), DrugBank, or SLCABPP, we considered it as a ligandable target.

## Protein–disease associations
We considered a protein as a cancer driver if it is encoded by an oncogene reported in the OncoKB or it is predicted to be encoded by an oncogene by 20/20+ algorithm. 20/20+ analysis was performed on the aggregated pan-cancer dataset with default parameters. Genes with an oncogene score greater than 0.5 are considered oncogenes. To annotate potential protein targets associated with other human diseases, we also downloaded the variant–disease association from the ClinVar database  (accessed on April 20, 2021). For quality control, we removed annotations of likely loss-of-function variants, including indel, deletion, insertion, and microsatellite, as well as some uncertain annotations with keywords like ‘conflicting’, ‘protective’, ‘uncertain’, ‘benign’, and ‘not’. This resulted in 3415 proteins associated with human diseases reported in the ClinVar database.

## Structural properties of lysine residues and Ub sites
We downloaded protein structures of human models or homology models from the Protein Data Bank (PDB), SWISS-MODEL  , and ModPipe  . Detailed data cleaning and processing have been described by Tokheim and colleagues  . Protein structures were analyzed using the Define Secondary Structure of Proteins (DSSP) program  in the bio3d R package, which returns the solvent accessibility and secondary structure of each residue.

## Benchmarking protein–protein docking method
Structures of unbound E3 ligases and targets with the parental compounds were extracted from an existing benchmark  . As we were trying to determine all feasible PROTAC-mediated ternary complexes between the E3 ligase and the target (not one induced by a particular compound), redundant pairs were eliminated from the benchmark. Using Rosetta v.3.12  and RosettaDock v.4.0  , we performed 5000 independent local docking of the target and the E3 ligase with the respective parental compounds in place with different starting points and random initial perturbations (trans = 3 Å and rot = 8) along with random spins along an axis joining the center of masses of the two proteins. Models were evaluated by the interface score metric (I_sc) and the 200 lowest-scoring models were selected for further evaluation. In each model, if a cylinder of radius 1 Å and length < 14 Å could be constructed between the atoms of the parental moieties where the linker is anchored with less than 2 protein backbone or compound atoms (except neighboring atoms) inside the cylinder, we estimated that there exists a free path to build a linker, and hence fit the PROTAC. To evaluate the models, we used the CAPRI criteria  with medium- and high-quality models deemed near-native and sufficient for identifying Ub sites facing the E2 enzyme. To test the importance of docking with the target ligand, we removed the ligand and re-docked the proteins.

## CRBN–kinase docking
We downloaded the protein structures of 323 kinases from the PDB. In cases where multiple structures were available, the largest structure was chosen. They were aligned to CDK2 (PDB: 1AQ1), a reference kinase, to ensure that the kinase domain was present. 251 kinase structures were alignable with root-mean-square deviation less than 3.5 Å near the ATP-binding pocket. Next, the aligned kinases were positioned in an arbitrary (but similar) orientation around the ligand-binding pocket of the CRBN–lenalidomide structure (PDB: 5FQD) . They were then docked using the protein docking protocol described in benchmarking. Structural biology applications were compiled and configured by SBGrid  .

## E2 accessibility of lysine residues
We assessed the accessibility of solvent-exposed lysine residues to the E2 enzyme by calculating the fraction of protein–protein docking models among the 200 lowest-scoring models that could fit a PROTAC and in which the lysine residues are in the ubiquitination zone of the E2 enzyme. All lysines with an atom having > 2.5 Å2 exposed surface area were considered solvent-exposed. The ability of the ternary complex to fit a PROTAC was assessed by aligning CDK2 with CDK4 inhibitor (PDB: 1GIJ)  to the kinase and calculating if there was a free path available between the N3 atom lenalidomide and C26 atom of the CDK4 inhibitor to build a linker as described in benchmarking. To assess which lysine residue lies within the ubiquitination zone of the E2 enzyme, we constructed two planes to split up space into quadrants. The ‘vertical’ plane passes through half the distance between the CRBN edge facing the kinase and the center-of-mass of the kinase. The ‘horizontal’ plane is approximately perpendicular to the vertical plane and passes through the center-of-mass of the kinase. The lysine residues lying in the quadrant facing the putative position of the E2 enzyme are considered accessible. Finally, if the lysine residue is more than 60 Å away from the lenalidomide or the Cα–Cβ vector points in the direction opposite of the putative E2 site, the residue was considered inaccessible.

## Association between protein degradability and characteristics of Ub sites
We first counted each protein’s lysine residues/Ub sites in different secondary structures (coil, strand, and loop), and then tested whether there is a difference between highly degradable and lowly degradable kinases using the Wilcoxon Z-statistics. Similarly, we assessed the associations between kinase degradability and the number of lysine residues/Ub sites with a specific range of solvent accessibility or B-factor. A positive Wilcoxon Z-statistic indicates the positive correlation between kinase degradability and the number of Ub sites/lysine residues in the proteins.
We also tested the association between kinase degradability and the number of E2-accessible Ub sites/lysine residues (E2 accessibility greater than a specific threshold) in each protein. To further demonstrate the specific importance of E2-accessible Ub sites, we randomly shuffled the Ub sites among all lysine residues and re-evaluated the association between kinase degradability and the number of E2-accessible Ub sites in each kinase. We generated a null distribution by repeating the shuffling process 10,000 times and calculated the P value by counting the percentage of shuffling that led to a higher Wilcoxon Z-statistic than the observed Wilcoxon Z-statistics.

## Association between deubiquitination and kinase degradability
For each protein, we estimated the deubiquitination activity using four different metrics: 1) the highest protein-level correlation between the protein and all DUBs based on proteomic data on CCLE cancer cell lines  ; 2) the number of DUBs interacted with the protein based on curated DUB–substrate interaction data from the UbiBrowser database  ; 3) the differential expression of the protein upon treatment of a pan-DUB inhibitor UbVS  ; and 4) the maximal down-regulation of the protein after DUB inhibitions with 11 different compounds  , . We statistically tested the difference of each DUB feature between highly and lowly degradable kinases (Wilcoxon rank-sum test). We also trained a RF model based on the four features and evaluated its performance based on 20-fold cross-validation.

## Code availability
The source codes for reproducing the model are available in the MAPD repository at https://github.com/liulab-dfci/MAPD. The source codes for reproducing the figures are available in the Degradability2021 repository at https://github.com/liulab-dfci/Degradability2021.

## Data availability
The datasets supporting the conclusions of this study are accessible at http://mapd.cistrome.org.

## CRediT author statement
Wubing Zhang: Conceptualization, Methodology, Software, Formal analysis, Writing - original draft. Shourya S. Roy Burman: Conceptualization, Methodology, Formal analysis, Writing - original draft, Funding acquisition. Jiaye Chen: Software, Formal analysis. Katherine A. Donovan: Resources, Writing - review & editing. Yang Cao: Methodology. Chelsea Shu: Formal analysis. Boning Zhang: Writing - review & editing. Zexian Zeng: Methodology. Shengqing Gu: Methodology. Yi Zhang: Methodology. Dian Li: Software. Eric S. Fischer: Conceptualization, Writing - review & editing, Supervision, Funding acquisition. Collin Tokheim: Conceptualization, Methodology, Writing - original draft, Supervision, Funding acquisition. X. Shirley Liu: Conceptualization, Writing - review & editing, Supervision, Funding acquisition. All authors have read and approved the final manuscript.

## Competing interests
X. Shirley Liu is a cofounder, board member, and CEO of GV20 Therapeutics. Eric S. Fischer is a founder, member of the scientific advisory board (SAB), and equity holder of Civetta Therapeutics, Lighthorse Therapeutics, Proximity Therapeutics, and Neomorph Inc (board of directors), SAB member and equity holder in Avilar Therapeutics and Photys Therapeutics, and a consultant to Astellas, Sanofi, Novartis, Deerfield, and EcoR1 capital. The Fischer laboratory receives or has received research funding from Novartis, Deerfield, Ajax, Interline, and Astellas. Katherine A. Donovan is a consultant to Kronos Bio and Neomorph Inc. All the other authors declared no competing interests.

## Acknowledgments
This study was supported by grants from the Breast Cancer Research Foundation (Grant No. BCRF-19-100 to X. Shirley Liu), the Mark Foundation for Cancer Research (Mark Foundation Emerging Leader Award; Grant No. 19-001-ELA to Eric S. Fischer), the National Institutes of Health (NIH; Grant Nos. R01CA218278 and R01CA214608 to Eric S. Fischer), and Cancer Research Institute (Irvington Postdoctoral Fellowship; Grant No. CRI 3442 to Shourya S. Roy Burman), USA. Collin Tokheim is a Damon Runyon Fellow supported by the Damon Runyon Cancer Research Foundation, USA (Grant No. DRQ-04-20). We acknowledge the Research Computing Group at Harvard Medical School and Dana-Farber Cancer Institute for cluster time. We also would like to thank Dr. Chris Sander for his valuable suggestions on this study.

Handled by Feng Gao

## Footnotes
Peer review under responsibility of Beijing Institute of Genomics, Chinese Academy of Sciences / China National Center for Bioinformation and Genetics Society of China.
Supplementary data to this article can be found online at https://doi.org/10.1016/j.gpb.2022.11.008.

## Contributor Information
Eric S. Fischer, Email: Eric_Fischer@dfci.harvard.edu.
Collin Tokheim, Email: collintokheim@gmail.com.
X. Shirley Liu, Email: xsliu.res@gmail.com.

## Supplementary material
The following are the Supplementary material to this article:

## Supplementary Figure S1
Kinase degradability is associated with features intrinsic to the target A. Box plot showing the difference between high-degradability and low-degradability kinases for frequency of detection in the chemoproteomic data from Donovan et al. study . B. Box plot showing the difference between high-degradability and low-degradability kinases for the proportion of lysines with at least one reported ubiquitination event in the PhosphoSitePlus . C. Box plot showing the difference between high-degradability and low-degradability kinases for the proportion of lysines with reported ubiquitination events in the PLMD database . D. Box plot showing the fraction of lysine residues in the high-degradability and low-degradability kinases. E. Box plot showing the protein half-life of high-degradability and low-degradability kinases in Hela cells. F. Box plot showing the mRNA expression of high-degradability and low-degradability kinases in the MOLT4 cell line. G. Heatmap showing the pairwise Spearman correlation of the four features intrinsic to protein kinases.

## Supplementary Figure S2
Development of MAPD A. ROC curves showing the performance of six machine learning models in predicting kinase degradability based on 20-fold cross-validation. B. Importance of five features in the MAPD revealed by the mean decrease accuracy metric that measures how much accuracy the model losses by excluding each feature from the model. C. ROC curves showing the performance of MAPD and models trained on a subset of features based on 20-fold cross-validation. D. Pie charts showing the fraction of acetylation sites that also serve as ubiquitination sites reported in the PhosphoSitePlus database . AUROC, area under the receiver operating characteristics; Ub, ubiquitination; PTM, post-translational modification; MAPD, model-free analysis of protein degradability; RF, random forest model; svmRadial, radial-kernel support vector machine model; NB, naive bayes model; Logistic, logistic regression model; svmLinear, linear kernel support vector machine model; KNN, k-nearest neighbor model.

## Supplementary Figure S3
MAPD shows good performance in predicting kinase degradability A. Box plot showing the MAPD scores of degraded kinases compared to other engaged kinases by each multi-kinase degrader (‘all’ indicates all degraders from Donovan et al. study ). B. Box plot showing the frequency of degradation of degradable kinases identified by both MAPD and Donovan et al. and other experimentally degradable kinases (Donovan et al. specific). C. Venn diagram showing the overlap between ligandable kinases from PROTAC databases (PROTAC-DB and PROTACpedia ), DrugBank , ChEMBL , and SLCABPP . D. Pie chart showing the number of degradable kinases (with/without ligand) and undegradable kinases from MAPD predictions. E. Venn diagram showing the overlap between degradable kinases identified by MAPD, oncogenic kinases reported in the OncoKB , and kinases associated with other human diseases reported in the ClinVar database .

## Supplementary Figure S4
MAPD predicts degradability proteome-wide A. Venn diagram showing the overlap of ligandable non-kinase proteins from PROTAC databases (PROTAC-DB and PROTACpedia ), DrugBank , ChEMBL , and SLCABPP ). B. Pie chart showing the number of degradable non-kinase proteins (with/without ligand) and undegradable non-kinase proteins from MAPD predictions. C. Venn diagram showing the overlap between degradable non-kinase proteins predicted by MAPD and disease-causing proteins reported in the OncoKB and ClinVar databases.

## Supplementary Figure S5
Local structural properties of a lysine/Ub site are not informative for predicting protein degradability A. Bar plot showing the Wilcoxon Z-statistics that indicates the association between protein degradability and lysine/Ub sites in each specific secondary structure. The salmon color indicates Ub sites and the orange color indicates lysine residues in general. B. Bar plots showing the Wilcoxon Z-statistics that indicate the association between protein degradability and lysine/Ub sites with B-factor (flexibility) greater than a specific threshold (x-axis). C. Bar plots showing the Wilcoxon Z-statistics that indicate the association between protein degradability and lysine/Ub sites with RSA greater than a specific threshold (x-axis). D. Box plots showing the proportion of total lysine sites and solvent-accessible lysine sites out of full protein length in experimental structures of highly- and lowly-degradable kinases. E. Box plots showing the proportion of total lysine sites and solvent-accessible lysine sites out of full protein length in AlphaFold predicted structures of highly- and lowly-degradable kinases . RSA, relative solvent accessibility.

## Supplementary Figure S6
Assessment of E2 accessibility of Ub sites A. Diagram showing the protein-protein docking process. All kinases were first aligned at their ATP binding pocket to a reference kinase, CDK2 (1AQ1). Next, the aligned kinases were positioned in an arbitrary (but similar) orientation around the ligand-binding pocket of the CRBN-Lenalidomide structure (PDB: 5FQD). Here, CDK1 (4Y72) is shown as an example. Local docking was performed, and the 200 top-scoring models were selected for further evaluation. B. For every docked model, the feasibility of ternary complex formation with a PROTAC was tested by aligning CDK2 with a multi-kinase inhibitor (TAE) and checking whether a free path for a linker exists. As multiple linkers of different lengths and rigidities were involved, a broad cylinder was used to estimate all linker conformations. C. For models where it was feasible to build a ternary complex with a PROTAC, Ub sites in the ubiquitination zone were estimated by drawing two planes with respect to the position of CRBN and the target kinase. The sites lying in the quadrant facing the putative position of the E2, estimated by the placement of RBX1 are considered accessible. For each Ub site, the fraction of feasible models with the site in the ubiquitination zone was used as a probability to measure its E2 accessibility. PROTAC, Proteolysis targeting chimeric; PDB, Protein Data Bank; TAE, a multi-kinase inhibitor; IMiD, immunomodulatory drugs.

## Supplementary Figure S7
Benchmarking of protein–protein docking protocol for ternary complex prediction Interface score vs. interface RMSD plots for the example of CRBN–dBET70–BRD4BD1 (PDB: 6BN9). Each point represents a docked model with the colors indicating resemblance to the experimental structure as per CAPRI criteria. A. Comparison of all models, the 200 top-scoring models, and the top models after filtering out models where it is infeasible to fit a PROTAC. With the anchor points for the linker in dBET70, several models with interface RMSD between 7.5 Å and 10 Å are not feasible. B. Comparison of all models with and without the target ligand present during docking. In both cases, the E3 ligand is present. Qualitatively, the plots are similar to energy funnels in similar regions. CAPRI, ; RMSD, root-mean-square deviation.

## Supplementary Figure S8
E2-accessibility of Ub sites is associated with protein degradability A. Smooth line showing the association between protein degradability and the number of E2-accessible Ub sites/lysine residues (E2 accessibility greater than a certain threshold). The x-axis shows the threshold of E2 accessibility for selecting E2-accessible lysine/Ub sites, and the y-axis shows the Wilcoxon Z-statistics indicating the association between kinase degradability and the number of lysine/Ub sites with E2 accessibility greater than a certain threshold. A positive Wilcoxon Z-statistic indicates the positive association between protein degradability and the number of lysine/Ub sites, while a negative Wilcoxon Z-statistic indicates the negative association between protein degradability and lysine/Ub sites. The salmon arrow points to the association between kinase degradability and the total number of Ub sites, while the red arrow points to the association between kinase degradability and the number of E2-accessible Ub sites (accessible to E2 in more than 50% of docking models). B. Box plot showing the association of kinase degradability with the total number of lysine residues (left) and E2-accessible lysine residues (right) in the kinase targets. The E2-accessible lysine residues were defined as the lysine residues lying in the ubiquitination zone of more than 50% of feasible models. C. Docking model of the ternary complex of CRL4CRBN and the target kinase CDK1. Overlay of CUL4A (PDB: 4A0K) and CUL4B (4A0L) superimposed on DDB1 WD repeat beta-propeller B (4A0K), with CRBN (5FQD) superimposed DDB1 WD repeat beta-propellers A and C demonstrates high flexibility of the CUL4 arm of the E3 ligase. The RBX1 fragment was used to estimate the position of the E2 enzyme and the corresponding ubiquitination zone in the target protein CDK1. The model of CDK1 (4Y72) docked to CRBN is shown in yellow, and the predicted E2-accessible and E2-inaccessible Ub sites are highlighted in blue and red, respectively.

## Supplementary Figure S9
Ub sites are enriched in the BRD4-BD1 domain Lollipop diagram showing the reported Ub sites in BRD4. The number in the circles indicates the number of references for each Ub site in the PhosphoSitePlus and the blank circle indicates that only one reference is available. The blue text near the circle indicates the location of the Ub site.

## Supplementary Figure S10
Deubiquitination features did not show the association with kinase degradability A. Box plot showing the highest correlation between each highly/lowly- degradable kinase and DUBs. B. Box plot showing the number of interacted DUBs with each highly/lowly- degradable kinase. C. Box plot showing the protein-level change of highly- versus lowly- degradable kinases upon the UbVS (a pan-DUB inhibitor) treatment. D. Box plot showing the maximal down-regulation of highly- and lowly-degradable kinases upon treatment of 11 different DUB inhibitors. E. ROC curves showing the performance of a random forest model trained on deubiquitination features (highest correlation with DUB proteins, the number of interacted DUBs, and differential expression upon DUB inhibitions) in predicting protein degradability. DUBs, deubiquitinating enzymes.

## Supplementary Table S1
Highly- and lowly-degradable kinases

## Supplementary Table S2
Protein-intrinsic features

## Supplementary Table S3
Forward feature selection result for each model

## Supplementary Table S4
MAPD predictions, ligandability, and disease associations of human proteins

## Supplementary Table S5
Structural properties of Ub sites

## Supplementary Table S6
Benchmarking results of protein–protein docking protocol

## References
 

## Associated Data

## Supplementary Materials

## Supplementary Figure S1
Kinase degradability is associated with features intrinsic to the target A. Box plot showing the difference between high-degradability and low-degradability kinases for frequency of detection in the chemoproteomic data from Donovan et al. study . B. Box plot showing the difference between high-degradability and low-degradability kinases for the proportion of lysines with at least one reported ubiquitination event in the PhosphoSitePlus . C. Box plot showing the difference between high-degradability and low-degradability kinases for the proportion of lysines with reported ubiquitination events in the PLMD database . D. Box plot showing the fraction of lysine residues in the high-degradability and low-degradability kinases. E. Box plot showing the protein half-life of high-degradability and low-degradability kinases in Hela cells. F. Box plot showing the mRNA expression of high-degradability and low-degradability kinases in the MOLT4 cell line. G. Heatmap showing the pairwise Spearman correlation of the four features intrinsic to protein kinases.

## Supplementary Figure S2
Development of MAPD A. ROC curves showing the performance of six machine learning models in predicting kinase degradability based on 20-fold cross-validation. B. Importance of five features in the MAPD revealed by the mean decrease accuracy metric that measures how much accuracy the model losses by excluding each feature from the model. C. ROC curves showing the performance of MAPD and models trained on a subset of features based on 20-fold cross-validation. D. Pie charts showing the fraction of acetylation sites that also serve as ubiquitination sites reported in the PhosphoSitePlus database . AUROC, area under the receiver operating characteristics; Ub, ubiquitination; PTM, post-translational modification; MAPD, model-free analysis of protein degradability; RF, random forest model; svmRadial, radial-kernel support vector machine model; NB, naive bayes model; Logistic, logistic regression model; svmLinear, linear kernel support vector machine model; KNN, k-nearest neighbor model.

## Supplementary Figure S3
MAPD shows good performance in predicting kinase degradability A. Box plot showing the MAPD scores of degraded kinases compared to other engaged kinases by each multi-kinase degrader (‘all’ indicates all degraders from Donovan et al. study ). B. Box plot showing the frequency of degradation of degradable kinases identified by both MAPD and Donovan et al. and other experimentally degradable kinases (Donovan et al. specific). C. Venn diagram showing the overlap between ligandable kinases from PROTAC databases (PROTAC-DB and PROTACpedia ), DrugBank , ChEMBL , and SLCABPP . D. Pie chart showing the number of degradable kinases (with/without ligand) and undegradable kinases from MAPD predictions. E. Venn diagram showing the overlap between degradable kinases identified by MAPD, oncogenic kinases reported in the OncoKB , and kinases associated with other human diseases reported in the ClinVar database .

## Supplementary Figure S4
MAPD predicts degradability proteome-wide A. Venn diagram showing the overlap of ligandable non-kinase proteins from PROTAC databases (PROTAC-DB and PROTACpedia ), DrugBank , ChEMBL , and SLCABPP ). B. Pie chart showing the number of degradable non-kinase proteins (with/without ligand) and undegradable non-kinase proteins from MAPD predictions. C. Venn diagram showing the overlap between degradable non-kinase proteins predicted by MAPD and disease-causing proteins reported in the OncoKB and ClinVar databases.

## Supplementary Figure S5
Local structural properties of a lysine/Ub site are not informative for predicting protein degradability A. Bar plot showing the Wilcoxon Z-statistics that indicates the association between protein degradability and lysine/Ub sites in each specific secondary structure. The salmon color indicates Ub sites and the orange color indicates lysine residues in general. B. Bar plots showing the Wilcoxon Z-statistics that indicate the association between protein degradability and lysine/Ub sites with B-factor (flexibility) greater than a specific threshold (x-axis). C. Bar plots showing the Wilcoxon Z-statistics that indicate the association between protein degradability and lysine/Ub sites with RSA greater than a specific threshold (x-axis). D. Box plots showing the proportion of total lysine sites and solvent-accessible lysine sites out of full protein length in experimental structures of highly- and lowly-degradable kinases. E. Box plots showing the proportion of total lysine sites and solvent-accessible lysine sites out of full protein length in AlphaFold predicted structures of highly- and lowly-degradable kinases . RSA, relative solvent accessibility.

## Supplementary Figure S6
Assessment of E2 accessibility of Ub sites A. Diagram showing the protein-protein docking process. All kinases were first aligned at their ATP binding pocket to a reference kinase, CDK2 (1AQ1). Next, the aligned kinases were positioned in an arbitrary (but similar) orientation around the ligand-binding pocket of the CRBN-Lenalidomide structure (PDB: 5FQD). Here, CDK1 (4Y72) is shown as an example. Local docking was performed, and the 200 top-scoring models were selected for further evaluation. B. For every docked model, the feasibility of ternary complex formation with a PROTAC was tested by aligning CDK2 with a multi-kinase inhibitor (TAE) and checking whether a free path for a linker exists. As multiple linkers of different lengths and rigidities were involved, a broad cylinder was used to estimate all linker conformations. C. For models where it was feasible to build a ternary complex with a PROTAC, Ub sites in the ubiquitination zone were estimated by drawing two planes with respect to the position of CRBN and the target kinase. The sites lying in the quadrant facing the putative position of the E2, estimated by the placement of RBX1 are considered accessible. For each Ub site, the fraction of feasible models with the site in the ubiquitination zone was used as a probability to measure its E2 accessibility. PROTAC, Proteolysis targeting chimeric; PDB, Protein Data Bank; TAE, a multi-kinase inhibitor; IMiD, immunomodulatory drugs.

## Supplementary Figure S7
Benchmarking of protein–protein docking protocol for ternary complex prediction Interface score vs. interface RMSD plots for the example of CRBN–dBET70–BRD4BD1 (PDB: 6BN9). Each point represents a docked model with the colors indicating resemblance to the experimental structure as per CAPRI criteria. A. Comparison of all models, the 200 top-scoring models, and the top models after filtering out models where it is infeasible to fit a PROTAC. With the anchor points for the linker in dBET70, several models with interface RMSD between 7.5 Å and 10 Å are not feasible. B. Comparison of all models with and without the target ligand present during docking. In both cases, the E3 ligand is present. Qualitatively, the plots are similar to energy funnels in similar regions. CAPRI, ; RMSD, root-mean-square deviation.

## Supplementary Figure S8
E2-accessibility of Ub sites is associated with protein degradability A. Smooth line showing the association between protein degradability and the number of E2-accessible Ub sites/lysine residues (E2 accessibility greater than a certain threshold). The x-axis shows the threshold of E2 accessibility for selecting E2-accessible lysine/Ub sites, and the y-axis shows the Wilcoxon Z-statistics indicating the association between kinase degradability and the number of lysine/Ub sites with E2 accessibility greater than a certain threshold. A positive Wilcoxon Z-statistic indicates the positive association between protein degradability and the number of lysine/Ub sites, while a negative Wilcoxon Z-statistic indicates the negative association between protein degradability and lysine/Ub sites. The salmon arrow points to the association between kinase degradability and the total number of Ub sites, while the red arrow points to the association between kinase degradability and the number of E2-accessible Ub sites (accessible to E2 in more than 50% of docking models). B. Box plot showing the association of kinase degradability with the total number of lysine residues (left) and E2-accessible lysine residues (right) in the kinase targets. The E2-accessible lysine residues were defined as the lysine residues lying in the ubiquitination zone of more than 50% of feasible models. C. Docking model of the ternary complex of CRL4CRBN and the target kinase CDK1. Overlay of CUL4A (PDB: 4A0K) and CUL4B (4A0L) superimposed on DDB1 WD repeat beta-propeller B (4A0K), with CRBN (5FQD) superimposed DDB1 WD repeat beta-propellers A and C demonstrates high flexibility of the CUL4 arm of the E3 ligase. The RBX1 fragment was used to estimate the position of the E2 enzyme and the corresponding ubiquitination zone in the target protein CDK1. The model of CDK1 (4Y72) docked to CRBN is shown in yellow, and the predicted E2-accessible and E2-inaccessible Ub sites are highlighted in blue and red, respectively.

## Supplementary Figure S9
Ub sites are enriched in the BRD4-BD1 domain Lollipop diagram showing the reported Ub sites in BRD4. The number in the circles indicates the number of references for each Ub site in the PhosphoSitePlus and the blank circle indicates that only one reference is available. The blue text near the circle indicates the location of the Ub site.

## Supplementary Figure S10
Deubiquitination features did not show the association with kinase degradability A. Box plot showing the highest correlation between each highly/lowly- degradable kinase and DUBs. B. Box plot showing the number of interacted DUBs with each highly/lowly- degradable kinase. C. Box plot showing the protein-level change of highly- versus lowly- degradable kinases upon the UbVS (a pan-DUB inhibitor) treatment. D. Box plot showing the maximal down-regulation of highly- and lowly-degradable kinases upon treatment of 11 different DUB inhibitors. E. ROC curves showing the performance of a random forest model trained on deubiquitination features (highest correlation with DUB proteins, the number of interacted DUBs, and differential expression upon DUB inhibitions) in predicting protein degradability. DUBs, deubiquitinating enzymes.

## Supplementary Table S1
Highly- and lowly-degradable kinases

## Supplementary Table S2
Protein-intrinsic features

## Supplementary Table S3
Forward feature selection result for each model

## Supplementary Table S4
MAPD predictions, ligandability, and disease associations of human proteins

## Supplementary Table S5
Structural properties of Ub sites

## Supplementary Table S6
Benchmarking results of protein–protein docking protocol

## Data Availability Statement
The datasets supporting the conclusions of this study are accessible at http://mapd.cistrome.org.