pmcChem RevChem Rev822acssdcrChemical Reviews0009-26651520-6890pmc-is-collection-domainyespmc-collection-titleACS AuthorChoicePMC11503651PMC11503651.111503651115036513931188010.1021/acs.chemrev.4c003751ReviewGenetic Code
Expansion Approaches to Decipher the
Ubiquitin Code
WankaVera https://orcid.org/0000-0002-8628-183XFottnerMaximilian https://orcid.org/0000-0003-1861-7968CiglerMarko https://orcid.org/0000-0002-1318-6567LangKathrin †Laboratory
for Organic Chemistry (LOC), Department of Chemistry and Applied Biosciences
(D-CHAB), ETH Zurich, Vladimir-Prelog-Weg 3, 8093 Zurich, Switzerland‡Department
of Chemistry, Technical University of Munich, 85748 Garching, Germany*Email: kathrin.lang@org.chem.ethz.ch.2309202423102024124204735511154411584170520241908202405082024251020242610202426102024© 2024 The Authors. Published by American Chemical Society2024The Authorshttps://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/Permits the broadest form of re-use including for commercial purposes, provided that author attribution and integrity are maintained (https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/). 
The covalent attachment
of Ub (ubiquitin) to target proteins (ubiquitylation)
represents one of the most versatile PTMs (post-translational modifications)
in eukaryotic cells. Substrate modifications range from a single Ub
moiety being attached to a target protein to complex Ub chains that
can also contain Ubls (Ub-like proteins). Ubiquitylation plays pivotal
roles in most aspects of eukaryotic biology, and cells dedicate an
orchestrated arsenal of enzymes to install, translate, and reverse
these modifications. The entirety of this complex system is coined
the Ub code. Deciphering the Ub code is challenging due to the difficulty
in reconstituting enzymatic machineries and generating defined Ub/Ubl–protein
conjugates. This Review provides a comprehensive overview of recent
advances in using GCE (genetic code expansion) techniques to study
the Ub code. We highlight strategies to site-specifically ubiquitylate
target proteins and discuss their advantages and disadvantages, as
well as their various applications. Additionally, we review the potential
of small chemical PTMs targeting Ub/Ubls and present GCE-based approaches
to study this additional layer of complexity. Furthermore, we explore
methods that rely on GCE to develop tools to probe interactors of
the Ub system and offer insights into how future GCE-based tools could
help unravel the complexity of the Ub code.

H2020 European Research Council10.13039/100010663101003289Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft10.13039/501100001659SFB1309Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft10.13039/501100001659SFB1035pmc-status-qastatus0pmc-status-liveyespmc-status-embargonopmc-status-releasedyespmc-prop-open-accessyespmc-prop-olfnopmc-prop-manuscriptnopmc-prop-legally-suppressednopmc-prop-has-pdfyespmc-prop-has-supplementnopmc-prop-pdf-onlynopmc-prop-suppress-copyrightnopmc-prop-is-real-versionnopmc-prop-is-scanned-articlenopmc-prop-preprintnopmc-prop-in-epmcyespmc-license-refCC BYdocument-id-old-9cr4c00375document-id-new-14cr4c00375ccc-price

## Special Issue
Published
as part of Chemical
Reviewsspecial issue “Noncanonical Amino Acids”.
1

## Introduction
1.1

## The Ubiquitin
System: Simply Complex
Proteins are the key players in all
cellular life, and they perform
a variety of essential functions from biocatalysis and signal transduction
to scaffolding and transporting purposes. In order to balance and
regulate these various processes, organisms adjust the abundance and
status of their proteins in response to exogenous and endogenous stimuli.
Proteomic diversity and flexibility are achieved both on a transcriptional
level, for example, by changing protein expression patterns and/or
through alternative splicing, and on a translational level, for example,
through the installment of PTMs (post-translational modifications). , Most PTMs involve the covalent modification of amino acid side chains
of target proteins with small chemical functionalities such as acetyl,
methyl, or phosphate groups. In contrast to these, larger and more
complex PTMs like glycosylation and ubiquitylation also play important
roles in regulating cellular processes. , Ubiquitylation
consists of the covalent attachment of the small protein Ub (ubiquitin)
to target proteins and represents one of the most versatile and abundant
PTMs in eukaryotes. Ub is a globular, 76 amino acid long protein and
is nearly completely conserved across all eukaryotic species. In canonical
ubiquitylation, Ub is attached to its substrate protein via an isopeptide
bond formed between the C-terminal carboxylate of Ub and the ε-amino
group of a lysine within the target protein ( a). Ubiquitylation controls a variety of
cellular processes ranging from proteasomal degradation to DNA repair, endocytosis, autophagy, nuclear
transport, and chromosomal organization. As ubiquitylation is closely intertwined with nearly all aspects
of eukaryotic biology, its dysregulation can lead to numerous severe
pathologies such as cancer or neurodegenerative disorders. 
The significance and complexity of ubiquitylation
are demonstrated by the sophisticated machinery of enzymes that cells
dedicate to the installation (writer proteins), interpretation (reader
proteins), and reversal (eraser proteins) of Ub modifications. To
achieve ubiquitylation, Ub is first activated, then conjugated, and
finally ligated to target proteins by an enzymatic cascade comprised
of E1 Ub-activating, E2 Ub-conjugating, and E3 Ub-ligating enzymes
( b). The human
genome encodes two E1 enzymes, approximately 30 E2s, and an estimated
number of more than 600 E3 ligases. In an ATP-dependent reaction,
an E1 enzyme first generates a reactive Ub-AMP intermediate that is
charged onto its active site cysteine forming an E1∼Ub thioester
conjugate. One of the E2 enzymes then engages in a transthioesterification
reaction to transfer Ub from E1 to the E2’s active site cysteine.
The final transfer of Ub from the Ub∼E2 complex to the target
protein is mediated by an E3 that recognizes a specific lysine residue
in a specific substrate protein. Historically, E3s have been grouped
into HECT (Homologous to the E6-AP Carboxyl Terminus) and RING (Really
Interesting New Gene) type enzymes that catalyze Ub transfer through
different mechanisms. , While HECT-type E3 ligases form
a thioester-linked Ub∼HECT intermediate, RING-type E3s mediate
the direct transfer of Ub from the E2 enzyme to the target protein.
The family of RBR (RING-between-RING) type E3 ligases catalyze ubiquitylation
in a multistep mechanism that shares the characteristics of both HECT-
and RING-mediated ligation. The RING1 domain recognizes the Ub∼E2
complex and transfers Ub to the active site cysteine located in the
RING2 domain, which in turn catalyzes the transfer of Ub to the substrate
protein. The recently discovered RCR
(RING-Cys-relay) type E3 family, which so far contains MYCBP2 (MYC
binding protein 2) as the sole member, exerts a unique mechanism involving
two catalytic cysteines that relay Ub before its transfer onto the
target protein. Remarkably, MYCBP2 was discovered to possess esterification
activity, leading to noncanonical threonine and serine ubiquitylation
within target proteins. RNF213 (ring
finger protein 213) represents another exceptional type of E3 ligase
that combines RING and AAA (ATPase associated with a variety of cellular
activities) domains. Its ubiquitylation mechanism depends on a catalytic
cysteine located in the zinc finger domain, and surprisingly, RNF213
was found to likely ubiquitylate the lipid A moiety of lipopolysaccharide
during bacterial infection, constituting one of the first reported
nonproteinaceous substrates to be ubiquitylated. − While the long-standing
consensus is that ubiquitylation is exclusive to lysine residues within
target proteins, these recently discovered noncanonical ubiquitylation
events and their novel cellular functions have attracted more and
more attention as of late. − Alluringly, noncanonical ubiquitylation
is frequently installed by pathogenic effector proteins that interfere
with the host Ub system to advance successful infection. − The development of robust methods to detect and study these nonlysine
and especially nonprotein ubiquitylation events is a major challenge
in the emerging field but will represent a new milestone in understanding
the complex Ub system. 
Ubiquitylation
of a substrate protein may occur in the form of
monoubiquitylation or multi-monoubiquitylation, where a single Ub
monomer is attached to a single lysine residue or several lysine residues
within the substrate protein, respectively ( c). As Ub can serve as a substrate for ubiquitylation
itself, these modification patterns are expanded by polyubiquitylation:
the modification of Ub with Ub chains. Ub displays eight potential
ubiquitylation sites: the N-terminus and seven lysine residues (K6,
K11, K27, K29, K33, K48, and K63) that can all participate in Ub chain
formation. Ub chains linked via the same type of lysine residue are
classified as homotypic chains. Conversely, heterotypic chains feature
different linkage types and can be subdivided into mixed chains and
branched chains, the latter featuring Ub monomers with more than one
ubiquitylation site ( c). 
The resulting multitude
of Ub topologies, also referred to as the
Ub code, are deciphered by so-called reader
proteins that use UBDs (Ub-binding domains) to interact with specific
surface areas of Ub, e.g., the hydrophobic F4, I36,
and I44 patches or the T9/K11 TEK-box motif. UBDs of more than 20
different families, including UBAs (Ub-associated domains), UIMs (Ub-interacting
motifs), and UBZs (Ub-binding zinc fingers), are found in many proteins. , Typically, UBDs interact with monoUb with low affinities in the
10–500 μM range. This low
affinity of a single UBD for monoUb allows for avidity effects in
proteins that contain multiple UBDs, leading to fine-tuned affinity
and selectivity toward distinct Ub topologies. While the well-studied
K48-linked chains mediate proteasomal degradation, K63-linked chains have been found to regulate nondegradative
functions exemplified by their important roles in signal transduction
pathways. , The remaining atypical linkages via M1,
K6, K11, K27, K29, and K33 are less-well studied but have been linked
to various signaling pathways in mitophagy, autophagy, epigenetics,
and angiogenesis in recent years. Similarly,
the biological functions of mixed and branched chains remain rather
elusive and are still under investigation. , , 
In addition to the writers and readers
of the Ub code discussed
above, the Ub system also encompasses erasers: DUBs (deubiquitylating
enzymes, b) reverse ubiquitylation by hydrolyzing
the isopeptide bond between Ub and the substrate protein, thereby
allowing the tight regulation of ubiquitylation in response to internal
and external stimuli. Human cells encode approximately 100 different
DUBs that are classified into seven structurally different families:
six cysteine protease families including UCHs (ubiquitin C-terminal
hydrolases), USPs (ubiquitin-specific proteases), OTUs (ovarian tumor
proteases), Josephins, MINDYs (motif interacting with ubiquitin (MIU)-containing
novel DUB family), and ZUP1 (zinc finger containing ubiquitin peptidase
1), as well as one Zn-dependent metalloprotease family (JAMMs (JAB1/MPN/MOV34)). , In addition to reverting ubiquitylation on target proteins, DUBs
process precursor forms of Ub and contribute to maintaining Ub homeostasis
by disassembling free polyUb chains. , The specificities
of DUBs toward different Ub topologies, their expression levels, and
their distinct localization regulate fundamental cellular processes
such as cellular propagation, DNA repair, and immune signaling. , Further, it should be noted that besides their catalytic role, multiple
DUBs of the OTU and USP families also possess diverse crucial noncatalytic
moonlighting functions that are only starting to be investigated in
more detail. Alterations and deregulation
in DUB abundance and activity are therefore connected to various pathologies,
and consequentially DUBs have become a focal point in drug discovery
in recent years. , This research is not limited
to eukaryotic DUBs but also expands to bacterial and viral effector
proteins that either exert DUB activity or modulate host DUBs to increase
infectivity. − 
The elegant concept of the Ub code is not limited
to Ub itself:
eukaryotes possess more than a dozen Ubls (Ub-like proteins), such
as SUMO (small ubiquitin-related modifier), NEDD8 (neural-precursor-cell-expressed
developmentally down-regulated 8), and ISG15 (interferon-stimulated
gene 15 ubiquitin-like modifier), that share the ß-grasp fold
and the flexible C-terminus of Ub ( d). Mirroring ubiquitylation, the activation
and conjugation of Ubls to substrate proteins (ublylation) are concerted
by Ubl-specific sets of E1, E2, and E3 enzymes and reversed by respective
deconjugating enzymes. Ubls possess distinctive
cellular functions but are also heavily intertwined with the Ub code,
as ublylation can lead to crosstalk with ubiquitylation in a synergistic
or antagonistic fashion. Moreover, the existence of polymeric hybrid
chains ( c)
containing different Ubls (e.g., Ub and SUMO or Ub
and NEDD8) represents an intriguing example of the overlapping worlds
of Ub and Ubls. Another layer of complexity
is conferred by small-molecule PTMs ( c).
As Ub and Ubls are protein-based
PTMs, they can be targeted themselves
by small-molecule modifications. It has,
for example, been shown that at least six of the seven lysine residues
within Ub are targets for site-specific acetylation, and serine/threonine
and tyrosine residues of Ub are susceptible to phosphorylation. 
Considering the tremendous complexity
of the Ub system, deciphering
the entire Ub code strikes one as a Sisyphean mission. Nevertheless,
chemists and biologists alike set out to unravel the mechanisms by
which ubiquitylation dictates the fate of single proteins, cells,
or entire organisms. Progress within this multidisciplinary adventure
will not only reward us with a better understanding of eukaryotic
life itself but also help us elucidate how dysfunctions of the Ub
system are connected to disease and how pathogens hijack ubiquitylation
patterns in host cells to increase virulence.
To gain further
insights into how Ub and Ubls orchestrate cellular
processes, we require a molecular and mechanistic understanding of
how specific Ub/Ubl modifications affect target proteins and how different
Ub/Ubl patterns are written, read, and decoded. For this it is important
to create defined conjugates with Ub/Ubl attached to specific lysine
residues within a protein of interest (POI). However, the generation
of such defined and homogeneous Ub-POI conjugates poses several challenges,
as the exact writers of specific ubiquitylation events are often unknown
or the corresponding enzymes lose their specificities in in
vitro settings. Progress in protein semisynthesis and chemical
protein synthesis for the generation of various Ub-POI conjugates
has paved the way for studying structural and mechanistic features
of site-specific Ub attachments to proteins. − The scope of these methods is, however, mostly limited to in vitro ubiquitylation of small and refoldable proteins
that withstand harsh chemical deprotection protocols. Hence, there
is a demand for innovative methodologies that on the one hand allow
the generation of ever more complex Ub/Ubl conjugates, including complex
Ub/Ubl chains attached to nonrefoldable multidomain substrate proteins,
and on the other hand may even enable the generation of these specific
conjugates within their native environment: inside of a eukaryotic
cell. GCE (genetic code expansion) methodologies paired with bioorthogonal
chemistries and/or enzymatic approaches may account for both of these
challenges. GCE allows the modification of proteins in living cells
by site-specifically introducing artificial designer amino acids into
target proteins and therefore represents a promising tool to further
shed light on Ub/Ubl signaling.

1.2

## Expanding
the Genetic Code: Naturally Unnatural
Proteins across all
domains of life are built almost exclusively
from the same set of 20 natural, also termed proteinogenic, amino
acids. Pyl (pyrrolysine) and Sec (selenocysteine), sometimes referred
to as the 21st and 22nd proteinogenic amino acids, represent rare
exceptions. In spite of their substantial structural and functional
role, proteinogenic amino acids cover only a limited range of chemical
functionalities. Naturally they are complemented by PTMs and cofactors
that significantly increase the chemical repertoire of proteins, enabling
the diverse chemistry that defines life. To artificially increase
the chemical space of proteins, scientists have strived for decades
to develop approaches to endow proteins with unique chemical and biophysical
probes in form of ncAAs (noncanonical amino acids). The use of solid-phase
synthesis, native chemical ligation, and in vitro translation , allows the site-specific installation of ncAAs into proteins. Such
methods, however, are not only experimentally challenging and often
low-yielding but also limited to the production of small proteins
in in vitro settings. Strategies harnessing the translational
machinery of a host organism to introduce ncAAs into proteins by GCE
aim to overcome these boundaries. These approaches allow the residue-
or site-specific incorporation of ncAAs into proteins during ribosomal
translation. − 
 Residue-specific incorporation
of ncAAs via selective pressure
allows global, proteome-wide decoration of proteins with specifically
designed noncanonical functionalities. This approach relies on the
recognition of an amino acid analogue as a substrate for an endogenous
aaRS (aminoacyl-tRNA synthetase), leading to partial replacement of
one of the 20 natural amino acids with an ncAA ( a). Typically, auxotrophic Escherichia
coli (E. coli) strains, lacking the endogenous
machinery for the biosynthesis of the natural amino acid that is to
be replaced, are used, and POI expression is conducted in media depleted
of the respective natural amino acid. The endogenous E. coli MetRS (methionyl-tRNA synthetase), for example, recognizes a range
of different ncAAs, including Aha (l-azidohomoalanine), and
has been used to globally incorporate Aha into proteins in response
to the methionine sense codon (AUG). While
the range of amino acid substrates that an endogenous aaRS can recognize
is limited, it can be significantly expanded by introducing a mutant
aaRS into the host organism, − thereby creating proteins harboring more diverse functionalities.
 Site-specific incorporation of ncAAs, on the other
hand, relies
on an orthogonal aaRS that specifically charges the desired ncAA but
none of the 20 natural amino acids onto its cognate orthogonal tRNA
and, consequently, directs its incorporation during mRNA translation
in response to a blank codon placed at a defined site ( b). Most often, the amber stop
codon (UAG) is the codon of choice for this approach—thus known
as “amber suppression”—for multiple reasons:
The amber codon terminates only 9% of E. coli genes,
most of them being nonessential, , and is only
recognized by one of the two bacterial release factors that facilitate
translation termination (RF1), which
was also found to be nonessential in E. coli. Furthermore, certain species such as methanogenic
archaea utilize the amber codon to introduce an amino acid instead
of for terminating protein synthesis. − To be classified as orthogonal,
an aaRS/tRNA pair imported from a heterologous host must not interfere
with endogenous aaRS/tRNA pairs and amino acids. Hence, the orthogonal
aaRS selectively and exclusively charges the ncAA onto the orthogonal
tRNA, and the orthogonal tRNA is not aminoacylated by any endogenous
aaRS.
Over the last two decades, a wide variety of different
aaRS/tRNA
pairs have been discovered and engineered for the site-specific incorporation
of ncAAs into proteins. These aaRS/tRNA pairs typically originate
from evolutionarily distant organisms with respect to the host organism
of choice. Among the most prevalently used orthogonal aaRS/tRNA pairs
are the PylRS/tRNA (pyrrolysyl-aaRS/tRNA) pairs derived from the archaeal
species Methanosarcina mazei (Mm) and Methanosarcina barkeri (Mb), which were shown to retain orthogonality and specificity in pro-
and eukaryotic expression systems. − , − Next to Mm- and MbPylRS/tRNA pairs,
variants of the Methanocaldococcus jannaschii (Mj) TyrRS/tRNA (tyrosyl-aaRS/tRNA) synthetase
pair, which is orthogonal in E. coli and other prokaryotes
but not eukaryotic systems, have found wide applications for incorporating
ncAAs in E. coli( , ) and constitute
the first orthogonal aaRS/tRNA pair for the incorporation of ncAAs
in living E. coli. Analogously,
the pSRS (phosphoseryl-aaRS) from Methanococcus marplaudis (Mmp) has been combined with the cysteinyl-tRNA
from M. jannaschii to engineer an orthogonal aaRS/tRNA
pair for the site-specific incorporation of pS (phosphoserine), its
nonhydrolyzable analogues, and pT (phosphothreonine) into proteins
in E. coli. − Vice versa, the E. coli leucyl-, tyrosyl-, and tryptophanyl-aaRS/tRNA
pairs, which are not orthogonal in prokaryotes,
were utilized to incorporate a broad spectrum of ncAAs in yeast and
mammalian cells. Recent studies have furthermore designed chimeric
orthogonal aaRS/tRNA pairs by grafting the N-terminal tRNA-binding
domain of a PylRS variant onto the catalytic domain of the E. coli histidyl-, phenylalanyl-, and alanyl-aaRS in combination
with transplanting the pyrrolysine tRNA acceptor stem to their respective
tRNA counterparts. These chimeric aaRS/tRNA pairs can direct the site-specific
incorporation of phenylalanine and tryptophane derivatives into proteins
expressed in E. coli. − The discovery of a PylRS/tRNA
variant from Methanomethylophilus alvus (Ma) showed that some PylRS variants contain solely
the C-terminal catalytic domain and are functional without the N-terminal
tRNA binding domain (ΔNPylRS/tRNA). The MaPylRS/tRNA
pair was demonstrated to be active and orthogonal in E. coli and mammalian cells and to efficiently incorporate ncAAs. − To enable site-specific incorporation of more than one distinct
ncAA into a target protein, mutually orthogonal aaRS/tRNA pairs have
been evolved either by taking advantage of the evolutionary divergence
of the used aaRS/tRNA pairs or by creating mutual orthogonality via
directed evolution. − These orthogonal pairs have been leveraged for the suppression of
two or even all three stop codons introduced into a POI. , − Recent efforts to even further expand the
repertoire of available codons for ncAA incorporation include the
evolution of an orthogonal bacterial ribosome that facilitates the
suppression and translation of quadruplet codons , , and genome engineering efforts
in E. coli to recode and repurpose sense codons for
ncAA incorporation. Early studies focused on replacing all genomic
amber codons in E. coli with synonymous ochre codons,
allowing for the deletion of RF1 and the efficient reassignment of
the amber translation function. Further
engineering efforts, led by the Chin group, culminated in the recent
creation of the synthetic E. coli strain syn61 in
which two serine codons are substituted with their synonyms and the
amber codon is replaced with the ochre codon. Removing the respective decoding tRNAs and RF1 from syn61’s
genome created three blank codons, enabling the incorporation of three
distinct ncAAs using mutually orthogonal aaRS/tRNA pairs. Most importantly, the substrate scope of PylRS
and other orthogonal aaRS has been significantly expanded by directed
evolution approaches to identify aaRS variants with high selectivity
and specificity for a given ncAA. While the most frequently used evolution
approaches rely on two-step dead or alive selection systems, , , − recent developments showed that it is possible to directly evolve
aaRS variants through phage-assisted continuous or noncontinuous evolution , and tRNA display. The latter system that decouples aaRS evolution
from translation was used to identify PylRS variants that direct the
incorporation of α,α-disubstituted and β-amino acids,
showing that the substrate scope of PylRS can be extended beyond l-amino acids with different side chains. Using orthogonal aaRS/tRNA pairs and their engineered variants,
hitherto more than 460 ncAAs , , have been site-specifically incorporated into proteins in prokaryotic , and/or eukaryotic cells, , , , , including multicellular organisms such as plants, Caenorhabditis elegans, − Drosophila melanogaster, and Mus musculus. − 
The ability to introduce novel functionalities
site-specifically
into POIs in living cells has shown great relevance for different
fields as it allows the study and manipulation of biological processes
that are difficult to tackle via more traditional approaches with
impressive spatiotemporal control. The rapid rise of the reported
applications of GCE in multiple research areas over the past decade
is therefore not surprising and has been the topic of several reviews. , , , − To highlight only a couple of examples,
GCE has proven to be an excellent means of site-specific protein labeling
in both in vitro and in cellulo or in vivo settings. The approach consists of the incorporation
of ncAAs equipped with a bioorthogonal handle (e.g., alkynes, strained alkenes and alkynes, and azides or tetrazines,
among others) that participates in a rapid and selective bioorthogonal
reaction with an externally added small molecule that introduces a
biochemical or biophysical reporter of choice. The use of light as an elegant external trigger for manipulating
enzyme activity has also been explored within the scope of GCE. Several
signaling processes in the cell have been successfully enlightened
through the incorporation of photocaged , , or photoswitchable ncAAs. , Photocrosslinking ncAAs have, on the other hand, allowed the mapping
of weak and transient PPIs (protein–protein interactions). , Similarly, ncAAs bearing fine-tuned electrophilic moieties that
only react with nucleophiles in sufficient proximity have been employed
for proximity-triggered chemical crosslinking to stabilize low-affinity
PPIs. − Furthermore, site-specific incorporation of ncAAs has found application
in improving enzyme activity and stability, uncovering enzyme mechanisms,
and designing enzymes with new catalytic functions and mechanisms. − 
Notably, GCE can also be used to study the effects of PTMs
through
the direct incorporation of an ncAA resembling a specific PTM or a
mimic thereof. This decouples the installation of a certain site-specific
PTM from its cognate endogenous writer enzyme and enables the facile
production of homogeneously modified proteins. It is crucial in case
the writer enzymes are unknown, challenging to handle, or nonexistent,
as some PTMs are installed in a nonenzymatic manner. In contrast to
synthetic or semisynthetic approaches, GCE can be used to introduce
PTMs on large, nonrefoldable proteins and on proteins in living cells,
potentially enabling not only the introduction but also the investigation
of these PTMs and their effects in native environments. GCE has allowed
the site-specific incorporation of a variety of small-molecule PTMs, , including acylations, , − methylation, − phosphorylation, , , , and sulfation, and has recently been the focus of an extensive
review. In contrast to these small chemical
PTMs, where corresponding ncAAs bearing these modifications or mimics
thereof are suitable substrates for engineered orthogonal aaRS/tRNA
pairs, protein-based PTMs like ubiquitylation and ublylation cannot
be directly installed via cotranslational incorporation. Instead,
ncAAs, most typically based on lysine derivatives, bearing a chemoselective
reactive moiety for the attachment of Ub/Ubl have been designed and
encoded via GCE. In combination with bioorthogonal conjugation and/or
chemoenzymatic ligation techniques, these strategies afford access
to site-specifically ubiquitylated POIs.

2

## Exploiting
GCE Approaches for Building Specific Ub-POI Conjugates
In this Review, we provide an
extensive overview of how GCE can
be leveraged to study the intricacies of the highly complex Ub/Ubl
code. We present available GCE tools for generating Ub-POI conjugates
and discuss their advantages, disadvantages, and applications. We
hope that our synopsis may serve as a guideline and go-to reference
for structural biologists, biochemists, chemical biologists, and cell
biologists working in the Ub field, complementing other recent reviews
in the field. , , We provide an overview of GCE methods for generating Ub-POI conjugates
by dividing them into two groups, i.e., (1) methods
that generate Ub-POI conjugates with artificial linkages instead of
the endogenous isopeptide bond and (2) methods resulting in isopeptide-linked
conjugates, and discuss how the respective conjugates have been applied.
Additionally, we describe how Ub and Ubls themselves are modified
by small chemical PTMs and how GCE approaches may help the study of
this second layer of PTMs. Furthermore, we discuss GCE-based tools
tailored to the investigation of writers, interactors, and erasers
of the Ub code. Finally, we summarize how GCE may help to address
future challenges the Ub community has to face.
2.1

## Strategies
Resulting in Ub-POI Conjugates
with Artificial Linkages
Bioorthogonal reactions have been
used to generate ubiquitylated target proteins displaying an artificial
linkage between Ub and POI instead of the endogenous isopeptide bond
catalyzed by E3 ligases. By definition, bioorthogonal reactions must
fulfill several essential requirements: (i) they must show high chemoselectivity
of the reaction partners toward various chemical functionalities found
on biomolecules and ideally within living cells, (ii) they should
generate the reaction product in high yields and with fast kinetics
under physiological conditions (aqueous environment, ambient temperature,
and neutral pH), and (iii) the reaction partners have to be metabolically,
kinetically, and thermodynamically stable. − For generating Ub-POI conjugates, the product of the respective
bioorthogonal reaction should further closely mimic the native isopeptide
bond and be obtained ideally in quantitative yields within short incubation
times in aqueous buffers on folded proteins without requiring too
high a stochiometric excess of one of the reaction partners (Ub/Ubl
or POI). Furthermore, the bioorthogonal functionalities have to be
efficiently installed at the C-terminus of Ub/Ubl and incorporated
within the POI at the chosen ubiquitylation/ublylation site. With
respect to these criteria, strategies based on click reactions between
alkynes and azides ( ), oxime ligation reactions between aminooxy moieties
and aldehydes or ketones ( ), and thiazolidine ligation ( ) have been
developed to generate Ub-POI conjugates with artificial linkages and
will be discussed in more detail below.
2.1.1

## Click
Chemistry-Based Approaches
The development of click chemistry
and bioorthogonal chemistry, awarded
with the Nobel Prize in Chemistry in 2022, introduced the versatile
and powerful click reaction concept to chemical biology. , The Cu(I)-catalyzed 1,3-dipolar cycloaddition between a terminal
alkyne and an azide (CuAAC) affords 1,4-disubstituted 1,2,3-triazole-linked
products and proceeds with fast kinetics in various complex chemical
and biological settings. Leveraging GCE for the site-specific incorporation
of correspondingly modified ncAAs enables the modification of recombinant
proteins with azide or terminal alkyne moieties on recombinant proteins , , and has been utilized in a plethora
of applications to label POIs with correspondingly modified biophysical
probes such as fluorophores or affinity handles. , As both azide and alkyne reaction partners can be incorporated into
proteins, CuAAC can also be leveraged to generate protein–protein
conjugates. Accordingly, the technology has been applied to generate
various Ub-POI conjugates over the past decade following one of three
general strategies ( a and b).
 The first approach for generating
defined homogeneous Ub-POI conjugates
via CuAAC was developed by Marx, Rubini, and co-workers and relies
on both selective pressure incorporation and amber suppression to
introduce azide and alkyne moieties into Ub/Ubl and POI, respectively. Selective pressure incorporation utilizing
the MetRS in E. coli enables the substitution of
the C-terminal glycine (G76) of the donor Ub with the azide-bearing
methionine analogue Aha (azidohomoalanine, c). Site-specific
incorporation of PlK (Nε-(propargyloxycarbonyl)-l-lysine, c) affords the introduction of a terminal alkyne moiety into an acceptor
POI. To access all seven triazole-linked
diUbs (diubiquitins), PlK was individually incorporated at all seven
lysine sites within an acceptor Ub using the wt (wild type) MbPylRS/tRNA pair and reacted via CuAAC with the Aha-modified
donor Ub(G76Aha).
Autoubiquitylation assays with the ubiquitin
ligase E6-AP showed
that diUbs generated with this method can engage in polyUb chain formation, confirming their structural similarity to isopeptide-linked
diUbs. CuAAC between Aha and PlK was, however, not limited to diUb
formation, as demonstrated by the generation of monoubiquitylated
PCNA (proliferating cell nuclear antigen). During DNA replication, the ring-shaped homotrimeric PCNA encircles
the DNA and tethers polymerases, e.g., the high-fidelity
Polδ (DNA polymerase-δ), to it, thereby enhancing polymerase
processivity. Furthermore, PCNA plays an important role in mediating
tolerance to DNA damage. In brief, DNA lesions cause stalling of the
replication fork, which leads to monoubiquitylation of PCNA at K164
and thus to the recruitment of low-fidelity DNA polymerases (e.g., Polη) that promote translesion synthesis. Notably,
PCNA can also be modified differently, e.g., by K63-linked
Ub chains, SUMOylation, or decoration with ISG15, leading to different
downstream responses. Incorporation
of PlK at position K164 of PCNA followed by CuAAC with donor Ub(G76Aha)
afforded triazole-linked Ub-PCNA(K164) that was shown to stimulate
DNA synthesis by Polδ and to possess increased affinity for
Polη, thus confirming the suitability of CuAAC-generated Ub-POI
conjugates for biochemical research. Further optimization of the click reaction itself by adding nondenaturing
amounts of anionic surfactants, such as SDS (sodium dodecyl sulfate),
facilitated the site-specific ubiquitylation of Polβ (DNA polymerase-β)
at K61. , Intriguingly, it was also possible to generate
bifunctional Ubs by replacing one lysine residue with PlK via amber
suppression while also installing C-terminal Aha via selective pressure
incorporation. These bifunctional building blocks were used to generate
polyubiquitylated Polβ and to generate and study unanchored
K11-, K27-, and K29-linked Ub chains. , Incubation
of these triazole-linked Ub chains with Xenopus laevis egg extracts showed their resistance toward DUB-catalyzed isopeptide
hydrolysis and enabled studies on linkage-specific physiological effects
of Ub chains. Ca2+-induced cyclin B degradation in Xenopus laevis egg extracts was inhibited by K11-linked
chains, while K27- and K29-linked chains had no effect on cyclin B
levels, and it was hypothesized that the binding of K11-linked Ub
chains to the proteasome outcompeted the recruitment and degradation
of natural substrates of the proteasome. In a different application, PlK was incorporated into histone H1.2
to generate site-specifically ubiquitylated histone H1.2. Histone H1.2 is one of the most prevalent human
subtypes of linker histone H1 and is known to be heavily post-translationally
modified. Ubiquitylation of H1 has been linked to activation of gene
expression, DNA damage response, and antiviral protection. Methods
to study this histone PTM in a controlled setting are therefore of
high interest. PlK was incorporated into N-terminally tagged H1.2
at lysine position K17, K64, or K206, and CuAAC with Ub(G76Aha) afforded
the ubiquitylated histone variants. Assessment of H1.2 interactomes
retrieved from HEK293T lysates showed that around a fifth of the enriched
interactors were ubiquitylation-dependent, including several known
DUBs that were characterized in more detail in downstream biochemical
assays. Furthermore, it was shown that ubiquitylation of H1.2 at K64
influences its interaction with SIRT1 (sirtuin 1), ultimately also
affecting SIRT1 deacetylation activity in vitro.
This observation in addition to the finding that Ub-H1.2(K64) seemed
to promote a relaxed conformational chromatosome state led to the
conclusion that site-specific ubiquitylation of histone H1 likely
contributes to a transcriptionally active state, in line with previous
reports. Research on H1.2 and modified
H1.2 was expanded in a recent follow-up study that for the first time
used intact chromatosomes as bait in affinity enrichment mass spectrometry
interactome studies in HEK293T lysates. 
Recently, access to triazole-linked Ub chains was further
simplified
by installing the alkyne functionality onto Ub via chemical modification
of cysteines instead of site-specific incorporation of PlK. The acceptor lysine of Ub was mutated to cysteine,
followed by Michael addition with propargyl acrylate and subsequent
CuAAC with Ub(G76Aha) ( c).
This strategy facilitated the preparation of all
seven differently
linked DUB-resistant polyUb chains, which were used for the identification
of novel interactors of K27-, K29-, and K33-linked chains through
affinity-based proteomic profiling. NMR
studies of triazole-linked K48-diUb demonstrated the close structural
resemblance to the natively linked K48-diUb, confirming click chemistry
approaches as attractive tools for identifying native Ub chain interactors. Similarly, K11-linked and K27-linked diUbs,
as well as K11-linked Ub trimers, were generated with triazole linkages
and investigated in regard to their structural and functional characteristics
using NMR spectroscopy and MD simulations. , In another recent study, the Scheffner and Marx groups showed that
multiple lysine-to-cysteine replacements in Ub followed by reaction
with propargyl acrylate and CuAAC with Aha-modified Ub allowed the
generation of Ub chains with defined branching sites at K6/K11, K11/K48,
K11/K63, and K6/K11/K48 residues. As
expected, the triazole-linked branched Ub oligomers were resistant
toward DUB-catalyzed hydrolysis in eukaryotic cell lysates, potentially
making them ideal probes for identifying proteins that selectively
interact with defined branched Ub topologies in cell lysates. Taken
together, the cysteine mutagenesis strategy is technically less demanding
and higher yielding than the site-specific incorporation of PlK by
amber suppression. It is, however, limited to the ubiquitylation of
target proteins that do not contain endogenous cysteine residues and
has so far only been applied for building diverse Ub topologies and
not for the ubiquitylation of other target proteins.
The second
main strategy for generating Ub- and Ubl-POI conjugates
with GCE is based on a combination of amber suppression and intein
technology ( d). As mentioned above, one gene can encode multiple proteoforms
that differ in sequence length, which can, for example, be caused
by alternative RNA splicing. Splicing
can, however, also occur post-translationally on the protein level
as first observed for the yeast TFP1 gene product. , Protein splicing is autocatalyzed by protein domains called inteins
that excise themselves from precursor proteins upon ligation of the
flanking N- and C-terminal sequences called N- and C-exteins. The
exact mechanism of protein splicing varies among distinct intein classes
but generally involves a series of acyl shifts and trans-(thio)esterifications. − The discovery that that introduction
of specific point mutations into the intein sequence stalls protein
splicing in a (thio)ester state opened
up the possibility to obtain POIs with C-terminal thioesters by replacing
the N-extein with a POI. Addition of a small molecule containing a
nucleophilic thiol group leads to trans-thioesterfication
and thereby affords the POI as the C-terminal thioester of the small
molecule. Such C-terminal thioesters
are integral for semisynthesis of proteins via EPL (expressed protein
ligation), but they can also undergo
aminolysis with suitable small molecules containing a nucleophilic
amine group. This allows the introduction
of various functionalities to the Ub C-terminus, including electrophilic warheads used for DUB trapping or terminal alkynes suitable for CuAAC. The
Mootz group used an intein-generated C-terminal thioester of a SUMO2
variant lacking the last two glycine residues (SUMO2(ΔGG)) to
install a terminal alkyne on the Ubl via aminolysis with propargylamine
and demonstrated successful CuAAC ligation to a small target protein
that was previously chemically equipped with an azide moiety through
cysteine-reactive chemistry. In several
follow-up studies by the same group, the established intein technology
was used to install a C-terminal alkyne on Ubl variants lacking the
C-terminal G (Ubl(ΔG)) by incubation of the respective Ubl-thioester
with propargylamine. In contrast to previous approaches, the azide
moiety was introduced into the acceptor POI via GCE using the ncAA
pAzF (p-azido-l-phenylalanine, d) and the previously
evolved mutant MjTyrRS/tRNA pair, broadening the scope of this approach to substrate proteins
containing cysteine residues. This technology was used to generate
a triazole-linked conjugate between SUMO2 and the SUMO-conjugating
enzyme Ubc9 (UBE2I) by incorporating pAzF into Ubc9, followed by CuAAC
with a C-terminally alkyne-modified SUMO2(ΔG) variant. SUMOylation
assays with substrates Sp100 (nuclear autoantigen Sp-100) and RanGAP
(Ran GTPase-activating protein) indicated altered the substrate preference
of SUMOylated Ubc9 versus its unmodified counterpart in accordance
with biochemical data on endogenously SUMOylated Ubc9. Furthermore, all seven triazole-linked diUbs
were generated with this method in a facile manner, although yields
for diUb formation did not exceed 20–40%. As expected, the
triazole-linked diUbs proved to be stable against DUB cleavage but
importantly showed no decreased binding toward the UBA domain of Mud1,
a DNA damage response protein that specifically recognizes K48-linked
chains through its UBA domain. The structural
and dynamic integrity of a triazole-linked diUb, accessed via the
pAzF-based approach, was further confirmed by a study based on quantum
mechanical and molecular mechanical methods. In another recent study, pAzF and intein chemistry were used to
generate a triazole-linked conjugate between Ub and PEX5 (peroxisomal
targeting signal 1 receptor). Peroxisome
biogenesis and turnover rely on the import of peroxisomal matrix proteins
into peroxisomes, which is mediated by the import receptors PEX5 and
PEX7. Upon cargo release, PEX5 is monoubiquitylated at C11, forming
a thioester-linked Ub-PEX5(C11) conjugate and leading to PEX extraction
from the peroxisomal membrane followed by cytosolic deubiquitylation
to initiate the next transport cycle. Studies in ΔPEX5 fibroblasts
electroporated with the in vitro generated triazole-linked
Ub-PEX5(C11) conjugate revealed that the artificially linked Ub-PEX5(C11)
conjugate was able to bind to the PEX7 complexes and restore cargo
import, mimicking the behavior of natively linked Ub-PEX5(C11). 
A third click chemistry-based approach
introduced by Kessler, Kramer,
and co-workers combines the features of the two presented technologies
to decorate Ub and Ubls with azide and alkyne moieties. It relies
on site-specific incorporation of Aha at acceptor lysine sites within
Ub, using selective pressure incorporation via MetRS, and intein-aided
installation of a terminal alkyne moiety bearing an electrophilic
warhead at the C-terminus of Ub ( e). The CuAAC-generated
triazole-linked diUbs possess an acrylamide moiety in their linker
region and can act as DUB inhibitors by covalently trapping the active
site cysteine of DUBs, which renders them useful probes for activity-based
DUB profiling in eukaryotic cell lysates. Surface plasmon resonance
experiments of these activity-based diUb probes with an active site
mutant of the DUB OTUB1 confirmed similar binding behavior as seen
for their respective isopeptide-linked counterparts, proving the utility
of these artificially linked conjugates for DUB profiling. Treatment
of HEK239T cell lysates with the acrylamide-bearing diUb probes followed
by pull-down and mass spectrometry analyses revealed that many DUBs
displayed a preference for atypical linkages (M1, K11, K27, and K29
linkages) over the well-studied K48 and K63 linkages. 
Taken together, click chemistry-based
approaches for studying protein
ubiquitylation have been optimized extensively over the past years
and have proven to be well-suited technologies for generating and
studying Ub-POI conjugates. All strategies discussed above yield nonhydrolyzable
Ub-POI conjugates. This enables their application in complex environments, e.g., cellular extracts containing endogenous DUBs that
would process natively linked Ub-POI conjugates. Despite the different
linker lengths between POI (or acceptor Ub) and donor Ub/Ubl in the
various CuAAC-generated Ub/Ubl-conjugates, their similarity and resemblance
to natively linked conjugates were confirmed in silico and/or experimentally for various Ub/Ubl-POI conjugates. The CuAAC
approaches based on intein technologies can in principle also be extended
to other Ubls, while selective pressure incorporation of Aha is limited
to Ubls that do not contain internal methionine residues and can therefore
not be expanded to, e.g., SUMO, ISG15, and NEDD8.
A similar constraint holds true for the approach that introduces the
alkyne moiety into target proteins via the reaction of cysteine with
propargyl acrylate: it is limited to substrate proteins that do not
contain any cysteine residues or in which cysteine residues can be
mutated without perturbing the structure and function of the protein. In addition, CuAAC relies on cytotoxic Cu(I),
which limits the method to in vitro applications
and can also affect the integrity of purified proteins, as metal traces
may lead to oxidation or precipitation. Nevertheless, the strength of click chemistry-based approaches lies
in their ease-of-use and simplicity, as all components are commercially
available and the procedures can be implemented easily in a typical
biochemistry/structural biology lab to access Ub/Ubl-POI conjugates.

2.1.2

## Oxime Ligation-Based Approaches
Condensation
reactions between aldehydes or ketones and primary amine
nucleophiles yielding imines, hydrazones, or oximes have found broad
application as bioconjugation methods on peptides and purified proteins. The oxime ligation between carbonyls and aminooxy
groups is of particular interest, as the obtained oxime bond is less
prone to hydrolysis compared to imines and hydrazones. 
In the context of generating Ub/Ubl-POI
conjugates, the oxime ligation confers an added advantage, as the
oxime linkage presents a close mimic of a peptide bond but provides
stability against DUBs ( a and b). Initial efforts to create
oxime-linked Ub-POI conjugates focused on ligating a Ub variant, which
lacked the two C-terminal glycine residues (UbΔGG) and was modified
with a C-terminal aldehyde functionality, to aminooxy-bearing Ub-fragment
peptides generated via SPPS (solid phase peptide synthesis). Virdee and co-workers then expanded the approach
to expressed proteins by site-specifically installing an aminooxy
moiety in a target protein via amber suppression. Incorporation of Boc-εOK (Nε-(tert-butyloxycarbonyl)aminooxy-l-lysine, c) was achieved by
using a MbPylRS/tRNA variant. The Boc (tert-butoxycarbonyl) protecting
group of Boc-εOK provides a recognition element for the orthogonal
synthetase and prevents side-reactions and adduct formations with
cellular ketones such as pyruvate. Boc deprotection under acidic conditions
on the purified protein unmasks the aminooxy moiety in the acceptor
POI that can subsequently undergo oxime ligation with an appropriately
C-terminally modified Ub/Ubl variant. Functionalization of the donor Ub C-terminus was achieved through
aminolysis of an intein-derived Ub-thioester with an acetal-bearing
small molecule that was in situ converted to the
respective C-terminal aldehyde under acidic conditions. 
 The strategy was successfully
employed for the generation of oxime-linked
K6- and K48-diUbs, as well as a Ub-SUMO2(K11) conjugate. Comparison
of X-ray crystal structures of isopeptide- and oxime-linked K6-diUbs
confirmed that the oxime linkage provides a suitable mimic for the
isopeptide linkage. The oxime linkage was only observed as a trans regioisomer, accurately mimicking the native isopeptide
conformation. Indeed, the oxime-linked conjugates showed high binding
affinities toward tested DUBs but remained refractory to DUB-catalyzed
hydrolysis, rendering them promising DUB inhibitors. IC50 measurements confirmed oxime-linked K6-diUb,
Ub-SUMO(K11), and K48-diUb were potent inhibitors for the promiscuous
DUB UCHL3. Furthermore, nanomolar affinities between oxime-linked
K48-diUb and the DUB USP2 were determined, in agreement with affinities
measured for natively linked K48-diUb.
Inspired by click chemistry-based
access to triazole-linked polyUb
chains, , a bifunctional Ub featuring an internal
Boc-protected aminooxy functionality at K6 as well as a C-terminal
acetal-caged aldehyde functionality was generated through the combination
of amber suppression and intein chemistry ( d). Simultaneous Boc and acetal deprotection
with aqueous trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) followed by oxime ligation
afforded K6-linked polyUb chains that were recalcitrant to DUB-catalyzed
hydrolysis. 
A different strategy
for generating Ub-POI conjugates via oxime
ligation and GCE was recently developed by the Marx and Scheffner
groups. In contrast to earlier approaches, the carbonyl group required
for oxime ligation was introduced into the POI in the form of an ncAA,
instead of using a C-terminally aldehyde-modified Ub/Ubl variant.
This was exemplified by site-specifically incorporating KetoK ((S)-2-amino-8-oxononanoic acid, e) at position K120 of the tumor suppressor
p53. The required aminooxy functionality was accessed by introducing
Boc-εOK at position 76 of Ub, enabling the generation of a defined
oxime-linked Ub-p53(K120) conjugate upon incubation with p53(K120KetoK) following
acidic treatment. As observed for CuAAC,
the addition of SDS in micromolar to millimolar concentrations enhanced
oxime ligation and led to increased conjugate formation. Interestingly,
it was shown that CuAAC was not suited for the generation of Ub-p53(K120)
conjugates, as the zinc binding domain in p53 likely did not tolerate
the Cu(I) concentrations in the mM range required for CuAAC. Importantly, oxime-linked Ub-p53(K120) retained
the structural integrity of p53, as shown by binding studies to a
cognate DNA sequence and by ubiquitylation assays with specific E3
ligases. As shown for oxime-linked diUbs, oxime-linked Ub-p53(K120)
also conferred resistance toward the tested DUBs. 
In conclusion, oxime-linked Ub-POI conjugates are
excellent structural
mimics of natively ubiquitylated proteins. The oxime linkage is a
close isostere of the peptide linkage, retaining binding affinities
to endogenous binders, such as DUBs and different reader proteins,
while at the same time being resistant toward DUB-catalyzed hydrolysis.
These combined characteristics make oxime-linked Ub-POI conjugates
promising tools for future studies. While neither strategy discussed
above explored other donors beside Ub, oxime ligation can in principle
be used to generate different Ubl-POI conjugates. Incorporation of
Boc-εOK into the acceptor protein limits potential acceptors
to simple and refoldable proteins that withstand harsh acidic deprotection.
This limitation could be overcome in the future by using photocaged
aminooxy functionalities that can be deprotected with light. A corresponding
ncAA has already been developed, but the amber suppression yields
were significantly lower than those observed for Boc-εOK incorporation. Directed evolution approaches to yield a more
efficient aaRS could solve this problem in the future. Equipping the
acceptor protein not with the aminooxy but instead with the carbonyl
moiety required for the condensation reaction as shown, e.g., by incorporation of KetoK represents a different strategy to broaden
the scope of accessible acceptor POIs. It should, however, be noted that this approach leads to Ub-POI
conjugates displaying linkers that differ markedly in length and composition
from the endogenous Ub-POI linkage and have not been analyzed yet
in detail from a structural point of view. Compared to the generation
of Ub-POI conjugates via CuAAC, oxime ligation strategies tend to
be more challenging due to the multistep synthesis of Boc-εOK
and obligatory protein refolding. On the other hand, oxime ligation
does not depend on Cu(I) and is therefore also applicable for ubiquitylation
of proteins that are sensitive toward elevated Cu(I) concentrations. 

2.1.3

## Thiazolidine Ligation-Based
Approaches
The bioorthogonal condensation reaction between
1,2-aminothiols
and aldehydes to form thiazolidines has been used to generate antibody–drug
conjugates and to ligate cyclic peptides by employing N-terminal cysteines
as 1,2-aminothiols. , GCE has allowed the site-specific
incorporation of 1,2-aminothiol moieties, which facilitated bioorthogonal
protein labeling using 2-cyanobenzothiazole-modified fluorophores as well as protein ubiquitylation via NCL (native
chemical ligation, see ). Liu and co-workers
exploited this reaction for the generation of thiazolidine-linked
Ub-POI conjugates ( a and b) through the site-specific incorporation of ThzK (Nε-thiaprolyl-l-lysine, c), a lysine derivative bearing
a thiaprolyl moiety, via GCE. Acidic
methoxyamine treatment of ThzK-containing
proteins under denaturing conditions installs a 1,2-aminothiol moiety
on the POI. A thiazolidine-bridged Ub-POI conjugate is afforded upon
reaction with an intein-derived Ub that is modified with a C-terminal
aldehyde ( c). 
 The method was applied for the generation of thiazolidine-linked
K48- and K63-diUbs, as well as for the monoubiquitylation of the proteasomal
subunit Rpn10 at position K99. So far, however, the structural integrity
and binding capabilities of these conjugates toward DUBs have not
been investigated. In its current implementation, the method suffers
from rather limited yields (10–30%) and the requirement of
acidic and denaturing conditions needed for generating the reactive
1,2-aminothiol moiety, restricting this technology to very stable
and easily refoldable proteins.

2.2

## Strategies
Resulting in Ub-POI Conjugates
with Native Linkages
While the previously discussed approaches
result in artificially linked Ub-POI conjugates, considerable effort
has been undertaken in the past decade in the development of methodologies
to access isopeptide-linked conjugates to better mimic natively ubiquitylated
proteins. Amide-bond-yielding bioorthogonal reactions include the traceless Staudinger ligation between azides
and phosphines − and ligation reactions between hydroxyl
amines and α-keto acids, acylboronates, or acylsilanes (KAHA,
KAT, MIDA, or ASHA ligations, respectively). − Staudinger ligation between AznL (azidonorleucine), a lysine derivative
bearing an ε-azide group that can be incorporated in response
to an amber codon using a PylRS variant or a methionine codon employing a modified MetRS, and a Ub C-terminal phosphino-thioester has conceptually
been contemplated but so far has not been used to access Ub-POI conjugates. , , Possible challenges include
the slow kinetics of the Staudinger ligation as well as the susceptibility
of phosphino-thioesters to oxidation. Hydroxylamine ligations with
α-keto acids or acylboronates might present further attractive
possibilities to access defined Ub-POI conjugates. The corresponding functionalities have, however, not yet
been incorporated into proteins via GCE.
As an alternative, complex protection/deprotection protocols to cage
all but one lysine residue within both the target protein and Ub/Ubl
have been developed and used for controlled chemical formation of
an isopeptide bond between POI and Ub/Ubl, followed by deprotection
of all lysine-caging groups ( ). Furthermore, researchers have utilized
nature’s functional repertoire and have adapted both inteins
( )
and certain classes of transpeptidases ( ) to react selectively with site-specifically
installed noncanonical moieties to form isopeptidically linked Ub-POI
conjugates. These approaches are described in detail below.
2.2.1

## Genetically Encoded Orthogonal Protection
and Activated Ligation (GOPAL)
To build Ub-POI conjugates
with native isopeptide linkages, Chin and co-workers developed a protection/deprotection
strategy dubbed GOPAL (genetically encoded orthogonal protection and
activated ligation, a and b). The striking difference
between GOPAL and the approaches described above is that GOPAL does
not require any bioorthogonal reaction handle (e.g., azide, alkyne, aminooxy, or 1,2-aminothiol) on the acceptor protein
but instead works by protecting all but one lysine residue in the
donor and acceptor proteins to enable specific Ub conjugation at this
one lysine residue. For this, ncAA BocK (Nε-(tert-butoxycarbonyl)-l-lysine, c) is incorporated site-specifically
at the target lysine position within the acceptor POI using the wt MbPylRS/tRNA pair, followed by subsequent installation of
an orthogonal protecting group on all remaining free primary amines
of the POI (all lysine residues and the N-terminus). Subjecting the
BocK-bearing POI to Cbz-OSu (N-(benzyloxycarbonyloxy)succinimide)
treatment leads to modification of the protein N-terminus as well
as the free lysine side chains with Cbz (benzyloxycarbonyl) groups.
Subsequent acidic on-protein Boc deprotection (typically with 60%
TFA) affords an acceptor POI that presents a single reactive primary
amine at the chosen conjugation site. To access a donor Ub suitable
for GOPAL, an intein-derived C-terminal Ub-thioester is globally protected
with Cbz-OSu and converted in situ to an activated N-hydroxysuccinimidyl ester in the presence of Ag(I). , Combination of the activated donor and the acceptor POI bearing
a single unprotected lysine residue affords selective isopeptide bond
formation. After successful ligation, global Cbz deprotection with
an acidic cleavage cocktail followed
by protein refolding yields a natively linked Ub-POI conjugate ( c). GOPAL enabled for the first time the generation of atypically
linked diUbs such as K6- and K29-linked diUbs. These diUbs were used
for the structural elucidation of K6-diUb as well as for the characterization
of both linkages in quantitative DUB assays that revealed the high
activity of the OTU-type DUB TRABID toward the K29 linkage. Further in-depth profiling of TRABID in a follow-up
study that investigated all eight possible diUb linkages confirmed
the K29-specificity of TRABID and discovered additional activity of
TRABID toward K33-linked diUbs. GOPAL-generated
diUbs were furthermore applied to develop a MALDI-TOF-based DUB screening
assay. The initial concept of GOPAL
was further expanded by the use of an Alloc (allyloxycarbonyl) protection
group instead of the Cbz protection group for global amine protection
( c). Choosing the Alloc protection group over the
Cbz group proved advantageous as its deprotection conditions, involving
catalytic amounts of Ru(II) complexes in the presence of an excess
of thiophenol, are milder than the acidic cocktail used for Cbz deprotection
and are completely orthogonal to the employed Boc deprotection conditions.
This enabled the sequential application of GOPAL for accessing, apart
from all differently linked diUbs, more
complex Ub chain topologies, such as homotypic, , , and branched Ub chains. Ub chains generated via GOPAL were used in
studies employing NMR and top-down mass spectrometry that contributed
to a better structural understanding of various Ub topologies. − 
 As GOPAL requires multiple steps of chemical protection
and deprotection
as well as subsequent protein renaturation, it is generally restricted
to proteins that can be easily refolded. Nevertheless, GOPAL was also
used to generate Ub-POI conjugates beyond Ub chains. The yeast homologue
of NEDD8, Rub1, was used both as donor
as well as acceptor in GOPAL-derived Rub1-Ub and Ub-Rub1 conjugates
in a study by Fushman and co-workers. Three hybrid chains that were previously observed under cellular
stress conditions, , Rub1-Ub(K29), Rub1-Ub(K48),
and Ub-Rub1(K48), were generated via GOPAL and subjected to biochemical
analysis, which revealed the derubylase activity of USP5 and OTUB1. In a different study, GOPAL was used for the
ubiquitylation of the DIX domain of Dvl2 (dishevelled 2), a eukaryotic
protein that plays an important role in Wnt signaling. The dynamic head-to-tail polymerization of
the DIX domain of Dvl2 is essential for its interaction with Axin
and therefore for the Wnt signaling activity of Dvl2. Biochemical studies uncovered that ubiquitylation
of the DIX domain at K54 blocks head-to-tail polymerization, while
ubiquitylation at K58 does not influence polymerization activity,
rendering polymerization of the DIX domain dependent on the ubiquitylation
status of K54. DUB profiling using GOPAL-derived Ub-DIX conjugates
identified 28 active DUBs, including cezanne and CYLD, that specifically
hydrolyze Ub-DIX(K54) while not acting on Ub-DIX(K58). 
In conclusion, GOPAL provided for the
first time access to atypical
Ub chains linked via native isopeptide bonds. This paved the way for
diverse structural studies and DUB profiling of different Ub topologies.
The scope of POIs suitable for ubiquitylation via GOPAL is, however,
limited to stable and easily refoldable proteins, as the multistep
approach requires quite harsh protection/deprotection procedures and
protein renaturation. Furthermore, the fully Cbz- or Alloc-protected
acceptor proteins present highly hydrophobic intermediates that are
incompatible with protein solubility, tend to aggregate, and can be
very difficult to handle and purify. Since its first description, further strategies based on the GOPAL
concept to globally and iteratively protect and deprotect natural
amino acid residues and thereby single out one individual and reactive
natural amino acid within a target protein have been further adapted
to allow the generation of Ub-POI conjugates linked via thioether
bonds, as described in more detail below, or native amide bonds. 
A GOPAL-inspired
approach that results—in contrast to archetypal
GOPAL—in DUB-resistant non-natively linked Ub-POI conjugates
is based on the site-specific incorporation of a photocaged cysteine
(PhotoC) at acceptor lysine sites within the target protein via amber
suppression using a previously reported
specific PylRS/tRNA variant ( a and b). Conversion
of the remaining native cysteines within the POI into disulfides using
MMTS (S-methylmethanethiosulfonate) followed by orthogonal
photodeprotection of the genetically encoded PhotoC via irradiation
at 365 nm results in a target protein with only one reactive thiol
moiety ( c).
The complementary donor Ub, bearing a cysteine-reactive moiety at
its C-terminus, is prepared via thiolysis of a Ub-intein fusion with
an α-bromoketone-containing linker that can undergo a nucleophilic
substitution reaction with the deprotected cysteine within the POI.
Subsequent reductive cleavage of MMTS-derived disulfides generated
Ub-POI conjugates that are linked via a noncleavable thioether bond
( a). This methodology
enabled the ubiquitylation of PCNA at K164. Furthermore, studies on
Polη, including translesion synthesis assays as wells as ATPase
assays with RFC (replication factor C), showed that the photo-GOPAL-derived
Ub-PCNA(K164) behaves similarly to its native counterpart. Since the
advantages of photo-GOPAL over archetypal GOPAL involve the rather
mild conditions used for orthogonal protection and deprotection (light
and disulfide formation/cleavage), photo-GOPAL does not require refolding
of the Ub-POI conjugate. The disadvantages, on the other hand, include
the creation of an artificial linkage between Ub and POI, the requirement
of oxidative conditions for disulfide-mediated protection, and the
challenge of achieving complete disulfide protection while preventing
potential disulfide exchange after light-mediated deprotection ( b). Additionally, ortho-nitrobenzylic photocleavable protection groups were
shown to be metabolically labile within the bacterial cytoplasm, which
may lead to diminished yields. 
 
2.2.2

## Native Chemical Ligation-Based Approaches
A versatile and robust method for the ligation of unprotected peptides
and proteins resulting in an amide bond is represented by NCL (native
chemical ligation). , NCL requires a C-terminal thioester
on the N-terminal peptidic fragment and a 1,2-aminothiol moiety presented
by an N-terminal cysteine on the C-terminal peptidic fragment. Mechanistically,
NCL involves first a nucleophilic attack of the thiol moiety of the
N-terminal cysteine onto the C-terminal thioester. The product of
this trans-thioesterification reaction spontaneously
rearranges via an S–N-acyl-shift that results in an amide bond.
Accordingly, products of NCL inherently feature a cysteine at the
ligation site, which limits the possibilities for scarless ligations.
To address this constraint, desulfurization procedures that convert
cysteine to the much more abundant alanine after NCL were developed, , although it should be noted that such desulfurization procedures
obviously target all cysteines within a protein sequence. Nevertheless,
accompanied by advances in SPPS and peptide or protein thioester synthesis,
NCL and EPL have facilitated the semisynthesis of many proteins over
the last 30 years, including proteins bearing site-specific modifications,
such as PTMs, d-amino acids, and biophysical probes. 
This development did not go unnoticed
by chemical biologists working in the Ub field and inspired several
approaches based on site-specific installation of a 1,2-aminothiol
moiety within the POI. In combination with intein chemistry-derived
C-terminal Ub-thioesters, NCL can be employed to generate Ub-POI conjugates.
Muir and co-workers pioneered the approach with the development of
a strategy for the site-specific ubiquitylation of histone H2B. The
rather sophisticated procedure employed two subsequent NCL reactions.
First, an intein-derived C-terminal Ub-thioester was reacted with
a peptide corresponding to the C-terminus of H2B(117–125) that
carried both a photocaged N-terminal cysteine and, at the acceptor
lysine position (K120), a lysine modified with a photoprotected thiol-based
ligation auxiliary mimicking the 1,2-aminothiol moiety. The resulting natively ubiquitylated H2B peptide
was, after photodeprotection, susceptible to a second NCL with the
thioester-modified N-terminal part of H2B(1–116). Desulfurization
to the native A117 and in vitro reconstitution of
nucleosomes bearing Ub-H2B(K120) allowed biochemical analyses of site-specifically
ubiquitylated nucleosomes. Subsequent
improvements of this approach introduced either a 1,3-aminothiol or
a 1,2-aminothiol group within the acceptor lysine side chain by adding
a sulfhydryl group to the γ- or δ-carbon (resulting in
γThioK and δThioK), respectively. This advancement allowed
access to various ubiquitylated peptides and chemically synthesized
proteins, including monoubiquitylated , and polyubiquitylated peptides, diUbs, , K48-linked tetraUb, tetraubiquitylated
α-synuclein and ubiquitylated
α-globulin. 
Strategies based
on chemical peptide and protein synthesis are,
however, limited to the ubiquitylation of peptides and/or to ubiquitylation
sites close to protein termini and furthermore require refolding of
the Ub-POI conjugates. Although it is possible to modify intermediate
sites, this necessitates arduous multistep ligations. Accordingly,
endeavors to genetically encode 1,2-aminothiol moieties have been
undertaken in order to expand the scope of potential target proteins
( a and b).
The first efforts by Chan and co-workers to incorporate the 1,2-aminothiol
moiety in the context of an ncAA succeeded by simply coupling cysteine
to the ε-amino group of lysine via an isopeptide bond (CisoK, c). Both diastereomers of CisoK, with d-cysteine or l-cysteine attached to the Nε of l-lysine, were
successfully incorporated into proteins using the wt MbPylRS/tRNA pair. Nevertheless, only the d-cysteine coupled
diastereomer was used for further experiments due to better incorporation
efficiencies. Incubation of CaM (calmodulin) bearing CisoK at position
K21 with intein-derived Ub(ΔG)-thioester yielded the corresponding
Ub-CaM(K21) conjugate, displaying a native isopeptide bond and a d-cysteine residue instead of G76 at the Ub C-terminus in approximately
30% yield. In agreement with previous studies based on enzymatically
derived Ub-CaM conjugates, the NCL-generated
Ub-CaM(K21) conjugate was shown to decrease the activity of phosphorylase
kinase compared to unmodified CaM. Unfortunately,
NCL-derived Ub-POI conjugates bearing the G76d-C mutations
were not probed in DUB assays and therefore no information is available
regarding their stability toward proteolysis by DUBs.
 An alternative approach presented by Yin and co-workers
consists
of incorporating ThzK ( c), followed by treatment with methoxyamine at acidic pH to
open the thiazolidine ring and access CisoK ( d). Combined with a donor Ub(ΔG)-thioester,
this method was used to generate K11-, K48-, and K63-linked diUbs
via NCL. The G76C-bearing linked diUbs
were shown to form mixed disulfides with the active site cysteine
of the E2 enzyme UBE2S (K11-linked diUb) or with single-site cysteine
E3 mutants of the HECT domains of HUWE1 (K48-diUb) and NEDD4 (K63-diUb)
in the presence of 5,5′-dithiobis(2-nitrobenzoic acid). The
specificity of this disulfide trapping was, however, not investigated
in more detail. The K11-diUb was further subjected to the conversion
of C76 in the linker region to dehydroalanine (G76Dha) by treatment
with α,α′-dibromoadipyl(bis)amide. This thiol elimination
afforded a DUB probe that covalently reacted with OTUB1 as well as
OTUB2 and to a lesser extent with USP2. 
Another approach combining genetic code expansion and NCL
to generate
Ub-POI conjugates entails site-specific installation of the above-described
δThioK (δ-thiolysine), which was first developed by Brik
and colleagues for making Ub conjugates of SPPS-derived peptides. For selective recognition of δThioK by
a PylRS mutant and to avoid mischarging by the lysyl-tRNA synthetase,
Chin and co-workers designed and synthesized an ncAA that bears—apart
from the δ-thiol moiety—a p-nitro-Cbz
protection group at the Nε-amino group of p-nitroCbz-δThioK (δ-thiol-Nε-(p-nitrocarbobenzyloxy)-l-lysine, e). This caging group is removed post-translationally, either in cellulo or during cell lysis, by the reduction of the
nitro group and concomitant elimination of the corresponding imine,
which is triggered by the expulsion of CO2, making additional
deprotection steps obsolete. Interestingly, MS analysis indicated
that site-specific incorporation of p-nitroCbz-δThioK
into a POI did not lead to δThioK-modified proteins but instead
to a thiazolidine adduct resulting from a condensation reaction of
the 1,2-aminothiol moiety with cellular pyruvate. In a further deprotection
step with methoxyamine under slightly acidic conditions (pH 6), the
thiazolidine adduct could be cleaved to reinstate the NCL-reactive
1,2-aminothiol functionality. Using this procedure, Ub(K6δThioK)
was generated and incubated with intein-derived Ub-thioester to access
the corresponding diUb via NCL ( e). K6-diUb, bearing δThioK at the ligation site,
was then desulfurized using free radical-based reduction followed by refolding to access completely
native diUb. Circular dichroism spectroscopy and DUB screening assays
with USP2 and USP5 confirmed the biological integrity of NCL-derived
K6-diUb and the expansion of the approach to the ubiquitylation of
SUMO2 at position K11, which resides within the disordered N-terminal
domain, demonstrating the applicability toward a non-Ub target protein. Access to this Ub-SUMO conjugate revealed that
the DUB UCHL3 readily cleaves Ub from the prepared conjugate, revealing
that UCHL3 might be tasked with removing Ub from intrinsically disordered
protein regions in the cell. 
In
conclusion, ubiquitylation using CisoK and NCL is straightforward
as the ncAA is easily accessible. Nevertheless, the approach does
not result in a completely native conjugate but rather in an isopeptide-linked
Ub-POI conjugate bearing a d-cysteine at position 76 in the
donor Ub. Desulfurization of d-cysteine to d-alanine
may, however, be attempted using different available protocols. , Furthermore, information concerning the structural and functional
properties of these Ub-POI conjugates as DUB substrates is lacking.
Conversion of d-cysteine at this position to Dha can, however,
be used to generate Ub-POI conjugates that bear an electrophilic warhead
and can covalently react with DUBs. Obviously, this is only possible
for Ub-POI conjugates that do not contain any other cysteine residues.
NCL between δThioK-bearing proteins and an Ub-thioester allows
the production of completely native conjugates after a free radical-based
desulfurization step. Synthesis of the employed p-nitroCbz-δThioK, on the other hand is far more complex than
the synthesis of CisoK or ThzK. The 1,2-aminothiol moieties (both
in CisoK and δThioK) are not inert under physiological conditions
inside cells, as they react with electrophilic metabolites such as
pyruvate and likely also α-ketoglutarate to the corresponding
thiazolidine adducts that have to be cleaved under slightly acidic
conditions with methoxyamine, restricting the approach to stable and
refoldable proteins. Similar limitations are posed by the desulfurization
step that requires denaturing conditions. Accordingly, the described
approaches based on a combination of GCE and NCL have only been used
for Ub and SUMO as target proteins.

2.2.3

## Ubiquitylation
and SUMOylation through Chemoenzymatic
Methods
2.2.3.1

## Sortase-Mediated Ubiquitylation and SUMOylation
To expand the methods for generating Ub/Ubl-POI conjugates linked
by native isopeptide bonds to various target proteins, including complex
and nonrefoldable proteins, and to ideally also trigger specific ubiquitylation
and SUMOylation events in living cells, our group recently developed
a chemoenzymatic approach, dubbed sortylation ( a–c). As the name might indicate, sortylation involves the use of sortase
A, a transpeptidase from Staphylococcus aureus that
is responsible for modifying the bacterial cell wall by anchoring
proteins to the peptidoglycan layer on Gram-positive bacteria. Since
their first characterization in 1999, sortases have been widely used in protein semisynthesis as well
as in protein engineering approaches to decorate protein termini with
a variety of different functionalities such as fluorophores, oligonucleotides,
metal chelators, and click handles. − Sortase enzymes catalyze
the transpeptidation reaction between a five amino acid recognition
motif within their target protein, e.g., LPXTG (where
X represents any amino acid), and a polyglycine substrate in a two-step
process. In a first step the active site cysteine of sortase attacks
the peptide bond between T and G in the recognition motif, thereby
cleaving the bond and forming a thioester intermediate. Subsequently,
this thioester is nucleophilically attacked by the N-terminal amine
of a polyglycine substrate, leading to the formation of a native peptide
bond. By means of directed evolution, sortase A enzymes with specificities
for recognition sequences other than the LPXTG motif can be obtained.
Researchers identified sortase variants that specifically recognize
and cleave LAXTG (Srt2A), LPXSG (Srt4S), APXTG (SrtF40), FPXTG (SrtF21), HPXTG (SrtW54), and LMVGG (SrtAβ) motifs. In order to make use of sortase for the generation
of Ub-POI conjugates, a closer look at the Ub C-terminus is necessary.
Ub is highly conserved throughout eukaryotic evolution, and the unstructured
C-terminus displays the sequence LRLRGG. It is therefore possible to place a sortase recognition motif, e.g., the recognition motif for Srt2A, within the Ub C-terminus
by introducing two point mutations into the LRLRGG motif (i.e., R72A and R74T), thereby creating Ub-AT bearing the
C-terminus LALTGG ( a and c). To attach this Ub-AT variant to a target protein,
our group designed and synthesized the ncAA GGisoK, in which a diglycine
motif is attached via an isopeptide bond to the Nε of lysine, and showed that sortase catalyzes transpeptidation
between Ub-AT and GGisoK. Furthermore,
by masking the terminal amino moiety of the diglycine motif in GGisoK
as an azide, generating the ncAA AzGGisoK ( c), sortylation can be rendered inducible
by the addition of a small molecule that reduces the azide in AzGGisoK
to an amine (GGisoK). Directed evolution approaches using custom-designed
PylRS libraries resulted in a novel PylRS variant with selective recognition
of AzGGisoK, enabling site-specific incorporation of AzGGisoK into
target proteins. AzGGisoK-modified proteins were readily reduced to
the corresponding GGisoK-bearing proteins via in cellulo-compatible Staudinger reduction using triphenylphosphine derivates
such as 2DBPA (2-(diphenylphosphino)benzoic acid), which has been
shown to be applicable in living prokaryotic and eukaryotic cells. Upon phosphine-triggered reduction, the resulting
GGisoK-modified proteins can participate in Srt2A-mediated transpeptidation
with Ub-AT to yield site-specifically ubiquitylated target proteins
connected via a native isopeptide linkage and displaying the two point
mutations R72A and R74T in the linker region between Ub and POI ( c). The efficiency and kinetic performance of sortylation
are dependent on the steric accessibility of the recognition motif
within Ub-AT, and both reaction rate and yield can be increased by
introducing leucine as spacer amino acid between the C-terminal ß-sheet
of Ub and the first amino acid of the sortase recognition motif, generating
Ub-LAT with a C-terminal LLALTGG sequence. This shifts the sortagging
motif one amino acid away from the compact Ub ß-grasp fold, which
improves the access of sortase to the Ub C-terminus. In vitro sortylation allowed the generation of differently linked diUbs as
well as site-specific ubiquitylation of PCNA at K164. DUB assays with
Srt2A-generated diUbs and Ub-PCNA(K164) revealed that the two point
mutations within the Ub C-terminus confer resistance toward DUB hydrolysis.
To validate the structural and physiological properties of sortase-generated
diUbs, binding assays with various UBDs were conducted. Pull-down
assays using the NZF (Npl4 zinc finger) domain of kinase TAK1 confirmed
that Srt2A-generated K63-diUbs (both with and without spacer leucine
in the linker region) retained the ability to bind the TAK1-NZF domain. A similar behavior was observed for the recognition
of sortylation-derived K48-linked diUbs by the proteasomal shuttling
factor hHR23A(human homologue of yeast Rad23a)-UBA2. Furthermore, fluorescence anisotropy experiments uncovered
similar binding constants of natively linked K63-diUb and Srt2A-generated
K63-diUbs toward Rap80 (receptor associated protein 80), which targets
BRCA1 (breast cancer type 1 susceptibility protein), to DNA damage
loci via its tandem UIM by recognizing K63-diUb. Additionally, MD simulations with K48- and K63-diUbs bearing in silico-modeled AT or LAT linkers confirmed that the mutations
did not lead to structural rearrangements and did not show altered
diUb dynamics. These experiments indicate that sortase-generated diUbs,
despite being resistant toward DUB cleavage, retain their binding
affinity to linkage-specific UBDs, a requirement for triggering various
signaling pathways, including protein degradation, DNA-damage repair,
and protein kinase activation. 
 Since all Ubls share the common ß-grasp fold
and importantly
display a flexible unstructured C-terminus, sortylation can be expanded
toward Ubls by simply introducing the sortagging motif via one or
two point mutations in the Ubl C-terminus. This was demonstrated for
SUMOylation, which was accessible through mutation of the native SUMO1
C-terminus QEQTGG to LAQTGG, enabling the site-specific SUMOylation
of target proteins in in vitro experiments. 
Sortylation is a chemoenzymatic reaction
that works under native
conditions, allowing the attachment of Ubls to complex, multimeric,
nonrefoldable proteins, as exemplified by the site-specific ubiquitylation
and SUMOylation of the trimeric protein PCNA. The chemoenzymatic nature
of the approach also enabled for the first time artificial and site-specific
ubiquitylation and SUMOylation of proteins within living cells. Sortase,
generally a Ca2+-dependent enzyme, can be engineered by
introducing two point mutations to work in surroundings without or
with very low Ca2+ concentrations, such as the cytosol
of living cells. By overexpressing the
Ca2+-independent sortase variant, Ub-AT, as well as a POI
bearing AzGGisoK, site-specific ubiquitylation and SUMOylation of
target proteins can be chemically triggered, providing a useful tool for producing ubiquitylated/SUMOylated eukaryotic
proteins in the established workhorse E. coli. 
For the expansion of sortylation toward
eukaryotes, first, site-specific
incorporation of AzGGisoK into mammalian proteins was successfully
established in mammalian cell culture using the orthogonal AzGGisoKRS/tRNA
pair. To establish sortylation as a ubiquitylation approach that is
orthogonal to and independent of the endogenous E1/E2/E3 machinery,
Ub variants bearing the LLALTG Srt2A recognition motif followed by
a rigid six amino acid sequence were designed. These Ub variants lack the highly conserved C-terminal
GG motif of Ub, and their overexpression in mammalian cells confirmed
that they are not recognized and charged by E1, E2, and E3 enzymes,
allowing sortylation to happen in parallel and independently of endogenous
Ubl modification. Cotransfection of mammalian cells with plasmids
coding for these Ub-variants together with Srt2A confirmed lack of
misubiquitylation of endogenous proteins by sortase and the successful
site-specific ubiquitylation of AzGGisoK-bearing proteins after in vivo Staudinger reduction via the addition of 2DPBA to
the growth media. Using this approach, site-specific ubiquitylation
and SUMOylation of sfGFP at position N150 and PCNA at K164 in living
cells were achieved. 
Taken together,
sortylation is an unprecedented chemoenzymatic
approach to ubiquitylate and SUMOylate proteins in vitro and in living cells and may represent a promising tool to further
dissect the complex Ub/Ubl system. Fine-tuning of all needed components
renders in cellulo sortylation independent of and
orthogonal to the endogenous machinery, yielding Ub-POI conjugates
that are resistant toward hydrolysis by DUBs and allows the study
of the effects of stable Ub-POI conjugates in physiological settings.
Importantly, sortase-generated Ub-POI conjugates retain the important
surface areas and hydrophobic patches within Ub, and interactions
with UBDs remain intact, establishing valuable tools for interrogating
cell signaling pathways and assigning Ub-specific proteins.
The ease of use of this three-component sortylation system allows
facile access to defined Ub/Ubl-POI conjugates within any biology
lab, as the amino acid AzGGisoK can be readily synthesized on multigram
scale via SPPS and the other components (Ubl, sortase) do not require
any chemical manipulation. Additionally, sortylation may be expanded
into a tool for identifying Ub/Ubl-binding proteins and for profiling
substrate-specific DUBs and E3 enzymes by introducing photocrosslinking
and proximity-triggered crosslinking functionalities into Ub/Ubl. , , Furthermore, sortylation may
allow the site-specific direction of otherwise nonviable Ub mutants
to POIs, enabling structure–activity studies that employ Ub
mutants or analogues. Recent findings
have shown that Ub itself can be modified by other PTMs, including
through acetylation and phosphorylation (see ). Sortylation,
combined with GCE tools to site-specifically incorporate phosphorylated
or acetylated amino acids, will allow the generation of defined Ub-POI
conjugates in which Ub bears further PTMs, thereby providing a tool
to study mechanistic effects of Ub PTMs and find specific reader proteins
for these complex modifications. A potential shortcoming of sortylation
consists of the need to introduce two point mutations into the Ub/Ubl-C-terminus.
Even though several assays have shown that sortase-generated Ub/Ubl-POI
conjugates retain their structural dynamics and biological functions,
it is not possible to completely generalize this outcome. Interestingly,
sortase enzymes can be engineered to recognize different motifs, as
exemplified by directed evolution approaches, , which might enable the development of tailor-made sortase enzymes
that recognize the native C-termini of Ub and different Ubls.

2.2.3.2

## Ubl Topologies via Orthogonal Sortylation
(Ubl-tools)
Recently, the identification of orthogonal sortase
enzymes paved the way for the expansion of sortylation toward the
generation of complex polymeric Ub/Ubl topologies. Orthogonal sortase
variants have specificity for distinct and mutually orthogonal recognition
motifs and are thereby suitable for iterative sortylation. Our group
has identified the previously engineered sortases Srt2A (recognition
motif LAXTG) and Srt5M (recognition
motif LPXTG) as a bidirectionally orthogonal
sortase pair that can be used for the iterative ligation of Ub and
Ubl monomers. For this, bifunctional
Ub and Ubl monomers were designed. They each present one of the two
orthogonal sortase recognition motifs at their respective C-termini
and bear a site-specifically introduced AzGGisoK handle; thus, they
can serve as donor and acceptor moieties in orthogonal sortylation
reactions. Iterative sortylation of these bifunctional Ub/Ubl variants
using either Srt2A or Srt5M allowed the assembly of defined Ub/Ubl
chains ( d).
The versatility of this approach, which we dubbed Ubl-tools (Ubl-topologies
via orthogonal sortylation), was demonstrated by the controlled generation
of various homo- and heterotypic polyUb-POI conjugates. Importantly,
as discussed above, through a small adaptation, sortylation can be
made orthogonal toward endogenous ubiquitylation and therefore Ubl-tools
can be used together with traditional ubiquitylation methods employing
E1 and E2 enzymes. Combining Ubl-tools using the orthogonal sortase
pair (Srt2A and Srt5M) with enzymatic ubiquitylation harnessing UBE1
and the K48-linkage-specific E2 enzyme CDC34 afforded a POI that was
site-specifically modified with a K48-linked tetraUb chain ( d). Moreover, dual
amber suppression within the same Ub monomer, bearing a C-terminus
for Srt5M, allowed for the site-specific incorporation of two GGisoK
moieties at K11 and K48. In a next step, Srt2A-mediated ligation enabled
the facile generation of a defined branched tri-Ub chain that was
subsequently charged onto GGisoK-bearing POI using Srt5M ( d). POIs linked site-specifically
to defined types of Ub-chains may prove helpful in cryo-EM studies
of the proteasome, elucidating the significance of K48-linked chains
versus K11/K48 branched chains in the context of proteasomal degradation.
The utility of Ubl-tools was further showcased by the generation of
K63-diUb-SUMO2 hybrid chains that are involved in the DNA double strand
break response ( d). Using Srt5M- and Srt2A-based sortylation in combination with
enzymatic K63-diUb assembly, K63-linked diUbs were charged onto different
lysine positions within SUMO2. Fluorescence anisotropy and NMR titration
experiments revealed a previously unknown binding mode of K63-diUb-SUMO2
hybrid chains to Rap80, a BRCA1 adaptor protein involved in DNA repair. 
In conclusion, Ubl-tools is an elegant
method for accessing complex and defined Ub/Ubl chains as well as
defined polyUb/Ubl-POI conjugates in a controlled, easily applicable,
and modular way. As described for sortylation, Ubl-tools could also
be combined with the incorporation of ncAAs bearing photocrosslinker
or chemical crosslinker moieties into one of the Ub/Ubl monomers.
This would allow the identification of receptor and effector proteins
that translate these complex Ub/Ubl patterns into specific biological
outcomes. Similar to sortylation, as a potential disadvantage, Ubl-tools-generated
Ub/Ubl chains also carry two point mutations in the linker regions
between the monomers and therefore careful examination is needed to
evaluate if these modifications may hamper important interactions.
Furthermore, in its current form, Ubl-tools can only be applied in vitro and in an iterative way; one-pot or in
cellulo approaches would not only need mutually orthogonal
sortase recognition motifs installed at the Ub/Ubl C-termini but also
require orthogonal nucleophilic acceptors.

2.2.3.3

## Asparaginyl
Endopeptidase-Mediated Ubiquitylation
A second chemoenzymatic
strategy for site-specific ubiquitylation
relies on the use of an asparaginyl endopeptidase (AEP) from the plant Oldenlandia affinis (OaAEP1, e and f). AEP enzymes, first
identified in plants but also found in animals including mammals,
are cysteine proteases that selectively target peptide bonds C-terminal
of asparagine or aspartate residues. , While most
AEPs catalyze the proteolytic cleavage of their targets, several members
of the protein family (such as the ligating AEP1 enzymes butelase1
and OaAEP1) were shown to possess transpeptidation
activity and are involved in cyclotide biosynthesis. As chemical biology tools, both butelase1 and OaAEP1 were successfully leveraged for in vitro macrocyclization
reactions as well as N- and C-terminal protein labeling. − OaAEP1 recognizes the tripeptidic motif NGL and
cleaves the peptide bond between asparagine and glycine, resulting
in a thioester intermediate between the target asparagine carboxylate
and the OaAEP1 active site cysteine thiolate. While OaAEP1 shows quite strict sequence requirements for its
recognition site and NGL represents an ideal motif, it is quite promiscuous
for the nucleophile that attacks the thioester intermediate, with
GL and GV dipeptides presenting efficient nucleophile acceptors. If present at high enough molar excess (typically
ca. 1000 equiv compared to protein bearing NGL motif), various other
primary amines were shown to be accepted as nucleophile acceptors
by OaAEP1. In an approach
mirroring sortylation, our group recently showed that GGisoK can also
act as an acceptor nucleophile for an engineered version of OaAEP1 with enhanced catalytic efficiency (bearing the gatekeeper
mutation C247A ) and can be employed
for site-specific ubiquitylation and SUMOylation. The enzyme was shown to mediate the ligation between a
donor Ub bearing a C-terminal OaAEP1 recognition
motif and the primary amine of GGisoK that was site-specifically incorporated
into the acceptor protein by GCE and Staudinger reduction ( f). Installing the
NGL recognition motif into the donor Ub requires the introduction
of two point mutations, altering the C-terminal sequence from LRLRGG
to LRLNGL. Nevertheless, the product of OaAEP1-mediated
ubiquitylation only differs from the native modification in position
R74N because G76 is restored by the use of GGisoK as acceptor ( e). The resulting
NGG motif is no longer recognized by OaAEP1, which
makes the transpeptidation irreversible. Moreover, Ub-POI conjugates
displaying this single point mutation are susceptible to DUB cleavage,
rendering OaAEP1-mediated ubiquitylation a valuable
complementary approach to sortylation. The applicability of OaAEP1-mediated ubiquitylation was demonstrated by the generation
of K48-linked diUb, site-selective ubiquitylation of histone H3 in
three different positions, and the expansion of the approach to SUMOylation
of Ub at position K48. The reaction is fast at neutral pH and works
under mild aqueous conditions, requiring only small amounts of enzyme
(0.01–0.04 mol equivalents). A potential drawback of this method
is its limitation to in vitro applications, since OaAEP1 needs to be activated at acidic pH and is therefore
not suitable for in vivo experiments. In this regard,
the recent identification of a truncated yet functional version of OaAEP1 C247A that bypasses the acidic activation step and
allows OaAEP1-mediated peptide cyclization in living E. coli, may become interesting. Nevertheless,
the minimal recognition motif (NGL) and the promiscuity regarding
nucleophile acceptors of OaAEP1 also constitute double-edged
swords: depending on the target proteins, unwanted side products may
arise from attack on off-target asparagine residues in unstructured
regions such as loop structures, especially if they are followed by
small and hydrophobic amino acids. Furthermore, N-terminal mislabeling
may also constitute an unwanted side reaction.
Sortylation and OaAEP1-mediated generation of Ub/Ubl-POI conjugates constitute
mutual chemoenzymatic approaches for making defined Ub/Ubl-POI conjugates.
Furthermore, both approaches can be combined with endogenous ubiquitylation,
employing linkage-specific E1 and E2 enzymes, allowing the generation
of complex Ub/Ubl chains and polyUb/Ubl-POI conjugates where DUB-resistant
and DUB-susceptible linkages can be placed at user-defined positions.
Directed evolution approaches could further open up the possibility
to create transpeptidases that target native Ub and Ubl C-termini
or to discover novel orthogonal transpeptidases to generate other
Ub/Ubl topologies with ease. In addition, combining the “ligation
handle” presented by GGisoK with a crosslinking moiety within
one ncAA could expand possible applications for chemoenzymatic site-specific
ubiquitylation in the future.

3

## PTMs Targeting Ubls: The Next
Layer of Complexity
Being a protein-based PTM, Ub can be
post-translationally modified
itself, giving rise to an intricate metalayer of distinct modification
patterns. As discussed above, the N-terminus as well as all seven
lysine residues of Ub can act as acceptors for further ubiquitylation
events, which leads to the formation of a plethora of sophisticated
Ub topologies including heterologous, branched, and mixed Ub chains.
Beyond the attachment of protein-based PTMs, small chemical modifications
such as acetylation, phosphorylation, deamidation, ADP-ribosylation, and arginine phosphoribosylation of specific residues within Ub and other Ubls
add yet another level of complexity to the Ub code. While some Ub/Ubl
modifications and their regulatory effects have been investigated
and the topic of previous reviews, , PTM databases
such as PhosphoSitePlus (http://www.phosphosite.org/) and CPLM 4.0 (http://cplm.biocuckoo.cn/) suggest the existence of many additional uncharacterized
Ub/Ubl modifications ( a). In the following sections we will highlight how GCE-based
approaches have helped decipher the role of site-specific small-molecule
PTMs in Ub and Ubls and could equip future research with ideal tools
to unveil further intricacies of Ub-PTM crosstalk ( ).
 3.1

## Acetylation
More than half a century
ago, modification of amine moieties in proteins by acetyl groups was
discovered and characterized as a PTM. Protein acetylation, most famously studied in the context of transcriptional
regulation orchestrated by histone acetylation, , consists of the covalent attachment of an acetyl group to the protein
N-terminus or to the Nε-amino group of a lysine
residue, leading to a change in net charge from positive (+1) to neutral
at physiological pH. Over the past decade, progress in proteomics
has made it possible to characterize the cellular acetylome and discover
many off-histone acetylation sites, including the acetylation of Ub
and Ubls. , , , , With the possible exception of K29, acetylation of all six remaining
lysine residues of Ub has been reported so far, , , which has important implications
for Ub chain formation. In order to
study the effects of defined acetylation events, ncAAs such as AcK
(Nε-acetyl-l-lysine) and nonhydrolyzable derivates thereof like KetoK ((S)-2-amino-8-oxononanoic
acid), TAcK (Nε-thioacetyl-l-lysine), and TFAcK (Nε-trifluoroacetyl-l-lysine) have been site-specifically incorporated into
proteins via GCE ( b).
GCE approaches for site-specific Ub acetylation
have so far been mainly used for in vitro studies,
while in cellulo studies often still rely on more
traditional and simple lysine to glutamine mutations to mimic AcK. AcK was one of the first amino acids to be
site-specifically incorporated into target proteins using Mb- or MmPylRS-derived variants. , , To improve the initially mediocre
incorporation efficiencies of early AcKRS variants, a variety of engineering
and evolution efforts have been undertaken to introduce mutations outside of the amino acid binding pocket as well as within the tRNA. Site-specific incorporation of AcK at positions K6 and
K48 in Ub have shown that acetylation hampers Ub chain formation. In vitro chain assembly assays with wt Ub and acetylated
variants in combination with a panel of E2 enzymes elucidated that
Ub(K6AcK) and Ub(K48AcK) inhibited polyUb chain formation via K11,
K48, and K63, presumably via inhibition of E2 access. For example,
the interaction site of UEV1A (ubiquitin-conjugating enzyme E2 variant
1A), an E2 enzyme that promotes K63-linked polyubiquitylation, is
close to K6 and K48 of the acceptor Ub, leading to decreased activity
upon acetylation of one of these lysine residues. Interestingly, both
acetylated variants were still competent donors for histone H2B(K120)
monoubiquitylation by the E2 enzyme RAD6. A recent study by Shaw and co-workers optimized AcK incorporation
in order to produce all possible Ub(AcK) variants in E. coli in good yields and analyzed their effect on two different E3 ligases
in conjunction with the corresponding E2 enzymes. Surprisingly, the HECT-like E3 ligase IpaH3 and the RING
E3 ligase RNF8, which are known to promote K48- and K63-linked polyubiquitylation,
respectively, were still able to assemble polyUb chains in
vitro even when the target lysines K48 and/or K63 were blocked
by acetylation. While this observation implies a change in specificity
of the conjugating machinery with regard to the generated linkage
type upon blockage of the preferred linkage site by acetylation, the
proposed effect was not studied in further detail. The structural
and functional consequences of Ub acetylation were investigated more
thoroughly in a recent study by Scheffner, Kovermann, Marx, and co-workers
that was also based on site-specific incorporation of AcK at all seven
possible sites within Ub. It was shown
that Ub acetylations at positions K6, K11, K27, and K48 impair autoubiquitylation
for several E3 ligases. For the K48-specific HECT E3 ligase E6AP in
combination with Ub(K48AcK), this could be explained by the specificity
of the E3. Yet, similar effects were also observed for unspecific
E3s as well as for E6AP in combination with other Ub(AcK) variants.
NMR studies revealed that in addition to loss of the positive charge,
lysine acetylations induce, in a position-specific manner, subtle
structural changes within Ub that may affect protein–protein
interactions. This effect is especially pronounced for position K11,
where acetylation leads to an altered I44 patch resulting in reduced
binding to the UBA domain of ubiquilin-2. Interestingly, this was
not the case for Ub(K11Q), which behaved like unmodified Ub, highlighting
that the commonly used lysine to glutamine mutation cannot fully mimic
acetylation in all positions. Furthermore, it was shown that for positions
K11, K27, K29, K33, and K63, acetylation has a similar effect on the
Ub structure as ubiquitylation, potentially leading to comparable
interaction properties of acetylated Ub and diUb. Affinity enrichment
mass spectrometry experiments with unmodified Ub and all seven AcK-bearing
variants in HEK293T lysates identified partly overlapping but nonetheless
distinct interactomes for the different acetylation sites. Further insights into the effects of Ub acetylation
were provided in a study by Lacoursiere and Shaw that investigated
the kinetics of Ub∼E2 conjugate formation. For this, acetylated
Ub variants were labeled with donor fluorophores, and the E2 enzyme
UBE2D1 was labeled with an acceptor fluorophore. E1-mediated formation
of the corresponding Ub∼UBE2D1 conjugates was followed via
FRET (Förster resonance energy transfer). Site-specific incorporation
of AcK into Ub revealed a correlation between the position of Ub acetylation
and UBA1 catalytic activity, providing evidence that acetylation of
Ub can modulate ubiquitylation pathways at early checkpoints. In conclusion, the incorporation of AcK into
Ub with GCE has proven very valuable for studying the effects of Ub
acetylation in vitro. The use of AcK in living eukaryotic
cells is, however, limited due to the presence of deacetylases that
catalyze the rapid hydrolysis of this PTM. This obstacle may potentially
be overcome by the use of nonhydrolyzable AcK mimics, such as KetoK,
TFAcK, and TAcK ( b). KetoK ( b) was designed as an ncAA bearing a site-specific reaction
handle for bioorthogonal labeling with hydrazides and alkoxyamines
but was also envisioned to serve as a stable AcK mimic. While it found use for oxime ligation-based
protein labeling in vitro( , ) and as an AcK mimic within p53(K120KetoK), KetoK has not found broad application as an AcK mimic on Ub, potentially
also due to toxicity that has been observed for ketone-bearing ncAAs. The trifluoro acetyl-bearing TFAcK mimic and
the thioacetyl-modified TAcK ( b) analog have been shown to be stable against hydrolysis
by certain NAD+-dependent sirtuins and the bacterial deacylase
CobB, respectively, as tested in in vitro assays. , Still, so far, they have not been used to study Ub acetylation in
eukaryotic cells.
An alternative method
to direct incorporation
of AcK or mimics thereof with GCE consists of a two-step approach
to install various lysine acylations. The method, developed by Liu
and co-workers, relies on the site-specific incorporation of AznL
(azidonorleucine) via GCE followed by traceless Staudinger ligation
with a phosphinothioester derivate ( c). This strategy
has been used to acetylate and succinylate Ub at position K48 but
suffers from its nonquantitative nature, since the undesired Staudinger
reduction of the azide to the corresponding amine limits the yield
of modified protein to roughly 30–40%, with wt Ub as side product.
Hence, it is difficult, if not impossible to homogeneously purify
the modified Ub variant. Moreover, the method is inherently limited
to in vitro applications.
Beside Ub acetylation,
SUMO acetylation has also been reported
( a). , , Pioneering studies by Müller
and co-workers focused on the acetylation of lysine residues residing
at the interaction interface between SUMO and SIMs (SUMO-interaction
motifs) of SUMO-binding proteins. In vitro pull-down
assays with SUMO1(K37AcK) and SUMO2(K33AcK), generated via site-specific
incorporation of AcK, showed that the acetylated variants failed to
associate with SIMs in SUMO-binding proteins such as the SUMO E3 ligase
PIAS1, Daxx (death domain-associated protein 6), and PML (promyelocytic
leukemia protein), while nonacetylated SUMO variants showed strong
interaction. Surprisingly, the interaction between SUMO1 and the SUMO
E3 ligase RanBP2 (Ran-binding protein 2) is independent of the SUMO1(K37)
acetylation status, indicating that the positive charge of K37 is
not required for binding to the SIM of RanBP2. Analogously to Ub, SUMO variants are able to form polymeric
chains that are preferentially linked via K11. MS-based approaches
showed that K11 can undergo acetylation, raising the question of how
this PTM impacts the polymerization of SUMO. The Müller group used site-specific incorporation of AcK
at position K11 within SUMO2 and revealed that SUMO chain formation
is strongly inhibited by acetylation and that SUMO2(K11AcK) is able
to terminate polySUMO chains. On a similar note, SUMO2(K11AcK) did
not influence the monoSUMOylation of p53 in an in vitro SUMOylation assay in rabbit reticulocyte lysate but strongly reduced
K11-linked SUMO chain formation on p53. Furthermore, in vitro deacetylation assays showed
that SIRT1 displays deacetylation activity toward SUMO2(K11AcK) but
does not affect acetylation at K33 and K35. In contrast, SIRT2 was
not able to deacetylate SUMO(K11AcK). Subsequent in vitro and cell lysate assays demonstrated that SIRT1 can restore SUMO
chain elongation by deacetylating SUMO2(K11AcK). Taken together, acetylation of Ub and SUMO serves as an
additional regulatory layer of the Ub- and SUMO-system that modulates
the catalytic activity of the writer and eraser machinery to influence
Ubl modification as well as polymerization status and fine-tunes downstream
protein–Ubl interactions. It should be noted that Ubl acetylation
is not limited to SUMO. A recent study by Kurz and co-workers observed
the acetylation of NEDD8 on K11, K22, K33, and K48 and investigated
the acetylation of unanchored NEDD8 trimers in response to oxidative
stress. It was shown that the inhibiting effect of the PTM on PARP1
(poly(ADP-ribose) polymerase 1) was reversed upon overexpression of
deacetylases. 

3.2

## Phosphorylation
Arguably the best
studied PTM involved in almost every cellular process is protein phosphorylation
catalyzed by kinases. Phosphorylation
events can occur either via O-phosphorylation on serine, threonine,
and tyrosine yielding phosphates or via less stable N-phosphorylation
on lysine, arginine, and histidine resulting in phosphoramidates. Furthermore,
aspartate phosphorylation via acylphosphates , and cysteine phosphorylation via thiophosphate bonds have been described. Concerning the Ub system, MS-based
approaches have identified O-phosphorylation sites spread over almost
all serine, threonine, and tyrosine residues of Ub. , In order to study the effects of phosphorylation, GCE enabled the
incorporation of a vast panel of phosphorylated amino acids and derivates
thereof, although the incorporation of ncAAs introducing these PTMs
poses unique challenges: the negative charge of the phosphate group
impairs cell permeability, renders phospho-ncAAs less suited substrates
for the hydrophobic active site of PylRS variants, and may also potentially
impair binding to EF-Tu. Furthermore, endogenous phosphatases will
reverse phosphorylation and may directly act on phosphor-ncAAs and
mimics thereof. Strategies for overcoming
these limitations range from the use of engineered expression hosts
and translation machineries to approaches for increasing the cellular
availability of phosho-ncAAs or masking their negative charge to use
of phosphatase-resistant analogs and were recently reviewed in detail. , 
3.2.1

## Tyrosine Phosphorylation
The site-specific
incorporation of pY (phosphotyrosine, d) into target proteins was achieved by
Söll and co-workers via direct incorporation of pY by an engineered MjTyrRS/tRNA pair employing an optimized EF-Tu variant in
an E. coli strain lacking five phosphatases. Shortly after, Schultz, Wang, and co-workers
used a dipeptide of pY (KpY) to promote active uptake in E.
coli for the incorporation of pY by employing an engineered MjTyrRS/tRNA pair. As MS analysis revealed 90% phosphate
hydrolysis despite the addition of phosphatase inhibitors during protein
expression, the same dipeptide strategy was successfully employed
for incorporating the nonhydrolyzable pY analog Pmp (4-phosphomethyl-l-phenylalanine, d). Wang and co-workers
successfully incorporated a phosphoramidate derivative of pY (paY, d) with an engineered MmPylRS/tRNA pair followed by in vitro acidic
deprotection to afford pY-modified proteins. In addition, the nonhydrolyzable pY mimic cmF (p-carboxymethyl-l-phenylalanine, d) was successfully incorporated using a MjTyrRS variant. , The impact of tyrosine phosphorylation
on Ub conformation and function is of great interest since this PTM
has so far been observed exclusively in cancerous tissue. There is only one tyrosine residue, Y59, within
the Ub sequence. Mutating Y59 to alanine revealed that a hydrogen
bond between the Y59 side chain and the E51 backbone amide (Y59-E51
loop) is crucial for Cdc34-mediated formation of K48-linked Ub chains. Incorporation of the phosphoramidate derivative
paY at position 59 followed by acidic treatment to reveal pY enabled
NMR studies on the structural effects of tyrosine phosphorylation
on Ub. Compared to wt Ub, Ub(Y59pY) displays dramatic changes in the
conformation of the Y59-E51 loop that lead to significantly decreased
charging onto the E2 enzyme UBE2D3, as demonstrated in E1/E2 autoubiquitylation
assays. Even though this study gives
a first insight into Y59 phosphorylation, its functional interplay
with other components of the ubiquitin system such as E3 ligases and
readers remains elusive and warrants further studies. The toolbox
for studying tyrosine phosphorylation of Ub was expanded recently
by the development of specific binders for folded Ub(Y59pY). To generate
Ub(Y59pY) required for the engineering and validation of the binders,
paY was incorporated into Ub via GCE followed by acidic deprotection
to afford pY. The evolved Ub(Y59pY)
binder may prove beneficial to assign biological function, elucidate
the upstream kinases and study signaling regulations of Ub tyrosine
phosphorylation.

3.2.2

## Serine and Threonine
Phosphorylation
In contrast to the still enigmatic biological
role of Ub tyrosine
phosphorylation, phosphorylations of serine residues (pS, d) within Ub have
been studied in more detail. By combining the orthogonal pS-tRNA synthetase
(SepRS) from Mmp with a cysteinyl-tRNA from Mj (with engineered anticodon recoding the amber codon)
and engineering EF-Tu, Söll and co-workers first showed the
site-specific incorporation of pS (O-phosphoserine, d) into target
proteins in E. coli. Additional optimizations, such as partial TAG codon reassignment
as well as depletion of RF1 and several phosphatases, increased yields
of the phosphorylated protein. Further
genetic and metabolic engineering led to an E. coli strain showing elevated levels of phosphorylated amino acids. The Chin group boosted pS-incorporation by
evolving the nucleic acid sequence surrounding the anticodon in MjtRNA as well as the tRNA binding region within SepRS and
showed efficient the incorporation of the nonhydrolyzable pS analog
pmA (N-(phosphomethyl)-l-alanine, d). Further amendments by engineering an EF-1α
derivative as well as using an eRF1 mutant combined with manipulations
of pS biosynthesis allowed the incorporation of pS and its nonhydrolyzable
phosphonate analog pmA into proteins expressed in mammalian cells. In parallel, deep sequencing as well as inserting
a biosynthetic pathway for efficient production of phosphothreonine
(pT, d) in E. coli allowed the evolution of a tRNA synthetase that
directs the site-specific incorporation of pT in bacteria. 
The most prominently studied example of
Ub phosphorylation is represented by the phosphorylation of serine
65 within Ub and its role in Parkinson’s disease. In brief,
PINK1 (serine/threonine-protein kinase 1) and the E3-ligase Parkin
play a crucial role in familiar parkinsonism by depleting damaged
mitochondria via the induction of mitophagy. The connection between
these key players has long been elusive. Groundbreaking investigations uncovered that Ub is a substrate of
PINK1, while subsequent structural studies
elucidated the mechanism of PINK1-mediated Ub phosphorylation and how phosphorylated Ub activates Parkin. The current model suggests that PINK1 stabilization
leads to S65 phosphorylation of Ub that is attached to proteins on
the outer mitochondrial membrane (OMM). Due to its high affinity to
Ub(S65pS), cytosolic autoinhibited Parkin gets translocated to the
OMM and is activated through the binding of Ub(S65pS). The UBL domain
of Parkin is then phosphorylated by PINK1, which leads to downstream
effects resulting in mitophagy. 
Using the above-mentioned optimized approach for pS incorporation,
Chin and co-workers generated Ub(S65pS), which was used in benchmarking
experiments to prove its structural and functional similarity to enzymatically
derived Ub(S65pS). Both enzymatically- and GCE-derived Ub(S65pS) performed
identically in E2-discharging and in Parkin activation assays. Furthermore, GCE allowed the generation of hitherto
inaccessible phosphorylated Ub variants, such as Ub(S7pS), Ub(S12pS),
Ub(S20pS) and Ub(S57pS). Biochemical
studies revealed that Ub(S12pS) was able to partially activate Parkin,
although to a lower extent than Ub(S65pS), while Ub(S20pS) completely
failed to activate Parkin. Most surprisingly, Ub(S57pS) was shown
to hyperactivate Parkin, possibly indicating a PINK1-independent route
for Parkin activation. , This constitutes an
especially interesting finding, considering that phosphorylation of
S57 is the most abundant phosphorylation observed for Ub. In a rigorous combinatorial study, GCE in conjunction
with enzymatic assembly facilitated the generation of 20 different
isomeric phospho-diUbs with different sites of isopeptide linkages
and/or phosphorylations at S20, S57, or S65. This panel of phospho-diUbs not only allowed large scale DUB profiling
with 31 different DUBs, unraveling the regulatory potential of Ub
phosphorylation in activating and repressing DUB activity, but also
revealed that phosphorylation of Ub at position S20 regulates the
specificity of the E3 ligase UBE3C. Systematic
profiling of small-molecule PTMs combined with differently linked
Ub/Ubl chains, as exemplified in this study, may represent a promising
strategy to further dissect the additional regulatory layer encoded
in small-molecule PTMs attached to Ubls. It should be noted that Ub
and diUbs modified by serine phosphorylation or a stable mimic thereof
were also accessed by total chemical synthesis in recent years. , Although labor-intensive and typically only suited for specialized
laboratories with expertise in chemical protein synthesis, such approaches
can be advantageous for introduction of multiple pSer modifications
and for the generation of diUb conjugates bearing asymmetric phosphorylation
patterns.
With regard to other Ubls, phosphorylation was also
identified
as a PTM on S2 of SUMO1 and SUMO3 as
well as on T76 of SUMO1, where it was reported to increase the half-life
of SUMO1. Interestingly, Akt, the kinase
responsible for the phosphorylation of SUMO1 T76, is also regulated
by SUMOylation, which again highlights the complexity and intricate
interplay of the Ubl code. 
NEDD8
gets phosphorylated at S65, analogously to the well characterized
Ub S65 phosphorylation, and has been shown to also allosterically
activate parkin. Site-specific incorporation
of pS and the nonhydrolyzable analogue pmA served as the basis for in vitro studies on homogeneously phosphorylated NEDD8 and
Ub. NMR experiments revealed that phosphorylation at S65 causes similar
structural changes for Ub and NEDD8, and that pmA serves as good mimic
of pS. Despite similar structural features of Ub(S65pmA) and NEDD8(S65pmA),
they showed limited overlap in their interactomes in HEK293T and SH-SY5Y
cell lysates as determined by affinity enrichment mass spectrometry.
Importantly, their interactomes are also distinct from those of unmodified
Ub and NEDD8. Strong enrichment of Hsp70 family proteins by phosphorylated
NEDD8 but not by phosphorylated Ub led to the discovery that NEDD8
phosphorylation increases the affinity of NEDD8 to Hsp70 as well as
the subsequent stimulation of Hsp70, which was further demonstrated
by in vitro ATPase assays. These results showcase how phosphorylated NEDD8 can also act as
a noncovalent modulator, as exemplified by its involvement in stress
response pathways.

3.3

## Succinylation
Although succinylation
of Ub remains more elusive than acetylation and phosphorylation, the
PTM has been reported to modify several residues of Ub, including
K48 and K33. In comparison to acetylation,
succinylation increases the size of the lysine side chain more considerably
and reverses its charge from +1 to −1 under physiological conditions,
likely impacting structure, function and interactomes of target partners.
As mentioned above, a two-step approach based on Staudinger ligation
has been used to generate succinylated Ub, but in only 30–40%
yield and with wild-type lysine-bearing Ub as the main byproduct,
making it impossible to obtain homogeneous SucK-modified Ub as needed
for functional biochemical studies. Our
group recently developed a more suitable approach to directly incorporate
this PTM for the facile and homogeneous generation of site-specifically
succinylated proteins. Masking the negatively
charged side chain of SucK (succinyllysine) with an S-propyl thioester (PrS-SucK) moiety allowed for the incorporation
of PrS-SucK by MbPylRS and MaPylRS
variants dubbed ThioRS via GCE ( e). Subsequent on-protein hydrolysis of
the thioester moiety by either β-mercaptoethanol treatment or
incubation at slightly elevated pH (pH 8–9) restored the negatively
charged lysine acylation. In the context of the Ub system, the method
was employed to study the effects of Ub succinylation at position
K33 on the interaction with the K11-specific DUB cezanne. Residue
E157 of cezanne forms a salt bridge with K33 of the proximal Ub in
K11-linked Ub chains. Comparing cezanne-induced hydrolysis rates of
K11-linked wt diUb versus the rates of a K11 diUb bearing the K33SucK
modification in the proximal Ub showed the impaired hydrolysis of
the succinylated variant, likely caused by electrostatic repulsion
between cezanne E157 and the succinylated lysine in Ub. This indicates a regulatory potential of succinylation
in repressing or potentially also increasing DUB activity, as has
been shown for phosphorylation. 

3.4

## Aminoacylation
Reversible aminoacylation
of lysine with all 20 proteinogenic amino acids has been characterized
and reported recently as a novel PTM, which is presumably installed
on proteins by aminoacyl tRNA synthetases and reversed by deacylases. Based on this hypothesis, a recent study by
Lin and co-workers set out to investigate this PTM in the context
of ubiquitylation, raising the question of whether aminoacylated lysine
residues in target proteins can undergo ubiquitylation and what potential
consequences such a secondary PTM might entail. Using MbPylRS and an engineered tRNA variant
that allows incorporation of the ncAA methionyl-lysine (MisoK, f) in response
to lysine sense codons (stochastic orthogonal recoding of translation,
SORT ), lysine residues all over the
proteome of HEK293T cells were in low-frequency replaced by MisoK.
Subsequent trypsin digestion and proteomic analysis identified several
sites that displayed a characteristic diglycine modification on MisoK,
indicating potential ubiquitylation of these sites. In-depth proteomic
analysis of unmanipulated cells and re-evaluation of a previously
published UbiSite data set provided
further evidence that hinted at the possible ubiquitylation of lysine
residues aminoacylated with all 20 proteinogenic amino acids. The authors conclude that ubiquitylation of
aminoacylated lysine residues may lead to accelerated proteasomal
protein degradation, complementing canonical lysine ubiquitylation.
It was proposed that the E2 enzyme UBE2W is responsible for ubiquitylation
of aminoacylated lysines, as it was discharged by aminoacylated lysine
in in vitro assays and, furthermore, a positive correlation
between UBE2W expression in HEK293T cells and the frequency of aminoacylated
lysine ubiquitylation was observed. While in vitro biochemical data on UBE2W-mediated ubiquitylation
of MisoK-modified (or more generally aa-isoK-modified proteins) is
missing and knowledge on this secondary PTM is limited so far, necessitating
further studies and proof, it represents an interesting example for
potential noncanonical ubiquitylation events and crosstalk between
ubiquitylation and other PTMs.
In conclusion, the studies of
small chemical PTMs on Ub such as acetylation and phosphorylation
aided by GCE have so far granted profound insights into this new metalevel
of regulation. This knowledge must now be expanded systematically
both toward the crosstalk between these PTMs and their impact on the
remaining Ubls. A promising possibility relies in the discovery of
mutually orthogonal aaRS/tRNA pairs, which would in theory allow the
simultaneous incorporation of a small chemical PTM or an analogue
thereof together with a conjugation handle at distinct positions within
one Ub molecule to allow the formation of Ub architectures with defined
linkages and a tailor-made PTM status. Taken together, we are just
at the beginning of a new understanding how the ubiquitin code is
regulated by these modifications and how they impact (1) the structure
of Ub itself, (2) the regulation of the conjugation and deconjugation
machineries, and (3) the downstream events triggered by readers of
the ubiquitin code.

4

## GCE-Based Ub/Ubl Probes to Investigate the Ub/Ubl System
The intricacies
and complexities of the Ub/Ubl system rely on a
multitude of transient PPIs that allow dynamic control of cellular
processes. These interactions are typically brief and weak but critical
for the selective and rapid modification of substrate proteins. They ensure flexibility and precision in cellular
regulation and allow for rapid assembly and disassembly of complexes
between E2 and E3 enzymes, between E3 enzymes and their target proteins,
and between ubiquitylated proteins and DUBs; therefore, they are critical
for responding swiftly to cellular needs and environmental changes.
Furthermore, low-affinity binding also contributes to the specificity
of the Ub/Ubl system, preventing prolonged or inappropriate interactions
that could disrupt cellular processes and allowing for modulation
and adaptation in a timely manner. To gain a deeper understanding
of the Ub/Ubl system, it is indispensable to study when and where
these interactions occur. Due to their fleeting and weak nature, however,
this poses a considerable challenge. Recent advances in chemical biology
and biophysical techniques, such as affinity-based probes and activity-based
profiling combined with proteomics, imaging, and structural biology,
have enabled researchers to capture, stabilize and analyze these transient
interactions effectively. − The possibility to site-specifically introduce
reactive groups such as photocrosslinkers, chemical crosslinkers,
or bioorthogonal handles into components of the Ub/Ubl system via
GCE opens up the exciting possibility to map transient PPIs and capture
low-affinity protein complexes of the Ub/Ubl system within living
cells. Such tools complement the vast and still growing palette of
synthetic and semisynthetic Ub/Ubl activity-based probes (ABPs), , and benefit from their potential of being directly generated in
living cells, bypassing the crucial hurdle of cell-permeability. , 
4.1

## Genetically Encoding Crosslinking Moieties
to Study PPIs within the Ub/Ubl System
ncAAs bearing a photocrosslinker
moiety in their side chain are stable under physiological conditions
but form highly reactive species upon UV light treatment and make
covalent bonds with molecules in their vicinity. Their genetic encoding
thereby provides—coupled with biochemical assays and advanced
proteomics methods—a useful tool for mapping dynamic and weak
protein interactions in living cells with spatial and temporal control
( a). Furthermore,
such approaches may help define the structure and topology of protein
complexes both in vitro and in cellulo. The repertoire of photocrosslinking ncAAs typically features benzophenone,
diazirine, or aryl azide moieties that are all activated with UV light
and form reactive ketyl radical, nitrene, or carbene intermediates,
respectively, that covalently crosslink to neighboring molecules ( b). , While the photocrosslinking ncAA Bpa (p-benzoyl-l-phenylalanine, b) was already used in SPPS-based applications in the
mid 1980s, its site-specific incorporation
into proteins via GCE by an evolved MjTyrRS synthetase
variant in E. coli ca. 15 years later laid the foundation for the use of Bpa as a
tool to study protein–protein interactions in living cells.
 Not surprisingly, site-specific incorporation of
photocrosslinker-bearing
ncAAs has also found application as a tool for studying interactions
between Ub/Ubls and their respective reader, writer, and eraser enzymes.
The effect of Bpa incorporation in Ub was investigated in a study
that focused on characterizing the properties of the resulting photoaffinity
probes in a series of in vitro experiments. Incorporation of Bpa into different positions
of Ub and subsequent in vitro photocrosslinking studies
with the E2 enzyme UBA2 allowed the identification of hot spot positions
within Ub showing enhanced crosslinking reactivity. Enzymatically
prepared K48- and K63-linked diUbs bearing Bpa at position T9 or K48
in the proximal Ub or position T9 in the distal Ub were successful
in capturing the respective binding partners (UBA2 or Rap80 tUIM,
respectively). Two other studies used site-specific Bpa incorporation
for the elucidation of PPIs between Ub and Parkin as well as Ub and PINK1 and
showed that the Ub I44 patch is important for both of these PPIs.
Furthermore, photocrosslinking studies with the proteasomal subunit
Rpn1 and Bpa-bearing monoUb, as well as K11, K48, and K63-linked Bpa-bearing
diUbs, provided insights into the interaction between these proteins
and revealed a previously unknown Ub-binding site in Rpn1. Similarly, photocrosslinking Ub(F4Bpa) recently
contributed to the identification of a novel Ub binding site in the
AAA+ ATPase VCP/p97 adaptor protein UBXD1. Bpa-based photocrosslinking was also used in a recent elegant approach
to design activity-based photocrosslinking probes targeting RING E3
ligases. With over 600 members, RING
E3s constitute by far the largest class of E3 enzymes. As they show
adaptor-like activity that can be subject to various regulatory mechanisms
and do not rely on a catalytic nucleophile but instead catalyze direct
transfer of Ub from E2∼Ub to a substrate, ABPs for measuring
RING E3 activity are difficult to design and engineer. Virdee and
co-workers engineered a Bpa-bearing E2-Ub ABP by leveraging the E1
enzyme UBA1 to charge Bpa-bearing Ub(Q31Bpa) onto a variant of the
E2 enzyme UBE2D3 that had the active site cysteine replaced by a lysine
in order to form a more stable isopeptide linkage between E2 and Ub
instead of the labile endogenous thioester linkage ( c). Importantly, structural analysis had shown that the isopeptide linkage
was an acceptable structural mimic of the native thioester. − Furthermore, the Ub-E2-photoABP was decorated with an affinity tag
to facilitate purification and to serve as a convenient reporter tag
for immunoblot analysis. The photoABP was used to profile the activation
of the E3 ligases RNF4 and c-Cbl in vitro and in
HEK293T cell extracts, respectively. Moreover, a subset of 25 RING
E3 ligases was trapped by the photoABP in HEK293T lysates, further
demonstrating the versatility of the probe. In a follow-up study, the same probe was used to monitor E3 ligase
RNF12 catalytic activity in normal and pathogenic contexts. Apart from efficiently trapping writer and
reader enzymes with Bpa-modified Ub, a recently published study used
Bpa-bearing Ub(T9Bpa) and crosslinking mass spectrometry for characterizing
interactions between Ub and eukaryotic DUBs of five different families
as well as three bacterial DUBs. 
In addition to the studies focused on Ub discussed above, photocrosslinking
ncAAs were also employed for the characterization of SUMO-interacting
proteins. Noncovalent interactions between SUMO and its interaction
partners are mainly dependent on the binding of the SIM to a hydrophobic
groove on the SUMO surface. As inherent to most interactions within
the Ub/Ubl system, SUMO-SIM interactions are also characterized by
low affinity binding. In cellulo photocrosslinking
via GCE therefore represents a suitable tool to trap and map these
transient interactions.
The Mootz group used site-specific incorporation
of Bpa as well
as pAzF (p-azidophenylalanine, b) into various positions
of the SUMO1 SIM-binding groove and showed that Bpa/AzF-bearing SUMO1
was still accepted by the SUMO conjugating and deconjugating machinery,
although the incorporation of the ncAAs had slight functional effects
on SUMO1. Subsequent photocrosslinking
studies with the SIM-containing proteins PIASX and RanBP2 showed successful
crosslinking. A comparison of SUMO1(R54Bpa) and SUMO1(R54AzF) revealed
that incorporation of the larger hydrophobic side chain of Bpa led
to more undesired self-crosslinking of the probe, likely caused by
its hydrophobic character and therefore increased aggregation tendency. Nevertheless, Bpa was used in a follow-up study
by the same group that focused on the identification of previously
unknown SUMO binding proteins. For this,
SUMO2(R50Bpa) as well as mimics of K11-linked diSUMO2 and tetraSUMO2
chains (expressed as linear ΔN11 fusions) displaying Bpa on
their proximal SUMO moiety were used in photocrosslinking pulldown
experiments in nuclear HeLa cell extracts. The majority of the >300
captured proteins had not been reported as SUMO binder candidates
in previous proteomic studies, yet analysis with SIM prediction tools
showed that 90% of the hits contained one or multiple in silico predicted SIMs, validating the photocrosslinking approach for finding
new SUMO interactors. 
Many writer
and eraser enzymes of the Ub/Ubl system contain active
site cysteines to activate, conjugate, and ligate Ub/Ubl as well as
to hydrolyze the isopeptide bond in Ub/Ubl chains and Ub/Ubl-POI conjugates.
SPPS- or EPL-generated ABPs based on monoUb or diUb bearing either
a C-terminal or an internal electrophilic warhead that covalently
traps proximal cysteine residues within interacting proteins are proven
tools to interrogate enzyme specificities and elucidate enzyme mechanisms. , , , To enable the stabilization of otherwise transient protein complexes
even in the crowded environment of a living cell, the genetic encoding
of latent and finely tuned electrophilic functionalities that can
react with cysteines and potentially also with other nucleophilic
canonical amino acids when in sufficient proximity has been explored
( d). A palette
of ncAAs bearing electrophilic functionalities have been incorporated
site-specifically into target proteins and have been shown to covalently
react with different proximal nucleophilic natural amino acids. , , Most prominent and useful examples
include bromoalkyl-bearing ncAAs such as BprY, EB3, and BrCnK ( e) that make covalent
bonds with proximal cysteine, aspartate, or glutamate residues within
living cells, , , as well as ncAAs featuring aryl fluorosulfate electrophiles that
can engage in sulfur(VI) fluoride exchange (SuFEx) reactions with lysine, histidine, or tyrosine such as
pFSY, mFSY, and FSK ( d). , , In a recent study, BprY (O-(3-bromopropyl)-tyrosine, d) was used to
characterize cysteine-dependent DUBs and Ubl proteases. DUBs cleave the isopeptide or peptide bond
C-terminal of Ub G76; therefore, BprY was site-specifically incorporated
at position 77 using a previously evolved MmPylRS
variant to achieve ideal proximity to
DUB active site nucleophiles. In addition, a G76V mutation was introduced
into BprY-bearing Ub to render the probe stable toward DUB cleavage.
Western blot and tandem MS analysis confirmed in vitro crosslinking with the active site cysteine of the DUB UCHL3. Interestingly,
crosslinking to noncysteine nucleophilic residues such as serine,
threonine, and histidine within the active center of UCHL3 was also
observed, indicating that the Ub-BprY probe could also be used beyond
the scope of cysteine-dependent DUBs. Indeed, expression of strep-tagged
wt Ub or Ub-BprY in HEK293T cells followed by immunoprecipitation
and proteomic analysis revealed the enrichment of more than 2000 proteins,
including several known DUBs and Ub interactors, by Ub-BprY. The validity
and biological relevance of hits that did not belong to the 57 identified
known DUBs or the 18 identified other known Ub interactors were unfortunately
not further discussed in the study. Nevertheless, the data set could
serve as basis for further investigations. The same applies to the
application of BprY-bearing diUb, UFM1, and ISG15 probes that were
successfully expressed and crosslinked to a respective deconjugating
enzyme in proof-of-concept experiments but not further investigated
in mammalian cells. A different approach
for studying the Ub system with proximity-triggered crosslinking ncAAs
focused on capturing the transient interaction between Ub-conjugating
enzymes and their substrates. The yeast
E2 enzyme UbcH5C and its human homologue UBE2D3 ubiquitylate PCNA
at K164. Site-specific incorporation of BprY or its alkyne-bearing
analog EB3 at position 164 (or also adjacent positions 163 and 165)
within PCNA led to a crosslink with C85 of UBE2D3 in vitro and when both proteins were coexpressed in E. coli cells. The versatility of BprY for
studying the ubiquitin system was further demonstrated in a study
that elucidated the interaction of the bacterial effector protein
NleE with the proteasomal subunit PSMD10. In brief, incorporation
of BprY into different positions of NleE in HEK293T cells led to proximity-triggered
crosslinking with PSMD10. These results contributed to a better understanding
of the protein–protein interaction and the role of NleE in
the escape of pathogens from autophagy. Furthermore, BprY was incorporated into SUMO2 to map binding interfaces
with SIMs and to probe SUMO2 interaction partners in HEK293T cells. 
Regarding aryl fluorosulfate-bearing
ncAAs that are able to engage
in SuFEx chemistries with nearby nucleophiles, proof-of-principle
studies have confirmed the in cellulo covalent crosslinking
of affibody-Z-protein interfaces when both proteins were overexpressed
in E. coli or mammalian cells, as well as the generation of covalently stabilized nanobody
conjugates. As their crosslinking selectivities
toward canonical amino acids seem to be complementary to bromoalkane-bearing
ncAAs, SuFEx-compatible ncAAs ( e) could present interesting tools to study
interactions in the Ub/Ubl system, but so far only intraprotein crosslinking
within Ub bearing FSK at a specific site has been shown. In conclusion, photocrosslinkers as well as
chemical crosslinkers introduced into Ub and SUMO have started to
become interesting tools for the identification of writers, readers,
and erasers of the Ub system, as well as for their detailed downstream
characterization.

4.2

## A Genetically Encoded Fluorescent
DUB Probe
The toolbox of genetically encoded Ub probes, however,
is not limited
to the incorporation of crosslinking ncAAs. In a recent study, Peng
and co-workers showed the site-specific incorporation of two novel
coumarin-based fluorescent ncAAs, ACouK and AFCouK ( f), into proteins in E. coli as well as HEK293T cells using a MmPylRS variant. Both ncAAs can form FRET pairs with GFP, which paved
the way for the first generation of fully genetically encoded fluorescent
DUB probes. Incubation of a recombinantly
expressed fusion construct composed of GFP fused C-terminally to Ub(Y59AFCouK)
with the DUB USP7 showed a loss of the FRET signal and an increase
in AFCouK emission in vitro upon cleavage of the
fusion construct between GFP and Ub ( f). Furthermore, a specific linear diUb
probe linked to GFP was developed as a probe for OTULIN, a DUB specific
for linearly linked polyUbs. The usefulness of the probes was demonstrated
in a DUB inhibitor screening assay with 40 commercially available
DUB inhibitors. The results revealed a previously undescribed activity
of the UCHL3 inhibitor TCID and the USP30 inhibitor 18 against OTULIN,
with IC50 values in the nano- to micromolar range. This
finding was especially interesting as inhibitors for OTULIN had not
been described before. While the authors did not address that the
introduction of a large ncAA at position Y59 of Ub could alter the
structure of Ub by interfering with the Y59-E51 loop, this could be
of interest in future studies on the interactome of genetically encoded
fluorescent DUB probes.

5

## Conclusion and Future Challenges
The
comprehensive exploration of a system as multifaceted and versatile
as the Ub/Ubl code demands an array of tools capable of tackling its
complexity from various angles, drawing on the interdisciplinary expertise
of researchers from diverse scientific backgrounds. In this Review,
we provide a thorough examination of recent advancements in the application
of GCE techniques, which have become essential tools for elucidating
the Ub/Ubl code. We highlight GCE approaches for creating Ub/Ubl-POI
conjugates with defined linkages. CuAAC, oxime, and thiazolidine ligation
yield Ub-POI conjugates with artificial linkages, benefiting applications
that demand recalcitrance toward hydrolysis by DUBs, while GOPAL and
NCL generate isopeptide-linked conjugates and are ideal if downstream
applications call for native linkages between Ub/Ubl and target proteins.
These approaches represent proven tools for studying ubiquitylation
and have been used for the elucidation and validation of structural
features of differently linked diUb variants and Ub chains, as well
as for assessing interactomes of Ub/Ubl-conjugates and for profiling
the activity of DUBs in cell lysates. As most of these approaches
work under conditions that are not applicable to sensitive proteins
(e.g., acidic pH, millimolar Cu(I) concentrations,
and metal-dependent desulfurization conditions) and therefore require
protein refolding, the scope of accessible Ub/Ubl-POI conjugates is
somewhat limited. Chemoenzymatic approaches such as sortylation and OaAEP1-mediated ligation that generate isopeptide-linked
conjugates offer the added advantage of allowing the ubiquitylation
of nonrefoldable proteins under native conditions. Sortylation is
so far the only method that allows for triggered and site-specific
ubiquitylation and SUMOylation in living cells and is not limited
to in vitro use. Apart from generating Ub/Ubl-POI
conjugates, GCE-based methods have also enabled the generation of
homogeneously site-specifically acetylated, phosphorylated, or succinylated
Ub/Ubl variants to study the influence of these small-molecule PTMs.
Last, but not least, site-specifically introduced crosslinker or fluorescent
moieties complement the GCE-based toolkit to study the Ub code by
providing means to elucidate PPIs and to profile enzyme activities.
Despite the value of these methods, challenges remain. Current
GCE-based methods for making Ub/Ubl-POI conjugates often depend on
harsh conditions, limiting their applicability to simple, refoldable
proteins. As discussed, chemoenzymatic methods can address these limitations,
and the discovery and evolution of new transpeptidases to enable completely
scarless natively linked Ub/Ubl-POI conjugates or alternatively the
design of novel amide-bond forming bioorthogonal reactions may further
expand the range of accessible conjugates. As sortylation represents so far the only available method to artificially
trigger site-specific ubiquitylation in living cells, its potential
to study the consequences of individual ubiquitylation events in cellulo should be harnessed in future applications.
Apart from lysine ubiquitylation, recent discoveries have revealed
the important roles of serine and threonine ubiquitylation in endoplasmic
reticulum-associated degradation, immune signaling, and neuronal processes. While an ester-linked Ub-α-globin conjugate
was previously accessed via total chemical synthesis and was used
for profiling DUBs, GCE-based tools
to study ester-linked Ub-POI conjugates are so far missing, and adaptation
of the bioorthogonal or chemoenzymatic approaches described herein
to access such noncanonical Ub-POI conjugates would be highly valuable.
Similarly, the majority of current studies and tools are primarily
centered on Ub, highlighting the potential for future GCE-based studies
to explore other Ubls. Regarding the study of small-molecule PTMs
and their impact on ubiquitylation events, considerable progress has
been achieved in studying acetylation and phosphorylation, but clever
approaches for precisely modifying Ub/Ubl with complex PTMs recently
identified, such as arginine phosphoribosylation and ADP ribosylation, are urgently needed. Similarly, the potential
of Ub/Ubl-based probes for mapping reader proteins and profiling writer
and eraser enzymes has not yet been fully realized. There is a need
for crosslinking probes that better mimic transient E3:E2:Ub-POI intermediates
to elucidate the structures of these complexes and delineate their
mechanistic principles. Furthermore, design of novel crosslinking
ncAAs and their site-specific encoding via GCE may enable DUB and
HECT-based E3 specificities to be profiled in living cells rather
than being confined to in vitro or lysate-based studies.
This may facilitate unprecedented insights into linkage and substrate
specificities of writer and eraser enzymes and may allow profiling
of their activities as a function of subcellular localization. Smart
combination of such technologies with advances in proteomic methods
may furthermore allow system-level interrogation of the whole Ub system.
It is inherent to the nature of GCE that protein production yields
are typically lower than those obtained for the expression of wt proteins.
This difference depends on the ncAA itself, its cell-permeability
and metabolic stability, the used aaRS/tRNA pair, the POI, the position
of the suppressed codon within the POI, and the expression system
and can be a marginal or, rarely, a real limitation for envisioned
downstream applications. Recent efforts in advancing GCE technologies,
such as the development of new or improved orthogonal aaRS/tRNA pairs , , , and engineered expression hosts, aim
to overcome this limitation to make use of unmined potential for future
studies that, for example, lies in the efficient generation of bifunctional
Ub/Ubl variants displaying two different ncAAs by dual suppression.
This will allow the study of PTM crosstalk or enable the assessment
of interactomes of site-specifically modified Ub/Ubl variants by incorporating
a crosslinker ncAA and a PTM-bearing ncAA into the same Ub/Ubl building
block. Furthermore, combining established GCE-based methods will allow
the generation of even more complex polyUb/Ubl-POI topologies that
carry a site-specific crosslinker moiety for the identification of
receptor and effector proteins that translate these complex Ub/Ubl
patterns into a specific outcome for the modified protein.
Ultimately,
we are convinced that GCE-based tools offer promising
avenues for unraveling the complexity of the Ub code. Continued advances
in the field, combined with creative chemical probe design and advancements
in protein engineering, will help overcome existing challenges to
provide deeper biological insights beyond proof-of-principle studies.
Importantly, GCE tools should be made available and accessible to
researchers from different disciplines, fostering collaborations between
tool-developers and tool-appliers to understand this most peculiar
PTM in more detail and to spur biological discovery.

## Author Present Address
# CeMM Research
Center for Molecular Medicine of the Austrian Academy
of Sciences, Lazarettgasse 14, 1090 Vienna, Austria

## Author Contributions
+ V.W.
and M.F. contributed equally to this work.
The authors declare
no
competing financial interest.
Vera Wanka earned her B.Sc. in Molecular Biotechnology
and M.Sc.
in Biochemistry from the Technical University of Munich. Currently,
she is pursuing a Ph.D. in the group of Professor Kathrin Lang at
ETH Zurich. Her doctoral research focuses on the development of tools
to study deconjugating enzymes of Ub and Ubls using chemical biology
and GCE.
Maximilian Fottner received his
M.Sc. in Biochemistry from Technical
University of Munich in 2016, where he worked on cyclic peptide-based
therapeutics and genetic code expansion. Subsequent Ph.D. studies
in the group of Professor Kathrin Lang focused on the development
of chemical biology tools to study protein ubiquitylation. Currently,
he is a Senior Scientist at ETH Zurich. His research now focuses on
optimizing the GCE system, as well as developing chemical biology
tools to study complex biological systems.
Marko Cigler graduated from the University of Zagreb in 2014 with
an M.Sc. in Chemistry. He completed his Ph.D. in 2019 at the Technical
University of Munich, where he specialized in chemical biology and
genetic code expansion under the guidance of Prof. Dr. Kathrin Lang.
In 2020, he joined the lab of Dr. Georg Winter at the Research Center
for Molecular Medicine (CeMM) in Vienna as a Postdoctoral Fellow.
His current research centers on developing molecular glue degraders
and exploring novel mechanism of small-molecule-mediated E3 ligase
recruitment for targeted degradation of cancer-associated proteins.
Kathrin Lang studied Chemistry at the University
of Innsbruck,
Austria, where she obtained a Ph.D. in 2008. After postdoctoral research
in the group of Venki Ramakrishnan on ribosome structural biology
and in the lab of Jason Chin on synthetic biology at the MRC-LMB in
Cambridge, UK, she was appointed in 2014 as a Tenure Track Assistant
Professor at TU Munich, Germany, where she was tenured and promoted
to permanent W3 Professor of Synthetic Biochemistry in 2020. Since
April 2021 she has been a Full Professor of Chemical Biology at ETH
Zürich, Switzerland. Her research interests lie in the interdisciplinary
area between chemistry and biology, applying concepts from organic
chemistry and protein engineering to develop new tools for investigating,
modulating, and designing novel molecular networks in living cells.
Her group is especially active in enabling approaches to expand the
genetic code and to endow proteins with novel chemical reactivities
within their physiological environment.

## Acknowledgments
This work was supported by ETH Zurich and
TU Munich.
We thank the DFG (SFB1309 and SFB1035 to K.L.) and the European Research
Council (under the European Union’s Horizon 2020 research and
innovation programme, Grant 101003289-Ubl-tool to K.L.) for funding.

## Abbreviations
2DPBA2-(Diphenylphosphino)benzoic
acid
AAAATPase
associated with
a variety
of cellular activities
aaRSAminoacyl-tRNA synthetase
ABPActivity-based probe
AcKNε-Acetyl-l-lysine
Ahal-Azidohomoalanine
AllocAllyloxycarbonyl
AMPAdenosine monophosphate
ASHAAcylsilanes with hydroxylamines
ATPAdenosine triphosphate
AzFp-Azidophenylalanine
AznLAzidonorleucine
Boctert-butoxycarbonyl
Boc-εOKNε-(tert-Butyloxycarbonyl)aminooxy-l-lysine
BocKNε-(tert-Butoxycarbonyl)-l-lysine
Bpap-Benzoyl-l-phenylalanine
BprYO-(3-Bromopropyl)-tyrosine
BRCA1Breast cancer
type 1 susceptibility
protein
CaMCalmodulin
CbzBenzyloxycarbonyl
Cbz-OSuN-(Benzyloxycarbonyloxy)succinimide
cmFp-Carboxymethyl-l-phenylalanine
CuAACCu(I)-catalyzed
1,3-dipolar azide–alkyne
cycloaddition
DaxxDeath domain-associated protein
6
DUBDeubiquitylating
enzyme
Dvl2Dishevelled
2
E. coliEscherichia
coli
EPLExpressed protein ligation
FRETFörster resonance energy
transfer
GCEGenetic
code expansion
GFPGreen fluorescent protein
GOPALGenetically encoded orthogonal
protection and activated ligation
HECTHomologous to the E6-AP carboxyl
terminus
HEK293THuman embryonic kidney 293 cells
(containing gene for SV40 large T antigen)
hHR23AHuman homologue of yeast Rad23a
ISG15Product of interferon
(IFN)-stimulated
gene 15
KAHAα-Ketoacid-hydroxylamine
KATPotassium acyltrifluoroborates
KetoK(S)-2-Amino-8-oxononanoic
acid
MaMethanomethylophilus
alvus
MbMethanosarcina
barkeri
MetRSMethionyl-tRNA synthetase
MIDAN-Methyliminodiacetyl
acylboronates
MINDYUbiquitin (MIU)-containing novel
DUB family
MjMethanocaldococcus
jannaschi
MmMethanosarcina
mazei
MMTSMethanethiosulfonate
MYCBP2MYC binding protein 2
ncAANoncanonical amino acid
NCLNative chemical ligation
NEDD8Neural-precursor-cell-expressed
developmentally down-regulated 8
NZFNpl4 zinc finger
OaAEP1Oldenlandia
affinis asparaginyl endopeptidase 1
OMMOuter mitochondrial membrane
OTUOvarian tumor protease
OTUB1Otubain 1
OTUB2Otubain 2
p-nitroCbz-δThioKδ-Thiol-Nε-(p-nitrocarbobenzyloxy)-l-lysine
p53Cellular tumor antigen p53
PARP1Poly(ADP-ribose) polymerase 1
paYPhosphoramidate
derivative of pY
PCNAProliferating cell nuclear antigen
PIAS1SUMO E3 ligase PIAS1
PINK1Serine/threonine-protein kinase
PINK1
PlKNε-(propargyloxycarbonyl)-l-lysine
PMLPromyelocytic leukemia
protein
Pmp4-Phosphomethyl-l-phenylalanine
POIProtein of interest
PolDNA polymerase
PPIProtein–protein interaction
PTMPost-translational modification
pYPhosphotyrosine
PylPyrrolysine
PylRSPyrrolysyl-tRNA synthetase
RanBP2Ran-binding
protein 2
RanGAPRan GTPase-activating protein
Rap80Receptor associated protein 80
RBRRING-between-RING
RCRRING-Cys-relay
RF1Release factor 1
RFCReplication factor C
RINGReally Interesting New
Gene
RNF213Ring
finger protein 213
SecSelenocysteine
SDSSodium dodecyl sulfate
SIRT1Sirtuin 1
SIRT2Sirtuin 2
Sp100Nuclear autoantigen Sp-100
Srt2ASortase 2A
Srt5MSortase 5M
SUMOSmall ubiquitin-related modifier
TAcKNε-Thioacetyl-l-lysine
TFATrifluoroacetic
acid
TFAcKNε-Trifluoroacetyl-l-lysine
ThzKNε-Thiaprolyl-l-lysine
TyrRSTyrosyl-tRNA synthetase
UbUbiquitin
UBAUb-associated domain
UBA1Ubiquitin-like modifier-activating
enzyme 1
UBDUbiquitin
binding domain
UblUbiquitin-like proteins
UBZUb-binding zinc finger
UCHUbiquitin C-terminal hydrolase
UEV1AUbiquitin-conjugating enzyme E2
variant 1A
UIMUb-interacting
motif
USPUbiquitin-specific
protease
USP2Ubiquitin-specific
protease 2
USP5Ubiquitin-specific protease 5
wtWild type
ZUP1Zinc finger containing ubiquitin
peptidase 1