pmcPLoS PathogPLoS Pathog349plospathplosPLOS Pathogens1553-73661553-7374PLOSPMC11115282PMC11115282.111115282111152823873963110.1371/journal.ppat.1012227PPATHOGENS-D-23-016131Research ArticleResearch and Analysis MethodsAnimal StudiesExperimental Organism SystemsModel OrganismsZebrafishResearch and Analysis MethodsModel OrganismsZebrafishResearch and Analysis MethodsAnimal StudiesExperimental Organism SystemsAnimal ModelsZebrafishBiology and Life SciencesOrganismsEukaryotaAnimalsVertebratesFishOsteichthyesZebrafishBiology and Life SciencesZoologyAnimalsVertebratesFishOsteichthyesZebrafishBiology and Life SciencesMolecular BiologyMolecular Biology TechniquesTransfectionResearch and Analysis MethodsMolecular Biology TechniquesTransfectionBiology and Life SciencesMolecular BiologyMolecular Biology TechniquesMolecular Biology Assays and Analysis TechniquesGene Expression and Vector TechniquesHyperexpression TechniquesResearch and Analysis MethodsMolecular Biology TechniquesMolecular Biology Assays and Analysis TechniquesGene Expression and Vector TechniquesHyperexpression TechniquesBiology and Life SciencesBiochemistryProteinsPost-Translational ModificationPhosphorylationBiology and Life SciencesDevelopmental BiologyLife CyclesLarvaeBiology and Life SciencesBiochemistryProteinsPost-Translational ModificationUbiquitinationResearch and Analysis MethodsPrecipitation TechniquesImmunoprecipitationBiology and Life SciencesBiochemistryEnzymologyEnzymesLigasesUbiquitin LigasesBiology and Life SciencesBiochemistryProteinsEnzymesLigasesUbiquitin LigasesZebrafish mylipb attenuates antiviral innate immunity through two synergistic mechanisms targeting transcription factor irf3
Zebrafish mylipb attenuates antiviral innate immunityLiZhiConceptualizationData curationInvestigationSoftwareValidationVisualizationWriting – original draft LiJunConceptualizationData curationFormal analysisVisualization LiZiyiInvestigationValidation SongYananInvestigationValidation WangYanyiFormal analysis WangChunlingMethodology YuanLeMethodology XiaoWuhanConceptualizationFunding acquisitionProject administrationWriting – review & editing https://orcid.org/0000-0002-4122-5471WangJingConceptualizationFunding acquisitionProject administrationWriting – original draftWriting – review & editing 1
State Key Laboratory of Freshwater Ecology and Biotechnology, Institute of Hydrobiology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Wuhan, China2
State Key Laboratory of Biocatalysis and Enzyme Engineering, School of Life Sciences, Hubei University, Wuhan, China3
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China4
Hubei Hongshan Laboratory, Wuhan, China5
The Innovation of Seed Design, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Wuhan, ChinaYountJacob S.Editor files.

## Data Availability
The authors confirm that all data underlying the findings are fully available without restriction. All relevant data are within the paper and its files.

## Introduction
Innate immunity represents an evolutionary conserved mechanism that serves as the host’s initial defence against invading pathogens of microbial pathogens [ – ]. The recognition of conserved pathogen-associated molecular patterns (PAMPs) by cellular pattern recognition receptors (PRRs) is essential for the initiation of the innate antiviral immune response [ – ]. Virus-derived nucleic acids are mainly recognized by the DNA sensor cyclic guanosine monophosphate-adenosine monophosphate synthase (cGAS) and the RNA sensors retinoic acid-inducible gene 1 (RIG-I)-like receptors (RLRs), including RIG-I and melanoma differentiation-associated gene 5 (MDA5), and laboratory of genetics and physiology 2 [LGP2, – ]. Activation of the sensors recruits the signaling adaptor proteins, including STING (stimulator of interferon [IFN] genes protein) and MAVS (mitochondrial antiviral signalling protein), which then activate the downstream signaling molecules TANK binding kinase 1 [TBK1, – ]. These cascades eventually converge on the activation of the transcription factor IFN regulatory factor 3 (IRF3), which serves as an indispensable transcription factor for type I IFN production and subsequent ISGs for host antiviral state [ – ]. Upon receiving upstream signals, IRF3 undergoes several processes to activate the type I IFN pathway, including phosphorylation, dimerisation, nuclear translocation, promoter binding and facilitating transcriptional activation of type I IFN genes [ – ].
Post-translational modifications (PTMs), such as phosphorylation, ubiquitination, acetylation, deamidation, and methylation have been shown to influence PRRs-dependent immune responses via their modifications of receptors, adaptors, kinase, and transcriptional factors [ – ]. In particular, ubiquitination plays an indispensable role in fine-tuning the RLR-mediated antiviral response [ – ]. Ubiquitin ligases serve as key regulators of this signaling by precisely regulating the dynamic ubiquitination process [ , , ]. The ubiquitin molecule itself can be ubiquitinated at seven internal lysine residues (K6, K11, K27, K29, K33, K48 or K63) to produce the corresponding polyubiquitination modifications [ ]. Among these, polymeric chains based on K48 and K63 have been extensively studied. For example, K48-linked polyubiquitination is the canonical signal that mediates protein degradation in a proteasome manner, whereas K63-linked polyubiquitination mainly contributes to signal transduction, DNA repair enzymatic activity and protein endocytosis [ ]. Although K48- and K63-linked polyubiquitination are widely recognized to influence innate antiviral immune responses, other atypical polyubiquitination modes such as K6-, K11-, K27-, K29-, K33- and linear-linked polyubiquitination are being investigated for their distinct roles in innate immunity [ – ]. As a key transcriptional factor in IFN-I signaling, IRF3 activity has been shown to be regulated by ubiquitination and deubiquitination [ , – ]. Meanwhile, IRF3 phosphorylation is required for its homodimerisation and nuclear translocation, and the mechanisms underlying phosphorylation-triggered activation of IRF3 have been the subject of many extensive studies [ , ]. Understanding the mechanisms that regulate IRF3 phosphorylation and ubiquitination has been an interesting topic in the field of innate immunity.
Myosin regulatory light-chain interacting protein (MYLIP, also known as inducible degrader of the low-density lipoprotein receptor) is currently the only really interesting new gene (RING) family ubiquitin ligase E3 with FERM (Band 4.1, ezrin-radixin-moesin) domain [ , ]. The function of MYLIP has been reported to monitor cellular and organismal cholesterol homeostasis by promoting the ubiquitin-mediated degradation of lipid metabolism proteins such as low-density lipoprotein receptor (LDLR), very-low-density lipoprotein receptor (VLDLR), and apolipoprotein E receptor 2[ApoER2, – ]. In addition, MYLIP can modulate its own stability by forming a homodimer followed by autoubiquitination and degradation via the proteasome pathway [ , ]. However, the role of MYLIP in vertebrate virus-induced innate immunity signaling is still largely unknown.
In this study, we report that mylipb-null zebrafish are hyposensitive to SVCV infection and exhibit an enhanced induction of the IFN response. Our in vitro data suggest that zebrafish mylipb associates with irf3 and increases K6-linked polyubiquitination at Lys 352, leading to the induction of autophagic degradation of irf3. In addition, mylipb acts as a decoy substrate for the phosphokinase tbk1 to attenuate irf3 phosphorylation. Our results demonstrate that zebrafish mylipb is a negative regulator of type I IFN signaling and the cellular antiviral response, with two synergistic mechanisms working together to target irf3.

## Results

## Zebrafish mylipb is induced by poly I:C treatment and SVCV infection
In zebrafish, there are two orthologous genes of MYLIP, including mylipa and mylipb. To know the behaviour of zebrafish mylip in response to viral infection, ZFL cells were stimulated with poly I:C, a mimic of RNA virus [ ], for 0–48 h. Using quantitative real-time PCR (qRT-PCR) assays, we found that similar to the key antiviral gene, ifn1 [ ], mRNA expression of mylipb was more significantly upregulated than mylipa ( ). Consistently, we challenged ZFL cells with SVCV for 0–48 h and found that mylipb expression was also increased more notably than mylipa ( ). MYLIP is transcriptionally induced by the liver X receptor (LXR), a transcription factor involved in the regulation of cholesterol metabolism [ ]. We then challenged ZFL with T0901317, an LXR agonist, for 24 h and found that only mylipa expression was significantly upregulated at different doses ( ). However, mylipb expression was barely affected by T0901317. A similar trend was observed during the time gradient treatment with T0901317 ( ). Therefore, we focused our subsequent assays on mylipb function.
 

## Mylipb exhibits proviral effects both in vivo and in vitro
To understand the physiological role of mylipb in the antiviral response in vivo and in vitro, we first generated mylipb-deficient zebrafish using CRISPR-Cas9 and obtained a mutant line with a 7-nucleotide deletion in exon 3 of mylipb ( ). Crossing mylipb+/- resulted in offspring with mylipb+/+, mylipb+/- and mylipb-/- genetic backgrounds in a Mendelian ratio (1:2:1), and no obvious defects in growth rate and reproductive ability were detected in mylipb-/- zebrafish under normal conditions. qRT-PCR assay confirmed that mylipb was efficiently disrupted ( ). We challenged mylipb-/- larvae (3 days post-fertilisation [dpf]) and mylipb+/+ larvae (3 dpf) (having a wild-type allele of mylipb) (WT) with high titer SVCV and photographed the larvae after 18 h ( ). We found that mylipb-deficient zebrafish larvae were more resistant to SVCV-induced death ( ). We then injected SVCV intraperitoneally (i.p.) into mylipb-/- and mylipb+/+ adult zebrafish (3 months post-fertilisation [mpf]) and used cell culture medium as a control, and subsequently observed their phenotypes. Compared to SVCV-injected WT zebrafish, SVCV-injected mylipb-deficient zebrafish showed less abdominal swelling and haemorrhagic symptoms ( ). In addition, we counted dead zebrafish at different time points after SVCV injection and plotted a survival curve. As shown in , after challenge with SVCV, mylipb-/- zebrafish showed a higher survival rate compared to WT zebrafish ( ). Consistently, mylipb-/- larvae exhibited lower mRNA expression of N-, P- and G-protein genes of SVCV genes than WT larvae ( ).
 To evaluate the alteration of IFN response by mylipb deficiency, we compared the mRNA expression of three antiviral genes, including ifn1, mxc and lta [ ], between mylipb-/- and WT larvae following SVCV infection. qRT-PCR assay showed that the transcription of these antiviral genes induced by SVCV was significantly increased in mylipb-/- larvae compared to WT larvae ( ). Inflammatory genes also contribute to the viral pathogenesis, we also compared the mRNA expression of inflammation factor, including il-1β, il8, tnfα, between mylipb-/- and WT larvae following SVCV infection. qRT-PCR assay showed that the transcription of these genes induced by SVCV was significantly decreased in mylipb-/- larvae compared to WT larvae ( ). In addition, upon SVCV infection at the cellular level in vitro, mylipb significantly inhibited the antiviral capacity and enhanced the cytopathogenic effect (CPE) ( ). Next, dramatically increased viral titers and upregulated viral gene transcriptions (N, P and G genes) were found in mylipb-overexpressing EPC cells compared to controls ( ). Taken together, these findings indicate that mylipb is a host negative factor against viral infections in vivo and in vitro.

## Mylipb inhibits poly I:C and SVCV-induced IFN activation
Since IFN activation plays a key role in the host’s antiviral capacity, it is necessary to further investigate the effect of mylipb on IFN response. Using promoter assays, we found that overexpression of mylipb suppressed the ISRE reporter (a commonly used reporter for monitoring viral infection)[ ] induced by either poly I:C transfection or SVCV infection in EPC cells ( ). Consistent with the ISRE reporter results, mylipb significantly inhibited Dr-IFNφ1-luc (the zebrafish ifnφ1 promoter) activity induced by poly I:C or SVCV infection ( ). Subsequently, the effect of mylipb on IFN system transcription was also monitored. Consistent with the promoter assays, overexpression of mylipb strongly reduced the expression of ifn and two typical IFN-stimulated genes (viperin and isg15, 60) in EPC cells upon poly I:C or SVCV stimulation ( ). In addition, overexpression of mylipb up-regulated the expression of inflammatory genes il1-β, il8, tnfα in EPC cells upon SVCV stimulation ( ). These results demonstrate that mylipb acts as a suppressor of IFN activation.
 

## Mylipb associates with and induces autophagic degradation of irf3
There is increasing evidence that the fish RLR signalling pathway plays a critical role in the activation of IFN production [ , , ]. In order to determine the mechanisms of zebrafish mylipb in the negative regulation of the antiviral response, we examined the activity of the ISRE reporter and EPC-IFN-luc stimulated by overexpressing of key molecules of the RLR pathway, including rig-i, mda5, mavs, tbk1 and irf3 together with Myc-empty vector or Myc-tagged mylipb. Overexpression of the RLR signaling cascade factors significantly activated the activity of the ISRE reporter and EPC-IFN-luc ( ). However, co-expression of mylipb suppressed the activity induced by these factors, from upstream to downstream factors in the RLR signaling pathway ( ). These data suggest that mylipb may negatively regulate antiviral immunity by suppressing the transactivity of irf3.
 To further investigate whether irf3 activity was directly affected by mylipb, we examined their protein-protein interactions. As shown in , immunofluorescence staining confirmed the predominant colocalization of mylipb and irf3 protein in the cytoplasm ( ). In addition, co-immunoprecipitation assays further demonstrated that ectopically expressed mylipb pulled down irf3 in HEK293T cells (Figs and ). Previous studies have shown that MYLIP exerts its physiological function by inhibiting the stabilization of target proteins [ ]. Therefore, we further investigated whether the inhibition of the RLR pathway by mylipb was achieved by affecting the stability of the irf3 protein. As expected, overexpression of mylipb resulted in a dose-dependent reduction of overexpressed irf3 protein ( ). Upon SVCV infection, irf3 protein level and phosphorylation of irf3 were detected, which appeared to be higher in mylipb-null zebrafish (mylipb-/-) compared with WT zebrafish (mylipb+/+) ( ).
The degradation mechanism of irf3 in this process was then investigated. Protein degradation is mediated by three classical mechanisms, namely the proteasome, autophagosome and lysosomal proteolysis pathways, which are disrupted by MG132, 3-methyladenine (3-MA) or Baf-A1 and NH4Cl, respectively. As shown in , MG132, a proteasomal inhibitor, had no effect on mylipb-induced irf3 protein degradation. However, 3-MA and Baf-A1, two autophagy inhibitors, clearly restored mylipb-induced irf3 protein degradation ( ), suggesting that mylipb might mediate autophagic degradation of irf3 protein. As expected, the addition of NH4Cl also restored mylipb-induced irf3 protein degradation, since the late stage of autophagy is involved in the lysosomal pathway ( ). Furthermore, overexpression of mylipb dose-dependently decreased the expression irf3 and was found to increase the levels of LC3-II ( ). Furthermore, during autophagy, conjugated LC3 coats the autophagosome membrane, so the observation of LC3 puncta formation is taken as an autophagy indicator. Confocal microscopy analysis revealed that LC3 puncta were significantly accumulated in cells overexpressing mylipb and irf3 ( ). To further strengthen this conclusion, HEK293T knockout cells for the essential autophagy genes ATG5 and BECN1 were used, and we found that the irf3 degradation induced by mylipb was detectable in wild-type (WT) cells but not in either ATG5 KO or BECN1 KO cells ( ).
Collectively, these data suggest that zebrafish mylipb induces autophagy-dependent degradation of irf3 to suppress RLR signaling activation.

## Mylipb degradates irf3 dependent of its ubiquitin ligase activity
To further elucidate the mechanisms of mylipb’s effect on irf3 protein stability, we first performed domain mapping assays. The results showed that the zine finger (ZF) domain of mylipb is critical for its association with irf3 ( ). The cysteine residue at position 387 (C387) of the ZF domain is the enzymatic activity centre of MYLIP and necessary for maintaining the E3 ubiquitin ligase activity [ ]. Amino acid sequence alignments revealed that C387, which corresponds to zebrafish C381, is evolutionarily conserved between human, mouse and zebrafish ( ). To investigate whether mylipb could enhance irf3 ubiquitination and depend on its enzymatic activity, we transfected mylipb-WT and ZF domain deletion mylipb (mylipb-ΔZF) together with flag-irf3 and His-Ub into HEK293T cells. In the presence of mylipb-WT or mylipb-1-416aa, irf3 ubiquitination was dramatically or partly increased (Figs and ). However, substitution of the cysteine at position 381 with serine (C381S), deletion of the ZF domain (ΔZF) in mylipb or mylipb-1-279aa, mylipb-1-380aa abrogated irf3 polyubiquitination (Figs and ), indicating that E3 ubiquitin ligase activity was required for mylipb-mediated irf3 ubiquitination. Consistently, we further confirmed that the ZF domian and C381 were also required for mylipb-mediated irf3 degradation ( ). Meanwhile, upon SVCV infection, ubiquitination of endogenous irf3 was decreased in mylipb-null zebrafish (mylipb-/-) compared with WT zebrafish (mylipb+/+) ( ).
 We also investigated which type of polyubiquitin linked to irf3 was increased by mylipb. As shown in , overexpression of mylipb effectively promoted K6-linked polyubiquitination of irf3, but not K11-, K27-, K29-, K33-, K48- and K63-linked polyubiquitination of irf3 (Figs , , and ). We then focused on screening which lysine(s) of irf3 were targeted by mylipb. Homology alignment analysis identified seven conservative lysine residues of mylipb from human, mouse and zebrafish ( ). Furthermore, overexpression of huMYLIP also destabilized huIRF3 ( ), suggesting that the ubiquitination sites they contain are evolutionarily conserved. Therefore, we constructed seven irf3 mutants irf3(K5R), irf3(K39R), irf3(K76R), irf3(K86R), irf3(K103R), irf3(K352R) and irf3(K401R) in which lysine residues at positions 5, 39, 76, 86, 103, 352 and 401 were specifically replaced by arginine. Ubiquitination assays showed that overexpression of mylipb significantly promoted K6 polyubiquitination of irf3(K5R), irf3(K39R), irf3(K76R), irf3(K86R), irf3(K103R) and irf3(K401R), but not irf3(K352R) ( ). We further confirmed that overexpression of mylipb suppressed the ISRE reporter activity induced by irf3(K5R), irf3(K39R), irf3(K76R), irf3(K86R), irf3(K103R) and irf3(K401R), but not irf3(K352R) ( ). Consistent with this notion, mylipb could not induce the degradation of irf3(K352R) ( ). These data suggest that zebrafish mylipb induces degradation of irf3 by promoting K6-linked polyubiquitination of irf3 at lysine 352.
To further investigate whether the enzymatic activity of mylipb is involved in the antiviral response. The results of promoter analysis and qRT-PCR analysis showed that mylipb-WT inhibited poly I:C- and SVCV-induced ISRE reporter and EPC-IFN-luc activity and the transcription of antiviral genes ( ). Notably, although the enzyme-inactivated mylipb-C381S significantly rescued the inhibitory effect of IFN activation compared to mylipb-WT, it still had a partial negative regulatory function ( ). Consistently, as shown in , overexpression of mylipb-C381S significantly impaired the ability to increase CPE, viral titer and mRNA expression of viral genes after SVCV infection in EPC cells compared to overexpression of mylipb-WT. However, overexpression of enzyme-inactivated mylipb still had a statistically significant enhancing effect compared to empty vector transfection ( ).
 Taken together, the results suggest that mylipb degrades irf3 in a manner dependent on its ubiquitin ligase activity, but also suggest that there are other mechanisms by which mylipb negatively regulates antiviral responses in addition to promoting irf3 degradation.

## Mylipb decreases tbk1-mediated irf3 phosphorylation and cellular antiviral response
Zebrafish tbk1 kinase activity and tbk1-mediated irf3 phosphorylation play an important role in defence against viral infection. To investigate whether mylipb could regulate tbk1-mediated irf3 phosphorylation in the antiviral response, we first overexpressed tbk1 in the absence or presence of mylipb and examined the gel shift of irf3. As shown in Figs and , overexpression of tbk1 resulted in a shift of irf3 in the gel, which was reduced by CIP treatment (Figs and ). However, in the presence of either mylipb-WT or mylipb-C381S, the shift band became weaker compared to that in the absence of mylipb, suggesting that mylipb could regulate tbk1-mediated irf3 phosphorylation ( ). Subsequent immunoblot analysis indicated that mylipb did not significantly disrupt the protein level of tbk1, which was distinct from mylipb-mediated degradation of irf3 ( ). Notably, in the presence of tbk1 did indeed cause a gel shift of mylipb, which was reduced by CIP treatment (Figs and ), suggesting that mylipb may be a substrate for the phosphokinase tbk1. To support this speculation, we examined protein-protein interactions. As shown in , coimmunoprecipitation assays revealed that mylipb associated with tbk1( ), and overexpression of both HA-tbk1 and flag-tbk1 caused a gel shift of mylipb ( ). However, the gel shift of mylipb disappeared after overexpression of enzyme-inactivated tbk1 (tbk1-R47H) [ ] (Figs and ). These results indicated that mylipb was a substrate for the phosphokinase tbk1. To determine the phosphorylation sites of mylipb, we performed a search in the phosphosite database (https://www.phosphosite.org/) and identified 8 conservative points of huMYLIP, including T47, S49, S149, T279, S282, T318, S319 and Y323. By homology alignment analysis, the corresponding zebrafish mylipb for these sites are T47, T49, S149, T279, S282, T318, S319 and Y323 (S9A Fig). Since huMYLIP can also be phosphorylated by huTBK1 ( ), we speculate that the phosphorylation sites they contain are evolutionarily conserved. Given that tbk1 is a serine/threonine phosphokinase, the following mutant plasmids including T47/S49A(mut1), S149A(mut2), T279/S282A(mut3) and T318/S319A(mut4) were constructed for further experiments. As shown in , overexpression of tbk1 caused hardly any gel shift of mylipb-mut4, suggesting that T318/S319 are the phosphorylation sites of mylipb catalyzed by tbk1. Based on these data, it is possible that the host uses mylipb to compete with cellular irf3 for phosphorylation by tbk1. As expected, immunoblot analysis showed that the presence of mylipb-C381S attenuated the shifted band of irf3, but mylipb-mut4 had no apparent effect on reducing the phosphorylation of irf3 ( ). Given that mylipb is a decoy substrate for tbk1 and that tbk1 plays a critical role in the defence against viral infection, the function of mylipb in regulating the tbk1-mediated cellular antiviral immune response was investigated. Upon SVCV infection, zebrafish mylipb-C381S interfered with the antiviral function of tbk1 in terms of both CPE and viral titer ( ). In addition, the effect of tbk1 on viral gene inhibition was attenuated by mylipb ( ). For the host antiviral IFN response, the tbk1-induced upregulation of ifn and ISGs was also reversed by mylipb ( ).
These results suggest that mylipb acts as a decoy substrate to attenuate the cellular antiviral response capacity induced by phosphokinase tbk1-mediated irf3 phosphorylation.
 

## Mylipb interacts with irf7 and induces degradation of irf7
We further test if mylipb also targets irf7 and NF-κB proteins. Co-immunoprecipitation assays demonstrated that ectopically expressed mylipb pulled down irf7 but not NF-κB–p65 in HEK293T cells ( ). Overexpression of mylipb resulted in a dose-dependent reduction of overexpressed irf7 protein ( ). However, we found that irf7 degradation induced by mylipb was detectable in both wild-type (WT) cells and ATG5 KO or BECN1 KO cells ( ), suggesting that mylipb induces degradation of irf7 independent of the autophagy pathway. As shown in , mylipb induced the degradation of irf7 dependent of its ubiquitin ligase activity ( ). Using promoter assays, we found that overexpression of mylipb-WT suppressed the ISRE and IFN reporter induced by irf7( ). These results suggest that mylipb also targets irf7, but is mechanistically distinct from irf3. We will investigate this further at a later stage.

## Discussion
IRF3 is a transcription factor essential for innate immunity against viruses, and its protein levels and activity can be precisely regulated by post-translational modifications to effectively protect the host from infection and prevent excessive immune pathology [ , ]. In this study, we identified zebrafish mylipb as a virus-responsive gene that negatively regulates antiviral innate immunity by promoting K6-linked polyubiquitination of irf3 at lysine 352 and inhibiting tbk1-mediated phosphorylation of irf3, uncovering a novel, to our knowledge, function of mylipb of innate antiviral responses using an in vivo model ( ).
 Ubiquitination is a post-translational modification with complex modes and diverse results [ ]. It plays an important role in the vital activities by regulating the stability, activity and localization of target proteins [ ]. The ubiquitin-mediated system is one of the major degradation mechanisms for the removal of abnormal and unused proteins in order to maintain intracellular protein homeostasis [ ]. In addition to the classical K48-linked polyubiquitination, all non-K63-linked (including K6-, K11-, K27-, K29- and K33-linked) ubiquitination could result in proteasomal degradation of proteins [ ]. Additionally, increasing evidence has shown that the ubiquitination proteins can also be degraded by the lysosomal and autophagy pathways [ , , ]. Previous studies have shown that different ubiquitination events are involved in the regulation of IRF3 stability. RBCK1, c-Cbl and RAUL induces K48-linked polyubiquitination and degradation of IRF3 by the proteasomes, thereby repressing the expression of type I IFNs [ , , ]. Zebrafish fbxo3 increases the K27-linked polyubiquitination of irf3 and promotes its degradation by the proteasome pathway [ ]. TRIM21 and PMSD14 regulate the autophagy of IRF3 by balancing the K27-linked polyubiquitination of IRF3 [ , ]. Furthermore, even the same E3 ubiquitin ligase causes substrates to undergo different degradation pathways due to the diversity of ubiquitination types. For example, as an E3 ubiquitin ligase, MYLIP inhibits LDLR and VLDRL proteins via the ubiquitin-lysosomal pathway, while controlling its own protein levels via the ubiquitin-proteasome pathway [ , ]. This study reports that zebrafish mylipb interacts with irf3 and catalyses the K6-linked polyubiquitination of irf3, dependent on its E3 ubiquitin ligase activity, leading to the degradation of irf3 by the autophagy pathway.
Protein undergoing K6-linked ubiquitination, resulting in different propensities to be stabilised, degraded, change in cellular localisation and ability to bind partners, etc [ , ]. The role of K6-linked ubiquitination in antiviral innate immunity is attracting the attention of researchers. It is a degradation signal for viperin and IRF7, and regulates the DNA-binding capacity of IRF3 [ , , ]. Here, we report that K6-linked ubiquitination is an autophagy signal for irf3, revealing the functional multiplexity of K6-linked ubiquitination. The function of K6-linked ubiquitination in innate immunity has been established, but the diverse patterns of regulation and the molecular mechanisms involved remain to be elucidated.
Upon pathogen recognition, IRF3 is activated through a sequential process including phosphorylation, dimerization and nuclear translocation [ , ]. Thus, modulation of IRF3 phosphorylation usually occurs in the cytoplasm, mediated by disruption of TBK1 function [ , ]. In this study, we show that cytoplasmic mylipb associates with tbk1 and acts as a decoy substrate to attenuate tbk1-mediated irf3 phosphorylation, thereby impairing the cellular antiviral response capacity. Our data provide a synergistic mechanism for mylipb in antiviral immunity independent of its enzymatic activity. However, we do not provide sufficient evidence to suggest that zebrafish mylipb could also reduce the dimerization and nuclear translocation of irf3 after infection with SVCV.
Viral infections in fish cause huge losses in the aquaculture industry [ – ]. In this study, we find that mylipb-deficient zebrafish are more resistant to SVCV infection, but have no defects in development, growth rate and reproductive ability. These data suggest that mylipb may be a good candidate gene for the cultivation of antiviral fish strains using gene-targeting technology, which would greatly benefit the aquaculture industry.
In summary, we have mainly used the zebrafish model and cell line to demonstrate the function of mylipb acting as a suppressor in the antiviral innate immunity. Given the evolutionarily conserved activity of MYLIP between zebrafish and mammals, mammalian MYLIP may have similar function as zebrafish mylipb in response to viral infection.

## Materials and methods

## Ethics statement
Fish experiments in this study were conducted at the Institute of Hydrobiology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, in accordance with European Union guidelines for handling of laboratory animals (2010/63/EU). All zebrafish experiments were approved by the Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee of the Institute of Hydrobiology, Chinese Academy of Sciences (IHB-2022-039).

## Cells and viruses
Zebrafish liver cells (ZFL) were grown in Ham’s F12 medium (HyClone) supplemented with 10% FBS. Epithelioma papulosum cyprini (EPC) cells were maintained in medium 199(M-199) (ViaCell Biosciences) containing 10% FBS. HEK 293T cells were maintained at 37°C containing 5% CO2, and ZFL and EPC cells were grown at 28°C containing 5% CO2. Human embryonic kidney (HEK) 293T cells were cultured in Dulbecco’s modified Eagle medium (DMEM) (ViaCell Biosciences) supplemented with 10% fetal bovine serum (FBS) (ViaCell Biosciences). All cell lines were cultured in a humidified incubator, verified to be free of Mycoplasma contamination before use. Spring viremia of carp virus (SVCV), strain OMG067 was propagated in EPC cells until the cytopathic effect (CPE) was complete, and the culture medium containing SVCV (multiplicity of infection [MOI]; 109 TCID50/mL) was collected and stored at -80°C until use.

## Zebrafish
Zebrafish (Danio rerio) strain AB fish were raised, maintained, and staged according to standard protocols. CRISPR/Cas9 was used to knockout mylipb in zebrafish. First, mylipb single guide RNA (sgRNA) was designed using the CRISPR design tool (http://crispr.mit.edu). The sgRNA sequence was AGATCTACGGTCAAGACCCC. The zebrafish codon optimized Cas9 plasmid was digested with XbaI and then purified and transcribed using the T7 mMessage machine kit (Ambion). PUC9 guide RNA (gRNA) vector was used to amplify mylipb sgRNA template. The Transcript Aid T7 highyield transcription kit (Fermentas) was used to synthesize sgRNA. One-cell stage embryos were injected with 1ng Cas9 RNA and 0.15ng sgRNA per embryo. The chimeras were initially detected using a heteroduplex mobility assay (HMA) as previously described[ ].If the HMA results were positive, the remaining embryos were raised to adulthood as the F0 generation and then backcrossed to WT zebrafish (strain AB) to generate the F1 generation. F1s were genotyped using HMAs. Genotypes were confirmed by target site sequencing. Heterozygous F1s were backcrossed to WT zebrafish (strain AB; parent-offspring mating prohibited) to generate the F2 generation. F2 adults carrying the target mutation were intercrossed to generate F3 offspring. The F3 generation contained WT (+/+), heterozygous (+/-), and homozygous (-/-) individuals. The primers used to identify mutants were as follows: forward primer,CTGATGCATGTGAAGGAGGA, reversed primer,GTAACGCAACTGATGCTAGG The novel mutants were named following zebrafish nomenclature guidelines: mylipbihbmb73/ ihbmb73(https://zfin.org/ZDB-ALT-230809-2). All zebrafish procedures were performed approval of the Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee (IACUC) at the Institute of Hydrobiology, Chinese Academy of Sciences.

## Plasmid construction and reagents
Zebrafish gene mylipb (ENSDARG00000055118) and its truncated mutants were PCR amplified from AB zebrafish cDNA using PCR. Amplified genes were subcloned into pCMV-Myc (Clontech), pCMV-HA (Clontech), or pCMV-Flag (Clontech) vectors. These plasmids, including Myc-rig-i, Myc-mda5, Myc-tbk1, Myc-irf3, were constructed using the pCMV-Myc vector as described previously. All constructs were verified by DNA sequencing.
VigoFect (Vigorous Biotechnology, Beijing, China) and FishTrans (MST, FT2020, Wuhan, China) were used for cell transfection. poly I:C (InvivoGen, San Diego, CA) was transfected with Lipofectamine 3000 (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Cycloheximide (CHX), MG132, Baf-A1 and 3-MA were purchased from MedChem Express. NH4Cl was purchased from Sigma-Aldrich. The antibodies used were as follows: anti-Flag antibody (F1804; Sigma-Aldrich), anti-Myc antibody (9E10; Santa Cruz Biotechnology), anti-HA antibody (MMS-101R; Covance), anti-LC3 antibody (ab48394; Abcam), anti-irf3 (A11921, Abclonal), anti-phosphor-IRF3 (4947, Cell Signaling Technology). anti-ATG5 (A0203, ABclonal), anti-BECN1 (A17028, ABclonal), anti-α-tubulin (62204, Thermo Fisher Scientific), anti-GAPDH antibody (AC033; ABclonal) and anti-β-actin antibody (AC026; ABclonal).

## Virus infection and plaque assay
For examining gene expression of zebrafish larvae, 30 larvae (3 dpf) were pooled in a disposable 60-mm cell culture dish filled with 5 mL of egg water and 0.5 mL of SVCV (∼2.5×107TCID50/ml) solution at 28°C for 24 h. The total RNA was extracted, and quantitative real-time PCR (qRT-PCR) assays were conducted. For survival ratio assays, zebrafish larvae were placed in 96-well plates individually, and then 100μL of egg water containing SVCV (5 mL of egg water plus 2 mL of SVCV (∼2.5×107TCID50/ml) was added to each well). The survival ratio was monitored every 1 h over a 24 h period. For viral injection of adult zebrafish, zebrafish (3mpf) were intraperitoneally (i.p.) injected with SVCV(∼2.5×107TCID50/ml) at 10 μL per individual. Zebrafish i.p. injection with M-199 cell culture medium was used as the control. The survival ratio was monitored every 12 h over a 108 h period.
For the plaque assay, EPC cells were transfected with 2 μg of Myc- mylipb or pCMV-Myc vector. After 24 h, cells were infected with SVCV for 48 h at the dose indicated. Subsequently, the supernatant was collected from EPC cells infected with SVCV (multiplicity of infection [MOI] of 1) for the detection of virus titers, and the cells were washed with phosphate-buffered saline (PBS), fixed with 4% paraformaldehyde, and stained with 1% crystal violet for visualizing CPE.

## Virus titer determination
EPC cells were cultured in 96-well plates. The culture supernatant (containing virus) was diluted in serial dilutions (10−1 to 10−11) in sterile 1.5 mL tubes using M-199 medium. Subsequently, the diluted viruses were added to EPC cells seeded into 96-well plates. After 4 days, the plates were observed under a microscope, and the area of detached cells after infection with virus. 50% in one well were counted as positive. The titers for SVCV infection were calculated using the Spearman-Kärber method and represented as 50% tissue culture-infective dose (TCID50) assay. The experiments were repeated three times for statistical analysis.

## Luciferase reporter assays
EPC cells were grown in 24-well plates and transfected with the indicated plasmids, as well as with CMV-Renilla used as a control. The ratio between the luciferase reporters (ISRE-Luc, Dr-IFNφ1-Luc, or EPC-IFN-Luc) and CMV-Renilla was 10:1, and pCMV-Myc vector was used to ensure equivalent amounts of total DNA in each well. After the cells were transfected for 24–48 h, the luciferase activity was determined by the dual-luciferase reporter assay system (Promega). Data were normalized to Renilla luciferase. Data are representative of three independent experiments (mean ± SD).

## Quantitative real-time PCR (qRT-PCR) analysis
Total RNA was extracted from cells, larvae (n = 30), using the RNAiso Plus kit (TaKaRa Bio, Beijing, China), following the manufacturer’s instructions. Equivalent amounts of total RNA (2ug) were used for cDNA synthesis with the RevertAid first-strand cDNA synthesis kit (Thermo Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA). MonAmp SYBR green qPCR mix (high Rox) (Monad Bio, Shanghai, China) was used for qRT-PCR assays. Each experiment was repeated at least three times independently. The primers for qRT-PCR assays are listed in .

## Immunoprecipitation assay and Western blot
Anti-Flag antibody, anti-Myc antibody and anti-HA antibody-conjugated agarose beads were purchased from Sigma-Aldrich. The experimental procedures including Western blot and coimmunoprecipitation analysis have been described previously [ ]. The Fuji Film LAS4000 mini luminescent image analyzer was used for photographing the blots. Multigauge V3.0 was used for quantifying the protein levels based on the band density obtained in the Western blot analysis.

## Immunofluorescence confocal microscopy
HEK293T cells grown on glass coverslips were fixed with 4% paraformaldehyde for 15 min, permeabilized with 0.1% Triton X-100, and blocked with 1% bovine serum albumin (BSA). Then, the cells were stained with the indicated primary antibodies followed by incubation with fluorescent-dye-conjugated secondary antibodies. Nuclei were counterstained with DAPI (4,6-diamidino-2-phenylindole; Sigma-Aldrich). Imaging of the cells was carried out using a Leica laser-scanning confocal microscope.

## Ubiquitination assay
HEK 293T cells seeded in 100-mm dishes were transfected with Flag-irf3 or HA-irf3, Myc-mylipb, or empty vector, together with His-ubiquitin or its mutants. At 24 h posttransfection, the cells were treated with 3-MA for 8 h. Transfected cells were washed twice with 2 ml ice-cold PBS and then digested with 1 ml 0.25% trypsin-EDTA for 3 min until the cells were dislodged. Cells were resuspended into 1.5 ml EP tube with 1ml PBS, centrifuged at 1000rpm for 3 min, and then the supernatant was removed. The cells were lysed using guanidinium chloride, and purifified with Ni2+-NTA agarose overnight at 4°C with constant agitation. These samples were further analyzed by immunoblotting. Ubiquitination assay of irf3 in zebrafish liver: mylipb-null zebrafish (3 mpf) and their WT siblings (3 mpf) were i.p. injected with (+) or without (-) SVCV(∼2.50 × 107 TCID50/mL) at 10 μl/individual for 48 h, then their livers were dissected, and lysed with lysis buffer (100 μl). The supernatants were denatured at 95°C for 5 min in the presence of 1% SDS. The denatured lysates were diluted with lysis buffer to reduce the concentration of SDS (<0.1%). Denature-IP was conducted using anti-irf3 antibody and then subjected to immunoblotting with anti-Ubiquitin antibody.

## Statistical analysis
The statistical analysis was performed using GraphPad Prism version 8.0 (unpaired t tests). Data are representative of at least three independent experiments, and error bars indicate the mean with SD. For zebrafish survival analysis, the Kaplan-Meier method was adopted to generate graphs, and the survival curves were analyzed by log-rank analysis. A p value <0.05 was considered significant. Statistical significance is represented as follows: *p <0.05; **p<0.01; ***p<0.001; ****p< 0.0001.

## Supporting information
S1 Fig

## The generation of mylipb-null zebrafish via CRISPR/Cas9 techniques.
(A) The schematic of the targeting site in mylipb and the resulting nucleotide sequence in the mutant (MT, mylipbihbmb73/ ihbmb73).The predicted protein product of maoc1 in the mutant and wild-type (WT) sibling. (B) Verification of the efficiency of CRISPR/Cas9-mediated zebrafish mylipb disruption by heteroduplex mobility assay (HMA). (C) The relative mRNA levels of mylipb in the WT and homozygous mutant. All data are presented as mean values based on three repeated experiments, and error bars indicate the ± SD. *,P < 0.05, **, P<0.01; ***, P < 0.001; ****, P< 0.0001
(TIF)
S2 Fig

## Mylipb induces inflammation factor expression in SVCV infection.
(A) Induction of genes downstream of NF-kB, including il-1β, il8, tnfα, was decreased in mylipb-/- larvae compared with WT larvae (mylipb+/+) after SVCV infection. 30 larvae (3 dpf) were pooled in a disposable 60-mm cell culture dish filled with 5 mL of egg water and 0.5 mL of SVCV (∼2.5×107TCID50/ml) solution at 28°C for 24h. (B) Overexpression of mylipb suppressed expression of il-1β, il8 and tnfα induced by SVCV infection in EPC cells. EPC cells were transfected with Myc-mylipb or empty vector for 24 h and infected with SVCV (MOI: 1). After 24 h, total RNAs were extracted for examining the mRNA levels of il-1β, il8 and tnfα by qRT-PCR analysis.
(TIF)
S3 Fig

## Mylipb interacts with irf3 and induces autophagic degradation of irf3.
Related to .(A) Mylipb associated with irf3. HEK293T cells seeded in 100-mm dishes were transfected with the indicated plasmids (4 μg each). After 24 h, total cell lysates were immunoprecipitated (IP) with anti-HA antibody conjugated agarose beads. Then, the immunoprecipitates and cell lysates were detected with anti-HA or anti-Flag Ab, respectively. (B, C) Wild-type (WT), ATG5 and BECN1 knockout (KO) 293T cells were co-transfected with Myc-mylipb and HA-irf3 for 24 h. The cell lysates were subjected to western blotting with the indicated antibodies.
(TIF)
S4 Fig(A) Amino acid sequence alignment of human MYLIP and zebrafish mylipb.
(TIF)
S5 Fig

## Mylipb negatively regulates irf3 by promoting K6-linkd ubquitination of irf3.
Related to . (A) Mylipb promoted irf3 ubiquitination depended on ZF domain and ubiquitin ligase activity of mylipb. HEK 293T cells were transfected with Flag-irf3, Myc-mylipb-WT, Myc-mylipb-1-279, Myc-mylipb-1-380, Myc-mylipb-1-416, Myc-mylipb-Δ381–416, or empty vector, together with His-ubiquitin. At 24 h posttransfection, the cells were treated with 3-MA for 8 h. The cells were lysed using guanidinium chloride, and purifified with Ni2+-NTA agarose. (B) Mylipb promoted irf3 K6-linked ubiquitination. HEK293T cells were transfected with Flag-irf3, Myc-mylipb, or empty vector, together with His-K6R ubiquitin. At 24 h posttransfection, the cells were treated with 3-MA for 8 h. The cells were lysed using guanidinium chloride, and purifified with Ni2+-NTA agarose.
(TIF)
S6 Fig(A) Amino acid sequence alignment of human IRF3, mouse Irf3, zebrafish irf3. (B) MYLIP induced degradation of IRF3. HEK293T cells co-transfected with Myc-IRF3 and empty vector together with HA-IRF3 for 24 h. The lysates were then subjected to IB with the indicated Abs.
(TIF)
S7 Fig

## Mylipb decreases tbk1-mediated irf3 phosphorylation.
Related to . (A-B) The amount of tbk1-phosphorylated irf3(A) and mylipb(B) were reduced by CIP treatment. Cells were transfected with the indicated plasmids (1 μg each) for 24 h. Then the cell lysates (100 μL) were treated with or without CIP (10 U) for 30 min at 37°C. Then the lysates were detected by IB with the indicated Abs.
(TIF)
S8 Fig(A) Homology alignment analysis show that the corresponding zebrafish tbk1 for R47 of human TBK1 is R47.
(TIF)
S9 Fig(A) Amino acid sequence alignment of human MYLIP, mouse Mylip, zebrafish mylipb. (B) TBK1 phosphorylates MYLIP. HEK293T cells co-transfected with HA-TBK1 and empty vector together with Myc-MYLIP for 24 h. The lysates were then subjected to IB with the indicated Abs.
(TIF)
S10 Fig

## Mylipb interacts with irf7 and induces degradation of irf7.
(A) Mylipb don’t associated with p65. HEK293T cells seeded in 100-mm dishes were transfected with the indicated plasmids (4 μg each). After 24 h, total cell lysates were immunoprecipitated (IP) with anti-Flag antibody conjugated agarose beads. Then, the immunoprecipitates and cell lysates were detected with anti-Myc or anti-Flag Ab, respectively. (B) Mylipb associated with irf7. HEK293T cells seeded in 100-mm dishes were transfected with the indicated plasmids (4 μg each). After 24 h, total cell lysates were immunoprecipitated (IP) with anti-Flag antibody conjugated agarose beads. Then, the immunoprecipitates and cell lysates were detected with anti-HA or anti-Flag Ab, respectively. (C) Mylipb induced the degradation of irf7 in a dose-dependent manner. HEK293T cells were transfected with Myc-empty, Myc-mylipb, and Flag-irf7 for 24 h, and then the cells were harvested to perform immunoblotting. (D) Wild-type (WT), ATG5 and BECN1 knockout (KO) 293T cells were co-transfected with Myc-mylipb and Flag-irf7 for 24 h. The cell lysates were subjected to western blotting with the indicated antibodies. (E) Mylipb induced the degradation of irf7 dependent of its ubiquitin ligase activity. HEK293T cells were transfected with Myc-mylipb-WT or Myc-mylipb-C381S, together with HA-irf7 for 24 h. The lysates were then subjected to IB with the indicated Abs. (F-G) Overexpression of mylipb-WT, but not mylipb-C381S suppressed the activity of ISRE reporter (F), EPC IFN reporter (G), induced by irf7.
(TIF)
S1 Table

## The primer sequences.
(DOCX)
S1 Data

## Excel spreadsheet containing, in separate sheets, the underlying numerical data for Figs.
(XLSX)
S2 Data

## File containing the original uncropped pictures for Figs.
(PDF)
S3 Data

## File containing the original uncropped photos for .
(DOCX)

We are grateful to Dr. Jun Cui (School of Life Sciences, Sun Yat-sen University) for providing Knockout cell lines (ATG5KO and BECN1 KO) and Guangxin Wang (Analysis and Testing Center, IHB, CAS) for her help with fluorescent microscope analysis.
 10.1371/journal.ppat.1012227.r001Decision Letter 0
YountJacob S.Academic EditorBestSonja M.Section Editor© 2024 Yount, Best2024Yount, Besthttps://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/This is an open access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License, which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original author and source are credited.Submission Version0
23 Oct 2023

Dear Dr/Associate professor wang,
Thank you very much for submitting your manuscript "Zebrafish mylipb attenuates antiviral innate immunity through two synergistic mechanisms targeting transcription factor irf3" for consideration at PLOS Pathogens. As with all papers reviewed by the journal, your manuscript was reviewed by members of the editorial board and by several independent reviewers. In light of the reviews (below this email), we would like to invite the resubmission of a significantly-revised version that takes into account the reviewers' comments.
We cannot make any decision about publication until we have seen the revised manuscript and your response to the reviewers' comments. Your revised manuscript is also likely to be sent to reviewers for further evaluation.
When you are ready to resubmit, please upload the following:
[1] A letter containing a detailed list of your responses to the review comments and a description of the changes you have made in the manuscript. Please note while forming your response, if your article is accepted, you may have the opportunity to make the peer review history publicly available. The record will include editor decision letters (with reviews) and your responses to reviewer comments. If eligible, we will contact you to opt in or out.
[2] Two versions of the revised manuscript: one with either highlights or tracked changes denoting where the text has been changed; the other a clean version (uploaded as the manuscript file).
Important additional instructions are given below your reviewer comments.
Please prepare and submit your revised manuscript within 60 days. If you anticipate any delay, please let us know the expected resubmission date by replying to this email. Please note that revised manuscripts received after the 60-day due date may require evaluation and peer review similar to newly submitted manuscripts.
Thank you again for your submission. We hope that our editorial process has been constructive so far, and we welcome your feedback at any time. Please don't hesitate to contact us if you have any questions or comments.
Sincerely,
Jacob S. Yount
Academic Editor
PLOS Pathogens
Sonja Best
Section Editor
PLOS Pathogens
Kasturi Haldar
Editor-in-Chief
PLOS Pathogens
​orcid.org/0000-0001-5065-158X
Michael Malim
Editor-in-Chief
PLOS Pathogens

orcid.org/0000-0002-7699-2064

***********************
Reviewer's Responses to Questions

Part I - Summary

Please use this section to discuss strengths/weaknesses of study, novelty/significance, general execution and scholarship.
Reviewer #1: These authors report zebrafish mylipb negatively regulates IRF3-mediated antiviral innate immunity through two synergistic mechanisms. 1) Mylipb promotes K6-linked polyubiquitination and autophagic degradation of IRF3. 2) Mylipb also acts as a decoy substrate for the phosphokinase tbk1 to attenuate irf3. Although the in vivo and in vitro experiments with overexpression and KO system convincingly support the view that zebrafish mylipb negatively regulates IFN-I signaling. However, the results that refer to the proof of regulatory mechanism are superficial (Fig 4, 5, 7), and some results are inconsistent. Furthermore the western blot experiments are conducted only with overexpression system.
Reviewer #2: In this manuscript, the authors report a role of mylipb in inhibiting irf3 functions in zebrafish. Using overexpression and under-expression strategies, the results suggest that mylipb inhibits virus-induced type-I IFN production via two synergistic mechanisms - induction of autophagic degradation of irf3 and inhibition of irf3 phosphorylation. mylipb interacts with irf3 and targets Lys352 for K6-linked polyubiquitination leading to autophagy-mediated degradation. Furthermore, mylipb gets phosphorylated by tbk1 and functions as a competitive inhibitor of irf3, which also works as a substrate for tbk1. Using this mechanism mylipb acts as a decoy substrate for tbk1, thereby attenuating phosphorylation of irf3 and cellular antiviral responses. Finally, they have demonstrated the physiological role of mylipb in vivo; knockout zebrafish are more resistant to SCVC infection due to increased viral replication and antiviral gene expression levels. Overall, there are several strengths in this study, including complementary mechanistic and physiological approaches and strong biochemical analyses. However, there are some weaknesses that need to be addressed.
**********

Part II – Major Issues: Key Experiments Required for Acceptance

Please use this section to detail the key new experiments or modifications of existing experiments that should be absolutely required to validate study conclusions.
Generally, there should be no more than 3 such required experiments or major modifications for a "Major Revision" recommendation. If more than 3 experiments are necessary to validate the study conclusions, then you are encouraged to recommend "Reject".
Reviewer #1: 1. It is necessary to study the phosphorylation, stability, ubiquitination of IRF3 in mylipb-KO cells, together with the proof of the endogenous IRF3.
2. From Fig 4G to 4K. The author proved that Mylipb induces autophagic degradation of IRF3 with WB and IF experiments. Several questions arise from this:
1) In fig 4K, the IF result indicated that overexpression of mylipb induce the LC3 puncta formation. LC3 puncta formation is a sign of autophagosome flux, indicating more LC3-I have been cleaved into the LC3-II. However, in fig 4J, the amount of lc3-II did not distinctly increase when overexpressing mylipb, indicating that mylipb did not induce the autophagosome flux. So the IF and IB results are inconsistent.
2) It is skeptical that the green signal of LC3 is undetected in the control group in fig 4K. In fig 4H, the bands of LC3-I and LC3-II between control group and mylipb-transfected group are without any difference. Whether the result is representative.
Reviewer #2: 1. The specificity of mylipb for irf3 is not solid. They should test if mylipb also targets irf7 and nf-kb proteins.
2. Inflammatory genes also contribute to the viral pathogenesis and induction of some of these genes should be tested in the whole fish study.
3. The species with slower mobilities in Fig 7 for irf3 and tbk1 were considered as phosphoproteins. However, some more specific studies, e.g., either phospho-specific antibodies or phosphatase should be used to come to a reasonable conclusion.
4. In Fig 5E, wt mylipb did not degrade irf3 protein, as expected. There was no explanation for this and also the mutant mylipb was used in this expt and for functional studies in Fig 6. mylipb mutant should be tested in the ubiquitination studies as well.
5. Autophagy-mediated degradation of irf3 has only been tested using inhibitors, which have off-target effects; genetic approaches (e.g., knockdown of autophagy components) should be used for validation.
**********

Part III – Minor Issues: Editorial and Data Presentation Modifications

Please use this section for editorial suggestions as well as relatively minor modifications of existing data that would enhance clarity.
Reviewer #1: 1. In fig 4A, the ISRE sequence is cloned from which species sample, because you have already labelled the IFN-luc with EPC or Dr. What are its sources?
2. In fig 5D, we can see that only mylipb-wt and 1-416 can induce the degradation of IRF3, while in fig 5B, the result is undetected in TCL.
3. For the ubiquitination assay result, three questions arise from this:
1) In fig 5C, IRF3 ubiquitination in △380-416 and C381S groups are still increased compared with the control group. So the result that E3 ubiquitin ligase activity was required for mylipb-mediated irf3 ubiquitination is skeptical. The ubiquitination assay of mylipb (1-280), (1-380), (1-416) should also conducted.
2) In fig 5F, the ubiquitination band is undetected in the K6R group, indicating that only K6-linked polyubiquitination chains can modify IRF3. However, in fig 5G, irf3 can be modified by any types of polyubiquitination chains. These results are contradictory.
3)It is suggested that 3-MA should appeared in ubiquitination assay results of fig 5.
4. In fig 7A, 7H, when transfected with TBK1, The HA-IRF3 has three bands, I want to know which band is unphosphorylated IRF3. If the three bands represent the whole protein level of IRF3, why both mylipb-wt and mylipb-C381S can induce the reduction of IRF3 protein level, which is contradictory with previous results.
5. In fig 7C, why the p-mylipb bands disappeared in TCL and IP sample.
6.The author declared that TBK1 phosphorylates mylipb. However, In fig 7D and E, the p-mylipb did not increase gradually with the overexpression of TBK1.
Reviewer #2: 1. In Fig 1, the levels of mylipb should be provided for the overexpression and knockout studies.
2. In Fig 2A, dose is not mentioned; also, the rationale for choosing 18h is not mentioned.
3. In Fig 3H-J the MOI of SCVC in EPC cell is missing.
4. In Figure 1B the titer of SCVC is mentioned but the MOI is missing.
5. In Figure 3D, line no 852, “After 24h, we infected (instead of transfected) the cells with SVCV”. The MOI is also not mentioned.
6. In Figure 6B and Figure 6D, MOI is missing.
**********
PLOS authors have the option to publish the peer review history of their article (what does this mean?). If published, this will include your full peer review and any attached files.
If you choose “no”, your identity will remain anonymous but your review may still be made public.
Do you want your identity to be public for this peer review? For information about this choice, including consent withdrawal, please see our Privacy Policy.
Reviewer #1: No
Reviewer #2: No

Figure Files:

While revising your submission, please upload your figure files to the Preflight Analysis and Conversion Engine (PACE) digital diagnostic tool, https://pacev2.apexcovantage.com. PACE helps ensure that figures meet PLOS requirements. To use PACE, you must first register as a user. Then, login and navigate to the UPLOAD tab, where you will find detailed instructions on how to use the tool. If you encounter any issues or have any questions when using PACE, please email us at figures@plos.org.

Data Requirements:

Please note that, as a condition of publication, PLOS' data policy requires that you make available all data used to draw the conclusions outlined in your manuscript. Data must be deposited in an appropriate repository, included within the body of the manuscript, or uploaded as supporting information. This includes all numerical values that were used to generate graphs, histograms etc.. For an example see here on PLOS Biology: http://www.plosbiology.org/article/info:doi%2F10.1371%2Fjournal.pbio.1001908#s5.

Reproducibility:

To enhance the reproducibility of your results, we recommend that you deposit your laboratory protocols in protocols.io, where a protocol can be assigned its own identifier (DOI) such that it can be cited independently in the future. Additionally, PLOS ONE offers an option to publish peer-reviewed clinical study protocols. Read more information on sharing protocols at https://plos.org/protocols?utm_medium=editorial-email&utm_source=authorletters&utm_campaign=protocols
10.1371/journal.ppat.1012227.r002Author response to Decision Letter 0
Submission Version1
24 Apr 2024

AttachmentSubmitted filename: Response to Reviewers.docx
10.1371/journal.ppat.1012227.r003Decision Letter 1
YountJacob S.Academic EditorBestSonja M.Section Editor© 2024 Yount, Best2024Yount, Besthttps://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/This is an open access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License, which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original author and source are credited.Submission Version1
26 Apr 2024

Dear Dr/Associate professor wang,
We are pleased to inform you that your manuscript 'Zebrafish mylipb attenuates antiviral innate immunity through two synergistic mechanisms targeting transcription factor irf3' has been provisionally accepted for publication in PLOS Pathogens.
Before your manuscript can be formally accepted you will need to complete some formatting changes, which you will receive in a follow up email. A member of our team will be in touch with a set of requests.
Please note that your manuscript will not be scheduled for publication until you have made the required changes, so a swift response is appreciated.
IMPORTANT: The editorial review process is now complete. PLOS will only permit corrections to spelling, formatting or significant scientific errors from this point onwards. Requests for major changes, or any which affect the scientific understanding of your work, will cause delays to the publication date of your manuscript.
Should you, your institution's press office or the journal office choose to press release your paper, you will automatically be opted out of early publication. We ask that you notify us now if you or your institution is planning to press release the article. All press must be co-ordinated with PLOS.
Thank you again for supporting Open Access publishing; we are looking forward to publishing your work in PLOS Pathogens.
Best regards,
Jacob S. Yount
Academic Editor
PLOS Pathogens
Sonja Best
Section Editor
PLOS Pathogens
Michael Malim
Editor-in-Chief
PLOS Pathogens

orcid.org/0000-0002-7699-2064

***********************************************************
Reviewer Comments (if any, and for reference):
10.1371/journal.ppat.1012227.r004Acceptance letter
YountJacob S.Academic EditorBestSonja M.Section Editor© 2024 Yount, Best2024Yount, Besthttps://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/This is an open access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License, which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original author and source are credited.
8 May 2024

Dear Dr/Associate professor wang,
We are delighted to inform you that your manuscript, "Zebrafish mylipb attenuates antiviral innate immunity through two synergistic mechanisms targeting transcription factor irf3," has been formally accepted for publication in PLOS Pathogens.
We have now passed your article onto the PLOS Production Department who will complete the rest of the pre-publication process. All authors will receive a confirmation email upon publication.
The corresponding author will soon be receiving a typeset proof for review, to ensure errors have not been introduced during production. Please review the PDF proof of your manuscript carefully, as this is the last chance to correct any scientific or type-setting errors. Please note that major changes, or those which affect the scientific understanding of the work, will likely cause delays to the publication date of your manuscript. Note: Proofs for Front Matter articles (Pearls, Reviews, Opinions, etc...) are generated on a different schedule and may not be made available as quickly.
Soon after your final files are uploaded, the early version of your manuscript, if you opted to have an early version of your article, will be published online. The date of the early version will be your article's publication date. The final article will be published to the same URL, and all versions of the paper will be accessible to readers.
Thank you again for supporting open-access publishing; we are looking forward to publishing your work in PLOS Pathogens. 
Best regards,
Michael Malim
Editor-in-Chief
PLOS Pathogens

orcid.org/0000-0002-7699-2064