pmcJ Chem Inf ModelJ Chem Inf Model822acssdciJournal of Chemical Information and Modeling1549-95961549-960Xpmc-is-collection-domainyespmc-collection-titleACS AuthorChoicePMC10498452PMC10498452.110498452104984523760286110.1021/acs.jcim.3c006031PerspectiveTargeted Protein
Degradation: Advances, Challenges,
and Prospects for Computational Methods
https://orcid.org/0000-0003-0568-9866MostofianBarmak MartinHolli-Joi RazaviAsghar PatelShivam AllenBryce https://orcid.org/0000-0001-9079-1376ShermanWoody https://orcid.org/0000-0002-4687-4884IzaguirreJesus A †OpenEye, Cadence Molecular Sciences, Boston, Massachusetts 02114 United States‡Laboratory
for Molecular Modeling, Division of Chemical Biology and Medicinal
Chemistry, Eshelman School of Pharmacy, University of North Carolina, Chapel Hill, North Carolina 27599 United States¶ENKO
Chem, Inc, Mystic, Connecticut 06355 United States§Psivant
Therapeutics, Boston, Massachusetts 02210 United States∥Differentiated
Therapeutics, San Diego, California 92056 United States⊥Atommap
Corporation, New York, New York 10013 United States*E-mail: jesus@atommapper.com.210820231109202363174452485408543227042023130920231409202314092023© 2023 American Chemical Society2023American Chemical Societyhttps://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/Permits the broadest form of re-use including for commercial purposes, provided that author attribution and integrity are maintained (https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/). 
The therapeutic approach of targeted protein degradation
(TPD)
is gaining momentum due to its potentially superior effects compared
with protein inhibition. Recent advancements in the biotech and pharmaceutical
sectors have led to the development of compounds that are currently
in human trials, with some showing promising clinical results. However,
the use of computational tools in TPD is still limited, as it has
distinct characteristics compared with traditional computational drug
design methods. TPD involves creating a ternary structure (protein–degrader–ligase)
responsible for the biological function, such as ubiquitination and
subsequent proteasomal degradation, which depends on the spatial orientation
of the protein of interest (POI) relative to E2-loaded ubiquitin.
Modeling this structure necessitates a unique blend of tools initially
developed for small molecules (e.g., docking) and biologics (e.g.,
protein–protein interaction modeling). Additionally, degrader
molecules, particularly heterobifunctional degraders, are generally
larger than conventional small molecule drugs, leading to challenges
in determining drug-like properties like solubility and permeability.
Furthermore, the catalytic nature of TPD makes occupancy-based modeling
insufficient. TPD consists of multiple interconnected yet distinct
steps, such as POI binding, E3 ligase binding, ternary structure interactions,
ubiquitination, and degradation, along with traditional small molecule
properties. A comprehensive set of tools is needed to address the
dynamic nature of the induced proximity ternary complex and its implications
for ubiquitination. In this Perspective, we discuss the current state
of computational tools for TPD. We start by describing the series
of steps involved in the degradation process and the experimental
methods used to characterize them. Then, we delve into a detailed
analysis of the computational tools employed in TPD. We also present
an integrative approach that has proven successful for degrader design
and its impact on project decisions. Finally, we examine the future
prospects of computational methods in TPD and the areas with the greatest
potential for impact.

pmc-status-qastatus0pmc-status-liveyespmc-status-embargonopmc-status-releasedyespmc-prop-open-accessyespmc-prop-olfnopmc-prop-manuscriptnopmc-prop-legally-suppressednopmc-prop-has-pdfyespmc-prop-has-supplementnopmc-prop-pdf-onlynopmc-prop-suppress-copyrightnopmc-prop-is-real-versionnopmc-prop-is-scanned-articlenopmc-prop-preprintnopmc-prop-in-epmcyespmc-license-refCC BYdocument-id-old-9ci3c00603document-id-new-14ci3c00603ccc-price1

## Introduction
1.1

## Historical Overview of Degradation
Protein degradation plays a crucial role in cellular regulation. The 26S proteasome is the primary enzyme in the
ubiquitin-dependent protein degradation pathway, which is the main
focus of this Perspective. The proteasome, a nanomachine that relies
on energy, breaks down proteins that are covalently “tagged”
with ubiquitin by an E2 ligase. This ligase usually participates in
a larger macromolecular assembly responsible for identifying proteins
to be targeted for degradation through a degron recognition motif.
The ubiquitin–proteasome pathway is vital for controlling protein
levels in cells and, therefore, essential for life. Since the early 2000s, several researchers have endeavored
to exploit this pathway using molecules that induce proximity and
can be leveraged for therapeutic purposes to degrade a protein of
interest (POI). − A degradation strategy offers multiple advantages over small molecule
inhibitors, including targeting nonfunctional sites on the POI and
the catalytic mechanism by which it operates. While traditional small
molecule drug discovery has primarily focused on directly controlling
protein activity, harnessing the endogenous protein destruction machinery
within cells to selectively degrade key drivers of human diseases
holds great potential for drug discovery.
The discovery of cells’
ability to degrade proteins through a nonlysosomal pathway dates back
to the early 1980s. Although the mechanism
was initially unclear, researchers soon identified a small regulatory
protein called ubiquitin, which was covalently attached to the protein
before degradation. Subsequently, it was found that three enzymes
(E1, E2, and E3) played a role in the ubiquitination process. The large protein assembly (20S proteasome, part
of the 26S proteasome) responsible for protein degradation was characterized and crystallized in the 1990s. These groundbreaking discoveries inspired drug researchers
to investigate the possibility of inducing the proximity between a
protein of interest and an E3 ligase, leading to growing efforts in
academia and industry to develop molecules capable of harnessing degradation
biology for therapeutic purposes. The first heterobifunctional degrader
molecule was reported in 2001 and in
2019, the first designed degrader molecule entered human clinical
trials. This progress has sparked a surge
of interest and investment in the field of targeted protein degradation
(TPD). Initial research efforts in TPD focused on well-validated cancer
targets such as estrogen receptor (ER) and androgen receptor (AR). However,
the TPD strategy extends beyond specific indications or therapeutic
areas. As a result, TPD research now
covers a wide range of targets and therapeutic areas, including notoriously
challenging targets like KRAS and MYC, as well as lesser-known targets such as IRAK4, STAT3, and Tau. 
The process of targeted protein degradation
by a degrader molecule
consists of several steps that can impact the degradation efficiency.
Some of these steps resemble those of traditional small molecule therapeutics,
while others are unique. For instance, like traditional small molecules,
a degrader must possess an adequate solubility and permeability to
reach the protein of interest (POI). However, the mechanistic steps
diverge once the degrader reaches the POI. First, TPD is a catalytic
process in which a single molecule can cause the degradation of numerous
POI copies. , The process commences when the
degrader induces proximity between a POI and an E3 ligase by forming
ternary complexes. These complexes can
involve non-native interactions between the two proteins as the therapeutic
strategy often involves repurposing the E3 ligase to act on non-native
substrates. The strength and nature of these protein–protein
interactions play a crucial role in degradation efficiency. Moreover, the ternary complex is typically flexible,
meaning that static representations might be inadequate for correlating
structure to function. The formation
of the ternary complex enables the ubiquitination of the POI, which
generally involves ubiquitin-conjugating enzymes (E2s). However, not all ternary complexes lead to the
same level of POI ubiquitination due to the spatial and kinetic aspects
of the ubiquitination process. Lastly, once ubiquitinated, the POI
is prepared for degradation by the proteasome. 
Solving crystal structures of ternary complexes has
been achieved, but converting these structures
into actionable
designs is not a simple task. Empirical rules created for traditional
small molecules may not be readily applicable as most heterobifunctional
degraders have a molecular weight significantly above 500 Da. Computational
chemistry tools, such as small molecule docking, are not designed
to simultaneously bind a degrader molecule and two proteins. Additionally,
the relationship between the ternary structure and degradation efficiency
remains unclear. Some researchers argue that more rigid linkers are
better, while others suggest that flexibility
is superior. The answer is likely dependent
on the specific system’s nuances, with numerous factors contributing
to the design of an effective degrader molecule.

1.2

## Heterobifunctional Molecules as Therapeutics
Therapeutic molecules for targeted protein degradation can generally
be classified into “glues” and “heterobifunctionals”,
although in reality there is a spectrum between these two extremes.
Glues resemble traditional small molecules in shape and size that,
upon binding, function as “adhesives” and convert the
target protein into a so-called “neo-substrate” for
the E3 ligase. Conversely, heterobifunctional degraders, as visualized
in , are larger
and consist of two protein-binding components connected by a linker
motif, usually inducing a more flexible ternary complex. In this Perspective,
we focus primarily on heterobifunctional degrader molecules.
 In terms of nomenclature, we will refer to the
molecular motif
binding the protein of interest as the “warhead”, the
motif binding the E3 ligase as the “E3 ligand”, and
the “linker” connecting the two motifs. This topology
presents both opportunities and challenges in the therapeutic design.
On one hand, it is possible to rapidly design degrader molecules by
connecting a known warhead to an E3 ligand using a flexible linker,
as demonstrated in numerous examples. − However, the linker’s
nature can significantly affect degradation, likely due to a combination
of factors that will be discussed in greater detail below. As a result,
while hit finding can be relatively straightforward in TPD programs
when there are known POI warheads, designing a degrader remains a
challenging task.
First, enhancing properties such as solubility
and permeability
is often more challenging for heterobifunctional degraders than for
traditional small molecules. This is due to the lack of substantial
data and the innate complexity of these larger, more flexible molecules.
Moreover, connecting chemical structures to degradation is difficult,
as binding is necessary but not sufficient to induce ubiquitination,
and enzymatic deubiquitination may interfere. Additionally, degraders
could bind to each protein-binding partner individually leading to
the concentration-dependent hook effect, i.e., the formation of binary
complexes that compete with the productive ternary complexes and thus
negatively impact the degrader potency and also complicate toxicological
assessments. − Furthermore, there are only a few computational tools
specifically designed for predicting and designing the properties
of heterobifunctional molecules. To predict the activity of these
molecules, it is beneficial, and sometimes essential, to consider
factors beyond binding, such as the conformational landscape of the
ternary complex ensemble, which is crucial for understanding functionality.
Lastly, while several molecules based on heterobifunctional design
are currently in clinical trials, there are no approved heterobifunctional
degraders. As a result, there is limited information about potential
toxicities and other liabilities associated with this emerging class
of molecules.

1.3

## Traditional Computational Approaches are not
Suited to Heterobifunctional Molecules
Targeted protein degradation
necessitates a novel approach to small molecule drug discovery, shifting
from static structures that function primarily via occupancy-driven
pharmacology to conformational stabilization within a complex free
energy landscape to achieve catalytic turnover. X-ray structures are
often inadequate for understanding structure–activity relationships
(SAR), given the dynamic nature of the ternary complex and its implications
for downstream ubiquitination. As previously mentioned, the warhead–linker–ligand
configuration of heterobifunctional molecules, along with the importance
of the ternary structure, poses challenges for traditional computational
methods.
For instance, conventional small molecule docking tools
can be used to position the warhead and E3 ligand to the POI and E3
ligases, respectively, but they are insufficient for predicting ternary
structures. Likewise, traditional protein–protein docking tools
do not consider small molecule sampling in conjunction with global
(translational and orientational) protein sampling. In essence, predicting
the ternary structure combines some of the most challenging aspects
of both small molecule docking and protein–protein docking
into one problem, although it is possible to simplify the search problem
in certain cases by applying constraints.
Predicting other drug-like
properties, such as solubility, permeability,
bioavailability, and clearance, also presents challenges. Currently,
there are minimal data available to create machine learning (ML) or
quantitative structure–activity relationship (QSAR) models,
and even if such data existed, the model-building methods might need
to change. For example, fingerprint representations may be insufficient
for constructing meaningful predictive models, and the quantity of
data required to build high-quality models might be significantly
larger for heterobifunctionals due to their size and conformational
flexibility. Furthermore, traditional physiochemical properties might
not directly inform project decisions, given the complex, multistep
catalytic process. While the scarcity of data will improve over time,
it is difficult to predict when enough information will be available
to make reliable predictions on various properties for heterobifunctionals.

1.4

## Assays for TPD
TPD shares some similarities
with traditional drug discovery such as the necessity of binding,
but it also exhibits numerous differences. TPD calls for a more diverse
approach (both computationally and in the wet lab) utilizing various
tools and unconventional ways of conceptualizing the problem. The
lack of a direct correlation between binding and degradation necessitates
that cellular assays be conducted earlier in the process and serve
as a primary assay. Additionally, permeability can sometimes fall
below the detectable limit by using traditional small molecule methods,
further emphasizing the importance of early cellular assays.
Since the primary objective of TPD is to reduce protein levels, it
is crucial to monitor these levels within the cell, typically through
proteomic techniques. This monitoring becomes central to the project
rather than just being part of exploratory biology. In fact, due to
its catalytic nature, TPD demands a new way of thinking about target
product profiles (TPPs), as the event-driven degradation mechanism
can still exhibit high efficacy at lower doses compared to the occupancy-driven
pharmacology of traditional inhibitors.
The intricacies of TPD
suggest that successful research groups
in this area will benefit from a more diverse workforce and the proper
integration of various skill sets. Further details on TPD assays can
be found in .

1.5

## Overview of This Perspective
Although
TPD research has thus far been successful without substantial computational
investments, the development and deployment of appropriate tools can
have a significant impact. Emerging examples show that traditional
computational tools are being adapted for TPD applications, such as
ternary complex docking, which will be covered in this Perspective.
However, in our opinion, the most significant impact will stem from
new techniques specifically designed for TPD applications, such as
molecular simulations of various TPD steps, which we will discuss
in detail.
To develop new tools, it is crucial to understand
the physical steps associated with TPD. We will start by examining
the targeted protein degradation process and the range of experimental
assays used to explore it. Subsequently, we will discuss how each
physical step can be modeled using different computational approaches,
with a focus on predicting properties like solubility and permeability,
multiscale simulations of various steps, and mathematical modeling
of degradation events. As the ultimate goal of TPD research is to
design innovative therapeutics, we will explore what an integrative
design process for heterobifunctional degraders might entail, showcasing
some recent results that demonstrate the impact of computational methods
in degrader design and the value of integration with experiments.
Lastly, we discuss potential areas for future investment and impact.

2

## Overview of the TPD Process—From Administration
to Protein Degradation
The TPD process involves a series
of steps, all of which must occur
for successful degradation. We describe the process from when a drug
enters the body to when the targeted protein is degraded, with relevant
assays interspersed.
 shows a
graphical depiction of the primary steps involved in the TPD process,
from administration of a heterobifunctional degrader to theproteasomal
degradation event. For a molecule to be efficacious as a drug it must
reach the target of interest. For a degrader molecule this still holds
true, although the amount required is likely to be significantly lower.
The molecule must be soluble to get distributed in the blood and permeable
enough for at least one copy of the degrader to get into the cell.
Once in the cell, the molecule must reach the protein of interest,
bind to the two partners (POI and E3), and induce ubiquitination.
Compared with traditional small molecule drugs, degraders need a lower
concentration in the cell because they operate by an event-driven
mechanism. , Thermodynamically, the order
of operations does not matter in terms of binding to the POI or the
E3 ligase first, although kinetically, there may be differences.
 A variety of different experimental techniques
and assays have
been developed to characterize each of the TPD steps. As summarized
in , some of
the most commonly used assays can be broadly categorized into (1)
target engagement assays, which are designed to measure the ability
of a degrader to bind to the POI or E3 ligase, (2) ternary complex
formation assays, which focus on evaluating the formation of the ternary
complex, and (3) functional cellular assays, which evaluate the ability
of a degrader to induce degradation of the target protein and its
downstream effects on cellular function. A combination of these assays
is often employed to characterize degraders, assess their specificity,
and determine their potential therapeutic utility in discovery projects.
In the following paragraphs, we discuss these and several other promising
techniques and the caveats associated with TPD projects.
As
with the development of any small-molecule drug, monitoring
biopharmaceutical properties, e.g., bioavailability and pharmacokinetics,
during the discovery of degraders is crucial to guide the decision-making
process and to ensure the development of active and potent degraders.
Several studies have offered insight into degrader metabolism and
pharmacokinetics, − concluding, based on solubility, biotransformation,
and elimination data as well as on nonenzymatic stability analysis,
that heterobifunctional degraders may well achieve acceptable drug
metabolism and pharmacokinetics (DMPK) properties, although optimization
strategies are required.
 Favorable aqueous solubility and membrane permeability
are key
attributes in the development of therapeutics and their mutual interplay, with reference to drug delivery and
distribution, is well known. , The correct estimation
of these properties is critically important for ADMET (Absorption,
Distribution, Metabolism, Elimination, Toxicity) screening and lead
optimization, which is discussed in greater detail in in the context
of predicting and modeling different aspects of degraders. Importantly,
the assessment of oral degrader absorption is more complicated than
that of small-molecule drugs because, similar to macrocyclic or peptidomimetic
compounds, degraders exhibit a certain “chameleonic behavior”
in response to different environments, enabling them to passively
permeate cell membranes and, yet, be sufficiently dissolved under
aqueous conditions. , Due to their relatively large
structure, heterobifunctional degraders are assigned to the so-called
“beyond rule of five” (bRo5) chemical space, , i.e., the accurate estimation of their properties is strongly hampered.
Therefore, recent lessons learned on the molecular features of bRo5
compounds will prove highly valuable for degrader design. − 
A variety of experimental physicochemical profiling methods , are usually applied to characterize properties such as polarity,
lipophilicity, ionization, or stability, which are major determinants
of a compound’s bioavailability. For instance, partition assays or reverse-phase HPLC , measure the lipophilicity, usually reported as the octanol–water
partition coefficient, Log P, i.e., the equilibrium distribution of
a compound between water and octanol, or, as the distribution coefficient,
Log D, for ionizable species, respectively.
Promisingly, systematic
studies on the aqueous solubility of degraders
are currently emerging in the literature. , To directly measure the thermodynamic aqueous solubility of a substance,
Log S, traditional saturation methods (in combination with LC/MS analysis)
or potentiometric methods are often applied. In particular, for degraders that contain ionizable sites, the pH-dependent
solubility can be assessed and the intrinsic solubility, Log S0, i.e., that of the neutral species, reported. Also, for poorly soluble compounds like many
degraders, dissolution profiles from amorphous solid or liquisolid
formulations are sometimes derived. 
Since different degrader chemotypes can penetrate different cell
types, it has long been argued that their cellular uptake occurs through
passive diffusion. Recently, common label-free methods that measure
the cell permeability, such as the parallel artificial membrane permeability
assay (PAMPA) , or the Caco-2 cell monolayer
assay, have shed light on degrader permeabilities. , To increase the sensitivity, a HaloTag-based assay, called the chloroalkane
penetration assay (CAPA), or even system-specific intracellular reporter-based
assays have been designed that helped rank degraders based on their
permeability. , In an interesting approach, Atilaw
et al. applied NMR spectroscopy to study
degraders with different physicochemical properties in polar and nonpolar
solutions, thus providing a structural basis for their permeability
differential. The recent development of new technologies and the creative
use of existing tools for the analysis of both the solubility and
permeability of degraders will advance our knowledge of distinct features
that govern their bioavailability.
As mentioned earlier, once
degraders reach their targets, their
mode of action is different from that of inhibitors. In particular,
degraders induce two binding events. The corresponding binding kinetics
are usually assessed by surface–plasmon resonance (SPR) that
informs on the lifetime or stability of the degrader-induced ternary
complex and the associated (un)binding rate constants. Since the protein is typically attached to a
surface through a tag, the native binding properties of the target
protein may be disrupted in SPR. Nevertheless, these measurements
are instrumental in characterizing a degrader’s binding affinity
to both the POI and the ligase and hence its degree of binding cooperativity,
i.e., the increase in a degrader’s affinity to either binding
partner in a ternary complex compared to the corresponding affinity
in a binary (nonternary) structure. Cooperativity is a key parameter
to determine degrader specificity. 
Competitive-binding and proximity-based assays can also probe the
degree of degrader–POI engagement or ternary complex formation
( ), thus allowing
the determination of binding affinities and cooperativity. These techniques
measure changes in the polarization of a fluorescently labeled target
protein upon binding to a degrader, as in fluorescence polarization
(FP), or detect intensity changes, upon
ternary complex formation, in the fluorescence or luminescence signal
emitted from beads tagged to the POI or E3 ligase, as in time-resolved
Förster resonance energy-transfer (TR-FRET) or in the amplified luminescent proximity homogeneous assay
(ALPHA). In the proximity ligation assay
(PLA), a technology that is gaining popularity in TPD research, the
signal is even further amplified through antibody-attached oligonucleotide
hybridization. These methods have been
used in TPD studies for the identification of selective degraders
and for the high-throughput screening of degrader designs. − , In particular, ALPHA has a high
dynamic range and signal-to-noise ratio and, when applied in a titration
experiment (usually set up as an immunoassay called AlphaLISA), it
yields relative populations of ternary complexes as a function of
degrader concentration and is routinely employed as a tool in degrader
design projects (see ).
Complementary to the methods described above,
isothermal titration
calorimetry (ITC) is a label-free technique and thus does not require
tagging or immobilization of the analytes. ITC measures the heat released
or absorbed during the binding of a degrader to its target protein,
providing information on binding affinity, stoichiometry, and the
changes in enthalpy and entropy, although at lower throughput and
higher protein demands. The ITC-guided optimization of degraders has
been reported for different POI–ligase pairs, e.g., Tau-KEAP1 and BRD4-VHL. 
Alternatively, NMR spectroscopy, which is based on chemical shift
perturbations upon ligand binding, is fairly sensitive to binding
signals and has been used for fragment
screening on protein surfaces, , in particular to identify
binding pockets on the von Hippel–Lindau (VHL) E3 ligase and to aid in the optimization of its inhibitors. Recently, Castro and Ciulli reported an NMR
assay that facilitates the evaluation of cooperativity in degrader-induced
ternary complexes. 
X-ray crystallography
has been used to resolve the structures of
entire ternary complexes, or those of
bound warhead–POI or E3 ligand–ligase, revealing distinct interactions in atomic detail
and providing invaluable structural knowledge for rational degrader
design. However, X-ray crystallography is a very challenging technique
and hence cannot always be applied, particularly not for relatively
large and, yet, dynamic ternary complexes that are difficult to co-crystallize.
This issue can be remedied by cryogenic electron microscopy (cryo-EM)
that solves large macromolecular structures, including ternary complexes. Cryo-EM is generally considered to become an
essential tool in drug discovery, and
we believe that it will play an important role in the discovery of
novel degraders.
Other (label-free) tools that have been used
to provide insight
into degrader–protein engagement and ternary complex formation
or ubiquitination include size-exclusion chromatography (SEC), that
can compare the degree of complex formation among different degraders, native mass spectrometry (MS), that has helped
explore degrader selectivity and specificity, and differential scanning calorimetry, that, when applied
as a cellular thermal shift assay (CETSA), exploits the differential in the thermal stabilization upon ternary
aggregation in a cellular environment. 
The Western blot immunoassay, after separation of protein
samples
by gel electrophoresis, is frequently used to measure the target protein
levels inside the cell, thus assessing the degrader activity. Although
capillary electrophoretic immunoassays are believed to be less error-prone, Western blot, coupled with other assays, has
become a standard tool to probe target protein ubiquitination and
degradation. , − 
Both fast photochemical oxidation of proteins (FPOP) and hydrogen–deuterium
exchange (HDX) are MS-based footprinting methods that report on the
solvent accessibility of proteins, which is altered upon conformational
changes, ligand binding, or consequently, ternary complex formation.
These two methods characterize the protein binding interface in a
fairly complementary fashion, as different
regions are labeled (side chains versus backbone) and, as a result,
different time scales can be assessed (ns−μs versus ms–s). , In particular, HDX-MS has already been applied to elucidate protein
sites that contribute to ternary complex formation, and the information
provided can easily augment follow-up modeling and simulation analyses. , In our opinion, these structural MS techniques can be ideally supported
by other chemical footprinting or even site-directed mutagenesis experiments
in which the role of distinct residues at the binding interface can
be intensely explored.
Mass spectrometry techniques are pivotal
for quantitative proteomics
to characterize protein modifications and thus assess target ubiquitination
and degradation. , For instance, when coupled to in vitro ubiquitination assays, MS analysis has identified
distinct degrader-induced ubiquitination sites and (poly-)ubiquitination
linkage types, , , although the coverage of ubiquitinated lysines may be incomplete
in these experiments. Recent advances in live-cell ubiquitinomics
involve the transfection of HeLa cells with the tagged POI and ubiquitin,
followed by immunoprecipitated ubiquitin pull-down and electrophoretic
or LC/MS analysis. , MS-based global proteome profiling
can quantitate the abundance of target proteins, i.e., their turnover
and resynthesis rates, and therefore the effective degrader response , , and possibly identify off-target
effects. Proteomics approaches are believed
to play an outstanding role in TPD research. 
To monitor the intracellular degradation, luminescence-based
reporter
assays with endogeneous HiBiT-tagged proteins have been developed
that yield degradation profiles, from which maximum degradation levels
(Dmax) as well as the half-maximum degradation
concentration (DC50) can be derived to estimate the potency
of a degrader molecule, which is instrumental
in degrader design (see ). As a matter of fact, variants of this technology
are applied to characterize the different steps in TPD, such as target
engagement, ternary complex formation, and target ubiquitination, providing complementary kinetic information
to the other experimental approaches discussed.
To evaluate
degrader activity phenotypically, the target phenotype
is often compared to those from CRISPR/Cas9-mediated protein knockouts
or from RNAi screens. , Recent techniques even employ
reporter genes to reflect the expression level of target proteins.
Measuring the intracellular downstream effect of TPD, such as changes
in cell viability, proliferation, or morphology, is
a functional readout that can provide insights into the biological
consequences of degrading the target protein.
The variety of
methods being deployed in TPD projects attests to
the complexity of the TPD process and mirrors the fact that multiple
molecular events must take place in order to achieve degradation.
In combination with molecular modeling, this large suite of technologies
has already helped advance our knowledge and understanding of the
different TPD steps for distinct POI–ligase pairs. For the
sake of completeness, we would like to note that multiple other approaches,
not listed above, have also been recently applied. Furthermore, the current toolbox is rapidly expanding as
new innovative methods are being developed to provide greater detail
about the TPD-related processes.

3

## Modeling the TPD Process
Despite the
breadth of biochemical and biophysical tools developed
and adapted for exploring TPD, an integrated approach to model the
different steps can lead to more holistic predictions of the entire
degradation process. shows a summary of properties
that help characterize different stages of the TPD process and the
state-of-the-art modeling techniques applied for their study.
 While pharmacokinetic–pharmacodynamic (PK–PD)
and
other quantitative models formulate the multistep TPD mechanism mathematically,
it is possible to model some aspects of the process on a molecular
level using quantitative structure–activity/structure–property
relationships (QSAR/QSPR) as well as
molecular modeling and simulation.
In QSAR/QSPR, multivariate
regression and classification analyses,
augmented by a variety of machine learning (ML) methods, − are applied to predict physicochemical traits, that determine ADMET-related
effects, based on a set of molecular descriptors, typically representing
the chemical structure of a compound at the level of its structural
formula (2D) or its conformation (3D). As a result of increased training data availability and advances
in deep learning methodologies, graph convolution models that learn
a molecule’s structural representation have recently been developed
for property prediction. − However, as noted earlier, for
most “beyond rule of 5” (bRo5) compounds and particularly
for heterobifunctional degraders, the accurate prediction of physicochemical
properties is quite challenging. Recently, some approaches have been
put forward to address this issue. − 
The prediction of degrader
properties can be enhanced by molecular
dynamics (MD) simulations, which have become an important tool in
computation-enabled drug discovery assisting in the identification
of ligand binding sites on protein surfaces, − augmenting docking routines, − and predicting protein–ligand
binding affinities. − Compared to current QSAR methods, which
often exploit topological descriptors, simulation trajectories are
information-rich, ideally containing a full mechanistic and dynamic
description of the system, providing useful information on the thermodynamics
and kinetics of a drug–target binding process in addition to extracting 3D descriptors, such as the radius
of gyration or intramolecular hydrogen bonding. We elaborate in the
following paragraphs why we expect MD simulations to be integral in
many aspects of TPD modeling and degrader design.
3.1

## The Prediction of Degrader Physicochemical
Properties Is Challenging
Traditionally, the computational
assessment of a drug’s thermodynamic aqueous solubility ranges
from predictions of properties such as melting points (Tm) or partition coefficients and the application of QSPR methods , to the estimation of solvation free energies − and solubility parameters from molecular simulations. − In recent years, ML methods for the prediction of solubilities in
water and in organic solvents have become popular. − Recent applications of predictive models to degrader molecules,
or similar high-molecular-weight compounds in the bRo5 space, suggest
that the same rules developed for small molecules cannot be readily
transferred. , In particular, the structural
flexibility of large heterobifunctional degrader molecules requires
model revisions such that certain parameters that support chameleonicity
(the ability of a molecule to adopt both hydrophobic and hydrophilic
3D conformations) are combined with those that favor oral bioavailability
(e.g., the distribution coefficient, Log D). , Moreover, the dynamic nature of features, such as the changing exposure
of surface polarity, seems to better capture the solubility (and permeability)
of bRo5 compounds than traditional two-dimensional descriptors do. 
To systematically distinguish degraders
from nondegraders in their solubility, Jiménez et al. trained a decision tree classifier that relies
on correlations between a set of experimentally obtained lipophilicity
descriptors and several in silico solubility predictors
based on the structure of ∼20 heterobifunctional molecules.
Furthermore, they also examined the effect each of the three different
motifs within a heterobifunctional molecule, i.e., the warhead, the
linker, and the E3 ligand, could have on a degrader’s solubility.
Despite the fact that they derive preliminary guidelines to identify
soluble degraders, this study reveals, as the authors admit, the complexity
of the task of designing orally bioavailable degraders.
Similar
to the prediction of solubility, QSPR methods have also
been established between results from experimental permeability screens,
e.g., PAMPA, and structural descriptors such as the intramolecular
hydrogen bonding, solvent-accessibility, or molecular size of the permeant. Often, these models use an expression for the
water–membrane partitioning or
free energy of transfer. To sample sufficient
conformations, MD simulations are routinely applied , and, in particular for bRo5 compounds such as macrocyclic , or degrader molecules, conformational
sampling has assisted in predicting permeability.
Over the past
decade, reports on atomistic simulations of the entire
process of passive membrane transport have multiplied in the literature,
as previously reviewed. − For drug molecules of different
sizes, experimental permeability coefficients have been estimated
based on the solubility–diffusion model − and, notably, distinct permeation pathways of (small-molecule) compounds
have even been detected, highlighting
the potential of novel simulation algorithms, in combination with
more realistic models of cell membranes, to advance our understanding of the cellular uptake of drugs. Yet,
despite these successes, all-atom simulations of translocation across
membranes remain costly to be applied at scale for relatively large
molecules like degraders. To this end, low-dielectric continuum or
implicit membrane models − and (physics-based) mechanistic predictors, such as PerMM, , COSMOperm, or other tools, have been developed, which allow higher throughput,
albeit at the cost of accuracy.
The application of ML methods
for the prediction of membrane permeability
has also sharply increased in recent years. Some examples include
neural networks, support-vector machines, and random forest classifiers
trained on molecular structures and physicochemical properties of
small and large compounds. − To predict degrader permeability, Poongavanam
et al. have tested several binary classifiers
using descriptors that represent molecular size, shape, and chemical
functionalities. While predictions were good (accuracy >80%) in
some
cases (e.g., VHL-recruiting degraders), the classifiers performed
poorly on cereblon-recruiting degraders due to imbalances in the corresponding
training data. This emphasizes the need for more high-quality degrader
data sets, especially given the hundreds of E3 ligases in the human
genome, many of which have minimal TPD data. Rather than directly
measuring permeability, which tends to be challenging for heterobifunctional
degrader molecules, cellular target engagement assays, described in
more detail in , are often deployed to assess whether a molecule gets into the cell
or not (although permeability is not measured directly through this
approach).
The examples presented above, as well as other references
in the
literature, , highlight the two obvious difficulties
in the prediction of degrader properties such as solubility and permeability.
First, due to their relatively large and heterobifunctional structure,
degraders can adopt a multitude of different conformations that, unlike
small-molecule drugs, can lead to very different molecular interactions,
thus complicating traditional property-based drug design. Yet, it
is this structural flexibility that leads to the aforementioned degrader
chameleonicity, which allows both solubility and permeability.
Conformational sampling via molecular dynamics, Monte Carlo, or other
techniques can be used to capture these effects and generate molecular
descriptors of degraders, which we believe to be important in degrader
design. Molecular simulations can furnish conformational ensembles
that help to derive structural attributes, such as hydrogen bonding
and solvent accessibility, in different environments. , The use of such 3D descriptors, in particular for the prediction
of solubility and permeability, is currently an active area of research. , , , , 
The second main issue
in TPD modeling is that accurate prediction
of degrader properties is currently strongly hampered by the lack
of experimental data. Although it had been argued before that the
actual QSPR algorithms, rather than the uncertainty in data measurements,
may be responsible for inaccurate solubility predictions, it is universally accepted that limitations
on training data impair prediction accuracy, especially for ML-based
approaches. Robust predictive modeling of physicochemical traits,
such as solubility and permeability, requires a large and representative
set of curated data, which are scarce
for degrader molecules. In this context, the ∼2-fold expansion
of PROTAC-DB 2.0, one of the primary
repositories on structural and experimental data on degraders, which
has recently grown to over 3,200 entries at the time of this writing,
mitigates this dearth of knowledge to some extent. However, the data
are still sparse given the complexity of the problem. We expect that
the collection of information about degraders, including their chemical
structures, biological activities, and physicochemical properties,
will continue to grow over the next decade. To compensate the lack
of available experimental data in the near future, data resampling
techniques , may be applied that, in combination
with dynamic structural features readily available through molecular
simulations, could facilitate the development of models for degrader
classification.

3.2

## Conformational Sampling of Degrader-Induced
Complexes Plays an Important Role in TPD Modeling
The most-studied
step in the TPD process by means of molecular modeling is the degradation-induced
formation and conformational sampling of ternary complexes. As discussed,
structure-based biophysical experiments, in particular, X-ray crystallography,
have previously helped in the rational design of new degraders. However,
since ensembles of structures better aid in understanding structure–function
relationships than static structures do, the optimization process
of potent degraders can strongly benefit from accurate modeling of
ternary structures, i.e., the prediction of distinct molecular interactions
that promote complex formation, thus characterizing the underlying
selectivity and cooperativity.
For a robust assessment of predicted
ternary complexes, the structural flexibility of degraders along with
the variability in productive POI–ligase poses requires a comprehensive
sampling of possible conformations of all components. For example,
it has been shown that the linker motif impacts the ternary complex
formation and degradation efficiency. , Furthermore,
the notion of cooperativity calls for a representative set of protein–protein
assemblies to identify possible degrader effects. To this end, several
prominent docking programs, often augmented with MD, have recently
been employed for the design of selective degraders. , , , , 
Ternary complex docking
has emerged as an extension of traditional
docking methods. Molecular docking is a standard tool for pose prediction
and virtual screening in drug discovery. , In the context of degrader-induced TPD, both protein–ligand and protein–protein docking may be applied to generate structures that are
not experimentally resolved. In fact, several protocols have been
developed that differ by the order in which degrader conformations
are sampled, i.e., either after all components are docked into a ternary
complex, or only in a binary protein–degrader complex before
superposing the second protein, or even before inserting the degrader
with its sampled conformation into a given protein–protein
aggregate. While each docking protocol
attempts to minimize the number of predicted structures with sterically
clashing components, those sampling the POI–ligase interactions
and the degrader conformations separately before combining all parts
into a ternary complex have become most popular due to their higher
accuracy in recapitulating experimentally known or crystal-like structures. − Typically, repurposing recently developed automated routines, − a library of linker conformations is combined with the warhead and
the E3 ligand motifs, that are possibly docked to structures from
the POI and the E3 ligase, thus generating ternary complex models,
which are scored by an energy function to identify favorable combinations. , , , The interactions within each protein are unlikely to change significantly
in the context of the ternary complex, simplifying the search for
high-scoring models. Although recent work argues for the simultaneous
docking of all three components for higher accuracy, in some instances, the binding modes of the warhead to
the target POI and that of the E3 ligand to the E3 ligase are known,
allowing for constraints to be applied to the ternary complex docking
problem. Specifically, the use of such structural information on the
ternary complex interface obtained from HDX experiments, as implied
above, has been shown to significantly boost the performance of ternary
docking protocols. , 
Considering the relatively
intricate problem of ternary complex
formation, MD simulations hold great promise for rationalizing structure–activity
relationships among the different binding partners. To date, simulations
of ternary complexes have been applied for tasks such as analyzing
interactions between the three binding partners in atomistic detail, probing the binding cooperativity, scoring and ranking given degraders, and assessing the stability of degrader variants,
such as covalently binding degraders, macrocyclic degraders, or such aimed
at new diseases. In particular, molecular
simulations have successfully augmented many biochemical and proteomics
assays to inform on the selectivity of distinct degraders , , , and also structural biophysical techniques to elucidate binding
site interactions. , , Recently, our research team has combined MD simulations with X-ray
crystallography, small-angle scattering, HDX, and ubiquitinomics experiments
to explore the differential in DC50 values between three
VHL-recruiting SMARCA2 degraders. This
rather comprehensive work provides an explanation for degradation
efficiencies as primarily influenced by the stability and geometry
of ternary complexes, particularly in the context of the entire Cullin–RING
ligase (CRL). Based on simulations, we found that productive ternary
complexes, i.e., such with a high ubiquitination probability, do not
coincide with the crystal structures, which presumably are dominated
by crystal contacts, but rather with the global energy minima, thus
demonstrating the value of advanced simulations for the study of the
TPD process.
In our opinion, MD simulations should be fully
integrated in degrader
design cycles (see ) as a means to provide mechanistic information as well as
thermodynamic and kinetic parameters for the decision-making process. displays the structural
variability of the degrader molecules and distinct degrader-induced
complexes sampled by MD simulations. Despite the structural complexity
of the molecular systems and the associated time scales of the processes
involved in ternary complex formation and target ubiquitination, modern
enhanced sampling algorithms, in combination with graphical processing
units (GPUs), offer substantial progress in the size and time scale
of simulations that can be routinely performed.
 Specifically, simulations can augment and greatly
improve the accuracy
of ternary complex docking protocols, more so than already acknowledged
in the context of small-molecule docking. , MD applied to docked ternary complexes can assess their quality
and possibly simulate transient and (meta)stable states. In contrast,
applying ternary complex docking after the simulation
of adjacent POI–ligase pairs that lack a degrader, so-called
“encounter complexes”, allows the assembly of a ternary
complex with distinct protein–protein interactions, which we
find a very appealing strategy. From a statistical–mechanics
viewpoint, the presence of a heterobifunctional degrader between two
proteins corresponds to a constraint leading to sampling of a confined
subspace within the full encounter complex configurational space.
Therefore, simulations of degrader-less encounter complexes exhibit
the baseline interactions of a given POI–ligase pair, which
are not accessible from simulations of the full ternary complex, providing
knowledge that can be exploited for rational degrader design.
Path-sampling strategies are employed to simulate nonequilibrium
phenomena, such as the degrader-induced assembly of proteins. These
methods, also referred to as importance-sampling techniques, usually
require a predefined collective variable along which phase space is
sampled, accomplished by the addition of biasing potentials as in
umbrella sampling or steered or accelerated
MD , or similar methods, that apply the potentials
in an adaptive fashion. − One such method, that has become
popular in computational drug discovery, is metadynamics − and its many variants that converge faster, − which, in our study, were adequate for the simulation of large structural
changes in the RING-finger E3 multiprotein ligase complex connected
to SMARCA2 by a degrader. Simulations
of large conformational changes of the ubiquitination system are instrumental
for modeling the TPD process and, in our opinion, enhanced sampling
methods are key in this regard. For instance, simulations that mechanistically
describe the ubiquitination process can model the presentation of
the target substrate, i.e., its proximity and orientation, with respect
to the ubiquitin-carrying enzyme, thus supporting the assessment of
degrader efficacies or the degree of (poly)ubiquitination of distinct
sites.
In contrast to the methods described above, rigorous
path-sampling
schemes introduce less bias into the dynamics and thus do not require
any additional assumptions for the calculation of rate constants of
the simulated rare event. These include, among other methods, transition
path sampling , or dynamic importance sampling, in which complete transition paths are iteratively
refined or reweighted, or strategies that construct paths by simulating
many short trajectory segments, such as forward flux sampling, milestoning, weighted
ensemble, , or innovative combinations thereof. In the context of ternary complex formation
and ubiquitination, we consider these simulation techniques to be
essential, as they yield kinetic and thermodynamic information on
binding events, thus complementing experiments like SPR and ITC. Importantly,
the simulation of multiple (weighted) binding pathways can reveal
the impact of degrader molecules on protein–protein association.
By estimating transition rates, these simulations can reveal which
pose of a ternary complex is most favored and thus measure the likelihood
of distinct sites to be ubiquitinated. In fact, we have shown the
capacity of weighted ensemble simulations to predict ternary complex
binding pathways and reproduce binding rate constants that are in
line with experiments. Notably, the
simulations gave more accurate results, particularly in comparison
to ternary complex docking, when the collective variable included
information from HDX experiments using an affordable amount of resources.
Generalized ensemble techniques, such as parallel tempering, , are orthogonal to path sampling in that the simulation is enhanced
in a path-independent manner, for instance by raising the temperature.
We have shown that such an approach is beneficial for the exploration
of ternary complex structures and dynamics, producing an accurate
description of conformational states upon projection onto a free energy
surface that aids in identifying metastable states within the dynamic
ternary system. Specifically, solute
scaling (or Hamiltonian replica-exchange MD, HREMD) and flexible tempering (REFT), in which the Hamiltonian of the whole solute or only parts of it
are scaled, are promising alternatives to sample the structures of
ternary aggregates as they are more efficient than the traditional
temperature REMD. A further option to efficiently explore the free
energy landscape of ternary complexes is the coupling of REMD to a
reservoir of different conformations, , that could
stem from ternary complex docking, virtually leading to the simulated
annealing of a docked ensemble.
The methods described can simulate
degrader binding, ternary complex
formation, and conformational changes ( ). Still, considering the size and the flexibility
of the ternary systems, sophisticated analytical treatments need to
be combined with the enhanced simulations, possibly even as iterative
reweighting schemes. , These approaches often project
the dynamical evolution of the system in space and time onto a model,
as in master equation representations, capturing the conformational dynamics of the system and enabling
long-time scale predictions. A popular concept is the use of Markov
State Models (MSMs), which, over the past decade, have been applied
to a large number of biomolecular systems. − MSMs provide one of the best ways of coarse-graining the dynamics
of the ternary complex ensemble and identifying high-probability conformational
states that can be correlated to ubiquitination scores and other properties.
This strategy can help identify specific residues that may be of particular
importance to transitions among different states and also quantify
the effect of degraders on the dynamics of the ternary system.
Finally, we should mention the recent rise in de novo protein structure prediction, based on contacts and sequence information
from known structures, − as an avenue to predict conformations of productive ternary complexes.
While these approaches are promising, their application to larger
protein aggregates, such as ternary complexes, is more complicated
and has not been reported yet. Moreover, in contrast to many simulation
methods, they lack information about the assembly and structural
variability of ternary complexes. Nevertheless, we consider that the
generative modeling of degrader-induced ternary complexes will become
an important analysis tool for TPD modeling as more knowledge on the
determinants of productive structures is being accumulated.
The methods outlined above highlight the significance of advanced
molecular simulations, not only in understanding the fundamentals
of TPD but also as a routine application tool for degrader design.
As we describe in more detail in , computation-enabled degrader design relies
on the orchestration of automated procedures to efficiently scan individual
degrader candidates. The simulation approaches presented here provide
a set of tools that are very well-suited for this task.

3.3

## Mathematical Models Can Help Determine Properties
to Optimize Degradation
There is a complex relationship within
the in cellulo and in vivo environments
between the aforementioned steps in the TPD process. Complementary
to molecular modeling, mathematical frameworks furnish a representation
of the TPD process at larger time and length scales. In addition to
the relationships across solubility, permeability, binding, ubiquitination,
and degradation, there are subtleties associated with the stability
of the ternary complex, which is influenced by the interactions between
the degrader molecule, the POI, and the E3 ligase. The resulting positive
or negative binding cooperativity during ternary complex formation
can influence the overall degradation efficiency. However, the impact
of cooperativity on degradation, mediated by a heterobifunctional
molecule, remains an open question. In a recent study by some of the
authors of this Perspective, a pharmacodynamic model was developed
to describe the kinetics in the TPD process and it was used to explore
the role of cooperativity in ternary complex formation and POI degradation. The model established a quantitative relationship
between the stability of the ternary complex and degradation efficiency
by examining the effect of the complex stability on the rate of catalytic
turnover. Additionally, the authors devised a statistical inference
model to determine cooperativity in intracellular ternary complex
formation using cellular assay data. The work was validated by quantifying
changes in cooperativity due to site-directed mutagenesis at the POI–ligase
interface of the SMARCA2-ACBI1-VHL ternary complex. This pharmacodynamic
model is an example of a quantitative framework to dissect the intricate
degrader-mediated TPD process, which could inform the rational design
of effective heterobifunctional degraders. By contextualizing these
findings with the experimental techniques described above, it should
be possible to provide a more comprehensive understanding of the factors
influencing the success of TPD-based drug discovery and therefore
a more rational approach to optimizing degrader properties for TPD.
In a related work, researchers developed an extensive modeling
framework to analyze experimental data for three primary objectives:
(1) evaluate degraders using precise degradation metrics, (2) optimize
crucial compound parameters, and (3) link degradation to subsequent
pharmacodynamic effects. The proposed
framework introduces several novel features: (1) a mechanistic model
to fit the hook effect observed in degrader concentration–degradation
profiles, (2) quantification of the role of target occupancy in the
mechanism of action, and (3) disentangling the effects of target degradation
and inhibition on the overall pharmacodynamic response. The authors
demonstrate the applicability of this approach by applying these three
models to analyze exemplary data from multiple compounds, projects,
and targets. The framework enables researchers to tailor their experimental
work, leading to a deeper understanding of their results and ultimately
facilitating a more successful degrader discovery. Although the focus
of this work was on in vitro pharmacology experiments,
the key implications for in vivo studies are also
discussed.
Along the same lines, a general model for ternary
complex catalysis
has been developed within a framework familiar to classical enzyme
theory. The authors adapted a strategy
within Michaelis and Menten’s original publication (integration
of the velocity equation) to solve for the maximum velocity (Vmax). These equations
are straightforward to implement and enable estimation of time scales
that are consistent with a wide range of published literature values.
Additionally, the authors validated these equations with thermodynamic
and kinetic databases and built an interactive web tool that enables
researchers to graphically simulate their own systems. Other reviews
have discussed the current state and future directions of TPD drug
discovery in the context of building a quantitative relationship between
loss of protein target and in vivo activity, where mechanistic PK–PD models are highlighted
with the aim to improve the translation from the preclinical to clinical
space.

4

## Computation-Enabled Degrader Design
Early in degrader discovery programs, when experimental information
is sparse, computational modeling can be leveraged to design and prioritize
molecules for synthesis. The process of designing degraders includes
multiple complex steps incorporating computational tools, which have
the advantage of prospectively generating degraders and computing
quantitative rankings that can inform decision-making in discovery
projects. To this end, we have developed a workflow that comprises
the modeling and simulation methods presented above to guide the degrader
design and assess the suitability of degrader candidates.
4.1

## A Design Strategy Based on the Integration
of Computational Tools
While both the warhead and the E3
ligand motifs within a heterobifunctional degrader molecule are essential
for ternary complex induction, a multitude of studies have demonstrated
that potent and efficacious degradation of a target POI is also dependent
upon the conjugation vector and, as noted above, the chemical structure
of the connecting linker motif. , , In this vein, many computational tools for degrader design focus
on linker conjugation and optimization. Biophysical and structural
studies have revealed critical insights into how linkers influence
the positioning of the POI in relation to the ligase, either positively
or negatively regulating its ubiquitination. , These studies and biochemical investigations alike have also shown
how alterations in chemical linkers can facilitate cooperativity and
stability of ternary complexes, often leading to improved and more
sustained degradation. , , Structural studies and the advancement of molecular modeling of
larger protein complexes have guided degrader linker design for targets
and ligases with prior information available. , , Therefore, combinatorial approaches
for degrader design typically use a small number of warheads and E3
ligands and consider their associated attachment points and linker
libraries. A good source of linkers is the patent literature on degraders,
commercially available linker libraries, and the aforementioned publicly
available PROTAC-DB. 
A good degrader
must be synthetically feasible, chemically stable, and bioavailable.
Thus, similar to small-molecule drug design cycles, any computational
prediction on degrader properties should be followed by decision making
in collaboration with synthetic and medicinal chemists. Considering
the many different types of linker motifs recently suggested in the
literature (for a good overview, see by Desantis et al. ), expert opinion is imperative for degrader design. For instance,
synthetic accessibility constraints should be employed, and synthetic
handles defined a priori to ensure computational
predictions can be validated experimentally.
An important step
in degrader design is certainly the use of physicochemical
and ADMET property predictions to filter the number of compounds being
considered. However, as discussed above, many of these methods are
currently being improved for degraders and will play a more significant
role in the near future. For the prediction of permeability, we found
that running MD simulations for 0.5 μs to obtain ensembles of
structures and thus distributions of quantities, such as the linker
end-to-end distance, provides more accurate results than applying
predictors to a single structure. Also, based on our experience, the
prediction of Log P values with (physics-based) mechanistic tools,
such as PerMM, , is suitable to provide a correct
trend among multiple degraders.
The fastest way to obtain a
ternary structure of a given POI–ligase
pair connected by a degrader candidate molecule is via ternary complex
docking. As we described earlier, the actual protein conformations
are not changing significantly during this procedure; therefore, the
key challenge in ternary complex docking entails computing the orientation
of the two proteins relative to each other. We use ternary complex
docking with two major modifications. First, rather than using rigid
protein–protein orientations generated by protein–protein
docking, we use conformations coming from MD simulations of the encounter
complexes (augmented by Markov State Modeling, as described below)
as the starting point for docking the degrader candidate to form a
ternary complex, thus, capturing important baseline interactions between
the POI and the E3 ligase in order to achieve accurate ternary models.
Second, those ternary complexes that minimize clashes, preserve warhead
and E3 ligand binding modes, and, if known, look similar to ternary
complexes of active degraders are scored highly, whereas those models
that look similar to ternary complexes formed by known nondegraders
are penalized. This orientational sampling thus defines what linker
geometries are tolerated and preferred for each ternary complex.
Since a large number of different protein–protein poses
or orientations may get sampled, the encounter complex simulations
can produce a vast amount of data that require reduction. We apply
Markov State Modeling (MSM) to the simulation trajectories and characterize
their slowest-relaxing degrees of freedom with a Time–structure
Independent Components Analysis (tICA), thus extracting a set of POI–ligase encounter complexes that,
based on the given simulations, correspond to their metastable states.
The significance of this simulation-driven approach is that degraders
can be developed to optimize the balance between enthalpic and entropic
contributions to ternary complex stability, for instance, such that
they stabilize a given state with favorable interactions at the protein–protein
interface or rather facilitate the conformational change between
two metastable states. In our MSM protocol, we use K-means (or K-centers)
clustering based on the number of contacts (i.e., heavy atoms within
5 Å) formed between the interprotein residues during the MD simulations.
Importantly, despite the fact that the protein–protein simulation
is more expensive than the rigid protein–protein docking, this
simulation has to be performed only once for a given POI–ligase
pair, resulting in a set of encounter complexes that can be reused
for ternary complex docking of a myriad of degrader candidates.
We point out that the ensemble of simulated encounter complexes
allows the direct design of degraders based on the baseline interactions
mentioned above, which are, in practice, preferred protein–protein
orientations or interfaces. This strategy essentially incorporates
the design process into the ternary complex docking, virtually using
the POI–ligase encounter structures as “templates”
to draft a new degrader molecule.
Generating ternary complexes
with candidate molecules should be
followed up by MD simulations to examine their relative stability,
preferably in the context of a supramolecular assembly to predict
more accurately the ubiquitination probability of lysines in the POI.
For estimating stability of the complexes, we recommend using proxy
metrics for stability such as RMSD, RMSF, and the solvent-accessibility
of lysine side chains over time.
More rigorously, as illustrated
in , we have
implemented a multistep simulation
routine to assess the quality of degraders, that is, their ability
to form a stable ternary complex with high ubiquitination probability.
These simulations are applied to new degrader designs, but also to
experimentally confirmed degraders and nondegrading heterobifunctional
molecules, that, as discussed below, would then serve as input classes
for a classifier to categorize a candidate molecule as a degrader
or a nondegrader and also to guide the design of new degraders.
 To drive the formation of ternary complexes (see a), we apply weighted
ensemble
(WE) simulations starting with the well-separated POI and the ligase–degrader
binary complex (or vice versa) and using as a collective variable
the RMSD of only the warhead (or E3 ligand) to a corresponding bound
structure of the other binary complex. The “Resampling of Ensembles
by Variation Optimization” (REVO) is the WE algorithm of choice, as it yields ternary complexes with
a variety of different conformations through the iterative optimization
of “trajectory variation”.
Then, HREMD simulations
are applied to bound ternary complexes
using 20 replicas with an effective maximum temperature of 425 K,
generating a more detailed map of the ensemble of ternary complexes
( b). We suggest
to use a projection of the sampled conformations that epitomizes the
interface, such as the principal components of site–site distance
distributions. These conformational
landscapes shed light on the stability of a ternary complex, and importantly,
they can inform the docking scoring functions for the next round of
designs.
Finally, to estimate a degrader’s impact on
the ubiquitination
of a POI, we superimpose the ternary complex structures obtained from
HREMD on the full ubiquitin-bound Cullin–RING ligase (CRL)
complex, which has been sampled exhaustively before between open and
closed conformations by the metadynamics variant meta-eABF , ( c). The
distribution of distances between ubiquitin and different lysine residues
on the target protein’s surface, computed over all frames,
can be used as a scoring function regarding the propensity of ubiquitination
induced by the simulated degrader. An alternative procedure that is
also robust for predicting ubiquitination scores is to directly simulate
the ternary complex in the CRL, rather than superimposing. Lysine
distance profiles should be evaluated for each choice of simulation
trajectory and model of the CRL.
We augment our modeling and
simulation workflow for degrader design
with a random forest classifier trained on known degraders and nondegraders
of the target protein under consideration. Nondegraders are heterobifunctional
molecules that have been experimentally verified to have very little
or no degradation activity, which may be due to a variety of reasons.
If available, experimental degradation data (e.g., Dmax) should be included in the model in addition to structural
and physicochemical descriptors of the compound, such as the molecular
weight and estimations of polarity and permeability, as well as features
extracted from MD simulations of a fully solvated degrader that characterize
its flexibility, like the (normalized) linker end-to-end distance
or its gyration radius, and also such obtained from the ternary complex
(HREMD) simulations, for instance, interface contacts and the lysine–ubiquitin
distance distributions. We apply a principal component analysis to
reduce the dimensionality in feature space and eliminate strong correlations
among features. To train such a model for a relatively accurate classification
of degrader candidates, we suggest to have a (well-balanced) set of
at least 50 degrader/nondegrader molecules, to use two-thirds for
training, and to cross-validate the ML model. Identifying the most
predictive features tells us what input properties are crucial for
degradation of the POI studied, which can strongly support the design
process.
Our initial studies on designs of SMARCA2 degraders
(described
in more detail in ) have revealed that the inclusion of all three feature categories,
i.e., properties derived from the molecular structure, such obtained
from fully solvated degrader simulations, and such from the ternary
complex simulations, leads to classifiers with predictive ability
of >80% accuracy, while those trained on only one of the mentioned
categories are still sufficiently accurate (70–75%). Thus,
to be operationally prudent, we suggest applying the random forest
classifier to only the physicochemical and structural features of
degrader designs in order to filter a smaller subset before running
the more expensive simulation workflow and applying the ML model again,
including features extracted from simulations.
Using 64 GPUs
and about 500 CPUs, we were able to operate our design
pipeline in 1 week, which is the appropriate time scale for decision
making in a discovery program. The random forest models require only
a few seconds for thousands or millions of virtual designs. Most of
the computation is spent on docking of 500–1000 degrader candidates
and MD simulations for the top 50 degrader compounds.
Although
our design strategy features multiple modeling and simulation
techniques, it must be complemented by experiments. Promising degrader
candidates, i.e., those that have formed stable ternary complexes
with a high ubiquitination probability and that have been labeled
as a degrader by the ML classifier, must be tested by biochemical
assays, e.g., by ALPHA or HiBiT, to attest their ability to form ternary
complexes or degrade the target. This experimental feedback is instrumental
in degrader design cycles, which, as mentioned earlier, are similar
to any drug design cycle in that experimental expertise is necessary
for decision making.

4.2

## Application to a Degrader Design Project
We demonstrate the impact of computation by briefly presenting
some results from our degrader discovery project, in which we designed
heterobifunctional degraders for SMARCA2-VHL with a novel linker motif
supported by our simulation workflow. lists all of our designs in this study (Linkers
1–6) along with ACBI1, a previously optimized VHL-recruiting
degrader of SMARCA2. Informed by the
random forest classifier, which was trained and validated on about
100 known compounds (model accuracy of 83%), the designs generally
involve rigid linkers that contain (aromatic) ring structures with
low molecular weight. Hence, five linkers were designed based on pyridine,
pyrimidine, dioxolane, and azetidine heterocycles (Linkers 1–5
in ) with the
objective of stabilizing the ternary complexes and improving the associated
ubiquitination probability of lysine residues on the surface of SMARCA2.
As shown in , three out of these five designs were found to have Dmax > 85% and DC50 ≤ 80 nM in the
corresponding
experiments, validating the high degradation potency of these designs,
and one of them had Dmax = 54% and DC50 = 174 nM, which is still acceptable in terms of degradation
activity (see experimental results in ). By contrast, 34 designs that incorporated
typical alkyl and PEG linkers spanning 4 to ∼20 atoms as well
as known linker moieties, such as triazoles and phenyl rings (o, m, or p-substituted
to provide different geometries), only produced two active degraders.
 Another demonstration of the impact of computation
is the design
of a SMARCA2-VHL degrader with a novel protein–protein interface.
Briefly, about 150 SMARCA2-VHL conformations were generated from rigid
protein–protein docking. 150 independent MD simulations of
3 μs were run starting at each one of these docked conformations
to capture the baseline interactions between SMARCA2 and VHL. Markov
state modeling revealed three main metastable states: one of the metastable
states recapitulated the known crystal structures of SMARCA2-VHL ternary
complexes (PDB IDs 6HAX, 6HAY, 74SE); another metastable state had
a completely different protein–protein interface, in which
SMARCA2 was indeed rotated by about 180° compared to the known
crystal structures as illustrated in . Using that latter state for structure-based
design, we produced a relatively short linker motif including a pyrrolidine
group and with attachment points different from those in the previously
resolved crystal structures or in any of the past designs (Linker
6 in ). Our
simulation workflow (see ) revealed that ternary complexes with this degrader
candidate were relatively stable and SMARCA2 very likely to be ubiquitinated.
 As displayed in a, the crystal structure of the ternary complex
with Linker
6 (red structure) is similar to the corresponding simulated structure
(transparent structure), based on which the degrader was designed,
thus validating this approach of a simulation-driven structure-based
degrader design. Furthermore, a confirms that this degrader induces an obviously
different conformation compared with the previously known ternary
complex crystal structure with ACBI1 (green structure). Despite the
distinctly different conformations, the interface–RMSD of these
two ternary complexes is 2.6 Å and about 40% of the same interface
atoms are in contact between the two corresponding crystal structures. b visualizes a free
energy landscape of the SMARCA2-VHL encounter complex simulations
that capture all baseline interactions of this POI–ligase pair.
Obviously, the ternary complex crystal structures with ACBI1 and Linker
6 occupy different metastable states. The degrader candidate based
on Linker 6 was classified as a degrader by our ML model, which has
been confirmed experimentally with Dmax = 90% and DC50 = 67 nM.
The results presented for
the SMARCA2-VHL degrader design underscore
the suitability and the benefit of the modeling and simulation strategies
we developed. In particular, the prediction of a favorable, previously
unknown, protein–protein interface, which served as a template
to design an active degrader, is, in our opinion, a remarkable achievement,
showing the potential of a simulation-driven protocol and its complementarity
to experiments. Importantly, we believe that our research has highlighted
how computational methods, similar to experiments, permit us to approach
the task of degrader design from different angles. We have combined
results from simulations that examine POI–ligase interactions
with such data that assess the stability of ternary complexes and
its ubiquitination probability in the context of a supramolecular
protein aggregate, showing how the integration of multiple molecular
simulation (and docking) methods can support degrader design.
We envision that in the future, a variety of different computational
protocols would be applied for TPD analysis and degrader design. Depending
on the POI–ligase system and the availability of data on known
active degraders, we anticipate that the focus might lie on predicting
only distinct features that could complement experiments. For instance,
these may be the likelihood of certain lysines being ubiquitinated
in ternary complexes or certain regions on the protein surfaces being
solvent-exposed, which can be assessed by the simulation methods discussed.
Also, if the rapid screening of designs is required for decision making,
ternary complex docking, followed by short MD simulations, will remain
the primary approach. However, as our research results demonstrate,
a rigorous strategy to examine degrader designs and explore protein–protein
interactions is often necessary and, evidently, achievable.

5

## Future Directions
This is a unique
time in the field of targeted protein degradation
(TPD). After decades of academic research, we are now seeing biotechnology
and pharmaceutical companies bring TPD molecules to the clinic. While
it appears that computational tools were used in the design of some
clinical-stage molecules, their impact was, in fact, minimal. However,
there is a growing number of examples where computational approaches
are being used to address some of the great challenges in TPD drug
discovery.
As discussed in this Perspective, there is a diverse
array of computational
tools contributing to the TPD field. In some cases, traditional tools
can be easily repurposed from small molecule applications to TPD.
For example, docking and screening of warheads and E3 ligands are
analogous to small molecules and can therefore be used directly. Similarly,
many of the underlying methods to predict properties are the same
(e.g., QSAR and machine learning based on experimental data), although
the data are quite sparse and the chemical space is much larger for
many TPD molecules, making the existing models less predictive. In
other cases, traditional tools require additional training and parameter
tuning to improve results for TPD, such as protein–protein
docking algorithms, where constraints related to the binding sites
and warhead/ligand attachment points can significantly reduce the
search space, thereby improving both the speed and accuracy of the
algorithms.
Perhaps the most interesting, innovative, and impactful
is the
growing number of approaches to simulate the dynamic behavior of the
ternary complex. The significance of these methods lies in the fact
that the formation of a ternary structure is a necessary step in the
TPD process and, furthermore, that the non-native protein–protein
interactions seem to be “floppier” than many endogenous
protein–protein complexes. Indeed, biology is in constant motion,
and not surprisingly, TPD follows the same paradigm. The importance
of understanding the induced ternary structures stems from the criticality
of this step in the degradation process, where the ubiquitination
mechanism requires not just binding but also forming the correct orientation
of the protein of interest in relationship to the rest of the supramolecular
assembly that is responsible for the ubiquitination. This is supported
by a growing body of evidence, both computational and experimental.
In addition to dynamics and conformational variability in the ternary
complex, early works that simulate the full supramolecular complex
(e.g., the Cullin–RING ligase) leading to ubiquitination of
the protein of interest have yielded promising results and significant
insights into the TPD process. These simulations involve hundreds
of thousands of atoms and therefore require significant computational
time and resources; fortunately, these simulations will become more
accessible as computer hardware continues to grow in power, efficiency,
and affordability. Still, for years to come, brute force simulations
of meaningful time scales for TPD will be out of reach for most researchers
and restricted to specialized hardware like the Anton supercomputer or massively distributed systems like Folding@home. Fortunately, enhanced sampling algorithms can
greatly accelerate simulations, especially when there is knowledge
about the collective variable (CV) of interest. In the case of the
Cullin–RING Ligase (CRL), there is a growing body of biophysical
and structural biology data that facilitates the elucidation of practical
CVs, as described in this Perspective.
Aside from the computational
approaches discussed here, we are
seeing many other technology advances related to TPD. Structural biology
techniques like cryogenic electron microscopy (cryo-EM) have enabled
atomic-resolution structures for supramolecular protein assemblies
like the CRL. Still, structure (even with dynamics) is insufficient
to design drugs. When developing degrader compounds, it is important
to optimize additional properties, such as cellular permeability and
affinity. Approaches such as the NanoBRET target engagement assay
provide a quantification of interactions in live cells, which encapsulates
permeability, affinity, and residence time. Mass spectrometry-based
chemoproteomics is also enabling TPD discovery efforts, from screening
for chemical scaffolds that bind to proteins in their native environment,
including post-translational modifications, to characterizing the
time-dependent degradation process in the cell. Additionally, as more
high-content experimental information becomes available, such as live-cell
kinetic data from technologies like HiBiT, the ability to predict
and improve degradation profiles becomes more amenable to advanced
ML algorithms such as 4D equivariant graph transformer representations
of simulated ternary complex molecular dynamics. This specific approach
encodes MD trajectories of ternary complexes as graphs that are transformed
and used for the training of feed-forward networks to predict the
functional form defined by the raw HiBiT data over time, enabling
the calculation of pharmacological constants such as DC50, Dmax, and the degradation rate. These
approaches and other experimental data can be used in many ways to
improve our understanding of the TPD process, such as building mathematical
models to connect quantities that can be more readily computed (e.g.,
permeability, affinity, and stability of the ternary complex) to important
downstream processes (e.g., degradation efficiency). 
The integration of the computational and experimental
methods introduced
in this Perspective is the key to success in TPD research. In our
opinion, which is based on the state-of-the-art methods and the promising
results presented here, there are three main avenues of combination:
first, experimentally generated data on degrader physicochemical,
binding, and activity properties support predictive models; second,
structural proteomics and biophysics enhance docking and simulation
procedures; and third, monitoring the degree of ternary complex formation
and target degradation is necessary for computation-enabled degrader
design cycles. This level of interdependence between experiments and
computation calls for a coordinated community-wide effort. However,
to bring to fruition the promise of proteasomal degradation as a therapeutic
modality, collaborations must go beyond simple information exchange;
rather, they must comprise multidisciplinary research teams dedicated
to exploring the different facets of TPD. Specifically, for the design
of degrader candidates, as we outlined above, simulation or data mining
results must be translated and implemented upon careful deliberation
with synthetic and medicinal chemists. While such teamwork has always
been required in drug discovery settings, it is all too often neglected.
The intriguing task of developing heterobifunctional degrader molecules
with high specificity and potency shows quite plainly how the cooperation
between both modelers and experimentalists could lead to sustained
productivity.
While much progress has been made in the TPD field,
more work is
needed in our quest to more efficiently design more effective TPD
therapeutics. First, traditional QSAR models generally perform poorly
for large heterobifunctional degrader molecules. A combination of
more experimental data coupled with improved QSAR modeling approaches
(perhaps accounting for 3D or even dynamic information) is likely
required. Improved docking and structure prediction methods would
also be of significant value. Ternary complex docking is a relatively
new problem, and most early applications have involved retrofitting
existing tools. It is likely that new algorithms, built from the ground
up, will be better at solving this specific problem. Finally, molecular
design tools for the TPD are greatly needed. Repurposing tools like
DeLinker in our experience has provided
some value, but there are still significant gaps in terms of designing
degraders that can be readily synthesized and have good ADMET properties.
When developing new tools, the broad direction of the TPD field
should be considered. Most early work focused on degradation through
inducing proximity to enable ubiquitination. In this context, covalently
binding degraders are considered to be more efficacious. , Also, many of the approaches, that we presented in this Perspective
on heterobifunctional degraders, can be applied to the characterization
of molecular glues, which, however, presents its own set of challenges,
such as the screening for suitable chemical matter or the identification
of an appropriate E3 ligase for a given target POI. Moreover, we are
now seeing the surfacing of many other modes of degradation, such
as lysosome-targeting chimeras (LYTACs ), macroautophagy degradation targeting chimeras (MADTACs ), autophagy-targeting chimeras (AUTOTACs ), deubiquitinase-targeting chimeras (DUBTACs ), and chaperone-mediated protein degraders
(CHAMPs ). Additionally, induced proximity
is being leveraged for nondegradation applications, such as phosphorylation-inducing
chimeric small molecules (PHICS ), where
a small molecule brings a kinase into proximity with a protein of
interest to phosphorylate the target protein, which is not otherwise
a substrate for the kinase.
We see a bright future for the field
of TPD, and induced proximity
approaches more broadly, with encouraging clinical data emerging and
a growing number of innovative companies in the preclincial stage.
We envision continued improvements across many different computational
and experimental methods that will contribute to a rich ecosystem
that companies will leverage to build integrated workflows that solve
some of the most critical challenges in the field. Ultimately, with
the confluence of advances in different methods, we expect to see
the emergence of next-generation workflows that will show demonstrable
advantages over approaches that do not leverage computation. The greatest
successes will come from the computational efforts that are tightly
integrated with advanced experimental approaches in an iterative fashion.
We hope that our Perspective will spark some ideas and contribute
to the future of the exciting field of targeted protein degradation.

The authors declare no
competing financial interest.

## Acknowledgments
This Perspective is shaped by the research performed
in the
Advanced Simulation group of Silicon Therapeutics and Roivant Discovery
in 2021–2022. We thank all other team members for their invaluable
input (listed in alphabetical order of last names): Simon Boothroyd,
Mihir Date, Taras Dauzhenka, Tom Dixon, István Kolossváry,
Samuel Lotz, Derek MacPherson, Zachary McDargh, Tushar Modi, Benjamin
Mueller, Rajat Pal, Sharon Shechter, Utsab Shrestha, Fabio Trovato,
Rafal Wiewiora, and Wenchang Zhou. We would also like to thank Alexander
Tropsha for thoughtful discussions during the preparation of this
Perspective.

## Glossary
Targeted Protein Degradation
(TPD)A biomedical research strategy that aims
to selectively eliminate
specific proteins from cells for therapeutic applications, often using
heterobifunctional degraders or molecular glues.
HeterobifunctionalA molecule
or agent with different structural motifs (or functional groups),
enabling simultaneous interaction with multiple biological targets.
ProteasomeA protein complex
that degrades unneeded or damaged proteins by proteolysis, a chemical
reaction that breaks peptide bonds.
DegraderA heterobifunctional
molecule designed to induce TPD, bridging a specific protein of interest
with an E3 ubiquitin ligase to trigger proteasomal degradation (often
referred to as a PROteolysis TArgeting Chimera or PROTAC).
E3 ligaseAn
enzyme that
plays a crucial role in the ubiquitin–proteasome system, catalyzing
the transfer of ubiquitin to specific target proteins, thereby marking
them for degradation.
Protein
of interest (POI)The target protein to be eliminated
through the TPD process.
WarheadThe structural
motif of a heterobifunctional degrader that is designed to bind a
specific protein of interest and to induce its degradation.
E3 ligandA
small-molecule
ligand of the E3 ligase that facilitates its interaction with a target
protein.
LinkerA structural motif
that connects the warhead to the E3 ligand within a heterobifunctional
degrader, facilitating proximity and interaction for targeted protein
degradation.
Hook effectAlso known
as the prozone effect, it refers to the phenomenon in which the efficacy
of bivalent molecules, like heterobifunctional degraders, decreases
at high concentrations due to the increased formation of unproductive
(binary) complexes.
CooperativityA phenomenon
in biochemical systems where the binding of a molecule to a site on
a protein affects the affinity of subsequent molecules binding to
additional sites on the same protein, leading to either enhanced (positive
cooperativity) or reduced (negative cooperativity) binding.
DC50A term
used in TPD to denote the concentration of a degradation-inducing
agent required to achieve 50% of its maximum degradation capacity
for a specific POI.
DmaxThe maximum
degradation capacity of a TPD-inducing agent representing the highest
achievable level of POI-degradation under given conditions.
Beyond Rule of 5 (bRo5)Compounds, like heterobifunctional degraders, that violate
Lipinski’s
‘Rule of 5’, which predicts the success of orally absorbed
drugs, yet can be effective therapeutics.
ChameleonicityThe ability
of a molecule to expose polar groups in aqueous environments and,
through conformational changes, bury them during membrane permeation
thus contributing to its bioavailability and pharmacological profile.
Ternary complex dockingA computational approach to study the formation and
stability of
a complex involving three molecular entities, such as a POI and an
E3 ligase connected by a degrader.