Chem RevChem. Rev822acssdcrChemical Reviews0009-26651520-6890pmc-is-collection-domainyespmc-collection-titleACS AuthorChoicePMC4350607PMC4350607.1435060743506072470270210.1021/cr40073291ReviewDisordered Proteinaceous Machines
FuxreiterMonika Tóth-PetróczyÁgnes KrautDaniel A. MatouschekAndreas T. LimRoderick Y. H. XueBin KurganLukasz UverskyVladimir N. †MTA-DE
Momentum Laboratory of Protein Dynamics, Department of Biochemistry
and Molecular Biology, University of Debrecen, Nagyerdei krt. 98, H-4032 Debrecen, Hungary‡Department
of Biological Chemistry, Weizmann Institute
of Science, Rehovot 7610001, Israel§Department
of Chemistry, Villanova University, 800 East Lancaster Avenue, Villanova, Pennsylvania 19085, United States∥Section
of Molecular Genetics and Microbiology, Institute for Cellular &
Molecular Biology, The University of Texas
at Austin, 2506 Speedway, Austin, Texas 78712, United States⊥Biozentrum
and the Swiss Nanoscience Institute, University
of Basel, Klingelbergstrasse
70, CH-4056 Basel, Switzerland#Department of Cell Biology,
Microbiology and Molecular Biology, College
of Fine Arts and Sciences, and ∇Department of Molecular Medicine and USF Health
Byrd Alzheimer’s Research Institute, Morsani College of Medicine, University of South Florida, Tampa, Florida 33612, United States○Department
of Electrical and Computer Engineering, University of Alberta, Edmonton, AB T6G 2R3, Canada◆Institute
for Biological Instrumentation, Russian
Academy of Sciences, 142290 Pushchino, Moscow Region 119991, Russia*Tel.: (813)
974-5816. Fax: (813) 974-7357. E-mail: vuversky@health.usf.edu.0404201409072014114132501992014 Intrinsically Disordered Proteins (IDPs)680668432712201304042015040420151003201511052024Copyright © 2014 American Chemical
Society2014American Chemical
SocietyThis is an open access article published under an ACS AuthorChoice License, which permits copying and redistribution of the article or any adaptations for non-commercial purposes.Correction to Disordered Proteinaceous Machines
1157263201527802780Chemical ReviewsPMC441503925811425National Institutes of Health, United Statespmc-status-qastatus0pmc-status-liveyespmc-status-embargonopmc-status-releasedyespmc-prop-open-accessyespmc-prop-olfnopmc-prop-manuscriptnopmc-prop-legally-suppressednopmc-prop-has-pdfyespmc-prop-has-supplementnopmc-prop-pdf-onlynopmc-prop-suppress-copyrightnopmc-prop-is-real-versionnopmc-prop-is-scanned-articlenopmc-prop-preprintnopmc-prop-in-epmcyesdocument-id-old-9cr4007329document-id-new-14cr-2013-007329ccc-price1

## Introduction
Many full-length proteins
and protein regions lack stable tertiary
and/or secondary structure under physiological conditions in vitro.
These proteins and regions, known as intrinsically disordered (ID)
proteins (IDPs) and ID protein regions (IDPRs), have attracted significant
attention from researchers over the past decade and a half. − Proteins with disorder are highly abundant in nature, with ∼25–30%
of eukaryotic proteins being mostly disordered, and with >50% of
eukaryotic
proteins and >70% of signaling proteins having long disordered
regions. − Functionally, IDPs/IDPRs complement the functions of ordered proteins
and domains, being often involved in regulation, signaling, and control
pathways. , , − , , , , − , IDPs and IDPRs are the key players
in various protein–protein interaction networks, being especially
abundant among hub proteins and their binding partners. , − Functions of IDPs/IDPRs may arise from a specific disordered form,
from interconversion between disordered forms, and from transitions
between disordered and ordered states. , , , , The choice between these states is determined by the specific protein
environment. Many IDPs possess an exceptional ability to fold in a
template-dependent manner, where a single IDPR can bind to multiple
partners gaining very different structures in the bound state. , IDPRs provide excessively large, malleable binding surfaces, which can associate with promiscuous partners
resulting in distinct, even opposite functions. IDPs/IDPRs carry out molecular recognition either in a
binding-coupled folding process, or via
short segment(s) embedded in a highly variable region. These short segments, often termed as molecular
recognition features (MoRFs) or the related
eukaryotic linear motifs, are distinguished
in protein–protein interactions. 
It is recognized now that IDPs and hybrid proteins with long
IDPRS
can adopt a continuum of structural states, such as completely disordered,
molten globules, or locally disordered tails and linkers. , , This variety of disordered states
can be beneficial, even prerequisite for various biological roles. , , , , In fact, IDPRs can act as entropic chains
(linkers, clocks, bristles) as the Nup2p FG repeat region of the nuclear
pore complex for example is responsible for regulation of gating. They often serve as target sites for post-translational
modifications (display sites), such as the KID domain of CREB, the
phosphorylation of which induces its binding to the KIX domain of
CBP. Binding of IDPs/IDPRs can also modulate
the effect of the partner (effectors). For example, p27Kip1 regulates cell-cycle by binding to cyclin-dependent kinases and
inhibiting their activity. Intriguingly,
their malleability enables binding in different conformations leading
to unrelated, even opposite functions. Activation and inhibition of the ryanodine receptor can be effected
by the binding of the same disordered C-terminal region of the dihydropiridine
receptor (DHPR) in two different conformations. IDPs/IDPRs frequently participate in folding of proteins
(e.g., heat-shock proteins, Hsps, and other protein chaperones) , or RNA partly by holding under-folded forms or by unfolding the
incorrect structures and facilitating formation of new contacts (chaperones). Formation of the scrapie form of prions is critically
dependent on the transient disordered state. Large multiprotein complexes also take advantage of IDPs that assist
assembly of these organizations (assemblers). The RNA polymerase II
disordered C-terminal domain provides a platform for the mRNA processing
machinery. Alternatively, IDPs/IDPRs
can capture and store small ligands (scavengers). This underlies the
response to dehydration stress in plants achieved by water retention
by Desiccation stress protein (Dsp) 16. IDPs/IDPRs are very promiscuous binders and are constantly involved
in various interactions with diverse partners. , 
Intrinsic disorder is abundant in proteins involved in signaling
and regulatory processes, where disorder-mediated protein interactions
enable transient signaling complexes. On the other hand, intrinsic
disorder provides various benefits for organization of large protein
assemblages. In addition to the transient signaling complexes, there
are numerous stable protein complexes (oligomers) that represent a
functional form of proteinaceous machines. Functional disorder could
be two distinctive types: (i) internal for assembly and movement of
the different parts and (ii) external for interaction with regulators.
The goal of this Review is to show that intrinsic disorder impacts
the function and assembly of the proteinaceous machines. The first
half of this Review considers some general aspects related to the
involvement of intrinsic disorder in assembly and function of the
protein complexes, whereas the second half is dedicated to the representation
of some illustrative examples of pliable proteinaceous machines.

2

## Intrinsic Disorder as a Crucial Factor for the
Assembly of Protein Complexes
2.1

## Starting Simple: Forming
Ordered Oligomers
Out of Disordered Subunits
Many biological functions are
performed by oligomeric proteins consisting of two or more polypeptide
chains. Similar to a journey of a thousand miles that begins with
a single step, formation of the most sophisticated protein complexes
begins with the dimer formation. Some basic principles underlying
productive protein–protein interactions are rather well understood, − and in addition to their complexity (which is defined by the oligomerization
degree) protein complexes are classified on the basis of their compositions,
geometrical considerations, lifetimes, obligatoriness, and the disorderedness
of the unbound forms, which is linked to the molecular mechanisms
of a given complex formation. Figure represents
some of the classifications of protein–protein complexes discussed
below.
 Composition-based classification takes into account a simple
fact
that the polypeptide chains involved in the complex formation can
be identical or nonidentical, thereby giving raise to homo- and hetero-oligomers
(Figure A). Geometrically, units of the homo-oligomers
can be organized isologously or heterologously, , where isologous association involves the same surface on both monomers
of the homo-oligomer, and an heterologous association relies on different
interfaces (Figure A). 
From the viewpoint of their lifetimes, protein complexes
can be
classified as transient (where protein–protein interactions
are easily formed and destroyed leading to transient association and
dissociation) and permanent (where protein–protein interactions
are usually very stable and the protomers only exist in the complexed
form) (Figure B). Also, some complexes are
obligate, with their protomers being not found as stable structures
on their own, whereas other complexes are nonobligate, whose protomers
can exist independently of the complex. Although the terms “obligate”
and “permanent” describe the same phenomenon (the obligate
interactions are typically permanent), “non-obligate”
and “transient” are not synonymous terms, because nonobligate
interactions can lead to the formation of both transient and permanent
complexes. This is further illustrated
by Figure B, which shows that complexes can
be transient, permanent nonobligate, or permanent obligate. Furthermore,
transient and permanent interactions can be distinguished from the
evolutionary viewpoint, with stable/permanent interactions being highly
conserved, and with transient/temporary interactions being typically
less conserved. 
Mechanistic classification
is based on the notion that the dimers
and trimers were observed to fold through two major paradigms: two-state
and three-state mechanisms. , , Here, protomers forming the two-state (or disordered) complexes
are disordered in their unbound forms and fold at the complex formation
(see Figure C, right side). This behavior
is different from the formation of the so-called three-state (or ordered)
complexes, individual chains of which are independently folded into
a stable structures even in their unbound states, with a subsequent
oligomerization (see Figure C, left side). , It was also emphasized that many complexes and protein–protein
interactions cannot be easily classified into specific rigidly defined
classes, and, instead, a continuum exists between transient and permanent,
and nonobligate and obligate interactions, because the stabilities
of all complexes are strongly dependent on the peculiarities of the
environment. The same concern is also
applicable to the classification based on the molecular mechanisms
of complex formation. In fact, among these mechanisms are two extreme
cases known as a conformational selection model and an induced fit
(or induced folding) model, which are also applicable for the description
of the peculiarities of protein interaction with small molecules. − The conformational selection model suggests that the protein exists
in a dynamic equilibrium between major and minor species, and the
binding partner selectively interacts with the minor species leading
to the formation of the protein–ligand complex. The induced
fit model assumes that the binding partner interacts with the major
species followed by a conformational change in the initial (weak)
complex eventually resulting in the formation of the final protein–ligand
complex. It was emphasized that these two pathways can potentially
be distinguished by transient kinetic measurements, and that, for
a given complex, both mechanisms may be operational, with the preferred
reaction path being modulated by the protein and ligand concentrations. , It is also important to remember that these two mechanisms represent
extreme models for the possible mechanisms of complex formation, and
that the reality is likely to involve sequential combination of both
mechanisms.
Coming back to the molecular mechanisms of the protein
complex
formation, the noted separation of oligomers (mostly dimers and trimers)
to the two-state and three-state multimers is very important from
the viewpoint of this Review. In fact, monomers of oligomers that
are formed via a two-state mechanism are intrinsically disordered
in their uncomplexed form and clearly undergo the binding-induced
folding at the complex formation. Curiously, careful analysis of the
structural characteristics of the two-state and three-state multimers
revealed that the per-residue interface and surface areas of ordered
protomers forming the three-state oligomers are significantly smaller
than those of the disordered monomers forming the two-state multimers. As a result, in the per-residue surface area
versus the per-residue interface area plot, the two-state and three-state
complexes occupy very different areas, with the disordered proteins
(that form complexes in a two-state mechanism) being distributed sparsely
over a broad area in the top-right part of the plot, suggesting that
disordered proteins opt for extended shapes and larger interface areas,
and with ordered proteins (that form complexes in a three-state mechanism)
being condensed in the small area at the bottom-right corner of the
plot, suggesting that these proteins are more globular and compact
in their bound form. Furthermore, it
was also pointed out that because the maxima of per-residue surface
and interface areas for stable monomers lie around 80 Å2, the line connecting these two extreme values in the per-residue
surface area versus the per-residue interface area plot represents
a natural boundary separating ordered and disordered proteins forming
three-state and two-state complexes, respectively. Here, ordered proteins were systematically located below
this boundary, and the disordered proteins were widely spread above
the boundary. Importantly, this plot
(example of which is shown in Figure D) provides
a simple scale that measures the confidence with which a conclusion
can be made of whether a given protein in its bound form can (or cannot)
exist as a stable monomer. One should
keep in mind though that this approach represents an elegant and efficient
tool to assess independent foldability of a protein taken out of a
complex and cannot reveal the subtle kinetic and structural differences
between the conformational selection and induced fit scenarios of
molecular recognition.

2.2

## Stepwise Targeting and
Assembly: Binding Chain
Reactions
2.2.1

## Stepwise Targeting and Binding to “Hidden”
Sites
It is generally assumed that the recognition and binding
by IDPs/IDPRs involves their folding into a specific structure, , , , , , − and that advantages of IDP/IDPR as signaling hubs are their adaptability,
promiscuity, and ability to fold differently upon binding to different
targets. , Another functional advantage of the disordered
binders has been recently recognized, the ability for a stepwise target
recognition due to the multiform binding effect. This hypothesis is based on the notion that all of the
interaction sites are exposed outside of the target molecule and easily
accessible to the IDP. As a result, some IDP–target complexes
are formed in a stepwise manner, where intermediate states are observed
in the binding processes. Formation of such binding intermediates
results in the structural changes in a partner molecule leading to
the exposure of its “hidden” binding site, which can
be accessed by an IDP due to its structural flexibility. Shirai and Kikuchi analyzed this possibility
computationally by first building a lattice model of an IDP based
on the extended HP (hydrophobic-polar) model, where an IDP is represented
as chain with a mixture of various conformations without a specific
structure formed in an equilibrium state, and where the target is
modeled as a highly coarse-grained object designed as a combination
of plates, which represent the binding surface with motions present
on both sides of the target to open or close the binding surface.
Next, computational simulations of this model were used to study the
target recognition process. This model
was able to reproduce the stepwise recognition, where intermediates
or encounter complexes formed early in the recognition process providing
the first scaffold to open one side of the hidden binding sites followed
by the IDP interaction with the surface to stabilize the second scaffold
to access the other hidden binding sites. The authors concluded that the presence of binding intermediate
states represents a characteristic feature of IDP binding to targets
with “hidden” binding sites. 
Figure represents two models illustrating
binding between an IDP and an ordered partner with a “hidden”
binding site. Figure A shows, in an oversimplified
way, that the formation of the binding intermediate is a necessary
step needed for productive waiting for the opening of the originally
closed binding site. Figure B represents a
more complex model with two sequential binding intermediates, where
the formation of a second intermediate stabilizes the open state of
the partner, thereby providing means for an easy access to the originally
hidden binding site. In both cases, the hidden binding site can be
open spontaneously or as a result of allosteric interaction. Obviously,
more complex mechanisms are possible.
 Curiously, the presence of binding intermediates was reported
for
signaling recognition reaction of several IDPs, the targets of which
are characterized by the presence of hidden binding sites, that is,
sites that are not exposed outside of the target molecule and are
not easily accessible to IDP. The two related examples are the formation
of the p27Kip1/cyclin A/cyclin-dependent kinase 2 (Cdk2)
complex , and the pKID–KIX interaction. Here, an intrinsically disordered p27 binds
to the binary cyclin A–Cdk2 complex in a stepwise manner, first
by interacting with a groove of the cyclin A and then via binding
to the hydrophobic interaction sites Cdk2 had originally hidden from
interaction. In another example, an intrinsically
disordered kinase inducible activation domain (pKID) of the transcription
factor cyclic-AMP-response-element-binding protein (CREB), being phosphorylated,
forms an intermediate binding complex with the ordered partner, the
KID-binding (KIX) domain of CREB binding protein. In this intermediate
complex, the buried interaction site of the KIX is not completely
exposed and does not properly interact with pKID, whereas in the final
bound state, pKID inserts one of its hydrophobic residues deeply into
the buried interaction pocket of KIX. 

2.2.2

## Stepwise Assembly of SNARE Complex
An illustrative example with well-documented stepwise assembly of
a multiprotein is given by the assembly of soluble N-ethylmaleimide-sensitive factor attachment protein receptor (SNARE)
complex, which is a molecular engine that drives membrane fusion. , In fact, SNARE plays a crucial role in the vesicle fusion in eukaryotes
by cross-linking the fusing membranes through the transmembrane domains
of the corresponding proteins. In neurons, ternary SNARE complexes
consist of syntaxin, synaptobrevin, and synaptosome-associated protein
of 25 kDa (SNAP-25) on deposited lipid bilayers. Here, a binary complex t-SNAREs between syntaxin and SNAP-25
is present on the target plasma membrane, whereas the vesicle membrane
contains v-SNAREs (synaptobrevin, also called VAMP2). Although individual t- and v-SNAREs are largely disordered,
they mediate membrane fusion via binding-induced folding resulting
in the formation of an extraordinarily stable zipper-like four-helix
bundle that draws two membranes into close proximity for fusion. − 
Analysis of the preassembled neuronal SNARE complexes by intermolecular
single-molecule fluorescence resonance energy transfer (smFRET) revealed
that they represent a mixture of parallel and antiparallel configurations
involving the SNARE motifs of syntaxin and synaptobrevin and the SNARE
motifs of syntaxin and SNAP-25. smFRET
analysis also revealed that the syntaxin/SNAP-25 interactions precede
assembly of the ternary SNARE complex. Furthermore, the syntaxin/SNAP-25 binary complex was shown to undergo
structural transitions between several states, with one state representing
a parallel three-helix bundle and the other states characterized by
dissociation of one of the SNAP-25 SNARE domains. The transition between
these states happened on the second time scale, and the formation
of the dissociated helix states was efficiently suppressed by adding
synaptobrevin or accessory proteins, such as complexin, Munc13, Munc18,
or synaptotagmin. Stepwise disassembly
of the SNARE complexes was also demonstrated by optical tweezers. , 

2.2.3

## Directional Sequential Assembly: Binding
Chain Reaction Model
Obviously, the described above stepwise
binding mechanism, where intrinsic disorder of some proteins allows
them to interact with hidden binding sites of ordered partners, represents
a special case of a more general allosteric mechanism, where the complex
formation between an IDP and its target leads to conformational changes
in a target and opening of a hidden binding site. Alternatively, binding-induced
(partial) folding of an IDP can generate a new conformation with a
novel binding site. Therefore, binding chain reactions can occur,
in which interaction between proteins A and B induces structural changes
in B or/and A, leading to the creation of new binding site(s) necessary
for the additional interactions between A and B and to the strengthening
of the AB complex. Alternatively, an activated AB* complex is created,
where some novel binding sites are present providing the AB* complex
with the capability to interact with a new partner C. When an ABC
complex is formed, mutual rearrangements take place, new binding sites
are created, and the activated ABC* complex is now ready to interact
with a new partner D. Obviously, the stepwise recognition and binding
might be the mechanism that defines the timing and specific order
of the assembly of some complexes, for example, where C cannot interact
with A until AB complex is formed (see Figure ). It was pointed out that the phenotypes resulting from mutations
in components of the complex can be defined by the specific assembly
order of protein complexes, where a mutation in one protein of a complex
could result in accumulation of an assembly intermediate maintaining
residual function or defining a gain of function, whereas a different
assembly order could result in a complete lack of assembly and a total
loss of function. 
 An illustrative example of the discussed above stepwise directional
mechanism of complex formation is given by BBSome, a stable Bardet–Biedl
syndrome (BBS) protein complex. BBS is
a complex disease characterized by the combined symptoms of obesity,
retinal degeneration, polydactyly, kidney abnormalities, cognitive
impairment, hypertension, and diabetes. , There are
16 BBS-associated genes, with seven proteins
(BBS1, 2, 4, 5, 7, 8, and 9) being involved in the formation of BBSome,
a specific complex known to be involved in membrane trafficking to
and inside the primary cilium, ciliary membrane biogenesis via the
small GTPase Rab8 and its interacting protein, Rabin8, and regulation of the hedgehog signal transduction. Furthermore, BBS1, BBS2, BBS4, BBS7, BBS8, and
BBS9 contain multiple protein–protein interaction domains.
Furthermore, three BBS proteins, BBS6, BBS10, and BBS12, are chaperones
that interact with CCT/TRiC proteins and BBS7 to form a BBS–chaperonin
complex that plays a role in BBS7 stability. On the basis of the careful mutational analysis, the directional
and ordered nature of the BBSome formation has been revealed. Here,
BBS7 interacts with BBS2 and becomes part of the BBS7–BBS2–BBS9
assembly intermediate, the BBSome core, to which BBS1, BBS5, BBS8,
and finally BBS4 are sequentially added to form the complete BBSome. A directional mechanism has been also described
for the formation of some other large complexes, such as the mammalian
20S proteasome, the
intraflagellar transport complex, and
various ribonucleoprotein complexes, such as 60S ribosomal subunits. 

2.2.4

## Role of Intrinsic Disorder
in the Directional
Assembly
Another interesting twist came from the analysis
of assembly and disassembly of protein complexes with electrospray
mass spectrometry that helped with identification of the intermediate
subcomplexes present at each step of assembly and disassembly. First, on the basis of the analysis of simple
homo-oligomers, it has been concluded that some simple features of
the known crystal structures can be used for the efficient prediction
of the identities of the assembly intermediates, where at each disassembly
step the largest interfaces would be preserved and smaller interfaces
broken. Later studies of the more complex
hetero-oligomers supported this observation and revealed that disassociation
of a complex always occurs in such a way that the least amount of
buried interface area is exposed. − Reversely, the assembly
of a complex should preferentially start with the formation of a subcomplex
with the largest interface. Because the per-residue interface and
surface areas of ordered proteins forming the three-state oligomers
are significantly smaller than those of the disordered monomers forming
the two-state multimers, this fact clearly
suggests that two-state subcomplexes will be formed first. In other
words, the very first step in the formation of a complex involves
binding-induced folding of some important IDPRs, which is followed
by the formation of complexes with small interface areas (i.e., the
interactions between the prefolded components). This order of events
makes perfect sense, because the binding-induced folding needed for
the formation of the two-state subcomplexes at the early stages of
the multimer assembly will undoubtedly generate more ordered species,
which will have their binding sites created as a result of the subcomplex
formation. In other words, for the complexes containing both large
and small interfaces, the folding-driven association leading to the
formation of the two-state subcomplexes is the necessary prerequisite
for the subsequent formation of the three-state ordered subcomplexes.

2.3

## Allostery of the Disorder-Based Interactions
Allosteric regulation is driven by binding of an effector molecule
to an allosteric site, that is, to a site topographically distinct
from the protein active site. To this end, an allosteric protein has
at least two identical or different ligands, the binding of one of
which modulates the affinity of the protein toward the second ligand. Therefore, an allosteric protein is a modular
multifunctional protein that can be considered as a group of interacting
domains, with the binding sites for
different ligands being segregated into the different structural domains. The two binding sites may be on the same polypeptide
chain although in different domains, or in different subunits. Allostery explains protein action via coupling
of conformational changes between two widely separated sites. This coupling can be described by the concerted
or symmetry model proposed by Monod, Wyman, and Changeux (so-called
MWC model), or by the sequential model
proposed by Koshland, Nemethy, and Filmer (KNF model). Both of these models suggest that the subunits
of an allosteric protein can exist in two conformations, tense (T)
and relaxed (R), where relaxed subunits interact easier with the effector
molecule than the tense subunits. According to the MWC model, the
equilibrium favors one of the conformational states, T or R. All subunits
exist in the same conformation, being connected in a special way that
ensures that a conformational change in one subunit is conferred to
all other subunits. As a result, the protein interconverts between
R and T conformations in a concerted manner and cannot exist in a
hybrid TR form. In the sequential or
KNF model, subunits can change conformation one at a time. They need
not exist in the same conformation, and conformational changes are
not propagated to all subunits, thereby providing the possibility
for a hybrid TR form to occur. KNF model
also suggests that effectors bind to a protein via the induced-fit
scenario, where the initial interaction between enzyme and substrate
is relatively weak, but that these weak interactions rapidly induce
conformational changes in the protein that strengthen binding. Later, MWC and KNF models were combined to
a general model of allostery. 
It has been believed that allostery refers to the situations where
the binding of a ligand to one site can affect the other through a
propagated change in the protein shape. However, protein structures
are not rigid crystals, , being better described
in terms of the dynamic conformational ensembles. Therefore, the ligand
binding may simply result in the population shifts of the conformational
states in these dynamic ensemble. These
considerations eventually resulted in the paradigm shift, and although
the allostery concept was originally proposed for the description
of enzymes, later it was extended to all proteins, and a new view
of this phenomenon was proposed. This
new view pointed out that because allostery is a consequence of redistributions
of protein conformational ensembles, and because appropriate ligands,
point mutations, or external conditions may facilitate a population
shift within these ensembles, all proteins can be allosteric. The next logical development was incorporation
of the intrinsic disorder phenomenon to the picture of allosteric
regulation. By considering a simple
model of a two-domain protein, each domain of which was able to be
independently folded or unfolded, Hilser and Thompson convincingly
showed “that site-to-site allosteric coupling is maximized
when intrinsic disorder is present in the domains or segments containing
one or both of the coupled binding sites.” Furthermore, this extended consideration of allostery,
where intrinsic disorder can maximize the ability to allosterically
couple two sites, provides logical explanation and a general quantitative
rationale for the high prevalence of disorder in various regulatory
proteins, such as transcription factors. Also, this consideration opens an absolutely new way to look at
the site-to-site coupling, “wherein the abilities to propagate
the effects of binding are determined not necessarily by a mechanical
pathway linking the two sites, but by the energetic balance within
the protein (i.e., what states are most stable and what ligands can
bind to each state).” 
These
theoretical considerations were supported by recent empirical
studies, which also granted a strong support to the concept of the
disorder-based directional assembly of functional complexes. For example,
a multiparametric analysis of the phd/doc antitoxin–toxin
operon and related three-component network formed by toxin (Doc),
antitoxin (Phd), and their operator DNA revealed the importance of
intrinsic disorder for the conditional cooperativity of this system. Antitoxin Phd possesses an intrinsically disordered
C-terminal domain that folds into an α-helix upon binding to
the toxin Doc, and an N-terminal dimerization domain that binds to
DNA and represses the transcription of the operon. , Recently, using NMR spectroscopy, this N-terminal domain was shown
to behave as a conformationally heterogeneous protein that populates
folded and disordered states. It was
also shown that the Doc-mediated enhancement of Phd binding to operator
that represents an illustration of the conditional cooperativity (or
directional assembly) can be explained by the intrinsic disorder-based
allostery. Here, monomeric Doc engages two Phd dimers on two unrelated
binding sites. The binding of Doc to the intrinsically disordered
C-terminal domain of Phd resulted in structurization of its N-terminal
DNA-binding domain, illustrating allosteric coupling between highly
disordered and highly unstable domains. 
Finally, smFRET was recently used to provide a detailed description
of the allosteric effects involved in the coupled binding and folding
processes associated with the formation of the ternary E1A system,
consisting of the intrinsically disordered adenovirus early region
1A (E1A) oncoprotein, the general transcriptional coactivator CREB
binding protein (CBP), and the retinoblastoma protein (pRb). In the infected cells, E1A recruits numerous
cellular regulatory proteins via cooperative use of N-terminal region,
and two conserved regions, CR1 (residues 42–83) and CR2 (residues
121–139). Among these cellular targets of E1A are CBP (or its
paralogue p300) and pRb, each of which binds to two noncontiguous
and largely nonoverlapping regions of E1A forming binary E1A–pRb
and E1A–CBP complexes, and a ternary pRb–E1A–CBP
complex. The polyvalent binding needed
for the formation of these complexes involves interactions between
the TAZ2 domain of CBP/p300 and CR1 and N-terminal region of E1A,
and interactions between pRb and E1A involve LXCXE motif (residues
122–126) within the E1A CR2 region and a binding site within
CR1 (residues 42–49). In a ternary complex, the TAZ2 domain
does not interact directly with pRb, being engaged in the complex
formation via its binding to E1A. On
the basis of the details of the formation of various complexes in
a wide range of CBP and pRb concentrations, it has been concluded
that E1A–CBP–pRb interactions might display positive
or negative cooperativity, depending on which domains of E1A are available
for interaction with CBP/p300 and pRb. It has been pointed out that the positive cooperativity in ternary
complex formation might be related to the enhancement of the E1A critical
function, the CBP/p300-mediated acetylation of pRb to force permanent
exit from the cell cycle and promote differentiation of the host cells.
On the other hand, negative cooperativity (i.e., preference for binary
complexes over the ternary complex) was suggested to broaden the stimulus
range via increasing the population of intermediate binding states
(binary complexes), facilitating their interactions with other cellular
partners, thereby permitting a context-dependent modulation of different
molecular species that contribute to the potency of viral E1A in hijacking
and exploiting host cellular mechanisms. On the basis of these observations, it has been concluded that “modulation
of allostery using intrinsically disordered protein regions that can
bind to diverse partners may be a mechanism by which a promiscuous
molecular hub IDP can manage its functional complexity.” 
Overall, intrinsically disordered regions
provide a new flavor
of dynamic allostery. In a classical
case, dynamic properties of a binding interface can be tuned by a
flexible regulatory region. , In disorder-based
interactions, regulatory sites can remain conformationally heterogeneous
in the complex; thus the protein is represented by a structural ensemble
in both unbound and bound forms. Shifting
population of various structural states within the ensemble can be
induced by environmental signals and can be realized via multiple
pathways. This also implies that disordered
segments can be subjected to further modifications (e.g., PTMs), which can modulate the ensemble by reshaping
the energy landscape of the disordered protein. Thus modifications
or interactions with further partners could function as a dynamic
relay, which affects conformation or flexibility of the binding interface.

2.4

## Complex Assembly, Evolution, and Intrinsic
Disorder
A correlation was uncovered between the assembly
and evolution of protein complexes, where both of the processes tend
to follow similar pathways. In other words, protein complex assembly
reflects the quaternary structure evolution of a given protein complex. As pointed out above, specific assembly intermediates
are observed in the protein complex assembly, where the largest intersubunit
interfaces are formed first, and the smaller interfaces are formed
later (and broken first during disassembly, which is generally reversible). In agreement with this hypothesis, the analysis
of the putative evolutionary pathways of a large number of homo-oligomers
revealed that the evolutionary intermediates tend to have the same
quaternary structure as the predicted assembly intermediates, and
thus there is a strong tendency for the assembly pathways of homo-oligomers
to recapitulate their evolutionary histories, with assembly intermediates
resembling subcomplexes that are conserved in evolution. , , 
Furthermore, predispositions
for local flexibility, global conformational dynamics, and large-scale
conformational fluctuations are also related to and reflected in evolution.
Here, local fluctuations and the intrinsic disorder propensities correlate
with the evolutionary rates, whereas global dynamics (where proteins
undergo large-scale motions involving multiple residues moving together
in a collective manner) reflect evolutionary variance. For ordered proteins, the evolutionary conservation
of the peculiarities of protein dynamics correlates with the conservation
of structural elements. As was mentioned
above, the directionality of protein complex assembly suggests that
the most thermodynamically stable subcomplexes, which are most likely
to be seen in assembly and which are most likely to be formed first,
are the assembly intermediates that form the largest interfaces and
bury the most surface area. The very similar trend is also observed
in the evolution of the protein complex assembly, where the subcomplexes
conserved in evolution are subcomplexes that bury the most surface
area. Again, as it follows from the
Gunasekarant et al. analysis of the protein complexes, two-state oligomers, that is, multimers that
are formed via the coupled binding and folding mechanism by IDPs or
proteins with IDPRs, are characterized by the largest interfaces.
Therefore, we can speculate that the formation of at least some most
stable and evolutionary conserved subcomplexes is an intrinsic disorder-based
process.

3

## Illustrative Examples of
Pliable Proteinaceous
Machines
3.1

## Mediator Complex and Transcription Regulation
in Eukaryotes
3.1.1

## Malleability of the Mediator
Complex
The Mediator complex is a central element of the
eukaryotic transcriptional
regulation, which conveys signals from gene-specific transcription
factors (TFs) to the general transcription machinery. − The human Mediator is an assembly of 26 subunits, but the number of subunits varies between species. The
Mediator can stimulate basal transcription and as an interface between RNA polymerase II (RNAPII) apparatus
and hundreds of transcription factors can also function as a coactivator
or corepressor. Despite intense efforts
since its discovery in the early 1990s, a molecular interpretation
of how this multisubunit assembly impacts eukaryotic transcription
depending on external signals has remained rather elusive.
X-ray
crystallography and electron microscopy (EM) structural studies in
combination with biochemical experiments indicated that functional
versatility of Mediator is intertwined with its structural heterogeneity.
Here, we aim to detail how dynamic regions contribute to the organization
of Mediator’s architecture, and how they influence conformational
changes required for different transcriptional outputs. We will also
discuss how intrinsically disordered (ID) regions facilitate communication
within the complex enabling a collective action of the individual
subunits.

3.1.2

## Modular Architecture
of Mediator
The Mediator has a variable subunit composition,
which also depends
on organism and cell type. The Mediator
is assembled from four structural modules: Head, Middle, Tail, and
Arm (Figure ). In addition, the dissociable
Cdk8 kinase module also significantly influences the regulatory potential
of Mediator.
 The Head is responsible for interactions with Pol II and
the basal
machinery. , Mutations in the Head were shown
to abolish mRNA synthesis in vivo. , The Tail
is the primary target of regulatory signals by transcription factors.
The Tail recruits Mediator to gene-specific promoters in yeast. TATA-containing and SAGA-dependent genes were
affected by impairment of Tail’s function. The Middle module bridges between the Head and the Tail
via flexible joints. , It also provides a platform
for interactions with the dissociable cyclin-dependent kinase 8 (Cdk8)
module, which could repress activated transcription. The kinase module provides an additional 4 subunits to
the whole Mediator complex. The transcription repression of the kinase
module is independent of the kinase activity of Cdk8 and is likely
related to blocking the interactions with RNAPII. Apart from the Cdk8
kinase activity, other Mediator subunits are largely devoid of enzymatic
activities. The Arm extrudes from the
Middle module and has been recently defined as an independent unit
based on mobility analysis. The biological
role/relevance of the different subassemblies on their own still remains
an open question.
High-resolution structures are only available
for the Head module
(Figure ), , while the
other modules as well as the intact complexes were only studied by
cryo-electron microscopy (cryo-EM) at a significantly lower resolution. , Biochemical data provided critical points for docking X-ray structural
data of heterodimer or trimer subcomplexes into the EM models.
 
3.1.3

## Organization and Conformational Heterogeneity
of the Head Module
The Head module is composed of seven subunits,
Med6, Med8, Med11, Med17, Med18, Med20, and Med22, which are organized
into three structural domains, neck, fixed jaw, and movable jaw (Figure A). The Head has a vital role in interacting with
general transcription factors TFIID and TFIIH as well as RNAPII. Med17 is central to the organization of the
assembly. On the basis of a 4.3 Å resolution X-ray crystallography
analysis of the Saccharomyces cerevisiae (Sc) complex, formation
of the Head starts with Med17, Med11, Med22 trimer. This is followed
by interactions with Med6 and Med8, while the Med18–Med20 heterodimer
binds the C-terminal region of Med8. The importance of Med17 is also
reflected by the loss of transcriptional activity upon deletion of
Med17 C-terminal domain (CTD).
A higher resolution analysis
of Schizosaccharomyces pombe (Sp) Head at 3.4 Å provided a more detailed picture
of eight distinct structural elements. These resemble a crocodile head (Figure B), also revealing various additional parts: a joint between the
fixed jaw and the neck, arm, shoulder, finger, which could not be
observed previously. Although the Sc and Sp sequences exhibit only 15% sequence similarity, the structures
are well-conserved. The Sp Head structure possesses
four flexible elements: the shoulder, the finger, movable jaw, and
the nose. The loop regions and structurally undefined regions are
critical to mediate intersubunit contacts in both Sp and Sc complexes (see below).
The Head module
was observed to exhibit a number of different conformations
in isolated form. These mostly differ
in orientation of the neck with respect to the jaws and the closed/open
status of the jaws. The movable jaw in the Head, which consists of
the Med8/Med18/Med20 heterotrimer, was demonstrated to have multiple
orientations, which resulted in different
overall conformations of the Head module. The position of the shoulder
changes due to flexible connections to Med6, which in turn plays a
critical role in transducing signals from the Tail to Head and eventually
to RNAPII. 
Structural studies
also indicated a variety of conformations in
the context of the intact Mediator. Such
structural heterogeneity can be utilized for RNAPII interactions via
selecting/inducing appropriate conformations for formation of the
preinitiation complex (PIC). Indeed, cryo-EM data showed large-scale
structural changes of the Head upon interacting with RNAPII. A remodeling of the Head subunits involves
a close to open transition of the jaws upon assembly of the PIC.

3.1.4

## Structural Versatility of the Mediator
The first EM pictures provided evidence for conformational variability
of Mediator. Even in the absence of
RNAPII binding, conformational flexibility among different subunits
was demonstrated in yeast. Recently
determined crystal structures exhibit marked conformational differences
even within the same organism. , The human Mediator
complex was also found to be extremely dynamic. Binding of RNAPII, activators, or the Cdk8 module triggers
substantial structural shifts throughout the complex. Despite the low sequence similarity between
yeast and human Mediator, the overall structural organization and
large-scale changes in its conformation appear to be well-conserved. These were suggested to underlie the extremely
versatile and complex transcriptional regulation of Mediator. Below,
the possible functional importance of conformational heterogeneity
will be discussed.
3.1.4.1

## Structural Shifts upon
RNAPII Binding
The Head interactions with TATA-box binding
protein (TBP) were
found to increase basal transcription levels. This was due to a shift in conformational equilibrium toward
an open conformation of the movable jaw. In the absence of TBP, the
jaw established additional interactions with Med17, and the closed
form is preferred. TBP most likely contacted Med8, although the corresponding
electron density could not be unequivocally determined. This might
be due to ambiguity in the corresponding interactions, also termed
as fuzziness. On the other hand, the
interactions with RNAPII also induced changes in the polymerase conformation
and facilitated clamp opening, which
increased basal transcriptional activity. The Arm module was also
observed to undergo extensive rearrangement upon interacting with
RNAPII. General transcription factors
could further contribute to alterations of the human Mediator RNAPII
structure, as it was observed for TFIIF. 
The Head induces phosphorylation of RNAP CTD by TFIIH. EM images showed strong interactions of RNAPII
CTD with the Middle and indicated a weak binding site on the Head. The CTD contacts mainly the Med6, Med17, and
Med8 of the Head in an extended conformation. The weak interactions are realized in a variety of ways,
which might account for some differences between human and yeast holoenzymes. 

3.1.4.2

## Structural Changes
upon Gene-Specific
TF Binding
The Mediator does not exhibit sequence-specific
DNA binding activity; thus its promoter selective regulatory functions
rely on TF binding. , Activation and repression of
gene expression is mostly controlled by the impact of Mediator–TF
interactions on RNAPII activity. The structure of human Mediator changes
upon TF binding, which could be utilized as a conformational “marker”
to process transcriptional signals. TF-induced specific structural
shifts enable Mediator to carry out gene-specific functions by introducing
new Mediator–cofactor interactions. These structural changes were proposed to propagate through the
entire complex. The composition of Mediator, on the other hand, did
not change upon TF interactions, underscoring the functional importance
of structural changes. This might also implicate that the different
TFs interact with different subunits, and thus have a different modulatory
effect on Mediator’s structure.
Although EM analysis
of both yeast and human Mediator revealed significant conformational
flexibility, , no long-range correlations were
observed between different parts of the structure. Hence, a specific (i.e., gene-specific) binding event does
not induce formation of a single conformation, which corresponds to
a given functional outcome. Instead, conformational heterogeneity
is preserved even upon TF interaction, and the equilibrium is shifted
accordingly. Such mechanism can underlie a rapid response to numerous
signals.
The heterogeneity of Mediator contacts with RNAPII
suggests a dynamic
exchange at actively transcribed genes. From initiation to elongation,
RNAPII must break contacts with the PIC. It appears that activator-induced
changes in Mediator structure facilitate promoter escape and the switch
to elongating state. Activation domain
(AD) of p53 was indeed shown to interact with different Mediator subunits,
each affecting Mediator’s structure differently with varying
impact on RNAPII activity. Only the
p53 activation domain, but not the p53 CTD, triggered the transition
of RNAPII to elongating state. Mediator was shown to be crucial for
phosphorylation of RNAPII CTD. In this manner, the RNAPII CTD processing
was also related to different structural states of the p53 AD–Mediator
complex. In the presence of VP16 activator, conformational heterogeneity
was observed in low-resolution cryo-EM data of the human Mediator
RNAPII complex. , Structural changes due to VP16
were similar to those that were induced by RNAPII binding, suggesting
that the structural state could control Mediator’s biological
activity.
All of these mechanisms could correspond to postrecruitment
of
gene-activation, when the stalled/paused polymerase is reactivated
in a context specific manner.

3.1.4.3

## Structural
Changes upon Binding of the
Cdk8 Kinase Module
The 2D EM map indicated that Mediator
interacts with the kinase module in multiple ways. Cdk8 and Med13 are located at the opposite ends of the
kinase module and mediate interactions with other modules. Med13 interacts
with a “hook” that serves as an anchor of the main Mediator
structure, while Cdk8 at the other end
exhibits less frequent contacts with the Middle. The interaction with
Med13 is the dominant one, whereas the one with Cdk8 has variable
positions, that is, “fuzzy” even in the context of other
subunits of the kinase module. Overall,
the Mediator has an extended shape upon interacting with the Cdk8
kinase module, which provides a large binding interface for the kinase
module.
Cdk8 module–RNAPII antagonism for Mediator binding
represents a key regulatory checkpoint. The kinase module in the yeast complex was found to block a binding
site required for RNAPII. The Cdk8 kinase
module in the human complex, however, was proposed to inhibit RNAPII
interactions via inducing conformational changes in other Mediator
modules. EM analysis of the different
constructs excluded the possibility that the kinase module interacts
with the Tail directly, so its effect is also likely propagated via
conformational changes.

3.1.5

## Experimentally
Detected Disordered Regions
in Mediator
Both X-ray crystallography and EM studies corroborate
that the overall structural organization of human and yeast Mediator
is dynamic. Flexibility of various subunits was also demonstrated
in detail, for example, those of the connecting joints between the
different modules and submodules. The importance of structural variability
in modulating RNAPII activity was discussed above. Some regions, however,
could not be resolved either in high- or in low-resolution electron
density maps. These segments lack a well-defined tertiary structure,
termed also as IDPR. IDPRs, for example,
could serve as a link between globular domains. They also facilitate
protein–protein interactions and contribute to formation of
subunit contacts. 
Med17 serves
a central role in organization of the Head structure by anchoring
other subunits. Truncating the N-terminal
region of yeast Med17, however, did not cause a considerable loss
in electron density. This indicates
the presence of an IDPR (∼1–200) in accord with the
segment predicted by bioinformatics methods (Figure C). The linker region in Med17 (320–420), connecting
the helical bundle domain and the C-terminal domain, is not fully
visible in the crystal structure and contains a >20 AA long disordered
region. This contributes to variable
position of the jaws with respect to the neck and facilitates more
efficient interactions with RNAPII. The movable jaw is comprised by
the Med18–Med20–Med8 heterotrimer. Its orientation is
controlled by the interactions of Med18 loop with the C-terminal region
of Med17, and N-terminal region of Med11. Both are mediated by an ID binding region in Med18, and the N-terminal
domain (NTD) of Med11 is also disordered. The flexibility of the neck
and jaws stems from a poorly ordered Med18 region (110–144)
of the central joint. This region is
flanked by two ID binding regions, but itself does not adopt any stable
structure even in the context of other subunits. Such regions, which
are disordered in the bound form, are termed fuzzy. They could contribute to structural multiplicity/heterogeneity
in the bound form by establishing ambiguous/transient interactions
in a complex. Other regions, which were
not present or could not be modeled in the crystal structure of the Sc and Sp Head, were also predicted to
be disordered. The functional importance
of some of them will be discussed below.
The Med7/Med21 heterodimer
is located at the Head–Middle
interface, and its coiled coil architecture establishes interactions
with Med6 of the Head and likely contributes to signal transduction
toward the basal machinery. The N- and
C-terminal regions of Med7 are predicted to be disordered, and were
shown to fold only when in complex with Med21. Because of their elongated shape, the Med7/Med21 dimer
serves as a flexible hinge, which could contribute to propagating
structural changes between the different modules of the Mediator complex.
The interface between the Head and Middle modules is indeed important,
facilitating a reorganization of Mediator’s structure and inducing
a conformation compatible with RNAPII binding.
Med13 is part
of the Cdk8 kinase module, which can be only poorly
localized in EM images. Deletion of Med13, however, significantly
reduces the size of the structure, indicating that this subunit is
not ordered. This is consistent with
the predicted high degree (>70%) of disorder of Med13, which is preserved even within the complex.
Med13 is a target of post-translational modifications (PTM) and thus
imparts PTM-dependent transcription regulation on the Mediator complex. 

3.1.6

## Abundance of Predicted
Disordered Regions
in Mediator
Structural and biochemical data indicate that
conformational heterogeneity and dynamics is essential for the organization
of Mediator’s structure and its regulatory mechanisms. Experimental
characterization of disordered regions, however, presents a bottleneck
in investigations of Mediator’s function. Two independent bioinformatics
methods , were applied to identify ID segments in
all Mediator’s subunits, where sequences are available. First,
the experimentally most studied yeast and human Mediator will be discussed.
The analysis was also extended to 340 sequences from 27 eukaryotic
organisms. 
Out of 25 subunits
that were studied in Saccharomyces cerevisiae and Homo sapiens, 5 and 7 were found
to be dominantly disordered, that is, comparable to experimentally
verified disordered proteins in the DisProt database. These subunits likely lack a well-defined tertiary
structure and can simultaneously exist or interconvert between different
conformations. In yeast, dominantly disordered subunits are mostly
localized in Tail (Med2, Med3, and Med15), while in human they are
in the Middle (Med1, Med4, Med9, Med19, and Med26). In addition, the
human Med8 (Head) and Med15 (Tail) and yeast Med9 and Med19 (Middle)
were found to be highly dynamic. This suggests that pliability in
yeast is mostly required for TF interactions and inducing gene-specific
responses, while in human for propagating conformational signals either
from the Tail or from Cdk8 module to Head and the basal machinery
to impact RNAPII activity. Sequences from other subunits indicate
enrichment in disorder for Med6, Med17, Med22, Med28, and Med30 (Head);
Med7, Med21, and Med26 (Middle); as well as Med12 and Med13 (Cdk8
module). Along these lines, amino acid compositions of all modules
are dominated by polar, charged, and structure-breaking residues and
depleted in hydrophobic residues relative to globular proteins. This
indicates less tightly packed (less compact) structures, in accord
with malleability of the whole complex. Conformational pliability
of Mediator due to the presence of disordered regions facilitates
rearrangements that expose a huge surface area to enable extensive
contacts with RNAPII upon interaction.
Almost all modules were
found to contain continuous stretches of
disordered residues, which can also play functional roles. They can
serve as linkers between globular structural domains, can mediate
interactions, or can facilitate conformational changes. Indeed, the propensity of long IDPRs exceeds
that of signaling proteins. In both
human and yeast Mediator, the Tail was observed to be most enriched
in disordered segments. IDPRs longer than 100 residues can be found
in >60% of proteins in both organisms. The largest ID segments
in
yeast are Med2 (334 AA), Med3 (256 AA), and Med15 (263 AA) of the
Tail, and Med1 (645 AA), Med9 (241 AA), and Med26 (261AA) of the Middle
in human Mediator. The enrichment of long ID regions relative to complexes
of similar size indicates that these are required for regulatory functions
in addition to structural organization/assembly of the complex.
The functional importance of ID regions can also be inferred from
their evolutionary conservation. In case of globular proteins, amino
acid similarity could indicate regions with conserved roles. Because
the high mutation rates in disordered regions, amino acid conservation cannot be conveniently utilized
for identification/assessment of functional segments. In Mediator subunits, the amino acid similarity
is also rather low (<10% for most subunits), especially in ID segments. The presence of repeat regions (polyQ and polyN
in Med1, Med9, Med10, Med12, and cdk8) contributes to rapid evolution
of Mediator subunits. In contrast to sequence, the similarity of the
arrangement of globular and ID regions is high (>60–80%). This suggests that, despite the rapid amino
acid changes in ID regions, the topology of ordered-disordered segments
is highly conserved. Thus, a given coarse-grained structural feature,
variation of flexibility/dynamics, is an essential component of Mediator’s
function.

3.1.7

## Distinguished Peptide
Motifs Mediating Interactions
in Mediator
Mediator could utilize ID regions for molecular
recognition either with other subunits within the complex or with
external factors (TFs, or Cdk8 module). Short segments of ID regions,
which are distinguished in partner recognition, can exhibit transient
secondary structure in the unbound form. These preformed elements or MoRFs are stabilized
by the interacting partner, and the conformational equilibrium is
shifted accordingly.
3.1.7.1

## Preformed Elements
and α-Helical
Recognition Features
Both yeast and human Mediator are enriched
in motifs (43 and 79, respectively), which are biased for α-helical
conformation. The Med18/Med20 heterodimer
of the Head contacts Med8 via a helical
recognition element, also termed as an α-MoRF (Figure ). This C-terminal region encompassing residues
193–210 of Med8 is flanked by a disordered region, which is
not visible in the complex (PDB code: 2hzs). Proteolytic sensitivity of this fuzzy
linker is consistent with its disordered state, enabling one to harbor
elongin B and C for in vivo transcription. The 195–212 region of the Med7 in Middle adopts an α-helix
upon interacting with Med21 (PDB code: 1yke). This
C-terminal region could serve to initiate the formation of the coiled-coil
heterodimer, which was proposed to serve as a flexible hinge and mediate
large-scale changes within the Mediator complex. It also appears to
interact with Med10. 
 Although direct structural evidence
is not available for other
motifs, their functional relevance could be inferred from in vivo
studies. In this manner, the biological roles of 11 α-MoRFs
were corroborated in yeast. The predicted
binding elements in Med3 (333–350) and Med15 (116–255) of the Tail are target sites for transcriptional
activators (e.g., GCN4, Tup1). Glucocorticoid receptor also has an
interaction site on Med15 overlapping with the predicted α-MoRF
(261–351). Med13 of the Cdk8
module has three distinct interaction sites for three different partners:
Caf1, Crc4, and Not2. Med17 of the Head
also comprises various disordered interaction motifs.
All of
these binding features, out of which many are exposed in
the RNAPII–TFIIF complex, enable contacts and distinct (i.e.,
gene-specific) responses with versatile partners and thereby contribute
to the complex signaling mechanism of the Mediator. Post-translational
modification sites could provide another layer of complexity. PTMs
are preferably located in ID regions, and, for example, T237 in Med4
(Middle) was shown to enhance RNAPII CTD phosphorylation. 

3.1.7.2

## Phenotypic Changes
Related to Intrinsically
Disordered Binding Sites
Interaction-specific ID regions
do not always adopt regular secondary structures, even if they fold
in the presence of the partner. These
regions can be identified on the basis of lower degree of disorder
with respect to their environment and their ability to get stabilized
by intermolecular contacts (Figure ). Various known mutations (Saccharomyces
cerevisiae) in the Head, which cause phenotypic changes, overlap with such intrinsically disordered
binding sites (IDBSs).
For example, temperature-sensitive mutations
S226P and F649S of Med17 affect intersubunit
stability by decreasing the interaction propensity of the corresponding
IDBs. The F159Y in med17–158 also
contributes to destabilizing the fixed jaw by protein–protein
interactions. The E17K and L24K replacements in Med11 also influence temperature sensitivity and
were predicted to mediate protein interactions. In med6-ts1, med6-ts2,
and med6-ts6, six mutations affect intrinsically
disordered binding regions, by stabilizing/destabilizing the predicted
interaction sites upon contacting the partner.
Mutations could
also interfere with interactions with Rpb3 of RNAPII.
For example, I128V in med17-sup1 rescues the A159G Rpb3 phenotype that is also part of a disordered protein binding
site.
It is important to note that, in addition to IDBs, phenotypic
mutations
are also associated with fuzzy regions, which remain disordered in
bound state. For example, in Med6, ∼50% of the temperature-sensitive
mutations are located in fuzzy segments, illustrating that modulating
dynamics strongly interferes with structural organization and function
of Mediator. , 

3.1.8

## Functional
Significance of Disordered Regions
in Mediator
3.1.8.1

## Mutations in Disordered
Regions Can Cause
Malignancies
A growing amount of evidence demonstrates the
involvement of Mediator in human diseases. , These could be related to mutations, which affect the assembly of
the PIC, interfere with RNAPII activities, or perturb the switch to
elongation. The L371P mutation in human Med17, for example, is associated
with infantile cerebral atrophy. This
mutation destabilizes a disordered binding site embedded in a longer
disordered (fuzzy) segment in the tooth of the Head (Figure ). The A335V missense mutation in Med25 is located
in a disordered proline-rich region, which connects two functional
domains. This segment interacts with SH3 domains, and the mutation causes Charcot–Marie–Tooth
disease, a peripheral neuropathy. As various subunits (e.g., Med12)
are involved in signaling pathways, such as Notch, Wnt, or Sonic hedgehog
pathways, , mutations affecting the communication/interaction
with the signaling proteins can also result in malignancies, for example,
in brain development. Similarly to transcriptional activators, pathogenic
viruses (e.g., E1A, herpes simplex VP16, Kaposi’s sarcoma associated
virus) also target gene-specific regulatory sites in Mediator and
reprogram the host cell transcription machinery. 
Overall, both experimental and computational evidence
corroborates the importance of conformational heterogeneity or actual
disorder in Mediator’s function. Disordered regions, which
impart pliability on the complex, are structurally, but not sequentially
conserved. Functional sites embedded within these regions, for example,
binding sites that adopt a stable structure upon interactions, were
shown to contribute to the organization of the complex or mediate
interactions with transcriptional regulators. The diverse response
of Mediator to cellular signals also originates in those regions that
retain their conformational freedom in the bound form (i.e., fuzzy),
which can induce large-scale structural changes upon different transcriptional
activators/repressors. Identifying disordered regions and the embedded
functional motifs thus could contribute to a better understanding
of the Mediator’s mechanism and possibly provide means to interfere
with different activities.

3.2

## Intrinsic
Disorder in Protein Unfolding Machines
Organisms synthesize
proteins to carry out innumerable cellular
functions, and these proteins must be removed when their activity
is no longer required, they become damaged, or if they misfold. In
all domains of life, eukaryotes, bacteria, and archaea, this function
is primarily carried out by ATP-dependent proteases, and in all cases intrinsically disordered regions play
important roles in the process.
ATP-dependent proteases share
a common overall architecture. Proteolysis
occurs in the interior of a barrel-shaped core structure, which is
constructed from one or two rings of six to seven protease subunits
per ring (Figure ). The entrances to these
rings are too small to permit folded proteins inside, so only unfolded
proteins can enter the degradation chamber. A further, typically hexameric,
ring of ATP-dependent motor proteins stacks on one or both sides of
the degradation chamber, where it unfolds substrate proteins and translocates
them into the degradation chamber for proteolysis. This motor protein
always recognizes a disordered region in the substrate, but other
factors may be needed to bring the substrate to the protease.
 In eukaryotes, cytoplasmic
and nuclear ATP-dependent protein degradation
is accomplished by the 26S proteasome (Figure A), a macromolecular assembly of at least 33 proteins
and a total molecular weight of approximately 2.5 MDa. The proteasome
recognizes most of its substrates through poly ubiquitin tags attached
to lysine residues in the substrates. Ubiquitin chains are attached through a cascade of three enzymes,
called E1, E2, and E3 enzymes, which activate ubiquitin (E1) and pass
it on to the target proteins (E2 and E3). Yeast encodes one E2, 11
E2s, and ∼60–100 E3s, and specificity is usually conferred
by the interaction between the E3 and the target (reviewed in refs ( , )).
In bacteria, several
proteases, including Lon, FtsH, ClpXP, ClpAP,
and HslUV (Figure B,C), fulfill the function
of the eukaryotic proteasome. They degrade overlapping sets of protein
substrates that they typically recognize through motifs in their primary
sequence. , These sequence elements may
be always exposed for short-lived proteins, or may be exposed conditionally
to enable regulated degradation. Many
substrates are recognized directly by the ATPase ring, while other
substrates are shuttled to the protease by adaptor proteins that bind
to both the protease and the target protein simultaneously. In actinobacteria, which contain a proteasome
acquired through horizontal gene transfer, degradation of some substrates
requires the covalent attachment of an ubiquitin-like protein (although
the modifier is not homologous to ubiquitin). 
Archaea also have a proteasome, albeit one that mostly
selects
its substrate in the same way as do bacterial ATP-dependent proteases.
The archaeal proteasome typically recognizes short sequence tags,
but in some organisms is capable of using small ubiquitin-like modifier
proteins (SAMPs) as targeting signals. , Nevertheless,
experimental investigations into its mechanism have provided many
insights into how the eukaryotic proteasome functions.
In this
section, we will discuss the multiple roles that intrinsic
disorder plays in the function of ATP-dependent proteases.
3.2.1

## Intrinsic Disorder in the Proteolytic Machine
The eukaryotic
26S proteasome is composed of two
main assemblies, the 20S core proteolytic particle,
and the 19S regulatory particle (Figure A). The 20S particle consists of
four stacked rings, each containing seven α or ß subunits,
with the α rings forming the top and bottom layers of the stack
and the ß rings, which contain the protease active sites, forming
the two middle layers. As described
below, the isolated 20S particle is largely proteolytically
inactive, even with small peptide substrates, because a built-in gate
prevents substrates from entering. The
19S particle contains the hexameric ring of ATPases
(Rpt1–6 in yeast) typical of all ATP-dependent proteases, which
binds directly to the α ring, opens the gate, and is responsible
for ATP-dependent unfolding and translocation. The 19S particle also contains some 13 non-ATPase subunits (Rpn subunits
1–3, 5–13 and Sem1 in yeast). , These additional subunits recognize, edit, and eventually remove
the ubiquitin chains on substrates. They also stabilize both the 19S cap and the entire proteasome particle and serve as an
interaction platform for a range of additional proteins such as substrate
adaptors and ubiquitin chain modulators. 
3.2.1.1

## Sem1
The proteasomal subunit
Sem1 in yeast and its orthologue DSS1 in mammals are components of
the 19S regulatory subunit of the proteasome. Sem1 and DSS1 are small (89 and 70 residues,
respectively), highly acidic, and share a central sequence that is
∼50% identical between yeast and human. Sem1 family proteins
are natively disordered in the absence of binding partners, and are
the only stoichiometric proteasome subunits listed in DisProt (DP00617).
These proteins form well-defined structures when they bind to other
proteins, for example, BRCA2 and TREX-2, but the structure is determined
by the binding partner and is different in each complex. , Recently, the position of Sem1 in the yeast 26S proteasome structure was determined by cryoEM of proteasomes purified
from ΔSem1 and wild-type yeast. Intriguingly, in the proteasome, Sem1 takes on a different conformation
than those in BRCA2 or TREX-2 complexes. In the proteasome, it serves
to stabilize the interaction between two other 19S subunits, Rpn3 and Rpn7. Deletion of Sem1 destabilizes the proteasome
structure and attenuates its function in yeast. , Indeed, Sem1/DSS1 has been termed “molecular glue”
because of its ability to stabilize a number of macromolecular complexes. Presumably Sem1/DSS1’s lack of a native
fold gives it the versatility required to perform these functions. 

3.2.1.2

## Gating of the Core
Particle
Protease
core particles without their caps have little proteolytic activity
on small peptides or unfolded proteins, even though such substrates
should not require active unfolding. For the proteasome, this lack
of activity is due to a gate that is composed of the N-termini of
the 20S α-subunits, which sterically block
the entrance to the degradation chamber. The tails that make up the gate were structured in the closed-gate
yeast core particle, but were not observed in the crystal structure
of either an archaeal core particle or in a gate-opened mutant missing
one of the N-termini. Thus, it was originally
thought that an order to disorder transition was responsible for gate
opening. However, more recent NMR experiments indicate that instead
the gate N-termini, although highly dynamic, interconvert between
conformations that either occlude the pore or leave it unobstructed
rather than becoming disordered. The
gate opens upon binding of the 19S particle. Tails
at the C-terminus of the 19S ATPases Rpt2, Rpt3,
and Rpt5 terminate in an HbYX (hydrophobic-tyrosine-any amino acid)
motif. These tails dock into pockets between subunits of the 20S α-ring, leading to the reorientation of the α-N-termini
and the opening of the gate. − Peptides corresponding to the tails are
able to activate the 20S proteasome in vitro, and
the crystal structures of the C-terminal domain of Rpt3 and the homologous
PAN ATPase that binds to the archaeal proteasome show no density for
the HbYX-containing tails, suggesting that the tails take on structure
only when bound in their pockets, and therefore that a disorder to
order transition is responsible for docking of the 19S particle and opening the gate. , , ClpA and ClpX also activate ClpP toward peptide hydrolysis
upon binding by opening an internal gate, but here the activation
is mediated by flexible loops rather than C-terminal regions of the
unfoldase. − 

3.2.1.3

## Adaptor
Proteins
ATP-dependent
proteases recognize many of their substrates directly at sequence
motifs or ubiquitin/ubiquitin-like modifications, as described above.
Other substrates are targeted to proteases through adaptors or shuttle
proteins that can bind both to substrates and to the protease. Intrinsic
disorder plays a role in the ability of some of these adaptor proteins
to deliver a wide variety of substrates for degradation.
The
SspB adaptor targets various substrates to ClpXP for degradation in
bacteria. The dimeric adaptor contains a substrate binding domain
and two flexible tethers that allow it to dock at the surface of ClpXP,
where it hands off a bound substrate to the ClpX ATPase (Figure A). Changes in tether
length change the affinity with which SspB interacts with ClpXP and
thereby change its ability to deliver substrates for degradation. Presumably, some degree of disorder in the
tether is required to allow different substrates to bind to the adaptor
and be presented to the motor proteins in the correct orientation
to be grabbed onto and unfolded.
 Yeast Rad23, Dsk2, and Ddi1 (and
related family members in mammals)
play a similar role in eukaryotes. Rad23 contains an N-terminal ubiquitin-like
(UbL) domain, two ubiquitin-associated (UBA) domains, and a Rad4-binding
domain, all separated by intrinsically disordered linkers. Rad23 serves as a substrate adaptor for the
proteasome by binding to ubiquitinated proteins through the UBA domains
and the proteasome through the UbL domain and thus bringing them to
the proteasome for degradation (Figure B).
The disordered linkers may allow Rad23 to present proteins of different
structures and ubiquitination patterns to the proteasome such that
the ATPase motors can engage these substrates. The extent to which the bulk of cellular substrates are
directly targeted to the proteasome or delivered by adaptors like
Rad23 remains a topic for further investigation.

3.2.2

## Intrinsic Disorder in Substrates
ATP-dependent proteases
are able to unfold their target proteins,
but this unfolding activity must be primed with a stretch of the substrate
that is already disordered, resulting in multiple possibilities for
selectivity and regulation. Other sequences that are predicted to
be disordered can actually regulate protease function mid-degradation,
preventing unfolding from occurring. Finally, there are many proteins
that are intrinsically disordered, and we discuss how this native
disorder may make them particularly susceptible to proteasomal degradation.
3.2.2.1

## Initiation of Unfolding and Degradation
Before a folded
substrate can be unfolded and degraded by an ATP-dependent
protease, it first needs to bind to the protease. For the proteasome,
this is largely accomplished by a ubiquitin tag attached to the substrate,
which is recognized by ubiquitin receptors in the 19S cap. However, binding alone is insufficient
for degradation to occur. The substrate must contain a disordered
region at which the proteasome can engage the protein so that ATPase
motors can pull it into the degradation chamber in the middle of the
protease particle. The entrance to the chamber is too narrow for folded
domains to pass through, and so the domains experience a force that
will cause them to unravel. − If continued translocation is
then faster than refolding, the protein will be trapped in an unfolded
state, translocated into the degradation chamber, and proteolyzed
into small peptides. The link between a disordered region and degradation
was discovered for the proteasome through the observation that a ubiquitinated
protein would remain stable, unless a disordered region was also present. Degradation would then begin at the disordered
region and proceed along the polypeptide
chain sequentially. The disordered region
must be long enough to stretch from where the substrate is anchored
to the proteasome to their receptor, which most likely is the ATPase
motor itself (Figure ). , After an initial, ATP-independent ubiquitin-mediated binding event,
the substrate becomes bound more tightly in an ATP-dependent step
that requires an unfolded initiation site or a weakly folded domain,
but no longer requires the ubiquitin. These initiation regions can be on the N- or C-terminus of the protein
to be degraded, or can function internally, if they are sufficiently
long to enter the proteasome as a loop (Figure ). , − 
 Bacterial ATP-dependent proteases can bind substrates directly
at sequence motifs in the substrate’s amino acid chain, and
in this case the binding and engagement steps are difficult to separate
structurally and may well be two facets of the same biochemical event. The first indication of the importance of an
intrinsically disordered region of the substrate for unfolding and
degradation came from studies of the degradation of UmuD′ by
ClpXP. UmuD′ degradation depends on short disordered regions
in the protein that were not directly responsible for UmuD′
binding to ClpXP. , 

3.2.2.2

## Disordered
Initiation Regions and Selectivity
The proteasome can even
pick a protein containing an initiation
site, but no ubiquitin modification, out of a complex containing another
ubiquitinated protein that lacks an initiation site, such that one
protein targets the complex to the proteasome, while the other protein
is selectively degraded (Figure ). The ability of the proteasome to remodel complexes
by extracting subunits was first shown in vitro with model proteins and in yeast with the α2 repressor; however, in these cases the subunit that contains
the ubiquitin tag is degraded, presumably because it also contains
the best initiation site for the proteasome. Degradation of only specific
subunits is a key principle in cell cycle regulation, where the proteasome
is able to extract first the cyclin-dependent kinase (CDK) inhibitor
Sic1 from a complex containing a cyclin and CDK to generate an active
CDK and then later to selectively remove
and degrade the cyclin from its complex with CDK. In these examples, the substrate protein is engaged by
the proteasome and its binding partner escapes. CDK does not contain
any disordered regions and cyclin is ubiquitinated at its disordered
tail, so because cyclin contains both elements of the proteasome degradation
signal it is the substrate that is degraded. When all three proteins
are present, only Sic1 is degraded, which is more puzzling given that
both Sic1 and cyclin contain disordered regions. All else being equal,
the proteasome prefers an initiation region close to the site of ubiquitination
to a more distal disordered region. In
the homologous mammalian cyclin A/CDK2/p27Kip structure,
the disordered cyclin tail is on the opposite side of the complex
from the site of p27Kip ubiquitination, presumably preventing its engagement by the proteasome.
The adaptor protein Rad23 described above may rely on similar principles.
It binds to the proteasome through its UbL domain, but only its binding
partner is degraded. Rad23 escapes because it contains only internal
disordered regions, and these are too short to support initiation. Thus, the selection of an initiation region
contributes to the proteasome’s ability to discriminate between
multiple potential substrates. Many other proteins involved in the
ubiquitin–proteasome system, such as E2 and E3 enzymes, become
ubiquitinated and must also have mechanisms that prevent their degradation
by the proteasome.

3.2.2.3

## Effects of Disordered
Initiation Region
Location on Outcome of Degradation
The location of the disordered
region that serves as an unfolding initiation site also has important
consequences for the ability of a protease to unfold and degrade its
substrates. ATP-dependent proteases can degrade their substrates from
the N- to the C-terminus or vice versa, but start at the initiation
site and proceed linearly through the rest of the substrate. Depending on how difficult it is to unfold
the first local structure encountered, degradation may occur successfully,
or the protease may release a partially degraded substrate, so initiation
from the N- and C-terminus may lead to different outcomes. , Degradation can also begin from an internal disordered loop, and
this internal initiation leads to a lower overall processivity of
the proteasome. , Moreover, the reduction in processivity
seems to depend on the stability of the domains flanking the internal
initiation loop; a more stable domain both resists degradation itself
and protects the domain on the other side of the loop from degradation, presumably because it extends the time that
the substrates compete with each other for the motor sites. This type
of position effect may be part of the signal that leads to the partial
degradation of the transcription factor Gli3 to Gli upon changes in hedgehog signaling,
because moving the ubiquitination site that drives partial degradation
of Gli3 from the middle of the protein to its terminus abolishes fragment
formation and leads to complete degradation instead. 

3.2.2.4

## Targeting to Bacterial
Proteases through
Disordered Regions
The best-characterized targeting sequences
to bacterial proteases like ClpXP are present as N-terminal or C-terminal
extensions, and presumably serve as both binding tags and initiation
regions within a single short disordered peptide. , Intriguingly, there are a few species of actinobacteria that contain
both an analogue to the 26S proteasome (a 20S proteasome plus a ring of ATPases called Mpa) and an analogue
to ubiquitin (PUP, or prokaryotic ubiquitin-like protein). Like ubiquitin, PUP is covalently attached
to substrates targeted for degradation, but the sequences of the two
proteins are not related to each other. PUP is intrinsically disordered,
and its C-terminal region interacts with coiled-coils present in the
Mpa ring, where it becomes structured, forming an additional coiled-coil
helix. PUP’s N-terminus remains
disordered, and is engaged by loops within the pore of the Mpa ATPases,
which then translocate and unfold the tag along with the attached
substrate so they can be degraded. 

3.2.2.5

## Disordered Initiation Regions as Regulatory
Elements
The requirement for a disordered region to serve
as an initiation site leads to an intriguing possibility for regulation.
A region of a protein that can access a structured state when bound
to another protein or small molecule, but is disordered in the absence
of the binding partner, can become a conditional initiation region.
At one extreme, this occurs in the proteasomal degradation of proteins
unable to correctly fold. These proteins are recognized by chaperones
and at some point ubiquitinated and handed-off to the proteasome.
If correctly folded, most metabolic enzymes and other globular single-domain
proteins would, if ubiquitinated, presumably be degraded only slowly,
if at all, due to lack of an initiation region (although some proteins
are directly destabilized by the ubiquitin tag). The misfolded or partially folded form, on the other hand,
has regions that are disordered and can therefore serve as initiation
sites. This principle is the basis behind several conditional degradation
systems in which a mutant of FKBP12 is attached to a protein of interest.
In the presence of a stabilizing compound, the FKBP domain remains
folded, but in the absence of the compound, it unfolds, becomes ubiquitinated,
and presumably serves as an initiation site for the degradation of
the entire fusion protein. Kinases that
are unstable in the absence of an Hsp90 chaperone cofactor are rapidly
degraded by the proteasome when Hsp90 is removed or inhibited, presumably
in an analogous fashion. Calmodulin,
which does not require ubiquitination for degradation, is stable in
the presence of Ca2+ but is degraded by the proteasome
when Ca2+ is removed or upon aging-induced damage. In either case, a flexible or disordered conformation
is required to enable degradation. Degradation in bacteria might also
be regulated by controlling order–disorder transitions. For
example, in the degradation of the Bacteriophage Mu repressor protein,
a C-terminal degron must transition from a rigid conformation to an
exposed and flexible conformation for ClpXP degradation to occur. 
Despite the importance of a disordered
or poorly ordered initiation region, there are some proteins that
are ubiquitinated, contain a disordered region, but are not degraded
by the proteasome. Understanding the properties of disordered regions
that are sufficient to support degradation will greatly advance our
understanding of proteasome’s mechanism.

3.2.2.6

## Disordered Regions That Lead to Incomplete
Degradation
Although most proteins that are targeted to the
proteasome via ubiquitination are unfolded and completely degraded
to small peptides, there are a handful of proteins in which the proteasome
removes and degrades one portion of the substrate while releasing
another part. This released fragment
can go on to have a new biological activity. For example, the p105
precursor to the NFκB subunit p50 is processed into the mature
form, capable of migration to the nucleus and activation of transcription,
by the proteasome. Other proteins known
to be processed by the proteasome are the homologous NFκB subunit
p100, which is converted to p52, the distantly related yeast proteins
Spt23 and Mga2, the unrelated Drosophila transcription factor Cubitus interruptus (Ci) and its mammalian
homologue Gli3, the Epstein–Barr virus protein EBNA1, and just
discovered example yeast Def1. , , − Although the mechanisms by which complete
degradation of the precursor proteins are prevented are still not
fully understood, much progress has been made. Both p105 and Ci contain
a natively disordered region immediately prior (in the direction of
degradation) to the domain where unfolding and degradation stalls.
While in general it would be expected that an intrinsically disordered
sequence stretch would pose no problem for the proteasomal degradation
machinery, these sequence stretches also possess unusual amino acid
compositions; they are what are termed compositionally biased regions,
in which one or a few amino acids are over-represented. Such low complexity
regions are associated with the absence of stable structure. For p105, Ci, and model substrates, the presence
of a low complexity region (but not the specific sequence identity
of the low complexity region) is required for the successful release
of a folded degradation product (Figure A). 
 Similar sequences exist in other
proteins spared in part or in
whole by the proteasome. The Epstein–Barr protein EBNA1 has
an extensive set of Gly-Ala repeats that inhibit degradation. In protein folding diseases such as Huntington’s
disease, ubiquitinated proteins containing poly-Gln repeats resist
degradation by the proteasome. Some evidence in cell culture and mouse
models suggests that huntingtin protein clogs the proteasome, inhibiting
the overall functioning of the ubiquitin-proteasome system, − although other studies fail to find these global effects. − Alternatively, their sequence composition combined with the stability
of aggregates may prevent their complete degradation. 
In principle, low complexity regions
could slip out of the proteasome
more easily, leading to faster substrate dissociation, they could
serve as poor force transducers, making it more difficult for a substrate
domain to be unfolded, or, finally, they could get stuck in the proteasome
degradation channel or the sequence composition could slow proteolysis,
which could then clog the proteasome, inhibiting degradation. In vitro,
the glycine-rich region from p105 stabilizes an adjacent domain by
slowing its unfolding rate, perhaps
because the translocation motor binds these sequences poorly, causing
the proteasome to lose its game of molecular tug-of-war with the substrate.
This inability to apply force to the substrate still allows the proteasome
to hold on to the sequence as long as no force is being applied, thereby
leaving the substrate release rate unaffected (Figure B,C). Presumably other low complexity
regions act in a similar manner, which would explain the requirement
for a neighboring unfolded domain. Bacterial proteases can also be
halted by low complexity regions such as glycine-rich regions or Gly-Ala
repeats adjacent to a folded domain, , , and the kinetic mechanism appears to be similar. The molecular interaction (or lack of interaction)
that leads to this loss of processivity remains to be determined.
Sequence complexity is likely one of several factors that determine
whether a given protein, upon targeting to the proteasome, is degraded
fully or partially, including the location of the proteasome’s
initiation region and the stability of the targeted domain against
force-based unfolding. For example, Gli3 is processed by the proteasome
into a fragment, while the highly similar protein Gli1 is not processed. Differences in both the composition of the
low complexity region adjacent to tightly folded zinc finger domains
and the position of the degron targeting the protein to the proteasome,
and therefore the likely site of initiation, are responsible for the
differences in processing. As described
above, the site of initiation can influence the outcome of degradation
both by changing the direction in which the proteasome is moving (and
thus the order and direction from which domains are unfolded) and
by the reduction in processivity that can occur upon initiation from
an internal site within the substrate protein.
In another example,
it was recently shown that yeast protein Def1
is processed by the proteasome into a form capable of moving to the
nucleus, where it helps promote the polyubiquitination of a component
of RNA polymerase II in response to transcriptional stress. Def1 contains an extensive glutamine-rich region,
and processing occurs in a proteasome and ubiquitin-dependent manner
within this region, far from any known folded domain. On the other
hand, there are predicted coiled-coil sequences within Def1, including
two that would give fragments of the approximate size observed (between
400 and 500 amino acids) if they blocked degradation, and it is possible
that coiled-coil formation leads to a stable enough structure that,
in combination with a low complexity region, degradation is inhibited.
It is also possible that the requirements for processing are less
stringent in yeast, which has a less processive proteasome than that
found in metazoans. To better understand
the mechanism underlying partial degradation by the proteasome, we
require better understanding of both the sequences that trigger processing
and which protein structures are stable enough to resist unfolding
when combined with such a sequence.

3.2.2.7

## Degradation
of Natively Unfolded Proteins
by the Proteasome
The main difference between the targeting
of proteins to the proteasome and to bacterial ATP-dependent proteases
is that most proteasome substrates require both a ubiquitin modification
and a separate disordered region, while most bacterial substrates
require a single disordered region that serves as both the binding
tag and the initiation region. It stands
to reason, then, that if an initiation region has high enough affinity
for the proteasome, a protein might be targeted for degradation even
in the absence of ubiquitin modification. Indeed, a growing number
of proteins have now been discussed in terms of ubiquitin-independent
degradation, , and many of them are largely
or wholly disordered. This lack of structure in part or all of the
protein is essential for degradation, as removing the disordered region
from otherwise structured proteins like thymidylate synthase or ornithine
decarboxylase protects the protein from degradation. Other largely disordered proteins that can be degraded
by the proteasome without ubiquitination include the cyclin-dependent
kinase inhibitor p21, the tumor suppressor p53, and the Parkinson’s
associated protein α-synuclein. These are likely only a small subset of the proteins that can be
degraded without ubiquitination, as it has become increasingly clear
that many proteins in the cell are intrinsically disordered, only
loosely folded under some conditions, or contain extensive regions
with these characteristics. 
Completely
unfolded proteins such as casein can be degraded by either the 20S or the 26S proteasome without the addition
of ubiquitination or another targeting signal. In the case of the 20S proteasome (which
lacks the ATPase subunits), degradation is ATP-independent, and unfolded
proteins (but not small peptides) are capable of opening the gate
that normally prevents substrates from entering. It has been shown that the 20S proteasome
can cleave more than 20% of all cellular proteins, and that the 26S proteasome can cleave many of the same proteins in the
presence of ATP. Intrinsically disordered
regions mediated much of this proteolysis, and the fate of most of
these proteins was simple cleavage, not processive degradation. Indeed,
susceptibility to cleavage by the 20S proteasome
has been suggested as an empirical way to define intrinsically disordered
sequences, , and many proteins may be cleaved
if not engaged in complex formation or some other interaction that
shields them from the proteasome. As this “degradation by default”
pathway does not seem to require the proteasome’s unfoldase
machinery, we will not address it further here. Those interested are
referred to recent reviews, for example, refs ( − ).

3.3

## FG Nups:
Intrinsically Disordered Proteins
within the Nuclear Pore Complex
Nucleocytoplasmic transport
(NCT) processes are unprecedentedly selective, efficient, and robust
within the complex biological milieu. − In eukaryotic cells,
biochemically specific cargoes comprising of proteins and mRNA are
continuously being exchanged across the nuclear envelope (NE) that
separates the nucleus and the cytoplasm. This occurs through numerous perforations in the NE called nuclear
pore complexes (NPCs), − which are the sole conduits
that bridge the genome to the protein-synthesizing apparatus. Each NPC is a massive macromolecular complex
that amounts to an overall ∼60 MDa and ∼120 MDa in yeast and vertebrates,
respectively. With the characteristic species-dependent diameter of
between 50 and 100 nm, − the NPCs constitute the largest
known pores in eukaryotic cells. Each NPC is constructed from approximately
30 distinct proteins known as nucleoporins (Nups) that are present
in multiples of eight based on the 8-fold
symmetry of the NPC. , , They are hierarchically categorized into three architectural subgroups: (i) membrane-spanning Nups that anchor the
NPC to the NE; (ii) structural scaffold Nups; and (iii) intrinsically
disordered Phe-Gly (FG)-rich Nups (i.e., FG Nups). The rest of this
section is dedicated to discussing the role of the FG Nups with respect
to the regulation of NCT.
3.3.1

## NPC Transport Selectivity
Depends on FG
Nups
The NPC is a fascinating proteinaceous machine that
functions to restrict or promote bidirectional cargo translocation
via biochemical selectivity and not size exclusion per se. Although
the NPC is permeable to small molecules below ∼40 kDa (e.g.,
water and ions), macromolecules larger than ∼5 nm in size are
generally withheld. As shown in Figure , rapid and exclusive access through the NPC is
permissible only to soluble transport receptors (i.e., karyopherins or Kaps, but, more specifically, importins
and exportins) such as the classical 97 kDa import receptor karyopherinβ1
(Kapβ1 or importin β ), despite
exceeding the passive limit. On this basis, NCT is orchestrated by
Kaps that identify, bind, and shuttle signal-specific cargoes (via
amino acid sequences known as nuclear localization/export signals
(i.e., NLS/NES)) from the complex biological milieu (sometimes using
Kapα/importin-α as an adaptor) through NPCs. Although the translocation of both importins
and exportins is bidirectional, cargo directionality is regulated
by the GTPase Ran, which has GTP- and GDP-bound forms localized to
the nucleus and cytoplasm, respectively. In the nucleus, RanGTP binding triggers the release of import cargoes
from importins, whereas in the cytoplasm RanGAP (Ran GTPase-activating
protein) triggers the hydrolysis of RanGTP to RanGDP, which dissociates
from its respective karyopherin receptor while releasing export cargoes
from exportins in the process. After
this, RanGDP is recycled to the nucleus by its specific carrier, NTF2
(i.e., nuclear transport factor 2). In
the absence of Kaps, even signal-specific cargoes that are smaller
entities than entire Kap–cargo complexes are rejected, which
demonstrates the exquisite selectivity of the NPC. In this manner, a cargo is unlikely to return through the
NPC once it has dissociated from its receptor in its destined compartment.
The Ran loop is then closed by RanGEF (guanine nucleotide exchange
factor), which catalyzes the recharging of RanGDP to RanGTP. In this manner, the Ran gradient acts as a
molecular ratchet that accumulates nuclear cargoes against a concentration
gradient. 
 Given that the size
of a legitimate Kap–cargo complex far
exceeds the passive transport limit, it is generally accepted that
a molecular gating mechanism acts within the NPC that simultaneously
promotes the selective translocation of Kap–cargoes while hindering
passive cargoes. Since their discovery, the FG Nups have been identified as the key
functional constituents of the NPC gating mechanism given that their
FG-repeat motifs (i.e., GLFG, FxFG, and FG) exert binding interactions
with the Kaps. , − Altogether there are 11 distinct FG Nups that line the central NPC channel from the cytoplasmic periphery
to the central plane till the distal ring of the nuclear basket. These
give rise to an estimated total of ∼200 FG Nup molecules that populate the NPC interior based on their
relative abundance and the presence of both symmetric (i.e., found
on both the nuclear and the cytoplasmic peripheries) and nonsymmetric
FG Nups (Figure ). Each FG Nup is tethered
to the inner wall of the NPC by an anchor domain from which the remaining
FG-rich domain (typically 200–700 residues in length) emanates
to occupy the aqueous space within the central channel. Presently, the exact location of each FG Nup
tethering site is known with a precision of approximately ±10
nm in the NPC. , 
 
3.3.2

## Intrinsic
Disorder in FG Nups
Initial
indications of their intrinsic disorder originated from the analysis
of amino acid composition, which indicated that the yeast S. cerevisiae FG Nups possessed high net charge and
low overall hydrophobicity due to a low presence of order conferring
amino acids (N, C, I, L, F, W, Y, V) and an enrichment of disorder-conferring
amino acids (A, R, Q, E, G, K, P, S). This was validated by spectroscopic measurements (e.g., circular
dichroism (CD)) showing that the FG Nups lacked ordered secondary
structure, which was consistent with
their large hydrodynamic dimensions. Later, it was shown that the
FG Nups with low charge content adopted more disordered configurations,
whereas those with high charge content adopt more extended confirmations. Indeed, most FG Nups are net positively charged, − and can adopt conformations within the NPC that might expose these
charged regions to attract more negatively charged Kaps, while repelling
positively charged cargoes. Nevertheless, biochemical analyses as
well as in vivo studies generally show that FxFG domains exhibit “non-cohesive”
properties, , while GLFG domains are more
cohesive. , 

3.3.3

## Conformational
Behavior of FG Nups
3.3.3.1

## FG-Hydrogels
Being intrinsically
disordered, the FG Nups still elude structural/conformational determination
inside the NPC, although their positional information has been obtained
indirectly by immunogold labeling microscopy , or via fluorescence. , Thus, our understanding
of FG Nup behavior is dominated by in vitro investigations. Nevertheless,
FG Nup “non-cohesion” or “cohesion” has
led to the idea that NPC barrier functionality largely derives from
their collective morphological characteristics. At the macroscopic scale, studies show that both FxFG and
GLFG Nup-types can cohere into hydrogels using nonphysiological chemical
treatments. , This is based on the notion
that the FG Nups might resemble a sieve-like meshwork or “selective
phase” within the NPC based on hydrophobic interactions between
neighboring FG-repeats. Indeed, mild
apolar solvents (e.g., hexanediol) could cause a reversible collapse
in the FG Nup barrier by perturbing the hydrophobic inter-FG interactions.
These FG-hydrogels show to reproduce the permeability properties of
the NPC provided that the gels are saturated; that is, every FG-repeat
participates in a cross-link. The selective phase model predicts that
the spacing between each mesh (estimated to be between 3 and 6 nm
based on the length of one repeat unit) defines the size limit for
free diffusion through the hydrogel. Selective transport may then
occur through catalytic binding of the Kap to individual FG-repeats
that would effectively break individual cross-links. It is not clear,
however, how these macroscopic hydrogel properties relate to the behavior
of ∼200 FG Nups in the NPC given the marked differences between
length scales, the in vitro requirements for gelation, and in vivo
conditions in the cell.

3.3.3.2

## Polymer Brush Behavior
In contrast
to hydrogels that congeal from FG Nups in solution, the NPC interior
presents many FG domains that a priori form a tethered layer in close
proximity to one another. Because of their inherent flexibility, the FG Nups are anticipated to exhibit a conformational
susceptibility to local interfacial constraints, which should have
a strong influence on their biophysical characteristics. Adopting
approaches from polymer/surface science, atomic force microscope (AFM)
force measurements show that FxFG Nups exhibit polymer brush-like
behavior when surface-tethered to 100 nm gold nanostructures. , By definition, polymer brushes are composed of end-tethered polymeric
chains that extend in a net perpendicular direction away from a surface
under dense packing conditions in a good solvent. In this way, polymer brushes resist nonspecific adsorption
and material accumulation due to an exponential, long-range repulsive
force that is generated upon compression of the brush. With regards to the NPC, brush-like FG Nups
could collectively give rise to a corona-like barrier that would entropically
exclude nonspecific cargoes from the NPC vicinity, as was first proposed
by the virtual gating model. This may
also explain why the NPC does not clog under physiological conditions.
Interestingly, the FxFG Nup brushes also exhibit a reversible collapse
under the influence of poor solvents (i.e., 5% hexanediol). 

3.3.4

## Models
of NPC Barrier Action
Comprehensive
in vitro microbead binding assays (i.e., “bead halo”)
show that the FxFG Nups are noncohesive as compared to the cohesive
GLFG Nups. , By correlating these properties
to their estimated locations in the NPC, the “two-gate”
model proposes that the central channel is occupied by cohesive meshwork-forming
GLFG Nups, whereas the peripheral FxFG Nups are brush-like. However,
further experimental/computational refinements have shown that cohesive
or extended noncohesive domains can coexist on different segments
along a single FG Nup depending on their charge content. This might define a particular barrier arrangement
(i.e., “forest and trees” model) that demarcates distinct
zones of traffic through the NPC.
These contrasting properties
of the FG domains may dominate the basis of mechanistic “FG-barrier
centric” models; however, explanations as to how Kaps bypass
the barrier remain phenomenological. As a first step to understanding
how this might proceed, it was observed within the NPC by immuno-labeling
electron microscopy and in vitro by biophysical AFM measurements that
Kapβ1–FG binding causes a collapse of brush-like FG Nups. The FG Nup collapse could be subsequently reversed
upon the introduction of RanGTP, which prevented further binding of
the Kapβ1 molecules to the FG Nups. This suggested that Kap
(un)binding causes the FG-domains to undergo transient conformational
changes, such as by collapsing and distending in a rapid, stochastic
manner during cargo transport. Yet,
it has been suggested that the FG Nups are in a perpetual state of
collapse at physiological Kap concentrations in the NPC. According to the “reduction of dimensionality”
(ROD) model, − the collapsed FG-domains could effectively
coat the walls of the central channel with a coherent hydrophobic
“FG-rich layer” that would promote the surface diffusion
of Kap–cargo complexes. This implies that an unoccluded space
at the central channel would allow small molecules to permeate through.
Very little is known beyond such figurative descriptions of possible
NPC barrier entry mechanisms at the molecular level. Given that NPC
rejection is a consequence of weak (nonspecific) binding implies that
selective translocation requires sufficient Kap–FG binding
to cause a transient breach or opening in the FG domain barrier. Here,
each Kapβ1 molecule consists of approximately 10 hydrophobic
grooves that can all potentially bind FG-repeats. , , Kap–FG Nup binding is
therefore characterized by highly multivalent interactions because each FG Nup contains between 5 to around
50 FG-repeats in vertebrates. This raises a paradox in the context
of the NPC, because multivalent interactions are generally known to
impart strong binding avidity that enhances stability and specificity. As a case in point, the high sub-micromolar
Kapβ1–FG domain binding affinities , − predict slow transport rates that contradict the rapid dwell time of ∼5
ms measured in vivo. In fact, synthetic
nanopores constructed by functionalizing polymeric membranes with
the FG Nups show to recapitulate the selective transport of Kaps and
Kap–cargo complexes while discriminating against nonspecific
proteins. Subsequently, biomimetic NPCs
constructed by covalently tethering the FG Nups to solid-state silicon
nitride nanopores were able to resolve Kap selectivity and translocation
at the single-molecule level using ionic current measurements. Notably, it was found that individual Kapβ1
molecules translocated with a dwell time of ∼2.5 ms, in close
agreement with known NPC values. Moreover,
the FG Nups strongly inhibited the passage of nonspecific proteins
in pores having diameters greater than 25 nm despite adopting a more
open structure, thereby alluding to a highly dynamic FG domain barrier
mechanism. Yet, insofar as these efforts go, it remains unexplained
how Kap–FG interactions promote fast translocation in the NPC
instead of slowing it down.

3.3.5

## FG
Barrier-Centric Paradigm
The
criteria for the FG-centric paradigm can be summarized as follows:
(i) The FG Nups should act collectively as a barrier that imposes
a ∼40 kDa limit on passive diffusion, for example, “hydrophobic
meshwork”, , “polymer brush”, , and “two gate/forest and trees”. , 
(ii) Karyopherin receptors that ferry NLS-cargo must bind
sufficiently
to the FG Nup barrier to ensure selectivity. This is because insufficient
binding (e.g., nonspecific cargoes) implies rejection. , 
(iii) Kap binding has to cause FG Nup conformational changes
to
alleviate spatial constraints imposed by the barrier, for example,
“meshwork melting”, , “reversible
collapse”. , 
(iv) High Kap mobility
is required; that is, single-molecule fluorescence
shows that in vivo transport dwell times are ∼5 ms. 
 Although each argument per se is rational, apparent contradictions
emerge when all four arguments are imposed on the NPC. It is particularly
difficult to reconcile Kap–FG binding kinetics with the mechanistic
control of the FG domain barrier. As a case in point, sufficiently
strong Kap–FG binding might ensure transport selectivity, but
how this promotes rapid in vivo translocation is not obvious. In fact, selective transport should essentially
slow down in FG-centric models.

3.3.6

## Emergence
of a Kap-Centric Barrier Mechanism
To provide insight into
this problem, most recently a novel surface
plasmon resonance method was used to directly correlate conformational
changes of surface-tethered FG Nups to multivalent Kapβ1–FG
binding interactions (i.e., binding avidity) in situ as a function
of FG Nup surface density. Stepwise
measurements at increasing Kap concentrations showed that FG Nup collapse accompanied strong Kap binding (KD ≲ 1 μM) at low concentrations, but gradually
re-extended or “self-healed” as the population of bound
Kaps increased at higher concentrations. Interestingly, this effect
has been observed in computational models, , and invalidates the idea that the FG Nups are in a perpetual state
of collapse − at physiological Kap concentrations. Instead,
“pile-up” was observed where Kaps could bind weakly
(KD ≳ 10 μM) to the top of
preoccupied FG domain layers at physiological Kap concentrations (∼20
μM). These findings predict the existence of multiphase binding
in the NPC; that is, strongly bound Kaps populate the FG Nups and
move slowly near the pore wall, whereas weakly bound Kaps located
close to the pore center translocate more quickly (Figure ). Indeed, striking similarities have been observed
in single-molecule fluorescence experiments that have resolved the
preferred localization of Kapβ1 in the NPC. , In this manner, Kap–FG binding can be sufficiently strong
to ensure selectivity but also weak enough to promote fast translocation
through the NPC. In fact, the high occupancy of Kaps within the FG
Nups has now led to the idea that the Kaps may constitute integral
constituents of the NPC barrier, which
might suggest that a Kap-centric barrier mechanism rather than a FG
domain-centric one regulates transport selectivity and speed through
the NPC. 
 
3.3.7

## The
NPC Meets Material Science
To summarize, the exact manner
by which the FG Nups contribute to
the NPC gating mechanism still remains unclear. This arises from the
general difficulty in ascertaining the collective FG Nup behavior
within the NPC in vivo, and their sensitivity to experimental design
and length scale in vitro. Like any complex material, what is clear
is that the FG Nups, being intrinsically disordered, can adopt different
morphologies and exist in varied forms with diverse structures and
characteristic properties. This can range from single molecules in
solution, , to the collective behavior of
surface-tethered FG Nups, , , to the formation of amyloids, , and macroscopic
FG Nup hydrogels. , Although they all consist of
FG Nups, it would be unrealistic to presuppose that each of these
higher order structures would be physico-chemically similar or functionally
comparable because they are different materials (Figure ). Hence, in vitro, it remains essential to consider
the contextual details and the physical constraints within the NPC
that underpin FG Nup behavior there. To illustrate this point, it
is difficult to establish direct morphological and functional correlations
between a macroscopic FG Nup “material” and the NPC
permeability barrier (nanoscopic). Being several orders of magnitude
larger in size, a hydrogel itself can consist of several different
higher order structures and phases with distinct materials properties.
Indeed, structural microanalysis has recently revealed that FG Nup
hydrogels are comprised of several submicrometer-sized channels enmeshed
within a structurally complex network of amyloid fibers (e.g., “Swiss
cheese”). As depicted in Figure , it is possible that each submicrometer channel
may contain surface-tethered FG Nups such that it resembles and imparts
NPC-like functionality to the hydrogel. Conversely, surface-tethered
FG Nups are physically constrained, unlike single molecules in solution.
Last, the NPC barrier may very well resemble a composite material
given that the high Kap occupancy may significantly alter the FG Nup
characteristics. Therefore, the challenge is not to simply understand
FG Nup behavior alone, but rather to resolve how Kap binding and occupancy
alters the physicochemical properties of the FG Nups under conditions
and length scales that are compatible with the NPC.
 

3.4

## Intrinsic Disorder in the Ribonucleoprotein
Complexes
3.4.1

## Intrinsically Disordered Histones and Nucleosome
RNA- and DNA-binding proteins are enriched in intrinsic disorder, , , , with
many nuclear proteins being IDPs involved in the regulation of transcription
and cell signaling, and with many transcription
factors being either completely disordered or containing long IDPRs. , , Disorder is also very common
in the histone family of small, highly basic nuclear proteins that
associate with DNA in a specific stoichiometry to form the nucleosome,
the basic unit of DNA packaging in eukaryotes. Histone family in mammals
has five classes, core histones H2A, H2B, H3, H4, and a linker histone
H1, which is substituted by a histone H5 in avian erythrocytes containg
nucleus. These histone classes are further divided into multiple subclasses,
each containing numerous variants expressed in a cellular context-dependent
manner. Being responsible for the DNA condensation in chromatin, histones
are involved in major cellular processes, such as DNA damage response,
X chromosome inactivation, transcriptional regulation, and even formation
of an epigenetic memory. − The activity of histones is intimately regulated via the broad range
of reversible, enzymatically catalyzed posttranslational modifications
(PTMs) constituting a specific histone code. − Several diseases and syndromes are related to the dysregulation
of histone functions and PTMs. 
Formation of chromatin is a very efficient way of DNA condensation
and packing inside the cell nucleus, which allows the almost 2 m-long
human DNA to be condensed to fit inside a nucleus with a diameter
of only 5–10 μm. This high
degree of DNA condensation is achieved via DNA interaction with histones
to form the specific “beads on a string” structure,
where each “bead” is the nucleosome core particle that
typically contains about twice as much protein as DNA. The eukaryotic nucleosome core particle contains
146 base pairs of DNA, wrapped 1.65 times around a histone core octamer
consisting of two dimers of H2A–H2B that serve as molecular
caps for the central (H3–H4)2 tetramer, whereas
the H1 histone binds to the DNA as it enters each nucleosome core
particle. 
As with other proteinaceous
machines, the nucleosome does not represent
a simple and static packaging system, being a dynamic regulator of
DNA chemistries in the nucleus, including transcription, replication,
and repair. , This dynamic regulation is achieved
via the modification of stability, structure, and association state
of the core nucleosome proteins. The crucial regulatory roles of intrinsic
disorder in the nucleosome function were recognized long time ago,
because the tails of all four core histones are known to be IDPRs containing sites of numerous and various PTMs. , In fact, reversible lysine acetylation and serine phosphorylation
of the histone tails at specific positions are known to modulate the
structure of chromatin, , and the histone tail-mediated
internucleosomal attraction and control of the chromatin conformation
through site-specific posttranslational modifications constitute the
basis of the histone code hypothesis. − Here, a specific combination of PTMs at
the histone tails affects the chromatic structure and serves as a
sectrete code responsible for the generation of diverse and controllable
biochemical responses by switching various gene transcription and
other signaling events on or off. 
Intrinsic disorderedness of the histone tails follows directly
from their specific amino acid compositions. In fact, the N-terminal
tails are the most basic regions of the core histones, as they contain
no acidic residues, and include 38 and 45 mol % basic residues, for
H2A and H2B, respectively. Furthermore,
in crystal structures, the C-terminal sequences of H2A and H2B histones
extend beyond the histone fold, with the H2A C-terminal 31 residues
adopting the largely extended conformation, and with the H2B C-terminal
extension of 23 residues being predominantly helical. The highly dynamic nature of histone tails
is further visualized by the X-ray structures of nucleosomes where
tail domains appear to sample multiple conformations. , Although the core histones typically contain flexible N-terminal
tails that are not completely resolved in the X-ray crystal structure
of the core nucleosome, some histone
tails are able to adopt specific structures being bound to a linker
DNA or to the acidic patches of core histones. − Circular dichroism and a combination of hydrogen exchange with NMR
experiments revealed that H4/H3 tails acquire structured conformations
as part of nucleosome core particles, whereas H2A and H2B are essentially
disordered. − The intrinsically disordered nature of the
N-terminal “tail” domains (NTDs) of the core histones
and the C-terminal tail domains (CTDs) of linker histones (which make
up ∼28% of the mass of the core histone proteins), peculiarities
of their amino acid compositions, and the role of disorderedness in
functioning and posttranslational modifications of these domains were
systemized in a review by Hansen et al. 
Structural and functional properties of the core histones
H2A,
H2B, H3, and H4 and members of a linker histone family (H1) and conformational
behavior of these important proteins are the subject of intensive
research. Curiously, although the crystal
structure of the nucleosome core particle has been solved, , pure histones dissolved in water with no added salt are in an “extended
loose form”. − Systematic structural characterization of a mixture of calf thymus
core histones H2A, H2B, H3, and H4, revealed that these proteins are
typical IDPs with extremely high conformational plasticity that determines
their ability to fold differently on a condition-dependent manner. 
The analysis of the crystal structure
of the histone core particle
from X. laevis revealed that the NTDs
of both H3 and H2B have random-coil segments passing between the gyres
of the DNA superhelix, whereas the two H4 NTDs have different structures. Also, only about one-third of the total length
of the histone NTDs and CTDs is seen in the electron density map, suggesting that the remainders of tails are
highly disordered. Careful analysis of the nucleosome crystal structure
revealed that the disorderedness goes far beyond the histone tails. In fact, the step-by-step computational dissection
of the nucleosome core particle (see Figure ) revealed that the shapes of individual histone proteins are highly
unusual for typical globular proteins. In fact, even a brief glance
at the nucleosome crystal structure reveals that histones possess
long disordered regions, seen as extended tails protruding from the
core structure (see Figure A). These extension
and protrusions become more evident when DNA chains are taken out
(Figure B). Analysis of the H2A–H2B
dimers (Figures C1 and C2), the (H3–H4)2 tetramer (Figure D), and two H3–H4
dimers (Figure D1 and D2) shows that these
elementary subcomplexes of the nucleosome core particle possess globular
cores that are heavily decorated with protrusions. The subsequent
visual inspection indicates that the individual histone proteins,
H2A (Figure C1a and C2a), H2B (Figure C1b and C2a), H3 (Figure D1a and D2a), and H4 (Figure D1b and D2b),
possess very unusual shapes and are almost complete devoid of the
globular structure. These peculiar shapes suggest that histones are
disordered in the unbound states and form the two-state (or disordered)
complexes via binding-induced folding process. One should remember however that many histones do not completely
fold at interaction with the binding partners, forming instead fuzzy
complexes. Furthermore, the computational analyses of >2000 histones
suggested that the majority of the histone family members are mostly
disordered proteins, with intrinsic disorder extending far beyond
the limits of mentioned NTDs of the core histones and CTDs of linker
histones. This bioinformatics study
also indicated that intrinsic disorder is not only abundant in histones,
but is absolutely necessary for various histone functions, starting
from heterodimerization to formation of higher order oligomers, to
interactions with DNA and other proteins, and to posttranslational
modifications. 
 
3.4.2

## Spliceosome:
Disordered Ribonucleoprotein
Machine for Splicing
One of the characteristic features of
the eukaryotic genes is their mosaic architecture with alternating
coding and noncoding regions, exons and introns. Because of this peculiar
structure, the maturation of the eukaryotic mRNA (mRNA) includes splicing
of the pre-mRNA at splice junctions found at the extreme ends of each
and every intron, leading to the removal of introns and joining of
exons. There are multiple ways of how exons are joined during the
RNA splicing. Some exons are constitutively spliced and are present
in every mRNA produced from a given pre-mRNA. Other exons are nonconstitutively
spliced and are only present in a subset of mRNAs produced from a
given pre-mRNA, providing a basis for alternative splicing, a process
that generate variable forms of mRNA from a single pre-mRNA species.
These alternative splicing events are commonly found in many eukaryotes
(e.g., ∼95% of multiexonic genes in humans are alternatively
spliced), where they contribute to the
increased proteome diversity, , because by this mechanism
a single gene may code for multiple proteins. On the other hand, aberrant
pre-mRNA splicing and distorted alternative splicing constitutes the
basis of some human diseases or contributes to the severity of other
human maladies. − 
Pre-mRNA splicing is found in all
eukaryotic organisms investigated to date, where it is typically done
by a special proteinaceous machine, multimegadalton ribonucleoprotein
(RNP) complex known as spliceosome. , The canonical
assembly of the spliceosome occurs anew on each pre-mRNA that contains
specific sequence elements (such as the 5′ end splice, the
branch point sequence, the polypyrimidine tract, and the 3′
end splice site) that are recognized and utilized during spliceosome
assembly. Two spliceosome types, the major and the minor spliceosomes,
are known. The major spliceosome is responsible for removing the vast
majority of pre-mRNA introns. This machine is composed of five small
nuclear RNPs (snRNPs), the U1, U2, U4/U6, and U5 snRNPs, each of which
contains a corresponding small nuclear RNA (snRNA) molecule (U1, U2,
U4, U5, or U6), and a number of core proteins. The minor spliceosome
is present in some metazoan species and plants. In addition to the
U5 snRNP, which is shared between the machineries, the minor spliceosome
contains the compositionally distinct but functionally analogous U11/U12
and U4atac/U6atac snRNPs. A common feature
of all spliceosomal snRNPs except U6 is the presence of seven mutually
related Sm proteins. U6 contains a set of related “like-Sm”
(Lsm) proteins. These Sm or Lsm proteins
form a ring structure with the positively charged central hole, where
a U-rich sequence in the corresponding snRNA binds. , These core structures are further enhanced by 80–150 proteins
that are abundant in the human spliceosome and are essential to the
process of spliceosome-dependent splicing. 
In spliceosome, the snRNA acts as a catalyst, whereas the
spliceosomal
proteins and nonspliceosomal pre-mRNA processing proteins (Prps) not
only hold the RNA in the correct configuration but also carry out
essential recognition, regulation, and catalytic functions during
the assembly of the spliceosome and in the splicing-related catalytic
reactions, − play crucial roles in the selection of intron
substrates during the alternative splicing, and have important functions related to the specificity, accuracy,
and regulation of the spliceosome. These
proteins are mostly conserved from yeast to metazoan. 
The spliceosome conformation and composition
are highly dynamic. The spliceosome
assembly is an ordered and
tightly regulated process that starts with recognition of the 5′
end of the intron (5′ splice site, 5′ss) of the pre-mRNA
by the U1 snRNP. Next, the U2 snRNP binds to the pre-mRNA’s
branch site, forming complex A. This complex A then binds the preformed
U4/U6·U5 tri-snRNP to produce penta-snRNP complex B, which contains
a full set of five snRNAs in a precatalytic state. Complex B is then
activated for catalysis by a major rearrangement of its RNA network
and by global changes of its overall structure, where the association
of U4 with U6 is destabilized, enabling U6 to isomerize into a base-pairing
interaction with U2 to form part of the catalytic center of the spliceosome.
This remodeling also includes dissociation of the U1 and U4 snRNAs
and binding of a set of specific proteins leading to the formation
of the activated spliceosome (Bact). Step 1 of splicing
takes place in catalytically activated complex, B*. Here, the adenosine
at the branch site attacks the 5′ss site of the pre-mRNA, generating
a cleaved 5′-exon and intron-3′-exon intermediate. Finally,
complex C is formed via binding another set of specific proteins.
This complex C catalyzes step 2 of splicing, in which the intron is
cleaved at the 3′-splice-site (3′ss) with concomitant
ligation of the 5′ and 3′ exons. , 
Spliceosome is rather well conserved from yeast to human.
In fact,
the yeast spliceosome contains the evolutionarily conserved core set
of spliceosomal proteins that are required for the constitutive splicing
to occur. However, the number of proteins
found in the yeast B, Bact, and C complexes is noticeably
lower than the number of spliceosomal proteins in the metazoan complexes. , For example, there are only ∼60 proteins in the yeast precatalytic
B complexes (as compared to ∼110 in humans and D. melanogaster spliceosomes). Similarly, the yeast C complexes contain only ∼50
proteins as compared to ∼110 in the metazoan C complexes. The reduced proteome of the yeast spliceosome
suggests that the mRNA splicing in yeast is simpler than that in the
metazoan. Many of the proteins found in human and D.
melanogaster spliceosomes but not detected in yeast
play a role in alternative splicing, a process that is essentially
absent in yeast. 
Bioinformatics
analysis of the yeast and human spliceosomes revealed that
despite the fact that the sequence homology between the yeast and
human spliceosomal proteins ranges from 36% to a little over 50%, the spliceosomal proteins of both species are
highly enriched in intrinsic disorder. This suggests that the predisposition
for intrinsic disorder is an evolutionary conserved feature crucial
for the multiple functions ascribed to the spliceosomal proteins.
In agreement with this hypothesis, the bioinformatics analysis of
the correlation between the Swiss-Prot functional keywords and protein
intrinsic disorder clearly showed that mRNA processing and mRNA splicing
were among the 20 top biological processes associated with protein
intrinsic disorder. Furthermore, the
functional keyword “spliceosome” was among the top 20
cellular components strongly correlated with predicted disorder. Also, there are several case studies, where
intrinsic disorder was found in some spliceosomal proteins. For example,
NMR analysis revealed that the flanking N- (residues 1–20)
and C-terminal regions (residues 100–125) of the protein p14
(which is a subunit of the essential splicing factor 3b (SF3b) present
in both the major and the minor spliceosomes, − and which is located near the catalytic center of the spliceosome
and is responsible for the first catalytic step of the splicing reaction , ) are disordered. Serine/arginine-rich
(SR) splicing factors are important spliceosomal IDPs, which, besides
their significance for both constitutive and alternative splicing, play key roles in the spliceosome assembly
by facilitating recruitment of components of the spliceosome via protein–protein
interactions that are potentially mediated
by the disordered SR domains of these splicing factors. 

3.4.3

## Flexible Fossil: Ribosome
Protein
translation is a process of protein biosynthesis from individual amino
acids delivered by tRNAs (tRNAs) using mRNA as a template. This is
one of the most central biosynthetic processes present in all living
organisms. The process is catalyzed by a large RNP, ribosome, which
is divided into two subunits, large and small, each with the set of
well-defined functions. Among the functions of the small subunit are
binding and decoding of the mRNA (this subunit contains the decoding
center, which monitors the complementarity of tRNA and mRNA in protein
translation), whereas the major functions of the large subunit are
binding of the tRNA, and the actual calaysis of the polypeptide synthesis
(this subunit contains the active site of the ribosome, that acts
as the ribozyme by using the specific rRNA (rRNA) nucleotides to catalyze
chemical reaction of the peptide bond synthesis).
Although ribosomes
are responsible for the synthesis of proteins across all kingdoms
of life, and although their core functions are mRNA decoding and catalysis
of the peptide bond formation, many
other translation-related processes (such as initiation, termination,
and regulation) are different in different domains of life. , This is reflected in the noticeable differences between the prokaryotic
and eukaryotic ribosomes. The prokaryotic ribosomes are the 70S RNP particles with the small and large subunits of 30S and 50S, respectively. The small 30S subunit contains a 16S rRNA and 21 proteins,
whereas the large 50S subunit possesses two rRNAs
(5S and 23S) and 31 proteins. Eukaryotes
have a larger ribosome (80S) consisting of the 40S (small) and the 60S (large) subunits.
The small subunit is comprised of a single 18S rRNA
and 33 proteins, whereas the eukaryotic 60S subunit
is composed of three rRNAs (5S rRNA, 28S rRNA, and 5.8S rRNA) and 46 proteins. Of the 79 eukaryotic ribosomal proteins, 32
have no homologues in bacterial or archaeal ribosomes, and those that
do have homologues possess long eukaryote-specific extensions. 
Ribosomal proteins, with their unique
functional and structural
properties, are an intriguing family of the RNA-binding IDPs that
are involved in interaction with both RNA and other proteins. In addition
to being a crucial structural part of a ribosome, many ribosomal proteins
are involved in translational regulation via binding to operator sites
located on their own mRNAs. On the other
hand, some ribosomal proteins (e.g., S16, L15, L16, L20, and L24)
are mostly essential for the assembly of the RNP particle and are
dispensable for function after the ribosomal subunits are fully assembled, suggesting that their major function in the
assembled ribosome is related to the improvement of the ribosome stability.
Among the various on-ribosome finctions of the ribosomal proteins
are the delivery of the mRNA into the proximity of the ribosome during
initiation (S1), formation of the mRNA entry pore (S3, S4, and S5),
some helicase activity to unwind mRNA during translation (S3, S4,
and S5), decoding and control of the fidelity of translation (S4,
S5, and S12), release and binding of tRNAs to the ribosome (L1 and
L16/L27), elongation-factor binding and GTPase activation (L7/L12),
interaction with nascent chains to control translation of particular
proteins (L22), regulation of the tRNA stability at the P site (L9),
regulation of the mRNA movement (L9), controlling of the efficiency
of the translational bypassing (L9), etc. Besides these and many other
on-ribosome functions that were covered in a recent in-depth review, many ribosomal proteins were shown to act as
moonlighting proteins, being involved in numerous extra-ribosomal
or auxiliary functions. , − The multitude of extra-ribosomal functions of ribosomal proteins
were grouped into two major categories related to the control of the
balance among the ribosomal components and control of the nucleolar
stress and aberrant ribosome synthesis leading to the cell cycle arrest
or apoptosis. 
The facts that many
ribosomal proteins are either completely disordered
or contain long IDPRs in isolation are known for a long time. , On the basis of the analysis of the crystal structures of ribosome
subunits, it was discovered that almost one-half of the ribosomal
proteins have globular domains with long extensions that penetrate
deeply into the ribosome particle’s core. − It was also indicated that many of the disordered protrusions play
important roles in ribosomal assembly, , − where the long basic extensions of ribosomal proteins (e.g., L3,
L4, L13, L20, L22, and L24) penetrate deeply into the ribosome subunit
cores, undergo disorder–order transition individually, or cofold
with their RNA, thereby facilitating the proper rRNA folding. One can argue that in the cell, most of the
ribosomal proteins only exist in the bound state and are never found
in isolation. However, as discussed above, many ribosomal proteins
are moonlighting proteins possessing various extra-ribosomal or auxiliary
functions. , − This suggests that these moonlighting ribosomal proteins might spent
some part of their functional life in the noncomplexed form, at least
while transitioning from one fucntional state to another. Also, some
ribosomal proteins preserve flexibility even in their bound forms
(e.g., flexible “stalk” formed by L7/L12 protein , ). Furthermore, local flexibility provides means necessary for the
easy access of the modifying enzymes to the potential PTM sites, which
are abundant in some ribosomal proteins (e.g., recent high-throughput
proteomics analyses and mapping studies showed that ribosomal proteins
and translation factors in mitochondria are commonly phosphorylated
and acetylated; the S6 phosphorylation
on five evolutionarily conserved serine residues is known to occur
in response to a wide range of stimuli ).
The computational disassembly of the eukaryotic ribosome
revealed
that almost all ribosomal proteins are characterized by the very unusual
shapes inconsistent with simple globular structure, suggesting that
many ribosomal proteins are involved in the formation of the two-state
(or disordered) complexes. This conclusion
is based on the results of the ribosome structure analysis using the
per-residue surface area versus the per-residue interface area plot. In this plot, ordered and disordered proteins
are separated by a linear boundary, with the components of the disordered
complexes formed via a two-state mechanism being distributed sparsely
over a broad area in the top-right part of the plot, and with the
protomers of the ordered complexes formed via the three-state mechanism
being condensed in the small area at the bottom-right corner of the
plot. Figure D represents the per-residue surface area versus the per-residue
interface area plot based on the analysis of the eukaryotic ribosome
crystal structure, and clearly shows that almost all of the ribosomal
proteins are expected to be disordered in their unbound form, being
located above the order–disorder boundary. These observations suggest that almost all ribosomal proteins
are likely to be intrinsically disordered in isolation but fold to
a different degree upon the ribosome formation. This hypothesis is in agreement with the earlier experimental
studies, which showed that many individual ribosomal proteins do not
possess ordered structure in their nonbound forms or at least contain
long disordered regions. , − Further support to this idea came from the comprehensive bioinformatics
analysis of 3411 ribosomal proteins from 32 species. This analysis revealed that the vast majority of ribosomal
proteins are intrinsically disordered, and that intrinsic disorder
is very important for various biological functions of these important
RNA-binding proteins, being commonly used as means for the numerous
interactions of any given ribosomal protein with its various binding
partners of different nature, such as other ribosomal proteins, RNA,
and proteins from the translational machinery. The intrinsically disordered
nature of ribosomal proteins is highly conserved in different domains
of life, indicating that the lack of rigid structure and the resulting
capabilities of the ribosomal proteins to interact with various binding
partners and be involved in the wide spectrum of the moonlighting
activities represent strong evolutionary advantage. 
Ribosomes are excellent examples of the IDP-rich
machines, where
disorder goes far beyond the discussed above extensive disordered
nature of ribosomal proteins. For example, recent cryo-EM analysis
generated a 6.6 Å resolution snapshot of the last step in eukaryotic
initiation, the complex of the 80S ribosome, Met-tRNAiMet, mRNA, and initiation factor eIF5B with the nonhydrolyzable
GTP analogue β-γ-methyleneguanosine 5′-triphosphate
(GDPCP). Curiously, this analysis revealed
that only the G-domain and domain II of the initiation factor eIF5B
were clearly visible in the complex, suggesting that the eIF5B had
become partially disordered. Also, recent
cryo-EM analysis of the eukaryotic release factor eRF1–eRF3-associated
termination complex containing 80S ribosome, tRNA, and eRF1–eRF3–GMPPNP
complex revealed that both eukaryotic release factors (eRF1 and eRF3)
underwent dramatic conformational changes as a result of complex formation,
where their domains shifted and rotated substantially as compared
to the structures of individual eRF1 and eRF3. Flexibility in linker regions connecting domains of eRF1
and eRF3 defines the ability of these factors to contact both ribosomal
units at multiple sites. Furthermore,
it was shown that binding of release factors induces conformational
changes in both 40S and 60S subunits
affecting the entrance of the mRNA-binding channel in the 40S subunit and the two stalks of the 60S subunit. 

3.5

## Scaffold
Proteins: The Pliable Heart of the
Signaling Machines
Among the realm of nonobligate and transient
multimers are various signaling and regulatory complexes characterized
by the presence of special scaffold proteins that selectively bring
together specific proteins within signaling pathways to facilitate
and promote interactions between them. Scaffold proteins influence
cellular signaling by providing specialized binding platforms for
multiple signaling enzymes, receptors, or ion channels. , − In essence, scaffold proteins represent a subclass of hubs that,
being characterized by a modest number of interacting partners, provide
selective spatial orientation and temporal coordination to facilitate
interactions among bound partners. In this way, a set of important
temporal, spatial, orientational, and contextual aspects is added,
which is crucial for modulation and regulation of alternative pathways
by promoting interactions between various signaling proteins. Being located at the heart of the crucial signaling
complexes, scaffold proteins possess multiple functions, ranging from
passive “bringer together” specific proteins within
signaling pathways to providing coordination of alternate signal routes
in multiple pathways, to binding simultaneously to multiple participants
in a particular pathway to facilitate and/or modify the specificity
of pathway interactions, , to acting on individual
proteins by changing their conformation and thus modulating their
activity, to acting on interaction partners by providing proximity
and spatial orientation, to controlling the relative position between
bound partners, to regulating the composition of bound proteins, to
creating focal points for spatial and temporal coordination of catalytic
activity of signaling enzymes. , Systematic computational
analysis revealed that there are several mechanisms by which intrinsic
disorder contributes to the functions of scaffold proteins. Some illustrative examples of the advantages
of these disorder-based functions of scaffold proteins are the ability for binding of the modular domains
(such as SH2, SH3, or PDZ domains) or the helical repeats (such as
armadillo, HEAT, and tetratricopeptide) found in scaffold proteins
to specific short linear motifs located in signaling proteins; ability
of binding of specific signaling proteins to the disordered MoRFs
located within scaffold proteins; ease of encounter complex formation;
structural isolation of partners; modulation of interactions between
bound partners; ability to mask the intramolecular interaction sites;
maximizing interaction surface per residue; toleration of high evolutionary
rates; competitive binding due to the binding site overlap; allosteric
modulation; suitability for palindromic binding; and efficient regulation
via posttranslational modifications, alternative splicing, and rapid
degradation.

3.6

## Flexibility of Cytoskeleton
and Extracellular
Matrix
3.6.1

## Intrinsic Disorder and Cytoskeleton
In this section, we consider the roles of intrinsic disorder for
function of seemingly rigid proteinaceous machines, cytoskeleton and
extracellular matrix. The cytoskeleton is a special proteinaceous
intracellular scaffolding present within all cells. Among various
functions ascribed to this organelle are maintenance of the cellular
structure and shape, active roles in intracellular transport (the
movement of vesicles and organelles, for example), and cellular division.
Although the term “skeleton” implies rigidity, cellular
cytoskeleton is characterized by the combination of opposite characteristics,
such as stability and dynamics, physical rigidity and flexibility,
long-time persistence, and rapid, cataclysmic rearrangements. Eukaryotic cytoskeleton is composed of three
basic components: microfilaments (actin), intermediate filaments (IFs),
or neurofilaments (NFs) in neuronal cells (these are the most heterogeneous
part of the cytoskeleton, and depending on a cell type, IFs can be
made of vimentin, acidic and basic keratins, desmin, peripherin, neurofilament
proteins, syncoilin, lamin, phakinin, and filensin), and microtubules
(MTs, which are the polymerized tubulin α/β heterodimers).
The cytoskeleton defines the physical separation of cellular constituents
that provides a special microenvironment, segregation, and direction
of cellular activities. 
Importantly,
recent comprehensive computational analysis revealed that many proteins
involved in the organization of three major filamentous networks comprising
cytoskeleton, for example, microfilaments (actin filaments), intermediate
filaments (neurofilaments), and microtubules, are intrinsically disordered
or hybrid proteins possessing functionally important disordered regions. It was emphasized that these three cytoskeletal
systems possess a very similar architectural design with a central
repetitive scaffold assembled from folded building elements being
surrounded by accessory intrinsically disordered regions/proteins
that regulate formation of this core and control, regulate, and mediate
its interactions with its environment, and send specific regulatory
signals to and from the cytoskeleton. In fact, proteins in the actin-based component of the cytoskeleton
were predicted to possess, on average, 30% disordered residues, with
many proteins associated with microfilaments (such as tymosin α,
β-thymosin, juxtanodin (or ermin), cordon-blue, epsin, WASP,
SCAR/WAVE, cortactin (EMS1), supervillin, JMY, and spire) being highly
disordered proteins. Furthermore, actin
itself, being the major component of the microfilaments, was shown
to possess multiple features ascribed to IDPs. What is even more important, microfilaments decorated with
the intrinsically disordered actin binding proteins (such as β-thymosin
and Wiskott–Aldrich syndrome protein homology domain 2 (WH2))
represent an important illustration of fuzzy complexes, where the
intrinsic disorder of WH2 and β-thymosin is partially conserved
in the bound state, and where the resulting fuzziness is needed to
assemble and disassemble the actin polymer. , 
Actin is an enigmatic multifunctional protein. It is found
in almost
every living cell, being most common in the muscle cells, where its
concentration ranges from 230 to 960 μM. Among various functional and structural features ascribed
to this protein are its ability to bind one divalent cation and one
molecule of ATP (or ADP), the ability to exists in monomeric form
known as G-actin, or a single-stranded polymer, the so-called fibrous
form known as F-actin, or in oligomeric inactive form that lacks the
ability to polymerize and can be produced by the release of cation
by EDTA or EGTA treatment, − among other means. Furthermore,
actin is found not only in the cellular cytoplasm where it participates
in the dynamic life of cytoskeletal microfilamets, but within the
cell nucleus, , where it can act as a transcription
initiator by interacting with nuclear myosin bound to RNA polymerases
and other proteins related to the transcription process, thereby playing crucial roles in regulation
of transcription, transcription factor
activity, and chromatin remodeling. 
The “functional” forms
of actin in the muscle, the
cytoplasm of the nonmuscle cells, and the nucleus are rather different.
In the muscle, being assembled, the filaments are not disassembled,
and new filaments appear only during the muscle growth or reparation;
therefore, the main functional form of actin here is F-actin. In the
nonmuscle cytoplasm, although the cytoskeleton is composed of actin
fibrils, it can be assembled and disassembled. Cell motility is also
based on actin filament polymerization and depolymerization. Therefore,
a sufficiently large amount of actin monomers must be stored in the
cytoplasm to support the effective function of actin. In the nucleus,
for the first time, actin monomers play a significant role by regulating
the serum response factor activity. The actin monomer pool is involved
in controlling the expression of many proteins that are themselves
components of the actin cytoskeleton. Besides, actin is characterized by a very unusual unfolding mechanism
(unfolding with a trap), where the formation of the transition state
N* precedes the transformation of the native actin into the essentially
unfolded form (U*). The formation of this essentially unfolded state
(U*) precedes the formation of completely unfolded (U) or inactivated
actin (I). In the processes of folding and unfolding, the essentially
unfolded state (U*) is an on-pathway intermediate, whereas inactivated
actin (I) is an off-pathway oligomeric form, the appearance of which
competes with the transition to the native state. , In vitro unfolding of this protein is a very complex, irreversible
process, indicating that the information encoded in its polypeptide
chain is not sufficient to ensure normal folding. Actin not only cannot
fold without chaperons but also cannot form a compact structure without
its ligands, the Ca2+ ion, and ATP. Also, it cannot maintain
the folded native state without fastening it with the Ca2+ ions. Actin always exists as a part of various complexes. Similar
to many other IDPs, actin interacts with an enormous number of partners,
acting as a hub protein, , and possesses numerous
PTM sites. Many of the actin binding proteins themselves are IDPs
involved in various signaling systems and interacting with other hub
proteins.

3.6.2

## Intrinsic Disorder in
the Extracellular
Matrix
The extracellular matrix is another example of semirigid,
proteinaceous, scaffolding structure that represents a three-dimensional
network fulfilling structural and biological functions (they contribute
to the shape, organization, and mechanical properties, such as tensile
strength and resistance to compression, of tissues) and is comprised
of multidomain proteins and proteoglycans. Extracellular structural
proteins include collagens, the most abundant protein family in the
body (∼30% of total protein), elastin and associated proteins (fibrillins, fibulins), laminins, and
a ubiquitous extracellular protein, fibronectin. Many other proteins termed matricellular proteins, being
deposited into the extracellular matrix and bound to structural proteins,
do not play a structural role. These proteins (such as thrombospondins,
secreted protein acidic, and rich in cysteine, SPARC, osteopontin)
act as extracellular “adapters” and modulate cell function. Comprehensive bioinformatics analysis revealed
that, as compared to the complete human proteome, the extracellular
proteome is significantly enriched in proteins containing more than
50% of disordered residues. The characteristic
feature of the proteins in extracellular matrix is the presence of
long IDPRs. Organization and assembly of the extracellular matrix,
development of mineralized tissues, and cell-matrix adhesion are the
biological processes overrepresented in the most disordered extracellular
proteins. Among important functions ascribed to extracellular disorder
are binding to growth factors, glycosaminoglycans, and integrins at
the molecular level. One of the interesting
players in the extracellular matrix assembly is elastin, a vertebrate
protein responsible for the elastic recoil of arteries, skin, lung
alveoli, and uterine tissue. − It was pointed out that the
elastic properties of elastin are very similar to the elasticity of
an insect elastic protein resilin, which is used by various insects
to store elastic energy needed for action of the wing joints of dragonflies and the jumping mechanism of fleas. Contrarily to the collagens that typically
form a highly ordered, triple helix structure possessing 10 times the elastic energy storage capacity
of steel, the flexible and easily stretched
structure of elastin is characterized
by a significant amount of structural disorder. , , Despite the highly disordered
nature of both monomeric elastin and elastin fibrils fibrils, this
protein has a half-life of about 74 years, being the longest lasting protein in the body.

4

## Concluding Remarks
Intrinsic disorder is a versatile
feature of large protein complexes.
This is a very important observation because a multimeric form represents
the functional state of many proteins. Protein intrinsic disorder
defines the ability of the components of the functional proteinaceous
machine to assemble, move relative to each other, and recognize, accommodate,
and respond to the external regulators. For doing all of this, the
proteinaceous components of the functional protein complexes have
two distinctive types of disorder: for internal use (assembly and
movement) and for the external applications (interaction with regulators).
Intrinsic disorder is uniquely positioned to serve various specific
needs of different proteinaceous machines. For example, ATP-dependent
proteases are molecular machines that unfold proteins and walk along
tracks consisting of unfolded polypeptide chains. The proteasome is
partially held together by a disordered protein, and flexible loops
are essential for the ability of adaptor proteins to shuttle substrates
to proteases. Perhaps, then, it is not surprising that these machines
are sensitive to the presence of intrinsic disorder in their substrates.
Indeed, potential substrates that lack IDPRs are inefficiently degraded,
suggesting that the protease motor must grab onto a disordered region
to unfold the rest of the protein. Intrinsic disorder is not sufficient,
as some intrinsically disordered sequences with unusual sequence composition
cannot support the application of force against a folded domain. Understanding
the complete role of these intrinsically disordered sequences, and
the balance between the need for intrinsic disorder and sequence composition,
will be critical for fully understanding how ATP-dependent proteases
unfold and degrade their substrates.
Similar perspectives can
be drawn for all of the protein complexes
discussed in this Review. For each of them, disorder represents a
universal tool crucial for the complex formation and action. Some
important mechanisms in complex assembly (i.e., assembly chain reaction)
rely on the intrinsic disorder of the complex’s parts and their
capability for mutual folding. Besides various versatile roles of
intrinsic disorder in assembly, function, and regulation of different
proteinaceous machines discussed in this Review, a new concept of
a “stochastic machine” has been recently proposed as
a basic mechanism of a scaffold protein action. According to this concept (which was built based on the
analysis of the mechanisms of action of an intrinsically disordered
scaffold protein axin that colocalizes β-catenin, casein kinase
Iα, and glycogen synthetase kinase 3β), interaction of
binding partners with long IDPR of the scaffold protein generates
a highly dynamic complex comprised of several structured domains connected
by long flexible linkers. Such flexible colocalization was suggested
to dramatically accelerate chemical interactions between proteins
involved in the complex formation and ensured a unique way of controlling
the complex action via random movements of its parts and not by coordinated
conformational changes. 
In this
field, as in protein science in general, transition is
happening from considering complexes as semirigid and static entities
to treating them as highly dynamic ensembles. Because multichain protein
complexes are typically characterized by exceptionally large dimensions,
and because they possess both spatial and temporal structural flexibility
and functional disorder at multiple levels, the analysis of these
ensembles is a challenging task. Therefore, elaboration of novel means
for structural and functional analyses of oligomeric proteins is an
important future direction. Further work is clearly needed for a deeper
understanding of the multifarious roles and functions of intrinsic
disorder in creation and maintenance of proteinaceous machines.

The authors declare no
competing financial interest.
 
Monika
Fuxreiter is an associate professor at University of Debrecen,
Hungary. She was a postdoctoral fellow at USC, Los Angeles, working
with the Nobel prize winner Arieh Warshel. She worked in the Weizmann
Institute, Israel and the Laboratory of Molecular Biology, MRC, Cambridge.
She developed various models for recognition by intrinsically disordered
proteins. She proposed the concept of “fuzzy” protein
complexes, where structural ambiguity exists and is functionally required
in the bound form. She revealed specific regulatory mechanisms by
fuzzy complexes and also their role in context-dependent activities.
Currently, she focuses on the role of fuzzy complexes in eukaryotic
transcriptional regulation. She is a recipient of the L’Oral
Unesco “Women for Science” award.
 
Ágnes
Tóth-Petróczy obtained her M.Sc. degree
in Chemistry at the Eötvös Loránd University,
Budapest, Hungary in 2007. She received her Ph.D. degree in Life Sciences
from the Weizmann Institute of Science, Israel in 2014. While she
was a research student in the group of Dr. Monika Fuxreiter at the
Institute of Enzimology, Hungarian Academy of Sciences, she became
fascinated by disordered proteins and studied the role of disordered
regions in the Mediator complex. Further, she used molecular dynamics
simulations and bioinformatics analysis to study how specific binding
of transcription factors via disordered segments is achieved. During
her Ph.D. studies in the group of Prof. Dan S. Tawfik, she described
several underlying features of protein evolvability, that affect the
tempo and mode by which the sequences and functions of proteins change
 
Daniel Kraut obtained his Bachelor’s degree in Biochemistry
with Highest Honors from Swarthmore College in 2000, where he did
research with Dr. Judith Voet. He then received a Ph.D. from Stanford
University (2006) where he studied mechanistic enzymology with Dr.
Daniel Herschlag. Dr. Kraut then was a postdoctoral fellow in the
lab of Dr. Andreas Matouschek, where he began to study the mechanism
of ATP-dependent proteases. In 2012, he became an Assistant Professor
at Villanova University. Dr. Kraut’s research focuses on the
ability of ATP-dependent proteases to processively unfold their substrates.
 
Andreas Matouschek is a professor in the Department of Molecular
Biosciences at the University of Texas at Austin. His current research
is on the basic biochemical principles that govern proteasome action
and on how these principles are applied in the cell. He obtained his
Ph.D. in the Department of Chemistry at the University of Cambridge,
UK, working on protein folding pathways in vitro in the laboratory
of Alan Fersht. From there, he moved to the Biozentrum at the University
of Basel where he investigated protein folding after their import
into mitochondria in the laboratory of Jeff Schatz. In 1996 he moved
to the Department of Molecular Biosciences at Northwestern University,
Evanston, IL. His laboratory investigated the mechanism of molecular
machines focusing on machines involved in cellular processes that
involved protein unfolding. This included projects on the mechanisms
of the mitochondrial protein import machinery and AAA+ proteases in
bacteria and eukaryotic cells. In 2012, his laboratory moved to the
University of Texas at Austin.
 
Roderick Lim studied applied
physics at the University of North
Carolina at Chapel Hill. He received his Ph.D. from the National University
of Singapore in 2003 for his work on the nanoscale properties of confined
liquids at the Institute of Materials Research and Engineering (Singapore).
Thereafter, he undertook postdoctoral training with Prof. Ueli Aebi
at the M.E. Müller Institute for Structural Biology within
the Biozentrum, University of Basel. During this time, Dr. Lim pioneered
the use of novel nanotechnological fabrication, imaging, and measurement
methods to reproduce in vitro the molecular functionality of the nuclear
pore complex in a stepwise manner. This led to breakthroughs in resolving
how transport receptors known as karyopherins gain selective access
through intrinsically disordered proteins that reside within the nuclear
pore. In 2009, he was appointed as the Argovia Professor for Nanobiology
at the Biozentrum and the Swiss Nanoscience Institute at the University
of Basel, where he received tenure in early 2014. A central theme
of his lab is to get at the fundamental physical determinants and
principles that underlie intracellular and mechano-cellular transport
processes in health and disease.
 
Bin Xue is an Assistant
professor in the Department of Cell Biology,
Microbiology, and Molecular Biology at University of South Florida.
After obtaining his Ph.D. in soft condensed matter physics from Nanjing
University, China (2005), Dr. Xue continued his research in computational
structural proteomics at State University of New York, at Buffalo,
and then Indiana University and Purdue University at Indianapolis.
In 2008, he joined in the Center for Computational Biology and Bioinformatics
and the Institute for Intrinsically Disordered Protein Research in
Indiana University and Purdue University at Indianapolis to work on
intrinsically disordered proteins and bioinformatics. He was a research
faculty in the Department of Molecular Biology at the University of
South Florida before taking the current position. Dr. Xue has published
more than 60 peer-reviewed papers and several book chapters. He is
the associate editor/regional editor/academic editor/editorial member
of many international journals.
 
Lukasz Kurgan received
Ph.D. in computer science from the University
of Colorado at Boulder in 2003. Currently, he is a Professor at the
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering at the University
of Alberta. His research interests are in the development and application
of computational methods for high-throughput analysis of sequences,
structures, and functions of proteins and short RNAs. He has published
close to 100 peer-reviewed journal articles. More details are on the
Web site of his lab at http://biomine.ece.ualberta.ca/.
 
Vladimir Uversky obtained his Ph.D. in biophysics from the Moscow
Institute of Physics and Technology (1991) and D.Sc. in biophysics
from the Institute of Experimental and Theoretical Biophysics, Russian
Academy of Sciences (1998). He spent his early career working on protein
folding at the Institute of Protein Research and the Institute for
Biological Instrumentation (Russian Academy of Sciences). Here, while
working on the experimental characterization of protein folding, Dr.
Uversky has found that some mostly unstructured proteins can be biologically
active. These findings, together with the similar observations of
other researchers, eventually forced him to reconsider the generality
of the protein structure–function paradigm and to suggest that
natively unfolded (or intrinsically disordered) proteins represent
a new important realm of the protein kingdom. In 1998, he moved to
the University of California Santa Cruz to work on protein folding,
misfolding, and protein intrinsic disorder. In 2004, he moved to the
Center for Computational Biology and Bioinformatics at the Indiana
University–Purdue University Indianapolis to work on the intrinsically
disordered proteins. Since 2010, he has been with the Department of
Molecular Biology at the University of South Florida, where he is
now an Associate Professor. At the University of South Florida, Dr.
Uversky has continued his work on various aspects of protein intrinsic
disorder phenomenon and on analysis of protein folding and misfolding.
He has published over 500 peer-reviewed articles and book chapters
in these fields. Dr. Uversky participated in the establishment of
the Intrinsically Disordered Proteins Subgroup at the Biophysical
Society and the Intrinsically Disordered Proteins Gordon Research
Conference. He is an Executive Editor of the Intrinsically Disordered
Proteins journal published by the Landes Bioscience.

## Acknowledgments
We are thankful to K. D. Schleicher for
assistance with the
artwork. M.F. acknowledges the support of Momentum program (LP2012-41)
of the Hungarian Academy of Sciences and the OTKA NN 106562 program
of the Hungarian Science Fund. V.N.U. acknowledges partial support
from the Program of the Russian Academy of Sciences for “Molecular
and cellular biology”.

## Abbreviations
ADactivation domain
AFMatomic force microscope
BBSBardet–Biedl syndrome
CBPCREB binding protein
CDcircular dichroism
CDKcyclin-dependent
kinase
Cdk2cyclin-dependent
kinase 2
Cdk8cyclin-dependent
kinase 8
CiCubitus
interruptus
CREBcyclic-AMP-response-element-binding
protein
Cryo-EMcryo-electron microscopy
CTDC-terminal domain
DHPRdihydropiridine receptor
E1Aadenovirus early region 1A oncoprotein
EMelectron microscopy
FG NupPhe-Gly (FG)-rich
Nup
GDPCPnonhydrolyzable
GTP analogue β-γ-methyleneguanosine
5′-triphosphate
GMPPNPnonhydrolyzable GTP analogue
guanosine 5′-[β,γ-imido]triphosphate
Hbhydrophobic
IDintrinsically disordered
IDPintrinsically disordered
protein
IDPRintrinsically
disordered protein
region
IFintermediate
filament
Kapkaryopherin
KIDkinase inducible
activation domain
KIXKID-binding
KNFmodel proposed by Koshland, Nemethy,
and Filmer
Lsmlike-Sm
MoRFmolecular recognition
feature
mRNAmRNA
MWCmodel proposed
by Monod, Wyman,
and Changeux
NCTnucleocytoplasmic transport
NEnuclear envelope
NESnuclear export signal
NFneurofilament
NLSnuclear localization signal
NPCnuclear pore complex
NTDN-terminal domain
NTF2nuclear transport factor
2
Nupnucleoporin
PICpreinitiation complex
pRbretinoblastoma
protein
Prppre-mRNA
processing protein
PTMposttranslational modification
Rrelaxed
RanGAPRan GTPase-activating protein
RanGEFguanine nucleotide exchange factor
RNAPIIRNA polymerase II
RNPribonucleoprotein
RODreduction of dimensionality
rRNArRNA
SAMPsmall ubiquitin-like
modifier protein
smFRETsingle-molecule fluorescence
resonance energy transfer
SNAP-25synaptosome-associated protein
of 25 kDa
SNAREsoluble N-ethylmaleimide-sensitive
factor attachment protein receptor
snRNAsmall nuclear RNA
SPARKsecreted protein acidic and rich
in cysteine
3′ss3′-splice-site
SRserine/arginine-rich
Ttense
TBPTATA-box binding protein
TFtranscription factor
tRNAtRNA
UBAubiquitin-associated
Ublubiquitin-like