SOURCE URL: https://docs.cloud.google.com/billing/docs/how-to/budgets-spend-caps
FINAL URL: https://docs.cloud.google.com/billing/docs/how-to/budgets-spend-caps
HTTP: 200
CONTENT-TYPE: text/html; charset=utf-8
======================================================================
Manage spend cap budgets | Cloud Billing | Google Cloud Documentation 

 Skip to main content

 Technology areas

 close 

 AI and ML

 Application development

 Application hosting

 Compute

 Data analytics and pipelines

 Databases

 Distributed, hybrid, and multicloud

 Industry solutions

 Migration

 Networking

 Observability and monitoring

 Security

 Storage

 Cross-product tools

 close 

 Access and resources management

 Costs and usage management

 Infrastructure as code

 SDK, languages, frameworks, and tools

 / 

 Console

 English 

 Deutsch 

 Español – América Latina 

 Français 

 Português – Brasil 

 中文 – 简体 

 日本語 

 한국어 

 Sign in 

 Cloud Billing

 Start free 

 Overview

 Guides

 APIs & Reference

 Resources

 Technology areas

 More

 Overview

 Guides

 APIs & Reference

 Resources

 Cross-product tools

 More

 Console

 Discover 

 Product overview 

 Cost management for project owners 
 
 Key concepts and tools 
 Set up project-scoped access 

 Supported currencies and payment methods 

 Find your account type and charging cycle 

 Find your billing account ID 

 Find your billing account administrator 

 Get started 

 Create a new Cloud Billing account 

 Get started from other products 

 Use Gemini Cloud Assist in Billing 

 Apply for invoiced billing 

 Interactive tutorials in the Google Cloud console 

 Pay your bill 

 Get an invoice, statement, or receipt 

 View your transaction history 

 Pay for invoiced accounts 
 
 Understand your monthly invoice 
 Split invoicing for agency model transactions 
 Pay your invoice 
 Update your PO number 

 Pay for self-serve (online) accounts 
 
 Split charging cycles for online billing accounts 
 Add, remove, or update a payment method 
 Make a manual payment, or pay early 

 Monitor your costs 

 Organize your resources for cost management 

 Analyze your AI spend with the AI Cost Summary Agent 

 Create budgets and set up spending alerts 
 
 Create, edit, or delete a budget alert 
 Manage a spend cap budget 
 Customize budget alert email recipients 

 View built-in billing reports 
 
 Choose a billing report 

 Analyze billing data with Reports 
 
 Access and configure Reports 
 View Gemini Enterprise costs in Reports 
 View and analyze your savings 
 View charges on invoices 
 View your forecasted costs 
 View costs by project hierarchy 
 View a budget in your report 

 Understand your monthly invoice with the cost table report 
 View and download your price lists 
 Understand your savings with cost breakdown reports 

 Export billing data for analysis 
 
 Overview of billing data export to BigQuery 
 Set up billing data export to BigQuery 
 Set up FOCUS export to BigQuery 
 Understand the billing data tables in BigQuery 
 Structure of FOCUS data export 
 Structure of Standard data export 
 Structure of Detailed data export 
 Structure of Pricing data export 
 Structure of CUD metadata export 
 Example queries for Cloud Billing 

 View and manage cost anomalies 

 Track your spend-based milestone credits 

 Optimize usage costs 

 Optimize costs with FinOps hub 
 
 Discover potential savings using the FinOps hub 
 Review and apply FinOps hub Recommendations 
 Review utilization and wasted usage insights 

 Committed use discounts 
 
 About CUDs for cost optimization 
 View your commitments 
 Analyze CUDs 
 Calculate savings with Compute flexible commitments 

 Estimate costs for simulated workloads 

 Optimize infrastructure management and data protection costs 
 
 About Infrastructure Management Essentials 
 Enable or disable Infrastructure Management Essentials 

 Discounts for education accounts 
 
 Get and redeem education grants 
 Get a data transfer discount for research and education 

 Automate cost management 

 Set up programmatic notifications 

 Set up cost control responses 
 
 Listen to your notifications 
 Send notifications to Slack 
 Control resource usage with notifications 
 Disable billing with notifications 

 Manage billing status of projects 

 View projects linked to a billing account 

 Verify the billing status of projects 

 Enable, disable, or change billing for a project 

 Lock a project to its billing account 

 Manage Cloud Billing accounts 

 About account management 

 Modify your Cloud Billing account 

 Close or reopen your Cloud Billing account 

 Control access to Cloud Billing 
 
 Overview of billing access control 
 Create custom roles for billing 
 Manage access to billing accounts 
 Manage access to payment methods 

 Manage payments for self-serve (autopay) accounts 
 
 Add, remove, or update a payment method 
 Verify your bank account 

 Troubleshoot 

 Resolve common billing issues 

 Restart services 

 AI and ML

 Application development

 Application hosting

 Compute

 Data analytics and pipelines

 Databases

 Distributed, hybrid, and multicloud

 Industry solutions

 Migration

 Networking

 Observability and monitoring

 Security

 Storage

 Access and resources management

 Costs and usage management

 Infrastructure as code

 SDK, languages, frameworks, and tools

 Home

 Documentation

 Costs and usage management

 Cloud Billing

 Guides

 Send feedback

 Manage spend cap budgets 

 Stay organized with collections

 Save and categorize content based on your preferences.

 Preview

 This product or feature is
 
 subject to the "Pre-GA Offerings Terms" in the General Service Terms section
 of the Service Specific
 Terms .
 
 Pre-GA products and features are available "as is" and might have limited support.
 
 For more information, see the
 launch stage descriptions .

 This document explains how to create, edit, and delete spend cap budgets
on projects linked to a Cloud Billing account.

 About spend cap budgets

 Spend Caps in Cloud Billing Budgets help reduce unexpected or runaway costs
for eligible services .
To help you stay informed about how your spend is tracking against your
budget, alert emails are sent when your spend exceeds 50% and 80% of your
spend cap budget amount.

 The spend cap is enforced when your usage costs exceed 100% of your
budget amount. When a spend cap budget is enforced, usage of your specified
services is automatically paused until you manually lift the spend cap.
Enforcement also triggers alerts, including email notifications and banners in
the billing console UI, with information and guidance about how to lift the cap.

 How spend cap budgets work to help you control spend

 For faster enforcement, spend caps use gross, estimated costs to trigger
alerts and enforce the spend cap.

 Automatic pause of usage and cost accrual when the spend cap is triggered

 In the specified project, when your gross, estimated usage costs for the
specific service exceed your budget target amount, the spend cap is triggered
and enforced. While enforced, all new usage for the specific service in the
specified project is blocked, pausing usage associated with the specific
service, including on-demand, pay-as-you-go usage and usage covered by
commitments such as
 Committed use discounts (CUDs) 
and
 Provisioned Throughput (PT) .
Any in-flight requests of the specified service are processed to completion,
accruing charges as applicable.

 Spend caps don't pause any on-going, fixed usage associated with persistent 
resources (such as compute and storage services), which remain active and
continue to accrue charges.

 Manual intervention required to restore services and spending

 When a spend cap is enforced, the usage block is reversed only when you
 manually lift the spend cap .
Lifting a spend cap restores normal function to the API calls. To unblock the
usage, in the billing console, edit the budget to manually lift the cap.

 Alerts sent when the spend cap is triggered

 When a spend cap is triggered, an email alert is sent to all billing account
administrators and project owners with details about how to lift the cap.
You'll also see banners in the billing console UI, on the Budgets page and the
Billing Overview page.

 Services that are eligible for spend cap budgets

 Spend caps are available for specific API-based services, including:

 Gemini API 

 Gemini Enterprise Agent Platform (formerly Vertex AI) 

 Cloud Run 

 Cloud Run functions 

 Limitations of spend cap budgets

 Spend cap budgets are subject to the following limitations:

 Spend caps are limited to budgets that are scoped to a single Google Cloud
project and a single 
 eligible service 
within the specified project.

 The time range budget period for a spend cap budget is limited to Monthly ,
starting on the first day of each month (such as May 1).

 The cost calculations for spend caps are based on gross costs and don't
include savings and credits.

 Folders, Organizations, Labels, and multi-project or multi-service budgets
are out of scope.

 Spend cap budgets are limited to first-party Google Cloud customers.
Reseller accounts are out of scope.

 Spend caps apply to on-demand, pay-as-you-go usage and usage covered by
commitments such as
 Committed use discounts (CUDs) 
and
 Provisioned Throughput (PT) . Subscription-based costs (such as for
 Gemini Enterprise subscriptions )
are out of scope.

 Faster enforcement, delayed reporting: Since spend caps are enforced using
 estimated, gross costs, alerts and caps are triggered much faster than the
 actual costs that appear on billing reports. Due to the complexity of our
billing and processing systems, your actual cost details are typically
available within a day, but can sometimes take more than 24 hours to process
and appear on billing reports.

 Even though faster than reports, the enforcement of spend caps aren't instant
and any cost overages are billed as normal.

 Permissions required to manage spend cap budgets

 To create and manage spend cap budgets, you need a role that provides
admin-level access to projects and their associated Cloud Billing account.

 The following predefined roles provide the required permissions:

 Billing Account Administrator 
on the Cloud Billing account.

 or

 Project Owner role 
on each project where you want to configure spend cap budgets.

 You can also use a combination of billing account and project roles to gain
the required permissions to manage spend cap budgets:

 Billing Account Costs Manager 
on the Cloud Billing account.

 and

 Project Editor role 
on each project where you want to configure spend cap budgets.

 Configure a spend cap budget

 Complete the following steps to create a spend cap budget:

 In the Google Cloud console, navigate to the Budgets & alerts page using the
 procedure that fits your level of access to Cloud Billing accounts .

 On the Budgets & alerts page, click Create new budget .

 Note: You can't edit an existing alerts-only budget to convert it to a
spend cap enforcement budget. To set a spend cap budget with a similar
scope, delete the alerts-only budget and then create a new spend cap 
budget. 

 1 : Select spend cap enforcement and name the budget.

 Define section

 Select the Spend cap enforcement option (instead of Alerts only ).

 Enter a Name for your budget, then click Next .

 2 : Select the project and service for the budget.

 Scope section

 For spend cap budgets, the Time range selector is automatically
set to Monthly . You can't edit this setting.

 Select a single Project and a single eligible Service for
the spend cap.

 For spend cap budgets, you can't edit the Savings settings.

 For certain services, we can estimate directional costs faster than
we can calculate the actual costs. For those services, the spend
amount we use to enforce a spend cap budget is based on estimated
gross costs, excluding savings.

 For the remaining services, we calculate the spend amount using actual
costs, inclusive of all savings.

 Click Next .

 3 : Set the amount of the spend cap.

 Amount section

 For spend cap budgets, the Budget type selector is automatically
set to Specified amount . You can't edit this setting.

 Enter the Target amount of the spend cap.

 When this spending threshold is reached, usage for the selected
service is paused.

 Due to latency in usage and cost reporting, spend cap enforcement
isn't instantaneous. Consider setting your budget slightly below
your absolute limit. You remain responsible for any overage costs
accrued due to reporting latency.

 Click Next .

 4 : Select Finish to save the spend cap budget.

 Actions section

 Spend cap notifications are automatically configured to notify all
billing administrators and project owners at 50%, 80%, and 100% of the
budget amount.

 For spend cap budgets, the alerts and recipients can't be customized.

 Click Finish to save and enable your spend cap budget.

 View a list of budgets

 After budgets are created, you can
 view the Budgets dashboard 
to see a list of budgets for a Cloud Billing account. Each budget in
the list includes an overview of the budget settings and a
 Spend and budget amount progress bar—a visual gauge of how your
Google Cloud spend is tracking against the target amount of the budget.

 To help you understand the status of your budgets, refer to the
 Spend cap status column in the Budgets dashboard. Possible values include:

 Not applicable – For Alerts-only budgets that don't trigger a
spend cap.

 Configured – For Spend cap budgets that are active during the budget
time period, but not yet enforced.

 Enforced – For Spend cap budgets that are triggered during the
budget time period when the usage costs exceed the budget's Target amount .
When enforced, the specified services are paused until you manually lift
the cap.

 Lifted – For Spend cap budgets that were enforced during the budget
time period, and then subsequently lifted to resume using the services that
were paused. After lifting the spend cap, the affected services might take
up to one hour to fully resume normal function. After a spend cap is lifted,
the cap automatically resets for the next budget time period.

 Lift an enforced spend cap

 When a spend cap budget is triggered, new usage for the specific service is
blocked until you manually lift the spend cap. You'll receive email
notifications and see banners in the billing console, as described in the
 How spend cap budgets work 
section. Lifting the cap restores normal function to the API calls.

 To lift a spend cap, edit the budget where the spend cap is enforced.

 Lift an enforced spend cap.

 In the Google Cloud console, navigate to the Budgets & alerts page using the
 procedure that fits your level of access to Cloud Billing accounts .

 On the Budgets & alerts page, look for the spend caps informational
banner, and select View spend cap details to view the Budgets dashboard
filtered to display the spend cap budgets that are enforced.

 Click the budget name to open the budget for edit.

 On the Edit budget page, select Lift spend cap to unpause services
and resume usage.

 Click Confirm to lift the spend cap.

 If the cap was enforced and lifted within the same billing month, it won't
trigger again for the rest of the month, unless you increase the target
amount of the cap.

 If the cap was enforced in a previous month, the spend cap is reset and
will trigger again if your costs breach the budget threshold in the
current budget period.

 Note: Services might take up to one hour to fully resume after you lift
the cap. 

 Frequently asked questions (FAQ)

 What are spend caps? 

 What can I set spend caps on? 

 Will my resources or data be deleted when a
 cap triggers? 

 What happens to my in-flight
 requests? 

 How am I billed during a spend cap? 

 For spend caps, are there any changes to the cost
 reporting latency? 

 What happens if multiple users
 create overlapping spend caps from the budgets tool? 

 What is the difference between
 the spend capped budget available within AI Studio and the
 Cloud Billing console? 

 What happens if a user creates a spend
 capped budget for Gemini API from both AI Studio and
 the Cloud Billing console? 

 What happens if a project with a spend
 cap is moved from one billing account to another? 

 What are spend caps? 
 Spend caps are a cost control mechanism. A spend cap is enforced when
 usage costs exceed your budget target amount. When enforced, any new request
 to the eligible service(s), within the specified project, are paused and no
 further usage costs are accrued. No other projects or other services
 are impacted.

 Spend caps typically use estimated costs to trigger the alerts and
 caps, enforcing a cap much faster than the actual costs are processed
 and appear on billing reports. Even though faster than reports, the
 enforcement of spend caps isn't instant and any cost overages are billed
 as normal.

 Back to FAQ 

 What can I set spend caps on? 
 In your Cloud Billing account, you can set a cap on your
 budgets that are scoped to specific eligible services within a project.
 Spend cap budgets can only be set on one project and one service at a time.
 In this release, the eligible services include Gemini API,
 Agent Platform (formerly known as
 Vertex AI), Cloud Run, and Cloud Run functions.
 Additional services will be included in subsequent releases.

 Back to FAQ 

 Will my resources or data be deleted when a cap
 triggers? 
 No, resources or data aren't deleted. Only usage of specific services
 is paused when the cap triggers. All other services and projects should work
 as normal.

 Back to FAQ 

 What happens to my in-flight requests? 
 Only new usage is blocked when the spend cap is enforced.
 In-flight usage is processed to completion.

 Back to FAQ 

 How am I billed during a spend cap? 
 Any overage due to cost reporting latency is billed as usual.
 Additionally, any ongoing fixed costs needed to retain the services are billed
 as normal.

 Back to FAQ 

 For spend caps, are there any changes to the cost
 reporting latency? 
 For certain services, we're able to estimate directional costs faster
 than the actual costs. For these services, we enforce the spend cap if the
 estimated directional costs reach the budget target amount. Directional costs
 don't appear on the cost reports. The actual costs for these services are
 published on cost reports, subject to the
 same latency 
 as today. Services for which we don't have estimated directional costs follow
 the regular cost reporting latency.

 Back to FAQ 

 What happens if multiple users create
 overlapping spend caps from the budgets tool? 
 We have a deduplication policy that prevents users from creating
 more than one budget with the same scope.

 Back to FAQ 

 What is the difference between the spend
 capped budget available within AI Studio and the
 Cloud Billing console? 
 Spend caps on Google Cloud Budgets brings the same spending
 protection offered in AI Studio, and expands it to the broader
 cloud platform with spend cap coverage on additional services.

 Additionally, spend cap budgets in Cloud Billing trigger spending
 alerts as your accrued costs reach 50%, 80%, and 100% of your target budget
 amount.

 Back to FAQ 

 What happens if a user creates a spend
 capped budget for Gemini API from both AI Studio and
 the Cloud Billing console? 
 If a user or multiple users create spend capped budgets from both
 AI Studio and the Cloud Billing console, the budget
 that receives usage cost faster is triggered first. However, regardless of
 where the cap is triggered from, usage for Gemini API is blocked for
 the project, across all platforms.

 Back to FAQ 

 What happens if a project with a spend cap
 is moved from one billing account to another? 
 On the old billing account, all spend cap budgets for the project are
 deleted. To be active within the new billing account, the spend caps on the
 project must be re-created in the new billing account. If the project is
 moved while the spend cap is in an enforced state, the spend cap is
 automatically lifted, restoring normal function to the API calls that were
 paused, and enabling new charges to accrue.

 Back to FAQ 

 What's next

 Learn more about managing alerts-only budgets 

 Learn more about spend caps in AI Studio 

 Send feedback

 Except as otherwise noted, the content of this page is licensed under the Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 License , and code samples are licensed under the Apache 2.0 License . For details, see the Google Developers Site Policies . Java is a registered trademark of Oracle and/or its affiliates.

 Last updated 2026-08-26 UTC.

 Need to tell us more?

 [[["Easy to understand","easyToUnderstand","thumb-up"],["Solved my problem","solvedMyProblem","thumb-up"],["Other","otherUp","thumb-up"]],[["Hard to understand","hardToUnderstand","thumb-down"],["Incorrect information or sample code","incorrectInformationOrSampleCode","thumb-down"],["Missing the information/samples I need","missingTheInformationSamplesINeed","thumb-down"],["Other","otherDown","thumb-down"]],["Last updated 2026-08-26 UTC."],[],[]]

 Products and pricing

 See all products

 Google Cloud pricing

 Google Cloud Marketplace

 Contact sales

 Support

 Community forums

 Support

 Release Notes

 System status

 Resources

 GitHub

 Getting Started with Google Cloud

 Code samples

 Cloud Architecture Center

 Training and Certification

 Engage

 Blog

 Events

 X (Twitter)

 Google Cloud on YouTube

 Google Cloud Tech on YouTube

 About Google

 Privacy

 Site terms

 Google Cloud terms

 Manage cookies

 Our third decade of climate action: join us

 Sign up for the Google Cloud newsletter 

 Subscribe

 English 

 Deutsch 

 Español – América Latina 

 Français 

 Português – Brasil 

 中文 – 简体 

 日本語 

 한국어