SOURCE URL: https://www.atcc.org/products/crl-2522
FINAL URL: https://www.atcc.org/products/crl-2522
HTTP: 200
CONTENT-TYPE: text/html; charset=utf-8
======================================================================
BJ - CRL-2522 | ATCC 

 Log In 

 Create a Profile 

 Order Status 
 Quick Order 

 0 

 Applications Cell Products Microbe Products Services Federal Solutions Resources About Us Order Status Quick Order 

 Careers 

 Support 

 Location: United States 

 United States 
 Afghanistan 
 Albania 
 Algeria 
 American Samoa 
 Andorra 
 Angola 
 Anguilla 
 Antigua and Barbuda 
 Argentina 
 Armenia 
 Aruba 
 Australia 
 Austria 
 Azerbaijan 
 Bahamas 
 Bahrain 
 Bangladesh 
 Barbados 
 Belarus 
 Belgium 
 Belize 
 Benin 
 Bermuda 
 Bhutan 
 Bolivia 
 Bosnia and Herzegovina 
 Botswana 
 Brazil 
 Brunei 
 Bulgaria 
 Burkina Faso 
 Burundi 
 Cambodia 
 Cameroon 
 Canada 
 Cape Verde 
 Cayman Islands 
 Central African Republic 
 Chad 
 Chile 
 China 
 Colombia 
 Comoros 
 Congo 
 Congo, Democratic Republic 
 Cook Islands 
 Costa Rica 
 Cote d'Ivoire 
 Croatia 
 Curacao 
 Cyprus 
 Czech Republic 
 Denmark 
 Djibouti 
 Dominica 
 Dominican Republic 
 Ecuador 
 Egypt 
 El Salvador 
 Equatorial Guinea 
 Eritrea 
 Estonia 
 Eswatini 
 Ethiopia 
 Fiji 
 Finland 
 France 
 French Guiana 
 French Polynesia 
 Gabon 
 Gambia 
 Georgia 
 Germany 
 Ghana 
 Greece 
 Grenada 
 Guadeloupe 
 Guam 
 Guatemala 
 Guernsey 
 Guinea 
 Guinea-Bissau 
 Guyana 
 Haiti 
 Honduras 
 Hong Kong 
 Hungary 
 Iceland 
 India 
 Indonesia 
 Iraq 
 Ireland 
 Israel 
 Italy 
 Jamaica 
 Japan 
 Jersey 
 Jordan 
 Kazakhstan 
 Kenya 
 Kiribati 
 Kosovo 
 Kuwait 
 Kyrgyzstan 
 Laos 
 Latvia 
 Lebanon 
 Lesotho 
 Liberia 
 Libya 
 Liechtenstein 
 Lithuania 
 Luxembourg 
 Macau 
 Macedonia 
 Madagascar 
 Malawi 
 Malaysia 
 Maldives 
 Mali 
 Malta 
 Marshall Islands 
 Martinique 
 Mauritania 
 Mauritius 
 Mexico 
 Micronesia 
 Moldova 
 Monaco 
 Mongolia 
 Montenegro 
 Montserrat 
 Morocco 
 Mozambique 
 Myanmar 
 Namibia 
 Nauru 
 Nepal 
 Netherlands 
 New Caledonia 
 New Zealand 
 Nicaragua 
 Niger 
 Nigeria 
 Northern Mariana Islands 
 Norway 
 Oman 
 Pakistan 
 Palau 
 Panama 
 Papua New Guinea 
 Paraguay 
 Peru 
 Philippines 
 Poland 
 Portugal 
 Qatar 
 Reunion 
 Romania 
 Russia 
 Rwanda 
 Saint Kitts and Nevis 
 Saint Lucia 
 Saint Vincent and the Grenadines 
 Samoa 
 San Marino 
 Sao Tome and Principe 
 Saudi Arabia 
 Senegal 
 Serbia 
 Seychelles 
 Sierra Leone 
 Singapore 
 Slovakia 
 Slovenia 
 Solomon Islands 
 Somalia 
 South Africa 
 South Korea 
 South Sudan 
 Spain 
 Sri Lanka 
 Sudan 
 Suriname 
 Sweden 
 Switzerland 
 Taiwan, R.O.C. 
 Tajikistan 
 Tanzania 
 Thailand 
 Timor-Leste 
 Togo 
 Tonga 
 Trinidad and Tobago 
 Tunisia 
 Turkey 
 Turkmenistan 
 Turks and Caicos Islands 
 Tuvalu 
 Uganda 
 Ukraine 
 United Arab Emirates 
 United Kingdom 
 Uruguay 
 Uzbekistan 
 Vanuatu 
 Vatican City 
 Venezuela 
 Vietnam 
 Virgin Islands, British 
 Virgin Islands, USA 
 Western Sahara 
 Yemen 
 Zambia 
 Zimbabwe 

 Home 

 Cell Products 

 Human Cells 

 CRL-2522 

 BJ

 CRL-2522
 ™ 

 BJ cells are fibroblasts established from skin taken from normal foreskin from a neonatal male. Applications include toxicology research.

 Powered by Bioz 
 See more details on Bioz 

 Notify me when available

 Please fill out the form below to sign up for notification when the product becomes in stock.

 Product Name : 

 ATCC Number : 

 Quantity of interest 

 First name 

 Last name 

 Email Address 

 Phone Number 

 Organization Name 

 Submit 

 Confirmation

 You were successfully signed up for notification. You will get an email notification when this product becomes in stock.

 OK 

 Product category 
 
 Human cells

 Organism 
 
 Homo sapiens , human

 Cell type 
 
fibroblast 
 Morphology 
 
fibroblast 
 Tissue 
 
Skin; Foreskin 
 Disease 
 
 Normal

 Applications 
 
 3D cell culture

 High-throughput screening

 Toxicology

 Product format 
 
Frozen 
 Storage conditions 
 
 Vapor phase of liquid nitrogen

 See Additional Product Information 

 Buy Now 

 Price:

 $577.00 EA

 Discounts may be available for our fellow nonprofit organizations. Login to see your price.

 Generally ships within 1-3 business days

 Quantity 

 Add to cart 

 Add to list 

 Added to Cart

 Required Products

 These products are vital for the proper use of this item and have been confirmed as effective in supporting functionality. If you use alternative products, the quality and effectiveness of the item may be affected.

 Select specific lot(s)

 Please enter the quantity for the selected lot number and add to cart.

 Please fill at least one quantity field.

 Quantity should not be greater than inventory.

 Quantity 

 Lot number 

 Inventory 

 Donor age 

 Donor sex 

 Donor ethnicity 

 Donor BMI 

 CoA 

 Add to cart 

 Available Lot(s) Information

 For specific lot selection, please contact your local distributor to confirm availability and include your request on your purchase order.

 Lot number 

 Inventory 

 Donor age 

 Donor sex 

 Donor ethnicity 

 Donor BMI 

 CoA 

 close 

 Documentation

 Product sheet

 Certificate of analysis

 Safety data sheet

 Certificate of Analysis Request

 Account number

 ATCC item number 

 Lot number 

 Email address 

 Request Certificate of Analysis 

 Never mind, I do not need this certificate of analysis 

 We have received your request for this certificate of analysis. We will contact you as soon as possible.

 Ok 

 You can find your account number on your sales order confirmation or order invoice. 

 Certificate of Analysis Download

 To download a certificate of analysis for BJ ( CRL-2522 ), enter the lot number exactly as it appears on your product label or packing slip.

 Lot number 

 Get Certificate of Analysis 

 Certificate of Analysis Request

 The certificate of analysis for that lot of BJ ( CRL-2522 ) is not currently available online. Complete this form to request this certificate of analysis. 

 Account number

 ATCC item number 

 Lot number 

 Email address 

 Request Certificate of Analysis 

 Never mind, I do not need this certificate of analysis 

 We have received your request for this certificate of analysis. We will contact you as soon as possible.

 Ok 

 You can find your account number on your sales order confirmation or order invoice. 

 Certificate of Origin Download

 To download a certificate of origin for BJ ( CRL-2522 ), enter the lot number exactly as it appears on your product label or packing slip.

 Lot number 

 Get Certificate of Origin 

 Certificate of Origin Request

 The certificate of origin for that lot of BJ ( CRL-2522 ) is not currently available online. Complete this form to request this certificate of origin.

 Account number

 ATCC item number 

 Lot number 

 Email address 

 Request Certificate of Origin 

 Never mind, I do not need this certificate of origin 

 We have received your request for this certificate of origin. We will contact you as soon as possible.

 Ok 

 You can find your account number on your sales order confirmation or order invoice. 

This product sheet is not available online. We only provide this product sheet to customers who have purchased this biosafety level 3 product. If you purchased this product, please contact Technical Service for this product sheet. 

 Safety Data Sheet Download

Open the Safety Data Sheet for this product to download. 

 Select a language 
 
 Language 
 English 

 error 

 Get SDS 
 Cancel 

 If a requested product is not a hazardous chemical, or does not contain any hazardous chemicals, a SDS is not required and therefore will not be provided. 

 Please check the Product Sheet and Safety Data Sheet Landing page for more information.

 BSL 1

 Read more about safety information about this product 

 ATCC determines the biosafety level of a material based on our risk assessment as guided by the current edition of Biosafety in Microbiological and Biomedical Laboratories (BMBL) , U.S. Department of Health and Human Services. It is your responsibility to understand the hazards associated with the material per your organization’s policies and procedures as well as any other applicable regulations as enforced by your local or national agencies.

 ATCC highly recommends that appropriate personal protective equipment is always used when handling vials. For cultures that require storage in liquid nitrogen, it is important to note that some vials may leak when submersed in liquid nitrogen and will slowly fill with liquid nitrogen. Upon thawing, the conversion of the liquid nitrogen back to its gas phase may result in the vial exploding or blowing off its cap with dangerous force creating flying debris. Unless necessary, ATCC recommends that these cultures be stored in the vapor phase of liquid nitrogen rather than submersed in liquid nitrogen.

 Jump to 

 Required Products

 These products are vital for the proper use of this item and have been confirmed as effective in supporting functionality. If you use alternative products, the quality and effectiveness of the item may be affected.

 Eagle's Minimum Essential Medium (EMEM) 

 30-2003

 Fetal Bovine Serum (FBS) 

 30-2020

 Trypsin-EDTA Solution, 1X 

 30-2101

 Dulbecco's Phosphate Buffered Saline (D-PBS), 1X 

 30-2200

 Dimethylsulfoxide (DMSO) 

 4-X

 Related Products

 Primary Dermal Fibroblast Normal; Human, Neonatal (HDFn) 

 PCS-201-010

 Detailed product information

 Expand all

 Collapse all

 General

 Specific applications 
 
 The cells may be used for stable transfection studies.

 Characteristics

 Growth properties 
 
 Adherent
 
 Passage history 
 
 A frozen ampule at population doubling 2.3 was received at the ATCC in April, 2000.

 Derivation 
 
 The line was established from skin taken from normal foreskin.

 Age 
 
 neonate
 
 Sex 
 
 Male

 Comments 
 
 The BJ cell line has a long lifespan in comparison with other normal human fibroblast cell lines.

 A frozen ampule at population doubling 2.3 was received at the ATCC in April, 2000.

 These cells have a reported normal diploid karyotype at population doubling 61 but an abnormal karyotype at population doubling 82.

 They are telomerase negative.

 Cells from ATCC ampules have the capacity to proliferate to a maximum of 72 population doublings before the onset of senescence.

 Handling information

 Unpacking and storage instructions 
 
 Check all containers for leakage or breakage.
 Remove the frozen cells from the dry ice packaging and immediately place the cells at a temperature below ­-130°C, preferably in liquid nitrogen vapor, until ready for use.

 Complete medium 
 
 The base medium for this cell line is ATCC-formulated Eagle's Minimum Essential Medium ( ATCC 30-2003 ). To make the complete growth medium, add the following components to the base medium: fetal bovine serum ( ATCC 30-2020 ) to a final concentration of 10%.
 
 Temperature 
 
 37°C

 Atmosphere 
 
 95% Air, 5% CO 2 

 Handling procedure 
 
 To insure the highest level of viability, thaw the vial and initiate the culture as soon as possible upon receipt. If upon arrival, continued storage of the frozen culture is necessary, it should be stored in liquid nitrogen vapor phase and not at -70°C. Storage at -70°C will result in loss of viability.

 Thaw the vial by gentle agitation in a 37°C water bath. To reduce the possibility of contamination, keep the O-ring and cap out of the water. Thawing should be rapid (approximately 2 minutes).

 Remove the vial from the water bath as soon as the contents are thawed, and decontaminate by dipping in or spraying with 70% ethanol. All of the operations from this point on should be carried out under strict aseptic conditions.

 Unscrew the top of the vial and transfer the contents to a sterile centrifuge tube containing 9 mL of the recommended medium. Remove the cryoprotectant agent (DMSO) by gentle centrifugation 150 to 400 x g for 8 to 12 minutes. Discard the supernatant, and resuspend the cells in 1 or 2 mL of complete growth medium. Transfer the cell suspension into the culture vessel containing the complete growth medium and mix thoroughly by gentle rocking. It is recommended that the cryoprotective agent be removed immediately. Resuspend the cell pellet in 8-10 ml of the recommended complete medium and dispense into a 25 cm 2 culture flask. Mix thoroughly by gentle rocking. 

 Incubate the culture at 37°C in a suitable incubator. A 5% CO 2 in air atmosphere is recommended if using the medium described on this product sheet.

 Subculturing procedure 
 
 Volumes are given for a 75 cm 2 flask. Increase or decrease the amount of dissociation medium needed proportionally for culture vessels of other sizes. Corning ® T-75 flasks (catalog #430641) are recommended for subculturing this product.

 Remove and discard culture medium.

 Briefly rinse the cell layer with D-PBS ( ATCC 30-2200 ) to remove all traces of serum that contains trypsin inhibitor.

 Add 2.0 to 3.0 mL of Trypsin-EDTA solution ( ATCC 30-2101 ) to flask and observe cells under an inverted microscope until cell layer is dispersed (usually within 5 to 15 minutes).

 Note: To avoid clumping do not agitate the cells by hitting or shaking the flask while waiting for the cells to detach.
 Cells that are difficult to detach may be placed at 37°C to facilitate dispersal.

 Add 6.0 to 8.0 mL of complete growth medium and aspirate cells by gently pipetting.

 Add appropriate aliquots of the cell suspension to new culture vessels.

 Incubate cultures at 37°C.

 Subcultivation Ratio: A subcultivation ratio of 1:2 to 1:9 is recommended

 Medium Renewal: Every 2 to 3 days

 Reagents for cryopreservation 
 
 Complete growth medium supplemented with 5% (v/v) DMSO ( ATCC 4-X )

 Quality control specifications

 Bacterial and fungal testing 
 
 Not detected
 
 Mycoplasma contamination 
 
 Not detected
 
 Population doubling capacity 
 
 ≥ 70 PDL
 
 STR profiling 
 
 Amelogenin: X,Y CSF1PO: 10,12 D13S317: 8,9 D16S539: 9,13 D5S818: 12 D7S820: 11,12 TH01: 7,8 TPOX: 10,11 vWA: 16,18 D3S1358: 14,16 D21S11: 29 D18S51: 17,19 Penta_E: 7,17 Penta_D: 12,13 D8S1179: 9,11 FGA: 22,23 D19S433: 14 D2S1338: 16,20 

 History

 Deposited as 
 
 human
 
 Depositors 
 
 JR Smith

 Legal disclaimers

 Intended use 
 
 This product is intended for laboratory research use only. It is not intended for any animal or human therapeutic use, any human or animal consumption, or any diagnostic use.

 Warranty 
 
 The product is provided 'AS IS' and the viability of ATCC ® products is warranted for 30 days from the date of shipment, provided that the customer has stored and handled the product according to the information included on the product information sheet, website, and Certificate of Analysis. For living cultures, ATCC lists the media formulation and reagents that have been found to be effective for the product. While other unspecified media and reagents may also produce satisfactory results, a change in the ATCC and/or depositor-recommended protocols may affect the recovery, growth, and/or function of the product. If an alternative medium formulation or reagent is used, the ATCC warranty for viability is no longer valid. Except as expressly set forth herein, no other warranties of any kind are provided, express or implied, including, but not limited to, any implied warranties of merchantability, fitness for a particular purpose, manufacture according to cGMP standards, typicality, safety, accuracy, and/or noninfringement.

 Disclaimers 
 
 This product is intended for laboratory research use only. It is not intended for any animal or human therapeutic use, any human or animal consumption, or any diagnostic use. Any proposed commercial use is prohibited without a license from ATCC . 

 While ATCC uses reasonable efforts to include accurate and up-to-date information on this product sheet, ATCC makes no warranties or representations as to its accuracy. Citations from scientific literature and patents are provided for informational purposes only. ATCC does not warrant that such information has been confirmed to be accurate or complete and the customer bears the sole responsibility of confirming the accuracy and completeness of any such information.

 This product is sent on the condition that the customer is responsible for and assumes all risk and responsibility in connection with the receipt, handling, storage, disposal, and use of the ATCC product including without limitation taking all appropriate safety and handling precautions to minimize health or environmental risk. As a condition of receiving the material, the customer agrees that any activity undertaken with the ATCC product and any progeny or modifications will be conducted in compliance with all applicable laws, regulations, and guidelines. This product is provided 'AS IS' with no representations or warranties whatsoever except as expressly set forth herein and in no event shall ATCC, its parents, subsidiaries, directors, officers, agents, employees, assigns, successors, and affiliates be liable for indirect, special, incidental, or consequential damages of any kind in connection with or arising out of the customer's use of the product. While reasonable effort is made to ensure authenticity and reliability of materials on deposit, ATCC is not liable for damages arising from the misidentification or misrepresentation of such materials.

 Please see the material transfer agreement (MTA) for further details regarding the use of this product. The MTA is available at www.atcc.org.

 Permits & Restrictions

 Import Permit for the State of Hawaii

 If shipping to the U.S. state of Hawaii, you must provide either an import permit or documentation stating that an import permit is not required. We cannot ship this item until we receive this documentation. Contact the Hawaii Department of Agriculture (HDOA), Plant Industry Division, Plant Quarantine Branch to determine if an import permit is required.

 MORE INFORMATION ABOUT PERMITS AND RESTRICTIONS 

 Images

 Frequently Asked Questions

 Expand ALL

 Collapse ALL

 View the Additional FAQs 
 View all our FAQs 

 References

 Curated Citations

 Yi X, et al. Both transcriptional and posttranscriptional mechanisms regulate human telomerase template RNA levels. Mol. Cell. Biol. 19(6): 3989-3997, 1999. PubMed: 10330139 

 Bodnar AG, et al. Extension of life-span by introduction of telomerase into normal human cells. Science 279: 349-352, 1998. PubMed: 9454332 

 Huffman KE, et al. Telomere shortening is proportional to the size of the G-rich telomeric 3'-overhang. J. Biol. Chem. 275: 19719-19722, 2000. PubMed: 10787419 

 Morales CP, et al. Absence of cancer-associated changes in human fibroblasts immortalized with telomerase. Nat. Genet. 21: 115-118, 1999. PubMed: 9916803 

 Powered by Bioz

 Related Resources 

 Human Cancer Models Initiative (HCMI) 

 Organoids 

 Organoid collection 

 Human Cancer Models Initiative (HCMI) 

 ISSX 

 Organoid Culture Guide 

 Peripheral Blood Mononuclear Cells (PBMCs) 

 HepatoXcell™ Primary Human Hepatocytes 

 Episode 48: Innovation to Application—The Next Chapter of Microphysiological Systems 

 View All Resources 

 For product-related inquiries and issues, contact Product Experience: 

 Message Us

 Send us a message 

 Hours of Operation

 Monday - Friday

 9:00am - 5:00pm

US Eastern Time

 We are ready to help 
 Order support Product technical support Resources Products and Services 
 New products Cell products Microbe products Services Federal solutions Make a deposit Policies 
 Privacy policy Product use policies Terms of sale Terms of services Trademarks Website Terms of Use About us 
 Upcoming events Newsroom Career opportunities Contact us Follow Us 
 Newsletter Signup Keep up to date with our events, news, and more. Enter your email to sign up. 
 Please enter a valid email address. 
 Sign Up 

 Quality Accreditations ISO 9001 ISO 13485 ISO 17025 ISO 17034 © ATCC 2026. All rights reserved. 

 Keep up to date with our events, news, and more. Enter your information below.
 Email * 

 First name * 

 Last name * 

 Organization name * 

 Country * 
 Please Select United States United Kingdom Canada India Netherlands Australia South Africa France Germany Singapore Sweden Brazil -------------- Afghanistan Åland Islands Albania Algeria American Samoa Andorra Angola Anguilla Antarctica Antigua and Barbuda Argentina Armenia Aruba Austria Azerbaijan Bahamas, The Bahrain Bangladesh Barbados Belarus Belgium Belize Benin Bermuda Bhutan Bolivia Bosnia and Herzegovina Botswana Bouvet Island British Indian Ocean Territory British Virgin Islands Brunei Bulgaria Burkina Faso Burundi Cambodia Cameroon Cape Verde Cayman Islands Central African Republic Chad Chile China Christmas Island Cocos (Keeling) Islands Colombia Comoros Congo Congo (DRC) Cook Islands Costa Rica Côte d’Ivoire Croatia Cuba Cyprus Czech Republic Denmark Djibouti Dominica Dominican Republic Ecuador Egypt El Salvador Equatorial Guinea Eritrea Estonia Ethiopia Falkland Islands (Islas Malvinas) Faroe Islands Fiji Finland French Guiana French Polynesia French Southern and Antarctic Lands Gabon Gambia Georgia Ghana Gibraltar Greece Greenland Grenada Guadeloupe Guam Guatemala Guernsey Guinea Guinea-Bissau Guyana Haiti Heard Island and McDonald Islands Honduras Hong Kong SAR Hungary Iceland Indonesia Iran Iraq Ireland Isle of Man Israel Italy Jamaica Japan Jersey Jordan Kazakhstan Kenya Kiribati Korea Kosovo Kuwait Kyrgyzstan Laos Latvia Lebanon Lesotho Liberia Libya Liechtenstein Lithuania Luxembourg Macao SAR Macedonia, Former Yugoslav Republic of Madagascar Malawi Malaysia Maldives Mali Malta Marshall Islands Martinique Mauritania Mauritius Mayotte Mexico Micronesia Moldova Monaco Mongolia Montenegro Montserrat Morocco Mozambique Myanmar Namibia Nauru Nepal Netherlands Antilles New Caledonia New Zealand Nicaragua Niger Nigeria Niue Norfolk Island North Korea Northern Mariana Islands Norway Oman Pakistan Palau Palestinian Authority Panama Papua New Guinea Paraguay Peru Philippines Pitcarin Islands Poland Portugal Tahiti Puerto Rico Qatar Reunion Romania Russia Rwanda Saba Saint Barthélemy Saint Helena, Ascension and Tristan da Cunha Saint Kitts and Nevis Saint Lucia Saint Martin Saint Pierre and Miquelon Saint Vincent and the Grenadines Samoa San Marino São Tomé and Príncipe Saudi Arabia Scotland Senegal Serbia Seychelles Sierra Leone Slovakia Slovenia Solomon Islands Somalia South Georgia and the South Sandwich Islands South Korea South Sudan Spain Sri Lanka Sudan Suriname Svalbard and Jan Mayen Island Swaziland Switzerland Syria Taiwan Tajikistan Tanzania Teheran Thailand Timor-Leste Togo Tokelau Tonga Trinidad and Tobago Tunisia Turkey Turkmenistan Turks and Caicos Islands Tuvalu U.S. Minor Outlying Islands Uganda Ukraine United Arab Emirates Uruguay Uzbekistan Vanuatu Vatican City Venezuela Vietnam Virgin Islands Wallis and Futuna Western Sahara Yemen Zambia Zimbabwe 

 Company or Organization Location * 
 Please Select... Alaska Alabama Arkansas American Samoa Arizona California Colorado Connecticut D.C. Delaware Florida Micronesia Georgia Guam Hawaii Iowa Idaho Illinois Indiana Kansas Kentucky Louisiana Massachusetts Maryland Maine Marshall Islands Michigan Minnesota Missouri Marianas Mississippi Montana North Carolina North Dakota Nebraska New Hampshire New Jersey New Mexico Nevada New York Ohio Oklahoma Oregon Pennsylvania Puerto Rico Palau Rhode Island South Carolina South Dakota Tennessee Texas Utah Virginia Virgin Islands Vermont Washington Wisconsin West Virginia Wyoming Military Americas Military Europe/ME/Canada Military Pacific Alberta Manitoba British Columbia New Brunswick Newfoundland and Labrador Nova Scotia Northwest Territories Nunavut Ontario Prince Edward Island Quebec Saskatchewan Yukon Territory None 

 Job Role * 
 Select One Facility Manager Laboratory Manager/Director Laboratory Technician/Research Assistant Manufacturing Process Development Marketing Physician/Doctor Postdoctoral Fellow Principal Investigator Professor/Instructor Purchasing QA/QC Research Scientist/Staff Scientist Senior Management Student/Graduate Student Other 

 Job Role (if other) 

 Please subscribe me to the following:

 Events 

 New Product Launches 

 News / Announcements 

 Newsletters 

 Special Offers 

 Which of the following product types are you most interested in hearing more about? * 
 Cell Biology 

 cGMP Services 

 Microbiology 

 What are your application areas of interest? * 
 Oncology and Immuno-Oncology 

 Toxicology and Drug Safety Testing 

 Infectious Disease Diagnostics Development 

 Bioproduction 

 Standards and Controls 

 Cell and Gene Therapy 

 Bioinformatics 

 Neuroscience 

 Select all that apply

 Which of the following best describes your industry focus? * 
 Please Select Academia or Education Agriculture Bioinformatics Bioproduction CDMO or CMO Chemical or Environmental Clinical Laboratory Contract Research Organization Cosmetics Food & Beverage Genomic Profiling or Testing Government Hospital or Clinical Laboratory Human Therapeutics R&D (Pharma/Biopharma) IVD or Assay Development Medical Devices Purchasing Agent, Broker, or Consultant Reagents & Tools Supplier Secondary School (Middle or High School) Veterinary Science Other 

 Industry - Other 

 If Other, please fill in the box above

 I agree to receive emails from ATCC and its distributors * 
 Yes 

 No 

 We will not share your information outside of our distributors network and solely use it to send relevant communications.

 address1 

 Are you sure you don't want to sign up to get news from ATCC? Yes No 

 Log In

 Email address 

 Password 

 Forgot your password? 
 Log In 

 Don't have a profile? Create one now .

 You have an application in progress 

Continue your most recent application below, or check its status from My Dashboard. If you started this application before June 20, it has been transitioned to the new application process and you can continue it from here.

 Continue account application

 Start a new account application

 Associate an Account to Your Profile

 Associating an account to your profile allows you to place an order on atcc.org. Please provide the following information to access this account.

 Account number

 Account billing postal code 

 Associate Account 

 You've successfully associated your account with your Profile. You can update your default account on the My Dashboard Accounts Management page at any time.

 My Dashboard Accounts Management 

 Close

 You can find your account number on your sales order confirmation or order invoice.

 Share

 Easily share this ATCC resource with your network. Use the options below to spread the word or save the link for later.

 LinkedIn

 X

 Email

 Copy Link