pmcBrain Neurosci AdvBrain Neurosci Adv3785bna101702599BNABrain and Neuroscience Advances2398-2128SAGE PublicationsPMC10236260PMC10236260.1102362601023626010.1177/2398212823118024610.1177_239821282311802461Abstract BookThe International BNA 2023 Festival of
Neuroscience
3052023Jan-Dec2023743266723982128231180246300520230306202309052025© The Author(s) 20232023SAGE Publications Ltd and British Neuroscience
Association, unless otherwise noted. Manuscript content on this site is licensed
under Creative Commons Licenseshttps://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc/4.0/This article is distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons
Attribution-NonCommercial 4.0 License (https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc/4.0/) which
permits non-commercial use, reproduction and distribution of the work
without further permission provided the original work is attributed as
specified on the SAGE and Open Access pages (https://us.sagepub.com/en-us/nam/open-access-at-sage).pmc-status-qastatus0pmc-status-liveyespmc-status-embargonopmc-status-releasedyespmc-prop-open-accessyespmc-prop-olfnopmc-prop-manuscriptnopmc-prop-legally-suppressednopmc-prop-has-pdfyespmc-prop-has-supplementnopmc-prop-pdf-onlynopmc-prop-suppress-copyrightnopmc-prop-is-real-versionnopmc-prop-is-scanned-articlenopmc-prop-preprintnopmc-prop-in-epmcyespmc-license-refCC BY-NCcover-dateJanuary-December 2023typesetterts123 - 26 April 2023 | Brighton, UK
Book of abstracts

## Table of Contents
 

## Cognitive Processes & Decision-making

Poster number: S_PZ1_001 (TP)

Sub-Theme: Functional Neurological Disorders: Cognitive, Affective, and
Implications for Everyday Life

## Measuring attentional bias to emotional and illness-related stimuli in
functional neurological disorder: A pilot study using modified dot-probe
tasks
Authors: Susannah Pick, King's College London; L.S. Merritt Millman
- Psychological Medicine, IoPPN King's College London; Eleanor Short -
Psychological Medicine, IoPPN King's College London; Biba Stanton - Neurology
King's College Hospital; Joel Winston - Basic & Clinical Neurosciences,
IoPPN King's College London; Mitul Mehta - Neuroimaging Sciences, IoPPN King's
College London; Tim Nicholson - Psychosis Studies, IoPPN King's College London;
Simone Reinders - Psychological Medicine, IoPPN King's College London; Anthony
David - Institute of Mental Health University College London; Mark Edwards -
Basic & Clinical Neuroscience, IoPPN King's College London; Matthew Hotopf -
Psychological Medicine, IoPPN King's College London; Laura Goldstein -
Psychology, IoPPN King's College London; Trudie Chalder - Psychological Medicine
King's College London
Introduction: Previous research has suggested potential dysfunction in
attentional allocation in functional neurological disorder (FND), including
attentional bias (AB) to salient environmental stimuli. We aimed to test the
hypotheses that individuals with FND would display enhanced AB towards emotional
faces and FND-relevant information, compared to healthy control participants
(HCs).
Methods: Fourteen individuals with FND and 16 HCs completed modified dot-probe
tasks, a test of general intellectual functioning (WASI-II) and a CANTAB test of
sustained attention (Rapid Visual Information Processing, RVIP). An emotional
dot-probe task assessed AB to standardised (Karolinska Directed Emotional Faces)
facial expressions of happiness, anger, and disgust, compared to neutral. An
FND-word dot-probe task measured AB for FND-relevant words that were generated
by our FND Patient and Carer Advisory Panel, relative to neutral words.
Statistical analysis: AB scores were analysed with mixed ANOVAs and t-tests.
Effect sizes were calculated using partial eta-squared and Hegdes’ g.
Results: On the emotional dot-probe, there was no significant group difference in
AB scores (F(1, 28) = .70, p = .41, ηp2 = .02) and no group x expression
interaction (F(2, 56) = 1.56, p = .22, ηp2 = .05). Similarly, the effect of
group on AB scores was not significant in the FND-word task (t(18.69) = .08, p =
.93, g = .03). The groups also did not differ in estimated full-scale IQ scores
(p = .57), or in performance on the RVIP (p = .43).
Conclusions: In contrast to previous findings in functional seizures samples,
this study did not provide evidence of attentional hypervigilance for facial
emotion or FND-relevant information in this mixed FND symptom group.
However, this pilot study was limited by a small, heterogeneous sample and low
power. Our future research will investigate attentional functioning in larger
samples of participants with specific FND symptom presentations including
functional motor symptoms and functional seizures.

Poster number: S_PZ1_002 (TP)

Sub-Theme: Functional Neurological Disorders: Cognitive, Affective,
and Implications for Everyday Life

## Investigating the influence of affective stimulation and experiential
detachment on subjective functional neurological symptoms - a pilot
study
Authors: Susannah Pick, Institute of Psychiatry, Psychology &
Neuroscience, King's College London; L.S. Merritt Millman - Psychological
Medicine Institute of Psychiatry, Psychology & Neuroscience, King's College
London; Emily Ward - Psychological Medicine Institute of Psychiatry, Psychology
& Neuroscience, King's College London; Eleanor Short - Psychological
Medicine Institute of Psychiatry, Psychology & Neuroscience, King's College
London; Biba Stanton - Department of Neurology King's College Hospital NHS
Foundation Trust; Timothy Nicholson - Section of Cognitive Neuropsychiatry
Institute of Psychiatry, Psychology & Neuroscience, King's College London;
Joel Winston - Basic & Clinical Neuroscience Institute of Psychiatry,
Psychology & Neuroscience, King's College London; Mark Edwards - Basic &
Clinical Neuroscience Institute of Psychiatry, Psychology & Neuroscience,
King's College London; Laura H Goldstein - Department of Psychology Institute of
Psychiatry, Psychology & Neuroscience, King's College London; Simone
Reinders - Psychological Medicine Institute of Psychiatry, Psychology &
Neuroscience, King's College London; Anthony David - Institute of Mental Health
University College London; Trudie Chalder - Psychological Medicine Institute of
Psychiatry, Psychology & Neuroscience, King's College London; Matthew Hotopf
- Psychological Medicine Institute of Psychiatry, Psychology & Neuroscience,
King's College London; Mitul A Mehta - Department of Neuroimaging Institute of
Psychiatry, Psychology & Neuroscience, King's College London
INTRODUCTION: We aimed to test the hypothesis that exposure to highly arousing
affective stimuli would provoke increased FND and associated symptoms. We also
explored the effects of experiential detachment on FND symptoms during affective
stimulation.
METHODS: Participants were 14 individuals with FND (10F:4M; 10 motor symptoms, 4
motor/seizures) and 13 age- (p=.71) and sex-matched (p=.72) healthy controls
(HCs; 11F:2M). We used validated affective stimuli in 12 blocks of 10 images
(four Positive, four Negative, four Neutral blocks). Participants were
instructed to passively observe the images (Watch) or detach from the experience
(Distance) in separate blocks. Momentary assessments of FND symptoms,
dissociation, affect, pain and fatigue were obtained at baseline and immediately
after each block (Likert- scale, 1-7).
STATISTICAL ANALYSIS: Data were analysed using within-groups or mixed ANOVAs.
Post-hoc tests were Bonferroni- corrected.
RESULTS: At baseline, the FND group reported elevated pain (p<.001), fatigue
(p=.001), and derealisation (p=.015), compared to HCs, but subjective arousal
(p=.83), positive affect (p=.11), negative affect (p=.08), dissociative amnesia
(p=.052), and depersonalisation (p=.87) did not differ. During the task, there
was a main effect of image type on FND symptoms (p=.002) and an image type x
task instruction interaction (p=.020). There was a main effect of image type in
the Watch condition (p=.008), but not in the Distance condition (p=.12). In the
Watch condition, FND symptom ratings were highest following Negative images
(M=3.61, SD=1.73), relative to Positive (M=2.79, SD=1.44) and Neutral (M=2.79,
SD=1.33). During the task, there were group main effects (FND>HCs) for
derealisation (p=.037), depersonalisation (p=.046), dissociative amnesia
(p=.016), pain (p<.001), and fatigue (p=.004), but not for positive (p=.94)
and negative affect (p=.20), or subjective arousal (p=.85).
CONCLUSIONS: Exposure to affectively arousing negative stimuli resulted in
increased FND symptom severity, but this was mitigated when participants
voluntarily detached from their experiences. The influence of affective
stimulation on FND symptoms was not mediated by heightened subjective negative
affect or perceived physiological arousal

Poster number: S_PZ1_003 (TP)

Sub-Theme: Functional Neurological Disorders: Cognitive, Affective,
and Implications for Everyday Life

## Objective and subjective neurocognitive functioning in functional
neurological disorder
Authors: Susannah Pick, Institute of Psychiatry, Psychology &
Neuroscience, King's College London; L.S. Merritt Millman - Psychological
Medicine Institute of Psychiatry, Psychology & Neuroscience, King's College
London; Yiqing Sun - Psychological Medicine Institute of Psychiatry, Psychology
& Neuroscience, King's College London; Eleanor Short - Psychological
Medicine Institute of Psychiatry, Psychology & Neuroscience, King's College
London; Biba Stanton - Department of Neurology King's College Hospital NHS
Foundation Trust; Joel Winston - Basic & Clinical Neuroscience Institute of
Psychiatry, Psychology & Neuroscience, King's College London; Mitul A Mehta
- Department of Neuroimaging Institute of Psychiatry, Psychology &
Neuroscience, King's College London; Timothy Nicholson - Section of Cognitive
Neuropsychiatry Institute of Psychiatry, Psychology & Neuroscience, King's
College London; Simone Reinders - Psychological Medicine Institute of
Psychiatry, Psychology & Neuroscience, King's College London,Anthony David -
Institute of Mental Health University College London; Mark Edwards - Basic &
Clinical Neuroscience Institute of Psychiatry, Psychology & Neuroscience,
King's College London; Matthew Hotopf - Psychological Medicine Institute of
Psychiatry, Psychology & Neuroscience, King's College London; Laura H
Goldstein- Department of Psychology Institute of Psychiatry, Psychology &
Neuroscience, King's College London; Trudie Chalder - Psychological Medicine
Institute of Psychiatry, Psychology & Neuroscience, King's College
London
INTRODUCTION: Previous studies indicated possible neurocognitive deficits in
functional neurological disorder (FND), but findings were variable. We aimed to
investigate both objective and subjective neurocognitive functioning in FND,
with standardised measures.
METHODS: Individuals with FND (n=16) and healthy controls (HCs, n=17) completed a
neurocognitive battery (CANTAB), testing motor response speed, sustained
attention, working memory, attentional set-shifting, response inhibition and
social cognition. Participants rated their performance on all tasks (1-7 Likert)
and completed the Wechsler Abbreviated Scale of Intelligence (2nd ed, WASI-II),
Medical Symptom Validity Test (MSVT), Cognitive Failures Questionnaire (CFQ),
Multiscale Dissociation Inventory (MDI), Somatoform Dissociation Questionnaire
(SDQ- 20), Patient Health Questionnaire-9 (PHQ-9) and Generalized Anxiety
Disorder-7.
STATISTICAL ANALYSIS: Data were analysed with t- and Mann-Whitney U tests. Effect
sizes were ‘Hedge’s g’ or ‘r’.
RESULTS: There were no group differences on the WASI-II (p=.57), MSVT
(ps>.49), and most CANTAB tests. On the CANTAB Emotion Recognition Test, FND
participants showed superiority in identifying facial sadness compared to HCs
(p=.042, r=.37). On two Emotional Bias Tasks, the FND group displayed shorter
reaction times than HCs when selecting happy (p=.013, g=.94) and angry (p=.02,
g=.89), and happy (p=.021, g=.87) and disgusted (non-significant trend, p=.054,
g=.72) faces. The groups did not differ in their subjective performance ratings
for any task (ps>.15). Nevertheless, the FND group reported more daily
cognitive complaints than HCs (CFQ, p=.01), which were positively correlated
with SDQ-20 (r=.75, p=.001), MDI (disengagement r=.88, p=<.001; memory
disturbance r=.69, p=.003) and PHQ-9 (r=.64, p=.007) scores (all elevated in the
FND group, p-values <.01-<.001).
CONCLUSIONS: Contrary to previous findings, this FND sample did not display
objective deficits in neurocognitive functioning or differences in task-related
metacognition, but they exhibited superiority in aspects of social cognition.
Daily cognitive symptoms in the FND group were elevated but were related to
psychological symptom burden rather than objective neurocognitive
impairments.

Poster number: S_PZ1_004 (TP)

Sub-Theme: Functional Neurological Disorders: Cognitive, Affective,
and Implications for Everyday Life

## Investigating the Relationship between Sleep Characteristics, Fatigue and
Executive Functioning (an fMRI study)
Authors: Hannah Windmill, Brain Research and Imaging Centre,
University of Plymouth; Nadège Bault - School of Psychology Brain Research and
Imaging Centre, University of Plymouth; Daniel Graham - School of Psychology
Brain Research and Imaging Centre, University of Plymouth; Ashwin Dhanda -
Peninsula Medical School University of Plymouth; Alastair D Smith - School of
Psychology University of Plymouth; Matthew E Roser - School of Psychology Brain
Research and Imaging Centre, University of Plymouth; Stephen D Hall - School of
Psychology Brain Research and Imaging Centre, University of Plymouth
Aim: Many neurological disorders present cognitive dysfunction along with high
levels of fatigue. However, our understanding of the neurological effects of
fatigue on cognition is poor. Generally, research informs of a disconnect
between reported measures of objective and subjective sleep, such that
individuals are not commonly capable of accurately predicting their own sleep
quality and quantities. Here we explore the role of sleep characteristics and
fatigue using objective and subjective measures alongside fMRI investigation of
executive functioning.
Method: Participants (n=34) wore a wrist accelerometer device (GENEActiv) for
7-days to obtain objective measures of sleep and completed the Pittsburgh Sleep
Quality Index as a subjective measure of sleep. An MRI protocol consisting of a
T1 anatomical scan and task-based fMRI consisting of an n-back and go/no-go task
was acquired. A general linear model analysis was used to determine the
relationship between fMRI haemodynamic responses, cognitive performance and
sleep characteristics.
Results: Here we demonstrate the relationship between objective and subjective
measures of sleep quality and quantity, and functional performance in the n-back
and go/no-go tasks (accuracy and reaction times). Furthermore, we highlight the
corresponding neural network changes associated with perceived and actual sleep
quality and subsequent impact on measures of executive functioning.
Conclusion: Demonstrating the relationship between objective and subjective sleep
measures, functional performance and subsequent neural correlates evidences the
role of sleep characteristics on executive functioning in a healthy population.
Through this understanding, we can expand further into the role that fatigue
plays in cognitive symptoms of neurological disease.

Poster number: S_PZ1_005 (TP)

Sub-Theme: Functional Neurological Disorders: Cognitive, Affective,
and Implications for Everyday Life

## A retrospective, observational study of outcomes for neurosciences patients
transferred to intensive care before and during the COVID-19 Pandemic
Authors: Stephen Foulkes, University Hospitals Birmingham; Elnaz
Ghasemi - Internal Medicine Trainee University Hospitals Birmingham; Shanika
Samarasekera - Neurosciences University Hospitals Birmingham
The outbreak of SARS_cov_2/ COVID 19 led to the prioritisation of care pathways
for patients hospitalised with this infection. Although there is emerging
understanding about these pathways, the impact on non-COVID patients during this
time frame is poorly understood.
We retrospectively considered the change in utilisation of services for
neurological patients transferred from a tertiary neurosciences ward to ITU pre
and during the COVID pandemic. Outcomes were measured using the Modified Rankin
Scale (MRS) on discharge from hospital. Outcomes were also compared between
different neurological diagnoses at the time of ICU admission, patients who had
a single versus multiple ICU admissions during a single inpatient stay, the
length of stay on ICU and the length of stay on the neurosciences ward prior to
being admitted to ICU. Data were collected from a total of 72 inpatient
admissions over two 14 month periods before and after the onset of the increase
in COVID hospital admissions (defined as 1/3/20) by review of electronic patient
records. There was no significant difference in MRS outcomes prior to versus
during the pandemic (p = 0.203, using Wilcoxon Rank Sum). The time spent on the
neurosciences ward prior to transfer to ITU did not correlate with outcome. The
number of days spent on ICU and the number of re-admissions to ICU positively
correlated with poor outcome, though these correlations were not significant (p=
0.112 and p=0.081 respectively, using Spearman Rank Correlation).
It is potentially reassuring that there was a consistency of outcomes for
patients pre- versus during the COVID-19 pandemic. We hope that these results
can begin to guide the utilisation of ITU care by critically ill neurosciences’
patients, especially at a time when there are competing demands for beds.

Poster number: S_PZ1_006 (TP)

Sub-Theme: Functional Neurological Disorders: Cognitive, Affective,
and Implications for Everyday Life

## What matters to people affected by MND? Integrating and valuing the
perspectives of people affected in MND Scotland’s research, strategy and
funding
Authors: Jane Haley, MND Scotland Introduction
As part of MND Scotland’s new strategy, Making Time Count, one of our commitments
is to make sure that the views of people affected by motor neuron disease (MND)
are central to the development, and ongoing evolution, of the charity. Funding
and supporting research is an important part of our work. Over the past 15
years, we have invested around £6 million into a range of projects from basic
science and clinical trials, to research improving quality of life. Here we
outline how we are integrating the perspectives of those affected into the
research we fund and support.
Methods
We have used three separate approaches to bring the perspectives of people
affected by MND into our funded research. First, we have embedded lay reviewing
into our grant review process. Second, we have introduced a request and support
system for researchers seeking input from those affected. Third, we have
undertaken a national survey asking people what issues are important to them and
what questions they’d like research to address. The findings will help to inform
the work we invest in and support in the future.
Results and conclusions
MND is a rapidly progressing terminal condition. Those affected by the disease
face innumerable challenges: they also have expertise and often an interest in
research. With careful attention to accessibility, we have found that people
have much to bring to lay reviewing grant applications. Working in the context
of a terminal condition has nuances, but this process has brought a valuable new
perspective to funding
As a result of our new involvement request system, we have begun offering
researchers bespoke assistance in tailoring their research, so it effectively
and appropriately engages those affected.
Through our survey, people affected by MND are also having a wider impact on the
charity’s development. The findings cover aspects from social care and
bereavement, to a desire for research which focuses upon improved diagnosis,
troublesome symptoms, and understanding disease progression.
These three components have enriched our organisational processes and continue to
inform future decisions.
This abstract does not include a section on statistical analysis due to its
nature (qualitative), and focus on research in practice.

Poster number: S_PZ1_007 (PP)

Sub-Theme: Compulsive Behavior, Habit Formation, and Reward
Processing: Insights from Rodent and Human Studies

## Determining whether dysfunctional checking is habitual in a rodent analogue
of compulsive-like checking in obsessive-compulsive disorder
Authors: Luise Pickenhan, University of Cambridge; Sharon
Morein-Zamir - School of Psychology and Sports Science Anglia Ruskin University;
Amy L Milton - Department of Psychology University of Cambridge
Introduction. A major subtype of obsessive-compulsive disorder involves excessive
and maladaptive checking behaviour. This maladaptive, dysfunctional checking can
be modelled using the Observing Response Task (ORT). The ORT distinguishes
between functional and dysfunctional checking shown by the same individuals, in
both rodents and humans. However, although dysfunctional checking on the ORT
serves no purpose, it has not yet been formally tested whether it is
habitual.
Methods. 24 male Lister Hooded rats will be trained on the ORT ( ). Briefly, rats
learn to respond on one of two levers to receive reinforcement, with the correct
lever changing unpredictably throughout the session. Rats can identify the
currently correct lever by pressing a third, ‘observing’ lever, illuminating a
light cue over the correct lever. These functional Observing Lever Presses
(OLPs) can be distinguished from dysfunctional Extra Observing Lever Presses
(eOLPs), with the latter having no programmed consequences. As we have
previously observed individual variation in dysfunctional checking, with
sign-tracking rats showing elevated levels, rats will separately undergo
classification as sign-trackers or goal-trackers on a pavlovian autoshaping
task. Contingency degradation will be used to determine whether dysfunctional
checking is habitual. This will weaken the contingency between pressing of the
observing lever and light cue presentation. Based on previous reports that
sign-trackers rely more on model-free learning, it is predicted that the
dysfunctional checking of sign-trackers will be insensitive to contingency
degradation. In contrast, goal-tracking rats are predicted to reduce any
dysfunctional checking following contingency degradation.
Approach for statistical analysis. The ORT provides a rich data set, including
data on OLPs and eOLPs, and secondary measures of generalised task performance
(e.g. rates of lever pressing, lever discrimination). Baseline responding on the
ORT (prior to contingency degradation) of sign-trackers and goal-trackers will
be compared for each measure using mixed-model ANOVAs. Checking following
contingency degradation will be analysed using mixed-model ANOVAs, comparing
pre-degradation and post-degradation levels of OLPs and eOLPs.
 
Poster number: S_PZ1_008 (PP)

Sub-Theme: Compulsive Behavior, Habit Formation, and Reward
Processing: Insights from Rodent and Human Studies

## Determining the nature of the relationship between sign-tracking and
dysfunctional checking on the Observing Response Task
Authors: Dou Hong, University of Cambridge
Introduction
Compulsive behaviours occur in a variety of psychiatric disorders including
addiction and obsessive-compulsive disorder. It has been proposed that
individual differences in the propensity to respond to reward-related cues is
associated with compulsive behaviours. For example, "sign-tracking” (engagement
with the reward-related cue rather than the reward) is associated with deficits
in attention and impulse control and is resistant to extinction. Indeed, in both
humans and animals, sign-trackers tend to exhibit more compulsive-like
behaviour. However, it remains unknown whether there is a causal relationship
between sign-tracking and compulsive behaviour. If so, then treatments and
prevention protocols for compulsive disorders could specifically target the
sign-tracking trait. By contrast, if sign-tracking and compulsions are both
underpinned by the appetitive motivational system but occur independently,
sign-tracking may be a diagnostic marker of disorders to achieve prevention and
early intervention.
This study aims to determine the nature of the relationship between sign-tracking
and compulsive-like behaviour to expand on our previous observations that
sign-tracking rats show higher greater dysfunctional checking on the Observing
Response Task (ORT; Figure 1). The causal nature of this relationship will be
tested by reversing the order of training, such that rats are first trained on
the ORT prior to classification using a pavlovian autoshaping task.
Method
Subjects will be 24 male Lister Hooded rats, trained on the ORT. To induce
dysfunctional checking behaviours, rats will undergo ‘uncertainty training’ in
which the correct response switches unpredictably, which increases functional
checking in all rats and dysfunctional checking in sign-trackers. Rats will then
be classified as sign-trackers or goal- trackers using pavlovian autoshaping,
and the relationship between high levels of dysfunctional checking and sign-
tracking assessed.
Approach for statistical analysis
Logistic regression will be used to determine whether increased dysfunctional
checking will make more rats to become the sign-tracking phenotype. Other
secondary measures (e.g. rates of lever pressing) will be examined to determine
any generalised differences in motivate.
 
Poster number: S_PZ1_009 (PP)

Sub-Theme: Compulsive Behavior, Habit Formation, and Reward
Processing: Insights from Rodent and Human Studies

## Is motivation toward a reward a predictor of dysfunctional behavior?
Authors: Felippe Espinelli Amorim, University of Cambridge; Sharon
Morein-Zamir - School of Psychology and Sports Science Anglia Ruskin University;
Emily Breese - School of Psychology and Sports Science Anglia Ruskin University;
Amy Milton - Department of Psychology University of Cambridge
When presented with a reward-related conditioned stimulus, individuals vary in
their responses. Depending on whether they approach the location of a reward
delivery or the cue itself, they are classified as goal- or a sign- trackers
respectively. We have previously observed a correlation between sign-tracking
and dysfunctional, compulsive-like checking on the Observing Response Task
(ORT). As sign-trackers have also been reported to show more rapid progressions
to compulsive-like drug-seeking and to rely more upon habitual-like model-free
learning, then this may indicate that sign-trackers rely more on habitual
learning. Whether this association is specific to sign- tracking, or could be
observed with other measures of motivated behaviour, such as
pavlovian-instrumental transfer (PIT) remains unknown. Thus, we aim to test
whether sign-trackers and goal-trackers show differential performance on both
specific PIT (which relies on model-free learning) and general PIT (which relies
on model-based learning), and whether PIT performance can be similarly related
to dysfunctional checking on the ORT.
Rats will be trained on a Pavlovian-Instrumental Transfer task with two separate
reinforcers, two responses and two reward-associated cues (and a third, neutral
cue). General and specific PIT will be assessed in a probe test, before rats are
subsequently trained on both pavlovian autoshaping (to classify the animals as
goal- and sign-trackers) and the ORT.
We will analyze the mean lever presses from the PIT test data using an ANOVA and
the ORT task using mixed 2x2 ANOVAs. In our study, we expect that ST will have a
greater general PIT effect than GT, which will positively correlate with
dysfunctional checking during the ORT task.

Poster number: S_PZ1_010 (TP)

Sub-Theme: Compulsive Behavior, Habit Formation, and Reward
Processing: Insights from Rodent and Human Studies

## Seeking certainty in an uncertain world
Authors: Emily Breese, Anglia Ruskin University; Estherina
Trachtenberg - Psychology and Sports Science Anglia Ruskin University; Felippe
Espinelli Amorim - Psychology University of Cambridge; Amy Milton - Psychology
University of Cambridge; Sharon Morein-Zamir - Psychology and Sports Science
Anglia Ruskin University
To cope with uncertainty, humans often use goal directed behaviours, such as
checking, to increase their knowledge about the environment. To date, research
on attitudes and behaviours relating to coping with uncertainty have largely
relied on self-report. This study investigated the tendency to use cues even
when they no longer provide useful information to reduce uncertainty.
Using the translational Observing Response Task, participants could earn rewards
(50p) by pressing one of two buttons on a variable ratio schedule. However, at
any given time, only one of the buttons was active. This introduced uncertainty,
in that participants did not know which button to press to earn rewards.
Pressing a third button revealed an observing (certainty) cue that showed which
of the two buttons was currently active (meaning that pressing it would lead to
a reward). However, pressing this cue incurred a small cost (5p). After six
minutes, unbeknownst to participants, the observing cue was extinguished, but
continued to incur a cost. Participants also completed a battery of self-report
questionnaires which included questions about uncertainty and obsessive
compulsive tendencies as well as anxiety levels before and after the task.
A sample of 82 participants was analysed using repeated measures ANOVAs and
bootstrapped regression. Overall, observing behaviour within individuals was
stable during the first six minutes. Following cue extinction, there was a clear
reduction in observing behaviour (η²p=.27, p<.001), however a proportion of
participants continued to press the observing cue, with 40% of participants
pressing as late as 6-8 minutes after cue extinction. Observing during
extinction, but not prior, was a significant predictor of self-reported levels
of obsessive-compulsive checking (assessed using the Obsessive Compulsive
Inventory). Further, the task was experienced as a mild stressor, with a rise in
self-reported anxiety (d=0.29, p<.01).
These findings indicate that certainty seeking is persistent, regardless of its
potential to become maladaptive. This provides insight into the mechanisms
underlying the development and maintenance of certainty seeking habits.

Poster number: M_PZ1_001 (TP)

Sub-Theme: Decision-making Processes: Neural Mechanisms, Contextual
Factors, and Reward Processing

## Distributed neural population encoding during a perceptual decision
confidence task: A dynamic causal modelling study
Authors: Abdoreza Asadpour, Ulster University; KongFatt Wong-Lin -
School of computing, engineering and intelligent systems Ulster University
Perceptual decision confidence is the metacognitive ability to internally
evaluate the accuracy or correctness of one’s own perceptual decisions. Several
studies on humans have identified neural activities in different brain regions
during perceptual decision formation (stimulation) phase and decision confidence
rating phase. However, it is unknown whether neural encoding is more prominent
in decision formation or confidence rating phase. Further, as reaction times
(RTs) are related to decision confidence levels, it is unclear how differently
slow and fast decisions are encoded within neural populations. We addressed the
above by using dynamic causal modelling (DCM) on an open dataset based on a
classic random-dot kinematogram with confidence rating task (Gherman &
Philiastides, 2020).
We chose 16 participants with significant Spearman’s correlations (p<0.05)
between RT and rated confidence level from the dataset. We compared neural
activities between stimulation and rating phases as well as between fast and
slow responses in stimulation phase. Using T-contrast analysis in SPM12 toolbox,
we isolated brain regions with significant activity differences for these two
conditions from functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) data. We then
created and estimated a DCM model space between extracted brain regions for each
condition from electroencephalogram (EEG) data using canonical microcircuit
neural mass model and selected the winning model using random-effects Bayesian
model selection. For stimulation-vs-rating condition, the right superior and
inferior parietal lobule (SPL and IPL), left and right precuneus (PrC), left
cingulate gyrus, left and right insula, and right superior frontal gyrus were
more active. Compared to rating phase, we found in stimulation phase higher
neural populations’ activities averaged over all participants in the winning
model, indicating stronger neural encoding. Next, we extracted activities from
the right SPL, left PrC, right supramarginal gyrus, left precentral gyrus, and
left medial frontal gyrus and found, for slow responses, the winning model
exhibiting higher activity for all neural populations in the left PrC,
suggesting the encoding of decision uncertainty.
 
Poster number: M_PZ1_002 (TP)

Sub-Theme: Decision-making Processes: Neural Mechanisms, Contextual
Factors, and Reward Processing

## A Systematic Review of M-EEG evidence on value-based decisions in humans:
experimental paradigms and spatiotemporal characteristics
Authors: Isabella Colic, Cardiff University; Jiaxiang Zhang - School
of Psychology - CUBRIC Cardiff University
Decision-making is an integrative process that is crucial for humans and animals
on a daily basis, and it has been at the centre of a long tradition of
psychological and economic research. This systematic review focuses on the
spatiotemporal dynamics of value-based decision-making. Since there is an
abundance of fMRI, neuropsychological, and animal studies on the topic, we
instead examined evidence collected from 100 magnetoencephalography and
electroencephalography studies, which are known for their high temporal
resolution. Additionally, we classified value-based decisions into ‘external’
(EDM) and ‘internal’ (IDM) and used this division as the theoretical framework
of the present review. In ‘external’ decisions, the values of different options
are objectively defined, whereas said values in ‘internal’ decisions are defined
by the individual. The review aims to assess whether there is a convergent
pattern of event-related potentials or fields (ERP/ERF) findings and how EDM and
IDM processes have been studied so far with these methods. Based on precedents
in the literature, we extracted statistically significant time intervals that
result from contrasts between experimental conditions that are sensitive to
differences in (external or internal) value. We also examined the topographical
and source space distribution of these intervals. Finally, we classified the
paradigms into specific clusters of experimental designs, an approach that will
guide future research and inspire the development of novel tasks to study
value-based decisions. Due to the nature of the data, we could not apply typical
statistical analyses and, instead, looked at the proportion of papers that
reported significant intervals for the aforementioned contrasts. Overall, our
findings show that there are similarities as well as differences in the time
course and the topography of EDM and IDM processes. To our knowledge, the
current review is the first to directly contrast these two types of
decision-making and to provide an in-depth description of the paradigms and
ERP/ERF components that are most consistently employed in the field.

Poster number: M_PZ1_003 (TP)

Sub-Theme: Decision-making Processes: Neural Mechanisms, Contextual
Factors, and Reward Processing

## The interplay between internally- and externally-guided decision-making:
evidence from three online behavioral experiments
Authors: Isabella Colic, Cardiff University; Jiaxiang Zhang - School
of Psychology - CUBRIC Cardiff University; Nikolay Petrov - School of Psychology
- CUBRIC Cardiff University
Value-based decision-making is vital for our interactions with the external
environment, and the nature of the values that guide our decisions can originate
from different sources, e.g., external (objective rewards) or internal
(connected to our preferences). However, how these different values interact
with each other has not been addressed in the literature, so far.
In the current study, we designed a series of three experiments where sources
relating to internal values (i.e., subjective preferences for specific food
items) and to external values (i.e., the reward probability associated with the
different options) are presented simultaneously, with the aim to examine whether
the presence of task-irrelevant value information influences human
behaviour.
In Experiment 1, after the stimulus display, participants were cued with a dollar
sign or a heart-shaped symbol, indicating whether they had to perform a
reward-based or a preference-based decision. In Experiment 2, the task cue was
presented before the stimuli, removing the uncertainty component. In Experiment
3, we introduced a delay between the cue and the response, to investigate how
the removal of temporal constraints affected the participants’ behaviour.
Results from linear mixed models show that, across all experiments, there is
evidence of a spill-over effect on accuracy and RTs from the preference-based
domain into the reward-based one, as indicated by significant interactions
between value conflict (i.e., the absolute difference between the average
ratings of the two food items shown on the screen) and congruency (i.e., whether
the preferred item was associated with advantageous or disadvantageous border
colour), with odds ratio value and confidence intervals of: OR = .65 [.58, .72],
p < .001; OR =.66 [.59, .74], p < .001; OR = .74 [.66, .83], p < .001
for Experiment 1, 2, and 3, respectively.
Overall, the data suggests that a value-based decisional conflict emerges,
hampering the participants’ performance, and it could be explained in turn by
factors like selection and reward history, value-directed attentional capture,
and conflict monitoring.

Poster number: M_PZ1_004 (TP)

Sub-Theme: Decision-making Processes: Neural Mechanisms, Contextual
Factors, and Reward Processing

## Comparing the neural correlates of reward processing during
Becker–DeGroot–Marschak and Vickrey auctions: an ERP study
Authors: Alice Newton-Fenner, University of Liverpool
Introduction
In value-based decision-making research, auctions are widely used as a tool to
quantify subjective values (SV) of goods in the form of willingness-to-pay. The
Vickrey auction (VA) and Becker–DeGroot–Marschak auction (BDM) are the most
well-established of these, being strategically equivalent demand-revealing
mechanisms that are differentiated only by a human opponent in the VA, and a
random-number-generator opponent in the BDM. Game parameters are such that
players are incentivised to reveal their true private SVs. Behaviour should be
identical in both tasks, but this has been repeatedly shown not to be the
case.
Methods
The neural correlates of outcome feedback processing during the VA and BDM were
directly compared using EEG. 28 healthy participants completed both tasks,
bidding for household products which were then divided into high- and low-SV
categories. Both tasks used a random-number-generator opponent, with the VA
including a human opponent deception to induce a social environment.
Approach for statistical analysis
EEG data were spatially transformed to reference-free using the common average
reference method, and artefacts were removed with principal component analysis.
Selected EEG epochs were averaged for each condition, and analysed using
repeated measures ANOVAs.
Results and conclusions
A P3 component peaking at 336 ms over midline parietal sites showed more positive
amplitudes for high-SV outcomes, and for win outcomes in the VA but not the BDM.
A N170 potential in the right occipitotemporal electrodes and a vertex positive
potential component were larger in the VA than the BDM. Both auctions elicited a
Reward Positivity potential, maximal at 275 ms along the central midline
electrodes, that was not modulated by auction task or SV. Results point to an
enhanced cortical response to bid outcomes during VA task in a potential
component associated with emotional control, and to the occurrence of enhanced
face-sensitive potentials in the VA. These findings suggest modulation of bid
outcome processing by the social-competitive aspect of auction tasks. This study
progresses the neural characterisation of the impact of social context on reward
processing in risky environments.

Poster number: M_PZ1_005 (TP)

Sub-Theme: Decision-making Processes: Neural Mechanisms, Contextual
Factors, and Reward Processing

## Can electrophysiological effects of reward during encoding explain the
context dependence of reward-enhanced memory?
Authors: Deborah Talmi, Robin Hellerstedt, Tristan Bekinschtein,
University of Cambridge
Introduction. Selective encoding can be studied by manipulating how valuable it
is for participants to remember specific stimuli, for instance by varying the
monetary reward participants receive for recalling a particular stimulus in a
subsequent memory test. Reward-enhanced memory may be driven by automatic
dopaminergic interactions between reward circuitry and the hippocampus and thus
be insensitive to context; or it may be driven by meta- cognitive strategies,
and thus context-dependent. It would be reasonable for participants to
strategically attend to items that predicted high reward more than to items that
predicted low reward in mixed lists, but to attend both types of items equally
in pure lists, as this incurs no tangible cost.
Method and statistical analysis. We contrasted these alternatives by using a
list-composition manipulation, and tracked selective encoding through multiple
EEG measures of attention. The sample size (N=43) was determined a priori based
on effect sizes in Hajcak et al. (2013). The pre-registered analyses of memory
performance and extracted ssVEP amplitudes utilised a generalised mixed effect
model with the lme4 package in R. We complemented the focal analysis with a
pre-registered global data-driven analysis of all time points of the trial and
all analysed electrodes, controlling for multiple comparisons with nonparametric
cluster-based permutation tests.
Results. Reward-enhanced memory depended on list context, such that recall of
high-reward items was increased in mixed, but not pure, lists. This result and
aspects of the recall dynamics confirm predictions of the eCMR (emotional
Context Maintenance and Retrieval) model. The amplitude of steady-state visual
evoked potentials was lower for high-reward items regardless of list context,
suggesting that high reward decreased visual processing of the stimuli and that
SSVEP may index the modulation of context-to-item associations predicted by
eCMR. By contrast, reward modulated the amplitude of Late Positive Potentials in
mixed lists, mimicking the memory results.
Conclusions. Taken together, the results provide evidence for the joint
functioning of both automatic and strategic processes in how selective encoding
shapes eventual memory.

Poster number: T_PZ1_001 (TP)

Sub-Theme: Cognitive Flexibility and Neural Disinhibition: Insights
from Rodent Models

## Too little and too much: balanced hippocampal, but not prefrontal, neural
activity is required for novel object recognition in rats
Authors: Charlotte Taylor, University of Nottingham; Jacco Renstrom
- School of Psychology University of Nottingham; Joanna Loayza - School of
Psychology University of Nottingham; Miriam Gwilt - School of Psychology
University of Nottingham; Stuart Williams - School of Psychology University of
Nottingham; Rachel Grasmeder Allen - School of Psychology University of
Nottingham; Paula Moran - School of Psychology University of Nottingham; John
Gigg - Division of Neuroscience and Experimental Psychology University of
Manchester; Michael Harte - Division of Pharmacy and Optometry, University of
Manchester; Joanna Neill - Division of Pharmacy and Optometry, University of
Manchester; Tobias Bast - School of Psychology University of Nottingham
Impaired GABAergic inhibition, so-called neural disinhibition, in the prefrontal
cortex and hippocampus has been linked to cognitive deficits in a range of
disorders, including schizophrenia (Bast et al., 2017, Br J Pharmacol). The
novel object recognition (NOR) task has been used widely to study cognitive
deficits in rodent models. Rat models of NMDA receptor hypofunction consistently
show NOR deficits at 1-min retention delays, suggested to reflect reduced
prefrontal and hippocampal GABA function (Cadinu et al., 2018,
Neuropharmacology). However, the contribution of GABAergic inhibition in these
regions to NOR capacity has not been established. Here, we investigated the
effects of neural disinhibition or functional inhibition on NOR using local
infusions of the GABA-A receptor antagonist picrotoxin or agonist muscimol,
respectively. Our infusion targets were the medial prefrontal cortex (mPFC),
dorsal hippocampus (DH) and ventral hippocampus (VH).
Three cohorts of male Lister hooded rats were used, with one cohort (n=16) for
each brain region (mPFC, DH and VH). The impact of bilateral regional saline,
picrotoxin or muscimol infusions on NOR was compared using a within- subjects
design. The NOR task consisted of 3-min acquisition and retention trials,
separated by a 1-min retention delay. Object exploration times and
discrimination index were analysed using ANOVA, with infusion condition and
object (novel vs familiar) as within-subject factors.
In the mPFC, neither functional inhibition by muscimol nor disinhibition by
picrotoxin affected NOR. In both DH and VH, neural disinhibition impaired NOR.
Functional inhibition in the DH impaired NOR, whereas there was limited evidence
for VH functional inhibition to affect NOR.
Overall, our data suggest that hippocampal, but not prefrontal, GABAergic
function contributes to NOR at 1-min retention delays. In addition, results
indicate that balanced neural activity in the DH is required for NOR, with both
too little and too much activity causing NOR deficits. NOR deficits following VH
disinhibition may reflect an aberrant drive of projections to other brain
regions, which may include the DH. Moreover, our data suggest that hippocampal
GABA deficits may contribute to NOR deficits caused by NMDA receptor
hypofunction.

Poster number: T_PZ1_002 (TP)

Sub-Theme: Cognitive Flexibility and Neural Disinhibition: Insights
from Rodent Models

## Ventral hippocampal functional inhibition disrupts repeated reversal
learning, whereas disinhibition disrupts expression of the previous
response
Authors: Rachel Grasmeder Allen, University of Nottingham; Charlotte
Taylor - School of Psychology University of Nottingham; Jacco Renström - School
of Psychology University of Nottingham; Joanna Loayza - School of Psychology
University of Nottingham; Luke O’Hara - School of Psychology University of
Nottingham; Jacob Juty - School of Psychology University of Nottingham; Neave
Smith - School of Psychology University of Nottingham; Silvia Maggi - School of
Psychology University of Nottingham; Tobias Bast - School of Psychology
University of Nottingham
Reversal learning is a form of cognitive flexibility, and involves switching from
one response to another when the reward contingencies of the responses are
reversed. Recently, we found that medial prefrontal cortex (mPFC) disinhibition
by the GABA-A receptor antagonist picrotoxin markedly impaired repeated reversal
learning performance in rats. mPFC functional inhibition by the GABA-A receptor
agonist muscimol did not impair repeated reversal learning performance, although
it impaired acquisition of reversal learning. The ventral hippocampus (VH)
strongly projects to the mPFC, and VH disinhibition may disrupt functions
depending on appropriate mPFC activity (McGarrity et al., 2017, CerebCortex).
However, little is known about how changes in hippocampal activity affect
reversal learning.
Here, we examined how VH functional inhibition or disinhibition, by muscimol or
picrotoxin infusion, affected repeated reversal performance on a two-lever
reversal task in male Lister hooded rats. Rats were trained to acquire a spatial
discrimination (right or left lever) and then completed four reversals, to
achieve relatively stable reversal performance levels. Then, the impact of
saline, muscimol and picrotoxin infusion into the VH on repeated reversals was
compared within-subjects. Retraining days, without infusions, were interleaved
between reversal days to reinforce the previous rule before the next reversal;
on infusion days, 20 ‘reminder’ trials to test expression of the previous rule
preceded reversal trials. Data were analysed by repeated-measures ANOVA, using
infusion as within- subjects factor.
Repeated reversal learning was impaired by VH functional inhibition (increased
responses to criterion), but unaffected by disinhibition. This indicates that
repeated reversal learning requires VH activity, but not balanced levels of VH
activity. In contrast, VH disinhibition, but not inhibition, impaired expression
of the previous response during reminder trials (reduced % of correct responses,
increased omissions). This suggests that such expression does not require VH
activity, but is disrupted by aberrant activation of VH projection sites.
Bayesian trial-by-trial analysis will be used to examine how VH manipulations
affected strategies underlying reversal performance.

Poster number: T_PZ1_003 (TP)

Sub-Theme: Cognitive Flexibility and Neural Disinhibition: Insights
from Rodent Models

## Too little and too much: The effects of prefrontal inhibition and
disinhibition on early reversal learning and established reversal
performance
Authors: Jacco Renstrom, University of Nottingham; Charlotte Taylor
- Psychology University of Nottingham; Joanna Loayza - Psychology University of
Nottingham; Luke O'Hara - Psychology University of Nottingham; Rachel Grasmeder
Allen - Psychology University of Nottingham; Silvia Maggi - Psychology
University of Nottingham; Paula Moran - Psychology University of Nottingham;
Carl Stevenson - Neuroscience University of Nottingham; Moritz von Heimendahl -
CNS Boehringer Ingelheim Pharma GmbH; Serena Deiana - CNS Boehringer Ingelheim
Pharma GmbH; Tobias Bast - Psychology University of Nottingham
Schizophrenia has been associated with both hypofrontality (i.e., reduced
prefrontal cortex (PFC) activation) and prefrontal disinhibition (i.e., reduced
GABAergic neural inhibition). Additionally, schizophrenia is characterised by
marked reversal learning deficits. Reversal learning has mainly been found to
require the orbitofrontal (OFC), but not PFC However, the PFC may still be
required for reversal learning if the reversal is particularly demanding.
Additionally, even if the PFC is not required, local disinhibition may impair
reversal performance, as such disinhibition causes aberrant prefrontal neuron
firing and may, thus, also disrupt processing in projection sites, including the
OFC.
Here, we examined the impact of medial PFC inhibition and disinhibition in rats,
by infusion of the GABA-A receptor agonist muscimol or antagonist picrotoxin,
respectively, on an operant two-lever reversal task. In two cohorts, we studied
the impact on (1) early reversals (task naïve rats with significant
between-session performance improvements) and on (2) later serial reversals
(when rats showed relatively stable performance indicating reversal
proficiency).
In addition to classical performance measures, including responses to criterion,
we used a Bayesian trial-by-trial analysis to examine strategies underlying
reversal performance and how these were affected by prefrontal manipulations.
Data was analysed using ANOVAs with infusion, trials and task stages as
variables.
PFC inhibition impaired early, but not late, reversal performance by increasing
perseveration and impairing ‘lose- shift’ behaviour. In contrast, PFC
disinhibition disrupted late reversal performance, characterised by impairments
in both exploitatory and exploratory strategies, resulting in slower switching
to the new response-reward associations.
Results indicate that PFC hypoactivity impairs exploration during early reversal
stages, which disrupts early reversal acquisition. At later reversal stages,
hypoactivity does not impair performance, indicating the PFC is not required
when task proficiency is high. In contrast, PFC disinhibition impaired later
serial reversal performance by impairing both exploration and exploitation.

Poster number: T_PZ1_004 (TP)

Sub-Theme: Cognitive Flexibility and Neural Disinhibition: Insights
from Rodent Models

## Contribution of medial prefrontal cortex D1 receptors to early and repeated
reversal learning in rats
Authors: Luke O'Hara, University of Nottingham; Jacco Renstrom -
School of Psychology University of Nottingham; Rachel Grasmeder Allen - School
of Psychology University of Nottingham; Charlotte Taylor - School of Psychology
University of Nottingham; Joanna Loayza - School of Psychology University of
Nottingham; Tobias Bast - School of Psychology University of Nottingham; Silvia
Maggi - School of Psychology University of Nottingham
Cognitive flexibility allows individuals to adjust their behaviour in response to
changes in their environment. A form of cognitive flexibility is reversal
learning: the ability to switch between responses when the reward contingency of
the responses is reversed. Impaired in Schizophrenia and other neuropsychiatric
disorders, reversal learning depends on frontal cortex function. The prefrontal
cortex receives midbrain dopamine projections, which convey information about
reward feedback signals. Moreover, dopamine D1 receptors in the medial
prefrontal cortex (mPFC) have been implicated in learning and attention.
However, whether mPFC D1 receptors play a role in the acquisition of reversal
learning or in flexibly switching between response rules after repeated exposure
is not fully understood.
To address this, we examined the impact of mPFC infusion of the D1 receptor
agonist SKF 81297 or the antagonist SCH 23390 on reversal performance on a
two-lever task in male Lister hooded rats. In one cohort, we tested the impact
on early reversals, when rats were naïve and showed significant between-session
performance improvements. In another cohort, we tested the impact on later
repeated reversals, when rats had ‘learnt to reverse’ and their performance was
relatively stable across reversals.
In both experiments, mPFC SCH, but not SKF, increased response omissions and
latencies compared to saline infusions. Furthermore, mPFC SCH impaired the
expression of the previous rule and decreased perseverative errors during early
reversals, but not later reversals. Moreover, a Bayesian trial-by-trial analysis
revealed that mPFC SKF increased perseveration, whereas SCH decreased
perseveration, during later reversals. These findings suggest that mPFC D1
receptors modulate the expression/exploitation of recently learnt rules and
inhibit exploratory behaviour. Specifically, D1 antagonism reduces expression of
a previously learned rule and promotes exploration, whereas D1 agonism promotes
exploitation at the expense of exploration. Additional Bayesian trial-by-trial
analyses are on the way to examine the emergence of exploratory versus
exploitative behaviour across reversals.

Poster number: T_PZ1_005 (TP)

Sub-Theme: Cognitive Flexibility and Neural Disinhibition: Insights
from Rodent Models

## Further characterisation of the rat model of Tourette-related striatal
disinhibition: in vivo electrophysiological and behavioural studies
Authors: Joanna Loayza, University of Nottingham
Tourette’s syndrome is characterised by loss of GABAergic inhibition, so called
neural disinhibition, in the striatum. Dorsal-striatal microinjection of GABA-A
antagonists, including picrotoxin, produces tic-like movements in rodents and
primates that resemble motor tics in Tourette’s.
Here, we unilaterally infused picrotoxin (300ng/0.5ul) or saline (0.5ul) into the
anterior dorsal striatum of young adult male Lister hooded rats and
characterised further the neuro-behavioural impact of striatal disinhibition by
electrophysiological and behavioural measurements.
Electrophysiological recordings in the striatum under isoflurane anesthesia
showed that disinhibition via picrotoxin, apart from evoking large LFP
spike-wave discharges, markedly enhanced multi-unit burst firing. In freely
moving rats, striatal picrotoxin reliably induced tic-like movements, which
involved lifting the contralateral forelimb, which resulted in rotation of head
and torso, before returning to normal body posture. Some of these movements
lasted for several seconds and led to the whole body rotating around its long
axis. Automated photobeam measurements in an open field revealed that striatal
disinhibition increased locomotor activity and fine motor counts. The time
course of the latter matched that of tic-like movements, suggesting a simple
automated way to measure these. Striatal disinhibition did not affect
prepulse-inhibition (PPI) of the acoustic startle response, but tended to reduce
startle. Data was analysed using ANOVAs.
Striatal disinhibition caused striatal spike-wave discharges in anaesthetised
rats, similar to previous findings in freely moving rats, and enhanced burst
firing of striatal neurons. In freely moving rats, striatal disinhibition
reliably produced tic-like movements, and we characterised the time course and
key features of these movements. Striatal disinhibition increased locomotor
activity suggesting such disinhibition may contribute to hyperactivity, which is
often comorbid with Tourette’s. Contrasting with PPI disruption in Tourette’s,
striatal disinhibition in rats did not affect PPI, suggesting GABAergic
inhibition is not required for intact PPI and deficits in PPI are not necessary
for tic- like movements.

Poster number: T_PZ1_007 (TP)

Sub-Theme: Circadian Rhythms in Neural Oscillators: Development,
Mechanisms, and Implications for Health

## Hindbrain clocks: a timely appearance in postnatal development
Authors: Charlotte Muir, University of Bristol; Lukasz Chrobok -
School of Physiology, Pharmacology, and Neuroscience University of Bristol; Jake
Ahern - School of Physiology, Pharmacology, and Neuroscience University of
Bristol; Hugh D Piggins - School of Physiology, Pharmacology, and Neuroscience
University of Bristol
1. Introduction
Our recent work has highlighted that the dorsal vagal complex (DVC) is a
surprisingly robust circadian timekeeping centre functioning semi-autonomously
from the master clock, the suprachiasmatic nucleus. The DVC is a collection of
brainstem nuclei involved in energy balance, ingestive processes, and feeding.
Despite dramatic changes in feeding behaviour in postnatal development, when
this brainstem clock begins to ‘tick’ and how it may change in postnatal
ontogeny remains unknown. The aim of this study was to explore how the DVC clock
develops at a molecular level in the first four weeks of postnatal life.
2. Methods
The rhythms of the clock gene Per2 were examined in the DVC of PER2::LUCIFERASE
(PER2::LUC) reporter mice. 7- day bioluminescence recordings were taken from ex
vivo brain slices in four developmental timepoints: postnatal day (P)7, 14, 21,
28, and compared to adults (over 2 months old). The intensity of bioluminescence
over time was analysed using the ImageJ Stacks T-functions plugin. Period,
phase, and robustness of the rhythms were then determined using the PyBoat
package in Python.
3. Approach for statistical analysis
Differences in the period of PER2::LUC expression in distinct subregions of the
DVC across developmental time points were analysed using a two-way ANOVA
followed by Tukey’s multiple comparison. The rhythm robustness in these
subregions over development was analysed using a repeated measures two-way ANOVA
followed by Sidak’s multiple comparison. ANOVAs were conducted using GraphPad
Prism. Phase was analysed using the MATLAB circular statistics toolbox
(Watson-Williams test, circular analogue of ANOVA).
4. Results and conclusions
Here we show that across development and as early as P7, the DVC circadian
oscillators exhibit robust rhythms in PER2::LUC expression. Sub-regional
differences in the phasing of these rhythms mirror that of the adults. This
investigation was limited to broad regional populations so future studies can
assess cellular level synchrony across different sub-populations. Our results
suggest DVC circadian oscillators are functional in early postnatal ontogeny and
could potentially participate in the control of rhythmic behaviour in
ontogeny.

Poster number: T_PZ1_008 (TP)

Sub-Theme: Neuroimaging Insights: Enhancing Rehabilitation &
Understanding Cognitive Processes in Diverse Populations

## Enhancing Learning Outcomes through Multisensory Integration: An fMRI and DTI
Study of Audio-Visual Training in Virtual Reality
Authors: Kholoud Alwashmi, University of Liverpool; Georg Meyer -
Virtual Engineering Centre University of Liverpool; Fiona Rowe - Institute of
Population Health University of Liverpool
The integration of information from different sensory modalities is a fundamental
process in the brain that enables behavioural and perceptual enhancement.
Virtual reality (VR) technology presents a unique opportunity for the provision
of immersive and realistic audio-visual (AV) environments. Understanding the
neural mechanisms underlying multisensory integration in virtual environments is
crucial for the development of VR applications, particularly in the field of
rehabilitation.
This study aimed to investigate the effects of multisensory training utilizing VR
on brain activity and microstructure, as well as cognitive performance. Twenty
healthy participants were recruited and instructed to complete a 30- minute
daily training program on VR for four weeks. The task was a ‘scanning training’
paradigm that is commonly used in hemianopia rehabilitation. Neuroimaging data,
including functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) and diffusion tensor
imaging (DTI), as well as performance data, were collected at baseline, after
two and four weeks of training, and four weeks post-training.
The behavioural data were analysed using repeated measures ANOVA, which revealed
significant improvements in behavioural performance (faster response time and
higher scores over time). fMRI and DTI were analysed using paired t-tests to
compare pre- and post-training results. The results revealed increased BOLD
signal activation in multisensory brain regions involved in early-stage AV
processing during the bimodal fMRI task as compared to the unimodal task.
Additionally, DTI data revealed changes in microstructural indices in the optic
radiation and superior longitudinal fasciculus II, which are key white matter
tracts involved in visual processing, spatial attention, and multisensory
integration.
The results of this study demonstrate that incorporating spatial auditory cues to
voluntary visual training in VR leads to augmented brain activation and
microstructural changes in multisensory integration, resulting in measurable
performance gains that apply to involuntary and visual search conditions. This
research underscores the potential of VR-based multisensory training as an
efficacious method for enhancing cognitive function and as a valuable tool in
rehabilitative programs.

Poster number: T_PZ1_009 (TP)

Sub-Theme: Neuroimaging Insights: Enhancing Rehabilitation &
Understanding Cognitive Processes in Diverse Populations

## Uncovering Microstructural Changes in the Brain with Diffusion Kurtosis
Imaging: A Study on Visuomotor Training
Authors: Fahad AL Harshan, University of Liverpool; Georg Meyer -
Virtual Engineering Centre University of Liverpool; Fiona Rowe - Institute of
Population Health University of Liverpool; Sophie Wuerger - Psychology
University of Liverpool; Abdulrhman Aloufi - Radiology University of Qassim
DKI (Diffusion Kurtosis Imaging) is a novel MRI technique that examines the
non-gaussian diffusion of water molecules in body tissue. It has been proven to
be more sensitive in detecting microstructural changes in the brain comparing to
traditional DTI (Diffusion Tensor Imaging) in detecting microstructural change
in a variety of white and gray matter regions.
This study evaluates the sensitivity of DKI to microstructural alteration induced
by visuomotor training: 14 healthy participants underwent a home-based eye
movement training programme, consisting of 30 daily 30-minute sessions, done 5
days a week for 6 consecutive weeks (Aloufi et al., 2021 https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuroimage.2020.117673)
DKI images were collected pre and post the intervention. A whole-brain white
matter analysis was performed using ExploreDTI software to measure the DKI
parameters, including: axial kurtosis (AK), mean kurtosis (MK), radial kurtosis
(RK), and fractional anisotropy (KA). A paired sample t-test was applied over
all regions for each parameter with a 95% confidence level.
Compared to conventional DTI analysis, additional brain regions were found to
show a significant change in response to training: the DKI analysis shows
increasing KA (in 6 regions) and decreasing in AK and MK (in 2 and 4 regions
respectively) after the training, while no significant changes RK were
found.
Overall, the findings suggest that DKI may provide more sensitive information
about microstructural changes in the brain induced by visuomotor training since
DTI findings were not identified these regions.

Poster number: T_PZ1_010 (PP)

Sub-Theme: Neuroimaging Insights: Enhancing Rehabilitation &
Understanding Cognitive Processes in Diverse Populations

## Investigating speed and vitality form perception in autistic and non-autistic
individuals
Authors: Ying Bai, University of Manchester; Ellen Poliakoff -
Psychology, Communication and Human Neuroscience University of Manchester; Emma
Gowen - Psychology, Communication and Human Neuroscience University of
Manchester
Introduction:
Autistic individuals have difficulties with social interaction. Vitality form
describes how actions are performed (e.g., rude or gentle) and is crucial for
interpreting the actions of other people. It is important to understand whether
vitality discrimination is altered in autism and whether this is distinct from
more basic speed discrimination. This study aims to investigate vitality form
discrimination in autistic adults and will be the first to compare speed and
vitality form discrimination within the same participants. The main hypotheses
are that autistic individuals may have 1) poorer performance in vitality form
than speed discrimination 2) shorter eye gaze duration in the intransitive
(gesture) than transitive (cup) condition.
Methods:
The experiment is a within-participant design. Participants will be asked to
complete the speed and vitality form discrimination tasks while their eye
movements are recorded. The two tasks share the same structure and participants
are asked to rate how fast (speed task) or gentle (vitality form task) the
movement is. Video stimuli consist of one actor using their right hand to
present an action to another actor (Fig. 1). The four transitive conditions
involve passing a glass cup (with or without a blue or green lid) to increase
variety and interest in the stimuli. The two intransitive actions are pointing
and giving gestures. Eight execution times 500, 700, 900, 1000, 1100, 1200,
1400, 1600 mm, were decided after a pilot session showed significantly different
vitality form ratings from 5 neurotypical participants.
Planned analysis:
Dependent variables are slopes, response values and response times. Slopes are
calculated from response values across the execution times to measure
discrimination ability. Eye data will include duration on and distance from a
pre-defined interest area. Primary analyses are 1) A mixed effect ANOVA with
factors of action (Object/gesture), task (speed/vitality form) and group
(autistic/non-autistic) for each dependent variable. 2) A mixed ANOVA of action
and group to test the mean percentage time of eye gaze spent in the interest
area.
 
Poster number: T_PZ1_011 (TP)

Sub-Theme: Neuroimaging Insights: Enhancing Rehabilitation &
Understanding Cognitive Processes in Diverse Populations

## Gotcha! A trial of an app-based therapy for proper name anomia in people with
Dementia: clinical effects and MEG correlates
Authors: Aygun Badalova, University College London Abstract
Objectives:
Proper name anomia is a common experience that can become amplified in patients
with a diagnosis of dementia (PWD). The Gotcha! app aims to provide
practice-based therapy for PWD to relearn the names of key people in their
lives. It has been developed according to the principles of errorless learning,
which have previously been shown to improve the remembering the familiar
people’s names and benefit the relationship between the PWD and their loved
ones. (Clare et al, 1999, 2000, 2003).
Methods:
Gotcha! is a digital confrontation naming therapy app which enables patients to
train one face per day by using photos that the app represents. During the
development phase we carried our qualitative research (thematic analysis) on why
PWD get involved in research projects such as ours. Gotcha! therapy block lasts
for six weeks and prior to the therapy patients complete a multiple baseline
paradigm with eight weekly tests of free naming of the to- be trained faces.
During the therapy, a novel speech verifier is used to provide real-time
feedback (Barbera et al. 2020). Two analyses method is used to investigate the
behavioural data: 1) within-subject non-parametric analysis using Tau-U metric
(Parker et al. 2011); 2) a parametric group analysis using an ANOVA.
Results:
The thematic analysis revealed four themes that will be discussed in more detail
on the talk.In terms of the quantitative data, our results from the first 16
subjects showed: 1) Tau-U. 73% showed a positive trend with better naming during
the training phase with 5/10 reaching statistical significance. 2) ANOVA
demonstrated a significant effect at the group level of training>baseline
phase, F(1,9) = 6.68, p = .029.

## Memory & Learning

Poster number: S_PZ1_011 (TP)

Sub-Theme: Entorhinal Cortex and Memory: Dissecting Neural
Representation, Circuitry, and Dysfunction

## Distinct types of memory produce different activation patterns across the
cortical layers of lateral entorhinal cortex
Authors: Dr Gareth Barker, University of Bristol; Dr Clair Booth -
School of Physiology, Pharmacology & Neuroscience University of Bristol; Dr
Paul Banks - School of Physiology, Pharmacology & Neuroscience University of
Bristol; Prof. Zafar Bashir - School of Physiology, Pharmacology &
Neuroscience University of Bristol; Prof. Clea Warburton - School of Physiology,
Pharmacology & Neuroscience University of Bristol
Introduction: Object-in-place (OiP) memory, our ability to associate an object
with a specific location, requires a network of brain regions which includes the
perirhinal cortex (PRH) and lateral entorhinal cortex (LEC).
The Targeted Recombination in Active Populations (TRAP2) mouse allows neurons
activated by a specific event to be labelled (DeNardo et al. 2019). The TRAP2
mouse was used to investigate activation patterns within PRH and LEC following
OiP learning. In a second set of experiments the necessity of neurons activated
in LEC during memory encoding for memory retrieval was tested.
Methods: Experiment 1: TRAP2 x Ai14 mice were assigned to one of four behavioural
conditions; OiP, novel arena, familiar arena or home cage. Following habituation
animals conducted the assigned behavioural task, immediately after the
behavioural task animals received an injection of 4-hydroxytamoxifen (50mg/kg
i.p.). After a 7 day delay animals were re-exposed to the behavioural task and
90min later were perfused. Brains were sectioned, imaged and the number of cells
expressing tdtomato in the superficial and deep layers of PRH and LEC were
counted using imageJ.
Experiment 2: TRAP2 x cre-iDREADD mice were implanted with guide cannula aimed at
the LEC. Following recovery animals were habituated to handling and the arena.
Mice performed an OiP task and immediately after the task animals were injected
with 4-OHT (50mg/kg i.p.). Following a forty-eight-hour delay mice were infused
with either vehicle or CNO (30µM) and performed a second test phase.
Statistical analysis: Experiment 1: A two-way ANOVA was used, post-hoc
comparisons used the student-Newman- Keuls test.
Experiment 2: A two-way ANOVA was used to compare performance in the OiP task,
simple main effects were used for post-hoc analysis.
Results and conclusion: Following the OiP task, the number of tdtomato positive
cells was significantly increased in the deep layers of LEC.
Infusion of CNO into LEC before test phase 2 significantly impaired performance
compared to vehicle infused animals.
These results provide evidence that object-in-place memory formation selectively
activates deep layers of LEC and that cells activated in the LEC during
object-in-place memory encoding are essential for memory retrieval.

Poster number: S_PZ1_012 (TP)

Sub-Theme: Entorhinal Cortex and Memory: Dissecting Neural
Representation, Circuitry, and Dysfunction

## So excited to see you! Object in place learning increases neuronal
excitability in lateral entorhinal cortex
Authors: Paul Banks, University of Bristol; Lisa Kinnavane -
Physiology, Pharmacology & Neuroscience University of Bristol; Clair Booth -
Physiology, Pharmacology & Neuroscience University of Bristol; Gareth Barker
- Physiology, Pharmacology & Neuroscience University of Bristol; Clea
Warburton - Physiology, Pharmacology & Neuroscience University of Bristol;
Zafar Bashir - Physiology, Pharmacology & Neuroscience University of
Bristol
Learned information is thought to be stored by material changes in the brain.
This information is hypothesised to exist as plastic changes in a sparse and
widely distributed subpopulation of brain cells which are activated during
memory encoding and then reactivated upon retrieval, the so-called memory
engram. Here, we examine such plastic changes in neurons activated during
learning of an associative recognition memory task, focussing on cells in the
lateral entorhinal cortex (LEC).
Methods: TRAP2 x Ai14 mice underwent object-in-place learning: mice explored 4
objects in an arena for 10 min. The position of 2 of these objects was exchanged
during a 5-minute delay, before replacement into the arena for a further 10 min
(test 1). Mice were immediately given a 50 mg/kg I.P. injection of
4-OH-tamoxifen to enable labelling of active neurons with tdTomato (tdTom).
Following a delay of 46h, mice were exposed to a further 10 min behavioural test
(test 2): here the pair of objects which had remained static in test 1 exchanged
positions. Brain slices containing LEC were prepared 10 min after test 2.
Patch-clamp recordings were made to assess neuronal excitability in tdTom
expressing neurons and their unlabelled neighbours.
Statistical analysis: Individual electrophysiological parameters were assessed
using Mann-Whitney tests, action potential firing was assessed by 2-way
ANOVA.
Results & conclusions: In slices of LEC taken from mice which had received
test 2 46h after labelling we observed an increase in firing in tdTom-labelled
layer 5 pyramidal neurons compared to their unlabelled neighbours, this was
associated with an increase in input resistance. By contrast, firing of tdTom+
layer 2 fan cells was not significantly different to unlabelled neurons. tdTom+
layer 5 pyramidal cells did not have increased excitability in animals that did
not undergo test 2, or those where only familiar object-place configurations
were presented at test 2. These data suggest that L5 pyramidal engram cells in
LEC increase excitability following reactivation, and that this increase in
excitability is associated with the encoding of novelty within the object-place
associations, which may serve to update information at fast timescales.

Poster number: S_PZ1_013 (TP)

Sub-Theme: Entorhinal Cortex and Memory: Dissecting Neural
Representation, Circuitry, and Dysfunction

## The Functional Role of Layer 1 in the Medial Entorhinal Cortex
Authors: Jack Armstrong, University of Edinburgh
Introduction
There has been significant recent progress in understanding of the medial
entorhinal cortex (MEC) and its functionality in spatial memory. However, roles
of its most superficial layer, layer 1 (L1), which is comprised of a sparse
population of interneurons that receive inputs from outside of the MEC (Vandrey
et al., eLife., 2022), are largely unclear. Here, we investigate the
connectivity of MEC L1 by mapping out its inputs and establishing its influence
on postsynaptic cells.
Methods
Neuron-derived neurotrophic factor (NDNF) has been shown to be a specific marker
for the majority of neocortical L1 cells (Schuman et al., J. Neurosci., 2019).
We used a NDNF-cre mouse line to genetically target a large portion of the MEC
L1 population.
We recorded L1 NDNF cell electrophysiology using whole-cell current clamp
recordings in acute brain slices and then visualised their morphology with
biocytin labelling. Their outputs were established by optogenetically activating
the NDNF L1 population whilst recording principle neurons across the MEC. GABA
receptor antagonists were applied to identify receptors that were active during
neurotransmission.
Inputs to neurons in L1 were visualised by using a rabies virus tracing approach
(Callaway and Luo, J. Neurosci., 2015). A helper virus with an optimised
glycoprotein (G) was injected into MEC L1 and then, after 5 weeks, G-deleted
rabies virus was injected. This virus spread transynaptically to neurons
presynaptic to infected NDNF cells.
Statistical analysis
To compare IPSP responses in current clamps experiments, a Kruskal-Wallis H-test
with Dunn’s multiple comparison was used.
Results and Conclusions
MEC L1 cells inhibited principle cell types across layers 1 to 5 by activating
GABAA and GABAB receptors. MEC L1 receives brain-wide sources of synaptic
inputs, with most local presynaptic cells located in MEC L3 and most long- range
afferents originating in areas involved in episodic and spatial memory (lateral
EC, subiculum and hippocampus). Many input neurons were also found in thalamic
nuclei, such as the reuniens nucleus. Since the cell types that L1 inhibits may
be important for spatial memory, we are now testing roles of L1 neurons in
spatial tasks.
 
Poster number: S_PZ1_014 (TP)

Sub-Theme: Entorhinal Cortex and Memory: Dissecting Neural
Representation, Circuitry, and Dysfunction

## Does deletion of Fmr1 affect spatial coding in the medial entorhinal
cortex?
Authors: Junji Hua, University of Edinburgh
The medial entorhinal cortex (MEC) has established roles in location memory and
path integration (McNaughton et al., Nat Rev Neurosci, 2006). Impaired memory
and navigation have been reported in ASD mice and humans (Consortium, Cell,
1994; Lind et al., J Abnorm Psychol, 2013). Here, we aim to test if Fragile X
(FXS) mice show altered spatial representation in the MEC during a goal-directed
virtual location memory task.
We recorded with tetrodes from the MEC of mice and trained them to locate reward
zones (RZ) on 200-cm virtual tracks (Tennant et al, Cell Rep, 2018). In stage 1,
mice were repeatedly exposed to 4 consecutive trials with a visible RZ and 1
trial with an invisible RZ. In stage 2 every second uncued trial was replaced by
a probe trial with no visible RZ and no reward. Stage 3 introduced extra tracks
including the same RZ, a different RZ and two groups of tracks with distinct
wall contexts and RZs.
Experiments compared Fmr1y/- mice with littermate controls. Non-parametric
Aligned Rank Transform and Tukey HSD tests were applied to reward rate,
percentage of trials with rewards given, and first stop locations averaged over
trials. To assess ramp-like firing, we generated the firing rate map and fit
linear models as a function of position across regions (Tennant et al, Current
Biology, 2022). Cells were classified as ramp cells if the model was significant
(corrected p < 0.01, Benjamini & Hochberg method). We used generalized
linear mixed effect (GLME) to assess influences of position, speed and
acceleration on firing rate. Cells were classified based on which coefficient(s)
better predict firing rate (ANOVA for coefficient significance; corrected p <
0.01).
Both groups learned the task with similar reward rate and spatial stopping
profiles even after we extended tracks or moved RZ. With 2 alternating tracks,
Fmr1y/- mice were less accurate initially after introduction of a novel track.
In both groups over 45% of cells had ramp-like firing, with position as the most
dominant coefficient to predict firing in more than 50% of cells. Our initial
results suggest that encoding of location in the MEC is maintained in Fmr1y/-
mice. We are now testing whether firing rates are modified at later stages when
reward location and track context are modified

Poster number: S_PZ1_015 (TP)

Sub-Theme: Entorhinal Cortex and Memory: Dissecting Neural
Representation, Circuitry, and Dysfunction

## Anchoring of grid cell firing predicts behavioural outcome in path
integration-dependent location estimation
Authors: Harry Clark, University of Edinburg; Matthew F. Nolan -
School of Biomedical Sciences University of Edinburgh
Grid cells of the medial entorhinal cortex (MEC) have been long thought to
provide the neural substrate for path integration. Performance in path
integration-dependent location estimation has been shown to be diminished in
mice with disrupted grid firing however it is unclear whether this is due to a
direct consequence of altered grid cell firing. Here, we address this by asking
does grid cell firing covary with path integration-dependent behaviour? Grid
cells were recorded from mice performing a virtual reality (VR) linear location
task that can be solved using either beaconing or path integration strategies.
We demonstrate grid cells adopt two distinct coding schemes during the task,
either a position code that reflects periodic firing fields anchored to salient
features of the track, or a distance code that reflects periodic firing fields
that are independent of track location. Grid cells switched between these coding
schemes within sessions. When grid cells were encoding position, mice performed
better in trials that required path integration but not on trials that required
beaconing. This result provides direct evidence linking grid cell activity to
path integration-dependent location estimation and is consistent with models of
location estimation that utilise anchored grid codes such as the grid-phase
vector models of location estimation.

Poster number: S_PZ1_016 (PP)

Sub-Theme: Entorhinal Cortex and Memory: Dissecting Neural
Representation, Circuitry, and Dysfunction

## Representation of Space in Rats performing the Episodic Memory using
Egocentric and Allocentric Strategies with Miniscope Ca2+ imaging
Authors: Francesco Gobbo, University of Edinburgh; Rufus
Mitchell-Heggs - Department of Bioengineering and Centre for Neurotechnology
Imperial College London; Dorothy Tse - Department of Psychology Edge Hill
University; Nuria Garcia - Centre For Discovery Brain Sciences University of
Edinburgh; Simon Schultz - Department of Bioengineering and Centre for
Neurotechnology Imperial College London; Richard Morris - Centre For Discovery
Brain Sciences University of Edinburgh
Introduction: The hippocampus is crucial to encode episodic memories. Our aim is
to understand how spatial information is represented and accessed. Tasks can be
solved using egocentric or allocentric coordinates, and the strategy may change
with time (Packard&McGaugh Neurob.Learn.Memory1996).
Hypothesis: We aim to test if the representation of space is affected by the
navigational strategy used by rats to learn and remember the reward position
during exploration (Q1) or the execution of the task (Q2).
Methods: We train 10 male LH rats in the everyday memory task using an egocentric
or an allocentric protocol (Broadbent et al Eur.J.Neurosc2019). GCaMP6f is
expressed virally in rat’s CA1 and neuronal activity is recorded with miniature
microscopes. Rats learn to retrieve food from one of 6 possible sandwells, whose
position changes every session, and are tested for memory at 60minutes. After 27
training sessions with controls without visual cues, 7 consecutive sessions are
recorded for each group. Rats enter the arena from four possible locations,
generating a number of trajectory combinations.
Analytical and statistical approach: The behavioural performance is measured as
number of errors. And analysed with RM 2-way ANOVA. Several spatial parameters
are considered in Q1: place field number and stability, directionality,
information content. We adopt a rigorous statistical definition of place cells,
comparing their mutual information with the randomised null distribution.
Wilcoxon or t-test compare measurables between groups (animals are experimental
points).
In Q2, the neuronal representation of matched spatial trajectories and goals is
compared between the two groups. Cosine distance and multidimensional analysis
are used (Gobbo et al PNAS2022) to parametrize neural representations and
compare symmetrical (identical in egocentric but distinct in allocentric terms)
and opposite- direction trajectories. This provides a robust way to identify
relative differences and make comparisons across animals and between groups (RM
1-way ANOVA).
Implications: Goals and paths can assume different meanings depending on the
spatial framework. Our data provide new information on how the hippocampus
represents them at the neuronal level in egocentric and allocentric terms

Poster number: S_PZ1_017 (TP)

Sub-Theme: Entorhinal Cortex and Memory: Dissecting Neural
Representation, Circuitry, and Dysfunction

## Pattern separation deficits in the 3xTgAD mouse model of Alzheimer's
disease
Authors: Haady Hajar, University of Manchester
The 3xTgAD mouse model of Alzheimer’s disease (AD) exhibits pronounced deficits
in episodic-like memory encoding, akin to AD patients. Pattern separation (PS)
is a dentate gyrus-dependent computational process that is required to encode
similar episodic memories as distinct neural representations within the brain,
making impaired PS a likely contributor of episodic memory deficits in AD.
Therefore, this study aimed to determine whether impaired PS underlies the
episodic-like memory deficit in 3xTgAD mice. To achieve this control and 3xTgAD
mice performed a four-trial continuous novel object recognition task. Each trial
comprised a sample phase where the mouse was familiarised to identical sample
object pair followed by a two-minute inter-trial interval away from the objects
and a test phase during which the mouse was exposed to the sample object paired
with a novel object of either high or low similarity to the sample object.
Two-way RM-ANOVA found there was a significant effect of group but not trial on
the novelty discrimination ratio (D2) for high similarity objects, with Šídák’s
post-hoc revealing that control mice D2s were significantly greater than those
of 3xTgAD mice at trial 4. There was no significant effect of group or trial on
D2s for low similarity objects. Furthermore, proactive interference did
significantly affect D2s across trials for both groups and novel object types.
Overall, these findings indicate that 3xTgAD mice had a moderate PS deficit;
such that they preferentially explored low similarity novel objects (which
requires less PS) but only control mice had the PS capacity to detect novelty in
high similarity objects.

Poster number: S_PZ1_018 (TP)

Sub-Theme: Entorhinal Cortex and Memory: Dissecting Neural
Representation, Circuitry, and Dysfunction

## Investigating Object-in-Place memory in the Fmr1-/y rat model of Fragile X
Syndrome
Authors: Lucja Kostrzewa, University of Edinburgh; Emma Wood -
Centre for Discovery Brain Sciences University of Edinburgh
Fragile X Syndrome (FXS) is a leading monogenic cause of inherited intellectual
disability and autism. It is caused by disruption of the FMR1 gene, leading to
loss of its protein product FMRP. To study the effects of FMRP loss on brain
development, mouse and rat models have been created by knocking out the Fmr1
gene. Previous data from the lab (Till et al, 2015; Asiminas et al, 2019) has
shown that Fmr1-/y rats are selectively impaired in an Object-Place-Context
(OPC) associative recognition memory task, but not in simpler object- and
object-context recognition tasks. As memory in the OPC task requires
interactions between the hippocampus (HPC) and medial prefrontal cortex (mPFC),
we reasoned that such interactions might be impaired in the Fmr1-/y rat. A
prediction of this hypothesis is that Fmr1-/y rats should show impairments in
other tasks that rely on HPC-mPFC interactions. One such task is the
Object-in-Place (OiP) recognition memory task (Barker & Warburton, 2011).To
test OiP memory, rats (n=13 Fmr1-/y, 14 WT) were placed in an arena with 4
different novel objects and allowed to explore freely during three 10min sample
sessions (ITI 3min). After 3min or 1h delay, the rat was placed back in the
arena with the same 4 objects, 2 of which had swapped locations. Time spent
exploring each object was used to calculate a discrimination index (DI)
reflecting preference for the swapped versus stationary objects. OiP memory is
inferred if rats preferentially explore the swapped objects. With a 3min delay
between sample and test, both WT and Fmr1-/y rats showed significant preference
for the swapped objects (mean DI significantly >0; one-sample t-tests
p<0.05).With a 1h delay, WT rats showed significant preference for the
swapped objects (p<0.05) whereas Fmr1-/y rats did not (p=0.57). These data
suggest that adult Fmr1-/y rats have intact OiP memory at a short (3min) delay,
but do not show long-term (1h) OiP memory. Our findings are consistent with the
hypothesis that the circuitry underpinning OiP memory is disrupted in Fmr1-/y
rats. However, as even short-term (5 min) OiP memory requires HPC-mPFC
communication (Barker & Warburton, 2011), FMRP loss may affect processes
within the circuitry that are required for memory consolidation but not for
short-term OiP memory

Poster number: S_PZ1_019 (TP)

Sub-Theme: Navigating the Entorhinal Cortex: Head Direction Cells
and Spatial Learning

## Stabilization of the medial entorhinal head direction signal by visual input
during learning
Authors: Eszter Arany, University of Cambridge; Pauline Kerekes -
Physiology Development and Neuroscience University of Cambridge; Julija Krupic -
Physiology Development and Neuroscience University of Cambridge
Introduction
Head direction (HD) cells provide a compass-like signal to mice during
navigation. HD cell activity is thought to be primarily driven by vestibular
inputs, updated by sensory information from external visual cues to stabilize
the HD system and anchor it to the external allocentric frame of reference. The
interaction between internal vestibular cues and external visual inputs is
poorly understood. Here we investigated how visual signal stabilizes HD cell
activity with and without vestibular input during learning.
Methods
To address this question, we recorded HD cells from the medial entorhinal cortex
(mEC) in 16 C57BL/6J male mice while they were freely foraging for food pellets
in familiar or novel rectangular enclosures for three consecutive days. To
investigate how visual inputs drive HD cell firing in the absence of vestibular
inputs, the mice were also recorded head-fixed navigating in the novel and
familiar 1D visual-input-based virtual enclosures. HD firing fields were
constructed by dividing the number of spikes by the total number of visits
occurring at each position. We conducted quantitative analyses to compare firing
fields.
Statistics
We statistically compared measures in novelty experiments (day 1-3) and familiar
baseline experiments in both real and virtual protocols. The mean value of a
given measure was calculated for each experiment and all combined means were
compared using two-way ANOVA with Tukey-Kramer post hoc test, except when
comparing event frequencies, where we computed the Bayes factor.
Results and Conclusions
In contrast to previous studies, we found that HD cell firing fields become
larger and less stable in novel enclosures. Removing vestibular input did not
affect these novelty-induced changes, suggesting that anchoring by the external
visual inputs is not instantaneous and is strengthened with increased
familiarity. The nature of changes in firing field properties and the mechanisms
of spatial learning were dependent on the cell’s directional tuning selectivity.
Our findings highlight the dynamic changes in signal processing during learning
in the mEC HD network.

Poster number: M_PZ1_006 (TP)

Sub-Theme: Neuroanatomical Connectivity: Establishing Networks for
Memory, Spatial Representation, and Language Function

## Memory and emotion in the human brain: Connectivity
Authors: Edmund Rolls, Oxford Centre for Computational
Neuroscience
The effective and functional connectivity and diffusion tractography of 360 Human
Connectivity Project-Multimodal Parcellation cortical and 66 subcortical regions
at 7T in 171 HCP participants shows the following:
A Ventromedial Visual ‘Where’ Stream for scene representations has effective
connectivity in the pathway V1 > V2 > V3 > V4 > Ventromedial Visual
regions VMV1-3 and medial parahippocampal regions PHA1-3 which is the
Parahippocampal Scene Area (PSA or PPA) where spatial view cells are found. It
is proposed that scene representations are formed in this ventral pathway by
overlapping visual features in scenes that form a continuous attractor network.
These cells are different to place cells in rodents.
A Dorsal Visual Stream connects via V2 and V3A to MT+ Complex regions (including
MT and MST), which connect to intraparietal regions (including LIP, VIP and MIP)
involved in visual motion and actions in space. This stream performs coordinate
transforms for idiothetic update, and has effective connectivity to the
Parahippocampal Scene Area, where it is proposed to implement the idiothetic
update of spatial view cells as discovered in macaques.
A Ventrolateral Visual ‘What’ Stream for object and face recognition projects
hierarchically from V1 > V2 > V3 > V4 > FFC (Fusiform Face Cortex)
> inferior temporal cortex TE regions, and has effective connectivity to the
human hippocampus via lateral parahippocampal cortex TF.
The human hippocampal system can then form combinations of these ‘What’ inputs
from the ventrolateral stream with ‘Where’ inputs from the Ventromedial Visual
Stream and Reward Inputs from the orbitofrontal cortex to implement episodic
memory, and navigation from landmark to landmark.
The orbitofrontal cortex, vmPFC and anterior cingulate cortex involved in emotion
provide reward inputs to the hippocampal memory system, and influence memory
consolidation via connectivity to the basal forebrain and septal cholinergic
systems.
Rolls (2022) The hippocampus, ventromedial prefrontal cortex, and episodic and
semantic memory. Progress in Neurobiology 217: 102334.
Rolls, Deco, Huang and Feng (2023) Human amygdala compared to orbitofrontal
cortex connectivity, and emotion. Progress in Neurobiology 220: 102385.

Poster number: M_PZ1_007 (PP)

Sub-Theme: Neuroanatomical Connectivity: Establishing Networks for
Memory, Spatial Representation, and Language Function

## Analysis of the subiculum network in humans and macaques
Authors: Samuel Berry, Royal Holloway University of London
Introduction: Preclinical studies suggest that the subicular complex, a
hippocampal (HC) subregion, has a privileged role within a wider network for
spatial/event memory. Despite its importance in this system, details of this
networks connections and how these brain regions work together is relatively
unknown. Addressing this, we will apply a range of structural and functional
analysis approaches to a large sample of 7T MRI data to examine the properties
of this subicular network. Findings will be contrasted with those of another HC
subfield - CA1. Further, we will use novel 7T MRI macaque analysis and
historical anatomical tract-tracing data to compare the networks of humans with
those of monkeys. This cross-species approach will help us to establish the
anatomical validity of MRI-constructed structural connections, which are prone
to false-positives. Finally, we will use graph theoretical (GT) techniques to
describe various properties of the network.
Methods: Subjects are 173 adults from the Human Connectome Project and 9 macaques
from The Virtual Brain Macaque MRI repository. Samples have task-free
functional, diffusion and submillimetre structural scans. HC segmentation will
be performed using gold standard automated approaches. Other spatial network
ROIs will be taken from a functionally-derived atlas. Functional connectivity
(FC) will be BOLD correlations and structural connectivity (SC) will be
estimated with probabilistic tractography. Tract tracing data will be used as a
reference for the exclusion of anatomically implausible tracts created during
the SC analysis. Derivative data and scripts will be published on Github and the
OSF.
Statistical analysis: Connectivity comparisons will consist of two 3-way mixed
ANOVAs with IVs: Species (human vs. macaque), HC ROI (CA1 vs. subiculum), and
Extra-HC ROIs. The DVs will be: FC (z-transformed correlations), and SC
(streamlines between ROIs). SC and FC connectivity measures will be used as
weighted inputs for GT analysis. GT- derived measures will be compared to
density-matched null models to assess statistical significance. Additionally, we
will simulate a virtual lesion of each ROI. Following each knockdown, global
efficiency will be recalculated and corresponding drops in network efficiency
measured.

Poster number: M_PZ1_008 (PP)

Sub-Theme: Neuroanatomical Connectivity: Establishing Networks for
Memory, Spatial Representation, and Language Function

## Connectivity of the Human Cerebellar Cortex
Authors: Kieran Allen, Royal Holloway University of London; Iqra
Arshad - Brain, Action and Cognition Laboratory, Department of Psychology,
School of Life Sciences and the Environment Royal Holloway University of London;
Michael Longley - Brain, Action and Cognition Laboratory, Department of
Psychology, School of Life Sciences and the Environment Royal Holloway
University of London; Narender Ramnani - Brain, Action and Cognition Laboratory,
Department of Psychology, School of Life Sciences and the Environment Royal
Holloway University of London
KA and IA are joint first authors
Introduction: The cortico-cerebellar system is topographically-organised and is
one of the largest long-range systems in the primate brain (Ramnani, 2006).
Neurons in the cerebral cortex send outputs to the cerebellar cortex via the
pontine nuclei, and these return connections to the cerebral cortex via the
cerebellar nuclei and the thalamus. Understanding the contributions of this
system to behaviour requires a detailed understanding of how parts of the
cerebellar and cerebral cortices map to each other. Previous work has shown that
in the frontal lobe, cortical motor areas communicate with Lobules HIV-HVI and
Lobules HVIIB, while prefrontal cortex communicates with Lobule HVIIA and Lobule
IX (Kelly & Strick, 2003). However, much of this system remains unmapped. We
will fractionate the cerebellar cortex into evenly spaced components, and use
resting-state fMRI to identify the connectivity of each with the cerebral
cortex.
Methods and Statistical Analysis: We will use previously acquired and
preprocessed resting-state human fMRI data (CamCAN Data Repository, Taylor et
al., 2017; Shafto et al., 2014). Our analyses will compare the results based on
primary and replication samples (N=50 each, representative of the age and gender
distributions in the repository). Seed-to-voxel connectivity analyses will be
conducted using the CONN Toolbox and SPM12. Connectivity analyses will be run on
182 seed voxels (radius, 3mm) across the left cerebellar cortex. First-level,
subject-specific general linear models will be estimated (GLMs will incorporate
regressors from 182 seed voxels, in which timecourses from head motion, white
matter and CSF will represent confounds). SPM{t} tests will generate a contrast
image for each seed voxel which will then be incorporated into a second level
group analysis. We will test the hypothesis that seed voxels in Lobules HIV-HVI
and Lobules HVIIB will show connectivity with areas of the cortical motor
system, and that Lobules HVIIIA and IX will show connectivity with parts of the
prefrontal cortex. We will also explore the connectivity of all cerebellar
cortical areas with those in the cerebral cortex, including those beyond the
frontal lobe.

Poster number: M_PZ1_009 (TP)

Sub-Theme: Neuroanatomical Connectivity: Establishing Networks for
Memory, Spatial Representation, and Language Function

## The Vestibulocerebellum: New Insights from Large Scale Resting State
Connectivity
Authors: Iqra Arshad, Royal Holloway, University of London
Introduction: Cells in Lobules IX and X of the cerebellar cortex are known to
connect with the vestibular nuclei and are widely considered to form the
‘vestibulocerebellum’. In humans and non-human primates, studies have identified
a set of neocortical areas that respond to vestibular stimulation. A
meta-analysis that included 28 functional images studies, identified a network
of human brain areas involving the parietal operculum, central and posterior
insula, inferior parietal cortex and lateral and medial parts of the premotor
cortex (zu Eulenburg et al., 2012). The anatomical relationships between this
network and the cerebellar cortex remains unclear. The aim of our study was to
investigate anatomical patterns of connectivity between this cortical vestibular
network and areas of the human cerebellar cortex. We tested the hypothesis that
each element of the cortical vestibular network influences activity in Lobules
IX and X.
Methods and Statistical Analysis: We used resting state fMRI data in humans
(N=514; Cam-CAN Data Repository, Taylor et al., 2017; Shafto et al., 2014). We
conducted a seed-to-voxel analysis using the CONN Toolbox and SPM12. EPI scans
were realigned, normalised to the MNI template, smoothed with a Gaussian kernel
of 4mm and the time courses denoised. First level analysis: the coordinates of
13 members of the cortical vestibular network (zu Eulenburg et al., 2012) were
used as seeds in our analysis. The time courses of these voxels were used to
construct general linear models (GLMs) which were estimated for each subject.
After estimation, contrast images were taken to a second level analysis.
Following this, t contrasts and a conjunction analysis were performed.
Results and Conclusions: We were unable to reject our null hypothesis because we
were not able to find effects in Lobules IX and X, even at very low thresholds.
Surprisingly, we found effects in adjacent left Lobule HVIIIa (FWE; p<.05).
We conclude that classically defined vestibulocerebellar areas do not appear to
come under the converging influence of areas in the cortical vestibular network,
but there does appear to be such a convergence in HVIIIa.

Poster number: M_PZ1_010 (PP)

Sub-Theme: Neuroanatomical Connectivity: Establishing Networks for
Memory, Spatial Representation, and Language Function

## Investigating hippocampal-cerebellar functional connectivity using the
Cambridge Center for Ageing and Neuroscience (CamCAN) dataset
Authors: Kavishini Apasamy, Royal Holloway, University of London;
Sam Berry - Psychology Royal Holloway, University of London; Narender Ramnani -
Psychology Royal Holloway, University of London; Carl J Hodgetts - Psychology
Royal Holloway, University of London
Introduction: Evidence from nonhuman species suggest that a close functional
interaction exists between the hippocampus and the cerebellum. Rodent studies
show that cerebellar disruption interferes with the firing of hippocampal place
cells – an important property of hippocampal function. This is consistent with
evidence that cerebellar lesions affect performance on navigational tasks which
are thought to depend on hippocampal spatial representations.
Electrophysiological and anatomical work suggest that such functional
interactions may be mediated by direct and indirect pathways, with the
hippocampus receiving input from disparate parts of the cerebellar cortex,
including lobule VI, HVIIA (Crus I) and paraflocculus. Despite this emerging
evidence in nonhuman animals, very little is known about hippocampal-cerebellar
connectivity in primates. A deeper understanding of this interaction will be
important for refining neurobiological models of spatial learning and
memory.
Methods: To address this, we will use task-free fMRI data from around 700
individuals from the Cambridge Centre for Ageing and Neuroscience (CamCAN)
dataset. We will also use task-free fMRI data from around 184 subjects from the
Human Connectome Project (HCP) dataset to investigate the potential influence of
age on this interaction.
Approach for statistical analysis: MRI data will be (1) quality assessed to
identify potential exclusions based on motions, and (2) pre-processed using the
default fMRIprep pipeline. Primary seed-based functional connectivity analysis
will be conducted using the CONN toolbox (Nieto-Castanon, 2021). The BOLD time
series of anatomically- defined bilateral hippocampal seeds (Harvard-Oxford
atlas, 50% threshold) will be used as regressors to examine correlations
(Fisher-transformed correlation coefficient) within a target ROI encompassing
the whole cerebellar cortex (SUIT). Follow-up analyses will examine differential
connectivity along the hippocampal long-axis and, cerebellar connectivity with
an extended memory system, incorporating the thalamus, retrosplenial and
parahippocampal cortices.
Hypothesis: We hypothesise a preferential connection between the hippocampus and
cerebellar lobule VI and lobule HVIIA (Crus I).

Poster number: M_PZ1_011 (TP)

Sub-Theme: Neuroanatomical Connectivity: Establishing Networks for
Memory, Spatial Representation, and Language Function

## Are inter-hemispheric shape asymmetries of white matter tracts related to
language lateralization
Authors: Ieva Andrulyte, University of Liverpool
Interhemispheric anatomical asymmetries have long been thought to be related to
language lateralization. Some studies have examined whether interhemispheric
asymmetries of fundamental diffusion scalar metrics of white matter tracts known
to be essential for language are consistent with language lateralization in
healthy and brain- damaged populations, with inconsistent results. In the
present study, we examined whether asymmetric morphometric features of white
matter tracts are related to the side of language lateralization in a large
cohort of healthy individuals. We investigated 1049 healthy participants from
the Human Connectome Project (HCP) database. All participants underwent
diffusion and functional MRI. Functional activation associated with language
comprehension was determined using a story-math contrast. Hemispheric language
comprehension lateralisation was determined using a laterality index (LI) for
each participant’s activated regions. The structural asymmetry index of the
several shape metrics of the white matter tracts was calculated. The
relationship between structural and functional asymmetry indices was assessed
using a linear regression model. The results demonstrated no significant
associations between various tract characteristics along the white matter tract,
indicating that interhemispheric shape asymmetries of white matter fibre tracts
are not related to the lateralization of language comprehension functions. On
the one hand, this is consistent with other studies that indicate no
relationship between language lateralization and interhemispheric asymmetries of
white matter and grey matter structure, suggesting that the lateralization of
language functions may not have a gross morphological basis. On the other hand,
it may be that such interhemispheric structure-function relationships exist in a
white matter not classically considered to comprise language neural
networks.

Poster number: M_PZ1_012 (PP)

Sub-Theme: Schema, Expectation, and Memory: Cognitive Mechanisms in
Encoding and Retrieval Processes

## Expectation and memory encoding: How object-location expectancy in visual
scenes influences memory formation
Authors: Avnee Jain, University of Cambridge; Andrea Greve - MRC
Cognition and Brain Sciences Unit University of Cambridge; Richard N. Henson -
MRC Cognition and Brain Sciences Unit University of Cambridge
We typically encounter familiar objects in certain locations within a visual
scene (e.g, a toaster on the kitchen sideboard rather than on a chair). The
presentation of a scene induces a prior expectation that facilitates subsequent
memory for such location-congruent objects. However, objects in unexpected
locations elicit a prediction error that may also facilitate their encoding into
memory. Taken together, this suggests memory performance should be a U- shape
function of expectancy, with better memory for either highly congruent or highly
incongruent object-locations (supported by dissociable brain systems according
to SLIMM [1]). This was confirmed by Quent et al. [2] using naturalistic stimuli
in immersive virtual reality (iVR). The aim of the present study is to replicate
these findings using instead 2D images of scene-object locations, which are
better suited for future MRI investigations.
Participants will study a series of scenes and will be asked to locate an object
in either a semantically expected (i.e., congruent), unexpected (i.e.,
incongruent) or neutral location. Participants will rate expectancy on a sliding
scale from -100 (highly unexpected) to +100 (highly expected). At test, memory
will be probed, first by cued recall for objects followed by 3 alternative
forced choice (3AFC) images, each with the object in a different location (only
one of which was studied), where expectancy of the locations is approximately
matched (to control for a congruency bias). In addition, we will test memory for
incidental information, for which SLIMM predicts only a linear increase with
incongruency.
The effect size by Quent et al. [2] will be used to power a preregistered study.
The predicted U-shape will be tested by a Bayes Factor (BF) for a positive
quadratic component of a second-order polynomial fit of individual expectancy
ratings. Interrupted regression will check for opposite slopes on either side of
a breakpoint. For incidental information, the predicted linear increase effect
is supported if the BF for the linear component is large, but that for the
quadratic component is small.
References:
1. Van Kesteren, M.T.R., et al. (2012). Trends in Neurosciences, 35, 211-219.
2. Quent, A., Greve, A. & Henson, R.N. (2022). Psychological Science

Poster number: M_PZ1_013 (PP)

Sub-Theme: Schema, Expectation, and Memory: Cognitive Mechanisms in
Encoding and Retrieval Processes

## SENTENTIAL PREDICTION AND MEMORY ENCODING: how word expectancy influences
memory formation
Authors: Andrea Greve, University of Cambridge; Kshipra Gurunandan -
MRC Cognition and Brain Sciences Unit University of Cambridge; Debbie Adam - MRC
Cognition and Brain Sciences Unit University of Cambridge; Richard N. Henson -
MRC Cognition and Brain Sciences Unit University of Cambridge
1. Introduction:
Events that are congruent with expectations made by the current context or
“schema”, are better remembered than unrelated events. Yet, events that conflict
with expectations can also be better remembered, resulting in memory performance
exhibiting a “U-shaped” function of schema (in)congruency. We have recently
confirmed these predictions, made by the SLIMM framework [1], using
experimentally-trained rules [2] and more naturalistic stimuli in Virtual
Reality [3]. Interestingly, a recent study [4] reported a trend for a similar
U-shape using linguistic material, where sentential gist modulated the encoding
of expected and unexpected words. The aim of this study is to replicate these
findings, and extend to memory for words that are incidental to the gist, for
which SLIMM predicts only a linear increase with incongruency.
2. Methods:
Participants study a series of sentences which render upcoming words more or less
predictable. The end of each sentence presents a “critical” word that is either
congruent, unrelated or incongruent with the preceding gist. In addition, each
sentence contains a “secondary” word that is incidental to this gist. Memory for
critical and incidental words will be tested using 3 alternative forced choice
with semantically-similar lures.
3. Approach for statistical analysis:
Our pilot data and the data reported by [4] will be used to power a preregistered
study to confirm whether or not the SLIMM framework holds for expectations of
words generated by sentential context. We will also test a quadratic component
to test for the U-shaped function across the three levels, followed by
one-sided, paired sample t-tests to establish whether memory is better for
congruent and incongruent trials, relative to unrelated trials.
4. References:
[1] Van Kesteren, M.T.R., et al. (2012). Trends in Neurosciences, 35, 211-219
[2] Greve, A. et al. (2019). Journal of Experimental Psychology: General.
[3] Quent, A., Greve, A. & Henson, R.N. (2022). Psychological Science.
[4] Höltje G, Mecklinger A. (2022). Brain Res. 2022 Aug 1, 1788:147942.

Poster number: M_PZ1_014 (PP)

Sub-Theme: Schema, Expectation, and Memory: Cognitive Mechanisms in
Encoding and Retrieval Processes

## What’s in a word? Memory for expected and unexpected sentence endings
Authors: Kshipra Gurunandan, University of Cambridge; Andrea Greve -
MRC Cognition and Brain Sciences Unit University of Cambridge; Mahtab Moniri -
Department of Physiology, Development and Neuroscience University of Cambridge;
Richard Henson - MRC Cognition and Brain Sciences Unit University of
Cambridge
1. Introduction
Schema theory predicts that information consistent with previous knowledge is
more easily incorporated and remembered. However, prediction error accounts in
psychology and neuroscience suggest that novelty or surprise is a key driver of
memory. The SLIMM model [1] integrates these contradictory theories by proposing
a U-shaped function for memory, driven by dissociable memory systems, with
greater recall for expected and unexpected information compared to a neutral
condition. Additionally, the model proposes greater recall of task-incidental
information in the unexpected condition compared to the expected and neutral
conditions. These predictions have been validated after training simple rules
[2] and using pre-experimental knowledge in more naturalistic VR environments
[3]. In the current project, we test SLIMM’s predictions for verbal memory.
2. Methods
A behavioural experiment will be carried out with healthy adult participants.
Materials consist of sentences which end with words that are either expected,
unexpected, or neutral. Sentences will be paired with famous people as purported
speakers. Participants will be exposed to the materials in the form of sentence
+ speaker and asked to indicate how much they expected the sentence-final word.
After a brief distractor task, participants will complete two surprise retrieval
tasks: first for the task-relevant target words, and then for task-incidental
speaker identity.
3. Approach for statistical analysis
The primary outcomes of this experiment are memory performance in the two
retrieval tasks. For the first task/hypothesis, we will fit a quadratic
component to test for the U-shaped function across the three levels, followed by
one-sided, paired sample t-tests to establish whether memory is better for
expected and unexpected trials, relative to neutral trials. For the second
task/hypothesis, we will use a linear contrast to test whether task-incidental
memory is better in the unexpected condition compared to other conditions.
4. References
[1] van Kesteren, Ruiter, Fernández & Henson (2012). Trends in
Neurosciences
[2] Greve, Cooper, Tibon & Henson (2019). Journal of Experimental Psychology:
General
[3] Quent, Greve & Henson (2022). Psychological Science

Poster number: M_PZ1_015 (PP)

Sub-Theme: Schema, Expectation, and Memory: Cognitive Mechanisms in
Encoding and Retrieval Processes

## Schema and memory selection: How external cues support internal control in
memory selection?
Authors: Xinyue Zhang, University of Sussex; Alexa Morcom -
Psychology University of Sussex
Introduction. Remembering everything is often not optimal. When only certain past
events are relevant to their goals, people try to remember ‘target’ events
selectively, avoiding retrieval of others. Selective retrieval is thought to be
achieved via both internal control and external cues[1]. We will test whether
selective retrieval is more effective when internal cues are supported by prior
knowledge schemas relating external cues to study episodes.
Methods. Participants will study pictures of object-scene pairings of different
schema-expectancy. In each test block two scenes will be targeted. They will
decide whether object names shown as retrieval cues refer to target episodes.
Congruency between objects and targeted scenes is derived from independent
ratings. N=32 is based on Quent et al.’s schema expectancy effect on object
memory (β=0.51,α=.05,power>.90)[2].
Analysis. We will use generalized linear mixed models to assess the effect on
memory of congruency between test cues and targeted scenes. Predictors will be
object-scene congruency at test(continuous), trial type at
test(target/non-target/new) and their interaction. Multiple logistic regressions
will predict binary target/non-target judgments and correct RTs at test with
random intercepts of participant and item. Inclusion of random slopes will be
decided based on model fit. Subsidiary analysis will check if findings hold for
confident responses(required in future imaging studies). Inclusion criteria are
overall target hits – non-target false alarms>0.1 and <20% no-responses at
test.
Hypotheses. Target accuracy should be higher when targeted objects are congruent
with their scenes if internal control reinstates these studied contexts at
test(positive linear and/or quadratic effect). However, for congruent
non-targets there is a potential conflict. Where objects were studied with
non-targeted scenes but are semantically congruent with the currently targeted
scene, we expect more false alarms and/or slower RTs than for cross- congruent
non-targets that have high schema-expectancy with their studied scene but not
with the currently targeted scene.
1. Moccia,A, Morcom,AM(2021). Cognitive Affective & Behavioral
Neuroscience,22,492
2. Quent,JA, Greve,A, & Henson,RN(2022). Psychological science,33,2084
 
Poster number: M_PZ1_016 (PP)

Sub-Theme: Schema, Expectation, and Memory: Cognitive Mechanisms in
Encoding and Retrieval Processes

## The effect of semantic processing and control demand on subsequent
memory
Authors: Fiona Lancelotte, University of Sussex; Dr Alexa Morcom -
Psychology University of Sussex
Introduction - It is well established that semantic compared to perceptual
processing during events benefits subsequent memory. An important mechanism of
this benefit may be semantic control. Episodic encoding and semantic control
activate overlapping brain regions, and recent lesion data support a critical
role of control in episodic memory with one key impact being to help resolve
interference at retrieval (Stampacchia et al., 2018). We will focus on encoding,
examining the effects of semantic control and task demand during encoding on
subsequent memory. This study will help us understand if controlled semantic
retrieval and selection during encoding contributes to subsequent memory.
Methods - Participants will complete study and test phases online. At study they
will complete 90 trials in each of two different encoding tasks involving
semantic control in which an image is presented along with 3 different words.
They will select either which word is most related in meaning to the probe image
(global association) or which is most similar in size (feature selection). Both
require controlled semantic retrieval but feature selection also involves
competing associations. At test participants will make
remember/familiar/guess/new judgements on 270 images individually. Sample size
will be determined via a priori power analysis using the simr package in R
(alpha=.05, power=.80, effect size will be determined from a review of previous
research).
Analysis approach - We will use a generalised linear mixed model to examine the
effect of semantic task (global association/feature selection) and control
demand (continuous, calculated using word2vec scores reflecting existing
word-probe associations) on whether studied items are remembered or forgotten.
This model will include standardised predictors with random intercepts of
participant and item. We will set alpha at .05 and use Holm- Bonferroni to
adjust for multiple post-hoc comparisons.
Hypotheses - If engaging semantic control benefits encoding, we expect greater
control demand will lead to higher subsequent memory performance across tasks.
Alternatively, or in addition, if semantic selection benefits encoding, we
predict that trials encoded through the feature selection task will be better
remembered.
 
Poster number: M_PZ1_017 (TP)

Sub-Theme: Memory, Oscillations, and Novel Intervention: Enhancing
Cognitive Performance and Emotional Regulation

## Role of midline thalamus in synchronising sleep oscillations
Authors: Yuqi Li, University of Cambridge; Audrey Hay - Physiology,
Development, and Neuroscience University of Cambridge; Ole Paulsen - Physiology,
Development, and Neuroscience University of Cambridge
Introduction
Memory consolidation is a process of stabilisation of information in two stages:
synaptic consolidation and system consolidation. Evidence point to sleep, and in
particular slow wave sleep, as an ideal stage for memory consolidation, when
information is reorganised and transferred from hippocampus to neocortex.
Indeed, information transfer could occur through the temporal coupling of two
sleep oscillations: the hippocampal ripples and cortical spindles. We recently
showed that midline NECAB-1 thalamic neurons synchronise neocortical slow
oscillations during slow wave sleep in mice. Here, we hypothesise that through
synchronising cortical activity, midline thalamus mediates coordination of
spindles and ripples.
Method
To investigate the role of midline NECAB-1 thalamic neurons in regulating
cortical spindle activities and hippocampo- cortical coupling, we
optogenetically inhibited NECAB-1 thalamic neurons while recording the local
field potential signals in multiple cortices and hippocampus. Baseline sleep and
NECAB-1 inhibited sleep were recorded in the same animal in an interleaved order
to study how the properties of sleep oscillations and their temporal coupling
were affected by NECAB-1 neuron activities.
Statistics
Bonferroni corrected Wilcoxon signed rank test with 95% confidence level was used
to assess the changes in parameters when optogenetics was used in NECAB-1
inhibition group and in negative control group. Two-way ANOVA was used to
compare the difference in the changes between NECAB-1 inhibition group and
negative control group.
Results and Conclusion
We report that inhibiting NECAB-1 thalamic neurons during sleep reduced the peak
power of cortical spindles by 6.4% ± 2.7%, with 95% confidence level (n = 8
mice, p=0.03), while the there was no effect on that in negative control animals
(n = 5, p=0.63). The percentage of ripple before spindle incidence was used as
an indicator of hippocampo-cortical coupling sequence, which did not show
consistent changes in the 7 animals analysed, and there was no significant
difference between NECAB-1 inhibition group and negative control group (p=0.26).
In conclusion, NECAB-1 inhibition reduced cortical spindle power but its effect
on hippocampo-cortical coupling was unclear.

Poster number: M_PZ1_018 (PP)

Sub-Theme: Memory, Oscillations, and Novel Intervention: Enhancing
Cognitive Performance and Emotional Regulation

## Does Theta Synchronicity of Sensory Information Enhance Associative Memory?:
Replicating the Theta-Induced Memory Effect
Authors: Fatih Serin, University of Cambridge; Richard Henson - MRC
Cognition and Brain Sciences Unit University of Cambridge; Danying Wang - School
of Psychology & Neuroscience University of Glasgow
The binding of information coming from different sources is critical for
associative memory. Previous animal research suggested that the timing of theta
oscillations in the brain supports the binding of different information. Clouter
et al. (2017) investigated this in humans by modulating the intensity of video
(luminance) and sound (volume) clips so that they ‘flickered’ at certain
frequencies. They manipulated the flicker frequency and synchronicity between
the visual-auditory stimulus pairs in a within-subjects design. The results
indicated better memory for pairs flickering synchronously at theta frequency
compared with no-flicker, asynchronous theta, and synchronous alpha and delta
conditions. This suggests that particularly theta synchronicity can enhance
memory. Additionally, a source localization analysis with electroencephalography
showed entrainment in the visual and auditory cortical regions for the video and
sound clips, respectively, suggesting that flickering indeed modulated brain
activity. The large effect size and the feasible applicability of the paradigm
to daily life demonstrate that the replication of the method would be highly
valuable. The present study aims to replicate the findings in a
magnetoencephalography (MEG) experiment. Participants will be presented with the
flickering stimuli during scanning. There will be four conditions: (1) 0° phase
offset (synchronous) at theta, (2) 180° phase offset (asynchronous) at theta,
(3) 0° phase offset at delta, and (4) no-flicker. MEG recording will allow the
confirmation of oscillatory entrainment in respective cortical areas. Three
pairwise comparisons between the theta 0° phase offset condition against the
other three conditions will be tested according to the Bayesian evidence. A
Bayes Factor (BF) of 6 in favor of the alternative hypothesis for all the
comparisons will be the criteria to conclude that the theta-induced memory
effect is replicable. Whereas, a BF of 6 in favor of the null hypothesis in any
of the comparisons will lead to the conclusion that the effect is not
replicable. The results will inform us about the relationship between
associative memory and brain oscillations, as well as evaluating whether this
paradigm offers an effective tool for improving memory.

Poster number: M_PZ1_019 (PP)

Sub-Theme: Memory, Oscillations, and Novel Intervention: Enhancing
Cognitive Performance and Emotional Regulation

## Investigating meditation's potential to enhance working and episodic memory
performance using EEG
Authors: Samantha Sheffield, University of East London
Introduction
Meditation practice has been shown to act on various cognitive functions.
Improvements in attention have been the most consistent research findings,
whilst enhancements in working memory performance can be seen even after a
single session of meditation. Given attentional control is key component of
models of WM, and the link between WM and encoding/retrieval in episodic memory
(EM) theoretically, meditation should also affect EM. The planned study will
investigate this supposition.
Additionally, meditation can be categorised into operationally distinct types
however, no studies to date have looked specifically at the potential
differential effects on WM and EM. Furthermore, few studies have included neural
measures to investigate meditation's effects on memory function. The planned
study will investigate the effects of three types of meditation on WM and EM
using both behavioural and EEG measures.
Methodology
Participants (N=60, aged 18-45) will be randomly assigned to one of four groups:
focused attention meditation (FAM), open monitoring meditation (OM), loving
kindness meditation (LKM) and a control sham meditation active control (SM).
Procedure: Participants will complete baseline demographic questionnaires and
self-report measures of anxiety, positive and negative affect, state mindfulness
and depth of meditation. EEG will then be recorded during 10 minutes resting
state, followed by completion of an Episodic Memory Task and N-back Task, a
meditation or mind wandering session (SM group) and a repeat of self-report
measures and the Episodic Memory and N-back Tasks. Procedure protocol is
presented in the image attachment included with this submission.
Analysis
For all measures, mixed measures ANOVA will be performed; meditation type X time
(i.e., pre and post intervention measures). Time- frequency analysis will be
performed on EEG recorded at resting state, during meditation and tasks. Theta,
beta, gamma, alpha and delta power will be used for comparison analysis for
resting state versus during meditation. For the EM task, theta power will be
used for comparison analysis, with increased theta power as an indication of
memory performance.
 
Poster number: M_PZ1_020 (PP)

Sub-Theme: Memory, Oscillations, and Novel Intervention: Enhancing
Cognitive Performance and Emotional Regulation

## Proactive and Retroactive Effects of Novel Exploration and Wakeful Rest on
Long-term Memory
Authors: Sumaiyah Raza, University of Cambridge; Judith Schomaker -
Department of Health, Medical and Neuropsychology Leiden University
Exploration of a novel environment seems to enhance memory for unrelated
information encoded shortly before or afterwards. Behavioural tagging theory
(BTT) proposes this is due to neurochemical changes induced by novelty,
benefitting weak encoding occurring in close temporal proximity. BTT predicts
that novel exploration may proactively or retroactively benefit memory, yet
evidence of retroactive effects in humans is lacking – something the present
study will address. Furthermore, interfering stimuli or effortful tasks
following encoding impede memory by interrupting consolidation processes.
Therefore, novel exploration may not enhance memory as much as simply resting
after encoding – this study will directly compare these interventions.
The present study will adapt a virtual-reality paradigm, developed by Schomaker,
Baumann and Ruitenberg (2022), to compare exploration of a novel environment, a
familiar environment, and wakeful rest. All participants will undergo each
intervention, on separate days. Half the participants will encode word lists
shortly before each intervention (retroactive group), and half shortly after
(proactive group). Participants will have same-day and next- day free recall
tests, and finally a delayed remember/know recognition test for all words.
Directional, paired, Bayesian t-tests will assess whether recall is better
following novel versus familiar exploration in the proactive and retroactive
groups (as predicted by BTT), and whether recall is better following wakeful
rest versus novel exploration (predicted to be true for the retroactive group
only). Non-directional, unpaired, Bayesian t-tests will compare recall between
retroactive and proactive groups following novel exploration and wakeful rest.
These analyses will be repeated with delayed recall data, to investigate the
effect of a delay and thus consolidation processes, and recognition test data to
compare familiarity-based recognition versus recollection.
Both novel exploration using virtual-reality and wakeful rest are potential
interventions for improving memory, with implications for clinical and ageing
populations. Direct comparison of these will prove valuable because wakeful rest
has no associated cost or set-up time, unlike virtual-reality exploration.
Conflict of interest: Co-author Prof Rik Henson is BNA President

Poster number: M_PZ1_021 (TP)

Sub-Theme: Memory, Oscillations, and Novel Intervention: Enhancing
Cognitive Performance and Emotional Regulation

## Depotentiation of emotional reactivity using Targeted Memory reactivation
during Rapid-Eye movement sleep
Authors: Viviana Greco, Cardiff University Brain Research Imaging
Centre; Greco, V1.; Pereira, S1.; Foldes, T1.; Harrison, N.1; Lewis, P.A1 – 1
Cardiff University Brain Research Imaging Centre, (CUBRIC), School of
Psychology, Cardiff University, UK - Greco, V1., Pereira, S1., Foldes, T1.,
Harrison, N.1, Lewis, P.A1. – 1 Cardiff University Brain Research Imaging
Centre, (CUBRIC), School of Psychology, Cardiff University, UK
Introduction: Emotional reactivity has been shown to habituate across a night of
sleep. This is thought to be mediated by memory reactivation in REM sleep. Such
reactivation can be intentionally triggered by targeted memory reactivation
(TMR) technique, in which a tone previously associated with a memory during wake
is re- presented during subsequent sleep. We have previously shown that REM TMR
leads to the habituation of responses to negative stimuli1. Here, we build on
this prior work by repeating our original study with measures of heart rate
deceleration (HRD) and brain activity.
Methods: Seventeen participants rated the arousal of 48 affective pictures paired
with semantically matching sounds on a 1-5 scale. Half of the sounds were cued
during REM in subsequent overnight sleep. Following a 48-hour delay, arousal
ratings and HRD were recorded in a magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) scanner.
Approach for statistical analysis: Functional images were analysed to compare
responses to cued and un-cued images. HRD was measured as the maximum R-R
interval in the 5s following each picture onset, subtracted from the mean R-R
interval during the 1.5s baseline period before each picture onset.
Results and Conclusions: TMR during REM led to a reduced activation of insula,
subgenual anterior cingulate, amygdala, and orbitofrontal cortex (p <= 0.001
uncorrected). Heart rate deceleration was also significantly reduced for cued
compared to un-cued items (p = 0.02). These preliminary findings support the
notion that REM TMR fosters a decrease of the emotional tone over time and can
lead to important implication for the early-treatment of psychiatric
conditions.
Hutchison, I. C., Pezzoli, S., Tsimpanouli, M. E., Abdellahi, M. E. A., &
Lewis, P. A. (2021). Targeted memory reactivation in REM but not SWS selectively
reduces arousal responses. Communications Biology, 4(1), 1–6. https://doi.org/10.1038/s42003-021-01854-3
 
Poster number: M_PZ1_022 (TP)

Sub-Theme: Subiculum & Spatial Memory: Unraveling Its Role in
Long-term Memory Formation

## The involvement of the subiculum in reference memory: behavioural and
electrophysiological data
Authors: Chiara Franceschi, Cardiff University; Sungmin Kang -
Psychology Cardiff University; John Aggleton - Psychology Cardiff University;
Joe O'Neill - Psychology Cardiff University
The dorsal subiculum (dSub) represents a major output region of the hippocampus
and an important conduit of spatial information to the rest of the brain.
Despite this key position in the hippocampal network, the precise role of the
dSub in spatial memory has yet to be established. The dSub is known to be
required for spatial working memory (WM). Conversely, its role in long-term
spatial ‘reference’ memory (RM) remains unclear. Here, we examined the dSub’s
involvement in RM by inhibiting it during memory formation and characterising
its network activity during learning.
Spatial memory was assessed using an eight-arm radial maze task (RAM) task, in
which adult male rats learned the location of three static rewards, across 7
days. To test the role of the dSub in the task we infused the GABA-A agonist
Muscimol into the dSub before learning on the first two days of the task. A
mixed ANOVA analysis revealed an increase in RM and WM errors, compared with
saline infused rats. However, dSub inhibition during learning may solely impair
WM, which could, in turn, impact RM formation. To account for this, we infused
Muscimol after learning in order to disrupt RM consolidation, leaving WM intact
during the task. The same analysis revealed a significant effect on performance,
consistent with a role of the dSub in spatial long-term memory formation.
Next, we characterized changes in dSub neuronal activity across days. Neuropixel
probes were implanted in the dSub of rats that first explored a familiar arena
and then performed the RAM task. Most cells maintained stable action potential
wave forms across the first 5 days. At the assembly level, joint firing patterns
of cells remained similar in the open field (where no learning took place),
while neuronal activity reorganised between day 1 and 5 of learning on the RAM
(Fishers Z).
Taken together, this data provides supporting evidence for the dSub’s involvement
in long-term memory and a method for recording the same cells across multiple
days.

Poster number: T_PZ1_012 (TP)

Sub-Theme: Experience, Learning, and Memory: Neural Mechanisms
Across the Lifespan and Disease States

## Circuit dissection of state-dependent shifts in perception
Authors: Michael Crossley, University of Sussex; György Kemenes -
School of Life Sciences University of Sussex; Ildikó Kemenes - School of Life
Sciences University of Sussex; Kevin Staras - School of Life Sciences University
of Sussex
Introduction: Learning and long-term memory formation are important but
energetically costly processes. Neural strategies that could help identify the
most relevant or fruitful associations are therefore likely to be beneficial for
an animal’s survival. Neuronal mechanisms to support such guided learning,
however, are not well established. One candidate to help instruct new memory
formation is a shift in perception induced by an animal’s prior experience.
Here, we used an established molluscan system (Lymnaea stagnalis) to directly
probe the relationship between past memory, perception, and new learning.
Methods: Adult (3-5 month) snails were behaviourally trained using a single-trial
appetitive conditioning paradigm. The central nervous systems of naïve and
trained animals were removed and the activity of individual identifiable neurons
of known function were recorded using intracellular electrophysiology.
Approach for Statistical Analysis Two-group statistical comparisons were
performed using two-tailed t-test statistics (either paired or unpaired as
stated in the text) or a Mann Whitney test or Wilcoxon signed-rank test for non-
parametric data. Data with more than two groups were first analyzed using a
one-way ANOVA or Kruskal-Wallis test followed by Tukey’s or Dunn’s post-hoc
tests with Bonferroni sequential correction.
Results and Conclusions: Strong classical conditioning drives a positive shift in
perception which facilitates the robust learning of a subsequent and otherwise
ineffective weak association. Circuit dissection approaches reveal the neural
control network responsible, characterized by a mutual inhibition motif. This
both sets perceptual state and acts as the master controller for gating new
learning. Pharmacological circuit manipulation in vivo fully substitutes for
strong-paradigm learning, shifting the network into a more receptive state to
enable subsequent weak-paradigm learning. Our study reveals a key mechanism for
coupling past and future learning through changes in perception. We hypothesise
that this serves to signal to the animal a potentially learning-rich
environment, allowing new positive associations to form to cues that would
otherwise be ignored.

Poster number: T_PZ1_013 (TP)

Sub-Theme: Experience, Learning, and Memory: Neural Mechanisms
Across the Lifespan and Disease States

## A parsimonious neuronal mechanism for a learning-induced switch in an innate
sensory response
Authors: György Kemenes, University of Sussex; Zsolt Pirger - Sussex
Neuroscience, School of Life Sciences University of Sussex; Michael Crossley -
Sussex Neuroscience, School of Life Sciences University of Sussex
Introduction: Sensory cues in the natural environment predict reward or
punishment, important for survival. While some sensory responses are innate,
they can undergo fundamental changes due to prior negative experience associated
with the stimulus. However, the neuronal mechanisms underlying such behavioral
switching of an innate sensory response require further investigation. We used
the model learning system of Lymnaea stagnalis to address the question of how an
anticipated aversive outcome reverses the behavioral response to a previously
effective feeding stimulus, sucrose.
Methods: Adult (5-6 months old) snails were trained using a multiple-trial
aversive conditioning paradigm (sucrose paired with a strong tactile US to the
head) and tested for a conditioned response 24 hours later. Learning-induced
changes in neuronal and muscle activity were recorded in semi-intact
preparations containing the CNS and attached sensory regions (lips and
tentacles) and feeding muscles, respectively. Photoinactivation of single
identified neurons was used to test their necessity for circuit-level changes
induced by the aversive training.
Approach to Statistical Analysis: Two-group statistical comparisons were
performed using two-tailed t-test statistics. Data with more than two groups
were analyzed using a one-way ANOVA followed by Tukey’s or Dunn’s post-hoc tests
with Bonferroni sequential correction. When comparing time-dependent changes in
the same group of animals under two different conditions, a two-way ANOVA with
repeated measures was used, followed by paired t-tests.
Results and Conclusions: Key to the switching mechanism is an extrinsic
inhibitory interneuron of the feeding network, PlB (pleural buccal), which is
normally inhibited by sucrose to allow a feeding response. After multi-trial
aversive associative conditioning, PlB's firing rate increases rather than
decreases in response to sucrose application to the lips and the feeding
response is suppressed; this learned response is reversed by the
photoinactivation of a single PlB. A learning-induced persistent change in the
cellular properties of PlB that results in an increase rather than a decrease in
its firing rate in response to sucrose provides a neurophysiological mechanism
for this behavioral switch.
 
Poster number: T_PZ1_014 (TP)

Sub-Theme: Experience, Learning, and Memory: Neural Mechanisms
Across the Lifespan and Disease States

## Enhanced activity of parvalbumin neurons and protein phosphatase calcineurin
in mesocrotciolimbic brain areas following appetitive extinction
learning
Authors: Zuzana Vaverkova, University of Sussex; Eisuke Koya -
School of Psychology University of Sussex; Emiliano Merlo - School of Psychology
University of Sussex
Reward-associated memories play a key role not only in behaviours necessary for
survival such as nutrient procurement, but also for disorders such as drug
addiction and overeating. Elucidating the neural mechanisms supporting reward
memory persistence and inhibition can help us better understand these disorders.
In animals trained with an environmental cue (conditioned stimulus, CS) followed
by delivery of food reward, subsequent exposure to the CS triggers a conditioned
response in anticipation of reward delivery. Repeated presentation of the CS
alone (no food delivery) weakens the conditioned response through a process
called memory extinction. Previous studies have demonstrated the roles of
parvalbumin (PV)-expressing interneurons and the protein phosphatase calcineurin
in fear extinction learning. However, these studies examined a limited number of
brain areas and the extent of activation across a wider neuronal network
involved in reward and motivation have not been described. Thus, we investigated
the activation patterns of several mesocorticolimbic brain areas implicated in
reward and motivation including the medial prefrontal cortex (mPFC) nucleus
accumbens shell and core (NAcS and NAcC) and the basolateral amygdala (BLA).
To this end, we trained rats in autoshaping by contingent presentations of a
compound CS (light + lever) paired with food-reward delivery, followed by
extinction learning and performed immunohistochemistry for the activity marker
‘Fos’, PV, and calcineurin.
Data revealed that extinction of food-seeking behaviour increased activation of
Pv+ interneurons in the BLA and mPFC, and increased calcineurin levels in the
mPFC, NAcS and BLA. We also examined whether increased motivational significance
or ‘sign-tracking’ modulated these activity patterns, but we did not observe any
activity changes.
Together, these results suggest that parvalbumin- and calcineurin-mediated
inhibitory signalling especially across a widespread mesocorticolimbic neuronal
network underlies the extinction of food-seeking behaviour in rats.

Poster number: T_PZ1_015 (TP)

Sub-Theme: Experience, Learning, and Memory: Neural Mechanisms
Across the Lifespan and Disease States

## Influence of threat cue detection sensitivity on extinction in adult male
rats
Authors: Emma Cahill, University of Bristol; Emily R Sherman - Dept.
of Physiology, Development and Neuroscience University of Cambridge; Serena
Deiana - CNS Diseases Research Boehringer Ingelheim; Bastian Hengerer - CNS
Diseases Research Boehringer Ingelheim
Introduction
Hypervigilance, a state of sensitivity to threatening stimuli, is an attentional
bias symptomatic of many anxiety disorders. The development of new therapeutics
for anxiety disorders is highly dependent on the characterisation of animal
models of anxiety. As such, this research intends to develop and refine a rodent
test of hypervigilance that could be used to screen new therapeutics.
Methods
Rats were trained in a fear-conditioning procedure, in which a tone predicted an
unavoidable footshock. Ultrasonic vocalisations and freezing were measured
across sessions. To test sensitivity to the threat cue, the salience was
modified at test. Inter-individual differences in responses were examined in
subsequent extinction of the conditioned responses. Pharmacological manipulation
of NMDA co-agonists was investigated as a potential enhancer of extinction
consolidation.
Approach for statistical analysis
In order to analyse the effects of group (cue salience, or drug treatment
depending on the experiment) and CS presentation on freezing repeated measures
two factor ANOVAs with post-hoc Sidak (cue salience) or Dunnett (compare to
control drug vehicle) correction tests were performed. Investigation into the
association between freezing and ultrasonic vocalisation levels were conducted
using Pearson’s correlation coefficient. Statistical significance was taken to
be at P<0.05.
Results and conclusions
A drop in cue salience reveals individual differences in vigilance to a threat
cue. The findings suggest the ability of NMDA-receptor co-agonists to influence
extinction may depend on the extent of learning in the extinction session. The
relation of cue sensitivity to subsequent extinction, and reacquisition of
conditioned freezing are currently being investigated.
Conflict of interest: This work was funded by Boehringer Ingelheim Pharma GmbH
& Co. Funding comprised of consumables and animals (CNS Diseases Research).
The funder did not have any additional role in study design, data collection and
analysis, decision to publish or preparation of the article. There are no
patents, products in development, or marketed products to declare.

Poster number: T_PZ1_016 (TP)

Sub-Theme: Experience, Learning, and Memory: Neural Mechanisms
Across the Lifespan and Disease States

## Sleep’s Contributions to the Development of PTSD-like Symptomatology in Lewis
Rats
Authors: Lucy K Pritchard, University of Bristol; E N Cahill -
School of Physiology, Pharmacology & Neuroscience University of Bristol; M W
Jones - School of Physiology, Pharmacology & Neuroscience University of
Bristol; R J Purple - School of Physiology, Pharmacology & Neuroscience
University of Bristol
Introduction:
Around 70% of people experience a traumatic event in their lifetime, but only a
subset (around 10%) develop Post- Traumatic Stress Disorder (PTSD). Given the
crucial role of sleep in the processing of daily experience, we hypothesise that
the processing of a traumatic experience during the first subsequent sleep bout
is critical to future outcomes and development of PTSD. This ongoing study aims
to explore whether pre- and post-traumatic sleep physiology predicts development
of PTSD-like symptoms in rats.
Methods
Male and female Lewis rats (n=28) were individually housed with infrared cameras
installed above their homecages to continuously monitor sleep/wake behaviour.
After one week, rats were exposed to a feline predatory odour (or unscented cat
litter for controls) placed in their cage for 10 minutes, with a camera to
monitor behaviour. They were subsequently tested a week later on the elevated
plus-maze (EPM) to measure long-term anxiety, in addition to the open field
test, recordings of ultrasonic vocalisations (USVs), and context
re-exposure.
Approach for Statistical Analysis
Animals were grouped into those with high-anxiety, characterised by spending zero
time on the open arms of the EPM, those with low-anxiety, and controls. T-tests
assessed group differences in freezing during exposure and a one- way ANOVA
compared total sleep across groups.
Results and Conclusions
The high-anxiety group showed significantly less sleep during the day of
predatory threat exposure compared to both control and low-anxiety groups
(F=6.15, p=0.013). No other days differed in estimated total sleep between
groups (p>0.05). Comparisons between adjacent days within groups revealed a
significant increase in amount of sleep in the high-anxiety group the day after
exposure to the predatory threat (t=-6.13, p=0.004) with no other differences
across days.
These changes in sleep/wake behaviour during the day of predatory threat exposure
support our hypothesis that the development of PTSD-like symptoms is influenced
by sleep-related memory processing within the first 24 hours.

Poster number: T_PZ1_017 (TP)

Sub-Theme: Experience, Learning, and Memory: Neural Mechanisms
Across the Lifespan and Disease States

## Humans and mice integrate sensory evidence and temporal expectation in
similar ways when making decisions about when to act
Authors: Sumiya Kuroda, University College London; Hannah Davies -
Sainsbury Wellcome Centre for Neural Circuits and Behaviour University College
London; Ivana Orsolic - Sainsbury Wellcome Centre for Neural Circuits and
Behaviour University College London; Thomas D. Mrsic-Flogel - Sainsbury Wellcome
Centre for Neural Circuits and Behaviour University College London; Michael
Lohse - Sainsbury Wellcome Centre for Neural Circuits and Behaviour University
College London
Introduction
Animals process a constant flow of sensory input and combine it with prior
knowledge to make choices. When relevant sensory events occur around particular
times, animals become capable of expecting the timing of upcoming events. Here,
we investigated how humans and mice use uncertain sensory information to decide
when to act, and how their decisions are influenced by their temporal
expectations, by comparing the performance and strategies of humans and mice
carrying out an identical behavioural task.
Methods
We adapted a visual change detection task previously developed for mice (Orsolic
et al., 2021, Neuron). 10 humans (7 male & 3 female, 18-50 years old) were
instructed to observe a drifting grating fluctuating in speed and to press a
keyboard when they detected a sustained change in the drifting speed (temporal
frequency: TF). We varied the magnitude and timing of the changes in each trial
and when the changes happened in blocks: 3-8 (early) or 10-15 seconds (late)
after trial onset. At the end of each trial, participants were asked to report
their confidence. 5 mice carried out the same task.
Approach for statistical analysis
We compared the task performance of humans and mice using a two-way repeated
measures ANOVA. Both species sometimes reported before the changes happened
(early reports). We compared their proportion and average TF prior to early
reports with a t-test and Pearson correlation coefficient, respectively. We also
compared when they made early reports between early and late blocks using
t-tests. For humans, we used a one-way repeated measures ANOVA to compare
standardized confidence levels of early reports and correct hits.
Results and conclusions
We found humans and mice had similar psychometric curves and reaction times (Fig.
1A, B). While humans had lower early report rates, both species had an increase
in report-triggered TF averages ~0.5 seconds before early reports (Fig. 1C, D),
suggesting they continuously monitor noisy sensory evidence in similar ways.
Humans were less confident when they made early reports compared to rewarded
reports (Fig. 1E). Early reports happened earlier in early blocks (Fig. 1F),
implying humans and mice combine priors about temporal expectation with sensory
evidence to decide when to act.
 
Poster number: T_PZ1_018 (TP)

Sub-Theme: Experience, Learning, and Memory: Neural Mechanisms
Across the Lifespan and Disease States

## Trial-resolution neural representations of behavioural strategies in a
tactile reversal learning task
Authors: Jasper Teutsch, Newcastle University; Rohan Rao -
Biosciences Institute Newcastle University; Fritjof Helmchen - Brain Research
Institute University of Zürich; Mark Humphries - School of Psychology University
of Nottingham; Silvia Maggi - School of Psychology University of Nottingham;
Abhishek Banerjee - Biosciences Institute Newcastle University
Animals continuously track past and current sensory and contextual information to
make appropriate decisions in changing environments. Such a process is an
essential component of flexible behaviour. However, how animals employ specific
behavioural strategies during sensory-guided task learning and rule switching
remains understudied.
We trained mice on a tactile reversal learning task and implemented a
trial-by-trial Bayesian evidence accumulation model to track the probability of
strategies used during behaviour. We measured multiple exploratory and explicit
strategies across key task learning and reversal phases and confirmed
significance using two-sided t-tests and ANOVA. To study neural representations
of behavioural strategy switching, we measured functional responses from
excitatory layer 2/3 neurons in the primary somatosensory cortex (S1) using
two-photon Ca2+ imaging. Furthermore, we employed tensor component analysis
(TCA) to reveal neural population structure and aligned single-trial behavioural
strategies with TCA trial factors (using Pearson correlation and a change-point
detection algorithm).
During initial task learning, mice showed an increase in the cue-driven strategy
(e.g., win-stay-cue) compared to the choice-driven strategy (e.g.,
win-stay-choice). Following the rule-switch, mice reused learnt strategies to
dynamically adapt their behaviour. Silencing of a key prefrontal brain
structure, the lateral orbitofrontal cortex (lOFC), during reversal, resulted in
delayed and decreased choice-to-cue strategy transition and impairments in
flexible behaviour. Our neural analysis reveals several components of S1
responses related to relevant trial phases (sustained ITI activity, stimulus
presentation, action and outcome) shared across mice. Several of these
components correlated with specific strategies during relevant task phases of
learning and following the rule-switch. Our study sheds light on strategies
animals employ during flexible behaviour, their cognate neural signatures in S1,
and further highlights the role of lOFC in leveraging prior knowledge supporting
error-guided learning.

Poster number: T_PZ1_019 (PP)

Sub-Theme: Experience, Learning, and Memory: Neural Mechanisms
Across the Lifespan and Disease States

## Brainstem control of state-dependent motor response reversal
Authors: Valentina Saccomanno, University of St Andrews; Wen-Chang
Li - School of Psychology and Neuroscience University of St Andrews; Maarten
Franz Zwart - School of Psychology and Neuroscience University of St Andrews
Resting Xenopus laevis tadpoles start swimming when appropriately stimulated, but
halt if the very same stimulation is applied during ongoing locomotion [1; Li
lab unpublished data]. This opposing behaviour can be explained by a
reconfiguration of the sensorimotor circuit, so that the same sensory pathway
can exert either an excitatory or inhibitory effect on locomotion, depending on
the current motor state. Studying this motor response reversal means
understanding a mechanism of neuronal network reconfiguration, which could be
shared by different neuronal networks and across different species.
To understand where the reconfiguration happens, brain activity will be
characterised during behaviour by means of either 2-photon imaging or
single-cell electrophysiological recordings, and labelling using neurobiotin for
morphological reconstruction. A group of midbrain cholinergic cells are prime
candidate sensors of the motor state and for the neuronal network
reconfiguration [1]. Immunohistochemistry will therefore be used to locate these
cholinergic cells. Paired whole-cell electrophysiological recordings and
pharmacology will then be used to characterise the connectivity of these cells
in relation to the locomotor central pattern generator.
3D imaging of GCaMP expressing tadpole brains will be analysed by linear
regression analysis. A series of parameters descriptive of the neuronal
physiology and morphology will be extracted from single-cell
electrophysiological recordings and neurobiotin staining respectively, and used
to run a cluster analysis to identify cell subtypes in the tadpole midbrain and
hindbrain. Finally, the effects of drugs altering the cholinergic transmission
will be assessed by means of paired t-tests.
1. W.-C. Li, X.-Y. Zhu and E. Ritson. Mechanosensory Stimulation Evokes Acute
Concussion-Like Behavior by Activating GIRKs Coupled to Muscarinic Receptors in
a Simple Vertebrate. eNeuro, 2017

Poster number: T_PZ1_020 (TP)

Sub-Theme: Experience, Learning, and Memory: Neural Mechanisms
Across the Lifespan and Disease States

## Cellular and molecular mechanisms of age-related changes in a defined
neuronal network encoding associative memory
Authors: István Fodor, Balaton Limnological Research Institute;
Bence Gálik - Genomics and Bioinformatics Core Facilities, Szentágothai Research
Centre University of Pécs; Péter Urbán - Genomics and Bioinformatics Core
Facilities, Szentágothai Research Centre University of Pécs; Réka Svigruha -
Ecophysiological and Environmental Toxicological Research Group Balaton
Limnological Research Institute; György Kemenes - Sussex Neuroscience, School of
Life Sciences University of Sussex; Ildikó Kemenes - Sussex Neuroscience, School
of Life Sciences University of Sussex; Zsolt Pirger - Ecophysiological and
Environmental Toxicological Research Group Balaton Limnological Research
Institute
Introduction: Due to the complexity of the central nervous system (CNS), studying
the aging processes at the level of neural circuits and individually identified
neurons is not an easy task in vertebrates. As a result, aging research heavily
relies on invertebrate model organisms. One such invertebrate model is the great
pond snail (L. stagnalis), which were used here as a versatile aging model to
investigate the molecular mechanisms of aging and age-related memory
impairment.
MM: The neural transcriptome of adult (5-6 months) snails was sequenced and
assembled. The ‘molecular footprint of aging’ was investigated between young
(3-4 months) and aged (>12 months) snails in the whole CNS and in an
identified key interneuron of implicit learning, the Cerebral Giant Cell.
Whole-mount in situ hybridization was performed for four homolog sequences to
genes involved in aging and age-related memory impairment of vertebrates in the
CNS between young and aged snails. To genetically modify the expression of the
four chosen sequences, we applied the method of single-cell embryo manipulation
and CRISPR/Cas9-mediated genetic modification.
Statistical Analysis: After normalization and quality control, the differential
gene expression analysis was performed with the Limma R package. Linear models
were fitted for each gene in each sample and F test was used to assess
differential expression between the samples (1.2 fold change and 0.05 adjusted P
value).
Results and Conclusions: Several evolutionarily conserved homolog sequences were
identified in the neural transcriptome to genes involved in aging and
age-related memory impairment of vertebrates. Both at the system and single-cell
levels, several transcripts showed significant changes during aging which may
contribute to age- related memory impairment. The expression of klotho,
huntingtin, presenilin, and RbAp48 was visualized in the CNS of young and aged
animals. Based on the preliminary results, the involvement of the genetic
modification method can open avenues for the investigation of molecular
processes underlying age-related memory decline in more detail leading to the
discovery of novel mechanisms operating not just in molluscs but also in higher
organisms.
This work was supported by NAP2022-I-10/2022 and OTKA138039

Poster number: T_PZ1_021 (TP)

Sub-Theme: Experience, Learning, and Memory: Neural Mechanisms
Across the Lifespan and Disease States

## Researching the ability of prior experience to influence subsequent learning
in early amyloid pathology and healthy aging
Authors: Tabitha Broadbelt, University of Edinburgh; Dr Szu-Han Wang
- Centre for Clinical Brain Sciences University of Edinburgh
Previous experiences affect how subsequent learning is acquired. For example, a
spatial or contextual learning that is initially dependent on
N-methyl-D-aspartate receptors (NMDAR) can be become independent of NMDAR after
previous acquisition of a similar task (Finnie et al., 2018). To date this
phenomenon of switch in the receptor mechanism of learning has been studied in
young animals. Here, we ask if this switch is affected by early aging or by an
amyloid precursor protein gene knock-in (APPKI) mouse model of Alzheimer’s
disease. If any impairment of the switch would be seen, we ask if improving
temporal memory association (Cai et al., 2016) could rescue this function. Mixed
male and female young wildtype mice, middle-aged wildtype mice, and young APPKI
mice received 2 contextual fear conditionings in distinct contexts. Systemic
injections of the NMDAR antagonist or saline was applied before conditioning to
determine if the learning required NMDA receptors. The animal holding and
transportation between the 2 learnings were either the same or different to
assess if these cues were critical for the switch of learning mechanism. The
time between recall of the first learning and encoding of the subsequent
learning were altered to assess the role of temporal association in the switch.
The effect of NMDAR antagonism was analysed via unpaired t-tests if the data
adhered to normality or Mann-Whitney U if not. All data was analysed with SPSS
24 (IBM). We first replicated the NMDAR-independent second learning in young
mice as seen in previous studies when the holding and transporting cues were
matched between 2 learnings. If these cues were mismatched, the second learning
remained NMDAR-dependent. The switch in the receptor mechanism in the second
learning was not seen in middle-aged mice or in young APPKI mice. Reducing the
delay between recall of the first memory and the second conditioning rescued the
switch in APPKI mice. While reducing the delay between the two conditionings
rescued the switch for the middle-aged mice. The holding cues of the learning
event are important for inducing experience- dependent changes in
NMDAR-dependent learning. Early amyloid pathology and middle-age also impact
switches in learning mechanisms that reflect prior experience.
 
Poster number: T_PZ1_022 (PP)

Sub-Theme: Experience, Learning, and Memory: Neural Mechanisms
Across the Lifespan and Disease States

## Naturalistic assessments of inhibitory control across the lifespan:
Systematic review of inhibition measures in different settings
Authors: Larisa-Maria Dinu, King's College London & University
College; Tobias Hauser - Max Planck UCL Centre for Computational Psychiatry
& Ageing Research University College London; Tim Smith - Psychological
Sciences Birkbeck, University of London; Eleanor Dommett - Psychology King's
College London
Inhibitory control is essential in our daily lives and refers to the ability to
suppress or delay responses to achieve a goal. It emerges in the first year of
life, rapidly developing throughout the toddler and preschool periods, before
continuing to mature in adolescence and early adulthood (Whedon, 2020). Despite
measurement advancements, constrained, non-naturalistic experimental paradigms
remain the norm in cognitive neuroscience (Hartley, 2022; Nastase et al., 2020).
However, these methods fail to account for the complexities of everyday life
(Munakata et al., 2011). It is proposed that to advance our understanding of
cognition we must take an ecological approach (Hartley, 2022), using
naturalistic settings. Nonetheless, to date, we lack a comprehensive review of
studies measuring inhibition using such methods, which are defined as methods
using dynamic, contextualised, continuous and often multisensory stimuli with
high ecological validity (Aliko et al., 2020).
To address this gap, we reviewed published studies using naturalistic assessments
to measure inhibition across the lifespan. Studies needed to include at least
one naturalistic method of assessing inhibition, such as self-reported,
smartphone- or external sensor-assessed inhibition (e.g., through ecological
sampling methodologies; ESM); or a laboratory assessment of inhibition capturing
naturalistic behaviours (e.g., gamified tasks, virtual reality). Electronic
searches were conducted from November 2022 to January 2023 using Pubmed,
PsychINFO and Web of Science. The search identified 8003 studies, with 5649
currently screened for title and abstract.
Data will be extracted for several parameters, including setting, method of
assessment and task characteristics. Because no fit-for-purpose quality
appraisal tool could be identified for the reporting of naturalistic or
real-world methodologies, two quality appraisal tools will be used: a quality
appraisal tool developed by Liao et al. (2020) and adapted by Kwasnicka et al.
(2021) for ESM studies, and The Appraisal tool for Cross-Sectional Studies
(AXIS; Downes et al., 2016) for non-ESM studies. Findings from the review would
a valuable resource for researchers interested in both the development and
application of naturalistic paradigms.

## Mental Health & Neuropsychiatric Disorders

Poster number: S_PZ1_020 (TP)

Sub-Theme: Anxiety, Depression, and Decision-Making: Investigating
Psychological Factors and Interventions Across Populations

## Exploration heuristics during anxiety – an online study
Authors: Georgios Tertikas, Brighton and Sussex Medical School /
University of Sussex; Magda Dubois - Max Plank UCL Centre for Computational
Psychiatry and Ageing Research / Wellcome Trust Centre for Neuroimaging
University College London; Tobias U. Hauser - Max Plank UCL Centre for
Computational Psychiatry and Ageing Research / Wellcome Trust Cetre for
Neuroimaging / Department of Psychiatry and Psychotherapy University College
London / Eberhard Karls University of Tübingen; Daniel Campbell-Meiklejohn -
Sussex Neuroscience University of Sussex; Hugo D. Critchley - Sussex
Neuroscience / School of Psychology Brighton and Sussex Medical School/
University of Sussex
Every day, we may choose something new randomly (random exploration) or select
something new with no prior information (de-novo exploration). The link between
exploration and anxiety has only been studied using trait-like anxiety
questionnaires, but an experimental manipulation of anxiety could have different
results. Individual differences (e.g., sex or novelty-seeking (NS) trait) also
impact specific exploration strategies. Thus, we examined if anxiety
manipulation in a task would influence different exploration strategies while
also looking at sex, NS bias and trait anxiety (from TPQ (TPQ-NS) and STAI
questionnaires). 117 healthy subjects (58 female) performed Maggie’s farm task
online, which allows to review different exploration strategies, promoting
exploration via the number of available choices (horizon). The threat of
aversive stimuli (loud noises appearing randomly) emulated anxiety, in a
between-subject design. Comparing computational models of exploration, the
best-fitting model (by BIC criterion) in our data was a Thompson model with an
ε-greedy element (random exploration) and a novelty bonus η (de-novo
exploration). We used repeated-measures ANOVA, comparing the effect of horizon
on the ε and η parameters with the anxiety category as a between-subject factor.
We used partial Pearson’s correlations of ε and η derivatives (mean and
standardised-difference (SD) across horizon) with STAI and TPQ-NS measures
correcting for participant’s reported stress levels and anxiety category.
Partial correlations analyses were repeated after splitting the data by sex.
There was no between-subject effect of anxiety category on the horizon of either
ε (F(1,1)=0.253, p=0.6) or η (F(1,1)=0.305, p=0.58). SD of ε was negatively
correlated with TPQ-NS (r=-0.184, p=0.050) but no other partial correlation was
significant. When splitting by sex, SD of ε was negatively correlated with the
STAI score (r=-0.341, p=0.01) in females and the TPQ-NS score in males
(r=-0.275, p=0.038). The mean η positively correlated with the STAI score
(r=0.318, p=0.016) in males. While the experimentally modulated anxiety did not
affect the exploration parameters, individual differences in NS and trait
anxiety are suggested to affect random and de novo exploration in a
sex-dependent manner.

Poster number: S_PZ1_022 (PP)

Sub-Theme: Anxiety, Depression, and Decision-Making: Investigating
Psychological Factors and Interventions Across Populations

## Evaluating the long-term outcomes of a school-based intervention for
depression in older adolescents
Authors: Denis Duagi, King's College London
Introduction. The leading cause of disability in youth are neuropsychiatric
disorders, accounting for 45% of years lost because of disabilities. More than
75% of them arise by mid-twenties, positioning adolescence as a key period for
early intervention. Concerningly, symptoms of depression and anxiety are on the
rise amongst 16–18-year-olds and there is a lack of interventions targeting
older adolescents. Schools are a universal access point for prevention and early
intervention; however, recent meta-analyses of school-based mental health
programs suggest that less than a third of interventions target older
adolescents and there is scant evidence of their effectiveness in the longer
term.
Methods. To test the long-term clinical effectiveness of a school-based
intervention specifically developed for stressed 16–18-year-olds, a long-term
follow-up of a cluster randomized controlled trial (BESST Trial) will assess
outcomes at 12 months and 18 months post-randomization. Primary outcome data on
depressive symptoms, as well as secondary outcome data on anxiety symptoms,
wellbeing, sleep and resilience will be collected between October 2022 and May
2024. A mixed-methods approach will explore quantitative differences in outcome
data between students who received the intervention and controls who received
the normal school provision, as well as qualitative data on the perceived
usefulness of the intervention during the transition to young adulthood.
Statistical analysis. Outcomes will be analysed using multilevel linear
mixed-effects models to account for the clustered structure of the data. A
treatment group by time interaction term will be included to allow for
extracting comparisons at both follow-up times. A random intercept model will be
fitted for each school and student, and the difference between the intervention
and control scores will be estimated, alongside the 95% confidence interval and
p-value. Additionally, a sensitivity analysis will be undertaken using
intention-to-treat principles, whereby multiple imputation will be used to
assess sensitivity of the results to missing data under the missing at random
assumption for students lost to follow-up. Qualitative data will be gathered in
interviews and analysed using reflexive thematic analysis.

Poster number: S_PZ1_023 (TP)

Sub-Theme: Anxiety, Depression, and Decision-Making: Investigating
Psychological Factors and Interventions Across Populations

## The effects of negative trait affect on decision-making under
ambiguity
Authors: Molly Davidson, University of Bristol; Vikki Neville -
Bristol Veterinary School University of Bristol; John Fennell - Bristol
Veterinary School University of Bristol; Elizabeth Paul - Bristol Veterinary
School University of Bristol; Iain D. Gilchrist - School of Psychological
Science University of Bristol; Michael Mendl - Bristol Veterinary School
University of Bristol
Introduction
Affective states can influence decision-making. For example, people in negative
affective states tend to make more ‘pessimistic’ decisions than those in
positive affective states, particularly in response to ambiguity. Here we aimed
to show that individuals with self-reported negative trait affect make more
‘pessimistic’ decisions when faced with ambiguous stimuli. This study was
preregistered here: https://osf.io/shvfr
Methods
A total of 540 participants (final sample of 509; 273 female, aged 18-73, median
age = 36) were recruited to an online experiment where they completed
questionnaires assessing trait anxiety, depression and pessimism, as well as
taking part in a judgement bias task. The judgement bias task is a cognitive
task designed to look at decision- making under ambiguity.
Statistical analysis
To determine whether demographic and questionnaire variables were significantly
associated with judgement bias, we used a general linear model (GLM) containing
the following independent variables: age, sex, anxiety score, depression score
and pessimism score. As the questionnaire scores were highly correlated with
each other we also ran three further GLMs, each containing one of the
questionnaires as well as age and sex.
Results and conclusions
We found that higher trait anxiety and depression scores were significantly
associated with a lower proportion of ‘optimistic’ responses to ambiguous
stimuli, i.e. a ‘pessimistic’ judgement bias. Interestingly, this was not true
for trait pessimism scores. We also found significant effects of age and sex on
judgement bias; males were significantly more ‘optimistic’ in the task than
females and ‘optimistic’ judgement bias responses significantly decreased with
age.
In conclusion, self-reported trait anxiety and depression, but not trait
pessimism, are associated with ‘pessimistic’ decision-making under ambiguity.
Next, we plan to apply computational modelling to this dataset to investigate
how negative trait affect influences underlying decision-making processes at the
individual level.

Poster number: S_PZ67_024 (TP)

Sub-Theme: Neurodevelopmental Disorders: Molecular Mechanisms,
Models, and Emerging Therapies

## Using zebrafish as an in vivo model of the human eye movement disorder
Duane’s Retraction Syndrome
Authors: Louise Reilly, University of Sussex; Ragnheidur
Gudjonsdottir - Life Sciences University of Sussex; Sarah Guthrie - Life
Sciences University of Sussex
Introduction: The ocular motor system (OMS) consists of 3 cranial nerves
interacting with 6 extraocular muscles to control eye movement. This
organisation is well conserved, including in zebrafish. Miswiring of these
nerves can result in Duane’s Retraction Syndrome (DRS), manifesting in limited
unilateral or bilateral abduction of the eye. A number of autosomal dominant
missense mutations have been identified in CHN1, encoding the signalling protein
α2-CHN, leading to DRS. Previous work in our lab has demonstrated that α2-CHN
plays a crucial role in axon guidance within the OMS by integrating
extracellular signals to contribute to remodelling of the cytoskeleton.
Methods: In order to further investigate the role of α2-CHN in the OMS, we
established three transgenic zebrafish lines harbouring either loss-of-function
(LOF) or gain-of-function (GOF) mutations in chn1. We verified the presence of
the mutant alleles using Sanger sequencing and expression of α2-CHN at 3 days
post-fertilisation (dpf) by Western blot. Using transgenic lines expressing GFP
to visualise motor neurons, combined with wholemount immunostaining of muscles
and acetylcholine receptors, we imaged the OMS at 3dpf. Additionally, we used a
custom-built setup to analyse the optokinetic reflex (OKR) at 5dpf. We varied a
number of parameters to assess horizontal eye movement fitness.
Statistical Analysis: Analysis of the OMS anatomy was performed on at least 3
clutches of larvae, with a minimum of 19 individuals per genotype and compared
using Mann-Whitney. For the OKR, at least 2 clutches were analysed, with a
minimum of 17 individuals and compared using one-way ANOVA followed by Tukey
test.
Results/Conclusions: Both LOF and GOF α2-CHN alleles increased defasciculation in
the OMS and decreased synapse formation. In a subset of homozygous GOF
individuals, we observed stalling of the oculomotor nerve. This suggests that
both loss of α2-CHN or constitutively activated protein affect microtubule
stability and impair axon guidance in the OMS. Consistent with these findings,
we observed a reduced OKR fitness in both GOF and LOF individuals, indicating
that these anatomical differences lead to functional defects in horizontal eye
movements and establish these zebrafish lines as models for DRS.

Poster number: S_PZ68_025 (TP)

Sub-Theme: Neurodevelopmental Disorders: Molecular Mechanisms,
Models, and Emerging Therapies

## A homozygous loss-of-function mutation in DRD1 causes disrupted cyclic AMP
homeostasis in a patient with severe dystonia-parkinsonism
Authors: Kimberley Reid, Zayed Centre for Research into Rare Disease
in Children, UCL GOS Institute of Child Health, London, UK; Dora Steel -
Molecular Neurosciences, Developmental Neurosciences Zayed Centre for Research
into Rare Disease in Children, UCL GOS Institute of Child Health, London, UK;
Maya Topf - Leibniz Institute for Experimental Virology (HPI) and
Universitätsklinikum Hamburg Eppendorf (UKE) Centre for Structural Systems
Biology (CSSB), Hamburg, Germany; Sanjay Bhate - Department of Neurology Great
Ormond Street Hospital, London, UK; Lorenzo Biassoni - Department of Neurology
Great Ormond Street Hospital, London, UK; Sniya Sudhakar - Department of
Neurology Great Ormond Street Hospital, London, UK; Michelle Heys - Department
of Paediatrics Newham Hospital, London UK; Elizabeth Burke - Office of the
Clinical Director National Human Genome Research Institute, and Undiagnosed
Diseases Program and Network, Office of the Director, National Institutes of
Health, Bethesda, MD, USA; Erik Van Kamsteeg - Department of Human Genetics
Radboud University Medical Center, Nijmegen, Netherlands; Tands,Biju Hameed -
Department of Neurology Great Ormond Street Hospital, London, UK; Katy Barwick -
Molecular Neurosciences, Developmental Neurosciences Zayed Centre for Research
into Rare Disease in Children, UCL GOS Institute of Child Health, London, UK;
Manju A Kurian - Molecular Neurosciences, Developmental Neurosciences Zayed
Centre for Research into Rare Disease in Children, UCL GOS Institute of Child
Health, London, UK
Introduction: The human dopaminergic system is vital for a broad range of
neurological processes, including the control of voluntary movement. Here we
report a proband presenting with clinical features of dopamine deficiency, in
whom we identified a homozygous loss-of-function DRD1 variant.
Methods: Triome whole-genome sequencing and analysis was undertaken using the
Illumina NovaSeq 6000 platform, Qiagen QCI Interpret Translational and Sanger
sequencing. Mutant constructs for overexpression in HEK293T cells were
generated. Gene and protein expression, localisation and function were assessed
using qPCR, Western blotting, biotinylation, immunofluorescence, ligand binding
and cAMP assays. Molecular modelling was also undertaken.
Approach for statistical analysis: Unpaired parametric Student’s t tests were
used when comparing 2 data sets. Two- way ANOVAs with multiple comparisons were
performed when comparing more than 2 data sets. Statistical significance was
considered on both occasions where p<0.05.
Results and conclusions: A novel homozygous variant c.110C>A (p.Thr37Lys) was
identified in DRD1 encoding dopamine receptor D1, in a patient presenting with
severe infantile dystonia-parkinsonism, with frequent oculogyric crises,
dysautonomia, hypomimia, bradykinesia and global developmental delay. CSF
neurotransmitter analysis was normal. This variant was absent in the homozygous
state in gnomAD with a CADD score of 27.5. Structural modelling of the mutant
protein suggested an alteration in substrate binding. Although this variant did
not affect protein expression and subcellular localisation, cAMP levels were
significantly reduced in response to the selective D1 dopaminergic agonist
Chloro APB (p<0.0001), and ligand binding was significantly reduced. Numerous
D1 agonists failed to rescue the reduced cAMP levels, and the patient had no
clinical response to dopaminergic therapy. Our study identifies DRD1 as a novel
disease-associated gene with disruption of downstream cAMP signalling likely to
affect key corticostriatal neuronal networks involved in motor control. A better
understanding of the underlying molecular genetic mechanisms may facilitate
future development of targeted precision therapies.
Conflict of interest: MAK is a co-founder of Bloomsbury Therapeutics.

Poster number: S_PZ2_026 (TP)

Sub-Theme: Neurodevelopmental Disorders: Molecular Mechanisms,
Models, and Emerging Therapies

## Variants in MED27, SLC6A7 and MPPE1 in severe complex dystonia: oligogenic
inheritance
Authors: Kimberley Reid, UCL ICH; Robert Spaull - Developmental
Neurosciences UCL ICH; Smrithi Salian - Department of Pediatrics CHU
Sainte-Justine Research Center, University of Montreal, Montreal, Quebec,
Canada.; Katy Barwick - Development Neurosciences UCL ICH; Esther Meyer -
Developmental Neurosciences UCL ICH; Juan Zhen - Cell Therapy and Cell
Engineering Facility Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center, New York, New York,
USA.; Hiromi Hirata - Department of Chemistry and Biological Science College of
Science and Engineering, Aoyama Gakuin University, Sagamihara, Japan.; Diba
Sheipouri - University of Sydney, Sydney, New South Wales, Australia. School of
Medical Sciences; Hind Benkerroum - CHU Sainte-Justine Research Center,
University of Montreal, Montreal, Quebec, Canada. Department of Pediatrics;
Kathleen M Gorman - Department of Neurology and Clinical Neurophysiology
Children's Health Ireland at Temple Street, Dublin, Ireland.; Apostolos
Papandreou - Developmental Neurosciences UCL ICH; Michael A Simpson - Division
of Genetics and Molecular Medicine King's College London School of Medicine,
London, United Kingdom.; Irene Farabella - Crystallography/Department of
Biological Sciences, Birkbeck College, University of London, London, United
Kingdom. Institute of Structural and Molecular Biology; Maya Topf - Centre for
Structural Systems Biology (CSSB), Hamburg, Germany. Leibniz Institute for
Virology (HPI) and Universitätsklinikum Hamburg Eppendorf (UKE); Detelina
Grozeva - Cambridge Institute for Medical Research, University of Cambridge,
Cambridge, United Kingdom Department of Medical Genetics; Martin Smith -
Department of Neurology John Radcliffe Hospital, Oxford, United Kingdom; Hardev
Pall - Department of Neurology Queen Elizabeth Hospital, Birmingham, United
Kingdom.; Peter Lunt - Clinical Genetic Service Gloucester Royal Hospital,
Gloucester, United Kingdom; Susanna De Gressi - Department of Paediatrics
Cheltenham General Hospital, Gloucestershire, United Kingdom.; Erik-Jan Kamsteeg
- Radboud University Medical Center, Nijmegen, Netherlands Department of Human
Genetics; Tobias B Haack - Institute of Medical Genetics and Applied Genomics
University of Tuebingen, Tuebingen, Germany.; Lucinda Carr - Developmental
Neurosciences UCL ICH; Rita Guerreiro - Department of Neurodegenerative Science
Van Andel Institute, Grand Rapids, Michigan, USA; Jose Bras - Department of
Neurodegenerative Science Van Andel Institute, Grand Rapids, Michigan, USA;
Eamonn R Maher - Department of Medical Genetics University of Cambridge,
Cambridge, United Kingdom; Richard H Scott - Department of Clinical Genetics
Great Ormond Street Hospital, London, United Kingdom; Robert J Vandenberg -
School of Medical Sciences University of Sydney, Sydney, New South Wales,
Australia.; F Lucy Raymond - Centre for Trials Research Neuadd Meirionnydd,
Cardiff University, Cardiff, United Kingdom.; Wui K Chong - Department of
Radiology Great Ormond Street Hospital, London, United Kingdom; Sniya Sudhakar -
Great Ormond Street Hospital, London, United Kingdom Department of Radiology;
Kshitij Mankad - Department of Radiology Great Ormond Street Hospital, London,
United Kingdom; Maarten E Reith - Department of Psychiatry New York University
School of Medicine, New York, New York, USA; Philippe M Campeau - Department of
Pediatrics CHU Sainte-Justine Research Center, University of Montreal, Montreal,
Quebec, Canada.; Robert J Harvey - School of Health and Behavioural Sciences
University of the Sunshine Coast, Sippy Downs, Queensland, Australia.; Manju A
Kurian - Molecular Neurosciences, Developmental Neurosciences Zayed Centre for
Research into Rare Disease in Children, UCL Great Ormond Street Institute of
Child Health, London, United Kingdom
Introduction: Despite advances in next generation sequencing technologies, the
identification of variants of uncertain significance (VUS) can often hinder
definitive diagnosis in patients with complex neurodevelopmental disorders. The
objective of this study was to identify and characterize the underlying cause of
disease in a family with two children with severe developmental delay associated
with generalized dystonia and episodic status dystonicus, chorea, epilepsy, and
cataracts.
Methods: Whole-exome sequencing was performed followed by functional
characterization of candidate genes using structural homology modelling,
patient-derived primary cell lines, in vitro overexpression systems, and a
zebrafish model.
Approach for statistical significance: Comparisons between two group of data
(functional activity of hPROT, expression and localization of hPROT and
expression of GPI anchored proteins) an unpaired parametric Student’s t- test
was performed using GraphPad Prim V9.0.0. Statistical significance was
considered where P < 0.05.
Results and conclusion: Homozygous variants were found in: MED27 - c.839C>T
(p.Pro280Leu), SLC6A7/PROT - c.1186G>A (p.Gly396Ser), and MPPE1/PGAP5 -
c.985A>T (p.Arg329*). The patients had many features of MED27- related
disorder, however the SLC6A7 and MPPE1 variants were investigated to determine
whether these genes also contributed to the phenotype. Homology modelling
predicted SLC6A7 p.Gly396Ser to result in impaired proline recognition; reduced
cell-surface expression, decreased proline transport, decreased proline affinity
and reduced maximal currents were observed. Zebrafish morpholino knockdown of
slc6a7 revealed developmental delay and fragile motor neuron morphology that was
rescued by PROT-WT, but not PROT-G396S RNA. Finally, analysis of patient
fibroblasts indicated a reduction in cell-surface expression of
glycophosphatidylinositol (GPI) anchored proteins, linked to PGAP5 dysfunction.
We report a family harboring a homozygous MED27 variant with additional
loss-of-function SLC6A7 and MPPE1 variants, highlighting the potential for
blended oligogenic phenotypes.

Poster number: S_PZ2_027 (TP)

Sub-Theme: Neurodevelopmental Disorders: Molecular Mechanisms,
Models, and Emerging Therapies

## Molecular mechanisms of the cognitive impairment associated with Duchenne
Muscular Dystrophy
Authors: Joanna Pomeroy, University of Portsmouth
Introduction: Boys with Duchenne Muscular Dystrophy (DMD) suffer from a
progressive muscle-wasting rendering them wheelchair bound by 12, and causing
death due to cardiac or respiratory failure in the second/third decade of life.
Moreover, they present with non-progressive neuropsychological abnormalities
severely affecting them and their families’ quality of life, relationships, and
compliance with their medications. DMD is caused by mutations in the DMD gene
encoding dystrophin. Every DMD patient suffers the loss of the full-length
dystrophin and has an IQ one standard deviation lower than the mean (Rae et al.,
2016). Specific dystrophin isoforms are expressed in distinct brain regions and
one unique full-length dystrophin (Dp427p) is present only in the Purkinje cell
(Gorecki et al., 1992), the cerebella’s major output neuron, and cerebellum
mediates motor control but also cognitive function, including short-term,
working, and verbal memory, which are impaired in DMD. While some specific
deficits, primarily altered functions of the GABA synapses were found in DMD
brains, these abnormalities do not explain all the symptoms. The aim of this
study is to uncover the molecular mechanisms behind the DMD neuropsychiatric
impairment.
Method: Total RNA was extracted from the cerebella of five mice lacking
full-length dystrophin (mdx) and the control C57BL/10 mice. At different
timepoints RNA sequencing was performed on stranded libraries using Illumina.
The software R was used to analyse significantly differentially expressed
transcripts. Functionally enriched pathways in mdx mice were uncovered using
EnrichR.
Statistical Analysis: Genes with a p-value < 0.05 and a false discovery rate
< 0.1 analysed using EdgeR’s QLF tests were considered significantly altered.
Enriched pathways had an adjusted p-value < 0.05 calculated by the Fisher
exact test with Benjamini-Hochberg correction, and at least 3 genes altered.
Results and Conclusions: There were significant transcriptomic alterations
identified in the dystrophic cerebella. The altered transcripts were found to be
enriched in specific pathways and these will be discussed in detail. Current
data indicates that some alterations in dystrophic cerebella contributing to the
cognitive impairment in DMD is treatable.

Poster number: S_PZ2_028 (TP)

Sub-Theme: Neurodevelopmental Disorders: Molecular Mechanisms,
Models, and Emerging Therapies

## A recurrent de novo MAX p.Arg60Gln variant causes a syndromic overgrowth
disorder through differential expression of c-Myc target genes
Authors: James Poulter, University of Leeds; Erica Harris -
Institute of Medical Research University of Leeds; Vincent Roy - Department of
Biochemistry University of Sherbrooke; Martin Montagne - Department of
Biochemistry University of Sherbrooke; Ailsa Rose - Institute of Medical
Research University of Leeds; Emma Hobson - Department of Clinical Genetics
Leeds Teaching Hospital; Francis Sansbury - Department of Clinical Genetics
Cardiff and Vale NHS Trust; Marjolein Willemsen - Department of Clinical
Genetics Radboud University Medical Center; Helen Firth - Human Genetics
Wellcome Sanger Institute; Pierre Lavigne - Department of Biochemistry
University of Sherbrooke; Ian Carr - Institute of Medical Research University of
Leeds; Helen Livesey - Department of Clinical Genetics Leeds Teaching
Hosptial
Introduction: Cyclin D2 (CCND2) stabilisation underpins a range of
macrocephaly-associated disorders through de novo mutation of CCND2, or through
activating mutations in upstream genes encoding PI3K-AKT pathway components.
Here we describe three individuals with overlapping macrocephaly-associated
phenotypes who each carry the same recurrent de novo variant in Myc-associated
factor X (MAX) and characterise the effect of the mutation on cMyc and E-box
promoter binding and the transcriptome.
Methods: Patients were sequenced, following informed consent, as part of the
Deciphering Developmental Disorders (DDD) study or as part of an ongoing
research study in Nijmegen. Cyclin D2 protein and RNA was assessed by Western
Blot and quantitative real-time PCR, respectively. Cyclin D2 degradation was
assessed using a cyclohexamide assay. All modelling and molecular rendering was
done using the open source version of Pymol. Circular dichroism measurements
were performed on a Jasco J-810 spectropolarimeter equipped with a Peltier-type
thermostat. RNA sequencing libraries were created using the Illumina Truseq
library preperation kit and sequenced on a NextSeq500.
Statistical analysis: Statistical analyses were performed using Prism 9 software.
Statistical calculations were performed using 3 independent biological
replicates unless stated. All statistical tests performed were unpaired two-
sided and a P-value of < 0.05 was considered statistically significant.
Results: Through analysis of two large sequencing cohorts, we identified three
individuals who each shared the same recurrent p.Arg60Gln variant in MAX. The
variant, located in the b-HLH-LZ domain, leads to increased levels of CCND2
through increased transcription, and not stabilisation of CCND2. We show the
purified b-HLH-LZ domain of MAXR60Q (Max*R60Q) dimerizes more readily as a
heterodimeric and specific DNA complex with c-Myc than Max*WT. Furthermore,
Max*R60Q binds its target E-Box sequence with a lower apparent affinity than
Max*WT resulting in an increase in transcriptional activity of c-Myc in patients
carrying this mutation. The recent development of Omomyc, a c-Myc inhibitor,
provides a possible therapeutic option for MAXR60Q patients, and others carrying
similar germline mutations.

Poster number: S_PZ2_029 (TP)

Sub-Theme: Neurodevelopmental Disorders: Molecular Mechanisms,
Models, and Emerging Therapies

## Variant G155D associated with autosomal dominant nocturnal frontal lobe
epilepsy alters Calcium Binding Protein 4 structure-function
relationship
Authors: Vanessa S Morris, University of Liverpool; Dan Rigden -
Department of Biochemistry and Systems Biology University of Liverpool; Caroline
Dart - Department of Molecular Physiology and Cell Signalling University of
Liverpool; Nordine Helassa - Department of Cardiovascular Science and Metabolic
Medicine University of Liverpool
Introduction – Autosomal dominant frontal lobe epilepsy (ADNFLE) is a partial
epilepsy disorder with a usual age of onset between 10 and 14 years of age. The
point mutation G155D in Calcium Binding Protein 4 (CaBP4), which is a
voltage-dependent calcium channel modulator expressed in photoreceptor synaptic
terminals, has been linked to ADNFLE. However, the effects of this mutation on
CaBP4’s structure-function relationship are still unknown.
Methods – G155D-associated structural changes were examined using a combination
of computational modelling (AlphaFold, 2Struc and DynaMut) and circular
dichroism (CD). Susceptibility to protease digestion (trypsin) was determined
using SDS-PAGE and densitometry analysis. The effect of G155D on calcium binding
was assessed using intrinsic fluorescence spectroscopy (tyrosine).
Approach for statistical analysis – To compare wild type and mutant in both
calcium-free (apo) and calcium-bound conditions, two-way ANOVA tests have been
performed on trypsin digestion data and the circular dichroism data. For the
analysis of calcium binding, t-tests have been performed.
Results and conclusions – Computational predictions and CD data showed that the
G155D point mutation does not cause large changes to the secondary structure.
However, we observed a significant gain in flexibility within close proximity to
the G155D mutation and an increase of predicted intra-molecular interactions
compared to CaBP4. Both DynaMut and trypsinisation highlighted that G155D
destabilised CaBP4 structure, with a higher susceptibility to protease
digestions, in both apo and calcium conditions. Using Calcium binding titration
and fluorescence spectroscopy, we demonstrated significant differences in
affinity between CaBP4 and the G155D variant. Therefore, at this stage in the
investigation, we showed that the ADNFLE-associated mutation G155D significantly
affects both stability and functionality of CaBP4.

Poster number: S_PZ2_030 (TP)

Sub-Theme: Neurodevelopmental Disorders: Molecular Mechanisms,
Models, and Emerging Therapies

## The development and characterisation of cellular assays for measuring the
effects of LIMK1 inhibitors
Authors: Loren Waters, Cardiff University; Ross Collins - Medicines
Discovery Institute Cardiff University; John Atack - Medicines Discovery
Institute Cardiff University
The LIM domain Kinase isoforms (LIMK1 and LIMK2) are dual-specificity kinases
that regulate actin dynamics through the phosphorylation of the actin
depolymerising factor/ cofilin (ADF/CFL) protein family. CFL is a crucial
downstream effector in the Rho/Rac/Cdc42 signalling pathways. The dysregulation
in pathway activity drives several diverse pathological processes, including the
intellectual disability disorder fragile X syndrome (FXS). FXS is characterised
by an abnormal synaptic morphology resulting from trinucleotide expansion of the
CGG sequence in the FMR1 gene, which results in the loss of the protein
expression causing dysregulation of signalling pathways that ultimately impacts
ADF/CFL activity. Inhibition of LIMK1 in-vitro and in-vivo has restored synaptic
morphology and alleviated associated symptoms of FXS. Herein, we describe the
development of indication-specific cellular assays to profile novel LIMK1
inhibitors and facilitate the optimisation of such inhibitors in the context of
FXS.
A compound series was screened and pharmacologically profiled using a NanoBRET
target engagement intracellular kinase assay. HEK-293 cells were transfected
with LIMK1-NanoLuc fusion vector and then a cell-permeable tracer was added to
bind to the LIMK1-NanoLuc. Competitive displacement due to compound binding
results in a loss of measured signal. This enabled a direct assessment of the
compound effect towards LIMK1/2 and their ability to selectively bind in a
live-cell system. AlphaLISA SureFire assay was used to quantify the functional
target phospho- CFL following concentration-dependent inhibition. Finally,
western blot analysis investigating levels of LIMK1, p-CFL and total CFL
comparing control and treated cells. The efficacy of each compound was evaluated
using a non-linear regression model to generate IC50 curves (GraphPad Prism
9.3.1). For protein analysis the data was normalized to the control,
semi-quantified using FIJI software (ImageJ V.2.1) and a two-sample t-test was
applied.
The biochemical and functional aspects of LIMK1 inhibition can be effectively
assessed with reliable cell-based technology. Current compounds have
demonstrated promising PK profile, with potent inhibition, good target
engagement and no observed toxicity to healthy cells.

Poster number: S_PZ2_031 (TP)

Sub-Theme: Neurodevelopmental Disorders: Molecular Mechanisms,
Models, and Emerging Therapies

## Liver X receptor-agonist treatment rescues degeneration in a Drosophila model
of hereditary spastic paraplegia
Authors: Niamh O'Sullivan, University College Dublin; Dwayne J Byrne
- UCD School of Biomolecular and Biomedical Sciences University College Dublin;
Craig Blackstone - MassGeneral Institute for Neurodegenerative Disease
Massachusetts General Hospital
Hereditary spastic paraplegias (HSPs) are a group of inherited, progressive
neurodegenerative conditions caused by a length-dependent degeneration of the
longest upper motor neurons. While more than 80 spastic paraplegia genes (SPGs)
have been identified, many cases arise from mutations in genes encoding proteins
which generate and maintain tubular endoplasmic reticulum (ER) membrane
organisation. However the mechanisms by which mutations in these genes cause the
axonopathy observed in HSP have not been elucidated.
This study aims to further our understanding of ER-shaping proteins through the
study of novel in vivo and in vitro models, using CRISPR/Cas9-mediated gene
editing to knockout the ER-shaping protein ARL6IP1, mutations in which give rise
to the HSP subtype SPG61.
Loss of Arl6IP1 in Drosophila results in progressive locomotor deficits,
emulating a key aspect of HSP in patients. ARL6IP1 interacts with ER-shaping
proteins and is required for regulating the organisation of ER tubules,
particularly within long motor neuron axons. Unexpectedly, we identified
physical and functional interactions between ARL6IP1 and phospholipid
transporters in both human and Drosophila model systems, pointing to a conserved
role for ARL6IP1 in lipid homeostasis. Furthermore, loss of Arl6IP1 from
Drosophila neurons results in a cell non-autonomous accumulation of lipid
droplets in axonal glia. Importantly, treatment with lipid regulating liver X
receptor-agonists blocked lipid droplet accumulation, restored axonal ER
organisation, and improved locomotor function in Arl6IP1 knockout
Drosophila.
Our findings indicate that disrupted lipid homeostasis contributes to
neurodegeneration in this model of HSP, identifying a potential novel
therapeutic avenue for the treatment of this disorder.

Poster number: M_PZ1_023 (TP)

Sub-Theme: Novel Treatments for Mental Health Disorders

## Selective effects of psilocin on layer V neurons in prelimbic cortex
Authors: Matthew Claydon, University of Bristol; Dr Zuner A
Bortolotto - Physiology, Pharmacology, & Neuroscience University of Bristol;
Professor Emma S J Robinson - Physiology, Pharmacology, & Neuroscience
University of Bristol
Introduction
Recent phase 2 clinical trials have shown promise for the treatment of depression
with a single dose of psilocybin. Secondary outcomes indicated that psilocybin
may be more efficacious than the commonly used medication escitalopram. Despite
their promise, preclinical research is still limited in this field, and a
mechanistic understanding of the actions psychedelics in the brain has yet to be
elucidated.
Behavioural evidence has highlighted that the medial prefrontal cortex (mPFC)
plays an important role in mediating the hallucinogenic and therapeutic effects
of psychedelic drugs. In vivo research has described variable changes to
neuronal firing rates in the anterior cingulate cortex in response to psilocybin
exposure, but how specific cell types and neuronal networks respond to these
drugs is unclear.
We hypothesize that psilocybin exerts specific effects on neuronal circuits
associated with the processing of affect, enabling the remodelling of synaptic
connections and facilitating the reconsolidation of memories with a more
positive valence. We aim to address this by assessing the electrophysiological
properties of specific neuronal populations and their response to the acute
application of psilocin, the active metabolite of psilocybin.
Methods
Whole-cell patch clamp recording in ex vivo brain slices of cells labelled by
retrograde fluorescent tracer.
Approach for statistical analysis
Unpaired t-tests to test for significance between two groups. One way ANOVA to
compare groups with one variable (i.e. concentration). Two-way ANOVA to compare
effects with two variables (i.e. concentration and labelling).
Results and conclusions
We find that psilocin has variable effects on evoked synaptic currents such that
amplitudes are increased, decreased, or unchanged in a cell-dependent manner. We
also report that psilocin extends the decay of evoked currents in a subset of
cells, which could underlie changes to bursting seen in some neurons in vivo
following psilocybin administration. Our data indicate that fluorescently
labelled cells projecting from prelimbic cortex to basolateral amygdala may be
biased to inhibition following psilocin exposure.
 
Poster number: M_PZ1_024 (TP)

Sub-Theme: Novel Treatments for Mental Health Disorders

## Pharmacological characterizations of a psychedelic derivative
2-oxo-PCE
Authors: Khadan Abdi, University of Bristol; Matthew Claydon -
School of Physiology, Pharmacology and Neuroscience University of Bristol; Steve
Fitzjohn - School of Physiology, Pharmacology and Neuroscience University of
Bristol; Jason Wallach - Department of Pharmaceutical Sciences University of the
Sciences, Philadelphia, PA, USA; Zuner Bortolotto - School of Physiology,
Pharmacology and Neuroscience University of Bristol
Introduction
Many recent studies have reported the positive effects of psychedelic and
dissociative drugs in the treatment of psychiatric disorders such as depression,
mood disorders, and addiction. Recent publications highlighting such therapeutic
promise (i.e. the recent study by Berman et al (2020)), have led to the approval
by the US Food and Drug Administration (FDA) of esketamine for the treatment of
depressed patients (2019). However, there is still a need for the development of
drugs with better therapeutic effects.
Synthetic psychoactive substances (SPS) have been designed to mimic naturally
occurring psychoactive substances and despite the increasing volume of research
into their effects, there is not definitive consensus as to whether they live up
to their therapeutic potential. On the other hand, there is clear acceptance
that their misuse can cause more harm than benefits. Therefore, the search for a
safer and more therapeutically effective drug remains challenging.
One candidate drug is 2-oxo-PCE (a derivative of Ketamine, a N-methyl-D-aspartate
receptor [NMDAR] antagonist). The work presented here was designed to
pharmacologically characterise the effects of 2-oxo-PCE on NMDAR- and
AMPAR-mediated fEPSPs and synaptic plasticity in area CA1.
Methods
fEPSP recordings in ex-vivo hippocampal slice preparations. The NMDAR mediated
component of fEPSPs were isolated by the perfusion of antagonist drugs to block
AMPA, GABAA and GABAB receptors. Under these conditions the DE50 of 2-oxo-PCME
on NMDAR-mediated fEPSPs was established.
Approach for statistical analysis
t-tests used to compare between two groups and ANOVA used to compare data across
groups with one factor (i.e. concentration).
Results and conclusions
We report here that bath application of 2-oxo-PCE: (a) rapidly and more potently
than Ketamine reduced NMDAR- mediated synaptic transmission in a concentration
dependent manner; (b) blocks the induction of Long-Term Potentiation (LTP); (c)
reduces the level of Long-Term Depression (LTD) and (d) does not affect AMPA
receptor mediated neurotransmission.
This dataset suggests that 2-oxo-PCE is fast-acting and more potent than
ketamine. However, more research is necessary to advance the understanding of
the effects of 2-oxo-PCE in the brain.

Poster number: M_PZ2_025 (TP)

Sub-Theme: Novel Treatments for Mental Health Disorders

## Preclinical characterisation of SPL028: a deuterated derivative of
N,N-dimethyltryptamine, developing a treatment for mental health
disorders
Authors: Meghan Good, Small Pharma; Carol Routledge - Technical team
Small Pharma; Sharon Cheetham - CNS in vivo pharmacology Sygnature Discovery;
Ian Davies - CNS in vivo pharmacology Sygnature Discovery
Introduction
SPL026 (N,N-dimethyltryptamine (DMT) fumarate) is a short-acting psychedelic that
is being developed for the treatment of major depressive disorder. Its rapid
metabolism via MAO-A correlates with an intense and transient psychedelic
experience. The profound subjective effects, due to its complex receptor
pharmacology, are thought to be associated with therapeutic efficacy. Prolonging
the pharmacokinetic (PK) profile to give a longer psychedelic experience may be
clinically beneficial for certain psychiatric disorders.
Isotopic substitution of protium (i.e. hydrogen, H) with deuterium (D) offers an
approach to prolong PK due to a higher bond strength of C-D, relative to C-H,
while retaining the same physical properties. D substitution of H at the
α-carbon of DMT is predicted to have a direct effect on metabolism, slowing
oxidative deamination by MAO-A, while retaining the same pharmacological profile
of DMT.
Methods
The PK and pharmacology of SPL028 (α,α-bisdeutero-N,N-dimethyltryptamine (D2DMT)
fumarate) [di-deuterated analogue of SPL026] was investigated through a series
of preclinical studies. The PK was assessed in vitro via metabolic stability and
in vivo following intravenous and intramuscular dosing in rats. The receptor
pharmacology of SPL028 was compared with SPL026 & vehicle through in vitro
receptor profiling and ex vivo receptor binding at on- target 5-HT2A &
5-HT1A receptors, and off-target D2 receptors. Finally, a drug discrimination
study using rats trained to recognise SPL026 vs vehicle, assessed if SPL028
generalises to SPL026 training cue over a time course & dose range.
Statistical analysis
Where sufficient data was collected, SPL028 & SPL026 were compared using
ANOVA or t-test. For ex vivo binding and drug discrimination, data were also
analysed by one-way ANOVA followed by appropriate post hoc tests comparing
SPL028 & SPL026 to vehicle.
Results
SPL028 exhibited prolonged PK and pharmacodynamic effects compared to SPL026. In
vitro & in vivo studies found the metabolic stability of SPL028 increased
relative to SPL026. The in vitro & ex vivo receptor profiles of SPL028 and
SPL026 were equivalent. These findings were consistent with drug discrimination
study: rats were not able to distinguish SPL028 from SPL026.
Conflict of interest: M.G., T.B., Z.J., C.R. and E.J. are all currently paid
employees of Small Pharma and have owned stock in the company, S.C., I.D. and
H.R., are all paid employees of contracted research organisations engaged by
Small Pharma.
 
Poster number: M_PZ2_026 (PP)

Sub-Theme: Novel Treatments for Mental Health Disorders

## Comparing and profiling the effects of novel treatments for alcohol use
disorder
Authors: Isabel Faulkner, The University of Bristol; Dr Daniel
Titheradge - Physiology, Pharmacology and Neuroscience The University of
Bristol; Professor Matt Jones - Physiology, Pharmacology and Neuroscience The
University of Bristol
Background and purpose: There is considerable evidence to suggest that early life
adversity is central to the development of alcohol addiction in humans and
rodents. There is therefore the potential to use a rodent model to study and
compare treatments. The current best treatment for alcohol use disorder (AUD) is
Naltrexone, however this is largely ineffective.
Drug-assisted psychotherapy in early phase 3 clinical trials has shown clear
benefit to patients with AUD and has highlighted the need to elucidate the
mechanism of the drugs used. In this study a comparison will be drawn between an
entactogen (MDMA), against a psychedelic (Psilocybin), Naltrexone, and a control
(saline). The aim is to define the neural basis of these drugs, and measure
quantitatively if MDMA reduces alcohol consumption.
Methods: Naltrexone, MDMA and Psilocybin will be subcutaneously given, and their
effects on alcohol drinking levels measured using an operant drug administration
system. These results, in combination with behavioural assays such as the
elevated plus maze and a three-chamber maze measuring sociability, will allow
insight into the behavioural phenotypes that align with alcohol preference.
The integration of chronic in vivo electrophysiological recordings will allow
neural network activity to be quantified in brain regions central to addiction
aetiology, and subsequently map the neural signatures of drug action.
Specifically, electrodes will be inserted into the dorsal Central Accumbens,
Basal Lateral Amygdala, posterior Dorsomedial Striatum, anterior Dorsolateral
Striatum, Nucleus Accumbens, and the Pre-Frontal Cortex where local field
potentials will be recorded.
Analysis: This experiment will use 36 Sprague-Dawley rats, half male half female,
and the data will be analysed using a two-way analysis of co-variance (ANOVA).
The mean alcohol intake between drug groups will be analysed to see if there is
a significant reduction in alcohol intake, and to see if this effect is specific
to animals who have experienced early life adversity (early maternal
separation).
Implications: The neurological basis of addiction is increasingly well-defined,
however, compounds need to be rationalised at a pre-clinical level to allow
further clinical trials to ensue.

Poster number: M_PZ2_027 (TP)

Sub-Theme: Novel Treatments for Mental Health Disorders

## The impact of the atypical antidepressant tianeptine on the behavioural
consequences of Early Life Adversity
Authors: Fiachra McEnaney, University of Dundee; Jeremy Lambert -
Cellular and Systems Medicine University of Dundee; Stephen Martin - Cellular
and Systems Medicine University of Dundee
Tianeptine is an atypical antidepressant and opioid receptor agonist. Chronic
administration reverses depression-like behaviours in adult mice that have
experienced chronic stress/corticosterone administration in a mu opioid receptor
(MOR)-dependent manner. Due to the link between adverse childhood experiences
and depression, we examined the impact of tianeptine on the depression-like
behaviours caused by early life adversity (ELA) in mice using the limited
bedding/nesting model. This model induces fragmented maternal care during a key
point in murine development.
From P2-P9, C57BL6/J ELA dams and pups were placed into cages containing reduced
bedding on a raised steel-mesh platform (ELA group, n=5 dams); control dams and
pups were housed in standard cages (control group n=4 dams).
Dam sortie frequency was monitored. From 10 weeks of age, blinded subcutaneous
injections of tianeptine (30mg/kg) or vehicle (saline) were administered twice
daily for 7 days to control and ELA male and female mice (control tianeptine
n=13; ELA tianeptine n=14; control vehicle n=11; ELA vehicle n=13). Additional
ELA groups received tianeptine (30mg/kg) co-administered with the MOR-selective
antagonist cyprodime (10mg/kg; n=13) or tianeptine only (n=12). Behavioural
testing was then conducted over 4 weeks comprising social interaction and
recognition memory tasks, the elevated plus maze anxiety test, and a water maze
spatial learning task. All data were analysed using unpaired t-tests or repeated
measures ANOVA.
ELA increased dam sortie frequency. Adult ELA mice that received vehicle showed
reduced social interaction and recognition memory. Tianeptine reversed these
social deficits to control levels, where there was no difference between
tianeptine and vehicle groups. This effect was blocked by cyprodime
co-administration. Anxiety and spatial learning were unaffected by ELA. In all
tests, no sex differences were observed.
Our results indicate that a 7-day period of chronic tianeptine administration can
reverse the anhedonic effects of ELA on social interaction and recognition
memory in mice in a MOR-dependent manner. These findings extend previous work by
demonstrating the effects of tianeptine in a model of developmental adversity
and confirms the role of MORs in this process.

Poster number: M_PZ2_028 (PP)

Sub-Theme: Novel Treatments for Mental Health Disorders

## Does proteinase-activated receptor 2 (par2) inhibition impair
pharmacologically-induced depression-like behaviour in mice?
Authors: Aparna Maruvada, University Of Strathclyde
Introduction: Depression is a major contributor to the global disease burden,
with current treatments having limited efficacy in many people with major
depressive disorder (MDD). Thus, it is clear that the treatment of depression is
an unmet clinical need and there is a profound need to improve our understanding
of the aetiology of depression so that new, better-targeted interventions can be
developed. We have recently shown that PAR2 deletion impairs LPS- induced
sickness behaviour and that direct PAR2 activation with AC264613 (AC), reduces
locomotor activity and induces anhedonia in mice, both of which are core
symptoms associated with MDD. Strikingly, AC-induced behavioural changes
correlate with altered cytokine levels, with these changes being analogous to
those reported in MDD. Hence, we hypothesise that PAR2 inhibition will impair
depression-like behaviour in mice. To test this hypothesis, we will characterise
a recently developed PAR2 antagonist, AZ8838, in vitro and in vivo to determine
whether PAR2 is a novel target for developing novel antidepressants.
Methods: AZ8838 will initially be characterised in rodent primary hippocampal
cultures and cultured human astrocytes using Ca2+ imaging techniques. To ensure
the validity of using AZ8838 in vivo to examine depression-like behaviour, we
will undertake pharmacokinetic profiling to determine the bioavailability of
AZ8838 in the brain over a 24h period. Behavioural tests, including locomotor
activity, sucrose preference, and the splash test, will be used to investigate
whether AZ8838 impairs depression-like behaviour in mice pharmacologically
induced by AC and LPS.
Power calculations & statistical analysis: Power calculations indicate that
for Ca2+ imaging and AZ8838 PK profiling, with a 90% power and assuming a 5%
significance level, the sample size should be at least 5 per treatment to
observe a 50% change. For AZ8838 to cause a 30% change in
pharmacologically-induced depression-like behaviour, the sample size should be
at least 9 for each group in the behavioural experiments. Statistical analysis
will be performed on treatment and control groups by performing one-way and
two-way ANOVAs with Tukey’s post-hoc tests where appropriate.

Poster number: M_PZ2_029 (TP)

Sub-Theme: Novel Treatments for Mental Health Disorders

## The importance of dose: is poor dose selection undermining the translational
validity of preclinical behavioural neuroscience?
Authors: Emma Robinson, University of Bristol; Dasha Anderson -
School of Physiology, Pharmacology & Neuroscience University of Bristol;
Justyna Hinchcliffe - School of Physiology, Pharmacology & Neuroscience
University of Bristol; Megan Jackson - School of Physiology, Pharmacology &
Neuroscience University of Bristol
Rationale: Animal behavioural research represents a critical component of
psychiatric drug development but there has been poor translation of findings
from animal studies into clinical benefits. Although many possible reasons may
underlie these failures, one issue we have identified is inappropriate dose
selection. Following studies in a novel translational model of affective biases
in depression, the affective bias test (ABT) we observed that our maximal
effective doses were surprisingly similar to clinical doses and much lower than
those reported in the literature for a conventional model of depression, the
forced swim test (FST). Methods: We undertook two systematic reviews to
investigate the range of doses and rationale for dose selection provided in
preclinical studies associated with depression research. Dose ranges were
compared against animal equivalent doses (AED) calculated based on allometric
scaling and receptor occupancy data where available. Results: 232 ketamine and
195 fluoxetine papers were included in the first systematic review. The median
dose, 10mg/kg, exceeding the AED by 1.6-3.2x for fluoxetine and 3.2-6.5x for
ketamine. Pharmacokinetic studies indicate that a 10mg/kg dose of ketamine or
fluoxetine elicits plasma concentrations greater than would be achieved with
clinical doses, while in pharmacodynamic studies 10mg/kg fluoxetine elicits
higher serotonin transporter occupancy than clinical doses and greater
engagement of 5-HT2C receptors. In the second review, 3 ABT and 150 FST studies
were included for 11 drugs. Although 60.5% of FST doses were effective in
eliciting a behavioural effect, median doses exceeded the relevant AED by up to
26x. ABT doses did not exceed AEDs for 9/11 drugs. 43.3% of FST papers did not
justify their dose choice and the majority only referenced previous publications
with significant findings as their rationale.
Conclusions: Our research found a pervasive use of inappropriate doses in
preclinical depression research. High doses will result in saturating levels of
receptor occupancy and engagement of off target receptors which are not relevant
to the clinic and may engage different underlying mechanisms.
 Conflict of interest: ESJR has received research grants from pharmaceutical
companies with research programmes in psychiatry. These companies have not been
involved in the work presented in this abstract.

Poster number: M_PZ2_030 (TP)

Sub-Theme: Novel Treatments for Mental Health Disorders

## Evaluation of the neurocognitive effects of ketamine in an animal model of
depressive disorder
Authors: Adejoke Elizabeth Memudu, Anatomy Department Edo State
University Uzairue Nigeria
Depression is a mental disorder of global concern and it is caused due to
psychological stress. Ketamine is an N- Methyl D-Aspartate (NMDA) receptor
antagonist and reviewed to have potential as a neurocognitive drug. This study
is aimed to assess the antidepressant potential of ketamine by evaluating
neuro-behavioral changes associated with neurocognitive function. A forced Swim
Test (FST) induced model of depression was adopted. 20 mg/kg (IV) ketamine and
20mg/kg oral fluoxetine were given. Thirty adult Wistar rats used were divided
into six groups (n=5): A= Control, B= FST, C= ketamine, D= fluoxetine, E= FST +
ketamine and F= FST + fluoxetine. The excised brain tissues were fixed in 4%
paraformaldehyde, and prefrontal-cerebellar cortices were processed and stained.
The treatment was for three days. Statistical significance was set at (p <
0.05) using the Tukey post-hoc test. This study showed that the ketamine-treated
FST group had a significant increase in brain weight, improved anhedonia,
reduced immobility time, and improved synaptophysin expression when compared to
the FST group at p<0.05. Also, neuropathology of the prefrontal-cerebellar
cortex of the FST group showed degeneration of the pyramidal and Purkinje cells,
and the marked proliferation of reactive astrocytes, chromatolysis, and necrotic
neurons which was averted by ketamine treatment. Hence, ketamine has a rapid
antidepressant potential that acts on synaptophysin and astrocytes by the fast
reversal of neuroinflammation and increased synaptogenesis that rapidly improves
neurocognitive function in the prefrontal-cerebellar cortex

Poster number: M_PZ2_031 (TP)

Sub-Theme: Novel Treatments for Mental Health Disorders

## Exploring the effects of ketamine on resting-state functional connectivity in
remitted depression
Authors: Matthew Burrows, King's College London
Ketamine has been shown to have rapid acting antidepressant effects that can be
detected within hours of a single intravenous infusion. Studies have shown that
ketamine infusions can lead to a normalisation of the functional connectivity
(FC) alterations observed in depression including in the ventral striatum,
amygdala, hippocampus, posterior cingulate cortex, and subgenual anterior
cingulate cortex (sgACC).
Two hours after being administered ketamine or placebo in a double-blind,
crossover design, resting state fMRI was acquired and blood samples collected
from 33 healthy participants with remitted depression. FC was investigated using
a seed-based connectivity (SBC), ROI-to-ROI, and an exploratory resting state
network (RSN) approach. Blood samples were analysed for ketamine’s
metabolites.
Non-parametric paired T-tests compared the ketamine and placebo conditions for
each set of the SBC and RSN connectivity maps. A SBC cluster was significant if
pFWE < 0.005 with Bonferonni correction. The exploratory RSN analysis had a
significant cluster if pFWE < 0.05. A paired T-test compared the FC between
two pairs of ROIs under ketamine and placebo with a Bonferroni corrected p <
0.025 considered significant. Correlation analyses assessed linear relationships
between any significant SBC and RSN findings and metabolite levels.
The ROI-to-ROI analysis revealed significantly decreased correlation in FC
between the sgACC and amygdala when comparing ketamine with placebo (p =
0.0003). The ventral-striatum seed had increased FC following ketamine when
compared to placebo in both subcortical and cortical regions however these did
survive Bonferroni correction.
Within the executive control RSN two clusters in the left hippocampus and right
amygdala had significantly decreased FC following ketamine when compared to
placebo (p < 0.05). There were no significant correlations between the
observed FC changes and metabolite levels. These changes, which occurred in a
remitted depressed cohort and were not the secondary effects of symptom
improvements, support a model in which ketamine alters brain connectivity in
areas and networks important for reward processing and emotional regulation that
are implicated in depression.

Poster number: M_PZ2_032 (TP)

Sub-Theme: Dopamine, Nicotinic Receptors, and Neuromodulation:
Exploring Therapeutic Strategies for Schizophrenia and Parkinson's Disease

## Dopamine D3 receptor modulation of stimulated dopamine release in nucleus
accumbens of rat brain slices in vitro
Authors: Mokolapo TENIBIAJE, University of Leicester; Andrew M. J
Young - School of Psychology and Vision Science University of Leicester
Dysregulation of dopamine signalling in the mesolimbic pathway, projecting from
ventral tegmental area to nucleus accumbens (NAc) may be critical in
schizophrenia, a debilitating mental illness affecting around 0.5% of the
population. Drugs used to treat schizophrenia target dopamine receptors,
particularly D2. However, recent interest has been directed at other receptors
belonging to the D2-like dopamine receptor subfamily, including D3 receptors
(D3R). Importantly D3R have relatively high density in limbic brain areas,
including NAc, and may play a pivotal role in modulation of dopamine release.
Changes in D3R density has been reported in schizophrenia, and drugs affecting
D3 signalling may provide potential novel antipsychotic drugs. Despite this
little is known about the function of D3R, particularly in modulating dopamine
release. Therefore, this research aimed to characterise the effects of D3R
agonists on stimulated dopamine release in NAc of brain slices taken from normal
rats and rats pretreated with phencyclidine, modelling schizophrenia.
Fast-scan cyclic voltammetry was used to measure electrically-stimulated dopamine
release from NAc in male and female rat brain slices (400µM). Repeated trains of
pulses (10 x 1ms pulses; 800µA at 3min intervals) were delivered at high (60Hz)
or low frequency (10Hz), resembling phasic or tonic firing in neurones,
respectively. The effect of PD128907 (D3R agonist: 0.1, 1, 10μM) was tested by
applying the drug in the superfusate during four consecutive stimulations
(12min).
The release of dopamine provoked by both high and low frequency stimulation
showed concentration-dependent attenuation by PD128907. At high frequency
stimulation all three concentrations caused significant decreases, whereas at
low frequency the changes were more variable, and were non-significant at the
low concentration.
Therefore local modulation of dopamine release by D3R in NAc. Since the
experiments used brain slices, the effects are mediated through local circuits,
probably via autoreceptors on dopamine terminals, although effects via
intermediaries cannot be ruled out. A better understanding of D3R modulation of
local dopamine release may provide a stronger theoretical basis for development
of potential novel treatment for schizophrenia.

Poster number: M_PZ2_033 (TP)

Sub-Theme: Dopamine, Nicotinic Receptors, and Neuromodulation:
Exploring Therapeutic Strategies for Schizophrenia and Parkinson's Disease

## Effect of alpha-4 beta-2 nicotinic acetylcholine receptors on L-DOPA-induced
dyskinesia in 6OHDA rat model of Parkinson’s Disease
Authors: Kiana Hassankhani, University of Hertfordshire; Alice
Kingslake - Department of Clinical, Pharmaceutical and Biological Sciences
University of Hertfordshire; Dr Yasaman Malekizadeh - Department of Clinical,
Pharmaceutical and Biological Sciences University of Hertfordshire; Dr Lucy
Annett - Department of Psychology, Sport and Geography University of
Hertfordshire; Dr Mohamed Shoaib - Institute of Neuroscience Newcastle
University; Dr Mahmoud Iravani - Department of Clinical, Pharmaceutical and
Biological Sciences University of Hertfordshire
Introduction: Accumulating evidence suggests that CNS α4β2 nicotinic
acetylcholine receptors (nAChRs) are important targets for the development of
therapeutic approaches for Parkinson’s disease (PD). L-DOPA is the gold standard
treatment for PD but within a few years, dyskinesia presenting as abnormal
involuntary movements (AIMs) becomes a debilitating side effect of treatment.
Extensive pre-clinical work using a wide variety of rodent and primate models
shows that nicotine not only protects against damage to nigrostriatal and other
neuronal cells, but is also antidyskinetic. This suggests that nicotine or
sub-unit selective nAChR agonists may be disease modifying and antidyskinetic.
Studies in several parkinsonian animal models including hemi-parkinsonian rats
show that nicotine reduces L-DOPA-induced AIMs but the role of α4β2 nAChRs has
not been previously investigated in dyskinesia. The aim of this study therefore,
is to investigate whether α4β2 nAChRs possess therapeutic antidyskinetic
potential .
Method: This study evaluated the role of A85380, an α4β2 agonist and
dihydro-β-erythroidine hydrobromide (DHβE), an α4β2 competitive antagonist in a
hemi-parkinsonian rat model. Rats were unilaterally lesioned with 8µg
6-hydroxydopamine then primed with 8mg/kg L-DOPA plus 15 mg/kg benserazide given
orally once daily for 33 days until stable AIMs developed. The effect of A85380
at doses 0.001- 0.01mg/kg and DHβE at doses 1-10mg/kg were examined on AIMs
induced by L-DOPA/benserazide treatment by blinded observers in a latin-square
design.
Approaches for statistical analysis: The AIMs scores for each experiment were
analysed using a two-way ANOVA (time x concentration) and p≤ 0.05 was considered
statistically significant.
Results and conclusion: Treatment with 0.003 and 0.01mg/kg A85380 significantly
reduces total ALO (axial, limb and orolingual) AIMs (n=12; *p≤ 0.05) but has no
significant effect on locomotive AIMs. In addition, treatment with DHβE did not
significantly affect L-DOPA induced ALO AIMs or locomotive AIMs. Therefore, the
α4β2 agonist, A85380 was extremely potent in reducing AIMs in the rat
hemiparkinsonian model suggesting that α4β2 nAChR drugs may be useful in
reduction of established dyskinesia in man.

Poster number: M_PZ2_034 (TP)

Sub-Theme: Dopamine, Nicotinic Receptors, and Neuromodulation:
Exploring Therapeutic Strategies for Schizophrenia and Parkinson's Disease

## Alpha7 nicotinic receptor- mediated reduction of L-DOPA-induced dyskinesia in
6OHDA rat model of Parkinson’s Disease
Authors: Yasaman Malekizadeh, University of Hertfordshire; Kiana
Hassankhani - Life and Medical Sciences University of Hertfordshire; Alice
Kingslake - Life and Medical Sciences University of Hertfordshire; Lucy Annett -
Life and Medical Sciences University of Hertfordshire; Mohammed Shoaib -
Dementia Research Alzheimer's Research UK; Mahmoud Iravani - Life and Medical
Sciences University of Hertfordshire
Introduction: In Parkinson’s Disease (PD) induction of involuntary movements
(AIMs) or dyskinesia, after long-term L-DOPA therapy is a major problem.
Evidence shows that nicotine can protect against nigrostriatal damage and reduce
L-DOPA-induced dyskinesia, and studies in transgenic mice suggest that deletion
of α7 nAChRs leads to increased L-DOPA-induced AIMs in animals with
nigrostriatal lesion compared to lesioned wild-type littermates.
Similarly, nicotinic agonists selective for the α7 nAChRs have been shown to
reduce dyskinesia. The discovery of positive allosteric modulators (PAMs) such
as PNU-120596 selective for nAChRs has extended the repertoire of therapeutic
strategies for targeting various subtypes of nAChRs. PNU-120596 increases both
agonist efficacy and open time of the α7 nAChRs channel, resulting in extended
nicotinic stimulation. The aim of this study was to assess the role of α7 nAChRs
selective PAMs in dyskinesia reduction using rat AIMS models, and to make direct
comparison to nicotine.
Methods: Rats unilaterally lesioned with 8 µg 6-hydroxydopamine were primed with
oral L-DOPA (8 mg/kg) plus benserazide (15 mg/kg) once daily for 3 weeks until
AIMs were fully developed.
Approach for statistical analysis: AIMs experiments were analysed using a
repeated measure two-way ANOVA followed by Dunnett’s post-hoc tests. *p≤ 0.05
was considered statistically significant, data are presented as mean ± SEM.
Results and conclusions: Treatment with 0.01 or 0.03mg/kg nicotine reduced AIMS
by 33%, whereas 0.3mg/kg nicotine (n=16; *p≤ 0.05) reduced AIMS by 34% (n=16;
*p≤ 0.05). Treatment with 1mg/kg or 3mg/kg PNU-120596 reduced AIMS by 34% and
44% (n=16; *p≤ 0.05); respectively. Combined treatment with 0.01 or 0.03mg/kg
nicotine and 1mg/kg PNU-120596 enhanced the anti-dyskinetic effects by 57%
(n=12; *p≤ 0.05) compared to each drug alone, resulting in an additive effect.
These findings provide an essential role for α7 nAChRs in the anti-dyskinetic
effect of nicotine. Targeting α7 nAChRs which has a rapid desensitization
kinetic using PAMs, presents advantages such as reduced toxicity, improved
pharmacokinetics, and better selectivity for the receptor target.

Poster number: M_PZ2_035 (TP)

Sub-Theme: Exploring Thought Patterns and Experiences in Psychiatric
and Neurodevelopmental Conditions

## Voice Hearing in Borderline Personality Disorder: From Ongoing Thoughts to
Connectivity Gradients
Authors: William Strawson, University of Sussex; Bronte Mckeown -
Neuroscience Queens University; Lisa Quadt - BSMS University of Sussex; Hugo
Critchley - BSMS University of Sussex; Jonathan Smallwood - Neuroscience Queens
University; Sarah Garfinkel - ICN Queens University
Auditory verbal hallucinations (AVH) in patients with borderline personality
disorder (BPD) are a common yet misunderstood phenomenon. Their phenomenology
and neural underpinnings are highly heterogeneous and these features are often
studied in an isolated manner, with little consideration given to co-occurring
mental states. To gain a more integrated understanding of hallucinatory
experiences, this study assessed their relationship to experiential states
identified using experience sampling. During a symptom-capture fMRI paradigm and
using a button box, sixteen patients with a clinical diagnoses of BPD reported
instances of AVH. After each three runs, they rated a series of statements
describing their ongoing thoughts (e.g., 'My thoughts were about other people')
and features of their hallucinations (e.g., 'The voices were distressing').
Dimension reduction (principal components analysis) was conducted on these data
separately to reveal multivariate patterns of experience related to thoughts and
AVH. First, using a series of linear mixed models, we assessed the relationship
between these patterns of subjective experience. We then assessed how patterns
of thought related to AVH-evoked BOLD activity, with respect to several cortical
connectivity gradients (Margulies et al, 2016). At the subjective level,
thoughts involving negative memories were linked to more distressing, loud and
prevalent hallucinations [b = 2.07, 95% CI (0.82, 3.31), t(40.3) = 3.36, P <
0.002], while more spontaneous and intrusive thoughts were associated with
hallucinations that were perceived as coming from more 'outside' the head than
'inside' [b = -2.83, 95% CI (-4.4, -1.26), t(37.2) = -3.7, P < 0.001]. At the
neural level, negative memories were associated with more transmodal (e.g.
default mode network) activation during AVH [b = -0.05, 95% CI (-0.09, -0.02),
t(24.0) = -3.14, P = 0.004], while temporally-distant thoughts about other
people were associated with more motor activation during AVH [b = -0.06, 95% CI
(-0.11, -0.02), t(22.7) = -2.62, P = 0.015]. This study demonstrates that
features of ongoing experience interact with subjective and neural features of
hallucinations, establishing a more integrated approach to studying how ongoing
mental states contribute to hallucinations.

Poster number: M_PZ2_036 (TP)

Sub-Theme: Exploring Thought Patterns and Experiences in Psychiatric
and Neurodevelopmental Conditions

## A Picture or a Thousand Words? Characterizing the Thoughts of Autistic
Adults
Authors: William Strawson, University of Sussex; Bronte Mckeown -
Neuroscience Queens University; Lisa Quadt - BSMS University of Sussex; Hugo
Critchley - BSMS University of Sussex; Jonathan Smallwood - Neuroscience Queens
University; Sarah Garfinkel - Institute of Cognitive Neuroscience UCL
Autistic people may be distinguishable from non-autistic individuals in the form
and content of their thoughts. Such differences potentially underlie both
psychological vulnerability and strengths including creative originality
motivating the need for better understanding of autistic thought patterns. In a
non-clinical population of undergraduates, self-reported autistic
characteristics were recently linked to the tendency to think more in words than
images during a working memory task (Turnbull et al., 2020). However, it is
unclear if people with a clinical diagnosis of autism express this verbal
dominance or manifest other differences in thought. The current study therefore
applied the same methods (multi-dimensional experience sampling of thoughts
during 0- and 1-back tasks) to examine differences in ongoing thoughts between
adults with and without a clinical diagnosis of autistic spectrum condition.
Principle components analysis was conducted on the experience sampling data to
reveal 'patterns' of thought. Using linear mixed models (where individuals'
scores on these thought patterns were dependent variables), autistic
individuals’ thought was characterised by less variability in the modality of
thought, with a tendency to think in the form of words during both conditions [b
= -0.07, 95% CI (-0.12, -0.03), t(1125) = -3.47, p = 0.001]. In contrast, the
non-clinical comparison group demonstrated a preference for verbal thinking only
during the harder 1-back task. In addition, autistic individuals show a
decoupling between task performance and off-task social episodic thinking since,
unlike non-autistic individuals, an increase in on-task thought was not
associated with improvements in performance [b = -0.06, 95% CI (-0.10, -0.02),
t(345.538) = -2.74, p = 0.006], a finding that may be related to differences in
social processing during the off-task state. Overall, our results provide an
important clinical replication and extension of previous work, highlighting that
autistic individuals show a preference for consistently thinking in words
despite changing task demands.

Poster number: T_PZ1_023 (TP)

Sub-Theme: Utilizing Alternative Model Organisms for Understanding
Neuropsychiatric Disorders and Decoding Behavior

## Determining and understanding the behavioural and physiological effects of
drugs of abuse using zebrafish larvae
Authors: Courtney Hillman, University of Surrey; James Kearn -
Toxicology, Trauma and Medicine The Defence Science and Technology Laboratory;
Matthew O. Parker - Faculty of Health and Medical Sciences University of
Surrey
In 2020 over 350 million people abused drugs globally with approximately 50% of
the population over 12 having used illicit drugs at least once. Evidently,
substance abuse is a global health concern costing England approximately £19.3
billion and the United States of America (USA) $78.5 billion annually. Moreover,
one in five deaths between the ages of 24 to 35 in the USA are attributed to
opioid misuse with nearly 80% involving poly-drug use. This highlights the
dangers substance abuse has on public health. Here, we examined the effects
induced by substances of abuse by performing light/dark assays in 4 days post
fertilisation zebrafish (Danio rerio) larvae. We exposed fish to abuse
substances and recorded their locomotion for three hours which included
30-minutes of 5-minute alternating light changes followed by a 30-minute break
in the light, repeated three times. The data was analysed by averaging fish
movement in millimetres (mm) for light and dark phases and performing a two-way
ANOVA on the results. The Dunnett’s post-hoc comparison test and unpaired
student’s t-test were used where appropriate. Data was excluded from analysis if
the fish moved 50 mm or more than the average for that time bin. Control fish
(DMSO only) produced predicted hypolocomotion in light conditions and
hyperlocomotion in dark conditions. Low concentration (0.5–5 mM) diazepam
(Valium) exposure induced dark phase hyperlocomotion with subsequent
dose-dependent hypolocomotion. These findings were replicated with other
GABAA-interacting sedatives including midazolam, flunitrazepam (Rohypnol) and
sodium thiopental. GHB exposure had no locomotor changes, which corresponds with
the lack of GHB receptor characterisation in the fish to date. Ketamine and
tiletamine reversed the light/dark response with light phase hyperlocomotion and
hypolocomotion in the dark (5-50 mM). Opioid exposure induced dose-dependent
hypolocomotion with our evidence indicating comparable potencies to humans. Our
findings demonstrate the suitability of the light/dark assay for assessing drugs
of abuse and therefore we will perform additional light/dark assays for
understanding the effects of poly-substances and novel synthetic drugs.

Poster number: T_PZ1_024 (TP)

Sub-Theme: APOE4 and Alzheimer's Disease for Understanding
Neuropsychiatric Disorders and Decoding Behavior

## Rapid screening for social and sleep phenotypes in novel schizophrenia model
zebrafish
Authors: Thomas Ryan, UCL
Schizophrenia is a complex mental health problem, which affects about one in
every 100 people. There are a wide range of symptoms including changes in
thinking, emotions and actions. Social dysfunction is a core element in the
diagnosis and experience of schizophrenia and is often the first sign of the
illness. Similarly, disturbances to sleep patterns have are also a key hallmark
of schizophrenia and is thought to be predictive and perhaps causative of future
disease severity.
While we know schizophrenia has a large genetic component (c.80% heritability by
some estimates), the mutations identified thus far generally effect entire
regions of the genome and changes expression of many genes, making the mechanism
of schizophrenia pathology and behavioural changes extremely difficult to study.
Recently, a large collaboration of research teams, including the UCL Molecular
Psychiatry Laboratory, identified specific changes in multiple, individual genes
that greatly increase the risk of developing schizophrenia. Although these
changes are rare in the population, understanding the mechanism of action of
these genes will be fundamental in understanding the neural basis of
schizophrenia.
Here we use the zebrafish model organism and developed an efficient pipeline
rapidly generating hundreds of Crispr KO animals, which are then assessed
through behavioural assays to analyse larval sleep behaviour and juvenile social
behaviour. Several candidate genes show a significant (corrected p<0.05,
MWU), marked and heterogenous reduction in social drive, increase in
anxiety-type behaviours and disturbances to sleep patterns; hallmarks of
schizophrenia and other mental health disorders. In the future we aim to use
imaging and neural circuit mapping and breaking to understand the neural basis
for these changes in behaviour and establish stable, mutant, schizophrenia model
fish lines for further study by ourselves and the wider community, providing
critical insight to the mechanisms and potential therapeutic targets for mental
health disorders.

Poster number: T_PZ2_025 (TP)

Sub-Theme: Utilizing Alternative Model Organisms for Understanding
Neuropsychiatric Disorders and Decoding Behavior

## Social Interaction and Pain Tolerance in Zebrafish
Authors: Alizee Kastler, University College London; Dr. Elena
Dreosti - Cell and Developmental Biology University College London
We cope better when we are not alone. Supportive social environments are known to
have an analgesic effect, significantly reducing the perception of pain.
Functional and anatomical studies in humans have indicated that the nociceptive
and social circuits share overlapping areas of activity in the brain. However,
the underlying circuitry as well as its molecular mechanisms are poorly
understood.
To better understand how pain and social circuits modulate one another, I study
Juvenile Zebrafish. Zebrafish are highly social, show stereotyped responses to
noxious stimuli, and allow whole brain imaging with single cell resolution.
I have developed a new behavioural assay where fish are exposed to both social
and noxious heat stimuli simultaneously. This assay has provided evidence that
the mere sight of social cues, other conspecific zebrafish, is enough to drive
zebrafish into swimming in higher water temperatures, which they would normally
avoid. This is characterized by a significant shift of their relative position
in the gradient, one-sample t-Test (n=73, p-value<0.01). These data
demonstrate that social context can modulate thermal noxious tolerance in
zebrafish through a descending pain modulatory pathway, similar to humans. To
gain insights into the mechanisms of pain modulation in zebrafish I have
generated whole-brain activity maps to identify anatomical correlates as well as
specific neuronal populations involved in the pathway.
These data will provide invaluable insights on the mechanisms of pain modulation,
and potentially identify new treatments for people suffering from chronic
pain.

Poster number: T_PZ2_026 (PP)

Sub-Theme: Utilizing Alternative Model Organisms for Understanding
Neuropsychiatric Disorders and Decoding Behavior

## Developing the rapidly aging African turquoise Killifish (Nothobranchius
furzeri) as a model for neurodegenerative disorders
Authors: Oliver Rowley, University of Bath; Dr Vasanta Subramanian -
Department of Life Sciences University of Bath Introduction
The short-lived (~20 weeks) African turquoise Killifish (Nothobranchius furzeri)
is an emerging vertebrate model for studying aging and age-related disorders.
Commonly used vertebrate animal models typically have relatively long lifespans
of up to 3.5 years while invertebrate models with short lifespans are not
optimum as they do not share the same physiology.
Aging Killifish exhibit cognitive decline, cellular senescence,
neurodegeneration, decline in proteostasis, telomere attrition and mitochondrial
dysfunction. These hallmarks of aging together with the short lifespan, the
availability of a sequenced and annotated genome and transgenic technologies
make the Killifish an attractive model for aging and age-related diseases.
However, not much is known about the anatomy of the Killifish brain or how it is
affected during aging.
Methods
We propose to map the Killifish brain using histochemical and immunohistochemical
approaches. Brains from Killifish at various timepoints, from hatching through
to juvenile, matured adult and aged fish (5,8,12 and 20 weeks) will be fixed,
embedded in wax and sectioned or processed for cryo-sectioning and stained. This
will allow for the determination of the histology of the brain, as well as
allowing for the elucidation of the changes during aging.
Alongside standard histological staining such as haematoxylin and eosin, we will
perform silver and Luxol fast blue staining to characterise the changes in the
organisation of nerve fibres. Thioflavin S and Congo red staining will also be
performed to monitor the incidence of amyloid plaques in the Killifish brain. In
addition, immunohistochemistry will be carried out to stain for Aβ40, Aβ42 and
for phosphorylated tau which are markers for Alzheimer’s disease.
Approach for Statistical Analysis
Each of the stainings will be performed on sections from brains obtained from
three separate fish for each timepoint. Staining will be carried out and data
will be acquired from multiple adjacent sections. We will perform unpaired
T-tests and ANOVA if data is normally distributed or non-parametric tests
including Mann-Whitney test if non-normally distributed.

Poster number: T_PZ2_027 (TP)

Sub-Theme: Utilizing Alternative Model Organisms for Understanding
Neuropsychiatric Disorders and Decoding Behavior

## A deep learning toolbox for decoding behaviour in larval zebrafish
Authors: Pierce Mullen, University of St Andrews; Beatrice Bowlby -
School of Psychology and Neuroscience University of St Andrews; Holly Armstrong
- School of Psychology and Neuroscience University of St Andrews; Maarten Zwart
- School of Psychology and Neuroscience University of St Andrews
Introduction: The actions and behaviour of animals provide a window into how
their minds work. Efficiently decoding animal behaviour from video recordings is
an important problem in neuroscience, since it allows us to correlate neural
activity with specific movements and therefore understand how the brain produces
behaviour. The manual study and classification of thousands of frames of filmed
animal behaviour is time intensive. Recent advances in deep learning have made
identifying an animal’s position and pose in video recordings a more efficient
process, but recognising animal movement or sequences of poses as meaningful
behaviour is a fundamental tool missing from the toolkits of neuroscientists.
Here, we trained and applied a neural network tool (Spatial Temporal Graph
Convolutional Networks, ST-GCNs) to decode a range of zebrafish behaviours from
sequences of poses.
Methods: Freely swimming zebrafish larvae (5-7 dpf) were video recorded at 330
frames per second. Zebrafish larvae coordinates were first extracted using a
DeepLabCut ResNet model trained to recognise key landmarks along the zebrafish
head, trunk and tail. Sequences of poses were manually behaviourally coded and
used to train an ST- GCN consisting of three layers. We tested the decoder to
classify three simple swim types (forward, left and right) from unseen
behavioural data as well as larger datasets containing a more diverse range of
behaviours. Statistical approach: To avoid bias, we ensured training, testing
and validation datasets were well balanced and data was completely unseen in the
test set. ANOVA was used to evaluate significance (p <0.05) in comparison of
heading angles between different behaviours. Results and conclusions: The
network was able to correctly classify behaviours with high accuracy (~90 %).
Training the model on a larger zebrafish behaviour dataset containing 36
different behaviours demonstrated that ST-GCNs can be applied to rapidly decode
a wide range of zebrafish behaviours (75% accuracy for ~200,000 swim bouts),
greatly improving the efficiency of behavioural analysis.
 
Poster number: T_PZ2_028 (TP)

Sub-Theme: Neurodegenerative and Neuropsychiatric Disorders:
Unraveling Genetic Factors and Molecular Pathways

## Exploring Neuromuscular Function in Drosophila Models of C9ALS/FTD
Authors: Ella Dunn, Royal Holloway, University of London
Introduction: Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) and frontotemporal dementia
(FTD) are adult-onset, neurodegenerative diseases that exhibit significant
pathological and genetic similarities. One common genetic cause of both ALS and
FTD is an expanded GGGGCC (G4C2) hexanucleotide repeat in C9orf72; the disease
resulting from this is referred to as C9ALS/FTD. Accumulating evidence suggests
that toxic dipeptide repeats (DPRs), produced via the repeat-associated non-ATG
(RAN) translation of repeat-expanded sense and antisense RNAs, drive C9ALS/FTD
pathogenicity. Models of C9ALS/FTD (C9 models) have previously been well
described in Drosophila, with larvae exhibiting reduced locomotion and body
contractions, and reduced synaptic activity and neurotransmission at the
neuromuscular junction (NMJ). This study aims to identify genetic and
pharmacological modifiers of neuromuscular function in Drosophila models of
C9ALS/FTD, in the hope of revealing a novel therapeutic target.
Methods: Pharmacological screens were conducted by adding various compounds to
standard fly food and feeding them to C9 larvae, whilst genetic screening
involved deleting a random portion of the C9 larval genome. In all cases, the
behavioural phenotype in C9 larvae overexpressing G4C2 or poly-DPR constructs in
the nervous system was characterised by measuring crawling speed and body
contraction frequency.
Statistical analyses approach: Statistical analyses were performed using GraphPad
Prism 9 software. One way ANOVA tests were used for comparisons between two or
more groups, followed by a Tukey-Kramer post-hoc test.
Results and conclusions: The genetic screen identified 33 genes that, when
deleted, rescue impaired larval performance, suggesting they are negative
regulators of the C9-associated behavioural phenotype. Pharmacological screening
revealed two compounds, nonanoic acid (NA) and 4-methyloctanoic acid (4-MOA),
that are able to improve the behavioural phenotype in C9 larvae. Future work
aims to elucidate the mode of action of the compounds and negative regulators
that were identified. Our results are the first step in identifying novel
therapeutic targets and potential treatments for C9ALS/FTD in humans.

Poster number: T_PZ2_029 (TP)

Sub-Theme: Neurodegenerative and Neuropsychiatric Disorders:
Unraveling Genetic Factors and Molecular Pathways

## Mutant forms of FUS are mislocated in the cytoplasm in the mouse primary
motor cortex and hippocampus in vivo
Authors: Abinayah John, University of Cambridge; Tanja Fuchsberger -
Department of Physiology, Development and Neuroscience University of Cambridge;
Asma Soltani - Department of Physiology, Development and Neuroscience University
of Cambridge; Ole Paulsen - Department of Physiology, Development and
Neuroscience University of Cambridge
Introduction: Mutations in the Fused-in-sarcoma (FUS) FUS gene have been found to
cause an inheritable form of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) or motor neuron
disease, associated with cytoplasmic aggregation. FUS has also emerged as a
significant disease protein in a subgroup of frontotemporal dementia (FTD).
However, the role of FUS in the pathophysiology of ALS and FTD is not fully
known, and most of the work has been done in vitro. This project aims to explore
further the role of FUS in vivo, looking at the subcellular location of wildtype
and mutated forms of FUS in neurons in the motor cortex and the CA1 area of the
hippocampus.
Methods: Stereotaxic surgery was performed on 8-12 week-old mice for viral
injection of wildtype FUS-GFP and two mutant forms of FUS P525L-GFP and
FUS-16R-GFP reported in ALS patients. Three weeks after viral injection, mice
were transcardially perfused with PBS followed by 4% paraformaldehyde (PFA).
Coronal slices were prepared for immunohistochemical analysis. Preparations were
co-stained with DAPI and imaged with a confocal microscope. We then determined
whether FUS was localised to the nucleus or the cytoplasm of neurons. The next
steps will involve electrophysiological characterisation of neurons expressing
mutated FUS. Approach to statistical analysis: FIJI imaging software will be
used to quantify FUS in the motor cortex and CA1 in the hippocampus. The effects
will be analysed using an ANOVA with Bonferroni’s multiple comparisons
correction (p value<0.05 considered statistically significant).
Results and conclusions: Wildtype FUS was localised in the nucleus of neurons in
both hippocampus and the motor cortex (figure 1), as previously reported in the
literature. The FUS mutants were found to be mislocated in the cytoplasm in
neurons in the hippocampus and the motor cortex, further supporting the role of
mutant FUS aggregation in ALS pathophysiology.
 
Poster number: T_PZ2_030 (TP)

Sub-Theme: Neurodegenerative and Neuropsychiatric Disorders:
Unraveling Genetic Factors and Molecular Pathways

## Brainwide Alterations in levels of FOXP2 in an Idiopathic Model of
ASD
Authors: Gabriel Gibson, University of Central Lancashire; Martin
Clark - School of Psychology University of Central Lancashire
The gene encoding the fork-head box p2 (FOXP2) transcription factor is commonly
understood to be a potential Autism Spectrum Disorder (ASD) candidate gene,
reportedly expressed in multiple cortical and subcortical areas such as the
globus pallidus external (GPe) and the basolateral amygdala (BLA). Morphological
and functional alterations within these regions may be associated with the
repetitive motor behaviours and social communication deficits observed in ASD,
respectively. Though the potential role of altered FOXP2 expression in relation
to alterations in these regions have not yet been fully elucidated. The aim of
the current study is to explore population number of FOXP2 expressing neurons
and investigate the relative concentration of FOXP2 within these neurons in the
GPe and BLA of an idiopathic model of ASD (BTBR T+tf/j). To explore this, tissue
from adult C57BL/6J mice (n=4) and BTBR T+tf/j mice (n=4) was processed using
immunohistochemical techniques and fluorescent microscopy. The number of FOXP2
expressing neurons, and their relative levels of expression, were compared
between animal model and brain region. Significant main effects were seen in
relative expression levels of FOXP2 between brain regions and animal models
(F(1,14)=15.30, p=.002, Eta2=.552(52.2%);F(1,14)=5.62, p=.003,
Eta2=.287(28.7%)). BTBR animals displayed significantly lower levels of FOXP2
expression in all regions, compared to controls. Whereas no significant
differences in the number of FOXP2 expressing neurons were noted between animal
models in both regions. This may suggest that alterations in FOXP2 observed in
ASD may relate to altered neuronal functioning on a molecular level, rather than
a circuit level with alterations localised to specific brain regions/components
of circuits, with downstream effects potentially contributing to the observed
behavioural phenotype of ASD.

Poster number: T_PZ2_032 (TP)

Sub-Theme: Cognitive Enhancement and Dysfunction: Investigating
Mechanisms and Therapeutic Interventions in Neurodegenerative Diseases and
Schizophrenia

## Adiponectin mimetic molecule shows cognitive enhancing effects in rat
hippocampal neurons
Authors: Alexandra Soca, School of Medicine, University of Dundee;
Prof. Jenni Harvey - Cellular and Systems Medicine School of Medicine,
University of Dundee
Introduction
Alzheimer’s disease (AD) is a neurodegenerative disease affecting 4% of the over
65 population in the UK as of 2020, with no disease-modifying treatment
currently available. Adiponectin is the most abundant adipokine secreted by the
white adipose tissue and is postulated to be part of the molecular link between
obesity and disorders such as AD. Adiponectin plays role in metabolism and
obesity, however little is known about its involvement in brain health and AD.
The present study aims to explore whether adiponectin has cognitive enhancing
effects and investigate the underlying cellular mechanisms in hippocampal
neurons. To this end, we used AdipoRon, an adiponectin receptor agonist which
shows central activity following peripheral administration.
Methods
Hippocampi were dissected from P1-P4 Sprague Dawley rat pups and used to generate
neonate primary hippocampal cultures. During the second week of in vitro
culture, neurons were exposed for 15 min to the compounds indicated in each
experiment and then immunocytochemistry was performed. Images were acquired
using SOM Leica SP5 confocal imaging system, and surface immunolabelling of
proteins of interest in hippocampal dendrites was quantified using Zeiss ZEN 3.4
Lite.
Approach for statistical analysis
All data are expressed as means ± SEM, and statistical analyses were performed
using either t-test for pair-wise tests, or ANOVA on ranks for comparisons
between multiple groups. * p ≤ 0.05, **p ≤ 0.01, ***p ≤ 0.001, with n
representing the number of analysed dendrites.
Results and Conclusions
AdipoRon increased the surface expression of the AMPA receptor subunit GluA1 in a
time-dependent (n=48; p=0.001) and dose-dependent manner (n=60; p=0.002). This
effect took place via the activation of AdipoR receptors (n=48; p<0.001),
with the requirement of NMDA receptor activation (n=48; p<0.001). PI3K and
AMPK-dependent pathways underlie the AdipoRon effects (n=48; p<0.001), with a
possible involvement of GSK-3β (n=48; p<0.001).
Moreover, AdipoRon promoted the trafficking of GluA1 (n=60; p<0.001) and
phosphorylated AMPK (n=48; p<0.001) into synapses. Therefore, AdipoRon shows
cognitive enhancing effects in rat hippocampal neurons, effects that are
mediated by PI3K and AMPK-dependent pathways.

Poster number: T_PZ2_033 (TP)

Sub-Theme: Cognitive Enhancement and Dysfunction: Investigating
Mechanisms and Therapeutic Interventions in Neurodegenerative Diseases and
Schizophrenia

## The effect of acute exercise on Novel Object Recognition and hippocampal BDNF
in the scPCP mouse model for schizophrenia
Authors: Katie Landreth, University of Manchester
1. Introduction
Treatments for Cognitive Impairments Associated with Schizophrenia (CIAS) are an
unmet clinical need, with the severity of these symptoms remaining a strong
predictor of functionality for patients. Sub-chronic phencyclidine (scPCP)
treatment models CIAS in mice, causing impairments in behavioural tests
including Novel Object Recognition (NOR). Here, we tested whether rescue of NOR
deficits by acute exercise in scPCP mice correlates with elevated brain-derived
neurotrophic factor (BDNF).
2. Methods
48 adult female C57BL/6J mice were divided into scPCP and Vehicle groups. Each of
these cohorts was divided further into exercise or sedentary subgroups. Mice
were dosed daily for 10 days with s.c. 10mg/kg PCP or 0.9% saline, followed by a
seven-day washout. Exercised mice were habituated with home cage running wheels
for 96 hours prior to testing. During testing, mice were given individual wheel
access for 1 hour and then subjected immediately to an NOR task followed by
tissue collection. Sedentary mice underwent the same NOR and tissue collection
protocol with no prior wheel access. Hippocampal BDNF will be measured using
ELISA.
3. Approach for statistical analysis
Discrimination index (DI) values were calculated using object exploration
durations. Mixed effects ANOVA analysis with post hoc Sidak’s tests compared DIs
between groups. One-sample t-tests compared each group’s DI to zero (chance).
Two-way ANOVA will compare levels of hippocampal BDNF.
4. Results and Conclusions
There was an effect of PCP treatment on NOR (ANOVA result) and scPCP sedentary
mice had significantly lower DIs than Vehicle sedentary mice. Although there was
no effect of exercise (ANOVA), there was a trend for scPCP exercised mice to
perform better. Thus, when compared to chance (DI=0), both Vehicle groups showed
significant novelty preference, while the scPCP sedentary group did not, and the
scPCP exercised group trended towards significance (p=0.05). This suggests that
acute exercise may produce a modest improvement in NOR performance in the scPCP
model. Ongoing analyses to investigate the link between exercise, BDNF and
cognition in the model will be presented.
 
Poster number: T_PZ2_034 (TP)

Sub-Theme: Cognitive Enhancement and Dysfunction: Investigating
Mechanisms and Therapeutic Interventions in Neurodegenerative Diseases and
Schizophrenia

## Characterisation of prefrontal hypofunction in the subchronic phencyclidine
model
Authors: Jennifer Fletcher, University of Manchester; Ines Jimenez
Pulido - b-neuro - Division of Pharmacy and Optometry University of Manchester;
Ben Grayson - b-neuro - Division of Pharmacy and Optometry University of
Manchester; John Gigg - b-neuro - Division of Pharmacy and Optometry University
of Manchester; Michael Harte - b- neuro - Division of Pharmacy and Optometry
University of Manchester
Background:
The subchronic phencyclidine (scPCP) model induces robust and long-term cognitive
deficits relevant to schizophrenia. A recurrent finding in patients and scPCP is
reduced parvalbumin (PV) interneuron density, a GABAergic interneuron critical
for excitatory and inhibitory (E/I) balance. It has been suggested that E/I
imbalance contributes to sustained behavioural and brain deficits in scPCP,
although how this imbalance persists in the absence of PCP remains elusive.
Here, we aimed to characterise changes in the prefrontal cortex (PFC) of
scPCP-treated animals to understand the nature of chronic brain alterations and
investigate how changes perpetuate pathology.
Methods:
54 female Lister Hooded rats were dosed with vehicle (0.9% saline) or PCP
(2mg/Kg, bidaily, 7 days), then underwent a 12-week washout. Brains were
collected, and the PFC was analysed using quantitative PCR (qPCR) (n=7), simple
western analysis (WES) (n=10), and immunohistochemistry (IHC) (n=10). As the
brains used for each technique were from a different animal, and we had two
treatment groups, we assessed differences in normally distributed data with
unpaired t-test, with Welch correction where appropriate. Not normally
distributed data were analysed with the Kruskal Wallis test.
Results:
Key to E/I balance are glutamate and GABA. Here we saw reductions to VGlut1, NMDA
receptor subunit 2B, PSD95 and SNAP25 (p<0.05) in scPCP-treated rats.
Investigations on GABAergic pathology focused on PV interneurons. We saw
increased PV mRNA and protein while cell density was reduced. There was further
GABAergic dysregulation, with reductions to GAD67, the enzyme that synthesises
GABA, and reduced density of perineuronal net (PNN), critical for protecting the
PV interneuron. Together, these changes suggest a reduced number of impaired PV
interneurons (p<0.05, t-test).
Conclusions:
The scPCP model results in a sustained and profound alteration of proteins
relevant to glutamatergic and GABAergic output. These changes could result in
impaired cognition and PFC hypofunction, reflecting clinical data. Studies
understanding the long-term brain environment after scPCP and the effects of
novel pro-cognitive compounds are ongoing.
 

## Neurodegeneration & Aging

Poster number: S_PZ2_032 (TP)

Sub-Theme: APOE4 and Alzheimer's Disease: Mechanisms, Early-Life
Effects, and Lifespan Impact on Memory and Cognition

## Inhibition of NMDA receptors rescues intrinsic neuronal excitability impaired
by ApoE4
Authors: Oliver G. Steele, Brighton & Sussex Medical School;
Lewis Taylor - Sussex Neuroscience University of Sussex; Andrew C. Penn - Sussex
Neuroscience University of Sussex; Ruth Murrell-Lagnado - Sussex Neuroscience
University of Sussex
The APOE4 allele is associated with an increased risk of developing late-onset
Alzheimer’s disease. How this allele confers a greater disease risk is poorly
understood and no dedicated therapeutic interventions exist for APOE4 carriers.
Signalling through the ApoE receptor can regulate aspects of neurophysiology,
and is implicated in some actions of ketamine. We tested whether APOE genotype
alters intrinsic neuronal excitability and modifies the action of ketamine, and
another NMDA receptor antagonist, memantine.
Organotypic hippocampal slices were prepared from P6-8 homozygous E3 and E4 mouse
pups and cultured for 21 days, before performing whole-cell recordings at room
temperature. The extracellular solution was supplemented with either 20 µM
ketamine, 10 µM memantine or vehicle (control) and action potential firing rate
was assayed by depolarising current steps. Firing rates were fit by a linear
model with genotype and drug as predictors. 95% confidence intervals for the
model parameters were computed from 10,000 bootstrap resamples. Hypothesis
testing was achieved using 2-way ANOVA (type III).
Depolarizing current injection into CA1 neurons of APOE3 slice cultures caused
neurons to fire at frequencies upto 11.00 Hz [9.31, 12.31]. Reduced intrinsic
excitability was evident in APOE4 neurons, where the firing rate was lower by
-2.94 Hz [-5.06, -0.78]. While acute application of either ketamine or memantine
had very little effect in APOE3 neurons (+0.08 Hz, [-2.94, +2.72] and +0.71 Hz
[-0.98, +2.65] respectively), both drugs increased firing rates more in APOE4
(than in APOE3) neurons by +3.53 Hz [+0.15, +7.18] and +4.27 Hz [+1.00, +7.24],
effectively rescuing firing rates to APOE3 control levels with the interaction
between genotype and drug being statistically significant (F(2,70) = 3.99, p =
.023).
Preliminary results indicate the effects seen on firing rates may be underpinned
by APOE4-specific impairments to NaV current densities that similarly proved
rescuable by both drugs. Further, these effects appear to be independent of any
changes in excitatory or inhibitory synaptic transmission onto the CA1 neurons.
These data demonstrate impaired intrinsic membrane excitability caused by APOE4
and its rescue with clinically relevant NMDAR antagonists.
 
Poster number: S_PZ2_033 (TP)

Sub-Theme: APOE4 and Alzheimer's Disease: Mechanisms, Early-Life
Effects, and Lifespan Impact on Memory and Cognition

## The effect of APOE isoform on early life hippocampal activity following
naturalistic behaviour
Authors: Dr Alex Stuart, University of Sussex; Dr S L King -
Psychology University of Sussex; Dr Andrew Penn - Neuroscience University of
Sussex
Introduction
APOE4 (Apolipoprotein E, variant E4) increases risk of late-onset Alzheimer’s
disease and drives dysfunction in multiple cellular pathways, including synaptic
function. However, the phenotypic effects of APOE isoforms on neuronal ensemble
activity during behaviour is not known. Therefore, we investigated the effects
of two major APOE isoforms (APOE3, APOE4) on hippocampal neuronal ensemble
recruitment.
Methods
APOE3 and APOE4 targeted replacement mice (APOE-TR, C57BL/6J background) were
tested at early to mid-life (3- 12-months) across three between subjects’
experiments (E1: N = 81, E2: N = 20, E3: N = 12).
Animals were exposed to environmental novelty to activate an acute hippocampal
ensemble (home cage control were used in E1), and brains were extracted one hour
later. Fixed brain sections were labelled using c-Fos immunofluorescence with
neuronal markers. Subsequently, we reconstructed dendrites of c-Fos+ and c-Fos-
neurons using carbocyanine dyes. In final experiments, CA1 Fos+ neurons were
selectively identified using an inducible c-Fos-tTA-GFP double viral labelling
approach for ex vivo current and voltage clamp recordings.
All procedures performed in line with UK Home Office Animals (Scientific
Procedures) Act 1986 (revised 2013) following review by the University of Sussex
AWERB; PPL: PP3378340).
Statistical analysis
Statistical approaches included general linear models (robust parameter
estimation), between/mixed analysis of variance (ANOVA) using the Sidak method
for post-hoc tests or simple main effects analysis when appropriate. Standard
alpha criterion was set at 0.05 and standardised effect sizes were calculated.
Experimenters were blind to condition at the data analysis stage.
Results and conclusions
Compared to APOE3-TR mice, APOE4-TR mice showed an increased hippocampal ensemble
size at young age particularly in CA1, which was modified by sex but not
associated with dendritic structural differences in c-Fos+/c- Fos- neurons. We
predict that APOE4 may promote increased intrinsic excitability in APOE4 which
could increase probability of ensemble recruitment. Together our results suggest
APOE4 may promote a state of hippocampal hyperactivity early in life prior to
gross neuropathology.
 
Poster number: S_PZ2_034 (TP)

Sub-Theme: APOE4 and Alzheimer's Disease: Mechanisms, Early-Life
Effects, and Lifespan Impact on Memory and Cognition

## The influence of APOE isoform on rapid ‘everyday memory’ across the
lifespan
Authors: Dr Alex Stuart, University of Sussex; Dr Sarah L King -
Psychology University of Sussex Introduction
APOE4 (Apolipoprotein E, variant E4) increases risk of late-onset Alzheimer’s
disease (LOAD) and late-life episodic reference memory deficits. However, the
phenotypic effects of APOE isoforms on rapid everyday memory across the lifespan
is unknown. Therefore, we investigated the effects of two major APOE isoforms
(APOE3, APOE4) on rapid everyday memory across the life span in APOE targeted
replacement mice (APOE-TR).
Methods
Female and male APOE3 and APOE4-TR mice (C57BL/6J background) were trained and
tested in a novel rapid everyday memory maze task across their lifespan in a
longitudinal design (3-18-months, 3-month intervals, total N = 36).
The novel paradigm involved a delayed-match-to-place (DMTP) appetitive maze task
in which location of a hidden food reward was shifted daily. Acquisition
performance and rapid recall accuracy was measured at each timepoint.
All procedures performed in line with UK Home Office Animals (Scientific
Procedures) Act 1986 (revised 2013) following review by the University of Sussex
AWERB (PPL: PP3378340).
Statistical analysis
Mixed general linear models (robust parameter estimation) were used to compare
APOE genotypes, sex and age on all performance measures. Standard alpha
criterion was set at 0.05 and standardised effect sizes were calculated.
Experimenters were blind to condition at the data analysis stage.
Results and conclusions
Mice quickly acquired task rules, showing within day learning in navigation
metrics and a spatially graded preference for the target location during
unrewarded probe trials as an indicator of memory recall accuracy.
APOE-TR mice demonstrated a complex set of genotype, age, and sex-dependent
effects on rapid everyday learning and memory. Despite mild acquisition deficits
at 3-months, APOE4 males exhibited advantages in single trial recall accuracy.
At mid-late life only female APOE4 mice demonstrated deficits in rapid everyday
learning, while overall single trial recall accuracy was poor. This was rescued
by additional encoding opportunities but did not distinguish APOE genotypes.
Together these results suggest only mild early life defects in rapid everyday
learning associated with APOE4 and which may be superseded by defects in long
term reference memory.
 
Poster number: S_PZ2_035 (TP)

Sub-Theme: APOE4 and Alzheimer's Disease: Mechanisms, Early-Life
Effects, and Lifespan Impact on Memory and Cognition

## Testing attention in APOE-TR mice from young adulthood to old age
Authors: Cansu Demirbatir, University of Sussex
Introduction
Human studies have demonstrated that carrying the Apolipoprotein 4 (APOE4)
version of the APOE gene (a risk factor for Alzheimer’s disease) can be
beneficial for components of memory and attention in young adults. To begin
dissecting the neurobiology underlying these cognitive benefits we tested
targeted replacement mice carrying the human APOE3 and APOE4 gene in place of
mouse APOE in a modified 5-Choice Serial Reaction Time Task (5-CSRTT), where
mice can be trained to criteria in less than two weeks. We re-tested the mice at
four timepoints to determine how APOE impacts cognition across the lifespan. We
hypothesised we would see cognitive benefits in young APOE4- TR mice, but a
faster rate of cognitive decline with old age when compared to APOE3-TRs.
Methods
We assessed the attention of young APOE3 and APOE4-TR mice (N=31, 8 weeks) in a
modified 5-CSRTT paradigm (adapted from Remmelink et al. 2017). Using this
modified paradigm allows mice to perform the task 24 hours a day. Training was
completed within 10 days, and the assessment of attention took place within 3
weeks. We retested the same mice at 6, 12 and 18 months of age. Attention was
tested by manipulating the stimulus duration and inter-trial intervals.
Statistical analysis
Mixed general linear model ANOVAs, with Tukey’s and pairwise comparisons as
post-hoc tests, were used in each case. Standard alpha criterion was set at
0.05.
Results and conclusions
As predicted with traditional 5-CSRTT, shortening the stimulus duration (from 1s
to 0.2s) caused lapse of attention, and increasing the inter-trial interval
caused more premature responses in all mice. However, there were no clear
genotype differences in performance either in young mice, across age, or with
sex. The lack of genotype differences and deterioration in performance with age
may be due to the life enrichment of repeat testing across the lifespan, or a
loss of sensitivity in the translation of the task from traditional to 24 hours.
We are currently rebuilding the apparatus (using open-source hardware) and
coding a new modular program to give us more flexibility in testing, and a
greater sensitivity to detect behavioural changes.

Poster number: S_PZ2_036 (PP)

Sub-Theme: APOE4 and Alzheimer's Disease: Mechanisms, Early-Life
Effects, and Lifespan Impact on Memory and Cognition

## Neurovascular contributions to Alzheimer's disease: the effects of human
APOE3 or APOE4 genotype on an early stage AD mouse model
Authors: Harry Trewhitt, University of Sussex; Kira Shaw -
Psychology University of Sussex; Silvia Anderle - Neuroscience UCL; Joseph
Henderson - Psychology University of Sussex; Catherine Hall - Psychology
University of Sussex
The APOE4 allele confers an increased risk of cardiovascular disease and is the
leading genetic risk factor in sporadic Alzheimer’s disease, suggesting a link
between vascular dysfunction and a disease characterised by progressive
cognitive decline. Amyloid β accumulation, strongly linked to AD, appears to
start earlier in certain brain regions such as the hippocampus.
We crossed transgenic mice strains; those with homozygous targeted replacement of
the mouse APOE gene with either the human APOE3 or APOE4 allele to mice carrying
a doxycycline responsive APPSwe/Ind operon. APP expression is suppressed with
doxycycline containing diet and is triggered when mice are switched to normal
chow. We are using this novel model to interrogate vascular function in these
mice as well as cognitive performance over a time course of Aβ accumulation.
Surgically implanted cranial windows allow us to investigate neurovascular
function in either the hippocampus or visual cortex. Mice are subject to a
behavioural testing protocol including Barnes Maze, Object-in-Context
Recognition and Y-Maze paradigms aiming to test visual and spatial memory
function. Testing is carried out at three timepoints: prior to expression of Aβ
(on Dox diet), 6-8 weeks and 16-18 weeks after Dox removal.
Preliminary results indicate vascular changes over the time course associate with
Aβ accumulation and may differ by APOE genotype and brain region. On the Barnes
Maze APOE4 mice have slightly worse performance at 16-18 weeks off Dox compared
to the APOE3 mice and the anticipated learning effect (due to repeated testing)
also appears to be reduced in this group.
Overall, however, mice appear so far to have no substantial cognitive deficit
even at the latest time point, suggesting they're representative of a pre or
early symptomatic AD model. Thus, we can identify early vascular changes in this
model, likely preceding onset of cognitive decline, opening up the potential for
identification of reliable neurovascular AD predictors.
Using linear mixed modelling and Principle Component Analyses we hope to identify
specific neurovascular deficits associated with Aβ accumulation and how these
changes may correlate to the trend of mild cognitive decline we are starting to
see in these mice.

Poster number: S_PZ2_037 (TP)

Sub-Theme: Neuroinflammation in Neurodegenerative Diseases:
Microglial Function, Pathways, and Therapeutic Targets

## Sex and interferon gamma signaling regulate microglia migration in vivo in
the adult mouse cortex
Authors: Craig Brown, University of Victoria
Microglia are morphologically dynamic immune cells in the brain. Although some,
but not all studies indicate these cells are capable of migration, especially in
neonates or after injury, there has been little direct study in the adult
cortex. Further, whether this mobility is evident in all microglia, is sex
dependent, and what molecular mechanisms drive this, are not well understood.
One issue with previous studies was the dependence on myeloid based reporters
that do not discriminate between microglia and macrophages. Furthermore because
most cells were labeled, unambiguously resolving long-distance movement in vivo
was not possible, especially after injury when cells cluster. Here, we performed
time lapse in vivo imaging of sparsely labelled microglia using adult, tamoxifen
inducible microglia reporter mice. In the absence of injury, we find a
relatively small population of microglia migrate over a 24h period. Following
the induction of a cerebral microbleed (CMB), the population of mobile microglia
increases significantly. However microglial mobility was dependent on sex, where
microglia in male mice migrated significantly greater distances towards the
bleed whereas female microglia did not. In order to understand the signaling
pathways that regulate migration, we then interrogated the role of interferon
gamma (IFNγ), a putative chemotaxic signaling pathway, in both male and female
mice. Our data show that in male mice, stimulating microglia with IFNγ or
inducible microglial knockdown of IFNγ receptor 1 stimulates or inhibits
migration, respectively, whereas female microglia were generally unaffected.
These findings highlight the diversity of microglia responses to injury and it’s
dependence on biological sex. Further we provide insights into the signaling
mechanisms that drive this unique migratory capability in the mature brain.

Poster number: S_PZ2_038 (TP)

Sub-Theme: Neuroinflammation in Neurodegenerative Diseases:
Microglial Function, Pathways, and Therapeutic Targets

## Drug discovery tools to examine neuroinflammation signalling in human
iPSC-derived microglia
Authors: Emma V. Jones, Medicines Discovery Catapult; Lorna M.
FitzPatrick - Cellular Sciences Medicines Discovery Catapult; Mairi Challinor -
Cellular Sciences Medicines Discovery Catapult; Eve Corrie - Cellular Sciences
Medicines Discovery Catapult; Rebecca Kelly - Cellular Sciences Medicines
Discovery Catapult; Dominic Simpson - Sir William Dunn School of Pathology
University of Oxford; Lucy Frost - Biomarkers Medicines Discovery Catapult;
Emily Offer - Cellular Sciences Medicines Discovery Catapult
Introduction
The translation of therapies targeting CNS disorders from preclinical drug
discovery to the clinic is complex, with a high attrition rate often due to a
lack of efficacy. Identification of efficacious therapeutics will require the
evaluation of potential new disease pathways and different mechanisms of action
to uncover novel disease targets.
Neuroinflammation is proposed to play a major role in across the spectrum of
neurodegenerative diseases, and neuroinflammatory mediators are receiving
increasing interest as potential drug targets. Microglia, the resident immune
cells of the CNS, are key mediators of neuroinflammation in the CNS. In recent
years, there has been a significant effort directed towards developing human in
vitro CNS cell models, with the aim to improve the understanding of disease
mechanisms and to increase clinical translation, with more relevant models.
Methods and Results
Here, we demonstrate human iPSC-derived microglia are functional and respond to
inflammatory stimuli using gene expression (Nanostring) and cytokine analysis.
To examine the activation of neuroinflammation signaling pathways in these
cells, lentiviral-based fluorescent reporters were used to evaluate the two
phases of NLRP3 inflammasome activation; the priming (signal 1) and activation
(signal 2) phases. First, we show NFĸB reporter activation in real-time in
response to inflammation and the priming (signal 1) of inflammasome in
iPSC-microglia. A second reporter assay examining the formation of ASC-specks
was employed to analyse activation of NLRP3 inflammasome. Together, these
innovative tools provide an opportunity for novel drug discovery and to further
understanding of microglia in neuroinflammation and CNS disease.
Statistical Analysis
Where quantitative data is shown, we used Anova with post-hoc tests to analyse
differences between conditions. For analysis of gene expression data, the
differential expression analysis calculated log2 fold change and adjusted P
values between control and treated conditions.

Poster number: S_PZ2_039 (TP)

Sub-Theme: Neuroinflammation in Neurodegenerative Diseases:
Microglial Function, Pathways, and Therapeutic Targets

## Cellular glial models for drug discovery in neurodegeneration
Authors: Rebeka Popovic, UCL; Carmen M Navarron - DDI UCL; Dawn H.
W. Lau - DDI UCL; Lucy Granat - DDI UCL; Leela Phadke - DDI UCL; Stefano
Benvegnu - DDI UCL; Susannah Baird - DDI UCL; Satinder Samar - DDI UCL; Chandni
Patel - DDI UCL; Oona Hinshelwood - DDI UCL; Fiona Jeganathan - DDI UCL; Emma
Armstrong - DDI UCL; Lorenza Magno - DDI UCL; Sarah Jolly - DDI UCL; Fiona
Ducotterd - DDI UCL
Introduction
Neuroinflammation, mediated by microglia and astrocytes, contributes to
pathological processes in neurodegenerative diseases including Alzheimer’s
disease (AD). Exposure of microglia and astrocytes to disease relevant cellular
insults, leads to their activation and release of neuroinflammatory mediators
that promote neurodegeneration. Modulation of glial cell function represents a
viable therapeutic approach in AD. Drug development for glia-targeted
therapeutics is limited by a lack of disease-relevant models that recapitulate
important aspects of disease biology and are suitable for high-throughput drug
discovery. We have developed and characterised quantitative and reproducible
primary rodent microglia, astrocyte, and triculture systems for pharmacological
studies. We are now testing disease-relevant insults with the goal of having a
physiologically relevant glial cell models for drug discovery.
Methods
We previously established a suite of functional assays with glia and neurons
including microglial phagocytosis and cytokine production (qPCR) and neuronal
electrophysiology in the presence of glia (MEA). We characterised the cellular
responses to proinflammatory factors i.e. lipopolysaccharide (LPS) and
proinflammatory factors TNF, IL-1α, and C1q (“TIC”) in these assays. We are
building on these experiments by characterising glial and neuronal responses to
other disease-relevant challenges, such as amyloid beta (Abeta) exposure.
Approach for statistical analysis
We aim to compare the response of glial cells stimulated with disease-relevant
insults and appropriate controls using either t-test or One-way ANOVA (or their
nonparametric equivalents), based on the data distribution predetermined by
Shapiro-Wilk normality test and number of conditions tested.
Results and conclusion
Our preliminary results suggest that glial cells show various physiological
responses to a variety of insults. As an example, treating primary rat microglia
with synthetic S26C Abeta 1-40 dimer caused no change in cytokine expression,
morphology or phagocytosis in microglia. We are in the process of exploring
glial cell response patterns with human brain extracts from disease and control
brains.

Poster number: S_PZ2_040 (TP)

Sub-Theme: Neuroinflammation in Neurodegenerative Diseases:
Microglial Function, Pathways, and Therapeutic Targets

## Astrocyte assay development for target validation of astrocytic cAMP
signalling in Alzheimer’s disease
Authors: Satinder Samra, UCL; Lucy Granat - Drug Discovery Institute
UCL; Leela Phadke - Drug Discovery Institute UCL; Susannah Baird - Drug
Discovery Institute UCL; Emma Armstrong - Drug Discovery Institute UCL; Charlie
Arber - Queen’s Square Institute of Neurology UCL; Jamie Bilsland - N/A
AstronauTx; Paul Whiting - Drug Discovery Institute UCL; Sarah Jolly - Drug
Discovery Institute UCL; Fiona Ducotterd - Drug Discovery Institute UCL
Introduction
Astrocytes play a fundamental role in pathological processes of neurodegenerative
diseases, including neuroinflammation, impaired glutamate uptake, reduced
neurotrophic support and defective metabolism. Activation of cAMP signalling in
astrocytes elevates glycolytic rate, increases glutamate transporter and
neurotrophic factor expression, and suppresses the immune response. Molecules
that regulate astrocytic cAMP signalling are therefore potential therapeutic
targets for neurodegenerative diseases such as Alzheimer’s disease (AD).
Methods
To aid astrocyte-targeted drug discovery, we developed an astrocyte-focused in
vitro platform to be used for target validation and drug screening. Using
primary rat and human iPSC-derived healthy and familial AD astrocytes in
monoculture and in co-culture with neurons, we have optimised pharmacological
assays including cAMP, Ca2+, RNA- seq, multi-electrode array, and seahorse
assays which can quantitatively and reliably measure changes to astrocyte
function and neuronal activity.
Approach for statistical analysis
qPCR and seahorse data analysed using one-way ANOVA; Western-blot data analysed
with Mann-Whitney test; MEA data analysed using unpaired T-test.
Results and conclusion
We validated the potential of astrocytic cAMP signalling as a therapeutic target
for AD in our astrocyte assays. We showed that the activation of adenylyl
cyclase using forskolin or stimulation of a Gs-coupled GPCR using a tool
compound induces cAMP signalling in rat and hiPSC-derived astrocytes. Alongside
increased cAMP levels, application of forskolin and a tool compound led to
elevated glycolytic rate, increased glutamate transporter expression, and
downregulation of pro-inflammatory pathway genes in astrocytes. Finally,
addition of a tool compound in rat primary astrocyte and neuron co-culture
induced an acute increase in neuronal excitability.
In summary, we showed that cAMP activation had positive effects on metabolism,
glutamate transporter levels and inflammatory gene expression, providing
evidence that activation of astrocytic cAMP signalling may translate to
therapeutic benefit in AD. Our astrocyte platform can be applied to future novel
drug discovery programs targeting astrocytes.

Poster number: S_PZ2_041 (TP)

Sub-Theme: Neuroinflammation in Neurodegenerative Diseases:
Microglial Function, Pathways, and Therapeutic Targets

## Evaluation of Serum/Glucocorticoid Regulated Kinase 1 as a potential target
for treatment of dementia
Authors: Carmen Maria Navarron Izquierdo, ARUK UCL Drug Discovery
Institute; Fiona Jeganathan - Neuromuscular Diseases ARUK UCL Drug Discovery
Institute; Stefano Benvegnù - Neuromuscular Diseases ARUK UCL Drug Discovery
Institute; Ben Atkinson - Neuromuscular Diseases ARUK UCL Drug Discovery
Institute; Sarah Jolly - Neuromuscular Diseases ARUK UCL Drug Discovery
Institute; Paul Whiting - Neuromuscular Diseases ARUK UCL Drug Discovery
Institute; Lorenza Magno - Neuromuscular Diseases ARUK UCL Drug Discovery
Institute; Fiona Ducotterd - Neuromuscular Diseases ARUK UCL Drug Discovery
Institute
Introduction
Neuroinflammation is a hallmark of neurodegenerative diseases. Genome wide
association studies (GWAS) have identified an enrichment of microglial genes
associated with altered risk of Alzheimer’s disease (AD) which could be
potential new targets for the treatment of AD and positioning experimental
studies of microglial cells at the centre of exploratory drug discovery programs
for neuroinflammatory targets. Serum/Glucocorticoid Regulated Kinase 1 (SGK1),
has emerged as a potentially interesting target for AD being upregulated under
certain pathophysiological conditions, including inflammation. SGK1 activates a
range of ion channels, transporters, enzymes, and transcription factors such as
NfkB, thus regulating cytokine production, and, indirectly, tau
hyperphosphorylation. SGK1 is upregulated in AD brain, Tau P301S mice and 5xFAD
mice. In this target validation study, we investigated the expression of SGK1
and developed an in vitro model of inflammation in microglia to look for effects
on SGK1 with the goal of validating SGK1 as a putative therapeutic target for
drug discovery.
Methods
We confirmed SGK1 expression levels in various microglial data sets and developed
a rat primary microglial cell culture system in vitro that models different
physiological states of microglia: serum-free microglia and classical
serum-containing media. We miniaturised and automated an inflammation assay
(based on LPS addition) and multiplexed our cytokine secretion assay (MSD
technology) and qPCR endpoints to generate target validation data for SGK1.
Approach for statistical analysis
For rtqPCR and MSD data ACTB expression was used for normalization. N= 3 per
condition, one-way ANOVA Bonferroni multiple comparisons; mean ± sem.
Results and conclusions
We integrated our high-throughput microglial platform using acute LPS stimulation
with compound administration to measure effects of SGK1 modulation with small
molecules. Pre-treatment with an SGK1 inhibitor reduced cytokine production dose
dependently, recapitulating the effect described in Kwon et al., 2021 in glial
cultures and in vivo.
Evaluation of the modulation of the inflammatory response provided key
information on how targeting SGK1 with a therapeutic may impact inflammation
associated with AD.

Poster number: S_PZ2_042 (TP)

Sub-Theme: Neuroinflammation in Neurodegenerative Diseases:
Microglial Function, Pathways, and Therapeutic Targets

## NETSseq platform identifies THIK1 as a target to modulate neuroinflammation
in Alzheimer’s disease
Authors: Samuel Russell, Cerevance
Neuroinflammation is a common underlying pathological feature of many
neurodegenerative diseases. Thus, understanding the gene expression profile of
microglia and how these change in disease will provide critical insight.
Cerevance’s proprietary Nuclear Enriched Transcript Sort Sequencing (NETSseq)
platform allows for deep RNA-seq expression profiles (~12,000 genes detected per
cell type) of distinct purified cell types (> 60 to date), including
microglia, from human post-mortem brain tissue. To better understand the
temporal changes that occur during Alzheimer’s disease (AD), machine learning
approaches, including a trajectory-based analysis to map high- dimensional gene
expression data into a one-dimensional quantity called “pseudotime”, have been
utilized.
Differential expression analysis against pseudotime has identified genes that are
associated with disease progression including KCNK13, a gene coding for the
2-pore K+ (K2P) channel THIK1. NETSseq demonstrated highly specific expression
of KCNK13 in microglia, which progressively increases with AD progression. These
data and subsequent literature evidence have suggested a role for THIK1 in
modulating the NLRP3 inflammasome.
Herein, the discovery and pharmacological characterisation of C101248, the first
potent and selective small-molecule inhibitor of THIK-1 is described. C101248
showed a concentration-dependent inhibition of both mouse and human THIK-1
(IC50: ~50 nM) and was inactive against K2P family member TREK-1, the closest
homologue to THIK-1, TWIK-2 and Kv2.1. THIK-1’s constitutive activity was
confirmed by patch clamp electrophysiology and blocked by C101248 at a similar
potency. In isolated microglia C101248 prevented NLRP3-dependent release of
pro-inflammatory cytokine IL-1β to the same degree as a genetic depletion of the
channel. C101248 showed no reduction of IL-1β when treating THIK-1-depleted
microglia, underscoring its selectivity and mode of action.
In conclusion, NETSseq demonstrated the ability to identify novel microglia
targets that are involved in the pathological regulation of neuroinflammation.
Targeting these genes may be a means of modulating microglial function and
ongoing neuroinflammatory processes in disease, as demonstrated by the KCNK13 /
THIK1 example described herein.

Poster number: S_PZ2_044 (TP)

Sub-Theme: Neuroinflammation in Neurodegenerative Diseases:
Microglial Function, Pathways, and Therapeutic Targets

## Assessing neuroinflammatory signalling in a human tissue model of traumatic
brain injury
Authors: Ronak Ved, Cardiff University; Chloe Ormonde - Neurosurgery
Cardiff University; Ben Dummer - Neurosurgery Cardiff University; Liam Gray -
Neurosurgery Cardiff University; Malik Zaben - Neurosurgery Cardiff
University
Background
Despite in vitro and in vivo research into the mechanisms underlying traumatic
brain injury (TBI)1, few agents have successfully translated to clinical
practise. We demonstrate a human tissue, explant model of TBI and its use to
identify the neuroinflammatory pathway instigated by the molecule High Mobility
Group Box Protein 1 (HMGB1) as a potential therapeutic target in TBI.
Methods
Normal human cortical tissue samples were collected from appropriately consented
patients undergoing resections of non-traumatic lesions, such as sclerosis or
neoplasia. Tissue was plated as 3D cultures, and after ten days in vitro
underwent weight-drop injury to simulate neurotrauma. Cells were fixed 1-7 days
hours post-injury and immunostained for DAPI (total cells), IBA1 (Microglia),
NG2 (oligodendrocyte precursors), neurones (TUJ1) and HMGB1. HMGB1-axis genes
were assessed in control and injured cultures 1-7 days post injury via qPCR.
Cell death up to one week after injury was quantified using ATP and LDH
cytotoxicity assays. Cell death was also assessed after control and injured
cultures were treated with the HMGB1-signalling antagonist FPS-MZ1.
Results
Microglia and NG2 cell counts were significantly increased in injured cell
cultures, whereas neurone counts were significantly reduced. Localisation of
HMGB1 within NG2, microglial and neuronal cells was statistically significantly
greater following injury compared to control cultures. HMGB1 and its associated
downstream neuroinflammatory proteins were significantly upregulated up to seven
days post-injury. Cell death was statistically significantly increased after
injury, and continued to accrue up to seven days post-injury. Cell death was not
affected by anti- HMGB1 treatment in control cultures, whereas cell death was
significantly reduced when injured cultures received the treatment.
Conclusions
We demonstrate use of a human tissue explant model of TBI to identify
co-localisation of HMGB1 within NG2 cells following simulation of traumatic
brain injury. This work supports recent animal tissue data suggesting that HMGB1
pathways are upregulated following TBI, and that it may influence human brain
cell responses to trauma2. The reduction in cell death post injury after
treatment with an HMGB1-antagoist in vitro highlights this signalling pathway as
one of interest for potential clinical drug development for traumatic brain
injuries.

Poster number: S_PZ2_045 (PP)

Sub-Theme: Neuroinflammation in Neurodegenerative Diseases:
Microglial Function, Pathways, and Therapeutic Targets

## How does focused ultrasound modulate brain microglial function?
Authors: Sarina Grewal, Imperial College London; Paul M. Matthews -
Department of Brain Sciences Imperial College London; Sophie V. Morse -
Department of Bioengineering Imperial College London
Introduction
Focused ultrasound (FUS) has gained much attention as a non-invasive technique
that uses acoustic energy to modulate neuronal activity. However, the mechanisms
by which FUS affects the functions of glial cells, specifically microglia, are
poorly understood. Microglia play a pivotal role in protecting the central
nervous system (CNS) against pathogens and inflammation. They exhibit diverse
functions, including surveillance and phagocytosis and are implicated in
neurological and neurogenerative diseases. Previous reports have shown FUS to
activate microglia in mouse models, however, the cellular and molecular
mechanisms are unknown [1]. This study aims to understand and evaluate the role
of FUS stimulation of microglia and how it influences their functions in
homeostatic and inflammatory states.
Methods
Experiments will be performed using in vitro BV-2 cell lines. The methodology we
will employ to understand the effect of FUS on microglia includes cell
cytotoxicity using lactate dehydrogenase (LDH)-cytotoxicity assay, quantifying
microglial inflammatory activation by enzyme-linked immunosorbent (ELISA) and
phagocytosis assays. Bulk RNA- sequencing will be performed to investigate
changes in gene expression. To test these factors in an inflammatory state,
cells will be first treated with lipopolysaccharide (LPS).
Approach for statistical analysis
We will test the underlying mechanisms of FUS in modulating microglial function
by using one-way analysis of variance (ANOVA) with Dunnett’s post-hoc test to
compare means from multiple conditions against the control. When comparing the
difference between two conditions student’s t-test will be used accordingly. To
ensure statistical significance and reproducibility, experiments will be
performed in triplicates. Statistical analysis will be conducted using GraphPad
PRISM software with a p-value <0.05 considered statistically significant.
[1] Bobola et al. (2020). Brain Stimulation, 13(4), 1014–1023.

Poster number: S_PZ2_046 (TP)

Sub-Theme: Neuroinflammation in Neurodegenerative Diseases:
Microglial Function, Pathways, and Therapeutic Targets

## The role of CD44 in neurodegeneration
Authors: Barry Bradford, The University of Edinburgh
Prion diseases are prototypic protein-misfolding neurodegenerative disorders.
Prion disease are infectious, progressive and invariably fatal. The earliest
neuropathological changes of prion disease include synaptic & dendritic
spine loss and reactive astrocytosis concurrent with the accumulation of
misfolded prions within the central nervous system. CD44 is a multifunctional
protein that has roles in dendritic spine & synaptic morphology and
plasticity and also astrocyte morphology and reactivity. During prion disease
increased expression of CD44 has been identified as a specific marker of
heterogeneity within prion-disease reactive astrocytes. Both prion strain and
host specific patterns of CD44 upregulation are observed commencing half-way
through the disease incubation period.
To determine the role of CD44 in neurodegeneration we challenged groups of both
male and female CD44 knockout and C57Bl/6 control mice intracerebrally with ME7
prions. CD44 knockout mice are viable but experience deficits in spatial
learning and memory. Mice were subject to weekly automated CatWalk gait analysis
and clinical scoring for symptoms of prion disease. Uninfected mice of both
genotypes were also monitored for comparison. Pre-clinical and terminal brain
samples will be collected for routine histopathological, protein (Western) and
gene expression (RT- QCPR) analyses to determine the impact of the absence of
CD44 on prion neuropathogenesis, prion disease incubation period and gait
aberration. Statistical analyses will be performed by one or two-way ANOVA where
appropriate.
At the time of abstract submission these experiments are still in progress,
however the results should reveal if CD44 has a role to play in the maintenance
of synaptic integrity and astrocyte reactivity during prion-induced
neurodegeneration. A greater understanding of the initial events and their
molecular regulation during neurodegeneration will direct novel therapeutic
approaches to modulate astrocytes and prevent synaptic loss across a wide array
of neurodegenerative conditions.

Poster number: S_PZ2_047 (TP)

Sub-Theme: Neuroinflammation in Neurodegenerative Diseases:
Microglial Function, Pathways, and Therapeutic Targets

## The Neuroinflammatory Environment in Depression of Alzheimer’s Disease: A
Human Post-Mortem Study
Authors: Jordan Lin, University of Bristol
Introduction: Depression in those with Alzheimer’s disease (AD) results in a
worsened prognosis than either condition alone. Comorbid depression and AD
complicates both diagnosis and treatment, with current limited options
highlighting the need for further understanding and research for biomarkers and
therapeutic targets in this combination of diseases. Neuroinflammation has been
implicated in the pathophysiological progression of both depression and AD, but
little is known about the neuroinflammatory environment when these conditions
occur simultaneously. This study aims to explore the neuroinflammatory
environment in AD brains comparing those with and without depression.
Methods: Post-mortem brain tissue from cases with AD who also suffered from
depression (n=20) and AD cases with no history of psychiatric illness (n=24)
were studied for a range of inflammatory markers. Markers of microglial
function, Iba1, P2RY12, CD64 and CD68 were assessed by immunohistochemistry.
Endothelial inflammatory markers ICAM-1 and VCAM-1 were measured by ELISA, and
brain cytokine levels of IFN-γ, IL-1β, IL-2, IL-4, IL-6, IL-8, IL-10, IL- 12p70,
IL-13, and TNF-α were measured using multiplex assays. Multiple linear
regression analysis was used to assess differences between groups, where
possible. If variables could not be transformed to a normal distribution, then
Mann-Whitney test was used.
Results: No significant differences were found between AD cases with or without
depression for any of the markers of microglial function or endothelial
inflammation. However, a significant increase was found in the level of anti-
inflammatory cytokine IL-4 in the depression and AD cases compared to the AD
only controls (P=0.037). No other cytokines had significant differences between
groups.
Conclusion: This study suggests a more anti-inflammatory environment in the
brains of those with depression in AD compared to AD alone. This may represent
reduced inflammation, or it could represent a compensatory anti- inflammatory
response to the presence of depression-related changes in AD. This raised
anti-inflammatory cytokine goes against the general evidence in the literature
for increased inflammation in depression and AD, warranting further
investigation into potential mechanisms involved.

Poster number: S_PZ2_048 (TP)

Sub-Theme: α-Synuclein, Neuroinflammation, and Cellular Mechanisms
in Parkinson's and Alzheimer's Disease Models

## Investigating changes in interneurons and perineuronal nets in a rodent model
of alpha-synucleinopathy
Authors: Anastasia Dimitriou, Newcastle University
Introduction: Dementia with Lewy Bodies (DLB) is characterized by the
accumulation of aggregated insoluble α- synuclein (α-syn) protein. Patients with
DLB exhibit impaired higher cognitive functions which involve the prefrontal
cortex (PFC). Parvalbumin-expressing (PV) interneurons, which are critical for
normal cognitive function, are often surrounded by a protective extracellular
matrix –the perineuronal nets (PNNs). Recent evidence suggests changes in both
PV cells and the PNN could play important roles in neurodegeneration.
Methods: Using transgenic mice that express human mutant (hA30P) a-syn we are
investigating the impact of α-syn pathology on PV interneurons and PNNs in the
PFC at different disease stages in A30P compared to control mice. We used
immunofluorescence (IFC) in coronal frozen sections containing PFC from
paraformaldehyde fixed brains of male and female A30P and age-matched C57BL/6
wild type (WT) mice. IFC was conducted against PV to investigate the
interneurons and lectin and avidin staining was performed to detect PNNs.
Sections were imaged using fluorescence confocal microscopy and densitometric
analysis was conducted using FIJI software. We compared PV and PNN integrated
density between medial PFC (mPFC) including anterior cingulate, prelimbic and
infralimbic cortices and lateral orbitofrontal cortex (LOFC) in both A30P and WT
mice.
Results: In aged (10-12 months old) A30P and WT mice most PV cells in mPFC and
LOFC were surrounded by PNNs. Integrated density measurements were significantly
higher for both PV immunofluorescence (n=4 WT, n=5 A30P; p<0.05, unpaired
t-test) and PNN staining (p<0.05, unpaired t-test) in LOFC compared to mPFC
in both WT and A30P mice. Interestingly, we also found significantly reduced
integrated density of PV expression only in the mPFC in the aged A30P mice
compared to WT mice (n=4 WT, n=5 A30P; p<0.05, unpaired t-test).
Conclusions: We found significant regional differences in PV cell and PNN
distribution across PFC regions in both WT and A30P mice. Importantly, we also
found that abnormal human a-syn expression in A30P mice caused a reduction in PV
expression which may represent a downregulation of expression or a loss of PV
neurons or processes. This may have functional implications in this model of

Poster number: S_PZ2_049 (TP)

Sub-Theme: α-Synuclein, Neuroinflammation, and Cellular Mechanisms
in Parkinson's and Alzheimer's Disease Models

## Evidence for prodromal neuroinflammation in a rodent model of
alpha-synucleinopathy
Authors: Ibtisam Al-Musawi, Newcastle University
Toxic aggregation of the presynaptic protein alpha-synuclein is a key feature of
several neurodegenerative diseases, including dementia with Lewy bodies (DLB)
and Parkinson’s disease. Recent studies suggest neuroinflammation early in the
disease may be a prodromal change occurring in DLB patients. Transgenic mice
expressing mutant human alpha-synuclein (hA30P) show early increases in cortical
network hyperexcitability. The study aims to investigate whether this early
abnormal cortical network activity may be linked to neuroinflammatory changes
occurring prior to the onset of cognitive dysfunction.
Fixed, frozen sections from the hippocampus of 2-4 month old hA30P and
age-matched wild-type (WT) mice were immunofluorescently stained for GFAP,
Iba-1, and c-Fos, which reveal reactive astrocytes, reactive microglia, and
newly upregulated neuronal activity, respectively. Sections were imaged and
densitometric analysis of the images performed using FIJI software. A comparison
of Z-scores of percentage area stained was conducted using unpaired Mann-Whitney
t-test.
Results showed an interesting differential laminar distribution of astrocytes and
microglia in the CA3 region of hippocampus. Very few GFAP+ astrocytes were
localized within stratum pyramidale, while reactive microglia were mainly
localized within it. There was a significant increase in % area of CA3 region of
the hippocampus of hA30P occupied by reactive astrocyte and microglia compared
to WT (GFAP+ astrocytes 27 sections/8 WT mice and 27 sections/8 hA30P mice,
P<0.0001 and Iba-1+ microglia 29 sections/8 WT mice and 27 sections/8 hA30P
mice, P<0.05). In addition morphological changes including an enlargement of
soma with elongation of processes of reactive astrocytes and enlargement of
reactive microglia soma and decreased length of the processes in hA30P mice in
comparison to WT. The results also showed a significant decrease in c-Fos+
neurons/area in hA30P compared to WT mice (15 sections/4 hA30P mice, 15
sections/4 WT mice, p<0.011).
We have found evidence of early neuroinflammation in the hippocampus in young
male hA30P mice at 2-4 months of age with an increase in gliosis. This is
accompanied by down-regulation of c-Fos expression consistent with chronic
network hyperexcitability.

Poster number: S_PZ2_050 (TP)

Sub-Theme: α-Synuclein, Neuroinflammation, and Cellular Mechanisms
in Parkinson's and Alzheimer's Disease Models

## Patient-based modelling of alpha-synuclein pathology in the murine
brain
Authors: Inga Schmidt, University of Aberdeen; Lianne Robinson -
Translational Neuroscience University of Aberdeen; Peter I. Imoesi -
Translational Neuroscience University of Aberdeen; Bettina Platt - Translational
Neuroscience University of Aberdeen; Gernot Riedel - Translational Neuroscience
University of Aberdeen
Parkinson’s disease (PD) is a neurodegenerative disorder characterised by motor
dysfunction and α-synuclein (α-syn) pathology. Patients can however show diverse
symptoms of variable severity, leading to an uncertain prognosis. To study PD,
toxin-based (e.g. MPTP) mouse models of PD can be used to induce motor
dysfunction, but lack the disease aetiology of PD. In contrast, seeding models
of PD are based on the prion-like function of α-synuclein. When pathological
α-syn is injected into the brain of a C57Bl6J mouse, it can act as a template
for murine α-syn, causing spreading, aggregation and neuronal dysfunction,
closely mimicking the actual disease processes.
Here, we investigated whether differential synuclein profiles might correlate
with individual disease progression.
To test this hypothesis, we designed a new seeding model of PD based on human
α-syn infusion into the dorsal striatum of 12-week-old male C57Bl6J mice. Α-syn
derived from post-mortem tissue from four male PD patients using a
sucrose-gradient based extraction to identify high vs low amounts of toxic and
aggregated α-syn using western-blotting. A randomized, blinded study was set up
to assess behavioural and molecular changes in this model six months
post-striatal infusion in a cohort of 82 mice, where mice received α-syn from a
patient with high or low amount of α-syn (n=12 per patient) or one of two
control buffers (n=6 per patient and n=10).
Presence of phosphorylated α-syn with IHC (DAB, pSer129, 1:5000) in the striatum
as well as other areas, such as the S1BF area in the cortex, highlighting a
successful introduction of toxic α-syn stable for 7 months as well as seeding
activity of α-syn. Quantitative analysis of western blots showed an increase of
phosphorylated α-syn (pSer129, 1:5000, Mann Whitney test) in the groups that
received patient α-syn. Interestingly, further analysis of inflammatory markers
showed differences in astrogliosis between the different patient groups (GFAP,
1:1000, Kruskal-Wallis test). Analysis of behavioural tests such as home cage
activity, nestbuilding and balance beam (2-way ANOVA for all tests) showed none
to minor changes in the behaviour. Home cage activity was reduced during the
dusk and dawn period in all mice that received α-syn, while their overall
ability to build nests and maintain their balance on the balance beam seemed
unchanged.
This model features aggregated α-syn and a patient-specific inflammatory
response, while only expressing minor behavioural changes. We propose this model
would be an ideal candidate for testing drugs aiming to intervene with PD prior
to onset of behavioural changes.

Poster number: S_PZ2_051 (TP)

Sub-Theme: α-Synuclein, Neuroinflammation, and Cellular Mechanisms
in Parkinson's and Alzheimer's Disease Models

## Gut-Brain Axis in a viral model of Parkinson’s Disease: Characterising
alpha-synuclein pathology and bacterial interventions
Authors: Philip A. Hoffmann, University of Aberdeen; Inga Schmidt -
School of Medicine, Medical Sciences & Nutrition University of Aberdeen;
Imke E. Mulder - 4D Pharma Research Ltd 4D Pharma Plc; Gernot Riedel - School of
Medicine, Medical Sciences & Nutrition University of Aberdeen; Bettina Platt
- School of Medicine, Medical Sciences & Nutrition University of
Aberdeen
Parkinson’s disease (PD) is the second most common neurodegenerative disease in
the aging population. PD primarily affects dopaminergic neurons of the
substantia nigra and presents with alpha-synuclein (αsyn) protein aggregations
spreading through the brain. Motor symptoms (postural instability and tremor)
accompany disease progression. Gut effects are observed up to 20 years before
other complaints, alongside αsyn expression in the intestine and colon,
inflammation, and dysbiosis. Microbiome changes have been catalogued for PD
patients. The aim of this study is to define gut bacterial candidates and
metabolites that can improve neuronal health and affect the spread and/or
aggregation of αsyn.
Here, virus-based gene delivery (human-A53T-αsyn, AMS Biotechnology) was used to
model early events of synuclein pathology. An empty virus served as control.
Preparations comprise rat hippocampal cultures and neuroblastoma SH-SY5Y cells,
incubated post viral exposure for multiple days. Toxicity was monitored using
propidium iodide and CCK-8 viability assays (Merck). SH-SY5Y cells were
differentiated and treated with a panel of anaerobic bacterial supernatants (SN;
e.g., Blautia coccoides, and Fecalibacterium prausnitzii, identified as being
reduced in PD patients) to determine protective or damaging effects.
A53T-αsyn toxicity is calculated based on at least 3 independent replications and
expressed relative to empty virus (mean ± SEMs). Confidence intervals determine
variance, and one-way ANOVAs followed by Bonferroni post-tests will reveal
differences between treatments.
Human-A53T-αsyn viral tag expression confirmed early cellular uptake (day 3) in
all cell types, followed by αsyn protein emergence (days 4-5) progressing over
time, alongside toxicity. A 5.1E10 vg/ml viral titre caused >25% ± 5% cell
toxicity by day 6. In differentiated SHSY5Y, a loss of ~45% ± 10% was observed
by day 7 (CCK-8 assay). Bacterial SNs are currently being tested vs vehicle
(media) at 10% as preliminary bacterial testing results showed poorer efficacy
at 5% and 15%. Ongoing work expands on the bacterial panel before co-treatment
with virus.
In conclusion, our in vitro αsyn models show cell loss and αsyn protein
expression, thus offering a test bed for gut bacterial preparations.

Poster number: S_PZ2_052 (PP)

Sub-Theme: α-Synuclein, Neuroinflammation, and Cellular Mechanisms
in Parkinson's and Alzheimer's Disease Models

## Effects of soluble ?-Synuclein oligomers on dopaminergic neurons in
substantia nigra and ventral tegmental area using whole-cell patch clamp
recording
Authors: Ivana Del Popolo, University of Warwick Introduction
Parkinson’s disease (PD) is a neurodegenerative condition that leads to motor
dysfunctions such as rigidity, bradykinesia, and postural instability. A
hallmark of PD is the early degeneration of dopaminergic neurons (DNs) in the
substantia nigra pars compacta (SNc). It is unclear why these DNs are so
vulnerable and other DNs, such as those in the ventral tegmental area (VTA) are
only affected later in the disease.
The causes of PD remain still elusive, but protein aggregation probably plays a
key role. Alpha synuclein is a small native protein that can misfold and
aggregate in PD, and its deposition in Lewy bodies closely correlates with
disease progression. There is strong evidence that small soluble aggregates of
alpha synuclein are toxic to neuronal function. For example, it has been
demonstrated that in SNc DNs, alpha synuclein aggregates open KATP channels,
reducing neuronal excitability (Hill et al, 2019). We are investigating whether
similar effects occur in VTA DNs.
Method
Acute coronal brain slices were prepared from P15-21 C57/BL6 mice. Whole-cell
patch clamp recordings were made from SNc and VTA DNs. DNs were identified by
their electrophysiological profile, position in the slice and hyperpolarising
response to dopamine. Alpha synuclein oligomers were prepared from pre-formed
fibrils (PFFs) (Abcam, ab218819) using a published protocol (Kumar et al, 2020).
Alpha synuclein oligomers were introduced into DNs via the patch pipette as in
Hill et al., (2019) and were recorded for 30 minutes to monitor changes to
neuronal properties.
Preliminary results and approaches for statistical analyses
Alpha synuclein oligomers had similar effects on SNc DNs to those reported by
Hill et al, (2019) such as increasing whole cell conductance. Ongoing work is
investigating the time-dependent effects of alpha synuclein oligomers on ventral
tegmental area (VTA) DNs.
All statistical analyses will be completed using non-parametric tests, tests such
as Mann-Whitney and Kruskall-Wallis. Hill, E., et al (2021), eneuro, 8(1).

Poster number: S_PZ2_053 (TP)

Sub-Theme: α-Synuclein, Neuroinflammation, and Cellular Mechanisms
in Parkinson's and Alzheimer's Disease Models

## Investigating Selective Neuronal Vulnerability in Alzheimer’s and Parkinson’s
Disease With Patient Induced Pluripotent Stem Cells
Authors: Ajantha Abey, University of Oxford, Kavli Institute; Bryan
Ng - Dementia Research Institute UCL; Rachel Heon-Roberts - Department of
Physiology, Anatomy, and Genetics University of Oxford, Kavli Institute; Becky
Carlyle
- Department of Physiology, Anatomy, and Genetics University of Oxford, Kavli
Institute; Nora Bengoa-Vergniory - Basque Centre for Neuroscience Achucarro;
Richard Wade-Martins - Department of Physiology, Anatomy, and Genetics
University of Oxford, Kavli Institute
Introduction:
Alzheimer’s and Parkinson’s disease feature progressive neurodegeneration
associated with the accumulation of protein aggregates in a remarkably
regionally selective manner. The cortical neurons that are relatively vulnerable
in Alzheimer’s Disease (AD) are only affected late in Parkinson’s Disease (PD),
whereas midbrain dopaminergic neurons exhibit striking vulnerability in PD, but
are relatively spared in AD. Rodent and human post mortem studies have posited a
role for cell autonomous mechanisms driving this, but having a live human cell
model that can replicate the phenomenon of selective neuronal vulnerability can
help to better determine common and contrasting disease mechanisms and identify
therapeutic targets.
Methods:
Here, we used induced pluripotent stem cell (iPSC) derived neurons as they offer
a rare opportunity to examine cell autonomous vulnerability in live human cells.
iPSCs from patients with AD-related presenilin-1 mutations (n=3), PD- related
leucine rich repeat kinase 2 mutations (G2019S n=3, R1441C n=3), and isogenic
corrected (n=3) and healthy controls (n=4) have been differentiated into both
cortical neurons and midbrain dopaminergic neurons to enable comparison of
vulnerability phenotypes in different neuronal subtypes from the same
patient.
Approach for Statistical Analysis:
All statistical comparisons are two-way ANOVA with Bonferroni correction for
multiple comparisons. Results and Conclusions:
AD cortical neurons insulted with alpha-synuclein pre-formed fibrils (PFFs) have
impaired neurite outgrowth, reduced synaptic density, and extensive aggregate
formation. Meanwhile, PFF insulted PD cortical neurons exhibit normal neurite
outgrowth and relatively little aggregation, whereas PD dopamine neurons readily
produce aggregates. These preliminary results show relative vulnerability of AD
and resilience of PD cortical neurons to alpha synuclein aggregates for the
first time. This suggests the selective vulnerability to proteinopathy exhibited
in these diseases may be replicated by the iPSC neuronal model, and additionally
supports the notion that cell intrinsic factors may partly determine this
vulnerability.

Poster number: S_PZ2_054 (TP)

Sub-Theme: α-Synuclein, Neuroinflammation, and Cellular Mechanisms
in Parkinson's and Alzheimer's Disease Models

## Human LUHMES neurons as an attractive cellular system to investigate
Parkinson’s Disease related pathologies affecting endo-lysosomal network
Authors: Dorota A Nawrot, University of Oxford; Annapoorna Kannan -
ARUK Oxford Drug Discovery Institute, Nuffield Department of Medicine University
of Oxford; Katerina Gospodinova - ARUK Oxford Drug Discovery Institute, Nuffield
Department of Medicine University of Oxford; Margarida Ruas - ARUK Oxford Drug
Discovery Institute, Nuffield Department of Medicine University of Oxford; Emma
Mead - ARUK Oxford Drug Discovery Institute, Nuffield Department of Medicine
University of Oxford; Paul Brennan - ARUK Oxford Drug Discovery Institute,
Nuffield Department of Medicine University of Oxford
1. Introduction
LUHMES is a conditionally immortalised human, mesencephalon-derived cell line,
which can be quickly differentiated to a homogenous population of
dopaminergic-like neurons upon tetracycline addition. This, together with an
amenable to transduction nature, makes them an attractive cellular system to
study PD-related pathologies.
Endolysosomal network dysregulation is an underlying factor in PD development,
and proteins part of the pathway are attractive candidates for therapeutic
intervention. We aim to establish LUHMES-based reporter cell lines for PD target
validation and high-throughput monitoring of endolysosomal parameters.
2. Methods
LUHMES were transduced with lentiviruses for expression of genetically encoded
fluorescent reporters, monitoring luminal lysosomal pH. After selection, cells
were FACS sorted to obtain homogenous levels of reporter expression. Following
differentiation into dopaminergic-like neurons, cells were challenged with
different treatments and reporter signal measured using a high-content imaging
platform. LUHMES neurons were also treated with cell- permeable fluorescent
probes (e.g. Bodipy-FL pepstatin A) to assess lysosomal parameters, as well as
changes in pH upon treatment with bafilomycin and chloroquine.
3. Statistical analysis
Input images were processed using Harmony/Columbus Image Analysis Software.
Nuclei, cytoplasmic regions and fluorescent puncta were identified under control
and treatment conditions. Puncta were segmented and the number per cell and
fluorescence intensity quantified. Data were presented as a mean ±SD (n=3-5) and
analysed using one-way ANOVA or t-test.
4. Results and conclusions
We showed that LUHMES neurons express neuronal markers of dopaminergic lineage
and exert spontaneous neuronal activity. Fluorescent probes were successful in
assessing pH-induced changes in fluorescence intensity and distribution of
endolysosomal parameters. In conclusion, differentiated LUHMES cells have proven
to be a robust and attractive cell system for the study of PD-relevant
endolysosomal functions, as well as early drug discovery target validation.

Poster number: S_PZ3_055 (TP)

Sub-Theme: α-Synuclein, Neuroinflammation, and Cellular Mechanisms
in Parkinson's and Alzheimer's Disease Models

## α-synuclein expression in L62 mice, before and after HMTM treatment
Authors: Monica Magri', University of Aberdeen; Karima Schwab -
Medical Sciences University of Aberdeen; Charlie Harrington - Medical Sciences
University of Aberdeen; Gernot Riedel - Medical Sciences University of
Aberdeen
Introduction: α-synuclein (α-syn) aggregation in fibrils is a hallmark of
synucleinoapthies such as Parkinson’s Disease. The role of α-syn in the
development and progression of these disorders has been studied using mouse
models, e.g. the Line 62 model (L62), in which full-length human α-syn fused to
a membrane-targeting signal sequence is overexpressed under the control of the
mouse Thy1-promotor.
The first aim of this study was to re-establish behavioural and histopathological
phenotypes in L62 mice (Frahm et al., 2018), following the transfer of these
mice to a new breeding and laboratory facilities. Secondly, we wanted to confirm
the inhibitory effects of HMTM on α-syn levels (Schwab et al., in 2018).
Methods: Both male and female mice (16 controls; 37 L62) were used for this
study. At 6 months of age, mice were administered HMTM orally (gavage) at a dose
of 15mg/kg/day, for 6 weeks. After this, brain tissue was harvested, embedded
and sectioned at selected areas, and α-syn levels quantified
immunohistochemically.
Results and conclusions: Qualitative and quantitative analysis showed heightened
accumulation of α-syn in L62 brains, while control brains were void from such
labelling, confirming the results reported earlier (Frahm et al., in 2018). The
analysis of the effect of HMTM on α-syn levels is ongoing.
HMTM has the potential to be a disease-modifying treatment for synucleinopathies,
and L62 mice offer a model for screening other compounds for the potential
treatment of these disorders.
References:
Frahm, Silke, et al. "Alpha-Synuclein transgenic mice, h-α-SynL62, display α-Syn
aggregation and a dopaminergic phenotype reminiscent of Parkinson’s disease."
Behavioural Brain Research 339 (2018): 153-168.
Schwab, Karima, et al. "A protein aggregation inhibitor, leuco-methylthioninium
bis (hydromethanesulfonate), decreases α-synuclein inclusions in a transgenic
mouse model of synucleinopathy." Frontiers in Molecular Neuroscience 10 (2018):
447.

Poster number: S_PZ3_056 (PP)

Sub-Theme: α-Synuclein, Neuroinflammation, and Cellular Mechanisms
in Parkinson's and Alzheimer's Disease Models

## Investigating the Effects of Chronic Pharmacological Inhibition of Glymphatic
Function on an Animal Model of α- synuclein Propagation
Authors: Douglas M Lopes, University College London; Sophie K
Lewellyn - Department of Imaging University College London; Jack A Wells -
Department of Imaging University College London; Guglielmo Verona - Department
of Inflammation University College London; Mark F Lythgoe - Department of
Imaging University College London; Ian F Harrison - Department of Imaging
University College London
Introduction :
The glymphatic clearance system is a brain-wide pathway responsible for the
removal of waste solutes. Facilitated by astrocytic aquaporin-4 channels (Aqp4),
this pathway has been shown to effectively clear proteins prone to aggregation
in neurodegenerative diseases including amyloid-β and tau. The extracellular
space, which is cleared by the glymphatic system, defines the major conduit for
cell-to-cell propagation of such proteins in the brain due to their ‘prion-like’
characteristics. Here, we will test whether modulation of glymphatic function
affects α-synuclein (αS) propagation in an animal model of Parkinson’s
Disease.
Methods :
To study the impact of glymphatic function on synuclein pathology, αS propagation
will be initiated in young transgenic mice (M83 line) overexpressing a mutated
(A53T) form of human αS, by intrastriatal injection of fibrillar recombinant αS
or monomers as controls. Animals will be treated with a pharmacological Aqp4
inhibitor, TGN-020 or vehicle for 6 weeks. Motor behavioural performance will be
accessed every 2 weeks. At the end of the study in vivo structural whole-brain
MRI scans will be acquired, as well as immunohistochemical characterisation of
αS pathology in the striatum and connected brain regions. All the work will be
performed in accordance with the UK’s Animals (Scientific Procedures) Act
1986.
Statistical analysis:
Data will be tested for normality and, if normally distributed, comparisons
between groups will be made via either a repeated measures two-way ANOVA
followed by post hoc Bonferroni tests for multiple repeated comparisons
(behaviour data), or regular one-way ANOVA followed by post hoc Bonferroni tests
(MRI and histology). If not normally distributed, non-parametric tests (e.g.
Kruskal-Wallis) will be used. Power calculations indicate that n=8 will be
sufficient to allow us to determine if synuclein propagation and its resultant
neurodegeneration is exacerbated as a result of glymphatic function

Poster number: S_PZ3_057 (PP)

Sub-Theme: α-Synuclein, Neuroinflammation, and Cellular Mechanisms
in Parkinson's and Alzheimer's Disease Models

## Investigating the Role of Aquaporin-4 Mediated Glymphatic Clearance in
Parkinson’s Disease
Authors: Sophie K Llewellyn, University College London; Douglas M
Lopes - Centre for Advanced Biomedical Imaging University College London; Steve
M Gentleman - Department of Brain Sciences Imperial College London; Anthony H V
Schapira - UCL Queen Square Institute of Neurology University College London;
Mark F Lythgoe - Centre for Advanced Biomedical Imaging University College
London; Ian F Harrison - Centre for Advanced Biomedical Imaging University
College London
Introduction
The glymphatic system is a brain pathway involved in clearance of cellular waste.
This system relies on aquaporin-4 (AQP4) water channels present on astrocytic
endfeet, which ensheath the cerebral vasculature and allow cerebrospinal fluid
to move across the interstitium. Studies show that this pathway effectively
clears aggregation- prone proteins in neurodegenerative disease, e.g. amyloid-β
and tau, and AQP4 expression changes have been observed with Alzheimer’s disease
(AD) progression. Evidence suggests that α-synuclein (αS) is also cleared by
this system, so we hypothesise that, like in AD, AQP4 expression may also change
throughout development of Parkinson’s disease (PD), effecting the ability of the
brain to clear pathogenic αS. Here, we will study post-mortem PD brain tissue,
to investigate AQP4 expression and localisation throughout disease progression.
Further, we will look at AQP4’s membrane binding partners, the dystrophin
associated complex (DAC), which ensures AQP4’s polarisation at the astrocytic
endfeet; to determine if dysregulation of these proteins also becomes affected
in disease.
Methods
To study the pathological significance of AQP4 mediated glymphatic clearance of
αS in PD, post-mortem tissue from three brain regions (locus coeruleus,
substantia nigra, and prefrontal cortex) from both early and late-stage PD
cases, and age-matching controls, will be examined. Tissue sections will be
stained for AQP4, αS, GFAP (astrocytic marker) and IsolectinB4 (blood vessel
marker), for quantification of AQP4 vessel polarisation and study of the
relationship between AQP4 expression and αS deposition. Further, qPCR and
Western blotting will be used to evaluate gene and protein expression levels of
DAC elements for study of the integrity of this complex throughout PD
progression.
Analysis
Statistical comparison between group means will be made using a two-way ANOVA
with Bonferroni Multiple Comparison Test, and regression analysis with Pearson
correlation coefficient used to detect correlative association between
continuous variable datasets. For all experiments, n=15/group will be used;
calculated to provide >95% power in detection of significant differences
(p<0.05) between groups means based on previously published control data.

Poster number: S_PZ3_058 (TP)

Sub-Theme: α-Synuclein, Neuroinflammation, and Cellular Mechanisms
in Parkinson's and Alzheimer's Disease Models

## Early Changes in Network Dynamics in Primary Hippocampal Neuronal Cultures
Derived from the AppNL-G-F Mouse Model of Alzheimer’s Disease
Authors: R. J. Turner, University of Cambridge; Y. Chen - Department
of Physiology, Development and Neuroscience University of Cambridge; T. L. Kelly
- Department of Physiology, Development and Neuroscience University of
Cambridge; T. Fuchsberger - Department of Physiology, Development and
Neuroscience University of Cambridge; O. Paulsen - Department of Physiology,
Development and Neuroscience University of Cambridge
Introduction
Amyloid β (Aβ) pathophysiology is an early and persistent feature of Alzheimer’s
disease (AD), developing many years before symptomatic onset. Preceding the
formation of amyloid plaques, extracellular Aβ has been shown to induce synaptic
dysfunction and subsequent hyperexcitability in the hippocampus.
Methods
The humanised AppNL-G-F knock-in mouse model contains genetic mutations, found in
patients with familial AD, that increase the expression of pathogenic Aβisoforms
and increase Aβ oligomerisation. Utilising primary hippocampal neuronal cultures
derived from AppNL-G-F or WT mice, grown on 60-channel multi-electrode arrays
(MEAs), this work aimed to elucidate the earliest signs of network disruption
due to Aβ-induced pathophysiology by performing regular recordings of
spontaneous activity over a 56 days-in-vitro culture maturation period.
Approach for Statistical Analysis
Assumptions for statistical testing were checked using the Shapiro-Wilk and
Bartlett’s tests for the normality of distribution and equality of variance,
respectively. Student’s t-test and Mann-Whitney U test were used for comparing
parametric and non-parametric data as appropriate, with the Benjamini-Hochberg
correction implemented to control for the false discovery rate.
Results and Conclusions
Mean firing rates increased for both genotypes as cultures matured but were
broadly comparable. However, a higher proportion of activity occurred within
bursts for AppNL-G-F cultures. Furthermore, they demonstrated comparative within
burst hyperexcitability via several indicative metrics. We next plan to evaluate
whether novel pharmacological interventions at an early stage may prevent such
hyperexcitability from developing.
In conclusion, AppNL-G-F MEA cultures demonstrate early and progressive
hyperexcitability and network dysfunction. Indeed, such early aberrations may
predispose networks to subsequent pathogenic mechanisms and pathological spread
in AD. Although this AppNL-G-F model may be used to gain such mechanistic
insights, it also has further utility for the pre-clinical testing of novel
treatment strategies that may benefit patients with AD.

Poster number: S_PZ3_059 (TP)

Sub-Theme: α-Synuclein, Neuroinflammation, and Cellular Mechanisms
in Parkinson's and Alzheimer's Disease Models

## Induced Epileptiform Activity is Increased in Ex Vivo Hippocampal Slices
Derived from Humanised Knock-In Mouse Models of Alzheimer's Disease
Authors: Tommy L Kelly, University of Cambridge; Richard J Turner -
Department of Physiology, Development, and Neuroscience University of Cambridge;
Tanja Fuchsberger - Department of Physiology, Development, and Neuroscience
University of Cambridge; Palani G Nagappan - Department of Physiology,
Development, and Neuroscience University of Cambridge; Ole Paulsen - Department
of Physiology, Development, and Neuroscience University of Cambridge
1. Introduction
Hyperexcitability of neurons in the hippocampus and entorhinal cortex has been
demonstrated in Alzheimer’s disease.
2. Methods
We performed multi-electrode array (MEA) recordings of hippocampal slices from
young wild-type mice, and the AppNL-F and AppNL-G-F knock-in (App-KI) mouse
models of Alzheimer’s disease amyloidopathy. To investigate the potential for
amyloid pathology to drive early hyperexcitability, epileptiform activity was
induced in these slices by treatment with aCSF supplemented with high K+
concentrations. A novel automated analysis pipeline was designed to detect
epileptiform activity.
3. Approach for Statistical Analysis
One-way ANOVA with post hoc Holm-Šídák tests comparing WT mice to AppNL- F and
AppNL-G-F mice
4. Results and conclusions
We found an increased frequency of induced epileptiform activity in the
hippocampus of AppNL- F mice (n = 8, 0.42
± 0.04 Hz, Holm-Šídák: t(24) = 2.75, p = 0.022) and AppNL-G-F mice (n = 11, 0.38
± 0.05 Hz, Holm-Šídák: t(24) = 0.026, p = 0.026) treated with a high K+
concentration of 7.5 mM from as early as 4–5 weeks old compared to WT mice (n =
8, 0.22 ± 0.05 Hz, One-way ANOVA: F(2,24) = 4.34, p = 0.025) — the earliest that
hyperexcitability has been observed in these mouse models to date. At this age,
amyloid deposition has not yet begun, thus suggesting soluble amyloid oligomers
are the driving factor behind increased epileptiform activity. In 12–13 week-old
AppNL- F mice, where amyloid plaque deposition is still yet to occur, increased
induced epileptiform activity was maintained, however, slices derived from
AppNL-G-F mice, which have plaques at this age, had comparable levels of
epileptiform activity to WT. These findings suggest that inducible
hyperexcitability occurs at an early age in App-KI mouse models of Alzheimer’s
disease amyloidopathy, driven by soluble amyloid oligomers.

Poster number: S_PZ3_060 (TP)

Sub-Theme: α-Synuclein, Neuroinflammation, and Cellular Mechanisms
in Parkinson's and Alzheimer's Disease Models

## Exploring different plaque environments in Alzheimer’s disease using spatial
transcriptomics
Authors: Anna Mallach, University College London; Magdalena Zielonka
- Centre for Brain and Disease Research Flanders Institute for Biotechnology
(VIB); Lorena Arancibia - Dementia Research Institute at UCL University College
London; Bart de Strooper - Centre for Brain and Disease Research Flanders
Institute for Biotechnology (VIB)
Previous research has described a plaque induced gene (PIG) response to amyloid
pathology in an animal model of Alzheimer’s disease (AD). These genes suggest an
involvement of microglia and astrocytes in how cells in the brain respond to
pathology, however the lack of resolution in the study did not allow for
specific intercellular interactions to be studied. New advances in the field of
spatial transcriptomics now allow us for the first time to study changes in the
cellular neighbourhood in response to a build-up of pathology and specifically
investigate how different cell types contribute.
Using state-of-the-art spatial transcriptomic platforms such as CosMx and
Stereo-Seq, we investigated cellular responses in the APPNL-G-F animal model of
AD.
We explored changes in the neighbourhood of plaque niches by calculating the
number of different cell types present within a 40 m radius around plaques. The
subsequent dimensionality reduction highlighted differences in microglial
density around plaques, which showed a positive correlation with an increase in
disease-associated microglial (DAM) genes in microglia, analysed using Pearson
correlation . Using SENIC co-expression analysis, we identified Irf8 as a key
driver of these microglia changes around some plaques . In line with an increase
in DAM, we also identified an increase in reactive astrocytes in the same plaque
niches, which was driven by Sox9.
Using continuous differential gene expression using the quasi-likelihood F-Test,
we investigated changes in neuronal transcriptome. We identified changes in
neurons as microglia activation increased in the plaque niche s. The proposed
function of these genes, analysed using gene set enrichment analysis, showed
increases in neuronal stress and downregulation of synaptic function.
These findings suggest that cells have differential response to different
plaques, highlighted in differences seen in microglia, astrocytes and
neurons.

Poster number: S_PZ3_061 (TP)

Sub-Theme: α-Synuclein, Neuroinflammation, and Cellular Mechanisms
in Parkinson's and Alzheimer's Disease Models

## Platelet-activating factor receptor (PAFR) modulation as potential strategy
to reduce astrocyte pro-inflammatory signalling in Alzheimer’s disease
Authors: Sakshi Hans, University of Limerick
The platelet-activating factor (PAF) molecule is a pro-inflammatory phospholipid
mediator that functions by binding its receptor PAFR. PAF is a key player in the
mechanism of chronic inflammation. The pathology of disorders such as
cardiovascular disease, cancer, rheumatoid arthritis, but also neurodegenerative
diseases has been linked to such chronic inflammation [1].
PAF signalling has been associated with cardiovascular diseases, however its role
in neurodegenerative disorders is less clear. The amyloid-beta hypothesis of
Alzheimer’s disease (AD) suggests that neuroinflammation due to amyloid-beta in
the brain is a driving cause behind this disorder [2].
Here, we investigate whether amyloid-beta driven PAF signalling has implications
for AD.
Our preliminary results show that PAFR expression is significantly upregulated
after treatment with Aβ and LPS (as positive control) both on gene and protein
levels. Protein levels of PAFR are significantly decreased after inhibiting PAF
receptors following treatment with Aβ. Inhibiting PAF receptors also
significantly reduces levels of oxidative stress, as determined by fluorescent
staining. Additionally, inhibiting PAF receptors also decreases astrocyte
activation, determined by staining with anti-GFAP, a marker for astrocyte
activation.
Thus, PAF signalling seems to control the majority of neuroinflammation in our in
vitro model. Further assays will model AD pathology in neurons and analyse AD
hallmarks in neurons treated with medium from astrocytes exposed to our
treatment conditions. We conclude that PAFR inhibition is a strategy in AD and
identified molecules with potent PAFR inhibitory activity.
1. Furman, D., et al., Chronic inflammation in the etiology of disease across the
life span. Nat Med, 2019. 25(12): p. 1822-1832.
2. Heneka, M.T., et al., Neuroinflammation in Alzheimer's disease. The Lancet
Neurology, 2015. 14(4): p. 388- 405.

Poster number: S_PZ3_062 (TP)

Sub-Theme: α-Synuclein, Neuroinflammation, and Cellular Mechanisms
in Parkinson's and Alzheimer's Disease Models

## SVCA approach analysis for TSPO PET is sensitive to LPS-induced
neuroinflammation in humans
Authors: Riccardo De Marco, Brighton and Sussex Medical School,
Brighton, UK; Alessandro Colasanti - Department of Neuroscience Brighton and
Sussex Medical School, Brighton, UK; Neil A Harrison - Cardiff University Brain
Research Imaging Centre (CUBRIC) Cardiff University, Cardiff, UK; Julia Schubert
- Department of Neuroimaging Institute of Psychiatry, Psychology &
Neuroscience, King’s College London, London, United Kingdom; Mattia Veronese -
Department of Neuroimaging Institute of Psychiatry, Psychology &
Neuroscience, King’s College London, London, United Kingdom; Prince Nwaubani -
Department of Clinical Neuroscience and Neuroimaging Brighton and Sussex Medical
School; Georgios Tertikas - Clinical and Experimental Medicine Brighton and
Sussex Medical School; Andrew W Barritt - Department of Neuroscience Brighton
and Sussex Medical School, Brighton, UK
Background: The development of a robust, clinically-viable imaging marker of
neuroinflammation is currently an unmet need in neuroimmunology drug discovery.
The current gold standard is TSPO PET due to its relative molecular specificity
for microglia. However, the lack of a reference brain region devoid of TSPO
expression and consequent need for invasive and methodologically challenging
arterial blood sampling has hindered its wider clinical applicability. A
supervised clustering algorithm (SVCA)-based technique, that extracts a
pseudo-reference region from PET voxels with minimal specific binding, has
recently been introduced to enable non-invasive quantification of
neuroinflammatory processes using TSPO PET. Here we present the first direct
demonstration that SVCA can also enable non-invasive assessment of
experimentally-induced neuroinflammation in the human brain. Methods: 19 healthy
volunteers (mean age: 23.7±4.4 (std) years, mean BMI: 24.9±2.4 (std) Kg/m2)
underwent PET scanning using the 2nd generation TSPO tracer [18F]-DPA714, on two
separate sessions: Once 3½ hours after receiving LPS endotoxin (1ng/kg i.v.) and
once 3½ hours after placebo (saline) in a repeated-measures within-subject study
design. We applied SVCA to estimate [18F]-DPA714 DVR (distribution volume ratio)
as a proxy of TSPO density. Our primary outcome measure was %deltaDVR, i.e. the
increase in TSPO binding induced by LPS compared to placebo [(DVRLPS –
DVRPLAC)/DVRPLAC x 100], which reflects LPS-induced microglia activation.
Peripheral inflammatory response was measured as LPS-induced increases in total
and differential white blood cell (WBC) count relative to placebo Results: LPS
acutely increased WBCs as anticipated. LPS increased DPA714 DVR in the whole
brain (p=0.007) and total cortical grey matter (p=0.02) but had no effect in
subcortical areas or total white matter. We observed a negative correlation
between brain deltaDVR and reduction in lymphocytes count at 3hr post injection
(Pearson’s r=- 0.59 p=0.024). Conclusions: Our findings demonstrate the
viability of a novel, non-invasive approach to TSPO PET for assessing human
neuroinflammation. Our data also shed light on the correspondence between
peripheral and central inflammatory responses.

Poster number: S_PZ3_063 (TP)

Sub-Theme: α-Synuclein, Neuroinflammation, and Cellular Mechanisms
in Parkinson's and Alzheimer's Disease Models

## The neuroprotective properties of NLX-112 in MPTP treated mice are mediated
by reactive gliosis and astrocytic GDNF
Authors: William Powell, University of Hertfordshire; Lucy Annett -
Department of Psychology, Sport and Geography University of Hertfordshire; Ronan
Depoortere - Castres, France Neurolixis; Adrian Newman-Tancredi - Castres,
France Neurolixis; Mahmoud Iravani - Department of Clinical and Pharmaceutical
Sciences University of Hertfordshire
Introduction: Preventing dopaminergic (DA) neuronal death is key to halting the
progression of Parkinson’s Disease (PD). There is evidence for serotonin 5-HT1A
agonists having neuroprotective effects on DA neurons. NLX-112 is a potent and
selective 5-HT1A agonist which is currently undergoing clinical development for
L-DOPA-induced dyskinesia in PD. Therefore, we examined the neuroprotective
potential of NLX-112 in a mouse MPTP model of PD.
Method: Mice were divided into four groups and received either saline, MPTP,
NLX-112 or MPTP+NLX-112 (s.c). Immunoreactivity (-ir) for tyrosine-hydroxylase
(TH, expressed in DA neurons), glial fibrillary associated protein (GFAP, an
astrocytic filament protein), ionized calcium-binding adapter molecule 1 (Iba1,
a microglial phagocytotic protein) and glial derived neurotrophic factor (GDNF,
promotes neuronal survival) was investigated in the substantia- nigra (SN) and
striatum. Cell number, co-localisation and optical-density was used to determine
the extent of -ir. All experiments complied with ARRIVE guidelines.
Approach for statistical analysis: Group comparisons were carried out using
one-way ANOVA followed by Fishers LSD and performed on the statistical software
package GraphPad Prism 9.0.
Results and conclusions: Compared to saline treated mice, MPTP caused a loss of
TH+ve neurons in the SN (-29%) and TH+ve fibre density in the striatum (-55%),
with both effects attenuated by NLX-112 (-3% in the SN and -30% in the
striatum). In the striatum, MPTP increased GFAP-ir, an effect which was reduced
by NLX-112. Co-localisation of GFAP-GDNF in the striatum was increased by MPTP
(110%), and was increased even further by NLX-112+MPTP (333%). In the SN,
GFAP-GDNF co-localisation was unchanged by MPTP, but was increased by
NLX-112+MPTP (173%). Furthermore, MPTP increased Iba1-ir (117%) in the SN, an
effect almost abolished by NLX-112. These data show that NLX-112 exhibits
neuroprotective properties in MPTP treated mice. In this model, NLX-112’s
protective effects are likely mediated through reversal of MPTP induced
inflammation as shown by attenuation of astrogliosis and inhibition of
microgliosis but also by upregulation of the neurotrophic factor, GDNF in
astrocytes.

Poster number: S_PZ3_064 (TP)

Sub-Theme: α-Synuclein, Neuroinflammation, and Cellular Mechanisms
in Parkinson's and Alzheimer's Disease Models

## Transglutaminase 2 in Parkinson's disease model
Authors: Bishr SHIBANI, Nottingham Trent University; Alan Hargreaves
- Science and Technology Nottingham Trent University; Luigi De Girolamo -
Science and Technology Nottingham Trent University; Aslihan Ugun-Klusek -
Science and Technology Nottingham Trent University
Transglutaminase 2 (TG2) is a ubiquitous enzyme that belongs to the
transglutaminase family, which consists of nine multifunctional proteins evolved
from the papain family and is expressed in various cells and tissues. It acts by
catalyzing the Ca2+-dependent covalent crosslinking between γ-carboxamide group
of peptide-bound glutamine and a free primary amine group of lysine residue
bound to a polypeptide or protein, producing a proteolytically-resistant
isopeptide bond. TG2 has been shown to be upregulated in various types of
neurodegenerative diseases including Parkinson’s disease (PD). This association
between TG2 and neurodegeneration has focused on TG2 structure and mechanism of
action, highlighting the importance of TG2 activity and post-translational
modifications. Our aim is to use neuronal cell culture models Differentiated
SH-SY5Y that simulate various molecular lesions that occur in a parkinsonian
nervous system, such as proteasomal inhibition, mitochondrial complex 1
inhibition, and lipid peroxidation, all of which eventually result in protein
aggregation in those neurons. Identifying the transamidating activity of TG2 was
achieved by quantifying incorporated FITC-cadaverine under PD-mimetic
conditions. Our results showed increased TG2 activity (p-value < 0.05 ) after
inducing mitochondrial complex 1 inhibition which manifested in decreased cell
viability and increased oxidative stress. Moreover, Western blot analyses also
showed an increased expression of TG2 in the same model (p-value < 0.05 ). In
addition, our results show colocalization of TG2 and Aggregates of α-synuclein
which have previously been found in tissues of patients with PD, as well as in
other neuronal aging-related diseases. The results suggest the role of TG2 can
be further investigated to identify protein substrates that might contribute to
the progression of PD.

Poster number: T_LRZ_141 (PP)

Sub-Theme: α-Synuclein, Neuroinflammation, and Cellular Mechanisms
in Parkinson's and Alzheimer's Disease Models

## Do histological abnormalities precede early behavioural alterations observed
in LRRK2 Knock-In G2019S mouse model of Parkinson’s?
Authors: Fatima Sheikh, UK Dementia Research Institute
Introduction –
Despite the common association of Parkinson’s (PD) with motor dysfunction, the
earliest manifestations are non- motor in nature (anosmia, alterations to
speech, and problem-solving issues). Despite major histopathological changes
being hallmark to PD (aggregated protein inclusions, synaptic loss, and neuronal
death) it is unknown whether they contribute significantly to the earliest
changes observed in PD. Understanding this would inform upon the temporal order
of the pathophysiology of PD thus aiding in therapeutic design
prioritisation.
Methods –
Here we will use C57Bl6/J mice carrying a knock-in (KI) LRRK2 G2019S mutation, a
genetically faithful model of PD. The LRRK2 G2019S mutation is the most common
genetic cause of PD and presents similarly to the majority of sporadic PD cases.
Histological, morphological, and behavioural measurements will be assessed in
the LRRK2 G2019S KI mice and their wildtype littermates at ages 4, 8, 12, and 24
weeks. Behavioural assessments including ultra-sonic vocalisation (USV)
frequency, duration and repertoire, olfactory discrimination, light-dark box and
elevated zero maze tests will be used to investigate potential changes to
vocalisation, olfaction and anxiety-like behaviours respectively, all functions
affected early in PD. DiOlistic labelling will be used to assess changes in the
number and morphology of dendritic spines in the striatum, cortex and olfactory
bulb. Vasculature interactions between pericyte and endothelial cells and their
impact on the Blood-Brain Barrier (BBB) will be determined using histological
techniques. Finally, Proximity Ligation Assay will be used to detect the level
of soluble aggregates of PD-associated protein alpha synuclein.
Approach for statistical analysis –
For each measure, a two-way ANOVA test will be carried out between WT and LRRK2
KI mice, and between male and female mice.
Our data will aid in determining whether histological abnormalities contribute to
the earliest changes observed in PD, as well as clarifying whether our model is
appropriate for early pathophysiological assessment of Parkinson’s.

Poster number: S_PZ3_066 (TP)

Sub-Theme: α-Synuclein, Neuroinflammation, and Cellular Mechanisms
in Parkinson's and Alzheimer's Disease Models

## RNA binding protein Rbfox1 and its regulation of synaptic function is
required for normal nociception and pain processing
Authors: Dr Olga Baron, University College Dublin; Dr Silvia Oggero
- Wolfson CARD King's College London; Dr George Goodwin - Wolfson CARD King's
College London; Dr Larissa Garcia Pinto - Wolfson CARD King's College London;
Nathalie Tychi - Wolfson CARD King's College London; Lee Phillimore - Wolfson
CARD King's College London
Recent studies suggest that splicing factor Rbfox1 is involved in mediating
maladaptive plasticity in a range of neurological conditions associated with
abnormal neuronal activity and maladaptive plasticity. Rbfox1 is an RNA binding
protein (RBP), which regulates genetic output through alternative splicing
(nuclear function) and regulation of translation (cytoplasmic function). Rbfox1
regulatory networks comprise wide range of genes that are essential for neuronal
excitability and activity as well as trans-cellular signalling. Significant
number of target genes which are regulated by Rbfox1 are also associated with
chronic pain and abnormal nociception.
To address the role of Rbfox1 in the nociceptive system and pain processing
mechanisms, we used Drosophila and mouse genetics combined with behavioural,
molecular and imaging techniques. We provide a significant evidence that Rbfox1
expression is required for normal nociception in sensory neurons of both
species. Functional assessment of somatosensory neuron function in mice with
sensory neuron specific deficiency in Rbfox1, indicates normal activation of
nociceptive neuron stomata in the DRGs following mechanical and thermal
stimulation, excluding any defects in excitability following sensory neuron
specific knockdown. However, transcriptomic analysis combined with functional ex
vivo assessment depolarisation dependent vesicle release at the presynapse
suggest that Rbfox1 deficiency leads to increased drive at the first synapse in
the spinal cord. Further analysis of the Drosophila nociceptive system using
translational reporter tools we demonstrate that Rbfox1 activity adapts to
noxious stimulation and is upregulated following sensitisation. Indeed,
overexpressing Rbfox in Drosophila nociceptors prevents injury induced
sensitisation of nociceptive pathways as evidenced through behavioural
assessment of heat evoked jump behavioural – which is robust measure of
nociceptive sensitisation in flies. We hypothesise that regulation of expression
of RBPs from the Rbfox family following injury is a compensatory mechanism, that
is required for adaptation of the circuit in the process of resolution of pain
and regeneration following injury.

Poster number: S_PZ3_067 (PP)

Sub-Theme: Lipids in Neurodegeneration: Function, Alterations, and
Therapeutic Potential

## Dissecting the role of plasmalogen lipids in synapse function
Authors: Anna Sadilova, Swansea University; Laila Nubi - Medical
School Swansea University; Alannah Grout - Medical School Swansea University;
Martina Sassi - Medical School Swansea University; Roberto Angelini - Medical
School Swansea University
Intro/Aims:
This research aims to reveal fundamental mechanisms of neurodegenerative
disorders by studying the consequences of disrupted lipid homeostasis in neurons
by means of functional synapse assays and protein expression analyses. In
neurodegeneration, the physiology of synapses is altered. Here, plasmalogen
lipids are abundant and their peculiar conical shape makes them ideal in
supporting vesicle fusion. In addition, plasmalogen levels decrease with
pathological progression in Alzheimer’s disease. Since current evidence is
correlative, we aim to provide tools to directly test whether plasmalogens
support synaptic transmission for normal neuronal cell function. Specifically,
we seek to prove that plasmalogens are required for synapse function and later
explore their potential for neuro- regenerative supplementation therapies.
Methods:
My work will include western blot and ICC/IF detection of markers of mature
neurons (NeuN, beta3-tubulin) alongside established synaptic and vesicular
markers (Synaptophysin1, PSD95, SV2, VAChT), and an assay for neurotransmitter
release (Ach). Wet-lab assays will be performed on otherwise untreated
differentiated cells alongside differentiated cells genetically silenced by
using siRNA for plasmalogen biosynthetic enzymes FAR1 and PEDS1. Specifically,
we will modulate plasmalogen levels in differentiated human SH-SY5Y cells as
they embody a convenient model for developing assays. This work will be
complemented with lipidomic analyses and will be soon translated to relevant
iPSC-derived neurons.
Statistics:
Based on our preliminary data and previous literature, we expect the data from
lipidomic and synaptic assays to be normally distributed. Comparison of multiple
groups (n=6) at one timepoint (e.g., normal vs plasmalogen-deficient) will use
one-way ANOVA with Bonferroni correction (GraphPad Software).

Poster number: S_PZ3_068 (PP)

Sub-Theme: Lipids in Neurodegeneration: Function, Alterations, and
Therapeutic Potential

## Dissecting the role of plasmalogen lipids in synapse function and
neurodegeneration by interdisciplinary lipidomics
Authors: Iwan Gane, Swansea University; Kathryn Coates - Swansea
University Medical School Swansea University; Ann Hunter - Swansea University
Medical School Swansea University; Roberto Angelini - Swansea University Medical
School Swansea University
Introduction
More than 520,000 people in the UK suffer from dementia caused by Alzheimer’s
Disease (AD), a number set to rise towards 1 million by 2025 with the resultant
cost to the economy expected to surpass £25 billion. With currently no effective
treatments for patients with AD or dementia, it is crucial that research
advances our understanding of these conditions with an aim to bring therapies to
the fore.
Synaptic dysfunction develops early in neurodegeneration, driving the gradual
impairment of memory, sensation, and cognition. This correlates with the loss of
plasmalogen phospholipids, which are enriched at synapses where their conical
geometry is believed to ease synaptic vesicle fusion. Direct assessment of the
role of plasmalogens at synapses has yet to be carried out, which is our
goal.
Methods
We have developed a neuronal model using the neuroblastoma cell line, SH-SY5Y, to
study the effects of plasmalogen levels on synapse formation and function
following post-transcriptional silencing of plasmalogen biosynthetic enzymes. We
are developing a novel quantitative shotgun lipidomics approach for the study of
plasmalogens in neuronal cells, and with this data in parallel with
immunocytochemistry, Western-blot and neurotransmitter assays, we will determine
and characterise the role of plasmalogens at synapses.
Furthermore, we will assess the capacity of plasmalogen precursor supplementation
to restore plasmalogen levels and hence to abrogate disruption of synapse
formation and function, endeavouring to open a future treatment direction for
AD.
Approach for Statistical Analysis
Based on our preliminary data and previous literature, we expect the data from
lipidomic and synaptic assays to be normally distributed. Comparison of multiple
groups at one time point (e.g., normal vs plasmalogen-deficient vs
plasmalogen-supplemented groups) will use one-way ANOVA with Bonferroni
correction (GraphPad Software).
Estimating a 50% decrease of plasmalogen levels and/or synaptic puncta upon KD
and a 50% increase upon supplementation, SD=20%, equivalent to an effect size of
3.16, we should be sufficiently powered (β=0.95) with n=6 (α<0.05) (GPower
software).

Poster number: S_PZ3_069 (TP)

Sub-Theme: Lipids in Neurodegeneration: Function, Alterations, and
Therapeutic Potential

## Anatomical brain lipid profiling identifies gangliosides and sphingomyelin as
altered in Parkinson’s disease
Authors: Jenny Hallqvist, Translational Mass Spectrometry Research
Group; Wendy Heywood - UCL Great Ormond Street Institute of Child Health
Translational Mass Spectrometry Research Group; Kevin Mills - UCL Great Ormond
Street Institute of Child Health Translational Mass Spectrometry Research Group;
Simon Eaton - UCL Great Ormond Street Institute of Child Health UCL; Anna
Wernick - The Francis Crick Institute UCL; Christina Toomey - UCL Institute of
Neurology UCL; Sonia Gandhi - The Francis Crick Institute UCL
Parkinson’s disease (PD) is a progressive, neurodegenerative condition affecting
roughly six million people worldwide. Most PD cases are sporadic with unknown
underlying causes. Many studies have looked at transcriptomic, proteomic and
metabolomic brain changes in neurodegeneration, but considering that the brain
consists of nearly 65% lipids, there have been few studies aimed at
understanding the lipid distribution across the human brain and the relation to
PD. Addressing this, we developed targeted panels to measure over 140 lipids
related to ceramide metabolism and applied these to several brain regions from
unaffected controls and individuals diagnosed with PD.
Targeted and multiplexed LC-MS/MS lipid analyses were performed on post-mortem
brain tissue from the temporal cortex, frontal cortex, parietal cortex,
cerebellum, parahippocampus, putamen, cingulate cortex and caudate from healthy
controls (n=19) and individuals diagnosed with early or late stage PD (n=17). We
evaluated the data for normal distribution and compared the expression between
PD and controls using Student’s t-test or Mann- Whitney’s U-test, adjusted for
multiple testing by the Benjamini-Hochberg procedure with 5% false discovery
rate. Overall differences between PD and controls, and region-specific
expressions, were evaluated by multivariate analysis, correlation analysis,
hierarchical clustering and UMAP.
We observed that different regions of the brain demonstrated different lipid
profiles, with the cerebellum being the most distinct. We identified an increase
of gangliosides in PD, observed in the majority of the regions. We also detected
increased levels of sphingomyelin, especially elevated in the putamen. Notably,
several lipids were differentially expressed in the cerebellum – a region
usually assumed unaffected by PD pathology. Our results suggest that there may
be a disruption in the processing of gangliosides in the glycosphingolipid
pathway and further that sphingomyelins may accumulate in PD. This atlas of
brain lipid expression in PD and healthy controls provides insights into
differences related to PD, but also to age, sex, and between brain regions and
thus adds to a body of knowledge necessary for the understanding of health and
disease in the human brain.

Poster number: S_PZ3_070 (TP)

Sub-Theme: Lipids in Neurodegeneration: Function, Alterations, and
Therapeutic Potential

## Imaging sterols in the multiple sclerosis (MS) brain by matrix-assisted laser
desorption/ionisation (MALDI)
Authors: Lauren Griffiths, Swansea University; Kristen Hawkins -
Neuroscience Swansea University; Roberto Angelini - Neuroscience Swansea
University; Eylan Yutuc - Mass spectrometry Swansea University; Yuqin Wang -
Mass spectrometry Swansea University; William Griffiths - Mass spectrometry
Swansea University; Owain Howell - Neuroscience Swansea University
BNA abstract
Cholesterol and oxysterols are important to the fundamental aspect of both
neuronal and glial cell populations, with cholesterol being a major lipid
component of myelin, with its dysregulation has been linked to several
neurodegenerative diseases including MS, where analysis of biofluid has shown
altered levels of cholesterol and oxysterols, however these analytes have not
been investigated in the MS brain. MALDI - mass spectrometry imaging (MSI) is
fast becoming a popular method for lipid analysis, allowing for precise
quantification in pathological and anatomical regions of interest. MSI of
cholesterol has not fully been explored primarily due to the difficulty of
ionizing sterol molecules.
We have optimised a method to visualise and quantify cholesterol on human MS
brain tissue using MSI with enzyme assisted derivatisation. We have also applied
a pioneering technique (liquid extraction solvent analysis, LESA) for the
analysis of other sterol derivatives (i.e., oxysterols) across those tissue
sections.
Statistical analysis implied comparison of multiple group of non-normally
distributed data, which required the use of the Kruskal-Wallis ANOVA accompanied
by Dunn's multiple comparisons test (GraphPad software).
In this pilot study, we identified areas of chronic active white matter (WM)
lesions, cortical grey matter (GM) lesions and normal appearing (NA)WM and GM in
four post-mortem cases of MS (1 PPMS, 3 SPMS; age range: 38-54; 3F; REC:
08/MRE09/31+5) and 3 controls (age range: 60-68; 2F). Our data highlighted a
general reduction of cholesterol in MS compared with control. In MS tissue, a
significant 16-fold decrease in cholesterol was seen in WM lesion centre
compared with NAWM (P<0.0001). WM lesion edge showed a 5-fold increase in
cholesterol compared with WM lesion centre (P=0.0004), with remyelinated WM also
showing a marked increase in cholesterol compared with the lesion (P=0.045). A
similar trend was observed in the GM, but no significance was observed. Data
from LESA analysis also showed differences for oxysterols and cholesterol
precursors; however, this data was based on n=1 and therefore did not show
significance.
Our findings suggest major changes in the cholesterol and sterol makeup in the
brain of progressive MS.

Poster number: S_PZ3_071 (TP)

Sub-Theme: Lipids in Neurodegeneration: Function, Alterations, and
Therapeutic Potential

## In silico modelling human VPS13 proteins associated with donor and target
membranes suggests lipid transfer mechanisms
Authors: Filippo Dall'Armellina, University of Liverpool;
Massimiliano Stagi - Biochemistry and Systems Biology University of Liverpool;
Laura E Swan - Biochemistry and Systems Biology University of Liverpool
The VPS13 protein family constitutes a novel class of bridge-like lipid
transferases. Autosomal recessive inheritance of mutations in VPS13 genes is
associated with the development of neurodegenerative diseases in humans.
Bioinformatic approaches previously recognised the domain architecture of these
proteins. In this study, we model the first ever full-length structures of the
four human homologs VPS13A, VPS13B, VPS13C, and VPS13D in association with model
membranes, to investigate their lipid transfer ability and potential structural
association with membrane leaflets. We analyse the evolutionary conservation and
physicochemical properties of these proteins, focusing on conserved C-terminal
amphipathic helices that disturb organelle surfaces and that, adjoined, resemble
a traditional Venetian gondola. The gondola domains share significant structural
homology with lipid droplet surface-binding proteins. We introduce in silico
protein-membrane models displaying the mode of association of VPS13A, VPS13B,
VPS13C, and VPS13D to donor and target membranes, and present potential models
of action for protein-mediated lipid transfer.

Poster number: S_PZ3_072 (TP)

Sub-Theme: Lipids in Neurodegeneration: Function, Alterations, and
Therapeutic Potential

## Phospholipase C-gamma 2, PLCɣ2, From Gene to Screen to Hit
Authors: Fiona Jeganathan, University College London
Introduction
Genome Wide Association Studies (GWAS) identified a novel coding variant (P522R)
in the immune gene Phospholipase C-gamma 2 that is protective against the
cognitive decline associated with late onset Alzheimer’s Disease (LOAD). PLCɣ2
is a membrane-associated signalling enzyme predominantly expressed in immune
cells that hydrolyses the 1-phosphatidyl-1D-myo-inositol 4,5-bisphosphate to
secondary messengers’ inositol-3-phosphate (IP3) and diacylglycerol. The
protective PLCɣ2 variant has a mild hypermorphic effect on enzymatic activity,
and therefore identifying small molecules that mimic this moderate potentiation
represents a novel therapeutic strategy for Alzheimer’s Disease. To facilitate
the identification of modulators of PLCɣ2 we developed a B cell RAMOS assay,
since the PLCɣ2 pathway downstream of the B cell receptor is well characterised
and complemented this with the Cellular Thermal Shift Assay, CETSA® technology
in the THP-1 macrophage cell line.
Methods
Reaction conditions were optimised to identify small molecule modulators of the B
cell pathway using a biochemical IP1 HTRF endpoint as a readout of IP3
production. In the THP-1 cells, where PLCɣ2 is highly expressed, the remaining
intact PLCɣ2 protein was measured after heat shock in the presence of compounds
to determine that the compounds were either on target or proximal to PLCɣ2
whilst eliciting the desired pharmacological profile. We used these approaches
in parallel to screen a library of 20000 diversity compounds and identified
potentiators that were concordant across both.
Approach for statistical analysis
The compounds were screened in single-point and selected compounds were run to
determine EC50. Cut-off criteria for failing plates were Z prime < 0.5 and
CV>10%. B scoring normalisation was used to correct for plate and positional
effects. % Effect was calculated over DMSO controls.
Results and conclusions
We used functional and biophysical cell-based approaches to identify positive
modulators of PLCɣ2. This offered the advantage of identifying compounds
engaging with the activated form of PLCɣ2 in the cellular environment where the
membrane, native substrate and other interacting partners of the complex are
present. The combination of these approaches allowed identification of novel
modulators of the PLCɣ2 pathway thus demonstrating the feasibility of
identifying small molecules that mimic the hypermorphic effect of the P522R
variant.

Poster number: S_PZ3_065

Sub-theme: Tauopathies & Alzheimer's Disease: Mechanisms,
Models, and Biomarkers in Neurodegeneration

## Investigating the effects of soluble recombinant Tau aggregates on
hippocampal synaptic plasticity
Authors: Abbie Richardson - Life sciences University of Warwick,
Emily Hill - Life sciences University of Warwick, Mark Wall - Life sciences
University of Warwick.
Introduction
Memory loss and progressive cognitive decline are key symptoms of Alzheimer’s
disease. Long-term potentiation (LTP), a form of synaptic plasticity, provides a
good neuronal correlate for learning and memory. One of the key pathological
hallmarks of Alzheimer’s disease is the accumulation of misfolded proteins like
tau into insoluble aggregates (Neurofibrillary tangles). There is strong
evidence that early soluble tau aggregates disrupt neuronal function and
synaptic plasticity. We aim to investigate the role of soluble tau aggregates on
the dysregulation of synaptic plasticity to determine its mechanism of
action.
Methods
Acute hippocampal brain slices were isolated from male and female 5–6-week-old
C57BL/6J. Field excitatory postsynaptic potentials (fEPSPs) were evoked and
recorded in the CA1 hippocampal region. Soluble tau oligomers (diluted in aCSF)
were sonicated from pre-formed fibrils (rPeptide, TF-1001-1). Slices were
incubated in soluble recombinant tau solution (444 nM or 133 nM) for 1 hour
prior to recording. Input-output and paired-pulse data were collected to
identify changes in basal synaptic transmission. Following a 20-minute baseline,
slices were exposed to high-frequency stimulation (100 Hz, 1 s) to induce
LTP.
Preliminary results, statistics, and future approaches
Preliminary data suggest that slices pre-incubated in recombinant tau did not
have significantly different input- output responses but showed elevated
paired-pulse facilitation. Slices pre-incubated in recombinant tau also showed
significantly reduced LTP. To continue this work, we aim to test the effect of
soluble tau truncations on synaptic plasticity. Non-parametric statistical tests
such as Mann-Whitney and Krushall-Wallis will be applied to electrophysiological
data.

Poster number: M_PZ2_037 (TP)

Sub-Theme: Tauopathies & Alzheimer's Disease: Mechanisms,
Models, and Biomarkers in Neurodegeneration

## Imaging Mass Cytometry of post-mortem human brains reveals that most
vulnerable neurons in Alzheimer’s Disease do not accumulate pTau or
β-amyloid
Authors: Alessia Caramello, UK Dementia Research Institute -
Imperial College London; Johanna S. Jackson - Department of Brain Sciences UK
Dementia Research Institute - Imperial College London; John Hardy - Department
of Neurodegenerative Disease UK Dementia Research Institute – UCL; Paul M.
Matthews - Department of Brain Sciences UK Dementia Research Institute -
Imperial College London
Introduction
Neurodegeneration in Alzheimer’s disease (AD) selectively affects a subset of
“vulnerable neurons” initially. Here we sought to define intrinsic cell
characteristics and local pTau and β-amyloid (Aβ) pathology associated with
vulnerable neurons with the long-term objective of developing cell type-specific
neuroprotective therapies.
Methods and statistical analysis
I analysed 43 post-mortem human middle temporal gyri from non-disease controls
and AD donors with either the common (CV) or the AD high-risk TREM2 variants
(TREM2var; Fancy et al., 2022). To distinguish neuronal subpopulations, define
their distribution and local pTau/Aβ pathology, I developed a panel of 31
antibodies for imaging mass cytometry for visualising excitatory and inhibitory
neurons, glial cells, Aβ and pTau. The SIMPLI pipeline (Bortolomeazzi et al.,
2022) was used for image processing and analysis. Statistical analysis was
performed using Dirichlet model for testing variation in cell proportions and
Kruskal-Wallis plus Wilcoxon tests or ANOVA plus Tukey tests for paired group
analysis of non-normal or normal distributed data, respectively. All p values
were corrected for multiple testing.
Results
While extracellular Aβ (representing plaques) increases 2.5x in AlzCV and 3.5x in
AlzTREM2var compared to their CV or TREM2var controls (p=0.01, 0.0001),
intracellular signal for Aβ (intraAβ) is higher in CtrlCV (13.76±5.95% intraAβ+
cells) and significantly decreases in AlzTREM2var cases (6.4±2.82%; p=0.0035).
The neuronal subtypes accumulating intraAβ are L3-6 GAD1+ and L5-6 RORB+, which,
compared to CtrlCV, are selectively reduced in AlzCV (35.2% fewer RORB+,
p=0.0002) and in AlzTREM2var (58.5% fewer GAD1+, p=0.045; 55.5% fewer RORB+,
p=0.0000). Conversely, pTau accumulated mostly in L3 RORB+ neurons, which
increased in AlzCV and AlzTREM2var samples compared to non-disease controls
(23.9% more, p=0.02; 44.5% more, p=0.02).
Conclusions
My results indicate RORB+ and GAD1+ neurons are vulnerable in AD and that
pathological intraAβ accumulation, rather than pTau, may be initiating early
neurodegeneration. I will next explore which Aβ fragment accumulates in
vulnerable neurons and its relation to defective autophagy, as well as the
proximity of vulnerable neurons to activated glia.
Conflict of interest: This study also was supported by an investigator-initiated
grant from Biogen IDEC to PMM and JSJ. PMM has received consultancy fees from
Roche, Celgene, and Neurodiem. He has received honoraria or speakers’ fees from
Novartis and Biogen and has received research or educational funds from Biogen
and Novartis.

Poster number: M_PZ2_038 (TP)

Sub-Theme: Tauopathies & Alzheimer's Disease: Mechanisms,
Models, and Biomarkers in Neurodegeneration

## Tau-containing Alzheimer’s disease cerebrospinal fluid induces neuronal
hyperexcitability and alters hippocampal theta oscillations
Authors: Dr Emily Lane-Hill, University of Warwick; Jessica Brown -
School of Health Sciences University of Manchester; Dr Thomas Karikari -
Department of Psychiatry and Neurochemistry University of Gothenburg; Professor
Henrik Zetterberg - Department of Psychiatry and Neurochemistry University of
Gothenburg; Professor Kaj Blennow - Department of Psychiatry and Neurochemistry
University of Gothenburg; Professor Mark Wall - School of Life Sciences
University of Warwick
Introduction:
Alzheimer’s disease (AD) is the leading cause of dementia worldwide. In AD animal
models, soluble tau aggregates have been shown to disrupt neuronal function,
alter synaptic plasticity and impair cognitive function in animal models. In
humans, a fraction of these toxic tau species are secreted into cerebrospinal
fluid (CSF), some of which can be measured as diagnostic and prognostic
biomarkers, starting from early stages of disease. However, the mechanisms of
how these tau forms alter neuronal and network function are not fully
understood.
Methods:
Here, we have developed and applied a novel approach to examine the
electrophysiological effects of CSF from AD patients with a tau-positive
biomarker profile. The method involves incubation of acutely-isolated wild-type
mouse hippocampal brain slices with small volumes of diluted human AD-CSF,
followed by a suite of electrophysiological recording methods to evaluate their
effects on neuronal function from single cells through to the network level.
Approach for statistical analysis:
Comparison of the effects of the same CSF samples, with and without
immuno-depletion for tau, enabled a pioneering demonstration that AD-CSF
potently modulates neuronal function, and that tau is central to these effects.
Due to small sample sizes (n < 15), statistical analysis was performed using
non-parametric methods; Kruskal–Wallis analysis of variance (ANOVA),
Mann–Whitney and Wilcoxon signed-rank tests as required.
Results and conclusions:
We demonstrate that tau-containing AD-CSF mediates an increase in neuronal
excitability in single cells. We then observed, at the network level, increased
input-output responses and enhanced paired-pulse facilitation as well as an
increase in long-term potentiation. Finally, we show that tau-containing AD-CSF
modifies the generation and maintenance of hippocampal theta oscillations, which
have important roles in learning and memory and are known to be altered in AD
patients.
Together, we describe a novel method for screening human CSF to understand
functional effects on neuron and network activity, which could have far-reaching
benefits in understanding pathological mechanisms of AD, thus allowing for the
development of better targeted treatments.

Poster number: M_PZ2_039 (PP)

Sub-Theme: Tauopathies & Alzheimer's Disease: Mechanisms,
Models, and Biomarkers in Neurodegeneration

## Investigating the electrophysiological properties of tau on OLM cells in the
hippocampus
Authors: Heran Wang, University of Warwick
Introduction
Alzheimer’s disease pathology is characterised by the accumulation of misfolded
proteins. Tau, a soluble microtubule stabilising protein, which is normally
bound to microtubules, detaches, and can aggregate to form oligomers and then
further to neurofibrillary tangles (NFTs). While the deposition of NFTs
correlates well with disease progression, there is growing evidence to suggest
that soluble tau oligomers have toxic effects on neuronal properties. Previously
it has been shown that introducing full-length oligomeric tau-441 aggregates
into excitatory pyramidal cortical neurons altered neuronal function, disrupted
synaptic transmission and plasticity1. In our study we will quantify the time
dependent effects of tau oligomers on individual subclasses of interneurons in
the hippocampus.
Methods
Acute Parasagittal hippocampal slices were obtained from P15-21 C57/BL6 mice and
transferred into the recording chamber individually. Whole-cell patch-clamp
recordings were made from Oriens-lacunosum moleculare (OLM) cells in the
hippocampal CA1 region which were identified by their characteristic
current-voltage relationship, morphology, and position in the slice. Recombinant
tau aggregates were produced by sonicating tau preformed fibrils (rPeptide;
TF-1001-1) and are added to the filtered intracellular solution (444 nM). Tau
aggregates were introduced into single neurons via the patch pipette. Effects on
neuronal properties were recorded over a 40-minute time period.
Preliminary results, statistics & future approaches
OLM cells were identified and recorded stably over a 40-minute period. Currently,
tau aggregates are introduced into single interneurons, and the
electrophysiological effects are measured. In future studies, how tau aggregates
alter the synaptic connections between interneurons and pyramidal neurons in the
hippocampus will be investigated using paired recordings. Due to small sample
sizes, the data obtained will by statistically analysed using Mann- Whitney,
Kruskall-Wallis, or ANOVA.
1. Hill, E., Karikari, T.K., Moffat, K.G., Richardson, M.J. and Wall, M.J., 2019.
Introduction of tau oligomers into cortical neurons alters action potential
dynamics and disrupts synaptic transmission and plasticity. eneuro, 6(5).

Poster number: M_PZ2_040 (PP)

Sub-Theme: Tauopathies & Alzheimer's Disease: Mechanisms,
Models, and Biomarkers in Neurodegeneration

## Effects of recombinant soluble tau aggregates on the generation of
oscillations within the cortico-thalamic network
Authors: Victoria Mitchell, The University of Warwick; Mark Wall -
School of Life Sciences The University of Warwick; Emily Hill - School of Life
Sciences The University of Warwick; Bruno Frenguelli - School of Life Sciences
The University of Warwick; Richard Ngomba - School of Pharmacy University of
Lincoln
Introduction
The thalamic cortical network (CTC), centred in the thalamus, generates rhythmic
oscillations which are pivotal to normal sleep and brain activity. Dysregulation
or disruption to these oscillations promotes several pathophysiological states,
including absence epilepsy and a range of sleep disorders. Sleep abnormalities
are common and often a highly disruptive symptom of Alzheimer’s Disease (AD),
reported in up to 45% of patients.
Whether, and to what degree, dysregulation of the CTC loop occurs in AD and the
impact it evokes on sleep abnormalities is unknown.
Methods
Horizontal brain slices (400 um) that retained sufficient intrathalamic circuitry
to support oscillations were obtained from p12-21 wild-type rats. These
preparations were incubated in diluted recombinant soluble tau aggregates to
model AD. Oscillations were evoked via stimulation of the internal capsule and
were recorded in the fibres of the ventral basal thalamus via electrical field
recordings in an interface chamber. Several parameters were observed, including
minimum stimulus strength required to evoke oscillations, oscillation number per
stimulus and oscillation latency following stimulation.
Preliminary results, statistics & future approaches
Preliminary data suggests that slices incubated with recombinant tau aggregates
have greater excitability, in that the stimulus strength required to generate
oscillations is, on average, lower than that of control slices incubated in aCSF
only. Due to limited sample sizes (n < 10), statistical analysis will be
completed using non-parametric tests, for example, signed-ranked tests such as
Mann-Whitney and Wilcoxon or analysis of variance (ANOVA, Kruskal-Wallis),
selected as appropriate. To further this work, we hope to establish the effects
of soluble tau aggregates on the CTC network on a cellular level using
whole-cell patch clamp recordings from different regions within the CTC loop.
From this, we hope to ascertain whether tau aggregates cause dysregulation of
the CTC generated oscillations and the mechanisms by which this dysregulation
occurs.

Poster number: M_PZ2_041 (PP)

Sub-Theme: Tauopathies & Alzheimer's Disease: Mechanisms,
Models, and Biomarkers in Neurodegeneration

## Behavioural outputs of tau spread in drosophila clock neurons
Authors: Edmond N. Mouofo, University of Edinburgh; James Catterson
- Centre for Discovery Brain Sciences and UK Dementia Research Institute
University of Edinburgh; Tara Spires-Jones - Centre for Discovery Brain Sciences
and UK Dementia Research Institute
Introduction
Alzheimer diseases is one of the leading causes of dementia. This represents a
huge burden in terms of health and social cost. In 2019 alone, the United
Kingdom had over 850, 000 people living with AD. Disruptions in normal circadian
rhythm physiology has been observed in AD. However, it is unclear what precise
mechanisms are responsible for these behavioural changes. Previous studies have
shown that expression tau in Drosophila could give rise to circadian disruptions
similar to those observed in AD.
Methods
Using the Drosophila Activity Monitoring system, I will investigate the
phenotypes that result from expressing phosphorylated tau and various isoforms
of wild type human tau in the whole brain, in various subsets of neurons
including clock neurons. In meeting these goals, I will include male and female
flies to identify sexed linked differences. I will also compare flies with
adult-onset expression of tau (using an inducible expression system) to flies
which had embryonic expression of tau (using Gal 4 drivers). I will compare
expression of tau within synaptically connected neuronal subpopulations.
Approach for statistical analyses
Previous observations have shown that tauopathic flies show increased locomotion
and decreased sleep. I our study, ShynyR-DAMs app will be used to extract CSV
files from the DAMs monitor files and an R-script will be used to analyse
Drosophila locomotor activity, sleep and circadian rhythms. After testing for
normality test, data will be analysed by 1-way ANOVA (for a single factors) or
2-way (for two factors). Multiple comparisons after ANOVA will be performed by
Tukey HSD test.

Poster number: M_PZ2_042 (PP)

Sub-Theme: Tauopathies & Alzheimer's Disease: Mechanisms,
Models, and Biomarkers in Neurodegeneration

## An improved Caenorhabditis elegans model of Alzheimer’s Disease to monitor
neuronal signalling activity
Authors: Viktoria Bajuszova, University of Leeds; Netta Cohen -
School of Computing University of Leeds; Jamie Johnston - School of Biomedical
Sciences University of Leeds
Introduction
Alzheimer’s disease (AD) is the most prevalent form of neurodegenerative disease
and is characterised by the presence of Aβ plaques and neurofibrillary tangles
which mediate memory impairments due to loss of neurons and impairments in
neuronal plasticity. One subset of neurons greatly affected by Aβ toxicity are
the glutamatergic neurons. Oftentimes transgenic rodent animals are used to
study the toxic effects of Aβ causing these animals to develop unpleasant
cognitive impairments. Thus, to reduce and replace the rodent animals used, we
are developing a C. elegans neuronal model of Aβ1-42 which will allow
simultaneous glutamate and calcium imaging in specific populations of
glutamatergic neurons.
Methods
C. elegans bicistronically expressing RCaMP and iGluSNFR in glutamatergic neurons
will be immobilised in microfluidic devices and stimulated by odorants. The
effect of Aβ1-42 on sensory responses will be determined to reveal the
progression of its toxic effects.
Approach to statistical analysis
The data will be analysed using the Suite2P python package. An ANOVA or t-test
will be carried out where relevant to identify statistical significance in any
differences between the wild type and Aβ expressing strains. The identity of all
traces will be blinded prior to their analysis.

Poster number: M_PZ2_043 (TP)

Sub-Theme: Tauopathies & Alzheimer's Disease: Mechanisms,
Models, and Biomarkers in Neurodegeneration

## Fibrillar amyloid-beta decreases protein synthesis in microglia
Authors: Liviu-Gabriel Bodea, Queensland Brain Institute, the
University of Queensland; Alison Keolani Carlisle - Clem Jones Centre for Ageing
Dementia Research (CJCADR) Queensland Brain Institute, the University of
Queensland; Jürgen Götz - Clem Jones Centre for Ageing Dementia Research
(CJCADR) Queensland Brain Institute, the University of Queensland
Alzheimer’s disease (AD) is characterised at the cellular level by neuronal
dysfunction and loss, as well as increased glial reactivity. At the molecular
level, it presents protein aggregates composed of extracellular amyloid-beta
(Abeta) plaques and intracellular hyperphosphorylated microtubule-associated Tau
protein. We have shown previously that Abeta enhances Tau expression in neurons
(Li & Götz, EMBO J 2017) leading to Tau-dependent dysregulations in the de
novo protein synthesis (Evans et al., EMBO J 2019) and ribosomal functions
(Evans et al., Acta Neuropathol Commun 2021). However, the effect of Abeta on
protein synthesis in microglial cells (that do not express Tau) remains to be
investigated.
To address this, we have used bioorthogonal labelling, click chemistry and other
classic biochemistry techniques in vitro to tag, visualise and quantify the
newly synthesised microglial proteins following Abeta stimulation in at least
three biological replicates per experimental group.
Our results revealed that the internalisation of Abeta fibrils (fAbeta) induces a
fast overall decrease in the microglial protein synthesis rates. In contrast,
scrambled or monomeric Abeta show less pronounced effects. To investigate if
fAbeta triggers the integrated stress response (ISR), an evolutionarily
conserved signalling pathway activation by cellular stress, we have next probed
the levels of phosphorylated eukaryotic translation initiation factor 1 alpha
(P- eIF1a). Our results revealed a marked increase in the levels of P-eIF1a
within microglia following fAbeta stimulation, but not with scrambled or
monomeric Abeta.
In conclusion, we have revealed that fAbeta induces a global decrease in the
protein synthesis of microglial cells, leading to the activation of the
integrated stress response. We next aim to validate these results in vivo and
investigate if pharmacologic inhibition of the ISR leads to an amelioration of
the AD phenotype.

Poster number: M_PZ2_044 (PP)

Sub-Theme: Tauopathies & Alzheimer's Disease: Mechanisms,
Models, and Biomarkers in Neurodegeneration

## Characterising truncated tau self-assembly and morphology to assess its
potential as an in-vitro model of tau aggregation in alzheimer’s disease
Authors: Tahmida Khanom, University of Sussex; Youssra Al-Hilaly -
1: Sussex Neuroscience, School of Life Sciences and 2: College of Sciences,
Chemistry Department 1:University of Sussex and 2: Al-Mustansiriyah University,
Baghdad, Iraq; Thomas Vorley - 1: Institute of Medical Sciences 1: University of
Aberdeen and 2: TauRx Therapeutics Ltd; Robert Milton - 1: Institute of Medical
Sciences 1: University of Aberdeen and 2: TauRx Therapeutics Ltd; Charles R.
Harrington - 1: Institute of Medical Sciences 1: University of Aberdeen and 2:
TauRx Therapeutics Ltd; Claude M. Wischik* - 1: Institute of Medical Sciences 1:
University of Aberdeen and 2: TauRx Therapeutics Ltd; Louise Serpell* - Sussex
Neuroscience, School of Life Sciences University of Sussex A hallmark of
Alzheimer’s Disease (AD) is the pathological deposition of the intrinsically
disordered, monomeric
protein Tau into intracellular neurofibrillary tangles (NFTs). These NFTs are
composed of β-sheet rich paired helical and straight filaments (PHFs and SFs,
respectively). A major limitation in developing PHFs and SFs in-vitro is the
addition of cofactors to promote Tau self-assembly and generate fibrils that are
morphologically similar to those found in AD. As a result, there is an active
interest in developing in-vitro models of self-assembling Tau that can be used
to provide results that are physiologically relevant to AD.
We have previously developed an in-vitro model for Tau assembly using the dGAE
fragment that encompasses Tau297-391, which was recently shown to assemble into
AD-like PHFs under certain conditions. More recently, to include the second
imperfect repeat region, we have been characterising Tau186-391. The
self-assembly of this fragment into fibrils is being characterised in terms of
protein concentration, pH, temperature, reducing agents and agitation time. This
will be measured primarily through changes in the secondary structure of the
fragment, using circular dichroism spectroscopy and thioflavin S fluorescence
and kinetics assays.
Transmission electron microscopy will be used to investigate the morphology of
the fibrils derived from this Tau fragment, with a particular focus on the
periodicity and width of the generated fibrils. These measurements will be
compared to those from AD brain tissue-derived PHFs (obtained and characterised
by Al-Hilaly et al. 2020) and the data will be analysed using a one-way ANOVA
with multiple comparisons and Sidak’s multiple comparisons test. The
characterisation of fibril assembly from this truncated Tau protein will also
provide insight into the contribution of the N-terminal region of the Tau
protein in fibril assembly and provide a promising new model for future
tauopathy research.

Poster number: M_PZ2_045 (TP)

Sub-Theme: Tauopathies & Alzheimer's Disease: Mechanisms,
Models, and Biomarkers in Neurodegeneration

## The involvement of disulphide bonding in truncated tau 297-391 assembly and
seeding capability
Authors: Sebastian S Oakley, University of Sussex; Karen E Marshall
- Sussex Neuroscience University of Sussex; Wei- Feng Xue - School of
Biosciences University of Kent; Charles R Harrington - Institute of Medicine
University of Aberdeen; Claude M Wischik - Institute of Medicine University of
Aberdeen; Louise C Serpell - Sussex Neuroscience University of Sussex
Introduction: Tau protein undergoes aberrant self-assembly in Alzheimer's disease
(AD) to form insoluble amyloid fibril aggregates, which are associated with
neurodegeneration and cognitive dysfunction. Understanding the mechanisms
involved in the assembly of these fibrils will help in our understanding of the
initial stages of the disease and for potential therapies inhibiting this
assembly. Disulphide bonding between cysteine residues has previously been
thought to be essential for tau self-assembly using other models of tau
assembly, such as K18/K19 and T40 with heparin. However, recent cryo-electron
microscopy (cryo-EM) studies have suggested disulphide bonding is not involved
in the structure of AD fibrils.
Methods and Materials: We use a truncated form of tau, corresponding to 297-391
of full-length tau (termed dGAE) as an in vitro model, which has a cysteine
residue and allows us to investigate the involvement of disulphide bonding. We
have investigated the assembly of dGAE using Thioflavin-S kinetics assays and
using Amylofit modelling, been able to look at the specific assembly mechanism.
We then studied the seeding capabilities of these structures in in vitro kinetic
assays and in FRET Biosensor cells.
Approach for Statistical Analysis: Investigating the assembly mechanism was done
using Amylofit modelling software, in which the best model is fitted visually
with no statistical analysis needed. An ordinary one-way ANOVA was used to look
at the lag phase time between conditions. Statistical differences between
seeding ability in FRET Biosensor cells was done using 2way ANOVA.
Results and Conclusion: Inhibiting disulphide bonding favours the pathological
self-assembly of dGAE and allows the production of fibrils that exhibit
characteristics expected from AD fibrils, such as seeding and protease
stability. This suggests that disulphide bonding is not involved in tau
pathology, which is supported by recent cryo-EM that indicate the cysteine
residue is not available for bonding in AD fibrils. This data also further
establishes dGAE as a reliable tau aggregation model.

Poster number: M_PZ2_046 (TP)

Sub-Theme: Tauopathies & Alzheimer's Disease: Mechanisms,
Models, and Biomarkers in Neurodegeneration

## Investigating Synaptic Tau Pathology and Propagation in Progressive
Supranuclear Palsy
Authors: Robert McGeachan, The University of Edinburgh
Pathological forms of tau protein accumulate in the brain and induce
neurodegeneration in tauopathies including Progressive supranuclear palsy (PSP).
In Alzheimer’s disease, the most common tauopathy, tau pathology accumulates in
synapses and in model systems this is associated with synaptic dysfunction and
the trans-synaptic spread of tau pathology throughout the brain. Much less is
known about the synaptic accumulation of tau and tau propagation in primary
tauopathies, such as PSP. PET data have demonstrated an association between
synaptic density, tau burden and disease severity in PSP patients and that tau
pathology progresses through functionally connected brain regions in PSP.
However, there is currently a lack of data from human brain tissue examining
whether tau accumulates in, and spreads via, synapses in PSP.
Here we use a sub-diffraction-limit resolution microscopy technique called array
tomography, to characterise synaptic tau in the frontal cortex (BA9) of
post-mortem human brain samples from 7 PSP and 7 age, sex and PMI matched
control patients. We further study the engulfment of synapses and synaptic tau
by GFAP positive astrocytes. Using linear mixed effects modelling of the data,
we show for the first time that tau colocalises to pre- synaptic vesicles
(synaptophysin) and post-synaptic vesicles (PSD95) in PSP, and that AT8-positive
tau accumulates in pre- and post- synaptic pairs, supporting the role of
trans-synaptic tau propagation in PSP disease progression.
Finally, we show that GFAP positive astrocytes engulf a greater proportion of
synapses and tau containing synapses in PSP. These data support that in PSP 1)
tau accumulates in pre- and post-synapses, 2) tau may spread trans- synaptic,
and 3) that astrocytes may contribute to synapse degeneration in PSP.

Poster number: M_PZ2_047 (TP)

Sub-Theme: Tauopathies & Alzheimer's Disease: Mechanisms,
Models, and Biomarkers in Neurodegeneration

## Total and Phospho-Tau Levels in an Animal Model of Alzheimer's Disease: A
Cross-Platform Comparison of Biomarker Measurements
Authors: Tatiana Rosado Rosenstock 1; Hannah Lockington 1,2 ; Ashley
Parkes 1,2 ; Diana Leite 1; Timothy Phillips 1; Stuart Thomson 1; Naheed Mirza 1
– 1: Sygnature Discovery Ltd, Biocity, Nottingham, UK; 2: School of Life
Sciences, University of Nottingham, Nottingham, UK.
Neurodegenerative disorders are multifactorial with unpredictable onset and rate
of progression. Therefore, biomarkers that allow detection and tracking of
disease progression and therapeutic efficacy are of significant medical value.
We investigated changes in protein levels of total Tau (tTau) and phospho-Tau
(pTau) species in different brain regions of a 5.6 month-old wild-type (WT) and
P301S transgenic mouse model of Alzheimer`s Disease. Cortex, midbrain, and
hippocampus, were evaluated using both a Jess-based western blotting platform
and ELISA assay. Using Jess, protein normalization was carried out using several
different approaches, including measuring β- actin levels, Protein Normalization
and Replex/Total Protein Normalization modules (Bio-Techne). Results were
analysed by 2-ay ANOVA followed by Tukey`s test. β-actin protein levels varied
across the different brain regions examined, with midbrain showing lowest
expression (p<0.05). By contrast, Protein Normalization and Replex/Total
Protein Normalization modules showed similar results, across regions, although
Total Protein Normalization showed less variation. After Total Protein
Normalisation, tTau levels in P301S mice were significantly higher than in WT
mice in all brain areas (p<0.05). For clinically relevant pS396 and pT181
biomarkers, P301S mice also showed significantly higher levels in all regions of
the brain evaluated when compared to WT. In corroboration, we also observed
higher levels of pS396 and pT181 in the P301S in relation to WT mice using an
orthogonal ELISA assay. Notably, the levels of pTau varies among the brain
areas, with cortex presenting the highest concentrations (p<0.05). Our data
highlights the importance of validating different sample normalization
techniques and corroborates the fact that pTau can be differentially expressed
in the brain, which could implica
Preregistration poster

Poster number: M_PZ2_048 (TP)

Sub-Theme: Neuronal Dynamics and Synaptic Alterations in Aging and
Neurodegenerative Diseases

## Effect of age on the dynamics and proportion of neurotransmitter released
from single vesicles
Authors: Nadezhda Velichkova, University of Brighton; ldiko Kemenes
- School of Life Sciences University of Sussex; Bhavik Patel - School of Applied
Sciences University of Brighton; Marcus Allen - School of Applied Sciences
University of Brighton; Marcus K. Dymond - School of Applied Sciences University
of Brighton; Nicolas Stewart - School of Applied Sciences University of
Brighton; Mark Yeoman - School of Applied Sciences University of Brighton
Introduction: Ageing is associated with cognitive decline, attributed to a
decreased ability of neurons to transmit and sense signals. Despite this, little
work has explored how ageing affects neurotransmitter release. This study
explored how increasing age affected vesicular neurotransmitter content and
release from the cerebral giant cell (CGC), a key neuron involved in long-term
memory formation in the pond snail L. stagnalis.
Methods: Micro and nano-tip carbon fibre electrodes in combination with single
cell amperometry (SCA) and intracellular vesicle impact electrochemical
cytometry (IVIEC) were used to monitor somatic vesicular 5- hydroxytryptamine
(5-HT) release and intracellular vesicle content of the CGCs. An unsupervised
machine learning clustering algorithm was applied to the collected data to
identify different population of vesicles with different modes of release.
Approach for statistical analysis: Intracellular vesicle content and
extracellular release events from young and old CGCs, were analysed using an
IgorPro 6 routine from the Sulzer laboratory. Statistical analyses between
groups were performed on the pooled data of all recorded events or on the mean
of the medians from each individual cell using the appropriate t-test.
Results and conclusions: Age significantly decreased the intracellular vesicular
5-HT content of the CGCs. However, there was a significant increase in the
number of molecules released per vesicular release event by the CGCs. This was
due to increases in the half width, rise time and fall time of the amperometric
events. The proportion of transmitter released by the CGCs increased from 46% in
the young to 78% in the old. Two clusters of release events were predicted by
the clustering algorithm, suggesting the existence of two distinct populations
of vesicles. Age significantly increased the number of molecules released by the
CGCs from both pools of vesicles. The increased proportion of transmitter
released from the old vesicles suggests a reduction of plasticity at the level
of individual vesicles.

Poster number: M_PZ2_049 (TP)

Sub-Theme: Neuronal Dynamics and Synaptic Alterations in Aging and
Neurodegenerative Diseases

## Computational modelling of mitochondrial trafficking in long-range axons in
health and neurodegenerative disease
Authors: Naomi Berthaut, University of Bristol; Michael C. Ashby -
School of Physiology, Pharmacology and Neuroscience University of Bristol; Cian
O’Donnell - School of Computing, Engineering & Intelligent Systems Ulster
University
Introduction: Axons have complex morphologies with branches reaching over long
distances to form synaptic connections in distant brain regions. Mitochondria,
which are mostly synthesised at the soma, are transported throughout the axon to
supply ATP and maintain calcium homeostasis. It remains unclear how neurons
effectively deliver mitochondria across their axonal arbour. We propose a novel
computational approach to investigate properties of axonal mitochondria
trafficking based on our in vivo two-photon imaging studies of long-range
cortical axons. The aims are first, to extrapolate imaging observations in small
axon portions to entire axonal arbours, second, to investigate how branching
morphology affects trafficking, and third, to predict how changes in
mitochondria motility associated with neurodegenerative tauopathy affect overall
mitochondria distribution.
Methods: We designed a model to simulate mitochondria movement within axonal
structures as individual and non- interacting particles that move stochastically
between discrete nodes and at discrete timesteps according to their state (using
custom Python code). Individual mitochondria switch between four possible
states: anterograde moving, retrograde moving, transient pause, or long-term
pause. The parameter values of probabilities of transition between states were
fitted to imaging data using the optimisation algorithm CMA-ES.
Approach for Statistical Analysis: Statistical analyses are not applicable to our
model outputs. Computational simulations allow to reach arbitrary statistical
power by running sufficient iterations to accurately quantify results.
Results and Conclusions: Our simple model can replicate mitochondrial movement
characteristics from imaging data and extend them to reconstructed neuronal
morphologies. Initial results reveal that branching morphology impacts on the
availability of mitochondria at different locations along the axon. Changes in
motility parameters, such as those associated with neurodegenerative disease,
affect mitochondria distribution. The generic model we developed, along with the
associated procedure for fitting the model parameters to data, is highly
adaptable for future data-driven computational modelling studies on
mitochondrial trafficking in neurons.

Poster number: M_PZ2_050 (TP)

Sub-Theme: Neuronal Dynamics and Synaptic Alterations in Aging and
Neurodegenerative Diseases

## Meta-analysis of presynaptic protein loss in rodent models of Alzheimer’s
disease: Preliminary results
Authors: Anne Anschuetz, University of Aberdeen; Karima Schwab -
School of Medicine, Medical Sciences and Nutrition University of Aberdeen;
Charlie Harrington - School of Medicine, Medical Sciences and Nutrition
University of Aberdeen; Gernot Riedel - School of Medicine, Medical Sciences and
Nutrition University of Aberdeen
Introduction: Synaptic protein loss is a known early feature of Alzheimer’s
disease (AD) and presynaptic proteins are reported to be most affected. Previous
reviews found presynaptic protein loss to be area- and protein-specific in human
patients. There have been no attempts to systematically appraise presynaptic
alterations in animal models. Therefore, a meta-analysis was performed to
characterize presynaptic protein changes in rodent AD models. Data represent an
initial analysis.
Methods: A systematic literature search restricted to publications since 2015 was
conducted on Pubmed, Medline and Embase, using search terms presynaptic marker
or presynaptic protein or synaptic marker or synaptic protein or proteome and AD
or Alzheimer. After removal of duplicates, title and abstracts were screened for
eligibility. Full texts for eligible publications were retrieved and screened.
Data and study characteristics for studies meeting criteria were extracted.
Standardized mean difference with small sample size adjustment was calculated
from extracted data. For primary analysis, multilevel meta-analysis was
conducted on all available effect sizes for an overall effect of presynaptic
proteins. Subgroup analysis was only performed if five or more independent
studies were available.
Approach for statistical analysis: Three-level random effects meta-analysis with
effect sizes clustered within studies was performed in R studio. Heterogeneity
was calculated using Q-test and I2 statistic.
Results and conclusions: Both amyloid- and tau-based animal models showed
significant presynaptic protein loss, while models aiming to recapitulate both
neuropathological hallmarks did not show significant protein reduction. Most
models analysed showed substantial reductions in protein levels compared to
wildtype animals. Overall effects were strongest in P301S tau transgenic mice
and animals with induced pathology by injection of pathological amyloid-beta
into the brain. Like human AD patients, animal models show reduced levels of
presynaptic proteins, however, effects differ depending on the type of model.
Further analysis will be performed with particular emphasis on brain regions of
interest and protein categories and functions.

Poster number: M_PZ2_051 (TP)

Sub-Theme: Neurodegenerative Disorders: Novel Therapeutic Strategies
and Molecular Targets in Alzheimer's and Parkinson's Disease

## A novel therapy for the treatment of TLR mediated neuroinflammation
Authors: Danielle M Galvin, University College Dublin; Meg Woods -
School of Biomolecular and Biomedical Science University College Dublin; Chloe
McCormack - Conway Insitute University College Dublin; Anupa Paulose - School of
Biomolecular and Biomedical Science University College Dublin; Bernie Creaven -
School of Chemical and Pharmaceutical Sciences Technological University Dublin;
Derek A Costello - School of Biomolecular and Biomedical Science University
College Dublin
Alzheimer’s disease is a neurodegenerative disease characterised by progressive
memory loss. Accumulation of amyloid β (Aβ) plaques and tau tangles in the brain
are primary pathological hallmarks. However current disease- modifying therapies
which target these aspects in isolation show limited clinical efficacy. Aβ
aggregation is promoted by interaction with free metals including Cu2+, which in
turn determines its capacity for oxidative damage and excitotoxic neuronal
death. Aβ is also the primary inflammatory stimulus in the AD brain. We have
previously shown that much of its detrimental effects are mediated through
activation of toll-like receptor (TLR)2, leading to uncontrolled microglial
activation and neuronal dysfunction. Coumarin derivatives are widely known for
their antimicrobial properties. Our collaborators have developed a novel suite
of coumarin-derived Schiff base compounds, with the ability to both regulate
oxidative capacity in cancerous cells and chelate free Cu2+. Therefore we sought
to further explore their potential as novel multifunctional neurotherapeutic
agents.
Coumarin derivative L4 was selected for investigation based on its
previously-determined solubility and cellular tolerability. BV2 microglia were
incubated with the TLR2 agonist lipoteichoic acid (LTA; 5µg/ml) in the presence
and absence of L4 (0-50µM; 24h). Microglial activation was determined by the
production of proinflammatory cytokines (ELISA) and nitric oxide (NO; Western
immunoblot and Griess assay). Two-way ANOVA revealed a significant,
concentration-dependent attenuation in TNFα and IL-6 release from LTA-stimulated
cells. Moreover, L4 significantly reduced the LTA-induced expression of iNOS and
nitrite. Further analysis in THP-1 monocytes indicates that L4 likely mediates
these effects via inhibition of NF-κB. To explore its neuroprotective effects,
cell viability (CCK-8, LDH) and reactive oxygen species (ROS; DCFDA assay) were
evaluated in H2O2-stimulated N2a neuroblastoma cells. Two-way ANOVA revealed
that incubation with L4 significantly reduced ROS production, and mitigated
neuronal death in response to oxidative stress. Taken together, our findings
support the further investigation of coumarin-derivative L4 as a strategy to
target multiple facets of AD pathology.

Poster number: M_PZ2_052 (TP)

Sub-Theme: Neurodegenerative Disorders: Novel Therapeutic Strategies
and Molecular Targets in Alzheimer's and Parkinson's Disease

## Investigating a novel coumarin-derivative in models of Alzheimer’s disease in
vitro and in vivo
Authors: Adam F. Ralph, University College Dublin; Ana Fitzsimons -
UCD School of Biomolecular and Biomedical Science University College Dublin;
Danielle M. Galvin - UCD School of Biomolecular and Biomedical Science
University College Dublin; Bernie S. Creaven - School of Chemical and
Pharmaceutical Sciences Technological University Dublin; Oliver E. Blacque - UCD
School of Biomolecular and Biomedical Science University College Dublin; Derek
A. Costello - UCD School of Biomolecular and Biomedical Science University
College Dublin
Alzheimer’s disease (AD) is the most common age-related dementia worldwide.
However, there are currently no disease-modifying therapies for AD that provide
significant clinical benefit. The accumulation of β-amyloid peptide (Aβ), and
free Cu2+ ions which promote its aggregation, contribute to the build-up of
neuritic plaques characteristic of the AD brain. Aβ evokes the uncontrolled
pro-inflammatory activation of microglia and induces oxidative damage in neurons
which accelerate neuronal death. L4 is a novel coumarin-derived Schiff base
molecule, designed to sequester Cu2+ with high affinity. In addition, it is
known to regulate the production of reactive oxygen species in a
concentration-dependent manner. This study explores L4 as a potential
therapeutic for Aβ-related impairment in models of AD in vitro and in vivo.
Human SH-SY5Y neuroblastoma cells were exposed to H2O2 (0.5, 1mM) or Aβ1-42
(50µg/ml) ± CuCl2 (100µM; 24- 72h). Cell viability (CCK-8, LDH assays) was
examined in the presence and absence of L4 (25µM). Two-way ANOVA revealed a
significant attenuation in oxidative-mediated neuronal death, following exposure
to L4. Wildtype N2 C. elegans were incubated with bacterial-derived stimuli
(lipopolysaccharide (LPS): 100μg/mL, lipoteichoic acid (LTA): 1mg/mL; 24h) to
assess inflammatory-mediated changes in well-established neuron-controlled
behaviours in vivo (roaming, reversal, omega bend assays). One-way ANOVA
identified significant alterations to behaviour in response to LTA but not LPS.
However, these LTA-induced changes were not restored by exposure to L4 (50µM).
Transgenic C. elegans CL4176 express human Aβ1-42 in their muscle cell wall and
are a widely used in vivo model of amyloidosis. Temperature-dependent
aggregation of Aβ (25°C) results in complete paralysis of the nematodes within
24-30h. Our finding revealed that long-term exposure to L4 (50µM; 3 days)
significantly mitigated Aβ1-42-mediated paralysis, compared with vehicle treated
controls (two-way ANOVA). Together, our findings report L4 as a novel
neuroprotective compound, and highlight its potential as a neurotherapeutic for
AD.

Poster number: M_PZ2_053 (TP)

Sub-Theme: Neurodegenerative Disorders: Novel Therapeutic Strategies
and Molecular Targets in Alzheimer's and Parkinson's Disease

## Neuroprotective properties of arylpiperazine-sulphonamides in in vitro models
of Parkinson's disease
Authors: Alice Kingslake, University of Hertfordshire; Vukic Soskic
- Department of Clinical, Pharmaceutical and Biological Sciences University of
Hertfordshire; Dr. Mahmoud Iravani - Department of Clinical, Pharmaceutical and
Biological Sciences University of Hertfordshire
Introduction: Parkinson’s disease (PD) is a neurodegenerative disease
characterised by the degeneration of dopaminergic neurons in the substantia
nigra. While incompletely understood, mitochondrial dysfunction, oxidative
stress, neuroinflammation and α-synuclein accumulation through impaired protein
clearance have been implicated in PD pathogenesis. Current treatments for
symptom management do not target the underlying pathophysiology, thus provide no
cure or prevent disease progression. Compounds with arylpiperazine moieties have
been shown to possess neuroprotective properties and may provide a valuable
treatment for PD. As such, this programme of work sought to investigate the
neuroprotective potential of novel arylpiperazine-sulphonamides in an in vitro
model of PD.
Methods: Retinoic acid differentiated SHSY5Y cells were incubated with
neurotoxins that cause mitochondrial dysfunction (MPP+) and impaired protein
clearance (lactacystin) to model PD in vitro. MTT assays were used to assess
cell viability following 24 hours of co-incubation with neurotoxins at IC50
concentrations, and compounds 4206, 4207, 4298 and 4133 at concentrations
ranging from 0-10µM.
Approach for statistical analysis: One-way ANOVAs with Dunnett’s multiple
comparisons were used to compare the effects of each compound at a range on
concentrations with a toxin-treated control group.
Results and conclusions: Treatment with compounds 4206, 4207, 4298 and 4133
improved cell viability by 58.25% (p<0.05), 78.95% (p<0.001), 75.25%
(p<0.01) and 82.55% (p<0.001), respectively, at the optimum doses,
compared to MPP+ treated cells. Compounds 4207 and 4133 were also successful at
improving cell viability by 99% (p<0.01) and 80% (p<0.01), respectively,
compared to lactacystin treated cells. That these compounds display
neuroprotective properties against multiple pathogenic mechanisms is extremely
encouraging for their potential as treatments in neurodegenerative disease,
since these mechanisms occur simultaneously and can act on one another.
Additional work to further examine the neuroprotective properties and
investigate the mechanisms of action of these compounds will be completed in due
course.

Poster number: M_PZ2_054 (PP)

Sub-Theme: Neurodegenerative Disorders: Novel Therapeutic Strategies
and Molecular Targets in Alzheimer's and Parkinson's Disease

## Targeting Intracellular amyloid-beta (A?) peptide by Neprilysin in a neuronal
cell line
Authors: Matthew Prince, University of Bath; Vasanta Subramanian -
Life Sciences University of Bath; K. Ravi Acharya - Life Sciences University of
Bath
Introduction
Alzheimer’s disease (AD) is a neurodegenerative disorder characterised by the
presence of plaques and neurofibrillary tangles for Aβ and tau respectively in
the brain leading to cognitive decline, a reduction in the quality of life and
eventually death. With an increase in aging populations worldwide, there is a
pressing need for effective AD treatment. The ‘Amyloid beta cascade hypothesis’
suggests that the parenchymal deposition of aggregated Aβ is primarily
responsible for the development of AD. Aβ is a potential target for
intervention. Amyloid degrading enzymes (ADEs) such as Neprilysin (NEP) control
the degradation of Aβ in the brain and maintain its homeostasis. We propose to
use the catalytic domain of NEP to target the degradation of Aβ.
Methods
We will create a recombinant Pichia pastoris yeast expression vector pPICZα A
containing NEP in fusion with a cell penetrating peptide (CPP) and a
haemagglutinin (HA) tag for imaging, using standard molecular cloning
approaches. HA tagged CPP-NEP will be expressed and purified using the yeast
expression system and assayed for activity.
We will also create mammalian expression plasmids with Aβ40, Aβ42, with a myc
epitope tag and introduce these into SH-SY5Y cells and create stable lines.
Expression will be confirmed by immunostaining for the myc tag in the
transfected cells and by western blots of cell extracts. To test the ability of
the recombinant HA tagged NEP-CPP to cleave Aβ40/42 we will use differentiated
SH-SY5Y cells stably expressing Aβ40 or Aβ42. Cells will be exposed to the
purified recombinant HA-NEP-CPP and uptake will be monitored by immunostaining
staining for the HA tag. Cell lysates of treated and untreated cells will be
analysed by western blots for degradation of Aβ40 and Aβ42.
Statistical analysis
Each experiment on cells will be performed a minimum of 3 times with at least two
independent stable cell lines. Data will be tested for normality. If the data is
normally distributed, a T-test or an ANOVA test will be performed. If data is
non-normally distributed, an appropriate corresponding non-parametric test will
be used. For experiments with a given or expected effect size, sample size will
be adjusted according to a statistical power calculation to avoid false
negatives.

Poster number: M_PZ3_055 (TP)

Sub-Theme: Neurodegenerative Disorders: Novel Therapeutic Strategies
and Molecular Targets in Alzheimer's and Parkinson's Disease

## Acid ceramidase inhibition as a mechanism to treat lysosomal storage
disorders
Authors: Mari Davies, Cardiff University; Ross Riseley - Medicines
Discovery Institute Cardiff University; Dr Heulyn Jones - Medicines Discovery
Institute Cardiff University; Dr Helen Waller-Evans - Medicines Discovery
Institute Cardiff University; Prof Simon Ward - Medicines Discovery Institute
Cardiff University
Lysosomal storage disorders (LSDs) are complex neurodegenerative disorders
characterised by an abnormal build-up of toxic materials within lysosomes as a
result of lysosomal enzyme defects. Due to the complex nature of these
disorders, currently, there are no available treatments for the majority of
LSDs. Acid ceramidase (ACase), a lipid hydrolase that cleaves ceramide,
contributes to the pathology of LSDs by deacylating accumulating
glycosphingolipids into lyso-glycosphingolipids, which are potent signalling
lipids and are toxic to cells. Therefore, ACase makes a promising therapeutic
target as a potential treatment for LSDs.
The chemotherapeutic drug Carmofur is a potent, covalent inhibitor of ACase,
however it is unsuitable as a treatment for LSDs as over-inhibition of ACase
causes the development of Farber disease – an aggressive LSD. By western blot
analysis, our data showed that ACase has a relatively slow turnover time of 24
h, further corroborating our aim to find a non-covalent inhibitor of ACase.
Therefore, our aim is to inhibit ACase to an extent that can alleviate the
lysosphingolipid-induced pathology, but not induce Farber disease. We aim to do
this by developing a non-covalent inhibitor of ACase.
After establishing a fluorescent ACase activity assay, we tested numerous in
house compounds for ACase inhibition. Currently, our most promising compound
(compound A), inhibits ACase with an IC50 of 343 nM. Preliminary biophysical
characterisation has also shown that compound A is a non covalent inhibitor of
ACase. IC50 values were determined using a non-linear regression model (GraphPad
Prism 9.3.1). For protein analysis, data was normalised to GAPDH as a control,
and the results were semi quantified using the FIJI software (ImageJ 1.52d).
Statistical differences were determined using one-way ANOVA.
Compound A provides a promising starting point to find a compound that will
inhibit ACase via a mechanism suitable for treating LSDs. Further work,
including crystallisation of ACase and compound A, will help discover more
potent and specific inhibitors of ACase for onward development towards the first
therapy for several life-shortening and life-limiting LSDs.

Poster number: M_PZ3_056 (TP)

Sub-Theme: Neurodegenerative Disorders: Novel Therapeutic Strategies
and Molecular Targets in Alzheimer's and Parkinson's Disease

## A small molecule drug discovery approach to inhibit Notum and activate Wnt
signaling in the brain
Authors: Luigia Salerno, ARUK DDI (UCL); Fredrik Svensson 1, Brett
Cosgrove 1, Robert Lesniak 1, Sarah Jolly 1, Stefano Benvegnù 1, Paul V Fish 1,
Fiona Ducotterd 1
Introduction
Notum, a carboxylesterase enzyme that depalmitoleoylate Wnt, is a key negative
regulator of Wnt signalling. Notum expression is upregulated in postmortem brain
tissue from Alzheimer’s disease (AD) patients. Wnt signalling is an important
pathway regulating several cellular functions, such as embryonic development,
and tissue homeostasis and regeneration and is downregulated in AD. Notum
inhibition could be a therapeutic intervention in neurodegenerative diseases
where Wnt signalling is downregulated. We are developing small molecule Notum
inhibitors with the goal of restoring Wnt signalling in AD.
Methods
We ran a screening campaign to identify potent, selective and brain penetrant
inhibitors of Notum activity suitable for oral dosing in rodent models of
disease to run proof of concept and in vivo safety assessment of Notum
inhibition. Our screening strategy identified hits that confirmed binding to the
Notum active site and 20 of the hits had IC50 <100 μM. X-Ray crystallographic
fragment screening delivered a lead compound that restored Wnt signalling in the
presence of Notum in a cell-based TCF/LEF reporter assay. Assessment in
pharmacology screens showed our lead compound to be selective against serine
hydrolases, kinases, and other drug targets.
Approach for statistical analysis
Statistical analysis is not applicable for this study, as no comparisons were
made between groups of samples. Results and conclusions
Using a multimodal medicinal chemistry and fragment-based screening approach we
could identify a potent, selective and brain-penetrant Notum inhibitor. Using
structural approaches, we confirmed active site binding. We confirmed on target
activity and downstream modulation of Wnt-signalling in a cell-based assay and
could progress the lead compound to in vivo pharmacology and safety studies.

Poster number: M_PZ3_057 (TP)

Sub-Theme: Ghrelin Signaling: Insights into Parkinson's Disease and
Dementia Biomarkers

## Characterising adaptive immunity in Parkinson’s disease – a potential immune
modulatory role for the stomach hormone, ghrelin
Authors: Jeff Davies, Swansea University; Bethan David - School of
Medicine Swansea University; Martina Sassi - School of Medicine Swansea
University; Natalia Kieronczyk - School of Medicine Swansea University;
Jaquleine Bayliss - Physiology Monash University; Romana Stark - Physiology
Monash University; Zane Andrews - Physiology Monash University
Parkinson’s disease (PD) is the second most common neurodegenerative disease. A
neuropathological characteristic is an altered immune response that is
characterised by chronic microglial activation, increased expression of
microglial genes and the infiltration of circulating immune cells into the
central nervous system (CNS). The role of the adaptive immune system is less
well characterised compared to the innate immune system in PD. To address this,
we characterised the presence of T-cells in post-mortem midbrain tissue from PD
and control subjects. In addition, we questioned whether the neuroprotective
effect of the stomach hormone, ghrelin, in models of PD, were associated with
altered T-cells in the adult mouse midbrain.
Human brain tissue was obtained from the PUK Brain Bank at Imperial College
London with ethical approval (07/MRE09/72). Briefly, post-mortem midbrain tissue
included controls with no indications of degenerative disease and people
diagnosed with PD. Additionally, adult WT and DAT-AMPK-ko mice were treated with
either the PD- linked mitochondrial neurotoxin, MPTP (30 mg/kg), or saline. In
addition, mice were treated with daily injections of ghrelin (1 mg/kg) or saline
prior to perfusion and tissue collection. Brains were cryo-sectioned, placed
onto SuperFrost+ coated slides, and analysed by IHC with anti-CD3 antibody.
Statistical analyses were performed on CD3+ T cell counts in the hippocampus and
midbrain of mouse and human tissue. Student’s t-test or one-way ANOVA with
appropriate post-hoc comparisons were performed with P <0.05 considered
significant.
We report a significant increase in the number of CD3+ T cells in human PD
midbrain compared to control. However, no differences were observed in the
hippocampus. These findings are consistent with previous reports and suggest
that further analysis of T-cell subtype are warranted.
We confirm an immune modulatory role for acyl-ghrelin in the context of PD, as
the MPTP-induced increase in midbrain CD3+ cell number was inhibited by
treatment with acyl-ghrelin in WT mice. Notably, the reduction in T-cell
infiltration was absent in acyl-ghrelin treated DAT-AMPK-ko mice.
These data support a role for the adaptive immune system and ghrelin-signalling
in PD.

Poster number: M_PZ3_058 (TP)

Sub-Theme: Ghrelin Signaling: Insights into Parkinson's Disease and
Dementia Biomarkers

## Detection of ghrelin species through mass spectrometry, novel biomarker for
diagnosing dementia?
Authors: Alanna Thomas, Swansea University
Introduction/Aim:
Parkinson disease (PD) is a chronic progressive age-related neurodegenerative
disease. The majority of patients begin having physical symptoms of PD between
the ages of 50-85 and of which up to 80% of people with PD develop dementia
(PDD).
Currently, biomarkers for diagnosing neurodegenerative disorders are limited. The
‘hunger hormone’ ghrelin has previously been linked to calorie restriction and
the protection of nerve cells in dementia models. Ghrelin exists in various
forms, including acylated ghrelin (AG) and unacylated ghrelin (UAG). AG has been
shown to stimulate neurogenesis whilst UAG hinders the process. Whilst the
plasma ratio of AG:UAG is reduced in PDD and therefore may be a potential
biomarker of dementia a major challenge is measuring both ghrelin peptides
simultaneously from the same sample. We aim to develop a mass spectrometry (MS)
technique with high sensitivity and the ability to detect the different species
of ghrelin from a single plasma sample. Validation of the MS technique will
allow investigation of whether circulating AG:UAG is altered between healthy
controls and people with dementia.
Methods:
We have optimised methodology for analysing ghrelin using multiple MS approaches
including liquid chromatography with tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS),
matrix-assisted laser desorption of flight (MALDI- TOF) and bead-assisted mass
spectrometry (BAMS). We will apply these approaches to analyse the ratio of
AG:UAG in plasma from people with PD and PDD.
Approach for statistical analysis:
Analysis of ghrelin ratio from the plasma will be performed using 1-way ANOVA
with post-hoc testing. P<0.05 will be considered statistically
significant.
Results and conclusion:
Optimized LC-MS, MALDI-TOF and BAMS protocols have enabled the detection of
exogenous ghrelin peptides. These methods will be used to analyse AG and UAG
ratios in patient plasma samples to determine whether ghrelin may be a potential
biomarker for PDD.

Poster number: M_PZ3_059 (TP)

Sub-Theme: Cerebral Hemodynamics and Oxidative Stress: Impact on
Neurodegeneration and Stroke

## Effects of mildly reducing inspired oxygen on mouse hippocampal oxygenation
and function
Authors: Letitia McMullan, University of Sussex; Dr Kira Shaw -
Psychology University of Sussex; Harry Trewhitt - Psychology University of
Sussex; Dr Silvia Anderle - Psychology University of Sussex; Dr Catherine Hall -
Psychology University of Sussex
Baseline cerebral blood flow (CBF), oxygen saturation (sO2), red blood cell
velocity (RBCV) and capillary density are lower in the hippocampus than other
brain regions with similar neuronal activity; likely making it especially
vulnerable to even a mild decrease in blood/ oxygen supply, as seen in early
Alzheimer’s Disease (AD). However, little is known about how such a mild
decrease in blood/ oxygen supply affects hippocampal neuronal and neurovascular
function, and whether this may lead to subsequent hippocampal dysfunction and
cognitive decline in AD.
We modelled this in 6 adult male and female mice of a C57BL/6J background. Cortex
overlaying the hippocampus was surgically ablated, 2µl
AAV1.CaMKII.GCaMP6f.WPRE.SV40 was infused 300µm below the hippocampal surface,
and custom-made cannula were implanted over the hippocampus. Net haemodynamic
measures, including CBF and sO2 were recorded using a combined laser doppler
flowmetry/haemoglobin spectroscopy probe (Oxy-CBF probe). The cerebral metabolic
rate of oxygen consumption (CMRO2), a proxy for neuronal activity, was
calculated. Changes in response to lowering the fraction of inspired oxygen
(FiO2) via a nose cone from 21% to 19%, 17%, 15%, 13% or 11% for 1 hour were
recorded in awake head-fixed mice. Subsequently, mice were subcutaneously
injected with 3000m.w. Texas Red to fill the blood vessels, and 2-photon imaging
of neuronal calcium signalling and neurovascular coupling was performed. The
effects of reducing the FiO2 from 21% to 15% or 11% were recorded.
Linear mixed effect models with post-hoc estimated marginal means were performed
in R to determine the effect of FiO2 on resting hippocampal sO2, CBF and CMRO2,
and the size of haemodynamic responses to fluctuations in CMRO2.
Reducing the FiO2 to 17% or lower for 30-45 minutes significantly reduced
hippocampal sO2 (p<0.05*), despite increased CBF (p<0.05*). The CMRO2 was
increased during hypoxia (p<0.05*), despite no significant change in the size
of haemodynamic responses to fluctuations in CMRO2 (p>0.05). This suggests
excitatory hippocampal neurons may become hyperactive during mild hypoxia,
despite no significant change in neurovascular coupling. However in vivo
2-photon imaging data will be extracted and analysed to directly test this.

Poster number: M_PZ3_060 (TP)

Sub-Theme: Cerebral Hemodynamics and Oxidative Stress: Impact on
Neurodegeneration and Stroke

## Investigating tissue oxygen deficits in an A?-producing mouse model of
Alzheimer’s
Authors: Kira Shaw, University of Sussex; Silvia Anderle -
Psychology University of Sussex; Harry Trewhitt - Psychology University of
Sussex; Joseph Henderson - Psychology University of Sussex; Magali Ostroviecki -
Psychology University of Sussex; Catherine Hall - Psychology University of
Sussex
Decreased blood flow occurs early in Alzheimer’s disease (AD), preceding the
onset of pathology and cognitive symptoms. A healthy blood supply to the brain
is important for delivering oxygen to active neurons, a process termed
neurovascular coupling. A number of genetic and lifestyle factors can predispose
a person to reduced brain blood flow, including diet, exercise and APOE
genotype. A compromised blood supply is unhealthy for the brain as it causes
tissue hypoxia, creating an environment where toxic proteins such as amyloid
beta (Aβ) can build up and neurons die.
We crossed APOE3 or APOE4 mice with app/tta mice, which develop Aβ plaques after
the cessation of a doxycycline diet. This allowed us to assess blood flow
changes before and after the onset of Aβ accumulation, and also in the presence
of the genetic risk factor APOE4. Our mice followed an experimental timeline
whereby they underwent a surgery to implant a cranial window over CA1
hippocampus (HC) or visual cortex (V1) at 8-12 weeks old, and then were subject
to a battery of imaging procedures at 3 time points: baseline (on doxycycline
diet, no Aβ produced), and then 4-8 weeks off and >12 weeks off the
doxycycline diet (Aβ produced). We measured neuronal and vascular activity in
awake mice using laser Doppler flowmetry or two photon imaging at each of these
timepoints.
We show that as the amount of time off doxycycline increases and Aβ accumulates,
the oxygen saturation (SO2) of the tissue decreases in both HC and V1. Deficits
in tissue oxygenation occur when there is a mismatch between the brain’s energy
demand by neurons and energy supply by the vascular network. Whilst we observed
mild vascular deficits in the dilation properties of individual vessels (slower
and less frequent responses), these did not summate to cause an overall
reduction in net blood volume in either HC or V1. The net oxygen metabolism of
neurons was increased by time off doxycycline, and the duration and magnitude of
calcium events from individual cells increased. We speculate that the deficits
in tissue oxygenation observed here are as a result of increased energy demands
by neurons which are not being met with an overall increase in blood supply.

Poster number: M_PZ3_061 (TP)

Sub-Theme: Cerebral Hemodynamics and Oxidative Stress: Impact on
Neurodegeneration and Stroke

## Type 1 respiratory failure-induced hypoxemia causes hypoxia and apoptosis and
triggers complex signaling pathways in the rat brain
Authors: Zoran Redzic, College of Medicine, Kuwait University; Rawan
Barakat - Physiology College of Medicine, Kuwait University; Hameed Al-Sarraf -
Physiology College of Medicine, Kuwait University; Marian Turcani - Physiology
College of Medicine, Kuwait University; Narayana Kilarkaje - Anatomy College of
Medicine, Kuwait University
Introduction. Type 1 respiratory failure (T1RF) is associated with secondary
acute brain injury, which could be caused by primary hypoxic injury, increased
intracranial pressure, or mediated by lung injury-triggered inflammation. This
study aimed to elucidate the effects of T1RF-induced hypoxemia on the brain in
the absence of lung injury.
Methods. SD rats were exposed to 8%O2 in N2 for up to 48h. Tissue partial
pressure of O2 (PtO2), cerebral blood flow (CBF) and lactate concentration in
the cerebral cortex (CC) were measured. Apoptosis in the CC, ependymal layer
(EL) and choroid plexuses (CPs) was estimated using the TUNEL assay.
Cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) samples were collected at various time points and the
concentrations of 32 signaling molecules were estimated in these samples by
multiplex assays. Expressions of 84 signaling molecules and 5 housekeeping genes
at the transcript level in the CC were explored by RT2 Profiler PCR Array.
Statistical analysis. Data was compared with one-way ANOVA and the Kruskal-Wallis
test. The Mann-Kendall test was used to assess if the CBF was increasing or
decreasing during hypoxemia. Fold changes in the expressions of the tested mRNAs
were estimated using GeneGlobe software. Statistical significance was set at
p<0.05.
Results & conclusions. Hypoxemia exerted a significant effect on PtO2 in the
CC (p<0.01) (Figure 1A). This was accompanied by a significant increase in
lactate concentrations in the CC and CSF (p<0.01). Hypoxemia exerted
significant effect on the number of apoptotic cells in the CC, (Figure 1B), EL
and CPs (p<0.01). Any monotonic increase or decrease in the CBF during
hypoxemia could not be detected (p>0.05). There was a significant effect of
the duration of hypoxemia (p<0.01) on the concentrations of 7 signaling
molecules in the CSF. Expression of mRNA for 13 mainly proinflammatory cytokines
decreased >2 folds after 6h, which was followed by a >2-fold increase in
expression of VEGFa and interleukin 7 after 24h, and VEGFa, interleukin 7,
platelet factor 4, lactate dehydrogenase and Secreted Phosphoprotein 1 after 48h
hypoxemia. Analysis of these data by Ingenuity Pathway Analysis software
revealed possible activation of pathogen induced cytokine storm signaling
pathway and erythropoietin signaling pathway.
 
Poster number: M_PZ3_062 (TP)

Sub-Theme: Cerebral Hemodynamics and Oxidative Stress: Impact on
Neurodegeneration and Stroke

## Targeting oxidative stress as neuroprotective strategy against hypoxia in
isolated rat hippocampal slices
Authors: Niamh Moreton, University College Dublin
The contribution of hypoxia and oxidative stress to the pathophysiology of acute
ischemic stroke (AIS) are well established and can lead to disruptions in
synaptic signaling. Hypoxia and oxidative stress lead to the neurotoxic
overproduction of reactive oxygen species (ROS). Antioxidant compounds have been
shown to have a preconditioning and neuroprotective effect against an ischemic
insult. Therefore, this study explores the effects of the ROS scavenger,
MnTMPyP, on synaptic transmission post hypoxia in isolated rat hippocampal
slices using electrophysiological techniques and organotypic hippocampal slice
cultures. Field excitatory postsynaptic potentials (fEPSPs) were evoked by
stimulation of the Schaffer-collateral pathway of the CA1 region in the
hippocampus using aCSF-filled monopolar glass electrodes. fEPSPs were acquired
at 20 kHz. Stimulus strength was adjusted in order to give 40 % of the maximal
response, determined by input/output curves. Paired fEPSPs were stimulated every
30 s separated by a 50 ms interval. Organotypic slices were kept in culture for
at least 8 days in vitro (DIV) prior to experimentation. Comparisons of controls
and drug treated groups were carried out using Student’s t-test using Prism
Software (Ver 9.0 GraphPad). All results are presented as mean ± SEM. A minimum
of P < 0.05 was considered to be statistically significant. We report a novel
modulatory effect of MnTMPyP on synaptic transmission post hypoxia in the CA1
where fEPSP slope failed to recovery post-hypoxia in the presence of MnTMPyP.
This reduction of the fEPSP by MnTMPyP post hypoxia (24.6 ± 7.1 %, n = 5, at 20
min post hypoxia) in the CA1 compared to controls (125.1 ± 12.4 % ; n = 8) was
attenuated through the co-application of the adenosine A1 receptor antagonist,
DPCPX (200 nM)(96.6 ± 30.5 %, n = 6), and the NMDA receptor antagonists, AP-5
(10 µM) (64.6 ± 11.2 %, n = 5) and DCKA (5 µM)( 57.62 ± 13.9 %, n = 5).
Additionally, our organotypic data demonstrated that MnTMPyP treated slices
(20.06 ± 2.85 %; n=9) had a similar amount of cell death compared to controls
(26.9 ± 8.5 %; n=9). Taken together, our results suggest a complex role for
MnTMPyP on both synaptic signaling in an hypoxic environment and cell
viability.

Poster number: M_PZ3_064 (TP)

Sub-Theme: Cerebral Hemodynamics and Oxidative Stress: Impact on
Neurodegeneration and Stroke

## Altered cerebral neurometabolic response to methylene blue in Bipolar
Disorder
Authors: Alessandro Colasanti, University of Sussex; Alfonso Russo -
Clinical Neuroscience and Neuroimaging, Brighton and Sussex Medical School
University of Sussex; Balazs Örzsik - Clinical Neuroscience and Neuroimaging,
Brighton and Sussex Medical School University of Sussex; Ivor Simpson - School
of Engineering and Informatics, University of Sussex; Prince Nwaubani - Clinical
Neuroscience and Neuroimaging, Brighton and Sussex Medical School University of
Sussex; Antonello Pinna - Clinical Neuroscience and Neuroimaging, Brighton and
Sussex Medical School University of Sussex; Riccardo de Marco - Clinical
Neuroscience and Neuroimaging, Brighton and Sussex Medical School University of
Sussex; Amy Kartar - Clinical Neuroscience and Neuroimaging, Brighton and Sussex
Medical School University of Sussex; Fernando Zelaya - Centre for Neuroimaging
Sciences, IoPPN King’s College London; Federico Turkheimer - Centre for
Neuroimaging Sciences, IoPPN King’s College London; Nefize Yalin - Centre for
Affective Disorders, IoPPN King’s College London; Nisha Singh - Centre for
Neuroimaging Sciences, IoPPN King’s College London; Allan Young - Centre for
Affective Disorders, IoPPN King’s College London; Mara Cercignani - Cardiff
University Brain Research Imaging Centre, Cardiff University; Iris Asllani -
Clinical Neuroscience and Neuroimaging, Brighton and Sussex Medical School
University of Sussex and Rochester Institute of Technology
Introduction: Electron transport chain (ETC) abnormalities have been reported in
the frontal lobe of patients with Bipolar disorder (BD). Methylene blue (MB) is
proposed to affect neuronal metabolism by providing an alternative electron
transfer pathway at mitochondrial ETC level. We used quantitative neuroimaging
to study the effects of an acute MB administration on regional cerebral oxygen
metabolism in BD.
Methods: Fifteen BD Type 1 patients (10 F, age 41.4±11) and 15 controls (10 F,
age 37±9.7) underwent two separate MRI sessions in a single-blinded randomised
cross-over study, each after IV infusion of either MB (0.05 mg/kg) or placebo.
MR Imaging data were acquired in pre-selected ROIs using Arterial Spin Labelling
and Asymmetric Spin Echo to estimate Cerebral Blood Flow (CBF) and Oxygen
Extraction Fraction (OEF). Cerebral Metabolic Rate of Oxygen (CMRO2) was derived
from CBF and OEF via the Fick’s principle. We explored correlations between
CMRO2 and mood stability scores assessed by inter-daily variability of one
week-PANAS scores.
Approach for statistical analysis: We used ANOVA repeated measures to test the
effect of the interaction between administration of MB, and Groups (Bipolar vs
Controls). PANAS scores were then added as covariate to the model
Results and conclusions: We observed an altered CMRO2 response to MB in BD
relative to controls in frontal lobe (p=.033), cingulate (p=.017), hippocampus
(p=.031): in those regions MB reduced CMRO2 in BD patients (from - 46.3% to
-66%) but there was no significant change in controls. PANAS-derived mood
instability measures were positively correlated to baseline regional CMRO2
values (p<0.012). Our observation of an altered CMRO2 response to MB in BD
patients is consistent with post-mortem reports of altered ETC function in BD
brain. Our experimental paradigm reveals a novel in vivo imaging biomarker of
altered neurometabolism in BD.

Poster number: M_PZ3_065 (TP)

Sub-Theme: Cerebral Hemodynamics and Oxidative Stress: Impact on
Neurodegeneration and Stroke

## Characterising cerebral hemodynamics in adults with Down syndrome
Authors: Miren Tamayo Elizalde, King's College London; Fedal Saini -
Forensic and Neurodevelopmental Sciences King's College London; Mina Idris -
Forensic and Neurodevelopmental Sciences King's College London; Flavio Dell'Aqua
- Forensic and Neurodevelopmental Sciences King's College London; Fernando
Zelaya - Centre for Neuroimaging Sciences King's College London; Andre Strydom -
Forensic and Neurodevelopmental Sciences King's College London
Background:
Adults with Down syndrome (DS) have a high risk of developing Alzheimer’s disease
(AD) due to the triplication of chromosome 21. By age 40, most adults with DS
show AD neuropathology [1], mainly atrophy and amyloid-β deposits in the
parenchyma and blood vessels [2].
Cerebral blood flow (CBF) decrease has been suggested as one of the early
neuroimaging biomarkers for AD in the general population [3]. However, little is
known about CBF changes in DS individuals and their correlation with cognitive
scores and AD symptoms.
In this work, I characterise cerebral hemodynamics across the lifespan of adults
with DS.
Method:
Arterial Spin Labelling (ASL) data was acquired from a total of 33 individuals
with DS with ages between 17 and 58. CBF maps were generated from ASL images
using the ASAP toolbox [4]. Mean CBF values were extracted for grey and white
matter.
First, correlations between CBF and age were studied in DS. Then, the
relationship between CBF and cognitive assessments was analysed via Spearman’s
pairwise correlation, controlling for age and sex.
Results:
CBF is inversely associated with age in DS in both grey and white matter. CBF
grey vs white ratio was about 2.5 by age 18 and was reduced to less than 2 at
around 55 years, coinciding with the mean age of AD diagnosis in DS [5].
Associations with cognitive scores showed strong negative correlations between
mean grey and white matter CBF and Simple Reaction Time (SRT) correct responses
(Spearman’s r= -0.693, p=0.003 and r= -0.537, p=0.032 respectively. This measure
of general alertness and motor speed has been suggested to be sensitive to early
cognitive changes in AD in the general population [6].
The relationship between CBF and the development of AD symptoms was further
analysed.
Conclusion:
Cerebral perfusion in adults with DS showed a marked decrease with age, as well
as a correlation with a measure of response time. CBF and SRT could be used as
early biomarkers of AD in DS.
[1] Strydom, A. et al., J. Policy Pract., 2010
[2] Lott and Head, Nat. Rev. Neurol., 2019
[3] Korte, N. et al., Acta Neuropathol., 2020
[4] Abad, V. M. et al, Magn. Reson. Imaging, 2016
[5] Sinai, A. et. al., J. Alzheimer's Dis., 2018
[6] Andriuta, D. et al., Dement Geriatr Cogn Disord.,2019
 
Poster number: M_PZ3_066 (TP)

Sub-Theme: Cerebral Hemodynamics and Oxidative Stress: Impact on
Neurodegeneration and Stroke

## Pulse Pressure Impairs Cognition via White Matter Disruption
Authors: Deborah King, University of Cambridge; Richard Henson -
Medical Research Council Cognition and Brain Sciences Unit University of
Cambridge; Lorraine Tyler - Department of Psychology University of Cambridge;
James Rowe - Department of Clinical Neurosciences University of Cambridge,
Cam-CAN - Medical Research Council Cognition and Brain Sciences Unit University
of Cambridge; Kamen Tsvetanov - Department of Clinical Neurosciences University
of Cambridge
We previously found that pulse pressure (systolic – diastolic) predicted
cognitive decline. Here, we hypothesized that the effects of pulse pressure on
cognition are partly explained by white matter microstructure impairment,
independently to other cardiovascular risk factors. We tested this in a
cross-sectional population-based cohort (n=615, age 18-88). We associated pulse
pressure, total blood pressure and heart rate variability with an indicator of
white matter microstructure which is relevant to cerebrovascular health (Peak
Width of Skeletonised Mean Diffusivity, PSMD, calculated on diffusion weighted
imaging), and with processing speed and fluid intelligence. In robust multiple
linear regressions, we found that pulse pressure significantly predicted white
matter microstructure, above other vascular measures. We also found that white
matter microstructure significantly predicted processing speed. This motivated
testing whether white matter mediates the effects of pulse pressure on
cognition, using structural equation models. White matter significantly and
substantially mediated the effect of pulse pressure onto processing speed. This
was moderated by age, such that older individuals with higher pulse pressure had
lower white matter integrity and reduced processing speed. We expanded the model
to show that vascular-related changes in processing speed drive changes in
higher cognitive abilities. In conclusion, we found that pulse pressure acts
through white matter microstructure to reduce cognition, particularly in older
individuals. Better managing pulse pressure may help to preserve cerebrovascular
health, and to support cognitive abilities throughout life.

Poster number: T_PZ2_035 (TP)

Sub-Theme: Neurodegeneration, Neurodevelopment, and Mitochondrial
Dysfunction: Unraveling Pathophysiology and Therapeutic Potentials

## Loss of parvalbumin interneurons and decreased colocalization with
perineuronal nets in the dorsomedial striatum of BTBR, idiopathic ASD mouse
model
Authors: Krystian Pieta, University of Central Lancashire
Autism Spectrum Disorder (ASD) is a predominantly idiopathic condition
characterised by restrictive, repetitive behaviours and interests (RRBIs) and a
deficit in social interaction and communication. Solely from parvalbumin (PV)
immunohistochemistry (IHC), the number of parvalbumin-immunoreactive (PV+)
GABAergic interneurons has been reported to be decreased across several mouse
models of ASD. However, more recent literature disputes for the downregulation
of the Ca2+ binding protein PV, not the loss of neurons. These alternatives are
anticipated to have opposing effects on excitation/ inhibition (E/I) balance.
Although convincingly, PV downregulation has only been reported in transgenic
and environmental mice models of ASD. The study of an idiopathic mouse model of
ASD, BTBR, which may be considered to have a more human-like aetiology of ASD,
will continue to identify convergent molecular endpoints across ASD models and
biomarkers which would allow for an earlier diagnosis and intervention. This
study used IHC techniques to quantify PV+ cells in the dorsomedial (DMS) and
dorsolateral striatum (DLS), regions that were shown to govern goal-directed and
habitual behaviour, respectively. Vicia Villosa Agglutinin (VVA) a lectin
recognising perineuronal nets (PNNs) which ensheath parvalbumin interneurons was
used as a second marker. Student t-tests were carried out and a value of p <
.05 was deemed significant. The findings show that female BTBR mice have
significantly fewer PV+, and VVA+, cells in the DMS compared to the controls.
The decreased counts of PV+ and VVA+ cells suggest that BTBR mice indeed have a
loss of parvalbumin interneurons. Consequently, the E/I balance is likely
shifted towards diminished inhibition, at least in the DMS region, which may be
responsible for symptoms of RRBIs in BTBR mice. Additionally, compared to the
controls, female BTBR mice have a significantly reduced PV+VVA+ percentage
colocalization in the DMS. Altered colocalization of PV+ cells with PNNs may
equally be a result, or the consequence of PV interneuron loss, but may also
contribute to symptoms of RRBIs. ASD research should investigate the DMS and DLS
as heterogeneous structures.

Poster number: T_PZ2_036 (TP)

Sub-Theme: Neurodegeneration, Neurodevelopment, and Mitochondrial
Dysfunction: Unraveling Pathophysiology and Therapeutic Potentials

## Mitochondrial dysfunction in parvalbumin cells triggers juvenile-onset severe
neurological disorder in vivo
Authors: Elizaveta Olkhova, Wellcome Centre for Mitochondrial
Research; Carla Bradshaw - Translational and Clinical Research Institute
Wellcome Centre for Mitochondrial Research; Debora Alvim - Translational and
Clinical Research Institute Wellcome Centre for Mitochondrial Research; Yi Shiau
Ng - Translational and Clinical Research Institute Wellcome Centre for
Mitochondrial Research; Grainne Gorman - Translational and Clinical Research
Institute Wellcome Centre for Mitochondrial Research; Fiona E. N. LeBeau -
Faculty of Medical Sciences Biosciences Institute; Nichola Z. Lax -
Translational and Clinical Research Institute Wellcome Centre for Mitochondrial
Research
Introduction: Mitochondrial diseases comprise the largest group of inherited
metabolic disorders. Neurological symptoms include epilepsy, ataxia, and
cognitive impairment. Previous studies implicated severe oxidative
phosphorylation (OXPHOS) deficiencies in GABAergic inhibitory neurons
accompanied by neurodegeneration in mitochondrial disease. This study aims to
test the hypothesis that metabolically demanding fast-spiking
parvalbumin-expressing (PV+) neurons are highly susceptible to mitochondrial
dysfunction.
Methods: A novel mouse model of mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) depletion selectively
within the PV+ cells was generated by a conditional knockout of mitochondrial
transcription factor A (Tfam) gene via cre-loxP system. Mice were characterised
at behavioural, electrophysiological, neuropathological, and molecular
levels.
Approach for statistical analysis: Shapiro-Wilk normality test was carried out.
Unpaired Student’s t-test was selected for parametric data and Mann-Whitney U
test for non-parametric data.
Results and conclusions: Mutant mice exhibited a progressive phenotype,
initiating at 8 weeks of age with tremor, and neuropsychiatric features
including cognitive impairment and anxiety-like behaviour. Hyper-locomotion and
stargazing (absence-like seizures) were detected at 10 weeks, with severe ataxia
observed by 12 weeks.
Hippocampal electrophysiology demonstrated a deficit in gamma oscillations in the
knockout group upon cholinergic agonism, and aberrantly high area power of gamma
oscillations upon stimulation with glutamatergic agonist kainate. A concomitant
loss of calbindin-expressing inhibitory interneurons was detected in hippocampal
CA3 region.
OXPHOS complexes I, III and IV within the PV+ cells of the knockout mice had
differential deficiency levels which were brain region dependent. PV+ neurons
demonstrated an upregulation of anaplerosis enzyme pyruvate carboxylase. PV+
Purkinje neurons showed a reduction in mtDNA copy number and modest cell loss.
Cerebellum exhibited reactive microgliosis and astrogliosis. Knockout mice had
reduced weight and severely shortened lifespan. The novel mouse model
recapitulates key features of neurological phenotype associated with
mitochondrial dysfunction and could be used as a powerful translational
model.

Poster number: T_PZ2_037 (TP)

Sub-Theme: Neurodegeneration, Neurodevelopment, and Mitochondrial
Dysfunction: Unraveling Pathophysiology and Therapeutic Potentials

## Delineating the neurodegenerative mechanisms underpinning epilepsy in Alpers’
syndrome
Authors: Laura A Smith, Newcastle University; Chun Chen - Wellcome
Centre for Mitochondrial Research, Translational and Clinical Research Institute
Newcastle University; Alasdair Blain - Wellcome Centre for Mitochondrial
Research, Translational and Clinical Research Institute Newcastle University;
Robert W Taylor - Wellcome Centre for Mitochondrial Research, Translational and
Clinical Research Institute Newcastle University / NHS Highly Specialised
Service for Rare Mitochondrial Disorders of Adults and Children, Newcastle Upon
Tyne Hospitals NHS Foundation Trust; Nichola Z Lax - Wellcome Centre for
Mitochondrial Research, Translational and Clinical Research Institute Newcastle
University; Daniel Erskine - Wellcome Centre for Mitochondrial Research,
Translational and Clinical Research Institute Newcastle University; Robert
McFarland - Wellcome Centre for Mitochondrial Research, Translational and
Clinical Research Institute Newcastle University / NHS Highly Specialised
Service for Rare Mitochondrial Disorders of Adults and Children, Newcastle Upon
Tyne Hospitals NHS Foundation Trust
Background: Alpers’ syndrome is a paediatric mitochondrial disease typically
caused by bi-allelic pathogenic variants in the mitochondrial DNA polymerase
gamma gene (POLG), and is characterised by super-refractory epilepsy which is
associated with severe neurodegeneration, neurological decline and premature
death. The precise neurodegenerative mechanisms underpinning the
occipital-predominant epilepsy in Alpers’ syndrome remain unclear. However, the
dysfunction and degeneration of inhibitory interneurons, in conjunction with
astrocytic abnormalities, are hypothesised to contribute to seizure-associated
alterations in cortical activity.
Methods: We performed a quantitative neuropathological investigation of
inhibitory interneurons and reactive astrocytes in post-mortem cortical tissues
from 13 patients with Alpers’ syndrome, 9 neurologically-normal controls and 5
sudden unexpected death in epilepsy (SUDEP) patients, controlling for
generalised epilepsy-associated pathology.
Results: Alpers’ syndrome tissues demonstrated a severe loss of
parvalbumin-expressing interneurons, particularly within the occipital cortex,
with decreased abundance of mitochondrial oxidative phosphorylation (OXPHOS)
proteins in those remaining. Reactive astrogliosis was prominent in occipital
tissues and was characterised by an accumulation of abnormal hypertrophic
astrocytes which demonstrated OXPHOS protein deficiencies and altered expression
of key astrocytic proteins including glutamine synthetase, Kir4.1 and
aquaporin-4.
Conclusions: The occipital cortex has a particularly high abundance of
parvalbumin-expressing interneurons, which are strikingly lost in Alpers’
syndrome. This is accompanied by changes to crucial astrocytic proteins
suggesting that dysfunctional astrocytes have a role in the pathophysiology by
exacerbating neuronal hyperexcitability in Alpers’ syndrome. Our current
research is now focussed on modelling these neuropathophysiological features of
Alpers’ syndrome using human and rodent organotypic cortical slices.

Poster number: T_PZ2_038 (PP)

Sub-Theme: Neurodegeneration, Neurodevelopment, and Mitochondrial
Dysfunction: Unraveling Pathophysiology and Therapeutic Potentials

## Gene expression alterations in cortical neurons carrying autosomal dominant
mutations affecting MAPT and APP dosage
Authors: Silvia Hnatova, University of Cambridge; Emmanouil
Metzakopian - Dementia Research Institute University of Cambridge
Autosomal dominant mutations affecting the dosage of APP or MAPT are causal for
early-onset forms of Alzheimer’s disease (AD) and frontotemporal dementia (FTD).
I aim to identify changes in gene expression in the cortical neurons carrying
such mutations that could explain the onset of familial dementia phenotype
decades later. For this, I created single-cell RNA-Seq datasets from in vitro
cortical neurons derived from patients with familial AD and FTD mutations. I
generated 10X datasets from cortical neurons carrying APP duplication and MAPT
E10+16 mutations and their isogenic controls, derived from patient-derived iPSCs
using two differentiation protocols: induced cortical neurons via transgene
introduction (Pawlovski et al., 2017) and directed differentiation protocol (Shi
et al., 2012).
Preliminary results suggest that in vitro iPSC-derived cortical neurons carrying
APP duplication and MAPT E10+16 mutations display gene expression changes
relevant to the known disease mechanisms underpinning dementia. The results from
in vitro cortical neurons are compared to the post-mortem samples from patients
carrying APP duplication and MAPT E10+16 mutations, and to publicly available
transcriptomics datasets from cortical neurons carrying APP or MAPT mutations
that affect their dosage. The overarching goal of this project is to identify
the pathways reflective of a changed cellular status in developing cortical
neurons carrying mutations linked to changed APP or MAPT dosage, that could shed
light on the disease processes leading to familial dementia decades later.

Poster number: T_PZ2_039 (PP)

Sub-Theme: Neurodegeneration, Neurodevelopment, and Mitochondrial
Dysfunction: Unraveling Pathophysiology and Therapeutic Potentials

## A deep sequencing investigation of mitochondrial DNA damage in cholinergic
neurons of the Pedunculopontine Nucleus
Authors: Amelia Lu, Newcastle University
In Parkinson’s disease (PD) patient brains, higher levels of somatic
mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) damage, manifesting as large-scale deletions, are
frequently seen. Such mtDNA damage associates with neuronal loss, particularly
the nigral dopaminergic neurons. However, cholinergic neuronal loss also occurs,
particularly within a brainstem structure termed the Pedunculopontine Nucleus
(PPN). We previously showed that, in contrast to nigral dopaminergic neurons,
which show reduced mtDNA copy number (mtCN) in the presence of mtDNA deletions,
PPN cholinergic neurons attempt to maintain the pool of wild-type mtDNA mtCN by
increasing mtCN.
Here we will isolate single cholinergic neurons from post-mortem PPN tissue of
aged controls versus PD patients followed by ultra-deep sequencing. At a
single-cell resolution, we will consider the location of mtDNA deletions, their
size, the nature of deletion breakpoints and their heteroplasmy level. We will
also compare how the number of point mutations, their locations and heteroplasmy
levels vary between PD and control cases. We will compare observations of these
genomic features between PD patients and controls, as well as with published
data on PD- affected nigral dopaminergic neurons. Our study aims to understand
how mtDNA deletions are generated and explain the different compensatory
responses by mtDNA in nigral (reduced mtCN) versus PPN cholinergic (increased
mtCN) neurons to the accumulation of mtDNA deletions. Finally, we will use
single cells qRT-PCR to determine expression levels of critical nuclear genes
involved in mitochondrial biogenesis, mitophagy and mtDNA maintenance.
Preliminary results support earlier observations of higher levels of large
deletions in PD compared to controls. The deletions range between 5-140bp
(small) and >1,400bp (large). Analysis of large deletion location ‘hotspots’
is consistent with generation due to errors during replication. We find no
significant difference in the levels of point mutations between cases and
controls. The low concentration of small deletions suggests that oxidative
damage is not a significant driver of excess mtDNA damage affecting PPN
cholinergic neurons in PD patients.

Poster number: T_PZ2_040 (TP)

Sub-Theme: Neurodegeneration, Neurodevelopment, and Mitochondrial
Dysfunction: Unraveling Pathophysiology and Therapeutic Potentials

## Mitochondrial DNA Maintenance Failure in Degenerating Pontine Neurons Differs
Between Lewy Body Disease Clinical Phenotypes
Authors: Ilse Pienaar, University of Birmingham
Introduction: Lewy Body Disease (LBD) entails Dementia with Lewy Bodies (DLB) and
Parkinson’s Disease with Dementia (PDD) distinguished via the 'one year rule'
between onset of dementia and parkinsonism. Consensus exists that phenotypes
converge end stage, suggesting similar pathological mechanisms i.e.
type-specific neuronal loss and protein aggregates in remaining neurons.
Deletions in mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA), encoding OXPHOS components, may underlie
the neurodegeneration, as we previously showed for Parkinson’s disease. Methods:
We quantified mtDNA deletion (mtDel) levels and mtDNA copy number (mtCN) in
single acetylcholine (ACh)- and noradrenaline- (NA) producing neurons from two
degenerating pontine nuclei, the pedunculopontine nucleus (PPN) and locus
coeruleus (LC) in post-mortem DLB, PDD and neurologically-normal control brains.
We also quantified mRNA expression of nuclear encoded genes regulating mtDNA
repair, biogenesis and mitophagy; for statistics we used ANOVAs.
Results/conclusions: DLB cases harboured greater mtDel burden in both PPN ACh
and LC NA neurons compared to PDD, frequently surpassing the 60% threshold for
inducing mt functional defects. In DLB cases, mtCN was also greatly reduced in
both neurotypes. Our data indicates PDD is an mtDNA depletion syndrome, with
both neurotypes showing intact mtDNA but severely reduced copies; female PDD
patients showed most severe mtCN depletion. In DLB-affected PPN ACh neurons,
nuclear genes regulating mtDNA failed to respond to the clonal expansion of
mtDNA deletions, displaying reduced expression; such pathways were largely
intact in PDD patients.
Disease stage and patient age correlated with mtCN in PPN ACh neurons and with
both mtCN and mtDel in LC NA neurons, highlighting mtDNA changes as potential
factors in DLB’s progression. Our results indicate that LBD- affected brainstem
neurons fail to maintain sufficient copies of wild-type mtDNA, the degree of
pathological burden being neurotype and clinical subtype dependent. We reveal
distinct mtDNA patterns in DLB vs PDD and impaired mtDNA-regulating RNA
transcription in DLB-impacted degenerating pontine neurons. Our findings
identify mtDNA maintenance pathway enrichment as a therapeutic target to promote
pontine neuronal survival in the DLB subtype.

Poster number: T_PZ2_041 (TP)

Sub-Theme: Neurodegeneration, Neurodevelopment, and Mitochondrial
Dysfunction: Unraveling Pathophysiology and Therapeutic Potentials

## Transforming diagnostic yield of motor neurone degenerative diseases through
empowering variant interpretation in underrepresented populations
Authors: Allison A. Newman, University of Exeter; Fatema Al-Salmi -
College of Applied Sciences and Pharmacy University of Technology and Applied
Sciences; Emma L. Baple - University of Exeter Medical School University of
Exeter; Andrew H. Crosby - University of Exeter Medical School University of
Exeter
Introduction
Motor neurone degenerative diseases (MNDs) are an extraordinarily heterogeneous
group of conditions associated with progressive deterioration of motor neurone
function and survival. The hereditary spastic paraplegias (HSPs) are a large
subgroup of MNDs characterised primarily by upper motor neurone degeneration.
Due to their highly monogenic nature HSPs comprise excellent study models to
define crucial motor neurone survival-degeneration molecular pathways.
In genetically isolated populations recessive monogenic HSP subtypes may increase
in frequency due to community cultural marriage preferences. The Exeter Rare
Disease research group has investigated these conditions in Amish and Omani
communities, leading to the discovery of novel monogenic causes of disease and
detail community HSP/MND genetic architecture.
Methods & results
Exome-genome sequencing data from multiple Amish/Omani individuals with HSP/MNDs
was filtered to exclude small variants/CNVs at >0.1% allele frequency or
>1 homozygotes (gnomAD/in-house databases). Likely/pathogenic variants
present in ClinVar/HGMDpro or within exons/±6 intronic nucleotides were
evaluated using variant appropriate statistical tools (REVEL/CADD/SpliceAI).
This defined specific founder gene variants associated with multiple novel (eg
B4GALNT1, EPT1, TMEM63C) and previously described (eg SPAST) monogenic forms of
HSP, and additional candidate new genetic causes of MNDs/HSP.
Discussion
In isolated populations the founder effect and large family size empowers genetic
studies, enabling new disease gene discovery. Evidencing this our work in such
settings has defined 8 novel monogenic causes of HSP/MNDs, facilitating
diagnostic provision for families worldwide. Importantly this work increases
representation of populations currently underserved in genomic databases,
empowering rare disease variant interpretation.
Ultimately the scientific insights provided by new disease gene discovery aids
the definition of novel disease biomarkers and potential therapeutic targets,
alongside enabling new rapid, low-cost approaches to target pathogenic founder
gene variants. Together this works provides crucial new pathomolecular
scientific insights, alongside transforming diagnostic provision for affected
families.

Poster number: T_PZ2_042 (PP)

Sub-Theme: Neurodegeneration, Neurodevelopment, and Mitochondrial
Dysfunction: Unraveling Pathophysiology and Therapeutic Potentials

## Patient-derived cellular models as tools to elucidate the pathophysiology of
Hao-Fountain syndrome
Authors: Janelle Stanton, Bernal Institute, University of
Limerick
Introduction:
Synaptic plasticity (SP) plays a key role in the human ability to adapt to
environmental input, along with the processes of learning and memory. Altered SP
significantly contributes to neurological and psychiatric disorders, including
Autism Spectrum Disorders (ASD). Mutations in essential proteins facilitating SP
have also been identified in human patients with intellectual disabilities.
Recently, loss of function mutations in ubiquitin-specific protease 7 (USP7,
also called herpes virus-associated ubiquitin-specific protease, HAUSP), have
been identified as a disorder- causing variant, linked explicity to Hao-Fountain
syndrome, a neurodevelopmental disorder manifesting intellectual disability,
ASD, and seizures. Located at chromosome 16p13.2, USP7 encodes a
deubiquitinating proteolytic enzyme that can cleave multiple ubiquitin chain
linkages. Previously, USP7 was shown to regulate the ubiquitination of proteins,
including the MDM2-p53 pathway, which is vital for DNA repair, transcription,
and cancer. However, so far, the precise mechanisms of how USP7 mutation causes
the clinical phenotype on a cellular level are missing.
Methods:
In this collaborative project, using patient-derived human induced pluripotent
stem cells in combination with omics approaches (proteomic and transcriptomic
analysis) and targeted biochemical analyses (qrt-pcr and western blot analysis),
we aim to understand the functions of USP7 in neuronal development and SP by
recapitulating neurodevelopmental processes using in vitro model systems
including 2D models from iPS cells to differentiated mature neurons along with
3D models systems such as cerebral organoids.
Approach for statistical analysis:
Throughout our approaches following each phase of differentiation we will utilise
primarily one-way ANOVA analysis along with appropriate post-hoc tests to
provide information at an individual level whereby we monitor alterations at a
protein and mRNA level when comparing each sample individually, while also
combining patient versus control to identify potential alterations due to the
USP7 deletion when compared to neurotypical controls.

Poster number: T_PZ2_043 (PP)

Sub-Theme: Neurodegeneration, Neurodevelopment, and Mitochondrial
Dysfunction: Unraveling Pathophysiology and Therapeutic Potentials

## High resolution respirometry to assess SH-SY5Y differentiation methods and
their suitability for Alzheimer’s modelling
Authors: Rachel Cruickshank, University of Nottingham
Alzheimer’s disease (AD) is a common neurodegenerative disease characterized by
gradual onset cognitive decline that affects millions of people globally. During
AD, β-amyloid (Aβ) proteins misfold and progressively aggregate. These proteins
exert neurotoxic effects towards cholinergic neurons. Mitochondrial dysfunction
is thought to be one of the first signs of this toxicity.
SH-SY5Y cells, a neuroblastoma derived cell line, are commonly used for research
into AD and other neurodegenerative diseases. When undifferentiated, these cells
display an immature catecholaminergic neuron phenotype. Protocols involving
retinoic acid (RA) and RA with brain derived neurotrophic factor (BDNF)
differentiate SH-SY5Y cells into a mature cholinergic phenotype; but unclear and
conflicting results exist as to the effect of differentiation on mitochondrial
function.
High resolution respirometry (HRR) involves the continual measurement of oxygen
flux in a closed chamber containing living tissue. Addition of substrates,
uncouplers and inhibitors (SUIT protocols) allows for assessment of individual
respiratory enzymes consecutively.
This study aims to use HRR to investigate the effect of RA and RA/BDNF protocols
on mitochondrial function of SH- SY5Y cells, specifically with regard to AD.
HRR will be performed using O2K-Resirometer (Oroboros). SUIT-003-D020 will be
performed on undifferentiated, RA differentiated and RA/BDNF differentiated
SH-SY5Y cells to measure proportional contributions of electron chain complexes
to overall respiratory capacity. Longer SUIT protocols can then be used to
further assess any differences identified.
Then, each cell type will be challenged with Aβ at progressive points throughout
the aggregation process and effect on mitochondrial function will be measured,
to assess both which stage/stages in the aggregation cause mitochondrial
dysfunction and the mechanism behind the dysfunction.
A one-way ANOVA statistical test will be used to analyse significance between
undifferentiated, RA differentiated and RA/BDNF differentiated cells.
A one-way ANOVA analysis test will be performed between control cells and cells
exposed to monomeric Aβ; misfolded Aβ; oligomeric Aβ and proto-fibrillar Aβ
within each of the differentiation types.

Poster number: T_PZ2_044 (PP)

Sub-Theme: Neurodegeneration, Neurodevelopment, and Mitochondrial
Dysfunction: Unraveling Pathophysiology and Therapeutic Potentials

## Testing carbonic anhydrase inhibitors for treating mitochondrial dysfunction
in neurodegeneration
Authors: Katherine Mortimer, University of Nottingham
Mitochondrial dysfunction is a key feature of neurodegeneration. Identifying the
components of ageing that promote mitochondrial dysfunction may lead to the
development of therapeutics to counteract neurodegenerative decline. Carbonic
anhydrases (CA) play a role in maintaining cellular pH by catalysing the
reversible reaction that balances levels of carbon dioxide, bicarbonate and
carbonic acid. pH is particularly important for mitochondrial respiration due to
the proton cycling that occurs in the electron transport chain to produce ATP.
Proteomic analysis of the ageing mouse brain revealed a significant increase in
expression of CA, isoforms CAII and CAIII, in aged mice compared to young mice.
Elevated levels of CAII were also found in younger brain tissue of the
neurodegeneration mouse model pcd5J, potentially identifying CAII as a specific
marker of neurodegenerative decline. Treating C. elegans with CAII (after
maturity was achieved) reduced their lifespan by up to 58% compared to controls.
CA inhibitors are already used to treat glaucoma and have been suggested as a
potential therapeutic to treat Alzheimer’s disease. Further research is required
to identify the specific role CAs play in mitochondrial dysfunction and whether
this is a mechanism that can be targeted to treat neurodegenerative decline in
ageing.
The SH-SY5Y human neuroblastoma cell line will be treated with CAs and CA
inhibitors. High-resolution respirometry (HRR) using the Oroboros O2K will be
utilised to observe their effect on mitochondrial respiration. Differentiated
SH-SY5Y cells will be exposed to 1-Methyl-4-phenyl pyridinium (MPP+). MPP+
inhibits complex 1 of the electron transport chain in mitochondria and induces
dopaminergic cell death providing a useful model of Parkinson’s disease.
Differentiated SH-SY5Y cells treated with MPP+ will be used to observe whether
CA inhibitors can restore mitochondrial function. HRR data will allow accurate
delineation of mitochondrial dysfunction and precise assessment of amelioration
effects of the CA inhibition.
Results from the HRR in control cells and treated cells will be analysed for
statistical significance using a one-way ANOVA statistical test.

Poster number: T_PZ2_045 (TP)

Sub-Theme: Neurodegeneration, Neurodevelopment, and Mitochondrial
Dysfunction: Unraveling Pathophysiology and Therapeutic Potentials

## Application of imaging mass cytometry on post-mortem brain tissue to
understand mitochondrial pathology on Parkinson’s
Authors: Chun Chen, Newcastle University; David McDonald - Flow
Cytometry Core Facility Newcastle University; Alasdair P Blain - Wellcome Centre
for Mitochondrial Research Newcastle University; Andrew Filby - Flow Cytometry
Core Facility Newcastle University; Amy Vincent - Wellcome Centre for
Mitochondrial Research Newcastle University; Amy Reeve - MS Society UK MS
Society UK; Gavin Hudson - Wellcome Centre for Mitochondrial Research Newcastle
University
Mitochondrial dysfunction is associated with neuronal loss in Parkinson’s.
However, the exact mechanism behind this loss remains unclear. To further our
understanding of the nature of this dysfunction and its impact on neuronal
health, we utilised imaging mass cytometry (IMC) to perform complex proteomic
profiling of mitochondrial and associated proteins. IMC is a powerful technique
that combines microscopy and mass spectrometry to simultaneously detect ~50
protein targets at the single cell level. We developed and applied large
antibody panels comprising key components of key mitochondrial pathways in
addition to several important brain cell markers. We used these panels to
analyse changes in mitochondrial OXPHOS, mitochondrial fatty acid metabolism and
mitochondrial quality control in Parkinson’s midbrain.
FFPE midbrain sections (5um thickness) from Parkinson’s cases (n=15) were
subjected to IMC for the measurement of protein abundance and compared to
healthy controls (n=15).
Statistical analysis was performed using R. Differences between groups were
described using Bayesian estimation, Mann-Whitney U test, Wilcoxon signed-rank
tests and multiple linear regression modelling.
Profiling of the mitochondrial protein abundance highlighted the heterogeneity
between individuals within each group. We found evidence of deficiencies
involving multiple respiratory chain subunits in both dopaminergic neurons and
astrocytes (PMID: 33980828 &34779538). Additionally, we identified a
synergistic decrease of Parkin, PINK1, Phospho-Ub, HSP60, TFAM and SIRT3 in
Parkinson’s neurons, suggesting the regulatory machinery of mitochondrial
quality control including mitophagy, mitochondrial proteases and biogenesis
might be impaired.
Analysis of the proteins responsible for fatty acid oxidation (particularly the
acylcarnitine pathway, PMID: 28394042) identified several differences between
Parkinson’s and control cases, and appeared correlated to OXPHOS
dysfunction.
Our studies highlighted the use of IMC in the assessment of mitochondrial protein
expression in Parkinson’s, providing important post-mortem evidence to support
the complexity of impaired mitochondrial protein homeostasis in Parkinson’s,
which may increase the neuronal vulnerability to age-related oxidative
stress.
 
Poster number: T_PZ2_046 (TP)

Sub-Theme: Neurodegeneration, Neurodevelopment, and Mitochondrial
Dysfunction: Unraveling Pathophysiology and Therapeutic Potentials

## EBP1 ubiquitination by PARKIN promotes mitophagy protecting neuron death in
brain disease
Authors: Jee-Yin Ahn, Sungkyunkwan University School of Medicine
Cerebral ischemia induces massive mitochondrial damage, leading to neuronal
death. The elimination of damaged mitochondria via mitophagy is critical for
neuroprotection. Here we show that the level of ErbB3-binding protein 1 (EBP1)
was notably increased early during transient middle cerebral artery occlusion
and prevented neuronal death by eliciting cerebral ischemia reperfusion
(IR)-induced mitophagy. Neuron-specific knockout of Ebp1 increased infarct
volume and aggravated neuron loss with impaired mitophagy and was rescued by
introduction of adeno- associated virus serotype 2 expressing EBP1. We
identified that EBP1 is ubiquitinated on lysine 376 by PARKIN on the damaged
mitochondria and interacts with adaptor protein P62 for mitophagy induction.
Thus, our study suggests that EBP1 ubiquitination following cerebral IR-injury
promotes mitophagy induction, which may be implicated in neuroprotection.

Poster number: T_PZ2_047 (TP)

Sub-Theme: Neurodegeneration, Neurodevelopment, and Mitochondrial
Dysfunction: Unraveling Pathophysiology and Therapeutic Potentials

## MSK1 is required for the beneficial synaptic and cognitive effects of
enriched experience across the lifespan
Authors: Bruno Frenguelli, University of Warwick; Lorenzo Morè -
School of Pharmacy and Biomedical Sciences University of Central Lancashire;
Lucia Privitera - Barts and the London School of Medicine Queen Mary University
of London Malta Campus; Marianthi Tsogka - School of Life Sciences University of
Warwick; Daniel Cooper - School of Life Sciences University of Warwick; Simon
Arthur - School of Life Sciences University of Dundee
Introduction: Normal human ageing and age-related dementias impair cognition.
Positive experiences, such as social interactions, cognitive training and
physical exercise, have been shown to ameliorate some of the harms to cognition
associated with ageing. Similar positive interventions in animal models, known
as environmental enrichment, strongly influence neuronal morphology and synaptic
function and enhance cognitive performance. However, little is known as to how
the environment influences neurons to respond and adapt to these positive
sensory experiences. Previously we showed that the BDNF-activated CREB kinase,
MSK1, is necessary for the expansion of the synaptic dynamic range and the full
complement of cognitive enhancement provoked by enrichment in young mice. Here
we report that MSK1 continues to be important for synaptic plasticity and
cognitive improvement in response to enrichment well into old age.
Methods: We used aged male wild-type and MSK1 kinase dead (MSK1 KD) mutant mice
housed in either standard housing throughout the study or moved into and
remaining in environmental enrichment from 78 weeks of age. Behavioural testing
in the elevated plus maze, spontaneous alternation task and Morris water maze
was conducted in weeks 88-92. Between weeks 94 and 100 animals were culled and
tissue removed for ex vivo analyses of area CA1 synaptic transmission and
long-term potentiation, CA1 spine density and hippocampal RNA-seq.
Statistics: Statistics were computed by IBM SPSS 27 using two-tailed one or
two-way analysis of variance (ANOVA). The level of significance was taken to be
p<0.05 (α=0.05). Exact p values are reported where p<0.0001. For lower
values, p< 0.0001 is reported. Data are reported as mean ± SEM and bar graphs
display individual data points.
Results and conclusions: We show that aged male wild-type mice that underwent
environmental enrichment showed less anxiety-like behaviour, improved
performance in spatial working and spatial reference memory tasks, and an
enhancement in hippocampal LTP. Many of these benefits were absent in MSK1 KD
mice. We conclude that enrichment is beneficial across the lifespan and that
MSK1 is required for the full extent of these experience-induced improvements of
cognitive abilities and synaptic plasticity.

Poster number: T_PZ2_048 (TP)

Sub-Theme: Neurodegeneration, Neurodevelopment, and Mitochondrial
Dysfunction: Unraveling Pathophysiology and Therapeutic Potentials

## Mef2c transcription factor is required for development of the medium spiny
neurons of the mouse striatum
Authors: Heba Ali, Al Hashemite University; Dr. Sophie Rowlands -
School of Biosciences Cardiff University; Dr. Michael Taylor - School of
Biosciences Cardiff University; Prof. Anne Rosser - Psychological Medicine and
Clinical Neurosciences Cardiff University
Introduction: Medium spiny neurons (MSNs) are the major projection of the
striatum and are the neurons predominantly degenerating in Huntington’s disease.
Understanding normal striatal MSN development is important for understanding the
pathological conditions affecting this area of the mouse brain. We showed
previously that the transcription factor myocyte enhancer factor c (Mef2c) is
significantly upregulated in the striatum during embryonic development. This
study investigated the role of Mef2c in the developing mouse striatum.
Methods: A conditional knockout (CKO)of the Mef2c gene in the striatum was made
using the Gsx2-cre-loxp system to generate Gsx2-Cre Mef2c-/- mice. A total of 80
mice were used, with equal numbers of males and females. Mice lacking Gsx2-Cre
served as controls. A range of assays were undertaken in a developmental series:
stereological quantification of striatal volume and striatal cell counts for
NeuN, and MSNs markers; Golgi-cox based dendritic tracing, proliferation using
BrdU and Edu, apoptotic assays e.g. TUNEL, cell culture and motor behavioural
testing.
Approach for statistical analysis. three tests were used: Two-way ANOVA followed
by Bonferroni post hoc test when a significant interaction between the two main
factors exists; Two-way repeated measure ANOVA test to analyse dendritic
arborization and behavioural data; and Multiple t test with Holm Sidak
correction (significance set at 0.05).
Results and conclusions: Mef2c CKO animals showed a significant impairment in
exploratory behaviour of new environments compared to controls. Striatal volume
and MSN numbers were significantly reduced in CKO striatum from postnatal day 14
(P14) onward, accompanied by a relative decrease of the striatal matrix
compartment, and there was a mild, yet significant, reduction of dendritic
intersections in 12-month-old CKO striatae. A significant increase in apoptotic
activity was observed in P3 CKO striatum accompanied by a significant reduction
in the anti- apoptotic factor Bcl-xl, but proliferation indices were unchanged.
In conclusion, we showed that Mef2c is required for the survival of a
subpopulation of matrix MSNs and proper development of dendrites and suggest
that these changes underlie the abnormalities in motor functioning.

Poster number: T_PZ2_049 (TP)

Sub-Theme: Neurodegeneration, Neurodevelopment, and Mitochondrial
Dysfunction: Unraveling Pathophysiology and Therapeutic Potentials

## Long-interspersed element 1 mobile DNA activity is prominent in parvalbumin
interneurons
Authors: Gabriela O. Bodea, The University of Queensland; Maria E.
Ferreiro - Queensland Brain Institute The University of Queensland; Juan M.
Botto - Queensland Brain Institute The University of Queensland; Geoffrey J.
Faulkner - Queensland Brain Institute and Mater Research Institute The
University of Queensland
Introduction. The retrotransposon Long Interspersed Element 1 (LINE-1, L1) is a
mobile genetic element that can autonomously mobilise from one location in the
genome to another via a “copy and paste” mechanism involving an RNA
intermediate. Due to its replicative nature, L1 copies have accumulated in
mammalian genomes over evolutionary time, making up over 17% of human DNA. L1
insertions within and proximal to genes provide a significant source of
regulatory sequences that can impact gene expression in various ways. Somatic L1
insertions have been detected in humans, macaques, and mice neuronal cells.
Previous studies suggest that early brain development and neurogenesis provide a
milieu for L1 mobilisation. However, whether the L1 activity is restricted to
specific neuronal subtypes is unknown, and its impact on neuronal function
remains unclear.
Methods. To address this knowledge gap, we have used single-molecule RNA in situ
hybridization and immunohistochemistry, as well as functional assays using L1
mobilization reporters in both primary neuronal cultures and mice. In addition,
we have used long-read Oxford Nanopore DNA sequencing to profile methylation at
L1 loci in sorted neuronal populations from mice.
Approach for statistical analysis. Significance testing of cell counts in mice
was done using one-way ANOVA with Tukey’s multiple comparison test or two-tailed
t-test using GraphPad Prism. Methylation comparisons were performed by Fisher’s
Exact Test using methylated and non-methylated call counts, with significance
defined as a Bonferroni corrected P value of less than 0.01.
Results and conclusions. We have found that L1 activity is stimulated by the
SRY-box transcription factor 6 (SOX6), a key player in the neuronal-type
specific transcriptional program of parvalbumin-expressing (PV+) interneurons.
PV+ neurons harbour unmethylated L1 promoters, express higher levels of L1 mRNA
than other neurons, and support L1 transgene mobilisation in mice. Additionally,
we identified unmethylated L1 promoter loci driving the expression of PV+
function-related genes, such as calcium-dependent activator protein for
secretion 2 (CAPS2). In conclusion, our findings reveal that L1 activity is an
integral part of the transcriptional program of PV+ neuron generation.

Poster number: T_PZ2_050 (TP)

Sub-Theme: Neurodegeneration, Neurodevelopment, and Mitochondrial
Dysfunction: Unraveling Pathophysiology and Therapeutic Potentials

## Selenium Deficiency and Increased Sodium/Potassium Ratios are Widespread in
the Huntington’s Disease Brain
Authors: Melissa Scholefield, University of Manchester
Background: Huntington’s disease (HD) is an autosomal dominant neurodegenerative
disease caused by mutations in the Huntingtin (Htt) gene. This disease leads to
progressive motor dysfunction, neuropsychiatric abnormalities, and cognitive
deterioration. Although primarily characterised neuropathologically by neuronal
loss and the presence of mutant Htt aggregations in the brain, metallomic
perturbations may also be present in the HD brain and contribute to
pathogenesis. This study aimed to identify what such, if any, perturbations may
be and where they are localised.
Methods: Changes in eight essential metals and selenium were investigated in
eleven brain regions in nine genetically confirmed HD cases and nine age,
post-mortem delay, and sex-matched controls using inductively coupled plasma
mass spectrometry (ICP-MS).
Statistical Analysis: Significant case–control alterations were identified using
non-parametric Mann–Whitney U tests; sodium/potassium ratios (Na/K) were also
analysed in the same manner. p < 0.05 was considered significant. Risk
ratios, E-values, and effect sizes were also determined to evaluate the
robustness of significant case–control alterations.
Results: The HD brain showed significantly decreased selenium in every
investigated region, as well as increased Na/K in 10 out of 11 regions. Multiple
regions also showed increased calcium and zinc levels, with localised decreases
in iron, copper, and manganese.
Conclusions: Selenium deficiency and increased Na/K appear to be a widespread
feature in the HD brain and may reflect mitochondrial dysfunction and oxidative
stress as well as blood–brain barrier breakdown; these changes may contribute to
pathogenesis in HD and may represent potential therapeutic targets.

Poster number: T_PZ2_051 (TP)

Sub-Theme: Neurodegeneration, Neurodevelopment, and Mitochondrial
Dysfunction: Unraveling Pathophysiology and Therapeutic Potentials

## Cranial irradiation induces age-dependent cognitive deficits and hippocampal
marker expression indicative of synaptic and GABAergic dysfunction
Authors: Georgina Pearson, University of Manchester; Sophie Johnson
- Department of Pharmacy and Optometry University of Manchester; Tawan Polsilapa
- Department of Pharmacy and Optometry University of Manchester; Jennifer
Fletcher - Department of Pharmacy and Optometry University of Manchester; Duncan
Foster - Department of Pharmacy and Optometry University of Manchester; Michael
Harte - Department of Pharmacy and Optometry University of Manchester; Kaye
Williams - Department of Pharmacy and Optometry University of Manchester
Radiotherapy is the mainstay of brain cancer treatment, in both adult and
paediatric patient populations. Although effective in tumour control, exposure
to therapeutic radiation can induce progressive cognitive decline that affects
domains including memory and social functioning. We investigated the cognitive
ability of mice irradiated at different ages to correlate behavioural changes
with well-established markers of cognitive function. Male C57BL/6 mice aged 8-
and 26 weeks were subject to a single dose of 20 Gy delivered to the right
hemisphere. The novel object recognition (NOR) test was performed 7- and 50-days
post-IR, and the 3 Chamber Social Interaction (3-CSI) Test 50 days post-IR.
Synaptic (SNAP-25, PSD-95) and GABAergic (PV, GAD-67) markers in the hippocampus
were analysed with simple westerns. NOR data was analysed using an unpaired
Student’s t-test. 3-CSI data was analysed using a repeated measure 3-way ANOVA.
Molecular data was analysed using a one-way ANOVA. Irradiation at 8 and 26 weeks
significantly impaired NOR test performance at day 7, as indicated by decreased
discrimination indices compared to controls (8w, p<0.001; 26w, p<0.01) and
day 50 (8w, p<0.01; 26w, p<0.05). Neither treatment nor age had an effect
on social preference. Mice were unable to complete the social memory element of
the test at 8 weeks old, thus no effect of IR was seen. 26-week old control mice
were able to discern the two mice, and spent more time interacting with the
stranger mouse, an ability lost in the IR mice (p<0.05). 8 week old IR mice
showed significant hemispheric decreases in PV (right (R), p<0.05) and GAD-67
(left (L), p<0.05), and an increase in PSD-95 (R, p<0.01). When delivered
to 26 week old mice, IR reduced levels of PV (L, p<0.01), GAD-67 (L,
p<0.01; R, p<0.05) and SNAP-25 (L, p<0.001; R, p<0.001). Our
findings in this study reveal clear IR-induced impairments in visual-spatial
memory, and a vulnerability of older populations to social memory losses.
Markers relevant to the GABAergic inhibitory system and synaptic connectivity
were altered by IR in a hemispheric- and age-dependent manner, indicating that
neural networks relevant to cognitive functioning are disturbed even 50 days
after exposure.
 
Poster number: T_PZ2_052 (TP)

Sub-Theme: Neurodegeneration, Neurodevelopment, and Mitochondrial
Dysfunction: Unraveling Pathophysiology and Therapeutic Potentials

## Endocannabinoid neurotransmitter abnormalities in Parkinson’s Disease
Psychosis and grey matter loss: A meta- regression
Authors: Sara Pisani, King's College London; Brandon Gunasekera -
Psychosis Studies King's College London; Latha Velayudhan - Old Age Psychiatry
King's College London; Dominic ffytche - Old Age Psychiatry King's College
London; Sagnik Bhattacharyya - Psychosis Studies King's College London
Introduction
There are extensive grey matter abnormalities in Parkinson’s Disease (PD)
patients with visual hallucinations and delusions (i.e., PD psychosis, PDP), as
well as dysfunction of serotonergic receptors. Evidence from clinical trials has
shown the effectiveness of cannabinoid-based medications in alleviating
psychosis in PD patients. However, the relationship between endocannabinoid
system and grey matter atrophy in PDP has not been examined. Here, we aimed to
investigate the relationship between grey matter volume loss in PDP and
endocannabinoid receptors.
Approach for statistical analysis
Systematic searches were conducted on PubMed, Web of Science, and Embase. Peak
coordinates were extracted from magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) studies for PDP
and PD patients without psychosis (PDnP) and were entered in Seed-based d
Mapping with Permutation of Subject Images (SDM-PSI, v6.21). PD medications
expressed in Levodopa equivalent daily dose (LEDD) was entered as covariate.
Gene expression data for endocannabinoid (i.e., CB1/CB2) receptors were
extracted from the Allen Human Brain Atlas, and parcellated across the 78
regions of the Desikan-Killiany brain atlas. Unadjusted and LEDD-adjusted
Hedges’ g effect-size estimates were extracted from the SDM-PSI analysis as a
measure of grey matter loss in PDP patients for these 78 regions and entered in
multiple regression models. Analyses were conducted on R.
Results and conclusions
Results from 10 MRI (PDP patients, n=211, mean age = 69.01 years; PDnP patients,
n=298, mean age = 67.34 years) showed reduction in grey matter was observed in
parieto-temporo-occipital regions in PDP patients in both LEDD- adjusted and
unadjusted analyses (uncorrected, p<0.05). Local expression of CB1 receptor
was significantly associated with whole-brain grey matter volume loss
(unadjusted, b=0.130, p=0.004; LEDD-adjusted, b=0.146, p=0.002). Entering fatty
acid amide hydrolase enzyme in the model did not change these results. Extensive
decrease in cortical volume within regions involved in high order visual
information processing and information integration in PDP was observed.
Abnormalities in CB1 receptor may contribute to better understanding
cannabinoid-based medications as a treatment for psychosis in PD patients.

Poster number: T_PZ2_053 (TP)

Sub-Theme: Neurodegeneration, Neurodevelopment, and Mitochondrial
Dysfunction: Unraveling Pathophysiology and Therapeutic Potentials

## Photobiomodulation therapy (PBMT) 1068 nm for the treatment of neurological
complications of COVID-19: molecular and cellular effects
Authors: Lydia Kitchen, Durham University; Paul Chazot - Department
of Biosciences Durham University
Introduction: COVID-19 can result in severe complications, such as the
pro-inflammatory cytokine storm, acute respiratory distress syndrome, thrombosis
or neurological issues. PBMT, using near-infrared light with the wavelength 1068
nm, could be used as a non-invasive, drug-free treatment for COVID-19. PBMT acts
via the mitochondrial enzyme cytochrome c oxidase to induce inflammatory
changes, cytoprotection, nitric oxide release and increase blood flow. It is
hypothesised that these effects will benefit the respiratory system and other
organs targeted by SARS-CoV-2, including the brain (with neurological symptoms,
ranging from anosmia to stroke and delirium, becoming increasingly common.)
Methods: Human SHSY5Y neuronal and rat C6 glioma cells were stressed with
SARS-CoV-2 spike peptide, lipopolysaccharides or hydrogen peroxide, and treated
with 1068 nm. Responses were measured with MTT assays, lactate dehydrogenase
(LDH) release, immunohistochemistry and immunofluorescence. Initial experiments
were performed on human skin cells (HDFs).
Approach for statistical analysis: SPSS and Microsoft Excel were used to perform
statistical analysis with t-tests and one-way ANOVAs (using * p < 0.05, ** p
< 0.01, *** p < 0.001 and **** p < 0.0001). ImageJ’s ‘Analyze
particles’ feature was used to count cells.
Results and conclusions: PBMT improved (*) mitochondrial viability in HDFs under
inflammatory and oxidative stress, obeying the cytochrome c oxidase theory of
activation. In C6 cells, PBMT reversed the S-peptide-induced redistribution of
the SARS-CoV-2 receptor ACE2 to the cell membrane, which may be useful in
reducing viral attachment. Starvation with serum free media reduced the number
of glioma and neuronal cells, and PBMT increased cell number (**** and ***
respectively) back to control levels. The basis of this was explored; PBMT had
no effect on the cytotoxicity marker LDH but increased the percentage of
proliferating cells expressing Ki-67 (**).
PBMT shows promising effects against SARS-CoV-2 infection and neurological
complications. In future experiments, techniques will be repeated with microglia
to assess their response to PBMT. ATP determination and calcium imaging will be
used on all cells to further understand the mitochondrial effects of 1068
nm.

Poster number: T_PZ2_054 (TP)

Sub-Theme: Unraveling Brain Resilience and Vulnerability: Aging,
Neurodegeneration, and Psychiatric Insights

## Synaptic resilience in Lothian Birth Cohort 1936 participants is associated
with maintained cognition during ageing
Authors: Declan King, University of Edinburgh; Kris Holt - UK
Dementia Research Institute and Centre for Discovery Brain Sciences University
of Edinburgh
Many people experience declining cognitive function as the brain ages. Age is the
most important risk factor for cognitive decline and dementia, but the degree to
which individuals experience these aspects of ageing is hugely variable.
Understanding the neurobiological bases of brain ageing can offer key insights
into individual differences in cognitive ageing and dementia risk.
Region-specific synapse changes observed in the ageing brain and in Alzheimer’s
disease (AD) correlate with cognitive decline; thus, we hypothesize that
synaptic resilience contributes to healthy cognitive ageing.
In this study, we test this hypothesis through observing human post-mortem brain
tissue from people without dementia donated by participants in the Lothian Birth
Cohort 1936 alongside young control subjects and people who died with AD. We
used array tomography imaging to examine synapse density and the accumulation of
Alzheimer’s- related pathological proteins within synapses in two brain regions
(inferior temporal cortex and visual cortex).
Further, we use proteomics and RNA sequencing to characterise molecular changes
in biochemically enriched synaptic fractions and in total brain homogenates from
these brain regions. We observe a stepwise decline in synapse density between
young controls, ageing participants with normal cognition, and people with AD
and a stepwise increase in the proportion of remaining synapses containing
amyloid beta or tau proteins. Molecular analyses indicate decreases in synaptic
signalling in ageing compared to young controls, which are exacerbated in AD.
The Lothian Birth Cohort 1936 participants took an intelligence test at age 11
and multiple cognitive tests through their 70s and 80s allowing us to compare
people with lifetime cognitive decline compared to those with maintained or
resilient cognition over their lifetimes. Although our participant numbers are
modest when split by lifetime cognition (n= 7 participants who experienced
lifetime cognitive decline and 8 with lifetime cognitive resilience), we observe
some differences, including increased gliosis in people with lifetime cognitive
decline and paradoxically gene changes indicating decreased synaptic signalling
in people who were cognitively resilient despite no change in synapse
density.

Poster number: T_PZ3_055 (TP)

Sub-Theme: Unraveling Brain Resilience and Vulnerability: Aging,
Neurodegeneration, and Psychiatric Insights

## Population-Level Genomic Variation and Childhood Structural Brain
Organisation
Authors: Alicja Monaghan, University of Cambridge; Professor Duncan
Astle - MRC Cognition and Brain Sciences Unit, Department of Psychiatry
University of Cambridge
We do not understand the mechanisms that shape emergence of brain organisation
and how this variability might arise. To address this, we integrated
computational models of structural brain development, genomic variation, and
population-level cognitive variation in 2154 children aged between 9 and 11
years old from the Adolescent Brain Cognitive Development study (Casey et al.,
2018).
Using streamline counts from deterministic tractography, we simulated structural
connectivity development using generative network modelling (Akarca et al.,
2021; Betzel et al., 2016; Kaiser & Hilgetag, 2004; Vértes et al., 2012).
Starting from a sparse seed network, this relatively novel technique iteratively
adds edges until the simulated connectome has the same number of edges as the
observed connectome. The probability of a new edge being added is proportional
to its metabolic wiring cost eta and the value gamma it brings to network
topology. This relationship is governed by different wiring rules, which add new
edges based on high clustering, degree, shared neighbours, or spatial proximity.
We performed group-level model selection and selected the model whose simulated
connectome had the smallest dissimilarity in capturing local and global
connectome properties. To probe common genetic influences on structural brain
development and cognition, we computed polygenic scores (PGSs) for cognitive
ability for 1461 children with high-quality genomic data.
PGSs accounted for 4% of variance in cognitive ability. A homophily wiring rule
which adds edges to nodes with similar neighbours provided the best fit. Across
individuals, this translated to large negative wiring cost penalties and smaller
positive wiring value terms. We extracted 3 significant components from a PLS of
PGSs and individual optimal eta-gamma combinations as predictors of cognition.
All 3 predictors loaded positively onto the first component, suggesting that
linear combinations of the predictors accounted for linear variation in
cognition. Using pathway enrichment of the 3 predictors ranked by predictive
value, we found unique and converging pathway enrichments.
This suggests that common and distinct biological pathways underpinned structural
brain development parameters and cognitive ability PGSs.
 
Poster number: T_PZ3_056 (PP)

Sub-Theme: Unraveling Brain Resilience and Vulnerability: Aging,
Neurodegeneration, and Psychiatric Insights

## Shared Transcriptomic Signatures between Neurodegeneration and Psychiatric
Diseases
Authors: Rahul Arora, University of Cambridge; James Tomkins - Yusuf
Hamied Department of Chemistry University of Cambridge; Michele Vendruscolo -
Yusuf Hamied Department of Chemistry University of Cambridge
Introduction
Neurological conditions present a wide spectrum of symptoms, which often exhibit
considerable overlap. These similarities pose a challenge to clinicians for the
correct diagnosis of these conditions, which are often observed to co-occur, as
for example in the case of depression in patients with Alzheimer’s disease. To
investigate these co- morbidities, we start from the observation that many brain
disorders share genetic architectures, which suggests that related genes and
pathways may be implicated in onset and progression of co-occurring conditions.
To quantify these observations, we leverage recent advances in transcriptomics
of single-cell data to understand the role of different cell types in the
context of molecular events which may underlie disease-associated
susceptibility. Our aim is to perform a meta-analysis to identify shared disease
associated transcripts across different brain conditions.
Methods
Brain derived single-nucleus RNA sequencing (snRNA-seq) data were collected for a
range of neurological diseases, including Alzheimer’s disease, Parkinson’s
disease, depression, schizophrenia, and others. These data were pre- processed
for quality control, mapped to the telomere-to-telomere genome assembly, and
quantified to generate expression matrices. These matrices were then processed
using custom R scripts built using the Seurat, and WGCNA packages. We are
currently performing differential expression analysis for these samples. We will
quantify these transcriptome changes and calculate a transcriptomic-based
distances, which we refer to as ‘omic distance’. We will use this distance to
cluster these samples on a transcriptomic space of reduced dimensionality to
assess shared transcriptomic changes among these disease conditions.
Approach for Statistical Analysis
Principal component analysis was employed for dimensional reduction followed by
UMAP and tSNE projections. Wilcoxon rank-sum test was used for differential
expression analysis along with Benjamini-Hochberg to calculate false discovery
rate in multiple hypothesis testing. The log-fold change and the p-values
obtained from differential expression were used to calculate the omic distance
and k-means clustering was employed with hypergeometric test for functional
annotations.

Poster number: T_PZ3_057 (PP)

Sub-Theme: Unraveling Brain Resilience and Vulnerability: Aging,
Neurodegeneration, and Psychiatric Insights

## Cell Type Specific Transcriptomic Signatures of the Ageing Brain
Authors: James Tomkins, University of Cambridge; Yusuf Hamied
Department of Chemistry University of Cambridge; Rahul Arora - Centre for
Misfolding Diseases; Yusuf Hamied Department of Chemistry University of
Cambridge; Michele Vendruscolo - Centre for Misfolding Diseases; Yusuf Hamied
Department of Chemistry University of Cambridge
Introduction
There have been great advances in understanding cellular ageing processes.
However, the selective vulnerability of brain cell types to these ageing
processes is yet to be characterised in detail. This knowledge is important
since ageing is the primary risk factor for many neurodegenerative disorders.
The investigation of molecular changes that underlie brain ageing will help to
identify distinctions between healthy and disease-associated ageing brains. The
application of single-nucleus transcriptomics derived from brain tissue is
generating a wealth of gene expression profiles at a transcriptome-wide scale
for individual cell nuclei. With this information our aim is to perform a meta-
analysis to identify cell type specific transcriptomic signatures across the
lifespan of neurologically healthy donors.
Methods
Single-nucleus RNA-seq data derived from the prefrontal cortex of neurologically
healthy donors across human lifespan was processed and samples categorised into
5 age groups. Data were processed through quality control, genome mapping and
transcript quantification to create gene-cell matrices for each sample. These
matrices were then input to an automated single-cell/nucleus pipeline based on
the Seurat package in R. Within this pipeline nuclei were clustered and
annotated to specific cell types using a multiple marker gene expression
approach. Cell type specific nuclei were then integrated across samples within
age groups. Next, differential expression analyses (DEA) will be performed
across age groups to identify age related transcriptome alterations at a cell
type resolution.
Metrics from the DEA will be used to calculate omic distances, which enable the
projection of samples/age groups onto a 2D transcriptomic space, to globally
assess the transcriptome variability across the lifespan.
Approach for Statistical Analysis
In this workflow dimensional reduction was performed using PCA based on the top
3000 variable genes per sample. Using 30 dimensions from PCA, data were then
clustered using UMAP and tSNE approaches. For DEA, Wilcoxon rank- sum test with
FDR multiple-testing correction will be utilised. The associated p-values and
fold changes form the basis of omic distance calculations for generating
pairwise distance matrices.

Poster number: T_PZ3_058 (PP)

Sub-Theme: Unraveling Brain Resilience and Vulnerability: Aging,
Neurodegeneration, and Psychiatric Insights

## Synchrotron XRF Metal Distribution in Neurodegenerative Disease: A Correlated
Multimodal Imaging Registration System
Authors: Natalie Arigundiya, University of Warwick; Joanna
Collingwood - School of Engineering University of Warwick; Kalotina Geraki -
Beamline I18 Diamond Light Source
Introduction: Transition metals have important roles in brain structure and
function, and they have been connected to detrimental mechanisms leading to
neurodegenerative diseases. Synchrotron x-ray fluorescence (SXRF) measurements
are increasingly used as a non-destructive method to acquire sensitive and
specific data on metal element distributions in biological tissue such as
post-mortem brain tissue [1]. Registration systems, enabling the integration of
SXRF-acquired elemental maps into histological evaluations, will advance what
can be learned from these data. It important to address this for SXRF mapping in
metallomics investigations of tissues, as traditional approaches (e.g. staining,
or deposition of metal grids for alignment) can be vehicles for metal
contamination, creating issues of sample integrity that limit interpretation.
Our method will allow registration of data from two or more complementary
modalities, delivering composite views to enable specific questions about the
role of metals in neuropathology to be addressed.
Method: Samples from two age-matched cases (disease and control) will be
cryosectioned with a sapphire blade and mounted onto a grid-etched quartz slide,
minimising scope for metal contamination. Light microscopy of ~1mm diameter
regions of interest (ROI) will be imaged prior to SXRF analysis, and aligned
with serial sections stained to establish tissue structure and targets of
interest. For SXRF mapping, beamline I18 at the Diamond Light Source synchrotron
will be used: a microfocus beamline with a 2µm resolution. The pre-identified
ROI in cryosectioned tissue will be mapped in order to determine chemical
element distributions at parts-per-million concentrations.
Approach for statical analysis: Spectral fitting to precisely identify elemental
peaks, and integrate the area under each element peak, will be performed using
PyMCA to extract maps of concentration distribution [2]. Non- parametric testing
of the null hypothesis (no difference in absolute and relative metal element
levels for cells and adjacent extracellular matrix) will be demonstrated
utilising the multiple ROI, aided by the new etched-grid registration
system.
[1]F. Lermyte et. al., Cells 2019 8:1231
[2]V. Solé et. al., Spectrochim. Acta Part B 2007 62:63-68

Poster number: T_PZ3_059 (TP)

Sub-Theme: Unraveling Brain Resilience and Vulnerability: Aging,
Neurodegeneration, and Psychiatric Insights

## Machine Learning Techniques for Biomarker Discovery of Depression to
Investigate its Effect on the Brain and Explore Associations with
Dementia
Authors: Lewis Hotchkiss, Swansea University
The use of machine learning algorithms, such as random forest classifiers, has
the potential to greatly improve the discovery of biomarkers for mental health
conditions, such as Major Depressive Disorder. Biomarkers are measurable
indicators of a biological process or condition that can be used to diagnose and
monitor diseases. In the case of depression, biomarkers could help identify
individuals at risk for the condition, as well as monitor the effectiveness of
treatments. This study aimed to use random forest classifiers, to discover
potential biomarkers for patients with depression using structural and
functional imaging derived data from magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) scans. By
applying machine learning algorithms to MRI data, this study sought to identify
specific patterns or features that could be used as biomarkers for depression.
Once potential biomarkers were discovered using random forest classifiers, the
next step was to assess their potential association with dementia. This was done
using a statistical method called structural equation modelling, which allowed
evaluation of the relationship between the biomarkers and dementia. The results
of this analysis could provide valuable insights into the potential overlap
between these two conditions and the potential for using discovered biomarkers
as a diagnostic tool for both depression and dementia.

Poster number: T_PZ3_060 (PP)

Sub-Theme: Unraveling Brain Resilience and Vulnerability: Aging,
Neurodegeneration, and Psychiatric Insights

## Imaging neuroinflammation and blood-brain barrier permeability in people
living with HIV and severe depression
Authors: Arish Mudra Rakshasa-Loots, The University of Edinburgh;
Nicholas G. Dowell - Clinical Imaging Sciences Centre Brighton & Sussex
Medical School; Itamar Ronen - Clinical Imaging Sciences Centre Brighton &
Sussex Medical School; Jaime H. Vera - Global Health and Infection Brighton
& Sussex Medical School
Introduction
People living with HIV experience an increased risk for depressive symptoms,
though it is unclear whether any biological mechanisms contribute to this risk.
HIV infection in the central nervous system may elicit chronic neuroinflammation
and concomitant blood-brain barrier (BBB) dysfunction. Neuroinflammation is, in
turn, associated with depressive symptoms in the general population. Thus, it is
possible that neuroinflammation contributes to the increased risk for depressive
symptoms amongst people living with HIV. However, participants with severe
depressive symptoms are often excluded from studies of HIV co-morbidities. In
this proof-of-concept study, we aim to explore whether neuroinflammatory
signatures can distinguish between people living with HIV who experience severe
depression and those who experience mild depression.
Methods
For this cross-sectional study, virally-suppressed adults living with HIV will be
recruited in Brighton, UK. Depressive symptoms will be measured using the
Patient Health Questionnaire (PHQ-9) and the South African Depression Scale
(SADS). We will seek to recruit equal numbers of participants with high (n = 10;
PHQ-9 > 15) and low (n = 10; PHQ-9 < 9) depression severity. All
participants will undergo diffusion-weighted magnetic resonance spectroscopy
(DW-MRS), a novel and sensitive technique for imaging neuroinflammation. Using
DW-MRS, Apparent Diffusion Coefficients (ADCs) of the neurometabolites
myo-inositol and choline, which are considered markers of glial cell activation,
will be quantified in the anterior cingulate cortex (ACC). BBB permeability
(leakage rate, Ktrans) will be measured using dynamic contrast-enhanced magnetic
resonance imaging (DCE-MRI). Absolute concentrations of inflammatory biomarkers
will be quantified in blood serum using a Luminex assay.
Statistical Analysis Approach
Linear regression models will be used to test for associations between measures
of neuroinflammation (ADC[mI], ADC[Cho], Ktrans, and absolute concentrations of
blood biomarkers) and depression severity (PHQ-9 and SADS scores). Regression
models will be adjusted for covariates including participant age, sex,
ethnicity, and HIV plasma viral load. We will report effect size estimates
(regression coefficients), p-values,

Poster number: T_PZ3_061 (PP)

Sub-Theme: Unraveling Brain Resilience and Vulnerability: Aging,
Neurodegeneration, and Psychiatric Insights

## Mission Lucidity: decoding brain disease
Authors: An Schreurs, KU Leuven; Jenny Ceccarini - Neurosciences KU
Leuven; Sebastian Haesler - Neurosciences KU Leuven, NERF; Peter Janssen -
Neurosciences KU Leuven; Ingeborg Stalmans - Neurosciences UZ Leuven; Patrik
Verstreken - Neurosciences VIB-KU Leuven; Dries Braeken - Life Sciences imec;
Rik Vandenberghe - Neurology UZ Leuven; Bart De Strooper - Neurosciences VIB-KU
Leuven; Mathieu Vandenbulcke - Psychiatry UZ Leuven
More than 60 million people worldwide suffer from neurodegenerative conditions
such as Alzheimer’s and Parkinson’s disease, and that number continues to rise
dramatically as life expectancy increases. The diseases are devastating for
patients and their families, and have enormous socio-economic costs.
Over the past decades, scientific research has provided many important insights
towards understanding, diagnosing, and treating neurodegeneration, but
therapeutic breakthroughs are still lacking. A long history of clinical trial
failures has discouraged industry investment, while the need for effective
treatments has become a medical emergency.
To lift the hurdles and roadblocks that are slowing down progress, we need to
mobilize state-of-the-art technologies such as nanoelectronics, brain-machine
interfaces, single-cell biology and genetic engineering.
In 2018, Mission Lucidity was launched as a joint initiative between VIB, KU
Leuven, UZ Leuven and imec. It combines the expertise of best-in-class partners
in biomedical research, clinical care and nanotechnology, who share a common
vision of a future without neurodegenerative diseases. Our mission is to create
new tools to accelerate global scientific discovery and medical progress,
transform neurodegeneration research and pave the way for prevention and
cures.
Our project portfolio addresses major challenges in various stages of
neurodegenerative diseases: from screening and risk prediction to better patient
cell-based models for research and drug development, early diagnosis based on
affordable and sensitive biomarkers, stratification of patients into subgroups
for personalised medicine, and non- invasive interventional therapies based on
neuromodulation.
Mission Lucidity is a proud member of the European CURE-ND alliance, founded in
2020 together with the UK Dementia Research Institute, the Paris Brain
Institute, and the German Centre for Neurodegenerative Diseases.

Poster number: T_PZ3_062 (TP)

Sub-Theme: Unraveling Brain Resilience and Vulnerability: Aging,
Neurodegeneration, and Psychiatric Insights

## The priority index pipeline recapitulates known ALS biological pathways and
suggests novel drug targets
Authors: Rebecca Harrison, Astex Pharmaceuticals; Yuki Kuniyoshi -
Office of Bioinformatics, Department of Drug Discovery Strategy Otsuka
Pharmaceutical Co., Ltd; Siddarth Sethi - Informatics Astex Pharmaceuticals;
Hiroyuki Iha - Office of Bioinformatics, Department of Drug Discovery Strategy
Otsuka Pharmaceutical Co., Ltd; Daisuke D. Ikeda - Office of Bioinformatics,
Department of Drug Discovery Strategy Otsuka Pharmaceutical Co., Ltd; Harpreet
Saini - Informatics Astex Pharmaceuticals
Introduction
The priority index (Pi) pipeline [Fang et al., 2019], originally developed and
tested on rheumatoid arthritis (RA), is a genetics-led pipeline that integrates
functional data from GWAS, ontologies and biological networks to produce a
ranked list of genes with evidence for disease association. We modified the Pi
pipeline to predict novel target genes associated with Amyotrophic Lateral
Sclerosis (ALS).
Methods
575 SNPs from an ALS GWAS (p-value threshold <1 x10-7) were used as initial
input [van Rheenen et al., 2021]. These SNPs were mapped to 44 genes utilising
gene proximity, physical interactions with chromatin in microglia, neurons and
oligodendrocytes [Nott et al., 2019], and association with eQTLs expression in
spinal cord and brain cortex (GTEx v8) [The GTEx Consortium, 2020].
Ontology information was incorporated based on manually curated lists of pathways
involved in ALS function (GO) [Ashburner et al., 2000; Gene Ontology Consortium,
2021], ALS associated genes (DO) [Schriml et al., 2018] and ALS related
phenotypes (HPO) [Kohler et al.,2021].
A STRING network (v11.5) [Szklarczyk et al., 2019] of 5183 genes with strong
experimental evidence (score >800) was used to identify genes that
interconnected the GWAS-implicated genes in a random-walk with a restart network
approach.
Approach for statistical analysis
The Pi R package was used in discovery mode. Random walk with restart was used to
identify genes related to GWAS-implicated genes based on connectivity. The gene
ranking was achieved by integrating all predictors (gene proximity, chromatin
interactions, eQTL associations, ontology associations (function, disease and
phenotypes) and network associations) by Fisher’s combined meta-analysis. For
each predictor, the scores were converted to P-like values, and aggregated for
each gene using a Fisher’s combined method. The combined p-values were rescaled
to a Pi rating (0–5).
Results and conclusions
We obtained a ranked list of 5211 genes associated with ALS. Several genes not
present in the GWAS had high connectivity to GWAS-implicated genes, and were
enriched in ALS relevant disease processes such as autophagy. We prioritised
potential target genes by integrating structural information and cell-type
expression data.

Poster number: T_PZ3_063 (TP)

Sub-Theme: Dietary Influences on Aging, Neurodegeneration, and
Behavior in Drosophila and Rodent Models

## The Impact of a High-Fat Diet on Locomotion and Olfactory Learning in
Wild-Type and Triosephosphate Isomerase- Deficient Drosophila
melanogaster
Authors: Oliver Cujic, University of Nottingham; Angel Rowlett -
School of Medicine University of Nottingham; Sophia Aderhold - School of
Medicine University of Nottingham; Emma Savage - School of Medicine University
of Nottingham; Daniel Clayman - School of Medicine University of Nottingham;
Catherine Furlong - School of Medicine University of Nottingham; Joern Steinert
- School of Life Sciences University of Nottingham
Introduction: Alzheimer’s Disease (AD) affects 520,000 people in the UK, with
approximately 40% of cases attributable to modifiable risk factors. Memory
impairment, a hallmark symptom of AD, was modelled using triosephosphate
isomerase (TPI)-deficient Drosophila melanogaster. The gut-brain axis (GBA)
links the gut microbiome to neuroinflammation, which exacerbates AD
pathophysiology. Alterations to the gut microbiome were modelled using a
high-fat diet (HFD), and its effect on behavioural and neuronal phenotypes were
assessed.
Objectives: To investigate whether hTPII170V and hTPIwstd mutations, alongside a
HFD, cause reduced locomotion and olfactory learning in Drosophila melanogaster
larvae. Thus, making TPI deficiency appropriate for modelling memory
impairment.
Methodology: Larval locomotion was assessed by measuring the distance travelled
using ANY-maze software. Olfactory learning and memory were assessed using
Pavlovian conditioning to train the larvae to associate an odour (distilled
water/n-amyl acetate) with a fructose reward. A preference index was calculated
and analysed to determine the extent of larval conditioning.
Statistical Analysis: One- and two-sample t-tests were utilized to analyse
olfactory learning/locomotion within and between groups. A two-way analysis of
variance (ANOVA) and post hoc Tukey test were conducted to compare the data.
Values of p<0.05 were accepted as significant.
Results: There was significant learning in w1118 normal diet (ND) (p=0.0051) and
hTPIwstd HFD (p=0.0411), with no significant learning in all other groups.
Compared to w1118 ND, there was significantly reduced learning in hTPIwstd ND
and w1118 HFD (p=0.0215). A significant increase in locomotion was identified
between w1118 ND, hTPII170V ND and hTPII170V HFD (p=0.0010).
Conclusion: TPI deficiency (hTPIwstd) is appropriate for modelling memory
impairment in Drosophila melanogaster. A HFD impairs olfactory learning and
memory in w1118 larvae. Locomotor activity is increased by a hTPII170V mutation,
and a HFD in hTPII170V larvae when compared to w1118. A larger sample size is
required to validate these results; further research assessing the relationship
between other dietary modifications and AD may yield more clinically relevant
findings.

Poster number: T_PZ3_064 (TP)

Sub-Theme: Dietary Influences on Aging, Neurodegeneration, and
Behavior in Drosophila and Rodent Models

## Triose-phosphate isomerase (TPI) dysfunction alters synaptic vesicle release
mechanisms and reduces life span
Authors: Aelfwin Stone, University of Nottingham
Neurodegeneration is linked to aberrant production of redox active molecules,
e.g. nitric oxide (NO). One target of NO-mediated posttranslational
modifications is the glycolytic enzyme triose-phosphate isomerase (TPI) the
activity of which is impaired by 3-Nitrotyrosination. In parallel, reported
mutations within the protein render it inactive and are associated with
disease.
We used Drosophila melanogaster expressing wstd1 (hTPIM81T) to investigate the
effects of mutant TPI on neuronal function, morphology and longevity linking its
compromised activity to synaptic defects at the glutamatergic neuromuscular
junction (NMJ). Electrophysiological recordings in two-electrode voltage-clamp,
provided evoked and spontaneous excitatory junctional currents (e/sEJCs) to
assess synaptic release, depletion, and recovery. Confocal images of NMJs were
taken on a Zeiss LSM 880 confocal microscope to assess NMJ morphology. Longevity
studies were performed for both genotypes.
Data is expressed as mean±SEM (n=no. of muscles/flies). Student’s t-test and
Log-rank (Mantel-Cox test) were used for comparisons with p<0.05 being
significant. Amplitudes of s/eEJC were unaffected by wstd1 expression, however,
sEJC frequencies were reduced in wstd1 (1.29±0.18s-1 and 0.83±0.08s-1
(p<0.05, n=14, 13)). eEJC amplitudes showed enhanced depression at 60Hz
stimulation (950ms) and plateaued at 35±13% vs 53±4% of initial values in wstd1
and in W1118, respectively (p<0.05). Exponential fits to the decaying
amplitudes revealed tau values of 202±64ms vs 286±70ms for W1118 (p>0.05, n=4
each). Subsequent recoveries from depletion were significantly slower in wstd1
(tau W1118: 13353±3436ms, wstd1: 4773±391ms, p<0.05, n=4 each). Calcium
dependency of release (0.25-3mM) was unaltered in wstd1. Preliminary confocal
images showed unaltered NMJs morphology in wstd1 larvae. Wstd1 flies showed
reduced longevity, median spans of 40 days vs 60 days in W1118.
Our data suggests that TPI-induced synaptic dysfunction is in part due to altered
vesicle dynamics, possibly reflecting a reduced endocytosis. Supressed TPI
activity enhances protein glycation and redox stress which could impact on
protein function within the vesicle recycling machinery presenting a possible
link between glycation and synaptopathology.

Poster number: T_PZ3_065 (TP)

Sub-Theme: Dietary Influences on Aging, Neurodegeneration, and
Behavior in Drosophila and Rodent Models

## Investigating the therapeutic effects of plant-based compounds on ageing and
neurodegenerative disease in Drosophila
Authors: Biqin Zhang, Royal Holloway, University of London
Introduction
Ageing is the gradual deterioration of cells, tissue, and organs, leading to a
decline in body functions and an increased risk of numerous diseases.
Pharmaceutical approaches have been attempted to slow ageing. Various
plant-derived compounds have been identified as bioactive, including decanoic
acid (DA), a medium-chain fatty acid and methyl-jasmonate (MJ), a cyclopentanoic
compound. DA has been used against epilepsy, and recent studies have also shown
it inhibits the mTOR pathway, a nutrient-sensing pathway known to promote
longevity when suppressed. Conversely, MJ can reduce neural damage in mice and
has an anti-inflammatory effect. The previous finding suggests that DA and MJ
may improve the symptoms of ageing and provide a therapeutic effect on ageing-
related neurodegenerative disease.
Methods
The main aim of this project is to identify the effect of DA and MJ on the
lifespan, and physical performances of wild- type (WT) flies and Parkinson’s
disease (PD) model flies with a non-functional PLA2G6 gene resulting in a
reduced lifespan and age-dependent locomotion deficit. 50 μM, 250 μM and 1 mM of
DA and MJ were administrated orally by adding to the standard fly food. The
effect of the compounds on the lifespan was examined with lifespan assay, and
the effects on the healthspan were investigated by locomotion assay.
Statistics:
The lifespans were analysed by log-rank test, which compares the survival
distribution of two or more independent samples. The locomotion assay was tested
with two-way ANOVA with Tukey's multiple comparisons test to examine the
influence of two independent variables (Compound treatment and Age). In both
cases, the result was considered significant if p<0.05.
Results and conclusion
The results showed that DA and MJ promote longevity in both WT and PD model flies
in a concentration- and gender-dependent manner. Furthermore, the optimum
concentration was identified to be 250 μM for both compounds. Although no
significant improvement in locomotion was found in flies treated with DA, both
WT and PD flies fed with MJ displayed increased locomotion compared to
non-treated animals. In conclusion, DA showed a beneficial effect on the
lifespan, and MJ improved both lifespan and healthspan.

Poster number: T_PZ3_066 (TP)

Sub-Theme: Dietary Influences on Aging, Neurodegeneration, and
Behavior in Drosophila and Rodent Models

## Maternal high fat diet consumption during only preimplantation or whole
gestation/lactation affects locomotory, exploratory and anxiety-like
behaviour
Authors: Eda Sezer, University of Southampton; Irene Peral-Sanchez -
Faculty of Medicine University of Southampton; Tom P. Fleming - Centre for
Biological Sciences University of Southampton; Neil R. Smyth - Centre for
Biological Sciences University of Southampton; Judith Eckert - Faculty of
Medicine University of Southampton; Sandrine Willaime-Morawek - Faculty of
Medicine University of Southampton
Introduction:
Both human and rodent studies have demonstrated that altered maternal environment
influences foetal development, causing impairments in offspring brain. We
hypothesise, in the absence of obesity, a maternal high-fat diet (HFD) during
gestation/lactation or only during the preimplantation period affects offspring
locomotor, explorative and anxiety behaviour.
Methods:
After mating, female-MF1 were allocated to one of three groups: Embryonic-HFD
(EHFD: HFD up to E3.5, chow diet after); HFD and control group (NFD), consuming
HFD and chow diet throughout pregnancy/lactation periods, respectively. Open
field test (OFT) for 10min at 4 (OFT1) and 10 (OFT2) weeks old and elevated plus
maze test (EPM) for 5min at 5 (EPM1) and 11 (EPM2) weeks old were performed. OFT
data were analysed as the first-5 and last-5min. Comparisons were made for male
and female offspring from HFD(n=9), EHFD(n=8), and NFD(n=9) groups using a
hierarchical linear regression model.
Results:
EHFD males but not females, significantly travelled less (p=0.043), rested more
(p=0.026), and had fewer ambulatory (p=0.023) and jump counts (p=0.018) than
controls in the first 5min of OFT1. HFD males had fewer jump counts (p=0.027)
while HFD females spent more time rearing (p=0.001), compared to respective
controls in the second 5min of OFT1. Moreover, the number of closed arm entries
was higher in HFD females (p=0.020) compared to NFD females in EPM1. There were
no significant differences observed in OFT2 or EPM2.
Conclusions:
Maternal HFD exposure during only the preimplantation period particularly
decreased juvenile male offspring locomotor and exploratory behaviour. Juvenile
female offspring from mothers who consumed HFD for the whole of pregnancy and
lactation, showed anxiety-like behaviour. This confirms that diet changes during
critical developmental periods can affect offspring locomotor, explorative and
anxiety behaviour.

## Neurodevelopment & Early Life Stress

Poster number: S_PZ3_073 (PP)

Sub-Theme: Early Life Stress & Cognition: Novel Approaches in Rodent
Models and Phenotyping Technologies

## Investigating brain region connectivity and biobehavioural markers of
psychiatric susceptibility following early life stress
Authors: Olivia STUPART, University of Cambridge
Early life stress (ELS) is a primary risk factor to various physical and mental
health disorders. ELS also results in increased susceptibility to negative
outcomes following adult stress. Being able to model ELS in rodents allows us to
probe the mechanisms behind susceptibility to psychiatric disorders to identify
novel therapeutic targets. Repeated maternal separation (MS) is a validated
model of ELS resulting in neurological and biobehavioural stigmata of a
depressive phenotype. We will use a longitudinal design to investigate the
behavioural, biochemical and neuroanatomical impacts of MS and later life
stress.
Complete litters (males and females) of Lister-hooded rats will be separated from
their dam for 6 hrs/day from P5-19. Control litters will have standard animal
husbandry and both groups will be weaned at P21.
At P56 all animals will undergo sucrose preference tests and then training and
testing for two behavioural tasks. The first is a spatial probabilistic reversal
learning task. The main outcome measures can be used as a metric of behavioural
flexibility. The second is an ambiguous cue judgement bias task. The main
outcome measures here will indicate positive or negative bias and the relative
proportions of rats with these biases if they have been subject to MS. Both
tasks will build a picture of altered feedback sensitivity in MS rats and will
be retested following an adult stressor involving unpredictable, inescapable
mild footshock.
Blood samples will be collected following significant stressful events across the
lifespan of the rats and analysed for quantification of corticosterone and the
cytokines IL6, IL1-b and TNF-a using IQELISA. Ex vivo diffusion tensor imaging
will be used for tractography to further investigate the previous in vivo result
of a larger amygdala in MS rats only after adult stress.
Estimated marginal means and standard errors will be generated for descriptive
statistics. Cohen’s d will be calculated to report the effect size for changes
in main outcome variables. Hypothesis testing will primarily use linear mixed
effects models including continuous predictors such as sex, session and age.
Neuroimaging data will be regressed with behavioural and immunological
readouts.
Conflict of interest: JWD acknowledges funding from a GlaxoSmithKline
(GSK)-Varsity award. OS acknowledges funding from the MB/PhD programme at
Cambridge University. JWD has received funding from GSK and Boehringer Ingelheim
Pharm GmbH & Co.

Poster number: S_PZ3_074 (PP)

Sub-Theme: Early Life Stress & Cognition: Novel Approaches in
Rodent Models and Phenotyping Technologies

## MURIDAE: Modalities for Understanding, Recording, and Integrating Data Across
Early life
Authors: Anthony Isles, Cardiff University; Cathy Fernandes - MRC
Centre for Neurodevelopment Disorders King's College London; Peter Oliver -
Nucleic Acid Therapy Accelerator Harwell Campus; Sara Wells - Mary Lyon Centre
MRC Harwell; R. Sonia Bains - Mary Lyon Centre MRC Harwell; Oscar Marin - MRC
Centre for Neurodevelopment Disorders King's College London; Michael Ashby -
School of Physiology, Pharmacology and Neuroscience University of Bristol; Neil
Dawson - Biomedical and Life Sciences Lancaster University; Steven Clapcote -
School of Biomedical Sciences University of Leeds
Early in life is critical in development of many neuropsychiatric disorders. Yet,
crucial gaps in our understanding of this remain - exactly when brain
development is perturbed early in life, and why it can lead to mental health
problems. MURIDAE (Modalities for Understanding Recording and Integrating Data
Across Early life) will address these challenges by fully characterising these
critical time windows in the mouse. MURIDAE is a cluster within the newly
established MRC National Mouse Genetic Network and brings together expertise
from around the UK with the MRC Mary Lyon Centre (MLC).
First, we will establish new, integrated approaches for studying the early life
(pre-adult) period in the mouse. Using machine learning analysis of home cage
video data we aim to link the emergence of changes in behaviour in early life
with changes in brain development and connectivity. We will then apply this
platform to new translational genetic mouse models of schizophrenia that are
guided by the latest genomic discoveries.
All testing and analysis will be carried out blind to genotype/treatment, using
the blinding function in the MLC LIM system. Data will be independently reviewed
by data analysts and any outliers queried, however these will not be removed
without clear experimental reason e.g. equipment failure. Data will also
reviewed for other factors such as user variability and batch effects, metadata
splits are put in place where appropriate. The most appropriate statistics will
be selected based on evidence in literature and input from statisticians. Where
a test is new and there is no precedence the most appropriate model will be
chosen through assumption testing and model building in open source tools such
as python and R script with input from statisticians. Reporting of results will
be aligned with the ARRIVE guidelines and where appropriate, statistical models
will be made available through the open source platforms such as github.
Although MURIDAE is initially centred on schizophrenia, once established our
early life phenotyping platform will be of relevance to all mouse models of
neurodevelopmental / neuropsychiatric disorders. We aim to engage with the wider
neuroscience community in order to provide robust and translationally relevant
research for users.

Poster number: S_PZ3_075 (TP)

Sub-Theme: Early Life Stress & Cognition: Novel Approaches in
Rodent Models and Phenotyping Technologies

## Smart-Kage: a fully automated system for life-long continuous phenotyping of
mouse cognition and behaviour
Authors: Hinze Ho, University of Cambridge; Nejc Kejzar - Department
of Physiology, Development and Neuroscience University of Cambridge; Hiroki
Sasaguri - Laboratory for Proteolytic Neuroscience RIKEN Brain Science
Institute; Takashi Saito - Department of Neurocognitive Science Nagoya City
University; Takaomi C Saido - RIKEN Brain Science Institute Laboratory for
Proteolytic Neuroscience; Bart De Strooper - UK Dementia Research Institute
University College London; Marius Bauza - Sainsbury Wellcome Centre University
College London; Julija Krupic - Department of Physiology, Development and
Neuroscience University of Cambridge
Comprehensive ethologically-relevant behavioural phenotyping in rodent
experiments is essential for deciphering the neural basis of animal cognition.
Automated home-cage-based testing platforms present a valuable tool to fulfil
this need. However, they often involve complex animal training routines, water
or food deprivation, and probe a limited range of behaviours. Here, we present a
new fully automated AI-driven home-cage system for cognitive and behavioural
phenotyping in mice ("smartKage"). The system incorporates spontaneous
alternation T-maze, novel- object recognition and object- in-place recognition
tests combined with monitoring of an animal’s position, water consumption,
quiescence and locomotion patterns, all carried out continuously and
simultaneously in an unsupervised fashion over long periods of time (>8
months). Mice learnt the tasks rapidly without any need for water or food
restrictions. We applied an ethomics approach to show that combined statistical
properties of multiple behaviours can be used to discriminate between mice with
hippocampal, medial entorhinal and sham lesions and accurately predict genotype
of Alzheimer’s disease mouse model (AppNL-G-F) on an individual animal level,
surpassing the performance of several gold standard cognitive tests. This
technology could enable large-scale behavioural screening for genes and neural
circuits underlying spatial memory and other cognitive processes.
Conflict of interest: M.B. and J.K. are co-founders of a startup company,
Cambridge Phenotyping Limited, offering related technology products to the
neuroscience community. M.B. is CEO and CTO, J.K. is CSA, N.K. is the lead
software developer and H.H. is an advisor of the company. Other authors declare
no competing interests.

Poster number: S_PZ3_076 (TP)

Sub-Theme: Early Adversity: Impacts on Neurodevelopment and Social
Responses to Threat

## Early Adversity Shapes the Wiring Economy of the Brain Across Species
Authors: Sofia Carozza, University of Cambridge
Early adversity is robustly associated with a range of neural and psychological
differences. However, the mechanism through which it might causally contribute
to these outcomes remains unclear, in part due to largely correlational research
that focuses on isolated brain regions. One possibility is that early adversity
may shift the economic constraints that govern the development of macroscopic
structural connections across the whole brain (Bullmore & Sporns, 2012). To
test this possibility, we used generative network modelling (Vertes et al. 2012)
to simulate the formation of the structural connectomes of a sample of mice,
half of which had been randomly assigned to a paradigm of unpredictable
postnatal stress. The imposition of early life adversity significantly shifted
model parameters toward zero, heightening the stochastic nature of connectome
formation. We then conducted a parallel analysis in a sample of young adults
from the Avon Longitudinal Study of Parents and Children (ALSPAC). Using a
data-driven approach, we identified the forms of early-life deprivation and
threat that most strongly predict the wiring economy of the brain in young
adulthood. Results revealed both similarities and differences to the development
of the mouse connectomes. We explored the implications of adversity-induced
shifts in generative parameters using targeted attacks on network hubs, as well
as assessments of the cognitive and socioemotional functioning of the subjects.
We conclude that, while greater stochasticity in the structural development of
the brain may constrain the development of cognitive abilities, it could also
reflect an adaptive mechanism that facilitates effective responses to future
adversity.

Poster number: S_PZ3_077 (TP)

Sub-Theme: Early Adversity: Impacts on Neurodevelopment and Social
Responses to Threat

## Neurodevelopmental Changes after Adverse Experiences in Early
Adolescence
Authors: Ayla Pollmann, King’s College London
Adverse childhood experiences (ACEs) are common and include experiences such as
abuse and neglect (Felitti et al., 1998). Previous research has shown that there
is a compelling link between youth adversity and a variety of detrimental
outcomes, including reduced mental health, socioeconomic status, and even life
expectancy (Felitti et al., 1998; Hughes et al., 2020; Liao et al., 2021).
However, the pathways by which adversity shapes development are still to be
understood (Huang et al., 2012). In the psychopathology literature on early
adversity, neurological changes have been hypothesized to follow adverse life
experiences (Short & Baram, 2019). This study aims to contribute to our
understanding of the associations between adversity and brain development in
adolescence by determining subpopulations of brain connectivity and
investigating their connection with adverse experiences during early
adolescence.
This study used data from the prospective, longitudinal Adolescent Brain
Cognitive Development study (ABCD, N ≈ 12.000, participants aged 9-12).
Structural brain connectivity was assessed using fractional anisotropy (FA) data
in canonical white matter tracts. Adverse life experiences modelled included
family conflict and school satisfaction. Our analysis followed a two-step
approach: We used K-Means clustering to determine subgroups based on height
(size) and developmental (shape) patterns of brain connectivity. Using
multinomial regression, we used these clusters to predict brain development
subgroups from adverse experiences.
We found subpopulations based on the height and development of FA data,
indicating individual differences in brain development trajectories. Family
conflict, neighbourhood safety and socioeconomic status were predictive of these
brain connectivity subgroups. Across the different regions, it appears that
family conflict may be predictive of the height of FA. At the same time,
socioeconomic status and neighbourhood safety may be relevant for brain
connectivity development across the two-time points. Therefore, there is an
association between brain connectivity and adverse experiences during early
adolescence. This shows that neurodevelopmental changes may be a pathway by
which adversity shapes developmental outcomes.

Poster number: S_PZ3_078 (PP)

Sub-Theme: Early Adversity: Impacts on Neurodevelopment and Social
Responses to Threat

## Does Early Life Adversity Predict Reduced Social Regulation of the Neural
Threat Response in Adulthood?
Authors: Shaunna Devine, LJMU; Dr Susannah Walker - Psychology-
Health LJMU; Dr Tara Kidd - Health-Psychology LJMU; Dr Cathy Montgomery - Health
- Psychology LJMU
Introduction
Across the lifespan, positive social relationships predict better health and
well-being. While the mechanisms underlying the benefits of social connectedness
are not fully understood, the physical presence of a social support figure
reliably regulates neural responses to threat. However, to date little attention
has been paid to whether individual differences exist in sensitivity to the
threat regulating benefits of social support. Attachment specific internal
working models (IWM) of self and others may explain variation to threat
sensitivity. Namely, hypervigilance to threat in adults may reflect IWM of
inadequate care provision in infancy. Thus, the aim of the present study is to
test the hypothesis that a history of unreliable or disrupted caregiving is
predictive of reduced social regulation of the neural threat response.
Methods
A cross-sectional sample of 80 adults (aged 18-25) will be recruited to a
laboratory study where they will complete a threat task. Participants will be
presented with 24 visual cues that either predict threat (20% chance of
receiving an electric shock, 20 ms at 4 mA) or safety (no chance of shock).
During the task, participants will either hold the hand of a close friend (1
block) or a stranger (1 block). Functional near-infrared spectroscopy will be
used to quantify the neural threat response. Specifically, relative oxygenated
and deoxygenated haemoglobin concentration changes in medial and lateral
prefrontal regions, in friend versus stranger conditions, will be the primary
measure of interest, as the presence of social support reliably regulates
threat-evoked neural activity in these brain areas.
Participants will also complete the Childhood Trauma Questionnaire (Bernstein et
al 1998) and the Relationship Structures Attachment Questionnaire (Fraley et al
2011).
Approach for statistical analysis
Multiple linear regression will be used to test the hypotheses that 1. The
presence of a close friend will predict reduced neural responses to threat. 2.
Childhood Trauma will predict less social regulation of the neural threat
response. 3. Attachment style will moderate the relationship between childhood
trauma and social regulation of the neural threat response.

Poster number: M_PZ3_067 (TP)

Sub-Theme: Neuronal Organization and Function: Unraveling
Development, Connectivity, and Electrophysiological Features

## Strikingly different neurotransmitter release strategies amongst interneuron
subtypes of the olfactory bulb
Authors: Ana Dorrego-Rivas, Centre for Developmental Neurobiology;
Darren Byrne - King’s College London Centre for Developmental Neurobiology;
Yunyi Liu - King’s College London Centre for Developmental Neurobiology; Menghon
Cheah - King’s College London Centre for Developmental Neurobiology; Matthew
Grubb - King’s College London Centre for Developmental Neurobiology,
Neurons establish morphological polarity by specifying two different
compartments: the axon and the somatodendritic domain. This polarity is also
functional, because in most neurons dendrites receive the majority of inputs
while axons generate output signals via neurotransmitter release. However, many
exceptions to this dogma occur in the olfactory bulb (OB), where most GABAergic
interneurons are anaxonic and can only release neurotransmitters from their
dendrites. OB glutamatergic cells, however, have classic morphological polarity
but release neurotransmitters from both axonal and somatodendritic domains.
Dendritic release is, therefore, a common feature of OB neurons.
A subset of GABAergic interneurons in the OB also release dopamine. These
dopaminergic (DA) cells comprise two groups – axonic and anaxonic – depending on
the presence or absence of an axon. Here, we provide structural and functional
evidence showing that, unlike their anaxonic counterparts, axon-bearing DA
neurons rarely if ever release GABA from their dendrites. We injected a
Cre-dependent AAV in embryonic VGAT-Cre mice to obtain sparse cell morphology
(GFP) plus structural evidence for putative neurotransmitter release sites
(synaptophysin-mRuby), finding dendritic mRuby puncta almost exclusively in
anaxonic cells. We then obtained electrophysiological recordings in acute slices
from DAT-tdT mice, using an auto-evoked inhibition (AEI) protocol to detect
dendritic GABA release. All anaxonic neurons displayed an AEI response, while
almost all axonic DA cells (Mann-Whitney test, ****p<0.0001) did not. Our
results suggest that axon-bearing DA neurons are the only OB cell type to not
effect dendritic neurotransmitter release, placing a key spatial constraint on
their ability to shape olfactory sensory processing.

Poster number: M_PZ3_068 (TP)

Sub-Theme: Neuronal Organization and Function: Unraveling
Development, Connectivity, and Electrophysiological Features

## Mapping the emergence of a subcellular balance between excitatory and
inhibitory synapses along dendrites
Authors: Sally Horton, King's College London; Guilherme Neves -
Centre for Neurodevelopmental Disorders King's College London; Juan Burrone -
Centre for Neurodevelopmental Disorders King's College London
Understanding the spatial organisation of synapses is essential for comprehending
how neurons integrate and compute information. The aim of this project was to
map the distribution of excitatory and inhibitory (E/I) synapses along pyramidal
cell dendrites in the hippocampus throughout development. Our goal was to
uncover the logic of how E/I synapses are arranged and chart the emergence of a
balance between the two. We used fibronectin intrabodies (FingRs), expressed in
individual pyramidal neurons and delivered by in utero electroporation, to
fluorescently label E/I postsynaptic compartments. Confocal microscopy of large,
tiled image series was used to reconstruct the entire basal dendrites of
pyramidal neurons in CA1 of the hippocampus at four developmental periods: P7,
P10, P14 and P21. This enabled us to map the spatial distribution of synapses
across complete dendritic branches. We used serial block face scanning EM
(SBFSEM) at these same developmental periods to assess synaptic distribution
with high resolution. Confocal imaging of FingRs along basal dendrites revealed
that the density of excitatory synapses doubled from P7 to P21, while the
density of inhibitory synapses remained consistent, suggesting differences in
the timeline of E/I synapse formation. Regardless of this difference, we
observed a similar balance between the excitation and inhibition already present
within short stretches of dendrite at all developmental timepoints (n=2764
excitatory and 619 inhibitory synapses across 51 dendrites from 13 cells,
p<0.05, Spearman’s rank). SBFSEM confirmed this sub-branch balance (n=889
excitatory and 75 inhibitory synapses from 8 dendrites, p<0.05, Spearman’s
rank). However, throughout the entire lengths of dendritic branches, excitation
and inhibition were most correlated at P7. Our results indicate that the
organisation of excitation and inhibition throughout the dendritic arbours of
hippocampal pyramidal neurons is non-random and established early in
development. Specifically, our results demonstrate that excitation and
inhibition are proportional to one another at a sub-branch level. Basal
dendrites of CA1 pyramidal neurons integrate synaptic inputs locally and our
findings suggest that they are well equipped to do so in a balanced manner.

Poster number: M_PZ3_069 (TP)

Sub-Theme: Neuronal Organization and Function: Unraveling
Development, Connectivity, and Electrophysiological Features

## Early postnatal development of neocortex-wide activity patterns in GABAergic
and pyramidal neurons
Authors: Michael Ashby, University of Bristol; Laura Mediavilla
Santos - School of Physiology, Pharmacology & Neuroscience University of
Bristol
Introduction: Before the onset of sensory experience, developing circuits
spontaneously generate synchronised activity that will not only influence and
guide its wiring, but ultimately contribute to behaviour. These complex
functions are thought to rely on widely distributed cortical networks that
simultaneously operate in multiple spatiotemporal scales. Particularly, the
timing of GABAergic maturation seems to be aligned to the different
developmental trajectories of each cortical region, playing a key role in
development of function within individual brain areas. Although various studies
have looked at the of local connectivity of these cortical microcircuits, the
dynamics of the functional maturation of GABAergic cortical networks at the
large-scale level have never been investigated.
Methods: We used macroscopic widefield imaging of head-fixed, behaving neonatal
mice expressing genetically- encoded calcium indicators in GABAergic
interneurons and in excitatory neurons to visualise cortex-wide activity
patterns across postnatal development.
Statistical analysis: Excitatory and inhibitory activity patterns are assessed
using time-averaged correlation coefficients. Generalised Linear Mixed Models
are used to assess effects of age on correlations between excitatory and
inhibitory population activity.
Results: This study provides the first broad description of inhibitory population
activity across the developing cortex, and its cross-talk with excitatory
dynamics. The activity maps of inhibitory networks observed across the first two
postnatal weeks show a complex mixture of small events, generally confined to a
single brain region, and larger events, which include simultaneous patterns
across distant cortical areas. These postnatal activity patterns vary with age
and cortical region, becoming rapidly more complex at later stages of
development. We found dynamic spatiotemporal fluctuations in the relative
activation of excitatory and GABAergic neuronal populations during bouts of
spontaneous cortical activity. In vivo manipulation of inhibition disrupts these
fluctuations, affecting not only the local activity, but also the wider cortical
functional network.

Poster number: M_PZ3_070 (TP)

Sub-Theme: Neuronal Organization and Function: Unraveling
Development, Connectivity, and Electrophysiological Features

## A cortex-wide map of interneuron distribution and developmental programmed
cell death
Authors: Eleanor Paul, King's College London; Eleni Serafeimidou
Pouliou - Centre for Developmental Neurobiology King's College London; Oscar
Marín - Centre for Developmental Neurobiology King's College London
Consisting of many functionally distinct areas, the cortex is one of the most
complex regions of the mammalian brain. Understanding how this diversification
occurs during development remains a major goal. Interneurons make up 1/6 of the
neuronal population in the adult mouse cortex. They are diverse cells, grouped
into broad populations based on developmental origin (MGE or CGE), and discrete
populations based on expression of molecular markers, physiological properties,
and morphology. A cortex-wide map of GABA populations is currently missing from
the literature. The final number of cells in the cortex is fine-tuned via
programmed cell death, a mechanism that occurs during early postnatal
development. This process has been studied in the mouse somatosensory cortex but
has not yet been examined across the entire cortex.
We developed a comprehensive map of interneuron distributions across the mouse
cortex. We used various cre/flp mice crossed with reporters to label (i) all
interneurons (ii) MGE and CGE derived (iii) and discrete populations (eg.
martinotti, bi-polar and basket cells). We counted cells from each population
and established cell densities (comparing regions with one-way ANOVA and
Fisher’s LSD for multiple comparisons). By labelling pyramidal cells, we also
established E/I ratios. We used transgenic knock-out mice in which GABA cell
populations are ‘immortalised’ to prevent programmed cell death. We then
compared densities to those in control tissue (t-test) to determine the degree
of cell death and create an atlas of programmed cell death.
Interneuron distribution across the cortex is extremely heterogeneous. These
differences remain at the level of broad populations (MGE vs CGE) but also when
looking at discrete cell-types (bipolar, basket cells, martinotti cells). This
suggests certain inhibitory motifs may be present at varying levels across
cortical regions which could be in part, due to differences in cell death
(ranges from 0-40%). This atlas of interneuron distribution will be of use to
those studying the cortex; a region that should not be assumed as uniform in
cell populations. Further investigation could establish whether these
differences in inhibitory populations are responsible for the functional
specialisation of cortical areas.

Poster number: M_PZ3_071 (TP)

Sub-Theme: Neuronal Organization and Function: Unraveling
Development, Connectivity, and Electrophysiological Features

## Anatomical characterization of synapse development in prefrontal and
somatosensory cortex
Authors: Luca Discepolo, University of Bristol; Paul Anastasiades -
Translational Health Sciences University of Bristol; Michael Ashby - Physiology
Pharmacology and Neuroscience University of Bristol; Seth Grant - Centre for
Clinical Brain Sciences University of Edinburgh
During postnatal development, the brain undergoes a series of processes that
bring about its mature architecture. The timeline of cortical maturation is
thought to be hierarchical, with primary sensory areas maturing earlier than
higher-order areas, such as the prefrontal cortex (PFC). The cortex is a laminar
structure with distinct synaptic inputs targeting specific layers. Within each
cortical area there is also evidence for layer-specific development. For
example, sensory critical periods in the mouse somatosensory barrel cortex
(S1BF) follow an “outside-in” pattern, occurring first in thalamo-recipient
layer (L)4 followed by superficial L2/3. The maturation of the PFC is thought to
be delayed to that of S1BF. However, less is known about the timeline of this
maturation, particularly with respect to the development of synaptic
connectivity within specific layers. This project aims to determine similarities
and differences in the synaptic maturation of a primary sensory barrel cortex
(S1BF) and the PFC.
We used a knock-in transgenic mouse line where two endogenous postsynaptic
proteins, PSD-95 and SAP102 are fused with EGFP and mKO2 respectively. Coronal
sections of PFC and S1BF were collected at 8 different timepoints, spanning
birth to adulthood. Confocal imaging allowed quantification of the raw signal
intensity profile across layers and captured individual synaptic puncta.
Analysis of the density, size, and intensity of PSD95 puncta allows us to draw
comparisons across different lamina and brain areas throughout the milestones of
mouse sensory and cognitive development.
Analysis was performed using ANOVA with Turkey correction (n=6 mice per age
group). Significance was defined by p < 0.05.
Our findings reveal considerable maturation in the density of PSD95 expression
between birth and adulthood. These changes follow a similar pattern in S1BF and
PFC. However, we also observe interesting differences in the timeline and
laminar sequence through which these two brain regions mature. These data
provide insights into synaptic developmental trajectories throughout the brain.
Although there are many similarities between cortical areas, there are also key
differences that may give rise to their unique connectivity and properties.

Poster number: M_PZ3_072 (TP)

Sub-Theme: Neuronal Organization and Function: Unraveling
Development, Connectivity, and Electrophysiological Features

## Neurexin 1 expression in the early human fetal forebrain
Authors: Gavin Clowry, Newcastle University; Maznah Alhesain -
Biosciences Institute Newcastle University
Introduction. Neurexin1 (NRXN1) is a presynaptic terminal protein and candidate
neurodevelopmental disorder susceptibility gene; mutations may upset synaptic
stabilization and function. We previously showed by tissue RNAseq, qPCR and
immunohistochemistry (IHC) that NRXN1 expression was high in the fetal human
cerebral cortex between 8-12 PCW when synaptogenesis is limited. IHC suggested
that protein expression was highest in the cortical plate (CP) and progenitor
zones, not the synapse containing subplate. In this study, we re-examined the
localisation of NRXN1 expression.
Methods. Transcriptomics data was taken from the following databases
(solo.bmap.ucla.edu/shiny/webapp/ and NeMO Analytics - Main page ). Thin
paraffin sections 8-21 post-conceptional weeks (PCW) were obtained from the
Human Developmental Biology Resource (hdbr.org) with maternal consent and
ethical approval and used for RNAScope in situ hybridization (ISH) against NRXN1
mRNA.
Results. In both cortex and thalamus scRNAseq at 18PCW showed highest NRXN1
expression in more mature glutamatergic neurons, some expression in GABAergic
neurons, migrating glutamatergic neurons and non-dividing radial glia, and
lowest expression in intermediate progenitors and cycling cells. For ISH, at
8-10 PCW, Expression was strong in the CP and low in the cortical progenitor
zones, except for the boundary with the ventral telencephalon, where expression
was also high in progenitor cells. In the ganglionic eminences, expression was
higher in the proliferative zone than in the post-mitotic compartments. In the
thalamus, expression was high in both proliferative and post-mitotic
compartments and higher than in pretectum and hypothalamus. This pattern was
maintained at older stages (15-21 PCW) but, in the cortex, expression increased
in proliferative zones. Relatively stronger expression of NRXN1 in was seen in
some emergent thalamic nuclei than others.
Conclusion. This study confirms that, in the developing human forebrain, NRXN1 is
likely not to just sub serve synapse formation. It is expressed quite strongly
in certain proliferative zones but not others. It is most strongly expressed by
glutamatergic neurons of the CP and thalamus. NRXN1 may have roles in cell-cell
recognition, migration and axon guidance.

Poster number: M_PZ3_073 (TP)

Sub-Theme: Neuronal Organization and Function: Unraveling
Development, Connectivity, and Electrophysiological Features

## Chemogenetic targeting of neurogliaform interneurons to control
hyperexcitability
Authors: Dr Amy Richardson, University College London; Dr Marion S.
Mercier - Institute of Neurology University College London; Suraya Bond -
Institute of Neurology University College London; Alejandro Garcia-Garcia -
Institute of Neurology University College London; Dr Robert T. Graham -
Institute of Neurology University College London; Professor Dimitri M. Kullmann
- Institute of Neurology University College London; Dr Vincent Magloire -
Institute of Neurology University College London
Seizures are thought to be due to a breakdown of the GABAergic inhibitory system
allowing excessive excitation to spread across the brain. Recent work has shown
that dendritic inhibition provided by somatostatin-positive (SOM+) interneurons,
via GABAA receptor activation, is too weak to control hyperexcitability.
Furthermore, parvalbumin- positive (PV+) interneurons, similarly acting via
GABAA receptors, can become paradoxically pro-epileptic during seizures due to
chloride loading of excitatory neurons. Another class of interneurons could,
however, be more powerful for controlling network excitability during seizures.
Indeed, neurogliaform (NGF) interneurons, which work by ‘volume transmission’,
indiscriminately inhibit most neuron types within a 100µm radius. They also act
via both GABAA and GABAB receptors, thus their inhibitory action is both
long-lasting and not fully reliant on transmembrane chloride gradients.
Here, we propose to target and activate NGF neurons using chemogenetics to
restore GABAergic inhibition and prevent focal seizures as a treatment for
drug-resistant epilepsy.
For this, we will use an Ndnf-cre mouse line to specifically target the
excitatory hM3Dq actuator to either NGF neurons in layer I of the cortex or to
the stratum lacunosum-moleculare (SLM) of the hippocampus. Using this mouse
line, we have already shown that optogenetic activation of layer I NGF neurons
in vivo can reduce seizure duration, even a few seconds after seizure onset,
suggesting that they retain their inhibitory power during seizures unlike SOM+
and PV+ interneurons. We are now testing whether a more translatable,
chemogenetic approach to activate NGF neurons, is sufficient to reduce seizure
severity. Our preliminary data suggest that we can specifically target
chemogenetics to NGF neurons in the SLM of the hippocampus using the Ndnf-cre
mouse line. In addition, we confirm that chemogenetic activation of SLM NGF
neurons has an anti-epileptic effect in ex vivo hippocampal- entorhinal cortex
slices. We are now testing this approach in vivo using a chronic mouse model of
temporal lobe epilepsy to understand whether it is a viable therapeutic
strategy.

Poster number: M_PZ3_074 (TP)

Sub-Theme: Neuronal Organization and Function: Unraveling
Development, Connectivity, and Electrophysiological Features

## Characterization of local field potential activity in a cell-based neuronal
assay for neurotoxicity and disease modelling
Authors: Giovanna De Filippi, Axion BioSystems; Parker Ellingson -
Applications Axion BioSystems; Denise Sullivan - Applications Axion BioSystems;
Heather Hayes - Marketing Axion BioSystems
The flexibility and accessibility of induced pluripotent stem cell (iPSC)
technology has allowed complex human biology to be reproduced in vitro at high
throughput scales. Indeed, rapid advances in stem cell technology have led to
widespread adoption for the development of in vitro models of neuron
electrophysiology to be used in screening applications in drug discovery and
safety. As in vitro neuronal models become more mature, the functional
electrophysiological activity may begin to reproduce low-frequency brain
rhythms, in addition to the spiking, bursting, and synchronization already
observed.
The objective of this work is to develop and validate a functional neuronal assay
that quantifies the relationship between spiking activity of individual neurons
and the network activity embedded in the local field potential (LFP) and
utilizes metrics associated with discrete LFPs to characterize neural activity.
A planar grid of microelectrodes embedded in the substrate of each well of a
culture plate interfaces with cultured cellular networks to continuously monitor
broadband (1 – 5000 Hz) electrophysiological data from rodent cortical neuronal
networks during maturation and before and after drug treatment. Spikes were
detected for spike train analysis and LFPs were detected and extracted during
network bursts.
Descriptive metrics such as mean firing rate are averaged first across
electrodes, then across wells in a multiwell plate. The mean power spectral
density (PSD) is computed from individual LFPs within a well, and bandpower
calculations are performed on this mean PSD.
Spectral power within the LFP was correlated with the emergence of bursting
activity within the rodent cortical neurons when monitored over 28 days in
culture. LFP event frequency, amplitude, and spectral power in were quantified
and compared across the rodent models over the culture period. A known reference
compound, Amoxapine, was then added to the cultures, which eliminated alpha (Hz)
band oscillations from the network burst triggered LFPs. These results highlight
the utility of low frequency signals in neuronal cultures and support the
continued development and use of neural assays for high throughput drug
discovery and safety assessment.
Conflict of interest: The Authors are or have been full-time employees of Axion
BioSystems.

Poster number: M_PZ3_075 (TP)

Sub-Theme: Neuronal Organization and Function: Unraveling
Development, Connectivity, and Electrophysiological Features

## Topographic variation in neurotransmitter receptor densities explain
differences in intracranial EEG spectra
Authors: Ulrich Stoof, University College London; Karl Friston -
Institute of Neurology / Wellcome Centre for Human Neuroimaging University
College London; Martin Tisdall - Great Ormond Street Hospital for Children
University College London; Gerald Cooray - Great Ormond Street Hospital for
Children University College London; Richard Rosch - MRC Centre for
Neurodevelopmental Disorders King's College London
The causes of epilepsy and its defining symptom – seizures – lie in cellular and
architectural features of brain tissue. Though, for clinical diagnoses,
electrophysiological measurements, e.g., intracranial electroencephalography
(iEEG), are used to infer causes of seizures. Therefore, understanding how brain
tissue generates (pathological) electrophysiological signals is essential. We
aim to bridge this explanatory gap using biophysically informed meso- scale
neural mass models (NMM) and dynamic causal modelling (DCM). In the first part
of our project, we developed the approach and derived a normative parameter
map.
We asked how neuroreceptor density data from autoradiography studies are related
to ‘healthy’ cortex iEEG signals from individuals with epilepsy. We first tested
if a canonical microcircuit NMM replicates electrophysiological (iEEG) data
using DCM. We then asked if receptor densities can be predicted by iEEG signals,
and if regional receptor compositions (‘fingerprints’) can explain regional
variation in iEEG spectra.
First, our DCM replicated ongoing awake cross spectral densities of iEEG signals
(1770 data series) highly accurately; with 40 exceptions (≅ 2.3%) DCM was able
to explain key components of regional cortical signal variability.
Second, using both correlation between DCM parameters and receptor densities, and
fitting DCM parameters with AMPA, NMDA and GABA regressors combined with
Parametric Empirical Bayesian (PEB), we found that receptor densities are only
predictable collectively but not individually.
Third, using PCA we captured regional receptor composition variability and showed
that the principal components of receptor density fingerprints can explain
regional variation in the generation of SEEG spectra, i.e., including receptor
density fingerprints improves model evidence (free energy ≈ accuracy –
complexity).
In summary, we show how tissue characteristics can be incorporated to improve
biophysically grounded models and explain regional variations in
electrophysiology. The results will be part of a toolbox (published on GitHub
and EBRAINS) that enables integration of normative datasets as prior information
to generate patient specific models of (pathophysiological) cortical dynamics,
e.g., in epilepsy.

Poster number: M_PZ3_076 (TP)

Sub-Theme: Neuronal Organization and Function: Unraveling
Development, Connectivity, and Electrophysiological Features

## Electrical conductivity of whole brain tissue, grey and white matter
post-mortem, in vivo and in silico
Authors: Judith Evers, University College Dublin
Introduction:
Electric brain tissue properties, particularly conductivity, are a key parameter
in computational modelling of bioelectric fields. But conductivity estimates are
inconsistent across literature and available values are mostly based on
post-mortem recordings, often neglecting the dispersive nature of biological
tissue. For example, a conductivity of 0.2S/m is typically used in clinical deep
brain stimulation(DBS) models and 0.3S/m in epileptic source location while
accurate models are highly sensitive to the selected electrical tissue
properties.
The aim of this study was to develop a method to record rodent dielectric brain
properties in vivo using 4-terminal measurements. The influence of bulk tissue
conductivity in computational modelling of DBS was also examined.
Methods:
Linear 4-terminal measurement probes for whole brain tissue (interelectrode
distance 3mm, electrode Ø100µm) and white/grey matter (2mm, Ø2µm) were
developed. Cell constants for each probe were calculated based on complex
conductance in 0.1, 0.01 and 0.001 M KCl standard solution at 25°C with a
conductivity of 1.41, 0.141 and 0.0141 S/m, respectively.
8 adult male and female rats were used for post-mortem (<1 hour) whole brain
recordings and 1 male rat for whole brain, white and grey matter in vivo
(Isoflurane anaesthesia) between 20Hz–300kHz.
A sensitivity analysis of bulk tissue conductivity was conducted using a finite
element model of DBS electrode surrounded by encapsulation and brain tissue.
Approach to statistical analysis: Descriptive statistics and ANOVA(GraphPad
Prism).
Results & conclusions:
Standard solution conductivity was frequency independent with cell constants of
0.0303 (large probe) and 0.0182 (small probe). Whole brain conductivity was
frequency dependent but approximately constant from 2-20kHz. The mean
conductivity post-mortem was 0.121S/m in this range (SD 0.06 5).
In vivo recorded conductivity was 0.216S/m in the 2-20kHz range in one rat.
In silico, lower conductivity led to higher electrical potentials in the vicinity
of the lead and a change from 0.2S/m±0.1S/m results in an up to 53% change in
electric potential.
In conclusion, physiological values of dispersive electrical brain tissue
properties in vivo are required for accurate models.
 
Poster number: M_PZ3_077 (TP)

Sub-Theme: Neuronal Organization and Function: Unraveling
Development, Connectivity, and Electrophysiological Features

## The genetic basis of functional subpopulations in the Inferior Olive
Authors: Eleonora Gagliardi, University of St. Andrews; Maarten
Zwart - Neuroscience University of St. Andrews
1. Introduction
Our ability to learn new movements and adapt them to a relentlessly changing
environment is an essential task for navigating the world. The inferior olivary
nucleus (IO), which sits in our brainstem, is essential for this motor learning
process. The IO is thought to detect mismatches between intended and actual
movements; the IO then “teaches” the cerebellum by signalling the occurrence of
movement errors to correct future movements. In spite of its importance, the
exact function of the IO is still unclear. Due to its optical transparency,
together with the ease of genetic and pharmacological manipulation, zebrafish
represents a powerful model for in vivo imaging studies.
Preliminary imaging evidence shows that IO cells have highly diverse neural
activity profiles and encode selective representations of the sensory
environment and motor output. The diversity in spatial location, dendritic
morphology, axonal projection patterns and anatomically-defined classes of
inferior olive neurons suggest a specific role of each cell subtype. How are
these specified?
2. Methods
We used scRNA-seq to disentangle the genetic complexity of the IO and delineate
its single-cell expression profiles in 5 days old zebrafish, corroborated by
fluorescent in situ hybridisations to confirm the scRNA-seq data and reveal
cluster marker genes.
3. Approach for statistical analysis (e.g. ANOVA, confidence intervals, t-test
etc)
Candidate gene markers for each cluster were identified by MAST test for
differential expression. MAST employs a hurdle model tailored to scRNA-seq data
by addressing specific characteristics such as stochastic dropout and bimodal
expression (Finak et al., 2015).
4. Results and conclusions
We found a number of cell clusters in the Inferior Olive of 5 days old zebrafish,
and identified a number of differentially expressed genes. These newly acquired
expression data will help to explore the neuronal diversity and functions of IO
subtypes in more detail. Our study provides insight into the distinctive
characteristics of the cells in the IO nucleus, allowing us to relate their
genetic makeup to their activity patterns and motor learning. This is the first
step towards the genetic characterisation of IO subpopulations to clarify their
role in

Poster number: T_PZ3_067 (TP)

Sub-Theme: Neurodevelopmental Disorders and Cellular Mechanisms:
Advances in Model Systems and Therapeutic Approaches

## Dissecting the contribution of astrocytes and upper layer neurons to human
cortical circuit dynamics in Down Syndrome
Authors: Elizabeth Brockman, Imperial College London; Ivan Alic -
Genomics & Child Health The Blizard Institute, Queen Mary University London;
Aoife Murray - Center for Genomics and Child Health The Blizard Institute, Queen
Mary University London; Shabana Khan - Institute of Clinical Sciences Imperial
College London; Maria Tortora - Institute of Clinical Sciences Imperial College
London; Dean Nizetic - London School of Medicine The Blizard Institute, Queen
Mary University London; Vincenzo De Paola - Neuroscience and Behaviour Disorders
Duke NUS Medical School, Singapore
INTRO
Human cortical circuit assembly is critical to neurodevelopment, but our
understanding of this process in Down Syndrome (DS) remains incomplete.
Previously, we transplanted induced pluripotent stem cells (iPSCs) and used
multiphoton microscopy to find that DS grafts have increased synaptic structural
stability and decreased neuronal oscillatory activity. Our project investigates
the mechanisms behind these cellular alterations, focusing on the effect of
major cortical cell types and microenvironment on axonal bouton stability and
strength.
METHODS
Patient-derived iPSCs and isogenic controls were differentiated into neural
progenitors and injected into the cortex of immunodeficient mice with cranial
windows. We altered the differentiation protocol to normalize graft size
differences and GFAP+ and SATB2+ cell numbers across genotypes, as these were
overproduced and underproduced, respectively, in previous DS grafts compared to
controls. 2-photon images were taken of axonal en passant boutons (EPB) and of
somatic calcium signals over time. EPB turnover rate (TOR) and EPB size
(strength) changes were quantified using EPBscore software. Calcium imaging was
analyzed via MATLAB/Fiji scripts to determine event frequency, integral, and
amplitude. Immunohistochemistry was performed on perfused brains to characterize
cell identity.
STATISTICS
Normality tests were performed on each dataset. Data was analysed using t-tests,
ANOVA, or Pearson correlation with GraphPad Prism. Significance was set at
p<0.05.
RESULTS
No significant difference was found in EPB TOR and EPB strength or somatic
calcium signals between DS and control grafts. Therefore, differences in
synaptic stability and somatic activity outcomes have been normalized across
genotypes. Correlative analysis was used to see if the normalization of SATB2+
and GFAP+ cell levels contributed to this rescue. SATB2+ cell densities were not
found to be significantly correlated to any outcomes. GFAP+ cell numbers
significantly correlate with synaptic stability outcomes (p=0.0253), but not
with neural activity outcomes.
CONCLUSIONS
Trisomy 21-related dysregulation is not sufficient to alter axonal bouton
stability and neuronal activity compared to control neural networks of similar
scale and cellular composition.

Poster number: T_PZ3_068 (TP)

Sub-Theme: Neurodevelopmental Disorders and Cellular Mechanisms:
Advances in Model Systems and Therapeutic Approaches

## Using CCND2 genetically modified cortical spheroids as disease models of
neurodevelopment
Authors: Erica Harris, University of Leeds; Rowan Taylor - Medicine
& Health University of Leeds; Ailsa Rose - Medicine & Health University
of Leeds; James Poulter - Medicine & Health University of Leeds
Mutations in genes encoding PI3K-AKT-mTOR pathway components result in a group of
megalencephaly-associated overgrowth conditions, including
megalencephaly-polymicrogyria-polydactyly-hydrocephalus syndrome (MPPH).
Children with MPPH and related overgrowth syndromes present with delayed
development, uncontrollable seizures and a lower life expectancy, thought to be
caused by de novo frameshift mutations (Mirza et al, 2014).
Cyclin D2 (CCND2) is a downstream component of this pathway and plays a crucial
role in neuronal development. Using CRISPR/Cas9 we created 2 independent induced
pluripotent stem cell (iPSC) lines with truncating mutations in the final exon
of CCND2, along with a heterozygous and homozygous line containing a previously
identified frameshift patient mutation (c.842C>G, p.Pro281Arg) (Mirza et al,
2014). Western blot confirmed successful truncation of CCND2 in all crispant
cell lines compared to the wild-type. CHX assays confirmed CD2 expression is
stabilized in both heterozygous and homozygous c.842C>G lines. Furthermore,
we observed altered expression of other PI3K-ATK-mTOR pathway markers such as
retinoblastoma (RB) and S6 Kinase (S6K) phosphorylation.
We subsequently differentiated both crispant and a non-mutated iPSC line into
human cortical spheroids (hCS) to better understand the role of Cyclin D2 in
neuronal development and investigated spheroids at key time points for 60 days
post-differentiation. We found little difference in the early stages of
neurogenesis but by day 25, truncation crispant spheroids contained more PAX6+
neural progenitor cells (NPC’s) compared to WT. By day 60 these crispant hCS
were larger in size, had an increased cortical thickness and had altered
neuronal patterning, consistent with a cortical migration defect.
In summary, we have generated crispant iPSC lines harbouring CCND2 mutations and
show they mimic the neurodevelopmental phenotypes associated with MPPH. Further
characterisation of these models is underway to better understand the mechanisms
underpinning this group of overgrowth disorders.

Poster number: T_PZ3_069 (TP)

Sub-Theme: Neurodevelopmental Disorders and Cellular Mechanisms:
Advances in Model Systems and Therapeutic Approaches

## High glucose impacts the proliferation and differentiation of neural
progenitors in TSC stem cell model
Authors: Tanya Singh, University of Oxford; Zameel Cader - Nuffield
Department of Clinical Neurosciences University of Oxford
Introduction: Tuberous sclerosis complex (TSC) is a genetic disorder caused by
mutations in either TSC1 or TSC2, genes responsible for regulating cellular
growth and tumour suppression. TSC mutations lead to hyperactivation of the mTOR
pathway and clinically patients can present with epilepsy and autism spectrum
disorder. The mTOR pathway plays a key role in cell growth in response to amino
acid availability, cellular energy status, and nutrient provision including
glucose. AMPK is another nutrient sensor and upstream regulator of mTOR, which
is activated in low glucose conditions via phosphorylation of TSC2 followed by
mTOR inhibition. Conversely, under high glucose conditions, AMPK is suppressed
via inhibition of TSC and activation of mTOR. Cell culture media typically has
very high glucose concentrations to support cell viability and growth. However,
given the interaction of glucose and other nutrients with the mTOR pathway, the
investigation of TSC disease mechanisms is potentially confounded.
Methods: Here we have generated cortical neurons from human Embryonic Stem Cells
(hES) using Dual SMAD inhibition. The cell lines used were hES harbouring a TSC2
deletion (TSC2−/−) and an isogenic control line (TSC2+/+). The neural
differentiation was carried out under a constant physiologically correct glucose
(5mM) or high glucose (25mM) media condition. ICC, qRT-PCR, and molecular assays
were performed at different time points throughout differentiation.
Approach for Statistical Analysis: For statistical analysis, three independent
sets of differentiation were used as biological replicates (N=3) and each
experiment was performed with three technical replicates (n=3). The data are
shown as mean with SEM and analysed using One-way ANOVA or Two-way ANOVA with
multiple comparisons.
Result and Conclusion: Our results suggest that neural differentiation is highly
sensitive to glucose concentrations in the cell culture media, affecting neural
progenitor gene expression markers and the later neuro-glial switch.
Furthermore, our studies highlight an important gene-environment interaction that
may explain the heterogeneity of clinical presentations of patients with TSC
mutations.

Poster number: T_PZ3_070 (TP)

Sub-Theme: Neurodevelopmental Disorders and Cellular Mechanisms:
Advances in Model Systems and Therapeutic Approaches

## Investigating Type II Diabetes (T2DM) in the Blood Brain Barrier in Mouse and
Human Platforms
Authors: Gabriel Rocha, University of Oxford
The ability to research neurovascular coupling in vitro is highly dependent on
platforms that accurately mimic the in vivo blood-brain-barrier
microenvironment. Patients with T2DM are more likely to get dementia, but their
link is not well understood. Here we describe a murine in vitro model for
glycaemic testing, and an ongoing protocol to differentiate brain endothelial
cells (BECs) from IPSCs via lentiviral expression of three transcription factors
(TFs).
Further, snRNA-seq from fresh-frozen diabetic and control brains will be
performed from isolated BECs to validate and identify new targets in T2DM. Mouse
capillaries were isolated by centrifugation through dextran and digested prior
to seeding. After BEC expansion, the cells were split and seeded for normal
(5.5mM, LG) or hyperglycaemic (15mM, HG) conditions. Glucose consumption, TEER,
qPCR, and ROS assays were then employed after 4 days.
Human IPSC-brain BECs were produced via lentiviral expression of 3 TFs, and
undertaking the IPSC through a mesodermal fate, followed by a BEC specification.
Results were obtained via ICC and qPCR for BEC markers. Human BEC nuclei
isolation was performed via differential centrifugation, dextran spin, and
filtering. The resulting capillaries were digested and homogenised to release
nuclei. Parse Biosciences kit was used for fixation and barcoding of the
isolated nuclei. Analysis comparing LG and HG conditions will undergo t-tests
for all assays (n=3). For the single nuclei human data, 25 diabetic and 25
controls were used. We will construct pseudo-bulk populations of each cell type
for each sample to reduce variation and to avoid false positives for
differential gene expression. This uses a linear model for determining
significance of differential RNAseq read counts. Mouse endothelial cells in HG
consume a higher amount of glucose than those in LG conditions, but no
phenotypic or inflammatory changes were detected. Although expression of key
transcription factors yielded robust expression of key endothelial markers in
IPSCs, they lack tight junction proteins specifying them as brain endothelial
cells and therefore should not be used to model the blood brain barrier. Future
results of snRNA-seq will yield key targets to validate in mouse or other human
models.

Poster number: T_PZ3_071 (TP)

Sub-Theme: Neurodevelopmental Disorders and Cellular Mechanisms:
Advances in Model Systems and Therapeutic Approaches

## TGF-β1-mediated senescence of outer blood-retinal barrier is regulated by
mTORC1-NOX signaling pathway
Authors: Jeong Hun Kim, Seoul National University College of
Medicine
The retinal pigment epithelium (RPE), outer blood-retinal barrier (BRB) undergoes
characteristic structural changes and epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT)
during normal aging, which are exacerbated in age-related macular degeneration
(AMD). Although the pathogenic mechanisms of aging and AMD remain unclear,
transforming growth factor-β1 (TGF-β1) is known to induce oxidative stress,
morphometric changes, and EMT as a senescence-promoting factor. In this study,
we examined whether intravitreal injection of TGF-β1 into the mouse eye elicits
senescence-like morphological alterations in the RPE and if this can be
prevented by suppressing mammalian target of rapamycin complex 1 (mTORC1) or
NADPH oxidase (NOX) signaling. We verified that intravitreal TGF-β1-induced
stress fiber formation and EMT in RPE cells, along with age-associated
morphometric changes, including increased variation in cell size and reduced
cell density. In RPE cells, exogenous TGF-β1 increased endogenous expression of
TGF-β1 and upregulated Smad3-ERK1/2-mTORC1 signaling, increasing reactive oxygen
species (ROS) production and EMT. We demonstrated that inhibition of the
mTORC1-NOX4 pathway by pretreatment with 5-aminoimidazole-4-carboxamide
ribonucleotide (AICAR), an activator of AMP-dependent protein kinase, or
GKT137831, a NOX1/4 inhibitor, decreased ROS generation, prevented stress fiber
formation, attenuated EMT, and improved the regularity of the RPE structure in
vitro and in vivo. These results suggest that intravitreal TGF-β1 injection
could be used as a screening model to investigate the aging-related structural
and functional changes to the RPE, outer BRB. Furthermore, the regulation of
TGF-β-mTORC1-NOX signaling could be a potential therapeutic target for reducing
pathogenic alterations in aged RPE and AMD.

Poster number: T_PZ3_072 (TP)

Sub-Theme: Neurodevelopmental Disorders and Cellular Mechanisms:
Advances in Model Systems and Therapeutic Approaches

## Enhanced Sestrin expression through Tanshinone 2A treatment improves
PI3K-dependent inhibition of glioma growth
Authors: Sonia Shinhmar, Royal Holloway University London; Judith
Schaf - Life Sciences University of Warzburg; Quingyu Zeng - Imperial College
London; Nelofer Syed - Imperial College London; Robin S B Williams - CBMS Royal
Holloway University London
Introduction: Tanshinone 2A (T2A) is a diterpenoid quinone compounds used in a
Traditional Chinese Medicines that exhibit potential anti-cancer effects, but
the mechanism of action remains unclear. Here we investigate the molecular
mechanisms of T2A in tractable model and apply insight to develop a potential
new approach to the treatment of Glioblastomas multiforme, a highly aggressive
brain cancer which responds poorly to current chemotherapeutic intervention.
Methods: We employ the model system Dictyostelium discoideum to provide insight
into the mechanism of T2A and apply this insight to reduce 2D cell proliferation
and tumour (spheroid) expansion in both rodent- and human- derived glioblastoma
cell lines.
Approach for statistics Mann Whitney tests were carried out to determine
significance of unpaired and non- parametric data.
Results and conclusions: We show that T2A potently inhibits Dictyostelium
cellular proliferation in a dose-dependent manner, supporting the use of this
model in identifying specific molecular mechanisms. Acute T2A treatment reduced
phosphoinositide 3 kinase (PI3K) and protein kinase B (PKB) activity, however
only chronic treatment inhibited downstream mechanistic target of rapamycin
complex 1 (mTORC1). The chronic effect of T2A was independent of mTORC1
regulators including PKB, tuberous sclerosis complex (TSC), and AMP-activated
protein kinase (AMPK), to suggest that these components are not responsible for
the effect of T2A on reducing mTORC1 activity. In contrast, chronic T2A
treatment enhanced expression of the negative mTORC1 regulator, Sestrin, to
inhibit mTORC1 activity, and combinatory treatment using T2A and a PI3K
inhibitor (LY294002) caused a synergistic inhibition of cell proliferation. This
effect was validated in translational studies using human- and mouse-derived
glioblastoma cell lines, where combinatory T2A PI3K inhibitor (Paxalisib)
treatment provided a synergistic inhibition of glioblastoma proliferation in
both 2D monolayer and 3D spheroid cultures. Thus, we propose a new approach for
cancer treatment, including glioblastomas, through combinatory treatment with
T2A and PI3K inhibitors.

Poster number: T_PZ3_073 (PP)

Sub-Theme: Neurodevelopmental Disorders and Cellular Mechanisms:
Advances in Model Systems and Therapeutic Approaches

## Automated Optimisation of Stem Cell Differentiation into Neurons
Authors: Heather McCourty, University of Sheffield; Pavel Truhans -
School of Biosciences University of Sheffield; Paul Gokhale - School of
Biosciences University of Sheffield; Anton Nikolaev - School of Biosciences
University of Sheffield
Stem cells are unique in their self-renewal and differentiation capacity into
many cell types. They are an attractive platform for modelling human tissue in
vitro but it can be difficult to produce homogenous cultures due to the limited
control of the microenvironment. Automating the differentiation protocols can
reduce human error and increase the efficiency and yield of the differentiation
protocol. There are commercial systems for automated imaging and treatment of
cells, but they are expensive to purchase and maintain.
Here we show an open-source robotic platform for cell culture maintenance and
stem cell differentiation that can boost the reproducibility of protocols and
promote the accessibility of this type of stem cell research. The robot
comprises four NEMA-17 stepper motors which control the movement of the XYZ
axis, and application manifold. The Z axis can autofocus on cells and includes a
camera with a fluorescent blue light filter.
Using this platform, we aim to automate the differentiation of Ntera-2 cells
(NT2Cs) into functional GABAergic and glutamatergic neurons via the robotic
platform. NT2Cs are a pluripotent embryonic carcinoma cell line with similar
surface antigen and protein expression to embryonic stem cells (ESCs).
Differentiation of NT2Cs can be induced by retinoic acid (RA) application
however cell populations exhibit significant phenotype heterogeneity. Optimised
differentiation will be achieved by automated testing of thousands of conditions
with variations of exposure time, concentration, and application dynamics of
RA.
Cell differentiation will be monitored by automatic immunostaining for surface
antigens and intracellular proteins related to pluripotency (TRA-1-60 and Oct-4)
and neuronal differentiation (A2B5 and NeuroD1). The statistical model Bayesian
optimisation will be used to evaluate variables in real-time in conjunction with
the experiments. All hardware, software analysis, and optimisation tools used in
this project are published at https://github.com/frescolabs/FrescoM and made available for
other researchers to use in similar studies.

Poster number: T_PZ3_074 (TP)

Sub-Theme: Neurodevelopmental Disorders and Cellular Mechanisms:
Advances in Model Systems and Therapeutic Approaches

## Elevated Glucocorticoid alters the trajectory of hypothalamic development and
function
Authors: Helen Eachus, University of Exeter
1. Introduction
Exposure to excess glucocorticoid (GC) during early development is implicated in
disease risk in later life, including psychiatric disorders and age-related
diseases. GC-induced acceleration of growth-rate leading to adverse phenotypes
later is widely observed at the organism level, but cellular and molecular
understanding of this process is currently lacking. One of the most consistent
long-term effects of elevated GC exposure on the brain is reduced adult
neurogenesis in the hippocampus. Despite this, the effects of GC exposure on
neurogenesis during development, and effects on other brain regions have not
been well studied.
2. Methods
To address this, we use an optogenetic zebrafish model to analyse the effects of
GC exposure on neurogenesis during development in the whole brain. In our model,
we non-invasively elevate the endogenous cortisol level during early life. We
analyse effects on neurogenesis using transcriptomics and confocal brain
imaging, as well as functional consequences for behaviour and animal
physiology.
3. Approach for statistical analysis
Prior to testing for statistically significant differences between groups, data
were tested for normality and variance. Where data did not fit the assumptions
for t-testing or ANOVA, non-parametric alternatives were used. Where
appropriate, Bonferroni correction for multiple testing was used.
4. Results and conclusions
We identify that the hypothalamus is a highly GC-sensitive region where elevated
GC causes accelerated development of the hypothalamus and precocious feeding
behaviour, suggestive of GC-induced adaptive developmental plasticity. However,
in later development this is followed by failed hypothalamic maturation and
early decline accompanied by impaired feeding, growth, and longevity. This rapid
decline is suggestive of a state of allostatic overload, induced by the
cumulative burden of GC. In GC-exposed animals, the developmental trajectory of
hypothalamic progenitor cells is strikingly altered, potentially mediated by
direct regulation of transcription factors such as rx3 by GC. Our data provide
cellular and molecular level insight to GC-induced adaptive plasticity leading
to allostatic overload in a developing brain, a process crucial for health
across the life-course.
 

## Neuromodulation & Receptor Targeting

Poster number: S_PZ3_079 (TP)

Sub-Theme: Neurotransmitter Dynamics: Stress, Neuroplasticity, and
Therapeutic Strategies in Brain Disorders

## Acute stress activates 5-HT-glutamate co-releasing neurons in mice
Authors: Cara Fuller, University of Oxford; L. Sophie Gullino -
Department of Pharmacology University of Oxford; David Bannerman - Department of
Experimental Psychology University of Oxford; Trevor Sharp - Department of
Pharmacology University of Oxford
Introduction
5-hydroxytryptamine (5-HT) is a key regulator of emotional behaviour and is
implicated in disorders such as anxiety and depression. A recent breakthrough is
the discovery that many 5-HT neurons express the vesicular glutamate transporter
3 (VGLUT3) and co-release glutamate. Global VGLUT3 deletion in mice increases
anxiety-related behaviours potentially implicating 5-HT-glutamate co-release in
anxiety and stress mechanisms. Here we examined the impact of acute stress on
5-HT-glutamate co-releasing neurons.
Methods
Adult C57BL/6J mice (6-7/group) were injected with saline or fluoxetine (10 mg/kg
i.p.), exposed to 6-min swim stress, and then transcardially perfused 90 mins
later. Coronal brain slices were cut at the level of dorsal and medial raphe
nuclei (DRN and MRN), processed for triple-label immunohistochemistry, and
visualised by epifluorescence microscopy. Colocalization of TPH2 (5-HT neuron
marker), VGLUT3 and c-Fos (marker of neuronal activation) identified activated
5-HT-glutamate neurons. Cell counting was made blind to treatment with the mean
count of 3 sections per mouse being used for quantification.
Approach for statistical analysis
All data distributions passed the Shapiro-Wilk test. Groups were compared by
Tukey’s post-hoc test following one- way ANOVAs. P<0.05 was considered
statistically significant.
Results and Conclusions
Acute swim stress increased c-Fos in the DRN but not MRN. Numerous c-Fos/TPH2
co-labelled neurons were evident within some DRN sub-regions (ventral DRN) but
not all (lateral DRN). Interestingly, in the ventral DRN swim stress increased
c-Fos in TPH2/VGLUT3 co-expressing neurons (F(2,17)= 4.896, p=0.021, post-hoc
p=0.036; see Fig 1), and this effect was reduced by fluoxetine (post-hoc
p=0.042). Taken together, the current data suggest that an acute stressor
activates subsets of DRN 5-HT neurons, and this includes 5-HT-glutamate
co-releasing neurons. The co- release of 5-HT-glutamate in the forebrain may
contribute to the emotional response to stress.
 
Poster number: S_PZ3_080 (TP)

Sub-Theme: Neurotransmitter Dynamics: Stress, Neuroplasticity, and
Therapeutic Strategies in Brain Disorders

## The impact of corticotrophin releasing hormone and urocortins on the
viability and proliferation of different types of brain tumours
Authors: Ana Rita Monteiro, University of Portsmouth; Professor
Jerome Swinny - School of Pharmacy and Biomedical Sciences University of
Portsmouth
Background:
Malignant brain tumours invariably correlate with poor patient survival.
High-grade gliomas (HGGs), the most common form of tumour in the central nervous
system (CNS), have a low median survival and medulloblastomas (MBs), the most
common paediatric brain tumour, lead to severe complications in survivors. These
poor outcomes stem in part from a lack of efficacious therapies.
The family of corticotropin-releasing hormone (CRH) stress neurohormones, which
includes urocortin I-III (UCN I-III), contribute to a range of neuroplastic
processes, as well as glial proliferation. This raises the prospect that stress-
induced cell division underpinning such glial proliferation could promote
oncogenic processes and tumorigenesis. If so, this could elucidate distinct
pathways to target tumoral development or progression. Therefore, the broad aims
of this project were to determine the comparative expression profiles of the CRH
family in different brain tumours and the impact on their viability and
proliferation.
Methods:
The mRNA and protein expression levels were assessed in HGG and MB cell lines
using qRT-PCR and confocal immunocytochemistry. The effects of applied CRH and
UCN peptides, and synthetic agonists and antagonists, were assessed through
viability and proliferation assays.
Statistical significance of viability and proliferation assays (n=3) was
calculated using a two-way ANOVA approach and of qRT-PCRs (n=5) through a
Kruskal-Wallis test. Values of P < 0.05 were accepted as significant.
Results and Conclusion:
The qRT-PCRs revealed that MBs express CRH and UCN mRNA at higher levels than
HGGs. Immunocytochemistry and confocal microscopy confirmed CRH and CRH-R1
expression on plasma membranes and cytoplasmic compartments, with UCN
predominantly located within the nucleus of both HGG and MB cell lines. Applied
CRH and UCN ligands had contrasting effects on the viability and proliferation
of different patient-derived HGC and MB cell lines. This suggests functional
CRH-UCN-R pathways within different types of brain tumours, in a
patient-specific manner. This raises the prospect of repurposing available CRH-R
ligands for targeted treatment of susceptible tumour types.

Poster number: S_PZ3_081 (PP)

Sub-Theme: Neurotransmitter Dynamics: Stress, Neuroplasticity, and
Therapeutic Strategies in Brain Disorders

## The effects of methamphetamine with reuptake inhibitors on primary cell
cultures of chromaffin cells
Authors: Spencer Gordon, Minot State University, ND, USA; Dr. Bryan
Schmidt - Division of Science (Chemistry) Minot State University, ND, USA
Introduction: Amphetamines can induce release of norepinephrine (NE), epinephrine
(Epi), and dopamine (DA) in the brain. Aversive effects of methamphetamine (MA)
use are similar to Epi responses, suggesting a possible MA- stimulated Epi
secretion in the peripheral nervous system via adrenal chromaffin cells. Given
that chromaffin cells are derived from the neural crest, it is possible they
respond to MA similar to the known mechanisms in the brain.
The study proposed here seeks to explore if MA stimulates catecholamine (CA)
release from adrenal chromaffin cells. Understanding the role that chromaffin
cells have in eliciting the aversive side effects of MA use have a crucial role
in understanding MA addiction. Further, lack of CA secretion is known to be
associated with various diseases, including Parkinson’s disease (PD). Providing
the detailed mechanisms involved in peripheral CA secretion could increase the
potential of autologous transplants for patients with PD.
Methods: This research will employ fresh primary bovine chromaffin cells in
culture treated with exogenous MA. Acetylcholine (Ach) will be used as a
positive control. Cells will be treated with varying levels of MA to represent
therapeutic, abuse or lethal doses (0.2 µM, 2 µM and 20 µM, respectively), and
aliquots of media will be extracted at various time points (0.25, 1 or 24 hours)
for ELISA and LC/MS analysis of CA (Epi, NE, DA) concentrations. Cells will be
treated with Ach, MA or a combination of MA and Ach. Additionally, inhibitors of
Epi reuptake or Epi degradation will be added to each treatment. Finally, mRNA
analysis of samples before and after treatment will be performed.
Comparison of transcriptional changes with CA secretion will be used to elucidate
the mechanism of any CA release.
Approach for statistical analysis: All treatments will be performed in
quadruplicate for each experiment performed for this project, with each
experiment repeated at least three times leading to at least 12 replicates for
each treatment type. Data will initially be analyzed using confidence intervals
and T-test. This will be followed by one-way ANOVA for each CA plus a MANOVA for
all CA (Epi, NE and DA), using MA treatment as the independent variable and CA
concentrations as the dependent variables.

Poster number: S_PZ3_082 (TP)

Sub-Theme: Neurotransmitter Dynamics: Stress, Neuroplasticity, and
Therapeutic Strategies in Brain Disorders

## Defining the clinical benefit of dual activation of M1/M4-muscarinic
receptors in the treatment of neurological disease
Authors: Aisling McFall, University of Glasgow
Introduction
Polypharmacy at the M1 and M4 muscarinic acetylcholine receptors (mAChRs) has
been shown to have clinical
benefits in the correction of behavioural abnormalities in both schizophrenia and
Alzheimer’s disease. The contribution of each receptor, and the interaction
between M1-M4, for clinical efficacy remains unclear. Therefore,
proof-of-concept behavioural studies were designed to begin to address this
question.
Methods
Chinese hamster ovary (CHO) cells stably overexpressing the human M1 or M4
receptor or M1-DREADD (Designer Receptor Exclusively Activated by Designer
Drugs) were treated with increasing concentrations of acetylcholine,
clozapine-N-oxide (CNO) or HTL9936, and receptor signalling assessed by assays
measuring IP1 accumulation or levels of ERK phosphorylation.
Male and female mice expressing M1-DREADD received vehicle (10% tween-80), CNO
(0.3mg/kg) or HTL9936 at 10, 30 or 100mg/kg by intraperitoneal injection (n=5
per group), 30 mins prior to being placed in an open field (OF) arena for 10
mins. Animal movements were recorded and analysed using AnyMaze software. Animal
data are presented as mean ±SEM and were analysed with one-way ANOVA followed
Sidak’s correction for multiple comparisons where *p<0.05 compared to vehicle
and #p<0.05 compared to CNO.
Results
In vitro cell assays demonstrated activation of both the M1 and M4 receptor with
HTL9936 and acetylcholine but activation of M1-DREADD by CNO only.
In vivo, M1 agonism with CNO had little effect on distance travelled in OF, but
M4 agonism with HTL9936 decreased locomotion in a dose dependent manner
(Distance travelled (m): Veh; 39.4 ±4, CNO; 45.0 ±8, HTL 10mg/kg; 24.9 ±5,
30mg/kg; 18.2 ±5#, 100mg/kg; 8.3±2*#). Using thigmotaxis measures in the OF,
HTL9936 treated mice spent less time in the OF centre than CNO treated mice,
suggesting increased anxiety with M4 agonism and decreased anxiety with M1
agonism (%time in centre: Veh; 6.9 ±1%, CNO; 12.2 ±2%, HTL 10mg/kg; 6.8 ±1%,
30mg/kg; 5.0 ±2%#, 100mg/kg; 5.1 ±2%).
Conclusions
The M1-DREADD mouse provides a unique opportunity to investigate the polypharmacy
of M1/M4 ligands. Preliminary results suggest differing effects of M1 and M4 on
anxiety and locomotion. Further work will expand the group sizes and incorporate
additional

Poster number: S_PZ3_083 (TP)

Sub-Theme: Advancements in Non-Invasive and Adaptive Neuromodulation
for Motor Disorders

## The effect of transcranial direct current stimulation on motor
responsiveness: a potential intervention for prolonged disorders of
consciousness
Authors: Alice Ditchfield, University of Birmingham; Davide Aloi -
Centre for Human Brain Health University of Birmingham; Davinia Fernández-Espejo
- Centre for Human Brain Health University of Birmingham
BACKGROUND: The therapeutic options for patients with prolonged disorders of
consciousness (PDOC) are limited and management is challenging. Some patients
with PDOC have retained awareness but cannot perform voluntary movements. It is
suggested that this motor deficit is caused by reduced functional coupling
between the primary motor cortex (M1) and the thalamus (1). Transcranial direct
current stimulation (tDCS) is a form of non-invasive brain stimulation gaining
increasing interest as therapeutic tool. It is proposed that tDCS to M1 may have
the potential to strengthen thalamo-cortical connections and restore some
voluntary motor control. We paired tDCS to M1 with passive thumb movements in
healthy participants, to test our protocol and investigate effects in healthy
subjects.
We hypothesised that anodal stimulation would increase the speed of active thumb
movements and reduce reaction time, and that cathodal stimulation would have the
opposite effect.
METHODS: 19 participants received five 20-minute sessions of anodal, cathodal and
sham tDCS to M1, paired with passive movement of the right thumb. We measured
mean velocity of active movement, peak acceleration, and reaction time, for
active thumb movements before and after single and repeated sessions of each
stimulation type.
STATISTICAL ANALYSIS: We conducted 2x3 repeated measures ANOVAs to assess the
effects of time (pre- and post- stimulation) by stimulation type (anodal,
cathodal, sham) for single and repeated sessions.
RESULTS: A significant interaction between stimulation type and time was found
for mean velocity following repeated intervention sessions. Both anodal and
cathodal stimulation produced a decrease in velocity of thumb movement compared
with sham.
CONCLUSIONS: Our findings suggest that tDCS paired with passive thumb movement
can influence the targeted thalamo-cortical pathway, which is extremely
promising for PDOC patients. Functional magnetic resonance imaging data for our
population could provide further information on the effects of this intervention
on neural structures.
(1) Stafford CA, Owen AM, Fernández-Espejo D. The neural basis of external
responsiveness in prolonged disorders of consciousness. Neuroimage: clinical.
2019 Jan 1;22:101791

Poster number: S_PZ3_084 (TP)

Sub-Theme: Advancements in Non-Invasive and Adaptive Neuromodulation
for Motor Disorders

## Comparable reduction in Parkinson-like motor symptoms with conventional and
adaptive deep brain stimulation in Parkinsonian rats
Authors: Judith Evers, University College Dublin
Introduction:
Closed-loop deep brain stimulation (DBS) which adjusts stimulation parameters in
real time can potentially improve efficacy and reduce side effects in the
treatment of medically refractory Parkinson’s disease (PD). The hemiparkinsonian
rat model of PD can be used for testing different aDBS algorithms and
establishing efficacy before clinical trials. In this study we compare on-off
and proportional closed-loop DBS, to conventional DBS in hemiparkinsonian
rats.
Methods:
A stimulation and recording multi-electrode array was implanted into the left
subthalamic nucleus (STN) and 15 ug 6- OHDA (n=7), or vehicle only (n=3), were
injected into the left medial forebrain bundle in 10 rats. Starting 3 weeks
post-surgery, open-loop DBS, on-off or proportional closed-loop DBS based on
recorded STN beta-power and control algorithms not based on beta activity were
applied using W2100 system (Multichannel systems). Behaviour was assessed during
the cylinder and stepping tests. Successful model creation was confirmed via
apomorphine-induced rotation test and TH-immunocytochemistry, and electrode
location was histologically confirmed.
Approach to statistical analysis: Groups were compared using t-test and the
influence of stimulation algorithms within groups was analysed using linear
mixed models taking the specific animal into account as a random intercept term
(R Studio).
Results and conclusions:
Hemiparkinsonian rats had reduced contralateral paw use (20% in cylinder and 25%
in stepping tests, p<0.001). Conventional, on-off and proportional
closed-loop DBS, but not randomly applied on-off nor low amplitude continuous
stimulation, restored contralateral paw use significantly in both behavioural
tests to ~45% (P<0.001). STN relative beta power was suppressed during DBS
(P<0.001). Both closed-loop algorithms used 40% less energy than conventional
DBS.
Hemiparkinsonian rats can be used to test closed-loop DBS in freely moving
animals. Closed-loop DBS, using both on- off and proportional control, is as
effective as conventional DBS in reducing PD motor symptoms in hemiparkinsonian
rats. Relative beta power is a feasible biomarker for closed-loop DBS in rats
and substantial energy savings can be achieved. More complex closed-loop
algorithms could be studied.
 
Poster number: M_PZ3_078 (TP)

Sub-Theme: Neuromodulation and Receptor Targeting: Advancements in
Understanding and Therapeutic Applications

## NMDA and sigma-1 receptor modulation of network oscillations and
neuroinflammation in the rodent hippocampus and anterior cingulate
cortex
Authors: Bethany Dennis, Newcastle University; Rowan Paxman -
Biosciences Institute Newcastle University; Oliver Baddiley - Biosciences
Institute Newcastle University; Stuart Neale - Neurexpert Ltd Neurexpert Ltd;
Tom Salt - Neurexpert Ltd Neurexpert Ltd; Fiona LeBeau - Biosciences Institute
Newcastle University
Introduction: Aberrant beta and gamma oscillations and impaired working memory
are reported in schizophrenia patients. Increased neuroinflammation is reported
in patient post-mortem tissue. Beta and gamma can be recorded from rat anterior
cingulate cortex (ACC) and hippocampus (HPC) in vitro. Cognitive and network
dysfunction is modelled in rodents using the NMDA receptor antagonist PCP. In
vivo studies suggest sigma-1 receptor (σ1R) activation may reverse deficits. The
mechanism by which PCP disrupts oscillations, and effects of PCP and σ1R
modulation on network activity and neuroinflammation are unknown.
Methods: Rat ACC/HPC slices were prepared and placed in an interface chamber for
electrophysiological recording. Oscillations were evoked using kainate. PCP was
applied to stable beta/gamma oscillations followed by co- application of σ1R
agonist PRE-084. Peak frequency and area power were measured. To assess the
effect of PCP and σ1R activation on glial activation ACC/HPC slices were
transferred to an interface chamber, pre-incubated for 30 minutes with PRE-084
then incubated for 4 hours with KA and/or PCP, and compared against slices not
pre- incubated with PRE-084. Slices were then fixed and immunohistochemistry was
conducted using astrocyte marker GFAP and microglia marker IBA1. The %area
stained was measured.
Statistics: One-way ANOVA and repeated-measures ANOVA were used where
appropriate.
Results and conclusions: In the ACC, PCP significantly increased the power of
beta oscillations (216±23%) and caused gamma oscillations to switch to a beta
frequency (41±1.3 to 27±1.5 Hz). In contrast, PCP had no effect on HPC
oscillations. PRE-084 had no effect on oscillations in either brain region. GFAP
expression in HPC slices exposed to KA alone was 6.78 ± 1.3%, which
significantly increased to 8.93 ± 0.92% when exposed to KA and PCP (p =
0.022).
Preliminary data suggests the PCP-evoked neuroinflammatory response was reduced
by pre-incubation with the PRE-084 (6.08 ± 1.17%; p = 0.025). PCP induces an
abnormally large beta oscillation in rat ACC, but not the HPC, and increases
neuroinflammation. The σ1R agonist PRE-084 reduces PCP’s neuroinflammatory
effect. Further investigation is needed to better understand these two receptors
and their effects on cognition.
Conflict of interest: S. Neale: E. Ownership Interest (stock, stock options,
royalty, receipt of intellectual property rights/patent holder, excluding
diversified mutual funds); Neurexpert Limited.
T. Salt: E. Ownership Interest (stock, stock options, royalty, receipt of
intellectual property rights/patent holder, excluding diversified mutual funds);
Neurexpert Limited.

Poster number: M_PZ3_079 (TP)

Sub-Theme: Neuromodulation and Receptor Targeting: Advancements in
Understanding and Therapeutic Applications

## Modulation of beta and gamma frequency oscillations in the rat anterior
cingulate cortex (ACC) in vitro by the mGlu2 metabotropic glutamate
receptor
Authors: Bethany Dennis, Newcastle University; Stuart Neale -
Neurexpert Ltd Neurexpert Ltd; Fiona LeBeau - Biosciences Institute Newcastle
University; Tom Salt - Neurexpert Ltd Neurexpert Ltd
Introduction: The anterior cingulate cortex (ACC) plays a role in memory,
attention and executive functions. These functions are associated with beta
(20-30 Hz) and gamma (30-80 Hz) network oscillations. We have demonstrated that
both beta and/or gamma oscillations can be recorded in vitro from rodent ACC.
Aberrant beta and gamma frequency activity occurs in schizophrenia patients, and
Group II mGlu receptors (mGlu2Rs & mGlu3Rs) are potential targets for
treating schizophrenia. Cognitive and network dysfunction can be modelled in
rodents using phencyclidine (PCP). It is important to determine whether these
receptors affect cortical network oscillations.
Methods: Coronal ACC slices (450µm) were prepared from rats. Slices were
transferred to an interface chamber for recording. Network oscillations were
evoked using kainate (800 nM). Stable beta (20-33 Hz) and gamma (33-80 Hz)
oscillations were observed in ACC slices.
Statistics: Repeated-measures ANOVA and paired t-test analysis were used where
appropriate.
Results and conclusions: Both beta and gamma activity were attenuated in the
presence of mGlu2/3 receptor agonist LY354740 in a concentration depend. After
60 mins application, LY354740 reduced the area power of beta and gamma activity,
with 3µM LY354740 reducing beta and gamma area power by 52±5 and 66±9%,
respectively. The effects of LY354740 were occluded by bath application of the
antagonist LY341495 (300nM). To distinguish between mGlu2 and mGlu3 activation,
the mGlu2-agonist/mGlu3-antagonist LY541850 (1µM) was applied, and this was
found to reduce beta and gamma oscillations by 38±9 and 58±8%, respectively.
Application of PCP (10µM) to a stable oscillation induced a significant increase
in beta frequency oscillations (216±23%). Subsequent application of LY354740
(3µM) or LY541850 (1µM) significantly reduced this effect, returning oscillation
power to levels not significantly different from pre-PCP application. Our
results show that Group II mGluRs modulate network oscillations and point to an
involvement of mGlu2Rs. In addition, attenuation of the effect of PCP points to
a mechanism by which mGlu2Rs may stabilise aberrant network activity. These
results underline the importance of mGlu2Rs as targets for the treatment
schizophrenia.
Conflict of interest: S.A. Neale: E. Ownership Interest (stock, stock options,
royalty, receipt of intellectual property rights/patent holder, excluding
diversified mutual funds); Neurexpert Limited.
T.E. Salt: E. Ownership Interest (stock, stock options, royalty, receipt of
intellectual property rights/patent holder, excluding diversified mutual funds);
Neurexpert Limited.

Poster number: M_PZ3_080 (TP)

Sub-Theme: Neuromodulation and Receptor Targeting: Advancements in
Understanding and Therapeutic Applications

## Activation of axonal Group 1 metabotropic glutamatergic receptors
persistently enhances hippocampal granule cell action potential firing
Authors: Shuaiyu Wang, UCL
Group 1 metabotropic glutamate receptors (mGluRs), consisting of mGlu1 and mGlu5
receptors, play a critical role in the induction and maintenance of synaptic
plasticity in the hippocampus. Within the hippocampal dentate gyrus, these are
located on hippocampal granule cell soma and dendrites. Yet, little is known
about how Group 1 mGluRs affect their intrinsic excitability. This was the aim
of our work.
To investigate this, we obtained hippocampal brain slices from 4-6-week-old
wildtype mice and made electrophysiological recordings from granule cell soma
before and after pharmacological agents were applied. Statistical significance
between control and pharmacological treatments was determined using paired
Student's t- tests with Prism 8.
We found that when application of Group 1 mGluR agonist, DHPG (100 μ M), onto
granule neurons that had a long axon (length > 35 μ m) depolarized resting
membrane potential (RMP), increased input resistance, reduced threshold of
single action potentials and generated an afterdepolarization following multiple
spikes (n=7). 30 min washout of DHPG reversed all effects apart from changes in
the input resistance and action potential threshold.
Consequently, depolarization-induced action potential firing was persistently
enhanced. The long-term changes in the input resistance and action potential
threshold were mGlu1 receptor-dependent as they were blocked by the mGluR1
antagonist, LY456236 (10 μ M, n=6), and not the mGluR5 antagonist, MPEP (30 μ M,
n=6). The sustained decrease in the action potential threshold caused by DHPG
was axon-dependent as DHPG did not alter the action potential threshold in short
axon (< 35 μ m) neurons (n=7). Immunogold labeling together with electron
microscopy showed that mGlu1β and mGlu5 subunits were expressed on dentate gyrus
granule neuron soma-dendrites present in hippocampal sections. Interestingly, in
support of the axonal effects of DHPG, mGlu1β subunits were also present on
granule neuron axons. These findings strongly suggest that, in addition to soma
and dendrites, mGluR1s are located in axons where they affect information
processing. Further, these results indicate that the diverse effects of mGluR1s
on neuron intrinsic excitability are dependent on their subcellular
localization.

Poster number: M_PZ3_081 (TP)

Sub-Theme: Neuromodulation and Receptor Targeting: Advancements in
Understanding and Therapeutic Applications

## Control of NPY/AGRP neuron firing and body weight by synaptic GABAA receptor
α3 subunits
Authors: Yuri Nishimura, University of Sussex
Introduction: Activation of NPY/AGRP neurons in the arcuate nucleus of
hypothalamus elicits feeding behaviour and acts as a negative valence signal for
learning food-seeking behaviours. NPY/AGRP neuron activity is rapidly suppressed
upon exposure to food-related sensory cues and food consumption, suggesting that
inhibitory control of AGRP neurons is important for regulation of feeding
behaviour. Here we used electrophysiology and in vivo knockdown methods to
investigate properties of GABAergic inputs onto NPY/AGRP neurons in mice.
Methods: NPY-GFP transgenic mice were euthanised and their brains were rapidly
removed to prepare hypothalamic slices. Spontaneous synaptic activity was
recorded with whole-cell patch clamp methods to isolate GABAergic inhibition
onto NPY/AGRP neurons. GABAAR subunits were individually knocked down with a
viral shRNA strategy targeted to NPY/AGRP neurons using AGRP-Cre transgenic
mice. Knock down efficacy was assessed by in situ hybridization and the effects
on synaptic currents and body weight were measured.
Approach for statistical analysis: Two group comparisons used two-tailed t-tests
for parametric data or non- parametric equivalents (Mann Whitney or Wilcoxon
signed-rank test). For datasets with more than two groups, statistical
comparisons used a one-way ANOVA or Kruskal-Wallis test followed by post-hoc
tests for paired comparisons.
Results and conclusion: We found that synaptic inhibition mediated via GABAARs is
sufficient to generate prolonged inhibition of NPY/AGRP neuron spiking within
milliseconds. Electrophysiological recordings in acute brain slices show that
NPY/AGRP neurons receive fast and strong synaptic GABAAR inputs that are
markedly biphasic, showing distinct fast and slow components. In vivo RNA
knock-down of specific GABAAR subunits in NPY/AGRP neurons showed that
knock-down of gabra3 expression selectively disrupts the slow component and
causes a significant increase in body weight. Taken together, our findings
suggest that GABAAR α3 subunits play a key role in the regulation of feeding
behaviour through the generation of long-lasting inhibitory synaptic
currents.

Poster number: M_PZ3_082 (TP)

Sub-Theme: Neuromodulation and Receptor Targeting: Advancements in
Understanding and Therapeutic Applications

## A Novel Type of Selective Modulation of GABAA Receptors
Authors: Caroline E. Wyatt, Cambridge University; Sulin Liu -
Pharmacology Cambridge University; Wan-Na Chen - Pharmacology Cambridge
University; Ayla A. Wahid - Pharmacology Cambridge University; Paul S. Miller -
Pharmacology Cambridge University
This work develops our understanding of gamma-aminobutyric acid type A (GABAA)
receptor diversity and our ability to selectively modulate receptor
sub-populations implicated in neurological disorders such as ataxia, epilepsy,
and autism.
The laboratory previously raised a panel of ~10 nanobodies against the β3 subunit
of GABAA receptors. This work assessed these nanobodies for their binding and
modulation characteristics and explored two different formats:
1) Conjugation of two identical nanobodies by a fragment crystallisable region
(Fc), increasing their concentration at the receptor binding site.
2) Conjugation of strongly, silently binding nanobodies to weakly binding but
strongly potentiating nanobodies (“concatemers”).
Recombinant DNA was generated using restriction-digest cloning and transfected
for expression in EXPI293 cells. Protein was purified using Ni-NTA beads against
a hexahistadine tag. Purified nanobodies were screened for binding against
HEK293 cells expressing β3 homomer or heteromeric ⍺1β3 or ⍺1β3ɣ2 GABAA
receptors. Binding was assessed by secondary staining with
fluoro-goat-anti-human IgG or fluoro-streptavidin. Purified nanobodies were also
tested by electrophysiology for their ability to modulate GABAA receptors.
For simple binding, fold-gain values (binding value over background fluorescence
on control cells) were calculated and Kruskall-Wallis and Dunn tests were used
to compare between nanobodies and against a realistic null distribution. For
binding curves, a model of nonlinear regression of specific binding was fitted
to the data.
A range of distinct nanobody binding patterns and modulation effects were
observed. Competition experiments were able to discriminate distinct binding
locations between nanobodies. In addition, some required the presence of a β-β
interface only present on extrasynaptic GABAA receptors, whereas others could
bind to heteromeric ⍺1β3ɣ2 receptors.
This work paves the way for further development of these nanobodies into novel
binders and/or modulators as important research tools to characterise behaviour
and disease, and with the potential for therapeutic translation for the
treatment of disorders such as ataxia, epilepsy and autism.

Poster number: M_PZ3_083 (TP)

Sub-Theme: Neuromodulation and Receptor Targeting: Advancements in
Understanding and Therapeutic Applications

## Exploring the therapeutic potential of protein PAMs of GABAA
receptors
Authors: Oliver E. King, University of Cambridge; Luke A. Pattison -
Department of Pharmacology University of Cambridge; Ewan St J Smith - Department
of Pharmacology University of Cambridge; John E. Linley - Discovery UK,
Neuroscience, Biopharmaceuticals R&D AstraZeneca; Carl I. Webster -
Discovery Sciences, R&D AstraZeneca; Paul S. Miller - Department of
Pharmacology University of Cambridge
Aberrant γ-aminobutyric acid (GABA) signalling is associated with a range of
central nervous system (CNS) disorders, including epilepsy, depression and
anxiety. Unfortunately, classical benzodiazepines and other small molecule
pharmaceuticals target a broad range of ionotropic type-A receptors (GABAARs)
and produce many side effects.
Antibody-based therapies can overcome this by targeting specific GABAAR isoforms
and could revolutionise existing treatments. Here, immunogenically-raised
nanobodies with promising subtype-selectivity and pharmacological activity [1]
were explored. Specifically, strategies were employed to aid transport of
nanobodies across the blood brain barrier (BBB) – a major obstacle preventing
many larger biological drugs from accessing the CNS. By engineering and
genetically fusing these nanobodies to systems that aid BBB trafficking [2], we
aim to enhance their delivery. Using mammalian expression systems,
antibody-based molecules were generated in a range of formats, purified and then
characterised. This included measuring target affinities for the BBB receptor
and GABAAR in cell- based assays. Retention of nanobody binding for GABAAR was
orientation specific, although all formats retained binding affinities for the
BBB receptor in the nanomolar range. C57BL/6 mice were IP injected with
generated molecules for pharmacokinetic analysis. Plasma and brain tissue
samples were tested in an ELISA to measure CNS penetration. Results were
analysed using 2-way analysis of variance; where appropriate, Tukey test was
used for pairwise comparisons. Post-injection, molecules were successfully
detected in brain tissue by ELISA and binders were compared to a non-binding
isotype control. Such work provides an exciting foundation for the future
development and further characterisation of these molecules in order to unlock
the therapeutic potential of subtype-selective GABAAR protein modulators.
1) Miller, P. et al., Heteromeric GABAA receptor structures in
positively-modulated active states. bioRxiv: 2018.
2) Webster, C. I. et al., Enhanced delivery of IL-1 receptor antagonist to the
central nervous system as a novel anti-transferrin receptor-IL-1RA fusion
reverses neuropathic mechanical hypersensitivity. Pain 2017, 158 (4),
660-668.
 
Poster number: M_PZ3_084 (TP)

Sub-Theme: Neuromodulation and Receptor Targeting: Advancements in
Understanding and Therapeutic Applications

## Elucidating the interaction between GABA-A receptors and Phospholipase-C
delta-1
Authors: Fatma Taha, UCL; Hozeb Haider - Pharma and Biochemistry
UCL; Jasmina N Jovanovic - Pharmacology UCL
Benzodiazepines are amongst the most widely prescribed medications for the
management of anxiety and the relief of insomnia. They produce their effects
through positive allosteric modulation of the GABA-A receptors, the main
inhibitory receptors in the brain. Previous studies have demonstrated that
dissociation of phospholipase-C delta-1 (PLCD1) from the GABA-A receptor upon
chronic administration of diazepam in-vitro, triggers a cascade of events
leading to the loss of GABAergic inhibitory synapses and the development of
pharmacological tolerance to this drug. In this study, we aim to define the
specific amino acid residues involved in the interaction between GABA-A
receptors and PLCD1. Using Modeller 9v21, computational homology modelling was
employed to assign structure to the intracellular loop (ICL) of the beta-3
subunits TM3-4 domain where this is lacking in existing GABA-A receptor crystal
structures including beta-3 homopentamer (PDB ID: 4COF), heteropentamer (PDB ID:
6HUG), as well as refining a PLCD1 crystal structure (PDB ID: 2ISD).
Protein-protein docking approaches using HADDOCK and ClusPro determined five
residues (Q716, K717, Q778, Y779, R780) within the ICL likely to directly
mediate the interaction with PLCD1. These residues were mutated to alanine using
site-directed mutagenesis and individual beta-3 subunit mutants were
co-immunoprecipitated with PLCD1 to determine which of these residues had the
most prominent effect. The functional implications of these mutations are
currently being tested with cell-surface ELISA and electrophysiology.
Determining the specific sites of interaction of PLCD1 with GABA-A receptors,
will help direct the ongoing research efforts aimed at the prevention of
tolerance development to benzodiazepines.

Poster number: M_PZ3_085 (TP)

Sub-Theme: Neuromodulation and Receptor Targeting: Advancements in
Understanding and Therapeutic Applications

## Development of a screening assay to support the drug discovery of GABAAR
Positive Allosteric Modulators, for the treatment of Post-Partum
Depression
Authors: Josephine Pedder, Cardiff University; Karen Elvers -
Medicines Discovery Institute Cardiff University; Marcus Hanley - Medicines
Discovery Institute Cardiff University; John Atack - Medicines Discovery
Institute Cardiff University
Introduction: Postpartum depression (PPD) is an extreme form of the “baby blues”
with serious consequences and an unmet need for treatments. γ-aminobutyric acid
type A receptors (GABAARs) are implicated in PPD pathophysiology, very relevant
given the recent approval of Brexanolone; a proprietary formulation of the
neurosteroid allopregnanolone, a GABAAR positive allosteric modulator (PAM).
δ-GABAARs are more sensitive to the hormonal changes of pregnancy, being
downregulated to counteract enhanced GABAAR activity that presumably occurs due
to increased allopregnanolone production. We propose that drugs which enhance
the function of the δ subunit-containing GABAARs (δ-GABAARs) will be efficacious
in PPD without the side effects commonly attributed to treatment with
Brexanolone, such as sedation and unconsciousness. The Medicines Discovery
Institute is working to identify such compounds. This work describes the
development of a functional assay to serve as a primary screen for the efficacy
novel compounds on GABAARs.
Methods: Using Fluorescent Imaging Plate Reader (FLIPR) technology, an assay was
developed in house to characterise various compounds against
δ-GABAARs-overexpressing HEK293 cells (α4β3δ cell line). This expression was
achieved through use of a doxycycline controlled transcriptional activation
system. FLIPR was used to evaluate the magnitude of GABA receptor activation for
a compound series through measurement of the changes in membrane potential
δ-GABAARs to validate our assay.
Statistical analysis: The fluorescence readings for each compound condition were
normalised and analyses were conducted using a nonlinear regression model
against log[GABA], to generate EC50 curves (GraphPad Prism 9.3.1).
Results and Conclusions: Known PAMs of δ-GABAARs, consistently produced data
in-line with the literature . Our data supports the concept of a δ-GABAAR PAM,
which can be used to generate optimised compounds. The results support the
validity of the in-house FLIPR assay and are comparable to electrophysiological
data. Novel compounds can therefore be screened and considered for the next
stage of the drug discovery process. A collective data set including functional
affinity, aqueous solubility and cell permeability can be generated.

Poster number: M_PZ3_086 (TP)

Sub-Theme: Neuromodulation and Receptor Targeting: Advancements in
Understanding and Therapeutic Applications

## Generation of thermostable, high yield a3b glycine receptor chimeras for
raising antibody modulators with analgesic properties
Authors: Melissa Irvine, University of Cambridge; Charlotte F. Jones
- Pharmacology University of Cambridge; Steven Hardwick - Biochemistry
University of Cambridge; Sara Carmen - n/a AstraZeneca; Martin Strain - n/a
AstraZeneca; Noemi Mallorqui Fernandez - n/a AstraZeneca; Roger Dodd - n/a
AstraZeneca; Paul Miller - Pharmacology University of Cambridge
Inhibitory neurotransmission in the spinal cord is mainly governed by glycine
receptors (GlyR). There are four a subunit subtypes (a1-4) and a b-subunit,
which assemble into pentameric rings typically comprising 4 a-subunits and 1
b-subunit. Of the receptor types, the a3b GlyR is of particular interest due to
its role in nociception and inflammatory pain making it a potential therapeutic
target to treat chronic pain. However, due to the remarkably high sequence
homology between the a subunits, it is challenging to target the a3b GlyR.
Selective targeting is crucial, as a1b plays a pivotal role in spinal motor
control and off-target modulation will lead to severe side effects. To date,
only a few small molecules against GlyRs exist, but these lack subunit
selectivity. Consequently, this project aims to generate high affinity antibody
(Ab) modulators which bind unique 4 – 8 residue epitopes, thereby, achieving
higher selectivity. Typically, phage display requires large amounts of antigen,
which presents a challenge for GlyRs.
Therefore, engineering of the GlyR to improve protein yields would be
advantageous.
Here, the a3 and b subunits were modified via overlap PCR and assessed using an
array of screening methods (in vitro screening and purification, and fluorescent
imaging) to determine expression, and yields. As this is a pilot study,
statistical analysis was not required until follow-on work. Initial data of the
full-length a3, as well as GlyRs with engineered intracellular loops, exhibited
low yields. Surprisingly, however, modifications of the transmembrane domain
resulted in highly stable chimeras with 15-fold higher yields than the
full-length a3 and giving rise to large- scale yields of 0.3 mg/litre for the
engineered a3 GlyR. Despite the GlyR being non-functional as assessed by
electrophysiology, cryo-EM data showed the extracellular domain taking on a
twisted, open conformation making it a useful target for Ab generation.
Additionally, the engineered GlyR represents a useful platform for cryo-EM, as
even short data acquisition resulted in the highest published resolution for
GlyRs of 2.2 Å. All in all, the chimera represents a thermostable option to
increase yields laying a solid foundation for raising antibody modulators with
AstraZeneca.

Poster number: M_PZ3_087 (TP)

Sub-Theme: Neuromodulation and Receptor Targeting: Advancements in
Understanding and Therapeutic Applications

## Dopamine D1-like receptors modulate synchronized oscillations in the
hippocampal-prefrontal-amygdala circuit in contextual fear
Authors: Carl Stevenson, University of Nottingham
Introduction: Contextual fear conditioning (CFC) is mediated by a neural circuit
that includes the hippocampus, prefrontal cortex, and amygdala, but the
neurophysiological mechanisms underlying its regulation by neuromodulators
remain unclear. Dopamine D1-like receptors (D1Rs) in this circuit regulate CFC
and local synaptic plasticity, which is facilitated by synchronized oscillations
between these areas. Therefore D1R signalling may regulate CFC by modulating
this oscillatory synchrony.
Methods: We determined the effects of systemic D1R blockade on CFC and
synchronized oscillations between dorsal hippocampus (DH), prelimbic (PL)
prefrontal cortex, basolateral amygdala (BLA), and ventral hippocampus (VH),
which sends hippocampal projections to PL and BLA. Male Lister hooded rats were
implanted with electrodes into all of these areas. The D1R antagonist SCH23390
or vehicle was injected (i.p.) before CFC (i.e. unsignalled footshocks in a
novel context) and retrieval was tested drug-free the next day. Local field
potentials from each area were recorded during CFC and at retrieval.
Approach for statistical analysis: Freezing at retrieval was analyzed via
unpaired t-test (5 min test) and two-way ANOVA (1 min bins). Theta and gamma
coherence before CFC and at retrieval were analyzed via a comparison of
coherence test. Theta-gamma coupling was analyzed via two-way ANOVA. Post-hoc
comparisons were conducted using Tukey’s test.
Results and conclusions: SCH23390 altered DH-VH and reduced VH-PL and VH-BLA
synchrony before CFC, as inferred from theta and gamma coherence and theta-gamma
coupling. SCH23390 impaired CFC, as indicated by decreased freezing at
retrieval, which was characterized by altered DH-VH and reduced VH-PL, VH-BLA,
and PL-BLA synchrony. This reduction in VH-PL-BLA synchrony was not accounted
for by non-specific movement effects, as revealed by comparing between epochs of
movement and freezing in the vehicle-treated controls at retrieval. These
results suggest that D1Rs regulate CFC by modulating synchronized oscillations
within the hippocampus-prefrontal- amygdala circuit. They also confirm and add
to growing evidence indicating that this circuit synchrony at retrieval reflects
a neural signature of contextual fear memory.

Poster number: M_PZ3_088 (TP)

Sub-Theme: Neuromodulation and Receptor Targeting: Advancements in
Understanding and Therapeutic Applications

## The effects of 40 Hz ultrasound stimulation on neuronal function
Authors: Deniz Tonyali, University of Bristol; Daniel Whitcomb -
Translational Health Sciences University of Bristol
Periodic fluctuations of electrical activity in the central nervous system are
known as neural oscillations. Gamma oscillations, between 30 and 100 hertz (Hz),
play a crucial part in the communication of cortical signals and cognitive brain
processes [1]. Importantly, exogenous induction of gamma oscillations by sensory
stimulation – termed gamma entrainment – has beneficial effects in rodent models
of neurodegenerative disease [2]. Accordingly, establishing an efficacious
method to induce gamma rhythms in the human brain could represent a novel
therapeutic intervention. Transcranial focused ultrasound (tFUS) is a
non-invasive neuromodulatory technique that harnesses the unique properties of
ultrasonic waves, allowing for spatially and temporally precise brain
stimulation [3]. In this study, we aimed to explore the potential neurotrophic
effects of ultrasound stimulation. Acute rat hippocampal slices were stimulated
with 40 Hz ultrasound (or sham stimulation) for 1 hour, and then processed for
Western blotting.
Statistical significance between experimental groups was determined by unpaired
t-tests, where we found a range of differences in protein expression, including
an increase in brain-derived neurotrophic factor (BDNF) expression following
ultrasound exposure. This is particularly interesting given the role BDNF plays
in promoting regenerative processes [4]. Together our data indicate that
ultrasound stimulation at gamma frequencies induces neurotrophic signaling in
hippocampal neurons, highlighting the possibility of using this approach for
therapeutic means.
1. Adaikkan, C. and L.-H. Tsai, Gamma Entrainment: Impact on Neurocircuits, Glia,
and Therapeutic Opportunities. Trends in Neurosciences, 2020. 43(1): p.
24-41.
2. Manippa, V., et al., An update on the use of gamma (multi)sensory stimulation
for Alzheimer's disease treatment. Front Aging Neurosci, 2022. 14: p.
1095081.
3. Darmani, G., et al., Non-invasive transcranial ultrasound stimulation for
neuromodulation. Clinical Neurophysiology, 2022. 135: p. 51-73.
4. Shi, X.-J., et al., Effects of brain-derived neurotrophic factor (BDNF) on the
Schizophrenia model of animals. Journal of Psychiatric Research, 2022. 156: p.
538-546.

Poster number: T_PZ3_075 (TP)

Sub-Theme: Neuronal Signaling and Voltage-Gated Channels:
Implications in Neurological and Psychiatric Disorders

## L-aspartate signalling in the brain
Authors: Jessica Szeto, University of Warwick
Introduction: While the role of L-glutamate as an excitatory neurotransmitter is
well established, the role of L- aspartate (L-Asp) remains uncertain. L-Asp is a
specific NMDA receptor agonist, and although it can be found in, and released
from, synaptic vesicles, a vesicular transporter for L-Asp has not been
identified.
Methods: Immunofluorescence was used to localise asparagine synthetase (ASNS)
with markers of GABAergic neurons: VGlut3 and glutamate decarboxylase (GAD).
L-Asp release was evoked via theta-burst stimulation (TBS) and studied in mouse
hippocampal brain slices via extracellular recording and microelectrode L-Asp
biosensors.
Approach for statistical analysis: The electrophysiology experiments had three
conditions: baseline, drug application and wash and were evaluated by means of
the Friedman test. The effect of NMDA receptor antagonist DAP5 on L- alb-induced
synaptic transmission depression and seizure-like activity was determined using
Mann-Whitney U test and Chi-squared test respectively.
Results and conclusions: ASNS was localised in Vglut3 and GAD positive neuronal
cell bodies and synaptic terminals around the pyramidal cell bodies. The
intensity of ASNS staining was higher in the hippocampal CA3 region compared to
CA1 region. Blockade of ASNS with 1mM L-albizziine (L-alb) inhibited synaptic
transmission and induced epileptic activity in 5/7 slices. Synaptic transmission
of hippocampal brain slices was reduced by 50% after 15-minute in 1mM L-alb
(n=7). DAP5 significantly blocked the effect of L-alb on synaptic transmission
(n=4, p=0.0061) and seizure-like activity (0/3 slices, X2 = 4.29, p=0.038). The
release of L-Asp was significantly enhanced in the presence of L-alb in
hippocampal CA3 region (average asp concentration: baseline = 106±74 μM, alb =
192±143 μM, wash = 126±92 μM; n=5, mean±SEM) (X2=7.6; p=0.022). Whereas in CA1
region L-Asp release evoked by TBS was only observed in 2/10 slices. Our
findings suggest that ASNS is a key determinant of extracellular L-Asp
concentration. The actions of L-alb are indirectly via the NMDA receptor.
Excessive accumulation of extracellular L-Asp lead to inhibition of synaptic
transmission and induce seizure-like activity. Disorders of L-Asp transmission
could contribute to chronic epilepsy.

Poster number: T_PZ3_076 (TP)

Sub-Theme: Neuronal Signaling and Voltage-Gated Channels:
Implications in Neurological and Psychiatric Disorders

## ASC mutations separate Shank3 N-terminal domains and induce protein
aggregation
Authors: Sophie Rustidge, University of Liverpool
Introduction
Shank3 is an integral scaffolding protein located within the postsynaptic density
(PSD) of excitable glutamatergic neurons. Mutations found within Shank3 have
been linked with Autism Spectrum Conditions (ASC). Crystallisation of the highly
conserved N-terminal region (1-348) revealed a Shank/ProSAP N-terminal (SPN
1-99) domain linked to an Ankyrin Repeats (Ank 99-348). ASC patient mutations
have been mapped to these domains with significant effects on binding partners,
yet the effect on the stability of the protein is widely unknown. Here we
investigated how ASC mutations affect Shank3 stability and structure.
Methods
Shank3 and mutants were expressed using E. coli and purified using an automated
AKTA Pure system. Purified samples were assessed via A280, SDS-Coomassie,
Nuclear Magnetic Resonance (NMR) and monomeric state was shown via Size
Exclusion Chromatography-Multi-angle light scattering (SEC-MALS). Concentration
was monitored via measuring A280 and A595 at several time points. Melting
temperature was assessed via Differential Scanning Fluorimetry (DSF). Data were
collected in triplicate for A280 and DSF and tested for significance via One-way
and Two-Way ANOVA, Students T-test and Tukey’s multiple comparisons’ test.
Results/Conclusion
We expressed N-terminal domains SPN and Ank separately and introduced ASC
mutations into different Shank3 fragments. Firstly, we tested the SPN, Ank and
SPN-Ank wild type (WT) for long-term stability. The SPN domain decreased
significantly in concentration when compared to Ank and SPN-Ank. NMR was then
conducted on these same fragments between 0-20 hours. These spectra also showed
a decrease in peak intensity for the SPN, and no reduction in peak intensity for
Ank domain. From this we concluded the SPN was intrinsically most unstable alone
and suggests a regulatory mechanism between the SPN and Ank. NMR spectra of ASC
mutation P141A (1-348) taken after 20 hours showed increased domain separation
and decreased peak intensity when compared to the WT (1- 348). This suggests the
ASC mutation decreases domain association and increases aggregation. We
hypothesise Shank3 N-terminal is intrinsically unstable upon separation of the
SPN and Ank domains and ASC mutations disrupt this association.

Poster number: T_PZ3_077 (TP)

Sub-Theme: Neuronal Signaling and Voltage-Gated Channels:
Implications in Neurological and Psychiatric Disorders

## Mutations in Kv3.3 increase vesicle density at the release site of
hippocampal excitatory synapses
Authors: Josh Whittingham, University of Leicester; Vincenzo Marra -
Neuroscience, Psychology and Behaviour University of Leicester; Will Norton -
Gentetics and Genome Biology University of Leicester; Ian Forsythe -
Neuroscience, Psychology and Behaviour University of Leicester
Excitability changes in epilepsy have been well characterised in postsynaptic
neurons, but potential presynaptic contributions are uncertain. We have observed
hyperexcitability and seizures in a mouse model of spinocerebellar ataxia type
13 (SCA13) where presynaptic Kv3.3 potassium channels are impaired. Here we
measure the proximity of presynaptic synaptic vesicles (SV) to the release site
of hippocampal synapses.
The R420H SCA13 mutation in TM4 of Kv3.3 subunits blocks channel opening,
increasing action potential duration and transmitter release, but non-ionic
mechanisms have been observed for other SCA13 mutations. The objective here was
to study hippocampal synapses across 3 genotypes: WT, Kv3.3KO and the R420H
mutation. I compared SV density at excitatory synapses from CA1 (possessing
little Kv3.3) and CA3 (with high Kv3.3). Mice were killed and perfused with low
calcium aCSF followed by glutaraldehyde fixation. Osmium-thiocarbohydrazide was
employed as a staining and contrast agent, and sectioned tissue was imaged on a
JEOL JEM-1400 electron microscope.
Both the CA1 and CA3 showed increased SV density at release sites in excitatory
synapses of Kv3.3 mutants, and showed increased docking of vesicles to the
release site: WT control 0.1404 ± 0.3482 (n = 235, ±SD); Kv3.3KO 0.0.9433 ±
0.08487 (n = 247) R420H 0.9553 ± 0.8487 (n = 246) of CA1; WT control 0.4016 ±
0.6408 (n = 249, ±SD); Kv3.3KO 0.5917 ± 0.7543 (n = 240) R420H 0.4280 ± 0.6539
(n = 243) of CA3. Statistical significance at the 95% level of this Gaussian
distributed data confirmed by a Mann-Whitney test for median differences. CA1
showed increased SV density towards the release site in both R420H and KO
mutants, as well as plasticity changes already found in other hyperexcitability
research, however, CA3 showed increased SV density only in the KO.
This data shows that Kv3.3 channels play a role in regulating SV density at
release sites in excitatory presynaptic terminals. Further work is required to
determine if this is a direct or indirect effect which could be mediated by
either ionic or non-ionic mechanisms.

Poster number: T_PZ3_078 (TP)

Sub-Theme: Neuronal Signaling and Voltage-Gated Channels:
Implications in Neurological and Psychiatric Disorders

## Investigating the Cerebellar Potassium Channel Mechanisms of Schizophrenia
Using a Pharmacological Mouse Model
Authors: Leah MacGregor, De Montfort University; Mohsen Seifi -
Health and Life Sciences De Montfort University; Lan Zhu - Health and Life
Sciences De Montfort University
Schizophrenia is a debilitating neurodevelopmental disorder. Current
antipsychotics face challenges due to incomplete pathophysiological
understanding. The cerebellum is now known to be involved in all brain functions
including higher cognitive functions. Cerebellar structural and functional
abnormalities are associated with schizophrenia. Kv3 channels (Kv3.1-3.4), a
subfamily of voltage gated potassium channels, enable neuronal fast spiking.
Kv3.1 reduction is seen in the cerebral cortex of patients and in an animal
model of schizophrenia and may contribute to disrupted gamma oscillations and
hence cognitive impairment. Different Kv3 channel subtypes show overlapping yet
distinctive cerebellar neuronal expression patterns. Another Kv channel type,
Kv2.1, is important for homeostatic regulation of neuronal excitability. The
Kv2.1 gene is a schizophrenia vulnerability risk gene; Kv2.1 reduction is linked
to schizophrenia-like behaviour in animals. We previously found downregulation
of Kv2.1 in the main cerebellar neurons in a subchronic phencyclidine (PCP)
mouse model of schizophrenia (unpublished). This project aims to investigate
changes in the detailed cerebellar morphology, the cerebellum-related behaviour,
cerebellar expression patterns and levels of Kv3 and Kv2.1 in this mouse
model.
Behavioural tests, immunofluorescence staining, fluorescence and confocal
microscopy are employed in this study, using a PCP mouse model. T-test or
Mann-Whitney U test and ANOVA will be used for quantitative analysis.
Our preliminary data shows reduced cerebellum-related motor coordination in this
PCP model (N = 12 for each group is needed to achieve a power of 0.80), it also
shows cerebellar Kv3.3 and Kv3.4 cellular expression patterns are consistent
with literature. Cerebellar morphology, including the molecular and the granule
layer thickness and the linear density of Purkinje cells, is not changed in this
PCP model. Significant Kv3.1b downregulation (control, N = 3; PCP, N = 3) is
seen in part of the cerebellum in this PCP model. Subcellular expression
patterns, potential changes to these patterns and levels of Kv3.x and Kv2.1 are
being explored.
Kaczmarek and Zhang (2017) Physiological Reviews, 97(4) Jones et al. (2011)
British Journal of Pharmacology, 164(4)

Poster number: T_PZ3_079 (TP)

## Violet light modulates mouse hippocampal function via the non-visual retinal
opsin OPN5
Authors: Sarah YT Robertson - Systems Engineering Keio University;
Pooja Gusain - Neuropsychiatry Keio University; Yasue Mitsukura - Systems
Engineering Keio University; Kazuo Tsubota - Tsubota Laboratory Tsubota
Laboratory; Motoshi Hayano - Neuropsychiatry Keio University
Introduction
The purpose of this study is to establish a novel neuronal circuit by which
violet light (VL) improves memory. Light therapy using blue or bright white
light has been shown to modulate neurological functions such as learning and
mood by activating RGCs to transmit electrical information to various brain
regions. OPN5 is a non-visual photoreceptor expressed in a population of RGCs
and activated by VL. It has recently been demonstrated that the axons of
OPN5-expressing RGCs project to the LGN, a brain region known to connect to the
hippocampus to improve spatial memory. Therefore, VL is a promising light
therapy to improve memory by activating a neuronal circuit connecting
OPN5-expressing RGCs to the hippocampus.
Methods
To test the hypothesis that activation of OPN5 by VL modulates neuronal activity
in the hippocampus, RNA sequencing was conducted in the hippocampus of aged
wild-type and OPN5 knockout mice following VL treatment compared to the control
ambient white light (WL). Memory behavioral tests were also conducted in aged
mice treated with VL compared to control WL. A transgenic mouse model of
Alzheimer’s disease, P301S, which show pathological hippocampal accumulation of
phosphorylated Tau and memory deficits, was also exposed to VL and WL. Tau
phosphorylation, neuronal activation, microglial phenotype, and oligodendrocyte
markers were quantified in the P301S mice using Western blot, immunostaining,
and qPCR.
Approach for statistical analysis
One-way ANOVA with multiple comparisons correction was used to compare the
different lighting conditions against continuous white light control.
Results and Conclusions
VL improved memory and increased transcription of genes involved in
oligodendrocytes in the hippocampus of aged mice. In the Alzheimer’s disease
model, VL increased numbers of microglia, modulated microglial morphology, and
delayed accumulation of phosphorylated Tau. Additionally, VL activated regions
in the brain involved in visual information processing. Our results suggest that
VL treatment improves memory through retinal OPN5, and the downstream visual
circuit activates glial cells in the hippocampus toward a neuroprotective
phenotype.

Poster number: T_PZ3_080 (TP)

Sub-Theme: Neuronal Signaling and Voltage-Gated Channels:
Implications in Neurological and Psychiatric Disorders

## Engineering a novel platform to boost expression of voltage-gated sodium
channels for applications such as structural biology and antibody
generation
Authors: Jose Enrique Gonzalez-Prada, University of Cambridge; Paul
Miller - Department of Pharmacology University of Cambridge
Nine isoforms of voltage-gated sodium channels (Navs), Nav1.1-Nav1.9, are
essential for the propagation of neuronal action potentials. Particularly,
Nav1.7-Nav1.9 have been implicated in the conduction of nociceptive signals and
chronic pain. Despite Navs being established analgesic drug targets, the
development of selective and efficacious modulators is hampered by a lack of
rational approaches to drug discovery. Robust protein production methods would
lower the barrier for structure-based drug design, which would produce novel
academic tools to study the role of Navs in pain transduction and provide a
translational route to generate analgesics. Notably, protein modulators,
including antibodies and nanobodies, have recently risen to prominence due to
their ability to bind target molecules with exquisite selectivity, suggesting
that protein modulators of Navs could be efficacious and selective. However,
efforts to develop these have been limited by technical challenges associated
with poor expression of mammalian Navs.
We set out to address this issue by engineering a novel platform to boost
mammalian Nav yields during heterologous expression and purification. We
trialled and verified an alternative higher-yielding, non-mammalian Nav
homologue as a scaffold, and produced several structure-guided chimeras that
include elements of mammalian Navs. We hypothesised that the Nav modular design
with four homologous domains would provide a way to embed mammalian Nav domains
onto the non-mammalian scaffold to test their effect on protein yield without
compromising folding. We found that the chimeric Navs can be purified with
encouraging protein yields due to the retention of domains from the more stable,
non-mammalian homologue. Importantly, we have produced chimeras with
extracellular regions of mammalian Navs that represent useful antigens against
which to raise protein modulators using animal injections or synthetic
platforms. These results are a solid foundation for follow-on work aiming to
generate and characterise novel protein modulators of mammalian Navs with
analgesic properties. As this study involves protein module design and pilot
screening of yields and monodispersity to identify initial hits from low n
numbers, the use of statistics is not appropriate.

Poster number: T_PZ3_081 (TP)

Sub-Theme: Neuronal Signaling and Voltage-Gated Channels:
Implications in Neurological and Psychiatric Disorders

## Psychiatric risk gene Cyfip1 and the effect on the multiprotein complexes at
the synapse
Authors: Simon Trent, Keele University; Elena Ortiz Wienken - School
of Life Sciences Keele University Introduction
Cyfip1 (cytoplasmic Fraglie X interacting protein) is a neuropsychiatric risk
gene relevant associated with autism spectrum disorder, schizophrenia, and
cognitive impairment more generally. The Cyfip1 protein has numerous biological
functions at the synapse, including mRNA translation (via complexing with the
Fragile X protein FMRP) and actin cytoskeletal regulation via through its
presence in the WAVE complex.
Cyfip1 is one of a 1,000 postsynaptic proteins that partake in
functionally-relevant multiprotein complexes at the synapse. However, there is
little understanding on precisely how reduced Cyfip1 protein might impact
larger, common multiprotein complexes at the synapse.
Two molecular candidates were investigated here to understand multiprotein
dynamics at hippocampal synapses: the hub protein and master regulator of
synaptic plasticity Arc and the structural Post Synaptic Density-95 (PSD95)
protein.
Methods
Microdissected hippocampal brain regions were obtained from naïve, adult male
transgenic Cyfip1 KO mice and wildtype (WT) littermates (n=9/genotype).
Subsequently, synaptically-enriched cellular fractions, known as
synaptoneurosomes (SNS’s), were created from these samples (via centrifugation
and Syn-PER). Standard immunofluorescence-based semi-quantitative western
blotting was performed and densitometric analysis performed (outliers >2.5
STD were removed).
Results & Conclusions
Proteins levels for PSD95 and Arc remained unaltered by the deletion of Cyfip1
normalised to Gapdh. Given that Cyfip1 and Arc both bind to the structural
protein PSD95, we examined their ratios to PSD95. Here we found that the ratio
of Cyfip1/PSD95 was reduced in the hippocampal synapses of KO’s compared with
WT’s ((F(1,15)=7.27, P=0.015, 1-way ANOVA)), which were not observed in
animal-matched cell-whole hippocampal homogenate samples. Arc/PSD95 ratios did
not alter in either synaptic or in whole-cell fractions. Further, WT’s displayed
strong positive correlations between Arc/PSD and Cyfp1/PSD, which was somewhat
abolished in KO’s (linear regression).
Additional protein and immunoprecipitation assays are ongoing.
In conclusion, risk genes can impact the fine balance of protein stoichiometries
in multiprotein complexes at the synapse.

## Neuroplasticity & Regeneration

Poster number: S_PZ3_085 (TP)

Sub-Theme: Neuronal Flexibility & Adaptation: Exploring Brain State
Transitions and Circuitry Dynamics

## Psychoactive compounds with different mechanisms of action predominantly
modulate slow-firing cortical neurons independently of consciousness
Authors: Melissa Shaw, University of Sheffield; Bradley Dearnley -
Psychology University of Sheffield; Michael Okun - Psychology University of
Sheffield
A change in brain state causes sub-populations of cortical neurons to be up and
downregulated. We find that the log firing rate distribution of upregulated
neurons narrows whilst the distribution of downregulated neurons widens.
This implies that in both cases the rates of slow-firing neurons are modulated
considerably more than the fast-firing neurons, suggesting that such neurons are
more flexible. This can be seen in both natural and artificial changes in brain
state, and is suggested to be a general structure across multiple categories of
brain state transitions. This work aimed to further test this prediction by
comparing the firing rate modulation caused by psychoactive drugs with different
mechanisms of action, and test whether this structure exists in both awake and
anaesthetised brain state transitions.
Neuropixels probes were used to record from the medial prefrontal and primary
visual cortices of awake and anaesthetised mice administered with either a
5-HT2a receptor agonist (TCB-2, a classical psychedelic) or an NMDA receptor
antagonist (ketamine). A combination of statistical tests was used in the
analysis of the neural recordings including Pearson’s correlation and the
Brown-Forsythe test for equality of variance.
The same structure of increased modulation of slow firing neurons compared to
fast firing neurons was observed with both classes of psychoactive compounds as
well as in both awake and anaesthetised conditions. This supports the hypothesis
that this structure is a general phenomenon across brain state transitions and
does not depend on a specific mechanism of drug action or a conscious awareness.
These results provide further evidence that neuronal networks are reliant on
flexible slow firing neurons and more rigid fast firing neurons to adapt to
changes in brain state.

Poster number: S_PZ3_086 (TP)

Sub-Theme: Neuronal Flexibility & Adaptation: Exploring Brain
State Transitions and Circuitry Dynamics

## Brain state transitions primarily impact the rate of slow-firing
neurons
Authors: Bradley Dearnley, University of Sheffield; Melissa Shaw -
Psychology University of Sheffield; Dr. Martynas Dervinis - Physiology,
Pharmacology & Neuroscience University of Bristol
Introduction
The spontaneous firing rate of forebrain neurons spans at least five orders of
magnitude (0.001—100 spk/s), yet across distinct brain states the rate of
individual neurons typically does not change more than 2-3 fold. Given this
relatively fixed position of each neuron on the rate spectrum, are there
consistent distinctions in the way fast and slow-firing neurons multiplicatively
modulate their rates across brain states?
Methods
To address this question, we analysed neuronal population recordings from rodent
cortex, hippocampus and thalamus across transitions between wakefulness and
sleep, changes in the level of arousal during wakefulness, and following
administration of psychoactive drugs.
Statistical analysis
We used Pearson correlation, Brown-Forsythe test for equality of variance, and ad
hoc methods, e.g., spike-train thinning.
Results
A brain state transition typically both elevated and suppressed a substantial
percentage of neurons. Therefore, we considered the up- and downregulated
subpopulations separately. Consistently across all the considered brain areas
and states, we observed that the bell-shaped distribution of log-rates of an
upregulated subpopulation could get narrower but not wider. Conversely, the
log-rate distribution of a downregulated subpopulation only got wider. This
implies that in both up- and downregulated subpopulations, the rates of
fast-firing neurons were modulated substantially less than of the slow-firing
neurons. Further analysis of the modulation variance indicated that generally,
fast neurons were only weakly modulated, whereas slow neurons exhibited high
variability in their strength of modulation. The subpopulation of ‘malleable’
slow neurons was unique to each category of brain state transition. This
empirical modulation structure was recapitulated by a correlated bivariate
log-gamma distribution, whose marginals have long left tails, but not by a
bivariate Gaussian distribution.
We suggest that this modulation structure generalises to other brain areas and
categories of brain state transitions and supports the view that forebrain
neuronal networks rely on hubs of ‘rigid’ fast neurons while allowing
subpopulations of ‘malleable’ slow neurons to flexibly adapt to specific brain
states.

Poster number: S_PZ3_087 (TP)

Sub-Theme: Neuronal Flexibility & Adaptation: Exploring Brain
State Transitions and Circuitry Dynamics

## Chemogenetic activation of preoptic area torpor circuits recapitulates only
some features of natural torpor
Authors: Mike Ambler
Recent studies indicate that neurons of the preoptic area of the hypothalamus
(POA) play a role in natural torpor in mice. We investigated the extent to which
the hypothermic state induced by targeted reactivation of POA neurons that are
active during torpor (‘synthetic torpor’) recapitulates the full characteristics
of natural torpor.
Homozygous TRAP2 mice underwent bilateral injection of
AAV2-hSyn-DIO-hM3Dq-mCherry into the POA (n = 3, females). Natural torpor was
induced by 24-hour fast, and 4-hydroxytamoxifen (50mg/kg i.p.) was given, to
drive DREADD expression in active neurons. TRAPed POA neurons were reactivated
by administering clozapine-N-oxide (CNO; 2 mg/kg i.p.), resulting in synthetic
torpor. To assess whether synthetic torpor drives bradycardia independently of
body temperature, mice were anaesthetised with isoflurane and ECG recorded. Body
temperature was either maintained via a heat pad (temperature-clamped), or
allowed to become hypothermic (n = 3, repeated measures). In separate
experiments, surface temperature was recorded with a thermal camera during
natural and synthetic torpor in unanaesthetised mice (n=2, repeated measures).
Heart rate data was analysed using a 2-way ANOVA.
Following CNO administration, heart rate dropped in both groups. When body
temperature was allowed to drop, there was a 36% reduction from baseline at 20
min post-CNO (p < 0.0001). When body temperature was clamped, there was an
11% reduction from baseline at 25 minutes post-CNO (p < 0.01). During the
onset of synthetic torpor, mice displayed profound vasodilatation in the tail.
Vasodilatation was not observed in the tails of mice during natural torpor.
These data suggest that neurons in the POA contribute to both the hypothermia and
the bradycardia observed during daily torpor. Further, these data indicate that
the bradycardia observed during natural torpor is the result of both an active
process, driven by neurons in the POA, and a passive component secondary to the
hypothermia. Our observation that synthetic torpor is accompanied by tail
vasodilatation, which is not seen during natural torpor indicates that activity
in the POA may not be sufficient to recapitulate all aspects of natural
torpor.

Poster number: S_PZ3_088 (TP)

Sub-Theme: Neuronal Flexibility & Adaptation: Exploring Brain
State Transitions and Circuitry Dynamics

## Opioidergic neurotransmission in the nucleus of the solitary tract brainstem
circuitry
Authors: Becks Tench, University of Dundee
The nucleus of the solitary tract (NTS) is the first central site for integration
of autonomic sensory input arriving from the vagus. NTS neurons excite
preganglionic cardiac vagal neurons (CVNs) in the nucleus ambiguus (NA), to slow
the heart and reduce cardiac output. This cardioinhibitory response is sensitive
to exogenous and endogenous opioids such as β-endorphin, a product of the
precursor proopiomelanocortin (POMC). The NTS contains POMC neurons which
project toward the NA. Activation of these neurons evokes a rapid bradycardia
which is abolished by opioid receptor antagonism. This establishes an apparent
paradox whereby rapid excitation of CVNs involves a slowly acting inhibitory
opioid.
We hypothesise that NTS POMC neurons are 2nd order glutamatergic neurons, forming
monosynaptic connections with vagal motor neurons in the medulla, and that
released β-endorphin modulates NTS POMC glutamatergic neurotransmission.
NTS POMC neurons were optogenetically activated using a Cre-dependent
Adeno-Associated Viral vector (AAV2- EF1α-DIO-ChR2(H134R)-mCherry) injected into
the NTS of POMC-Cre mice. Fast opto-evoked excitatory postsynaptic currents
(EPSCs) could be recorded in the NTS, NA and dorsal motor nucleus of vagus.
Opto-evoked EPSCs were abolished by ionotropic glutamate receptor antagonists.
Together this establishes NTS POMC neurons as 2nd order NTS neurons in
vago-vagal reflexes.
NTS POMC neurons were found to spontaneously fire at rest (4.1±1.3 Hz, n=14). A
prolonged light stimulus, increased the excitatory postsynaptic potential (EPSP)
frequency in NA neurons from 2.2±1.3 Hz to 23.6±3.1 Hz (n=6) (repeat measures
one-way ANOVA, p<0.001. Bonferroni post hoc test, control vs during p=0.015).
Application of an opioid receptor antagonist (CTAP) completely abolished the
rapid excitatory drive by POMC neurons (control pre 4.1±3.9 Hz, vs during
25.9±4.8 Hz, n=2) (CTAP pre 1.4±0.8 Hz, vs during 1.6±1.0 Hz, n=2).
We propose that activating NTS POMC neurons evokes the release of β-endorphin in
the NA, increasing NTS POMC excitatory drive to putative CVNs. β-endorphin
mediated disinhibition of excitatory POMC terminals, via inhibitory
interneurons, likely accounts for the apparently paradoxical, rapid,
opioid-sensitive bradycardia.

Poster number: S_PZ3_089 (TP)

Sub-Theme: Advancing Spinal Cord Injury Recovery: Neuroprotection
and Neuroplasticity Strategies

## Spinal cord circuitry reorganisation after acute and delayed treatment with
Fortasyn® Connect in a rat model of cervical contusion spinal cord
injury
Authors: Rebecca Maguire, Queen Mary University of London / Barts
and The London School of Medicin; Patrick N. Pallier - Neuroscience, Surgery and
Trauma Queen Mary University of London / Barts and The London School of
Medicine; Oscar Seira - Blusson Spinal Cord Centre University of British
Columbia / International Collaboration on Repair Discoveries; Adina T.
Michael-Titus - Neuroscience, Surgery and Trauma Queen Mary University of London
/ Barts and The London School of Medicine; Wolfram Tetzlaff - Blusson Spinal
Cord Centre University of British Columbia / International Collaboration on
Repair Discoveries
Introduction
Spinal cord injury (SCI) is a leading cause of disability worldwide. Damage to
the cervical corticospinal tract (CST) can lead to paralysis of the limbs and
trunk. Fortasyn® Connect (FC) is a multi-nutrient that supplements phospholipid
precursors and co-factors essential for membrane synthesis. We hypothesized that
acute and delayed administration of FC will be neuroprotective and promote
regeneration and neuroplasticity of the CST after cervical contusion SCI
(CCSCI).
Methods
Following injury, 60 adult Sprague-Dawley rats were treated with either a control
diet (control group (CG); n = 20), FC for 18 weeks then a control diet for 14
weeks (acute treatment group (AG); n = 20), or a control diet for 18 weeks then
FC for 14 weeks (delayed treatment group (DG); n = 20). At 30 weeks,
biotinylated dextran amine (BDA) was injected into the motor cortex
contralateral to the lesion. The injured sections from animals with left-sided
lesions were processed with toluidine blue or BDA staining (CG: n = 7; AG: n =
5; DG: n = 6).
Approach for statistical analysis
All data sets were tested for normality using the Shapiro-Wilk Test. If the data
were normally distributed, one-way or two-way ANOVAs were used to compare the
means of the three treatment groups, followed by a Dunnett’s multiple
comparisons test. A Kruskal-Wallis test was performed when data were not
normally distributed, followed by a Dunn test. All test outcomes were considered
statistically significant if P < 0.05.
Results
Neither acute nor delayed administration of FC led to increased neuronal survival
or decreased lesion size or cavitation in the CCSCI model. However, the AG
showed increased sparing of CST tracts and both the AG and DG showed increased
CST sprouting in the grey matter.
Conclusion
FC was not notably neuroprotective in a CCSCI model but significantly promoted
the CST reorganisation, suggesting that FC can modulate neuroplasticity
following cervical contusion SCI, even with delayed treatment.

Poster number: S_PZ3_090 (TP)

Sub-Theme: Advancing Spinal Cord Injury Recovery: Neuroprotection
and Neuroplasticity Strategies

## Acute baclofen administration promotes functional recovery after spinal cord
injury in mice
Authors: Antón Barreiro-Iglesias, University of Santiago de
Compostela; Nidia de Sousa - ICVS University of Minho; Diego Robledo - Roslin
Institute University of Edinburgh; Andreia G. Pinho - ICVS University of Minho;
Susana Monteiro - ICVS University of Minho; Laura González-Llera - Department of
Functional Biology University of Santiago de Compostela; Diogo J. Santos - ICVS
University of Minho; Jonas Campos - ICVS University of Minho; Jorge R. Cibrão -
ICVS University of Minho; Nuno A. Silva - ICVS University of Minho; Laura
Sánchez - Department of Zoology, Genetics and Physical Anthropology University
of Santiago de Compostela; António J. Salgado - ICVS University of Minho
Traumatic Spinal Cord Injury (SCI) leads to severe motor and sensory functional
impairments. Medical advancements have improved supportive therapeutic measures
for SCI patients, but no effective therapeutic options exist to date that can
promote neurological recovery after SCI. Deficits in motor function are the most
visible consequence of SCI. However, other complications, as spasticity, produce
a significant impact on SCI patient’s welfare. baclofen, a GABA agonist, is the
most effective drug for spasticity treatment. Interestingly, emerging data
reveals that baclofen can also play a role on neuroprotection and regeneration
after SCI. The goal of this study was to analyse the potential of baclofen as a
treatment to promote recovery after SCI. For this, we used a pre-clinical
compression SCI mouse model with the administration of baclofen 1mg/Kg at
different time-points after injury. Behaviour analyses (locomotor and bladder
function) were performed during nine weeks after the SCI. Afterwards, spinal
cords were collected and processed for histological and molecular analysis. An
RNA-seq study was also performed 7 days after the SCI for one of the treatment
conditions. Our data showed that baclofen leads to locomotor improvements in
mice when it is administered acutely after SCI. Moreover, baclofen
administration also led to improved bladder function in all experimental groups.
Interestingly, acute baclofen administration modulates microglia activation
state and levels of circulating chemokines and cytokines, suggesting a putative
role of baclofen in the modulation of the immune response. Transcriptomic and
pathway enrichment analyses also revealed that many of the differentially
expressed genes after the baclofen treatment are related to calcium homeostasis,
ion transport, lysosome activity, ubiquitination, kinase activity or cell
adhesion. Although further studies must be performed to understand the
mechanisms that underlie the functional improvements produced by baclofen, our
data shed light into the pharmacological potential of baclofen to promote
recovery after SCI. Our outcomes revealed that baclofen, a well- known drug used
for spasticity management, improves motor performance and bladder control after
SCI in a pre- clinical animal model.

Poster number: M_PZ3_089 (TP)

Sub-Theme: Unlocking Neurogenesis: Dietary Interventions, Hormonal
Regulation, and Brain Functions in Adult Mice

## Anti-obesity compounds upregulate adult neurogenesis in the hypothalamus of
mice
Authors: David Petrik, Cardiff University; Sara K.M. Jörgensen -
School of Biosciences Cardiff University; Alena Karnošová - Bio Cluster
Institute of Organic Chemistry and Biochemistry, Czech Academy of Sciences;
Simone Mazzaferro - Wellcome-MRC Institute of Metabolic Science University of
Cambridge; Oliver Rowley - School of Biosciences Cardiff University; Sarah J.
Robbins - School of Biosciences Cardiff University; Sarah Christofides - School
of Biosciences Cardiff University; Florian T. Merkle - Wellcome-MRC Institute of
Metabolic Science University of Cambridge; Lenka Maletínská - Bio Cluster
Institute of Organic Chemistry and Biochemistry, Czech Academy of Sciences
Introduction
Adult neurogenesis (AN) has been implicated in regulating energy homeostasis.
Adult-generated neurons and adult Neural Stem Cells (aNSCs) in the hypothalamus
were found to control food intake and body weight. Conversely, Diet Induced
Obesity (DIO) by High Fat Diets (HFD) has adverse effects on hypothalamic AN
(hAN). However, the effects of anti-obesity compounds on hAN are not known.
Methods
To determine the effects of anti-obesity compounds on hAN, mice were administered
two compounds that reduce body weight under HFD. First, we used a lipidized
analogue (called LiPR) of an anorexigenic neuropeptide, Prolactin Releasing
Peptide (PrRP). Second, we used Liraglutide, an agonist of the Glucagon-like
Peptide 1 receptor (GLP-1RA). We determined the effects on these compounds on
aNSCs and new neurons using metabolomics, stereology, time- lapse imaging, and
RNAseq. In addition, we performed calcium imaging of human neurons derived from
the induced Pluripotent Stem Cells (iPSCs).
Approach for statistical analysis
All data were tested for normal distribution. Normally distributed data were
analysed by ANOVA or unpaired T-Test. Non-normal distribution data were analysed
by Mann-Whitney Test (unpaired) or Wilcoxon rank test. Data are presented as
mean ± SEM (normally distributed) or median ± interquartile range, IQR
(non-normal).
Results and Conclusions
We have found that both anti-obesity compounds influenced hAN but with different
effects. LiPR rescued HFD- decrease in aNSC number and survival of adult-born
neurons in the hypothalamus and reduced cell proliferation, which was also
observed with Liraglutide. Importantly, LiPR reduced activation of aNSCs by
influencing their cell cycle as determined by in vitro time-lapse imaging and
RNAseq. In the adult hippocampus, LiPR but not Liraglutide rescued HFD-induced
decrease in number of immature neurons. In human hypothalamic iPSC-derived
neurons, LiPR increases intracellular calcium suggesting it may act also in the
human brain. These results show for the first time that anti-obesity compounds
differentially influence adult neurogenesis and suggest that the neurogenic
process can serve as a target of anti-obesity pharmacotherapy.

Poster number: M_PZ3_090 (TP)

Sub-Theme: Unlocking Neurogenesis: Dietary Interventions, Hormonal
Regulation, and Brain Functions in Adult Mice

## Effects of Diet and Exercise on Adult Neurogenesis in the Hypothalamic
Neurogenic Niche
Authors: Sara Jorgensen, Cardiff University; David Petrik -
Bioscience Cardiff University Sara K.M. Jörgensen 1 and David Petrik 1*
Affiliations:
1 School of Biosciences, Cardiff University, Cardiff CF10 3AX, UK Abstract
Body
Introduction
Diet induced obesity (DIO) causes long term adverse effects to adult neurogenesis
(AN), the process of generating new neurons from adult Neural Stem Cells (aNSCs)
in the adult brain. Impairment of AN by DIO exacerbates the progression of
obesity. In contrast, physical exercise restores normal AN, which can prevent
the development of obesity. Determining which mechanisms are diet and exercise
responsive in hAN is important as this can lead to the development of new
methods to prevent development of obesity.
Methods
To determine the effects of DIO and voluntary exercise on hypothalamic AN (hAN),
mice were exposed to High Fat Diet (HFD) or control diet (CD) and to voluntary
running or sedentary conditions. Immunohistochemistry, stereology, time lapse
imaging, RNAseq and neurosphere assays were used to determine the effects of HFD
and exercise on cell proliferation and neurogenic differentiation.
Approach for statistical analysis
All data were tested for normal distribution. Normally distributed data were
analysed by ANOVA or unpaired T-Test. Non-normal distribution data were analysed
by Mann-Whitney Test (unpaired) or Wilcoxon rank test. Data are presented as
mean ± SEM (normally distributed) or median ± interquartile range, IQR
(non-normal).
Results and Conclusions
WT mice were exposed to HFD or CD for 2 weeks with concurrent access to running
wheels. Exposure to 2 weeks of running increased cell proliferation in the
Subgranular Zone (SGZ), the neurogenic niche of the adult hippocampus, as
reported previously but did not change proliferation in the Hypothalamic
Ventricular Zone (HVZ). In contrast, we observed a decrease in cell
proliferation in HFD runners compared to all other treatment groups and a trend
in upregulation of doublecortin-positive cells in the hypothalamic parenchyma of
HFD runners compared to HFD sedentary mice. To resolve whether longer period of
exercise is required to induce neurogenic effects in the HVZ, we are in the
process of exposing animals to 3 months of running.

Poster number: M_PZ3_091 (TP)

Sub-Theme: Unlocking Neurogenesis: Dietary Interventions, Hormonal
Regulation, and Brain Functions in Adult Mice

## GHSR expressing neurones within the rostral dentate gyrus regulate
hippocampal neurogenesis in adult mice
Authors: Miss Martina Sassi, Swansea University; Miss Felicia Reed -
Department of Physiology Monash University; Dr. Sarah Lockie - Department of
Physiology Monash University; Dr Romana Stark - Department of Physiology Monash
University; Prof Zane Andrews - Department of Physiology Monash University; Dr
Jeffrey Davies - Medical School Swansea University
The production of new neurones in the adult mammalian hippocampus that contribute
to learning and memory is known as Adult Hippocampal Neurogenesis (AHN). An
important characteristic of these cells is that they separate highly similar
memories into distinct memory representations that are unique and less easily
confused, a function called ‘pattern separation’. The gut hormone acyl-ghrelin
has been reported to improve spatial memory and AHN via binding to its receptor,
GHSR, within the hippocampus. Despite acyl-ghrelin-mediated AHN being widely
reported, the role of hippocampal GHSR in this function is still not clear. For
this reason, we aimed to evaluate the effect of ablating hippocampal GHSR on AHN
in adult mice.
24 8-week-old male GHSR-Cre mice on C57BL/6 background were bilaterally injected
with AAV-Cre dependent Caspase (AAV-flex-taCasp3-TEVp) into the rostral dentate
gyrus of the hippocampus (rDG) (AP = -1.8mm, ML: +/- 0.8mm, DV: -2.1mm from
bregma) to induce cell-autonomous apoptosis (GHSRKOrDG mice), or with saline
solution (GHSRWTrDG mice). All results were expressed as mean±SEM. Statistical
analysis was performed using unpaired t- test or 2-way ANOVA with Tukey’s post
hoc multiple comparisons test.
Data showed that GHSR ablation in the rDG decreased the survival of new
adult-born cells (BrdU+) and cell proliferation (Ki67+) in GHSRKOrDG mice
compared to GHSRWTrDG mice. Moreover, the ablation of GHSR+ neurones reduced the
number of immature neurones and increased the number of aberrant neurites
(Dcx+), specifically in the rDG. Interestingly, the neural stem and progenitor
cell (NSPCs) population (Sox2+) was increased in GHSRKOrDG mice. Analysis of the
astrocyte population (GFAP+) demonstrated that they were not altered in
GHSRKOrDG mice. Collectively, these data suggest that selective ablation of rDG
GHSR+ neurones in adult mice impaired AHN in that region but increased the
number of quiescent NSPCs across the rostro-caudal axis of the DG. These studies
extend our knowledge of the ghrelinergic system and our understanding of
GHSR-regulated AHN. The spatio-temporal ablation of GHSR demonstrates that GHSR+
neurones of the rDG regulate AHN and suggest that further research into the role
of GHSR in regulating AHN and higher brain function is warranted.

Poster number: M_PZ3_092 (TP)

Sub-Theme: Unlocking Neurogenesis: Dietary Interventions, Hormonal
Regulation, and Brain Functions in Adult Mice

## Mineralocorticoid receptor expression in adult neurogenesis in the rat
dentate gyrus
Authors: Samantha Haque, University of Bristol; Luke Doughty -
Department of Neurogenetics Max-Planck-Institute for Multidisciplinary Sciences;
Karen Mifsud - Bristol Medical School University of Bristol; Johannes Reul -
Bristol Medical School University of Bristol
Introduction: The mineralocorticoid receptor (MR), is implicated in the adult
neurogenesis in the dentate gyrus, but its exact role is unknown. By determining
MR expression across the various cell stages of adult neurogenesis, we will
obtain insight into the cell stages at which MR is expressed thereby helping to
elucidate the function of MR in the adult neurogenesis process.
Methods: We used immunofluorescence staining on adult male rat brain sections of
the dentate gyrus to investigate the expression of MR alongside four markers of
distinct stages of adult neurogenesis (sox2, DCX, Tuj1, NeuN). The level of MR
expression as well as its overlap with staining of these markers were
quantified. Additionally, the levels of expression were further categorised into
specific dentate gyrus subregions to assess whether there were any differences
in expression patterns across their hippocampal region.
Statistical analysis: One-way ANOVA tests were conducted to compare expression
levels across all MR and neurogenesis marker groups and between dentate gyrus
regions. In appropriate cases, a post-hoc Bonferroni test was performed.
Results and conclusion: Our data show that MR is very rarely expressed in Sox2+
progenitor cells. Expression of MR substantially increases during neuronal
differentiation and is most abundant in the final stage of neurogenesis, i.e. in
mature (NeuN+) neurons. Further analysis into subregion-specific expression of
MR revealed higher expression levels in the tip and the dorsal blade of the
dentate gyrus than observed in the ventral blade of the dentate gyrus. These
results are consistent with a role of the MR in neuronal differentiation as part
of adult neurogenesis. Furthermore, the higher abundance of MR in the dentate
gyrus tip and dorsal blade suggests that neuronal activity-related factors may
play a role in the expression levels of MR and, thus, possibly, the course of
the local neurogenesis process.
Studies are now proceeding with female rat tissue to enable comparisons with our
current results in males.

Poster number: M_PZ3_093 (TP)

Sub-Theme: Unlocking Neurogenesis: Dietary Interventions, Hormonal
Regulation, and Brain Functions in Adult Mice

## Omega-3-derived endocannabinoids prevent cytokine-induced decreases in human
hippocampal neurogenesis and astrogliogenesis, and increases in
apoptosis
Authors: Gargi Mandal, King’s College London; Carmine M. Pariante -
Stress, Psychiatry and Immunology Laboratory, Institute of Psychiatry,
Psychology and Neuroscience, Department of Psychological Medicine King’s College
London; Alessandra Borsini - Stress, Psychiatry and Immunology Laboratory,
Institute of Psychiatry, Psychology and Neuroscience, Department of
Psychological Medicine King’s College London
Introduction
Eicosapentaenoyl ethanolamide (EPEA) and Docosahexaenoyl ethanolamide (DHEA) are
two principal omega-3- derived endocannabinoids (eCBs) that are synthesised from
eicosapentaenoic acid (EPA) and docosahexaenoic acid (DHA), respectively. This
study investigated whether treatment with EPEA and DHEA can prevent the
detrimental changes induced by treatment with interleukin-1 beta (IL-1β) or
interleukin-6 (IL-6) on neurogenesis, astrogliogenesis, and apoptosis.
Methods
Human hippocampal progenitor cells were treated with IL-1β (10000pg/ml) or IL-6
(50pg/ml) either alone or with EPEA (300pM) or DHEA (700pM) for 48hrs during
differentiation. Immunocytochemistry was used to detect doublecortin (DCX)+
neuroblasts, microtubule-associated protein-2 (MAP2)+ neurons, S100 Calcium
Binding Protein β (S100β)+ astrocytes and caspase3 (CC3)+ apoptotic cells.
Results
Treatment with both EPEA and DHEA prevented IL-1β-induced decreases in DCX+ cells
(IL-1β+EPEA vs IL-1β: +73.36%, p<0.0001; IL-1β +DHEA vs IL-1β: +70.78%,
p<0.0001) and MAP2+ cells (IL-1β+EPEA vs IL-1β: +89.32%, p<0.0001; IL-1β
+DHEA vs IL-1β: +81.38%, p<0.0001), and IL-1β-induced increase in CC3+ cells
(IL-1β+EPEA vs IL-1β: - 53.05%, p<0.0001; IL-1β +DHEA vs IL-1β: -54.67%,
p<0.0001). However, treatment with EPEA and DHEA did not prevent
IL-1β-mediated decrease in S100β+ cells (IL-1β+EPEA vs IL-1β: -3.6%,
p>0.9999; IL-1β +DHEA vs IL-1β: -1.6%, p>0.9999). Similarly, treatment
with EPEA and DHEA prevented IL-6-induced reduction in DCX+ cells (IL-6+EPEA vs
IL- 6: +123.4%, p<0.0001; IL-6+DHEA vs IL-6: +124.18%, p<0.0001) and
S100β+ cells (IL-6+EPEA vs IL-6: +108.4%, p<0.0001; IL-6+DHEA vs IL-6: +114%,
p<0.0001). However, only DHEA prevented IL-6 induced reduction in MAP2+cells
(IL-6+EPEA vs IL-6: +4.8%, p>0.9999; IL-6+DHEA vs IL-6: +67.12%,
p<0.0001). In contrast, only EPEA prevented IL-6-induced increase in CC3+
cells (IL-6+EPEA vs IL-6: -40.27%, p<0.0001; IL-6+DHEA vs IL-6: +2.85%,
p>0.9999).
Conclusion
Our findings demonstrate the anti-inflammatory and neuroprotective effects of
EPEA and DHEA against IL-1β and IL- 6. Further investigations would help
identify the molecular mechanisms underlying their beneficial mode of
action.

Poster number: T_PZ3_082 (TP)

Sub-Theme: Advancements in Neural Regeneration: Techniques and
Insights in Disease Modeling and Treatment Strategies

## Remote and Selective Control of Astrocytes by Magnetomechanical
Stimulation
Authors: Yichao Yu, Division of Medicine, University College London;
Christopher Payne - Centre for Advanced Biomedical Imaging Division of Medicine,
University College London; Nephtali Marina - Centre for Cardiovascular and
Metabolic Neuroscience Research Department of Neuroscience, Physiology and
Pharmacology, University College London; Alla Korsak - Centre for Cardiovascular
and Metabolic Neuroscience Research Department of Neuroscience, Physiology and
Pharmacology, University College London; Paul Southern - Healthcare Biomagnetics
Laboratory University College London; Ana García-Prieto - Departamento Física
Aplicada I Universidad del País Vasco; Isabel N. Christie - Centre for
Cardiovascular and Metabolic Neuroscience Research Department of Neuroscience,
Physiology and Pharmacology, University College London; Rebecca R. Baker -
Centre for Advanced Biomedical Imaging Division of Medicine, University College
London; Elizabeth M. C. Fisher - Department of Neuromuscular Diseases Queen
Square Institute of Neurology, University College London; Jack A. Wells - Centre
for Advanced Biomedical Imaging Division of Medicine, University College London;
Tammy L. Kalber - Centre for Advanced Biomedical Imaging Division of Medicine,
University College London; Quentin A. Pankhurst - Healthcare Biomagnetics
Laboratory University College London; Alexander V. Gourine - Centre for
Cardiovascular and Metabolic Neuroscience Research Department of Neuroscience,
Physiology and Pharmacology, University College London; Mark F. Lythgoe - Centre
for Advanced Biomedical Imaging Division of Medicine, University College
London
Introduction
Astrocytes play crucial and diverse roles in the brain. To understand their
functions and translate such knowledge into new therapies, the ability to
selectively control astrocytes in a live brain is highly desirable. While
optogenetics and chemogenetics have enjoyed great success in research, the need
for genetic modification has impeded their clinical application. This has
motivated us to develop the magnetomechanical stimulation (MMS) technology that
enables remote and selective control of astrocytes without genetic modification.
MMS triggers endogenous mechano-gated ATP and Ca2+ signalling with targeted
magnetic forces created by magnets acting on magnetic particles attached to
astrocytes.
Methods
Two devices (“yoke” magnet and “Magnetic Mangle”) were made for in vitro and in
vivo experiments respectively. The fringe magnetic field of an MRI scanner was
also used. To assess force generation with different particles, Ca2+ signals and
ATP release were measured in astrocyte cultures. Then the chosen type was
injected into the brain and its fate was investigated with MRI and histology.
Lastly in vivo MMS was performed on astrocytes in the ventrolateral medulla
(VLM), which are known to modulate the central sympathetic drive. The arterial
blood pressure (ABP) was monitored as a readout.
Approach for statistical analysis
ATP release measurements and ABP changes were subjected to statistical analyses
(t-test and linear regression).
Results and conclusions
With the yoke magnet and Fe3O4 particles, the mechanosensory threshold of
astrocytes was determined (0.32 Pa). SiMAG particles (500 nm) coupled with the
anti-GLAST antibody bound selectively to astrocytes in vitro and, when actuated
by the Magnetic Mangle, induced ATP release. After injection into the rat VLM,
anti-GLAST-coupled SiMAG particles bound to astrocytes and were still present 7
days later. Lastly, these particles induced ABP rises upon actuation by either
the MRI scanner fringe field or the Magnetic Mangle.
This work is the first to demonstrate the in vivo feasibility of MMS as a
neuromodulation method with spatial, temporal and cell-type specificity. Because
no device implantation or genetic modification is required, MMS is a promising
candidate for clinical translation.
 
Poster number: T_PZ3_083 (TP)

Sub-Theme: Advancements in Neural Regeneration: Techniques and
Insights in Disease Modeling and Treatment Strategies

## Methods to examine morphology and function in human iPSC-derived CNS disease
models
Authors: Eve Corrie, Medicines Discovery Catapul; Rebecca Kelly -
Discovery Medicines Discovery Catapult; Isabel Peset-Martin - Cellular Sciences
Spanish National Cancer Research Center; Hervé Barjat - Discovery Medicines
Discovery Catapult; Emma V. Jones - Discovery Medicines Discovery Catapult
Introduction
The ability to reprogram somatic cells to stem cells has revolutionised the
modelling of human diseases in vitro. Induced pluripotent stem cells (iPSCs) can
be used to generate the various cell types found in the central nervous system
(CNS), including diverse types of neurons, astrocytes, and microglia. MDC has
expertise in the generation of iPSC-derived monocultures, cocultures and
tricultures of neurons, astrocytes and microglia. These can be applied to the
modelling of neurodegenerative diseases (for example, via disease-causing
mutations or exposure to toxic aggregates), and used in a variety of assays
relevant to drug discovery. One focus of this poster is the characterisation of
neurons which have been engineered to have the mutation associated with
Huntington’s disease, as an example of a specific disease model.
Methods
At MDC, we use a number of techniques to examine morphological and functional
changes that occur due to disease phenotype or drug treatment. This includes
Incucyte live-cell imaging to track the morphology and viability of
disease-state neurons over time. The functional activity of neurons can be
assayed with calcium imaging approaches. This poster presents a method for
calcium imaging utilising lentiviral transduction of a genetically encoded
calcium indicator driven by a synapsin promoter, allowing long-term Incucyte
imaging of action potential firing. In addition, more traditional calcium dyes
can be used, for example by loading with the calcium indicator Fluo4, allowing
analysis at the single neuron level. We also use immunocytochemistry and
advanced microscopy to investigate changes in structural markers of neurons,
astrocytes and microglia in triculture in response to disease-associated states
such as neuroinflammation.
Approach for statistical analysis
Where appropriate, data have been analysed with two-way ANOVA with post-hoc
tests.
Results and conclusions
Here we present a variety of techniques to probe the function of iPSC-derived CNS
cell models in control and disease states. These methods are invaluable to drug
discovery as they further the understanding of disease phenotypes and provide a
way to investigate therapeutics in a human system in vitro.

Poster number: T_PZ3_084 (TP)

Sub-Theme: Advancements in Neural Regeneration: Techniques and
Insights in Disease Modeling and Treatment Strategies

## Inducing fast-spiking neurons from glia in the postnatal cerebral
cortex
Authors: Nicolas Marichal Negrin, King's College London; Sophie
Péron - Institute of Physiological Chemistry, University Medical Center Johannes
Gutenberg University, Mainz, Germany; Ana Beltrán - Centre for Developmental
Neurobiology King's College London; Chiara Galante - Institute of Physiological
Chemistry, University Medical Center Johannes Gutenberg University, Mainz,
Germany; Benedikt Berninger - Centre for Developmental Neurobiology King's
College London
Direct lineage reprogramming of resident glia into induced neurons (iNs) is an
emerging concept for the remodelling and restoration of diseased circuits. Here,
we aimed at testing whether the proneural transcription factor Ascl1 in
combination with Bcl2 (Gascón et al 2016) can reprogram glia undergoing
developmental expansion into functional iNs in the early postnatal cortex. For
this, we transduced neonatal (P5) proliferating glia with retroviruses encoding
the reprogramming factors and explored the electrophysiological properties of
these cells in acute brain slices. The significance of the differences between
groups was analysed by independent t-test (for samples with normal distribution)
or using the Mann–Whitney U test (for samples without normal distribution). The
number of independent experiments (n), number of cells analysed, and the number
of cells recorded for electrophysiology are reported in the panels legends.
We found that cells transduced with Ascl1 and Bcl2 acquired membrane properties
similar to immature neurons, displaying transient inward currents and fired
single action potentials. Intriguingly, forced co-expression of the
phospho-deficient variant Ascl1SA6 (Ali et al., 2014) and Bcl2 resulted in the
generation of iNs capable of repetitive action potential firing. At 4 weeks post
injection, Ascl1SA6-Bcl2-derived iNs developed fast-spiking (FS) properties
characterized by sustained high-frequency firing (>150 Hz) and received
excitatory synaptic inputs. Consistent with this, a substantial portion of
Ascl1SA6-Bcl2 iNs also expressed mRNA and protein of the calcium binding protein
parvalbumin.
Taken together, our data show the potential of a phospho-deficient mutant of
Ascl1 to induce FS-interneuron specific features from glia in vivo.

Poster number: T_PZ3_085 (TP)

Sub-Theme: Advancements in Neural Regeneration: Techniques and
Insights in Disease Modeling and Treatment Strategies

## Testing bioimplant modulation of regenerative responses in injured
organotypic spinal cord slices derived from the chick embryo
Authors: Christopher Adams, Keele University; Aina Mogas Barcons -
Institute for Translational Neuroscience University of Sheffield; Divya Chari -
School of Medicine Keele University
Effective repair of spinal cord injury sites remains a major clinical challenge.
One promising strategy is the implantation of multifunctional bioscaffolds for
enhancing nerve fibre growth, guiding regenerative tissue and modulating
scarring/inflammation processes. Given their multifunctional nature, such
implants require testing in models which replicate the complex neuropathological
responses of spinal injury sites. This is often achieved using live, adult
animal models of spinal injury. However, these have substantial drawbacks for
developmental testing, including the requirement for large numbers of animals,
costly infrastructure, high levels of expertise and complex ethical processes.
As a partial replacement strategy, organotypic slices of spinal cord derived
from rodents have previously been shown to replicate neuropathological responses
to injury and have the capability to test bioscaffold implantation. Whilst
promising, such systems are restricted to institutes with dedicated rodent
infrastructure. As an alternative, we show that organotypic spinal cord slices
can be derived from the E14 chick embryo and cultured with high viability for at
least 28 days, with major neural cell types detected. A transecting injury could
be reproducibly introduced into the slices and neuropathological responses
associated with adult spinal cord injury observed at the lesion margin. This
included characteristic ‘palisading’ astrocyte morphologies and upregulation of
glial fibrillary protein in astrocytes, microglial infiltration into the injury
cavity and limited nerve fibre outgrowth. Bioimplantation was able to modulate
these responses, disrupting the astrocyte barrier, enhancing nerve fibre growth
and supporting immune cell invasion. Chick embryos are simple and cost-effective
to house and need only limited technical skill in handling. Therefore, the data
show the chick embryo spinal cord slice system could be a highly useful model
for laboratories developing new tissue engineering solutions for spinal injury
but which do not have routine access to neural tissue for testing.
The image shows a bioimplant (dotted outline) within the injury cavity of a
spinal cord slice, with invading microglia and astrocyte processes.
 
Poster number: T_PZ3_086 (TP)

Sub-Theme: Advancements in Neural Regeneration: Techniques and
Insights in Disease Modeling and Treatment Strategies

## Uncrossing The Wires Of Human Specific Neural Network Development Using
Multi-Electrode Arrays In Organoid Models
Authors: Daniel Lloyd-Davies Sánchez, MRC Laboratory of Molecular
Biology Introduction:
The mechanisms underlying human brain and network development, and how the
processes leading to network establishment differ from other species, remain
poorly understood. Human brain development is a protracted process compared to
other apes and mammals and this may have implications for the efficiency of
networks generated. This project aims to better understand whether a delayed
neuronal maturation in humans facilitates the establishment of more
sophisticated or efficient neural networks, and what cellular mechanisms may
underlie this.
Methods:
Brain organoids were generated from ESCs or iPSCs of human or mammalian origin
and cultured in suspension before stage-matched slicing for prolonged slice
culture at the air-liquid interface (Air-Liquid Interface Cerebral Organoids).
ALICOs were either placed on high resolution multi-electrode arrays (MEAs) for
acute recording of electrical activity at different timepoints, or were recorded
in a longitudinal fashion with custom built MEAs optimised for compatibility
with ALICOs in their usual culture environment.
Long-term MEA-ALICO culture was evaluated for health and morphology using
brightfield microscopy and immunohistochemical techniques. Organoid morphology
with respect to neuronal tracts and connections was compared between species.
Electrical activity was recorded and spike activity morphology, rate, and
amplitude analysed and compared between species across time. Low frequency waves
were recorded and mapped temporally.
Statistics:
In order to validate long term culture health, non-parametric t-tests were
carried out on quantifications of morphological parameters between MEA-cultured
ALICOs and controls. For quantifications of spiking data across time between
species, multiple factor ANOVAs have been utilised. Statistical significance was
marked at P<0.05. Similarly stringent tests are used in ongoing
experiments.
Results and Conclusions:
Our novel designs permit longitudinal recording from the same samples, optimised
for in-situ ALICO recording in their usual culture environment. Human organoids
exhibit slower maturation compared to other species. Ongoing experiments seek to
analyse and quantify connectivity and inter-species differences correlated with
maturational delays.

Poster number: T_PZ3_087 (TP)

Sub-Theme: Advancements in Neural Regeneration: Techniques and
Insights in Disease Modeling and Treatment Strategies

## Listening to the Experience of participants on Neurosurgical trials: outcomes
of the LEARN-GDNF and LEARN- TransEuro studies
Authors: Cheney Drew, Cardiff University; Kim Smallman - Centre for
Trials Research Cardiff University; Suzette Shamoon - School of Pharmacy and
Pharmaceutical Sciences Cardiff University; Emma Lane - School of Pharmacy and
Pharmaceutical Sciences Cardiff University
Introduction: Clinical trials involving direct intra-cranial delivery of novel
therapeutics (including growth factor, cell and gene therapies) are filling the
horizon for Parkinson’s disease. To give these trials the best chance of success
participant recruitment and retention need to be maximised. Understanding the
specific needs and lived experience of participants and their support network in
coping with the significant burdens of neurosurgery, brain imaging and repeated
‘off’ assessments will serve to enhance development of acceptable,
patient-centred trial designs.
Methods: Semi-structured online interviews were conducted with participants and
their family members/ care partners following a trial of Glial Derived
Neurotrophic Factor (GDNF) infused via intra-cranially implanted drug delivery
catheters (Whone et al.) and also with participants of the TransEuro, a foetal
cell transplantation trial (Barker et al.). Interviews were conducted alone or
in dyads, observed by a second non-participatory researcher.
Analytical Approach: Interviews were transcribed verbatim and analysed using a
reflexive thematic approach supported by NVivo software (statistical analysis is
not applied to qualitative data).
Results: The experiences of participants were largely positive, expressing strong
feelings of collegiality and altruism. Specific issues surrounding the nature
and timing of assessments and post operative care were identified. A common
thread relating to negative experiences lay with the difficulties participants
faced once the trial had ended and the transition from participant to patient.
This included the impact of learning about the negative outcome of the trial and
decreased interactions with health care professionals following an intensive
study period.
Conclusions: Listening to the voice of lived experience from complex trials is
vital to enable trial design for maximum impact. Simple modifications to trial
conduct can significantly improve the participant experience and study data have
been used to generate resources to support this. Further, our data advocates for
the inclusion of broad and diverse patient experience in the development of
future studies.
Whone et al. Brain. 2019:142: 512–25 Barker et al. Nat Med.
2019;25(7):1045-53

## Novel Approaches & Interdisciplinary Perspectives

Poster number: S_PZ3_091 (PP)

Sub-Theme: Exploring Perceptual Diversity and Extraordinary Mind
Potential: A Science-Art Collaboration

## The Perception Census: An extremely large-scale online study of perceptual
diversity
Authors: Reny Baykova, University of Sussex; Matteo Alleman - Center
for Theoretical Neuroscience Columbia University; Sylvia Schroeder - Life
Sciences University of Sussex
Introduction: We all experience the world differently, but the nature and extent
of perceptual diversity remain largely unknown. Here we introduce The Perception
Census: an online research program part of the Dreamachine project, which itself
was part of the UK Unboxed festival. The Perception Census aims to capture
individual differences across different perceptual domains. Having already
reached over 20,000 participants, the Census provides a unique opportunity to
shed new light onto questions that have so far been examined in relatively
small, highly specific samples. Methods: The Perception Census consists of 58
tasks divided into 11 sections investigating topics like the perception of
colour, music, and time, as well as sensory precision, imagery, and
susceptibility to illusions. Participants also complete tasks measuring traits
including synaesthesia, phenomenological control, and sensory sensitivity.
Completing the first section of the Census is mandatory, after which
participants can freely explore the other sections. Data collection began in
July 2022 and will continue until at least May 2023. So far, the first section
has been completed by 20,219 participants, and each of the other sections by an
average of 4,290 participants. In this presentation, we focus on the scope of
the census and present preliminary participant statistics. Approach for
statistical analysis: Some tasks were included in the Census with specific goals
for confirmatory research while others were included for exploratory purposes to
generate predictions for future studies. Due to the large scope of the project,
we were unable to prepare preregistrations for confirmatory research before data
collection. However, the predictions and statistical analysis plans for
confirmatory research will be preregistered before carrying out analyses.
Together with collaborators for each task, we will analyse a small random sample
of the data related to each research question, to act as pilot data to form
specific analysis pipelines. After submitting a pre-registration of predictions
and analyses, full analysis can proceed. Upon completing preregistered analyses,
we will make the data from the Census widely available, providing a valuable
resource for researchers interested in perceptual diversity.

Poster number: S_PZ3_092 (TP)

Sub-Theme: Exploring Perceptual Diversity and Extraordinary Mind
Potential: A Science-Art Collaboration

## Dreamachine – a journey into the extraordinary potential of the mind
Authors: Anil Seth, University of Sussex; Fiona Macpherson -
Philosophy University of Glasgow; Devraj Joshi - n/a Collective Act; Trevor
Hewitt - Informatics University of Sussex; David Schwartzman - Informatics
University of Sussex; Jennifer Crook - n/a Collective Act
Introduction. Dreamachine is a major interdisciplinary programme bringing
together neuroscientists, philosophers, artists, composers, and technologists,
created by Collective Act. Its goal is to take audiences on a magical journey to
reveal the power of their own minds and brains, to ignite mass curiosity about
neuroscience and philosophy, and to generate a sense of awe, wonder and
connection. The foundation of Dreamachine is that bright stroboscopic light on
closed eyes can generate vivid visual and emotional experiences, as explored by
the scientist Grey Walter and the artist Brion Gysin decades ago. Our
Dreamachine reimagined Gysin’s original invention by creating a collective
experience (20-30 people), utilising spatial sound, and situating the core
experience in a neuroscientifically-informed audience journey. The programme
also includes an (ongoing) study of perceptual diversity (The Perception Census)
and a major learning programme, which has reached over 1 million young people in
the UK.
Methods. We created Dreamachine using stroboscopic light sequences, fine-tuned to
generate immersive visual hallucinations in most people without being
overwhelming. We developed a pre-screening procedure to minimise risk (e.g. from
undiagnosed photosensitive epilepsy), and we involved over 2,200 people in focus
group testing (including groups of blind/partially-sighted people). We developed
an interactive ‘sensory tool’ tablet-based interface surveying audience members
about their Dremachine journey, and we provided opportunities to draw, write,
and talk about their experiences.
Analysis. Full analysis is underway. Analysis will cover sensory tool data
(linking to The Perception Census), image analysis of drawings, analysis of
wider impact through longitudinal follow-up, and more.
Results. "One of the most indescribably profound experiences of my life." This
testimony from one audience member echoes thousands of others. Over 30,000
people experienced Dreamachine, with audience reports being overwhelmingly
positive. More than 15,000 drawings were created, showcasing a striking
diversity in experience. Dreamachine is a unique science-art collaboration that
has had transformative effects on thousands of people. It was commissioned by
UNBOXED: Creativity in the UK.
 
Poster number: S_PZ250_093 (TP)

Sub-Theme: Parkinson's Disease: Emotion Recognition, Anxiety, and
Social Challenges Amidst COVID-19

## Exploring the recognition of emotion from dynamic and static faces by people
with Parkinson’s
Authors: Moudhi Twaijri, University of Manchester; Ellen Poliakoff -
Body Eyes And Movement (BEAM) Lab, Division of Psychology, Communication and
Human Neuroscience University of Manchester; Karen Lander - Division of
Psychology, Communication and Human Neuroscience University of Manchester
Introduction
People with Parkinson’s (PwP) have been found to have impairments in recognition
and production of emotional facial expressions. Although most studies use static
stimuli to test for emotion recognition, dynamic faces are more realistic and
allow for a natural display of emotion from neutral state. Previous research has
shown that healthy participants are better at recognising emotion from dynamic
faces compared to static faces; and preliminary work has suggested that this may
also be the case for PwP (see Bek et al., 2020), despite evidence for general
difficulties in emotion recognition. Therefore, we investigated emotion facial
recognition from dynamic versus static faces by PwP and healthy controls.
Methods
We compared 42 PwP (mild-to-moderate severity) and 42 healthy controls (50
females and 34 males; age mean 65 years, SD=7.39). All participants performed an
online computerised emotion facial recognition task. Nine different facial
emotions (anger, contempt, disgust, embarrassment, fear, joy, neutral, sad,
surprise) were presented in dynamic and static form in separate blocks of
trials, at low and high levels of intensity.
Statistical analysis
A two-way mixed ANOVA was used [Group (Parkinson’s, controls) X Stimulus
(dynamic, static)]. Results
There was a main effect of Group and a Group x Stimulus interaction. Controls had
higher recognition accuracy than the PwP, but this was only significant for the
dynamic stimuli. However, PwP had significantly higher recognition accuracy for
static stimuli than dynamic; unlike the control group who had significantly
higher recognition accuracy for dynamic than static stimuli.
Conclusion
PwP did not show the typical pattern of better recognition of emotions from
dynamic stimuli, as seen for the controls. This suggests that PwP are more
impaired in recognising dynamic facial expressions, which may relate to their
difficulties in producing facial expressions. This is likely to have negative
consequences for their everyday social interactions.

Poster number: S_PZ252_094 (TP)

Sub-Theme: Parkinson's Disease: Emotion Recognition, Anxiety, and
Social Challenges Amidst COVID-19

## Investigating the effects of COVID-19 and the first UK lockdown on anxiety
and mood in people with Parkinson’s
Authors: Moudhi Twaijri, University of Manchester Background
Anxiety is common in people living with Parkinson's (PwP) and a key contributor
to poor quality of life. Anxiety has been related to the emotional and physical
stress of living with Parkinson's. In this study we examined how anxiety and
mood were affected in PwP during the UK’s first COVID-19 lockdown.
Methods
166 PwP (79 female) and 50 healthy controls (HC; 32 female) participated in an
online survey. Standardised scales included anxiety during (state) and prior to
(trait) lockdown, apathy, and depression. In addition, qualitative data from
open questions about lockdown experiences was analysed using thematic
analysis.
Statistical analysis
A two-way mixed ANOVA, a three-step hierarchical regression analysis was
administered, and thematic analysis.
Results
Both groups reported significantly higher anxiety during compared to before
lockdown; however, PwP had significantly higher anxiety overall (state and
trait) and a higher proportion isolated early compared to HC. Depression and
trait anxiety were both significant predictors for state anxiety in PwP.
Additionally, PwP reported feeling vulnerable and experienced increased motor
symptoms during lockdown, sometimes linking these effects to increased anxiety.
Many described being negatively affected by lockdown, attributing this to low
mood as well as reduced access to medical support, physical activities, personal
space, and physical and social contact. Notably, some reported a positive
experience during the lockdown due to fewer social obligations, and others
reported no change in their lifestyle.
Conclusion
Both PwP and controls experienced higher anxiety during than before lockdown and
some PwP thought this exacerbated their motor symptoms. While many PwP described
negative effects during the lockdown, others
reported positive experiences or described little change since living with
Parkinson’s was already a lockdown of its own. This highlights the need for
remote support in general as well as in the case of another lock-down.

Poster number: S_PZ4_095 (TP)

Sub-Theme: Focal Cortical Dysplasia: Investigating Seizures and Gene
Therapy Approaches

## Origin of seizures in a mouse model of focal cortical dysplasia
Authors: Rob Graham, UCL
Focal cortical dysplasia (FCD) is a leading cause of pharmacoresistant epilepsy,
and is often associated with cognitive impairments and autistic features. It is
characterised by cortical dyslamination and the presence of
cytomegalic/dysmorphic neurons, and is caused in most cases by somatic mutations
of genes encoding members of the mTOR signalling cascade. FCD-associated
epilepsy is often a poor candidate for resective surgery because the dysplastic
region typically occurs in an eloquent cortical territory, highlighting the need
for an improved understanding of epileptogenic mechanisms in FCD, and the need
for novel therapeutic strategies. Despite the overt structural abnormality,
whether seizures arise from dysplastic neurons and their connections remains
unclear.
Here we present electrophysiological and imaging data dissecting the contribution
of heterotopic/dysmorphic and morphologically normal appearing neurons in the
dysplastic region. We used a mouse model of FCD generated by in utero
electroporation of a constitutive activator of mTOR (RhebS16H), which
recapitulates many molecular, morphological, electrographic, and behavioural
features of FCD type II in patients, including subclinical electrographic
abnormalities.
Whole cell patch-clamp recordings of dysplastic neurons obtained in acute brain
slices from FCD mice revealed profound intrinsic hypoexcitabilty, while
neighbouring, morphologically normal cells show reduced rheobase, increased
membrane resistance, and higher stable firing rates than control cells. However,
dysmorphic neurons functionally integrate in the cortical network receiving
spontaneous excitatory and inhibitory input. Following a test for normal
distribution and prior assumptions, parametric statistical tests were used to
assess difference and significance. We also recorded spontaneous activity in
both dysplastic and non-dysplastic neurons using single-cell calcium
fluorescence imaging in freely moving animals, during both interictal and ictal
periods. Here we compared basic excitability in the populations by measuring
calcium event frequency and AUC. Deconvolutions of the calcium signal were used
to more accurately compare internal synchrony and responsivity of the
populations during different behaviours. This experiment allows us to capture,
in a naturalistic setting, the involvement of both dysmorphic and
normal-appearing neurons in seizure generation and maintenance, and to infer the
cellular and network basis of seizures in FCD.

Poster number: S_PZ4_096 (TP)

Sub-Theme: Focal Cortical Dysplasia: Investigating Seizures and Gene
Therapy Approaches

## Gene Therapy for Focal Cortical Dysplasia type II
Authors: Amanda Almacellas, UCL; Robert T. Graham - Clinical and
Experimental Epilepsy UCL; Benito Maffei - Clinical and Experimental Epilepsy
UCL; Justin Hoke - Clinical and Experimental Epilepsy UCL; Jenna Carpenter -
Clinical and Experimental Epilepsy UCL; Christos Chimonides - N/A Leipzig
University; Dimitri M. Kullmann - Clinical and Experimental Epilepsy UCL;
Vincent Magloire - Clinical and Experimental Epilepsy UCL; Gabriele Lignani -
Clinical and Experimental Epilepsy UCL
The Focal Cortical Dysplasias (FCDs) are a group of malformations of cortical
development, which are frequently associated with drug-resistant epilepsy in
children. FCD type II is the commonest pathology found at epilepsy surgery in
children. It is typically caused by somatic mutations resulting in the mammalian
Target Of Rapamycin Complex 1 (mTORC1) hyperactivation. Epilepsy surgery is not
always effective and is often precluded by proximity to eloquent brain regions.
Gene therapy is thus currently the most promising candidate replacement for
surgical treatment of FCD.
We tested a gene therapy approach based on viral expression of a modified KCNA1
gene (which encodes the potassium channel Kv1.1). We chose Kv1.1 as a
therapeutic protein not only because it attenuates neuronal excitability, but
also because mTOR hyperactivation is associated with downregulation of KCNA1
expression.
The therapy tested in a mouse model of FCD type II generated by in-utero
electroporation of neuronal progenitors with a constitutively active RHEB
plasmid, an activator of mTORC1. A battery of molecular biology and behavioural
tests confirmed that the model recapitulates the pathology seen in humans,
including cognitive comorbidities.
Continuous EEG recordings from mice before and after local injection of
AAV9-KCNA1, showed a 64% decrease in seizure frequency over 4 weeks (n=13 mice),
which was not seen in mice injected with a control AAV encoding a fluorescent
reporter alone (n=11 mice). We observed no worsening of performance in tests
sensitive to frontal lobe function, including spontaneous alternation in T-maze
and olfactory habituation and discrimination.
In conclusion, KCNA1 gene therapy is a promising genetic approach for the
treatment of FCD type II.

Poster number: S_PZ4_097 (TP)

Sub-Theme: Neuroprotective Strategies in Stroke: Exploring Prolyl
Hydroxylase Inhibition and Oxygen-Glucose Deprivation Models

## Neuroprotective effect of prolyl hydroxylase inhibition in an in vitro rat
oxygen-glucose deprivation model
Authors: MARTINA PUZIO, Conway Institute, Belfield, Dublin 4,
Ireland
Stroke is one of the leading causes of death and disability worldwide. Targeting
prolyl-hydroxylase inhibition has been shown to be a successful approach in
ischemia. Therefore, this study investigated the effects of the prolyl-
hydroxylase inhibitors Roxadustat and JNJ-42041935 in an oxygen-glucose
deprivation (OGD) rat stroke model. Field excitatory post-synaptic potentials
(fEPSPs) were elicited by stimulation of the Schaffer collateral pathway in rat
hippocampal slices. During OGD slices were perfused with glucose-free aCSF
bubbled with 95% N2/5% CO2 for 20min. LTP was elicited by high frequency
stimulation (HFS) consisting of 3 trains of 100Hz with a stimulus interval of
20s. Organotypic hippocampal slices (P7 rat pups) were exposed to 1 hr of OGD
before staining with 2µM Propidium Iodide (PI). All data are presented as mean
value±SEM. Analysis was performed using unpaired t-test and one-way ANOVA.
Incubation with Roxadustat (100µM) did not modulate the OGD-induced depression
(16.5±1.0% vs controls 21.2±3.0%, n=6) but significantly improved the synaptic
transmission during 40min recovery (120.3±18.1% vs controls 70.0±11.3%). Since
Roxadustat is a potent iron chelator and ferroptosis is a well-known mechanism
of neuronal damage in ischemia, we evaluated whether iron chelation was involved
in the modulation of synaptic transmission. Application of Roxadustat did not
reverse the inhibitory effect of Fe3+ (100µM) in our OGD experiments. However,
application of Roxadustat impaired LTP (111.0±7.0% vs controls 138.0±7.0%, n=5,
at 60 min). JNJ-42041935 (10µM) did not reverse the synaptic depression observed
during OGD (28.0±4.1% vs controls 21.2±3.0%, n=4) but did improve synaptic
transmission recovery (116.4±7.0% vs controls 70.0±11.3%). In the organotypic
slice cultures, pre-treatment with Roxadustat and JNJ-42041935 improved neuronal
viability compared to untreated slices (19.5±3.0% and 11.0±2.0% vs OGD
41.0±7.0%, n=9). In conclusion, our electrophysiological results have
demonstrated a modulatory role for the two PHD inhibitors in hippocampal
synaptic transmission during OGD. Also, the PI data highlighted a protective
effect for both compounds. Further research will be required to elucidate the
exact mechanistic action of the compounds during OGD.

Poster number: M_PZ4_094 (PP)

Sub-Theme: Sustainable Neuroscience: Addressing Carbon Footprint,
Reproducibility, and Ethical Standards

## The Neuroscience community's attitudes towards green Neuroscience
Authors: Sophie Grange, Bath spa University
Introduction
Earth has reached the point of being in a climate crisis, leading to an
uninhabitable planet (Ripple, W.J. et al. (2021) “World scientists’ warning of a
climate emergency 2021,” BioScience, 71(9), pp. 894–898.). If humans increased
sustainable behaviour the negative effects of the climate crisis could be
averted or reversed, including the negative impact on mental wellbeing. This
project aims to provide insight into the attitudes and behaviours of the
neuroscience community with respect to ‘green neuroscience’, i.e. the
environmental sustainability of the neuroscience sector.
Methods
An online survey has been designed to collect data from members of the
neuroscience community. Requests to complete the survey have been emailed to
members of the British Neuroscience Association (BNA) as well as posted on
social media. The survey includes collection of demographic data to enable
identification and sub-categorisation of respondents. Remaining questions
collect information on green neuroscience with respect to (1) place of
study/work; (2) sustainability of the research process itself; (3) attending
events; (4) the local community; and (5) societies and the BNA; as well as (6)
open-ended text questions.
Approach for statistical analysis
Data will be analysed differently depending on question type. Null hypothesis
significance testing (NHST) is appropriate for six of the survey questions. For
five of these, parametric testing will be used: the independent two- sample
t-test, with sample sizes calculated assuming a one or two-tailed hypothesis
with an effect size of 0.5, α≤0.05 and power of 0.8. The remaining question will
use Pearson’s r formula to uncover any correlations between the variables, with
sample sizing decided assuming an effect size of 0.5, α ≤0.05 and power of 0.8.
The statistical analysis software will be JASP. The open-ended text questions
will require thematic analysis to help identify patterns of behaviour. Chosen
codes will include ‘change’, ‘sustainability’ and ‘motivation’. Chosen themes
include ‘prevention of change’; ‘motivation for change’. Primary outcome will be
different for each question. The survey as a whole will allow better
understanding of the neuroscience community towards their sector’s environmental
sustainability.

Poster number: M_PZ4_095 (PP)

Sub-Theme: Sustainable Neuroscience: Addressing Carbon Footprint,
Reproducibility, and Ethical Standards

## Measuring and reducing the carbon footprint of fMRI analysis
Authors: Nicholas E Souter, University of Sussex; Raghavendra Selvan
- Department of Computer Science University of Copenhagen; Charlotte L Rae -
School of Psychology University of Sussex
Introduction - Data storage and processing contribute to the climate crisis
through the carbon footprint associated with energy use. Neuroimaging research
frequently relies on large datasets and computationally expensive analysis. We
will investigate how the carbon footprint of fMRI analysis can be measured and
reduced, providing tools and guidance to make analysis more sustainable without
inconveniencing researchers. Method - We will investigate two strategies. (i)
Modifying preprocessing pipelines to remove steps that increase energy
consumption but do not significantly improve data quality. In 100 subjects from
the Human Connectome Project, using data for a motor and an emotion processing
fMRI task, we will quantify such trade-offs for the fMRIPrep pipeline. Multiple
variants will be run, with preprocessing steps differentially toggled on or off.
(ii) Scheduling analysis to run at times at which the carbon intensity of the UK
National Grid is low, using real-time public data. Carbon intensity peaks at the
start and end of the working day and is lowest in the middle of the night.
Approach for Statistical Analysis - For step (i), task activation in regions
typically associated with a given task (e.g., primary motor cortex for the motor
task) will be extracted using group-level ROI analysis in FSL following each
fMRIPrep variant. Smoothness of resulting fMRI data will also be extracted.
These proxies for preprocessing performance will be plotted against estimates of
carbon emissions from a given pipeline, measured by CodeCarbon (Goyal-Kamal et
al., 2021). ANOVA and post-hoc contrasts will be run between pipelines for
performance metrics and carbon emissions. The elbow point, where additional
preprocessing steps confer negligible benefits in performance but significant
increases in carbon emissions, will be identified. Step (ii) will contextualise
the CodeCarbon estimates of a given subject’s data relative to historical carbon
intensity data, allowing one to identify time windows at which the carbon
intensity of a given analysis step will likely be lowest.
Goyal-Kamal, F. B., Schmidt, V., et al. (2021). CodeCarbon: Estimate and track
carbon emissions from machine learning computing. Zenodo. Available at:
https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.4699491

Poster number: M_PZ4_096 (TP)

## Aerobic exercise improves dorsal hippocampal CA1 synaptic plasticity and
novel object memory in the sub-chronic phencyclidine rat model for
schizophrenia
Authors: Ningyuan Sun - Faculty of Biology, Medicine and Health
University of Manchester; Michael Harte - Faculty of Biology, Medicine and
Health University of Manchester; John Gigg - Faculty of Biology, Medicine and
Health University of Manchester
Introduction
Evidence suggests that aerobic exercise improves neurocognition and increases
relative hippocampal volume in patients with schizophrenia. Here, we introduced
chronic exercise to the sub-chronic phencyclidine (scPCP) rat model for
schizophrenia to investigate its effect on the cognitive impairment associated
with schizophrenia.
Methods
40 Female Lister Hooded rats were dosed with either saline or PCP (2 mg/kg, i.p.)
twice daily for seven days. Running wheels were provided for aerobic exercise, 1
hour daily for 30 days. Novel object recognition memory was measured after 6
weeks of exercise. Synaptic plasticity in the dorsal hippocampus was then
assessed via acute in vivo electrophysiology under urethane anaesthesia (30%
w.v.; 1.4g/kg i.p.). The hippocampal CA1 Schaffer-evoked field excitatory
postsynaptic potential (fEPSP) was analysed to measure short and long-term
synaptic plasticity. Data were analysed with Student t-test and mixed-effect
three-way ANOVA.
Results
Behavioural testing after exercise showed improved novel object recognition
memory in the exercised scPCP group. The nonexercised scPCP group showed smaller
potentiation after high-frequency stimulation compared to the other three
groups, especially for response amplitude. However, the exercised scPCP group
showed similar potentiation to the control group. Effects on short-term
plasticity will also be presented. In conclusion, chronic aerobic exercise
appears to rescue cognitive and hippocampal synaptic deficits in the scPCP rat
model.

Poster number: M_PZ4_097 (TP)

Sub-Theme: Parkinson's Disease: Molecular Mechanisms and Novel
Therapeutic Approaches in Patient-Derived Models

## Disturbed basal mitophagy and neuronal activity in Parkinson’s
patient-derived dopaminergic neurons with an α- synuclein gene triplication
mutation
Authors: Elliot D. Mock, University of Oxford; Brent Ryan -
Department of Physiology, Anatomy & Genetics University of Oxford; Richard
Wade-Martins - Department of Physiology, Anatomy & Genetics University of
Oxford
Introduction
α-Synuclein accumulation in Lewy bodies in the brain is one of the hallmarks of
Parkinson’s disease (PD), which predominantly affects dopaminergic neurons in
the substantia nigra pars compacta. α-Synuclein has been linked to dysfunctional
degradation of mitochondria or mitophagy and impaired neuronal activity, however
the exact mechanisms how α-synuclein contributes towards these phenotypes are
poorly understood. Here, we have characterised induced pluripotent stem cell
(iPSC)-derived dopaminergic neurons from a patient with an α-synuclein (SNCA)
gene triplication mutation, which causes a rare form of early-onset familial PD,
and compared these to neurons from healthy control volunteers.
Methods
All iPSC lines were derived from dermal fibroblasts from healthy donors or PD
patients which have been recruited through the Discovery clinical cohort and
gave signed informed consent (Ethics committee: National Health Service, Health
Research Authority, NRES Committee South Central, Berkshire, UK, REC
10/H0505/71). The live cell mt-Keima mitophagy assay was used to measure basal
mitophagy and PINK1-Parkin dependent mitophagy by treatment with the
mitochondrial uncoupling agent CCCP. Neuronal activity was assessed from D30-D90
post-differentiation using a multi-electrode array (MEA) system.
Statistical Analysis
mt-Keima results were analysed by one-way ANOVA. MEA results were analysed by
two-way ANOVA.
Results
We find that under basal conditions SNCA triplication neurons show an increase in
mitochondria located in lysosomes compared to control neurons 35-50 days
post-differentiation. No significant changes were seen in mitophagy induced by
mitochondrial membrane depolarisation, suggesting that this process is
PINK1-Parkin independent. A neuronal activity assay using multi-electrode arrays
(MEAs) revealed that SNCA triplication neurons have significantly reduced firing
rates and bursting events from D60 post-differentiation onwards to D90. These
combined results suggest that mitochondrial dysfunction is likely to precede
impairment of neuronal activity. Further investigations are underway to pinpoint
how α synuclein deregulates basal mitophagy and to elucidate its connection to
the observed reduction in neuronal activity.

Poster number: M_PZ4_098 (TP)

Sub-Theme: Parkinson's Disease: Molecular Mechanisms and Novel
Therapeutic Approaches in Patient-Derived Models

## Autophagy modulation using small molecules in LRRK2 Parkinson’s patient
fibroblast-derived dopaminergic neurons
Authors: Francesco Capriglia, The University of Sheffield; Tia
Parker - Sheffield Institute for Translational Neuroscience (SITraN) The
University of Sheffield; Tom Leah - Sheffield Institute for Translational
Neuroscience (SITraN) The University of Sheffield; Chris Frank - Target
Validation Verge Genomics; Thomas Nieland - Target Validation Verge Genomics;
Heather Mortiboys - Sheffield Institute for Translational Neuroscience (SITraN)
The University of Sheffield
Parkinson’s Disease (PD) is the second most common neurodegenerative disease,
characterised by degeneration of dopaminergic neurons. The causes of PD are not
fully understood; however, some familial types of PD are due to mutations in
several genes, many of which have a role in autophagy and mitochondria.
For this study we use patient fibroblast-derived dopaminergic neurons (iDANs)
harbouring the LRRK2 G2019S mutation, which is the most common inherited,
autosomal dominant cause of PD. The iDANs were generated from LRRK2 mutant
patient fibroblasts via cellular reprogramming methods which retain ageing
features.
We aim to investigate how modulating the autophagy pathway can potentially
ameliorate the PD phenotype. Moreover, we are working with an industry partner
to validate novel potential therapeutic targets.
We have observed increased autophagosomes and autolysosomes levels in the LRRK2
mutant iDANs compared to control, with an increased number of lysosomes and
mitochondria per cell as well. Furthermore, we found decreased mitophagy rates
in the LRRK2 mutant iDANs. These data are critical to understanding endogenous
functions of LRRK2 in patient derived dopaminergic neurons.
All the data were normalised to the Healthy control vehicle and the means were
compared by two-way ANOVA following by the Dunnett's multiple comparisons
test.
Furthermore, we sought to investigate the effect PDPK1 and PI3KCB inhibitor
compounds on these phenotypes in our patient derived system. PDPK1 and PI3KCB
are two proteins that play a key role in the autophagy pathways. We found these
two small molecules are able to reduce some of the autophagy and mitophagy
alterations seen in iDANs.
Next, we will investigate if these small molecules can also ameliorate the PD
phenotype improving the mitochondrial functionality i.e., either increasing the
mitochondrial membrane potential or shaping the mitochondrial morphology.

Poster number: M_PZ4_099 (TP)

Sub-Theme: Parkinson's Disease: Molecular Mechanisms and Novel
Therapeutic Approaches in Patient-Derived Models

## Effect of LRRK2 inhibitors on autophagy and mitophagy in LRRK2 patient
fibroblast-derived dopaminergic neurons
Authors: Tia Parker 1, University of Sheffield; Francesco Capriglia
1 - Sheffield Institute for Translational Neuroscience (SITraN) University of
Sheffield; Tom Leah 1 - Sheffield Institute for Translational Neuroscience
(SITraN) University of Sheffield; Hassan Hali 1 - Sheffield Institute for
Translational Neuroscience (SITraN) University of Sheffield; Thomas Nieland 2 -
Translational Genomics Verge Genomics; Chris Frank 2 - Translational Genomics
Verge Genomics; Heather Mortiboys 1 - Sheffield Institute for Translational
Neuroscience (SITraN) University of Sheffield
Parkinson’s Disease (PD) is a progressive neurodegenerative disease characterised
by the loss of dopaminergic neurons in the substantia nigra pars compacta
(SNpc). It is the 2nd most common form of neurodegeneration and is
multifactorial, having genetic and non-genetic causes. Notable mechanisms
involved PD development include the accumulation of misfolded proteins
aggregates (alpha-synuclein), autophagy impairment, and mitochondrial and
lysosomal dysfunction.
This study used patient fibroblast-derived dopaminergic neurons (iDANs)
possessing the LRRK2 G2019S mutation. The iDANs were generated from LRRK2 mutant
patient fibroblasts via cellular reprogramming methods which retain ageing
features. LRRK2 mutations are one of the most prominent monogenetic risk factors
for PD linked to both familial and sporadic forms of the disease. The LRRK2
G2019S “gain of function” mutation occurs in the LRRK2 kinase domain and leads
to pathogenic kinase activity via aberrant phosphorylation, which in turn
increases lysosome formation and alters autophagy. Therefore, to better
understand endogenous functions of this phenotype and cellular pathways, we used
three LRRK2 inhibitor compounds on LRRK2 mutant iDANs.
For the parameters we investigated regarding autophagy and mitophagy, data was
normalised to the vehicle control and analysed using a two-way ANOVA, followed
by Dunnett’s Test for Multiple Comparisons.
Compared to the healthy control, the LRRK2 mutant iDANs have shown increased
lysosomal and mitochondrial numbers per cell, decreased autophagy rates and
increased LC3 puncta and autophagy levels. We found that LRRK2 inhibitors
improve autophagy and mitophagy related alterations within our mutant line, with
GSK2578215A having the most significant effects in a dose-dependent manner.
Our findings demonstrate that treatment with LRRK2 inhibitor small molecules
reverses pathological phenotypes observed in autophagy and mitophagy. Future
work will focus on investigating mitochondrial functionality via membrane
potential and utilising live assays to assess the functional properties and
morphology of the LRRK2 iDANs treated with LRRK2 inhibitors.

Poster number: M_PZ4_261 (TP)

Sub-Theme: Parkinson's Disease: Molecular Mechanisms and Novel
Therapeutic Approaches in Patient-Derived Models

## Primary Screen of Novel Compounds for the Treatment of Parkinson’s
Disease
Authors: Louise Heywood, Univeristy of Sheffield
Introduction: Parkinson’s Disease (PD) is the second most common
neurodegenerative disease worldwide, caused by the loss of dopaminergic neurons
in the substantia nigra. There are currently no licensed compounds for PD
treatment capable of modifying the disease progression. We have previously
identified the naturally occurring bile acid ursodeoxycholic acid (UDCA) as
boosting mitochondrial function in PD patient cells, subsequently we screened
122 bile acid metabolites and synthetic derivatives and identified 5 top
performing compounds capable of recovering mitochondrial defects seen in PD
patient fibroblasts. Here we have performed a primary screen of 82 analogues and
metabolites of two of these top five compounds in sporadic (sPD) patient
fibroblasts for effects on mitochondria and ATP production.
Methods: Three age- and sex-matched pairs of sPD patient and healthy control
fibroblast cell lines were used to screen 82 compounds for restorative activity
in mitochondrial membrane potential (MMP) and total cellular ATP production.
Compounds were tested at 100nM and 1uM. Lead compounds were tested in an Agilent
XF Seahorse MitoStress assay to detect any possible effects on mitochondrial
respiration. Each compound was assessed compared to the positive effect of UDCA
which we have previously published.
Approach for statistical analysis: All compounds were tested with three
independent biological repeats (n=3). Screening data was analysed for compounds
restoring mitochondrial parameters at least 1 standard deviation and 2 standard
deviations above the vehicle treated mean in each sPD patient line; then
assessed for a positive effect across multiple lines. Seahorse data was analysed
using 2-way ANOVA with multiple corrections to identify compounds capable of
significantly increasing or decreasing respiratory chain parameters.
Results and conclusions: A total of 26 compounds were found to increase total
cellular ATP production and 13 to improve MMP, without causing toxicity in the
sPD fibroblasts. These compounds improved ATP levels or MMP to above vehicle
control sPD levels, with some returning levels to those of control cell lines
and will be further assessed in dose-response and downstream assays to identify
mechanisms of action. Two priority compounds assessed
Conflict of interest: HM and OB are in receipt of research funding from NZP UK
Ltd. which co-funds LH's studentship.

Poster number: M_PZ4_262 (TP)

Sub-Theme: Parkinson's Disease: Molecular Mechanisms and Novel
Therapeutic Approaches in Patient-Derived Models

## Stratifying People with Sporadic Parkinson’s Disease by Pathological
Mechanism in Patient-Derived Fibroblasts
Authors: Toby Burgess, University of Sheffield; Thomas Payne -
Neuroscience University of Sheffield; Katy Barnes - Neuroscience University of
Sheffield; Oliver Bandmann - Neuroscience University of Sheffield; Heather
Mortiboys - Neuroscience University of Sheffield
Objectives
To stratify a new cohort of Sporadic Parkinson’s disease (sPD) patients into
small, homogeneous subgroups defined by specific mitochondrial and lysosomal
dysfunction.
Background
sPD is widely recognised as a heterogeneous disorder, both clinically and
mechanistically. Several dysfunctional mechanisms have been identified,
including mitochondrial and lysosomal dysfunction. However, clinical trials
select participants without considering mechanism heterogeneity and continually
fail to reach efficacy outcomes.
Methodology
We investigated mitochondrial and lysosomal dysfunction, two key mechanisms of
sPD and promising targets for therapeutics. Imaging and biochemical assays
assessed mitochondrial and lysosomal health parameters in fibroblasts from a new
cohort consisting of 35 sPD patients and 24 healthy individuals. The sPD
population was then stratified by assessing patterns of dysfunction across these
parameters. Validation of these subgroups is currently being undertaken in the
patient fibroblasts and induced Dopaminergic Neurons.
Statistical Analysis Approach
The results for each parameter were transformed to z-scores in proportion to the
entire control population. Composite z-scores across triplicate repeats were
calculated, using the sum of the Pearson correlation coefficients between all
components, and was repeated for both media conditions to provide a single
z-score for each parameter per cell line. Population differences were then
interrogated using the T-test and F-test of equality of variance.
Results
The sPD population was heterogeneous in 88% of mitochondrial and lysosomal
parameters. Stratification of this cohort by distinct patterns of dysfunction
identified four unique subgroups, defined by mitochondrial dysfunction,
lysosomal dysfunction or both. The top 3 patients in each subgroup were selected
for validation and mechanism studies, which discovered a significant reduction
in maximal respiration in the pure mitochondrial dysfunction subgroup.
Conclusion
This study suggests that it is possible to stratify cohorts of sPD patients
providing a possible model for clinical trial recruitment in order to aid the
effectiveness, and therefore approval, of new therapeutics and support an
approach to personalised treatment plans.

Poster number: M_PZ4_263 (TP)

Sub-Theme: Parkinson's Disease: Molecular Mechanisms and Novel
Therapeutic Approaches in Patient-Derived Models

## MicroRNA and gene expression profiles in a Parkinson’s disease cell
model
Authors: Paul Moran, University of Hertfordshire; Dr Mahmoud M.
Iravani - Department of Clinical, Pharmaceutical and Biological Science
University of Hertfordshire; Dr Maria Braoudaki - Department of Clinical,
Pharmaceutical and Biological Science University of Hertfordshire
Introduction: Parkinson’s disease (PD) is a neurological condition that
predominantly effects movement. It is estimated that 1% of the population over
65 will develop PD, rising to 3% by the age of 85. Analysis of MicroRNA (miRNA)
may highlight the genetic mechanisms that contribute to pathogenesis of PD. It
has been suggested that miRNA regulate up to 60% of protein coding genes and the
dysregulation may contribute to the pathogenesis of different disease states
within the body. Identification of miRNA expression profiles may allow for the
early identification of PD, potentially allowing for earlier medical
intervention before the disease onset. The aim of this study was to analyse the
expression of miRNAs and the possible interaction of genes in cells of
dopaminergic phenotype after they have been subjected to a mitochondrial or
proteasomal inhibitor.
Methods: The SH-SY5Y cells were exposed to the mitochondrial neurotoxin MPP+ and
proteasome inhibitor MG132 for 24 hours to result in 50% cell death. The cells
were extracted using TRIzol and purified using the mirvana kit.
Following isolation and purification, reverse transcriptase quantitative
polymerase chain reaction was conducted to observe the possible dysregulation of
the genes, SNCA, ITPR1 and CACNA1C and the PD associated miRNA: miR-107, and
miR-128a, in the absence and the presence of MPP+ or MG132.
Approach for statistical analysis: Paired t-test was used to observe the 2-ΔΔCt
for expression variation between
wildtype cells and drug exposed cells.
Results and conclusions: The three genes and miR-107 exposed to MPP+ were all
significantly down regulated (p<0.05), SNCA (90.94%), ITPR1 (56.43%), CACNA1C
(79.72%) and miR-107 (74.56%). There was a significant
downregulation (p<0.05) of SNCA (87.11%) and miRNAs, miR-107 (95.71%) and
miR-128a (62.09%) that had exposure to MG132. Interestingly, both MPP+ and MG132
caused a similar level of decreased expression in SNCA, although both drugs have
a different mode of action. Based on current findings, the expression data
generated indicate that both drugs may cause significant down regulation of
specific genes and miRNAs within the cell potentially identifying a contributing
factor associated with the pathogenesis of PD.

Poster number: M_PZ4_264 (TP)

Sub-Theme: Music-Enhanced Interventions for Parkinson's: Imagery,
Movement, and Quality of Life Improvements

## Moving and music in my head: Vividness and use of imagery related to music
and movement in people with Parkinson’s
Authors: Ellen Poliakoff, University of Manchester; Judith Bek -
Centre for Motor Control University of Toronto; Michelle Phillips - Royal
Northern College of Music Royal Northern College of Music; William R. Young -
School of Sport and Health Sciences University of Exeter; Dawn C. Rose - School
of Music Lucerne University of Applied Sciences and Arts
Introduction: Parkinson's disease affects multiple aspects of movement, impacting
significantly on everyday tasks. Music is used in interventions for people with
Parkinson’s, either to pace movements, or as an integral element of activities
such as dance. This study explored self-reported vividness of motor imagery
(imagined movements) evoked by music and auditory (including musical) imagery in
people with Parkinson’s, and whether and how they use these types of imagery in
everyday life. We investigated whether vividness and use of imagery were
associated with prior music and dance experience.
Methods: Participants (N=199) completed an online survey including: (i) vividness
ratings of visual and kinaesthetic music-evoked motor imagery, (ii) vividness of
auditory imagery, and (iii) ratings and open questions about their everyday use
of these types of imagery.
Approach for statistical analysis: This study followed a pre-registered analysis
plan (logged on OSF). We used correlations to explore relationships between
imagery vividness and use and (a) severity of Parkinson’s symptoms, (b) musical
and dance experience.
Results and conclusions: While most participants reported experiencing
music-evoked motor imagery (with more vivid visual than kinaesthetic motor
imagery), <20% reported actively using music to support motor imagery in
daily activities. In contrast, participants reported a broad range of contexts
and uses for musical imagery (imagined music), from supporting movement (e.g.,
walking or exercise) to emotion regulation and concentration. Correlational
analyses associated music-evoked motor imagery with an urge to dance and musical
training, while the use of musical imagery was associated with singing ability.
A minority of participants reported not experiencing either motor or musical
imagery, suggesting that interventions based on imagery may not be suitable for
all. Nonetheless, even participants with more severe motor symptoms reported
both types of imagery, indicating promise for their strategic use at different
stages of Parkinson’s. Indeed, musical and motor imagery have the potential
either separately or combined to support rehabilitation strategies for people
with Parkinson’s.
 
Poster number: M_PZ4_265 (PP)

Sub-Theme: Music-Enhanced Interventions for Parkinson's: Imagery,
Movement, and Quality of Life Improvements

## Music, Movement, Mood & Parkinson's: A transdisciplinary PPI approach to
optimizing the use of music in rehabilitation for people with
Parkinson’s
Authors: Marietta Ungerer, University of Hertfordshire / Lucerne
University of Applied Sciences and Arts; Dr Sabrina Köchli - School of Music
Lucerne University of Applied Sciences and Arts; Dr Dawn Rose - School of Music
Lucerne University of Applied Sciences and Arts
Introduction
Medication/surgical options do not ameliorate all symptoms in Parkinson's so
adjunct therapies are needed to improve quality of life (QoL). Therapeutic
approaches involving physical activities and music can increase QoL for people
with Parkinson's (PwP; Karageorghis et al., 2020). This research study will test
a new music-based group intervention (Songlines) designed for and with PwP to
improve mood and movement.
Methods
An inclusive approach (Patient and Public Involvement, PPI) working with PwP,
practitioners and medical professionals was used to create context appropriate
materials for the new intervention. This involved 15 workshops and 28 interviews
exploring the use of music in relation to potential rehabilitative mechanisms,
and two online surveys documenting the use of music in everyday life by Swiss
and British PwP (Rose et al., 2022).
The Songlines intervention using the co-created materials will now be evaluated
using a within-subject repeated measures design (N=72). Mixed methods involving
a newly developed protocol integrating a pressure sensitive gait mat with motion
capture technology will record change over time in functional mobility.
Standardized measures (e.g., PDQ-39, MDS-UPDRS) and qualitative methods will
track change over time in relation to motivation and mood.
Statistical analyses
The systematic development process has produced a protocol that directly links
tasks with outcomes, thereby generating a series of testable hypotheses.
Repeated measures ANCOVAs will be conducted on the quantitative data, while
thematic analyses of qualitative data will provide insight into participant
experiences.
References
Karageorghis, C. I., Rose, D., Annett, L. E., Bek, J., Bottoms, L., Lovatt, P.
J., Poliakoff, E., Schultz, B. G., Whyatt, C. P., Young, W. R., &
Delevoye-Turrell, Y. N. (2020). The BASES Expert Statement on the Use of Music
for Movement among People with Parkinson’s. The Sport & Exercise Scientist,
63, 6-7.
Rose, D.C., Poliakoff, E., Hadley, R., Guérin, S.M.R., Phillips, M., & Young,
W.R. (2022). Levelling the playing field: The role of workshops to explore how
people with Parkinson's use music for mood and movement management as part of a
patient and public involvement strategy. Front. Rehab. Sco, 3:873216.

Poster number: M_PZ4_105 (PP)

Sub-Theme: Functional Connectivity, Preprocessing Methods, and
Autism Spectrum Disorder: Evaluating the Impact on Brain Network Analyses

## Impact of global signal regression on connectome predictive modelling in
autism spectrum disorder
Authors: Carolina Moretti Ierardi, King's College London; Clara
Riégis - Neuroimaging King's College London; František Váša - Neuroimaging
King's College London
Introduction
Connectome-based predictive modelling (CPM; Shen et al. 2017) is a recently
developed method that enables researchers to establish brain-behaviour
predictive relationships based on neuroimaging data. However, there is little
consensus on how to best preprocess the input neuroimaging data. One of the most
controversial steps is global signal regression (GSR), which involves extracting
the shared variance from the voxelwise fMRI time series. Although this step can
eliminate artifacts such as head movement, respiration and cardiac cycles,
others claim that by removing the global signal, important neural information is
lost (Murphy et al., 2017). Our goal is to investigate the impact of GSR on CPM
predictive power and predictive networks identified.
Methods
We will use the ABIDE dataset with 573 controls and 539 autism spectrum disorder
(ASD) patients (Craddock et al., 2013). Preprocessed resting-state fMRI data
with and without GSR will allow for a comparison between models predicting
clinical diagnosis based on each type of data. We will apply a modified version
of CPM. Traditionally, CPM is used to predict continuous values: we aim to
predict diagnostic categories instead.
Approach for statistical analysis
Analysis steps include a) using t-tests to identify edges predictive of clinical
diagnosis, b) creating a summary value for each participant with the predictive
edge weights, c) fitting a classification model to the training data, d) 10-fold
cross-validation in novel subjects, using the model generated in the previous
step and e) testing performance, by comparing predicted to actual diagnosis for
new participants with accuracy, sensitivity and specificity measures. This
procedure will be done across both datasets: once using data with GSR and once
using data without GSR. Differences in predictive power between data with and
without GSR will be evaluated using permutation testing. Overlap between
predictive networks derived from the data with and without GSR will be
quantified using the Dice coefficient. For further details, see Fig. 1.
References
Craddock, C., et al. Frontiers in Neuroinformatics, 7, 27. (2013) Murphy, K.,
& Fox, M. D. NeuroImage, 154, 169-173. (2017) Shen, X., et al. Nat Protoc
12, 506–518. (2017)
 
Poster number: M_PZ4_106 (PP)

Sub-Theme: Functional Connectivity, Preprocessing Methods, and
Autism Spectrum Disorder: Evaluating the Impact on Brain Network Analyses

## The dependence of network organization on overall functional connectivity and
its impact on classification of autism spectrum disorder
Authors: Clara Riégis, King's College London; Carolina Moretti
lerardi - Neuroimaging King's College London; František Váša - Neuroimaging
King's College London
Introduction
Graph theory is a key approach to study brain connectivity. However, some network
measures are strongly correlated with overall functional connectivity, and
accounting for this reduces group differences (van den Heuvel et al., NeuroImage
2017). These findings raise questions about the diagnostic and prognostic
relevance of graph theory. Individual differences in overall functional
connectivity can be removed by applying global signal regression (GSR), a
controversial pre-processing method that removes noise but potentially also
valuable neuronal information. An alternative method is mean regression (MR) to
remove shared variance between mean functional connectivity and edge weight
across participants. Our aim is to investigate the dependence of network
organisation on overall functional connectivity and its impact on classification
of autism spectrum disorder (ASD), a neurodevelopmental condition in which
atypical functional connectivity patterns have been observed (Keown et al.,
Biol. Psych. CNNI 2017).
Methods
Resting state fMRI data (N = 785) from the Autism Brain Imaging Data Exchange
(ABIDE) dataset pre-processed with the Connectome Computation System (CCS)
pipeline and parcellated using the Harvard-Oxford atlas will be used.
Connectomes will be built using Pearson’s correlation, for both raw (Not
Regressed, NR) and GSR data. Mean regression will be applied to NR connectomes.
Each individual NR, MR, and GSR connectome will be proportionally thresholded to
retain 5%, 15%, or 25% of the strongest edges. Three representative graph
theoretic measures – global clustering, assortativity and characteristic path
length – will be calculated using each thresholded connectome.
Statistical analysis
Mann Whitney U tests will be used to assess the effect of MR and GSR on group
difference in network measures between ASD patients and Typical controls (TC).
The proportion of shared variance between NR, MR and GSR measures and mean
functional connectivity will be quantified using simple linear regressions. A
kernel Support Vector machine (kSVM) applied using 5-fold cross-validation will
be used to evaluate the relevance of graph theoretic measures in the phenotypic
categorization of ASD patients, comparing NR, MR, and GSR thresholded
connectome.
 
Poster number: T_PZ3_088 (TP)

Sub-Theme: Altered States of Consciousness: Insights from Brain
Connectivity and Anxiety Regulation Techniques

## Cerebral haemodynamic correlates of altered consciousness states induced by
High-ventilation breathwork
Authors: Amy Kartar, Brighton and Sussex Medical School; Balázs
Örzsik - Radiology Leiden University Medical Center, Leiden, Netherlands; Toru
Horinouchi - Department of Neuroscience Brighton and Sussex Medical School;
Samira Bouyagoub - Clinical Imaging Sciences Brighton and Sussex Medical School,
Department of Neuroscience Brighton and Sussex Medical School; Duncan Bailey,
Psychophysiology Brighton BodyTalk; Hugo Critchley - Department of Neuroscience
Brighton and Sussex Medical School; Yoko Nagai - Department of Neuroscience
Brighton and Sussex Medical School; Iris Asllani - Clinical Imaging Sciences
Brighton and Sussex Medical School; Alessandro Colasanti - Department of
Neuroscience Brighton and Sussex Medical School
INTRODUCTION
Therapeutic breathwork practitioners who employ hyperventilation-like breathing
(HVB) techniques report profound subjective effects resembling aspects of
altered states of consciousness (ASC) induced by 5-HT2A agonists such as
Psiloycbin. We hypothesize that altered cerebral haemodynamics induced by
prolonged voluntary hyperventilation might be implicated in the emergence of
these subjective effects.
METHODS
19 healthy participants with 6-months+ experience in HVB were recruited.
Participants performed 20 minutes of normal breathing followed by 25 minutes of
HVB facilitated by breathing instructions, whilst undergoing MRI scanning.
Cerebral blood flow (CBF) was measured using pseudo-continuous arterial spin
labelling (pcASL) at baseline (BASE), and twice during HVB, i.e., immediately
after starting HVB (START HVB), and after 6 minutes of uninterrupted HVB
(SUSTAINED HVB). Capnograph measurements confirmed end-tidal CO2 remained below
20mmHg during SUSTAINED HBV. Subjective ratings of ASC were collected via the 5
dimensions of ASC questionnaire.
ANALYSIS
CBF maps were partial volume corrected and normalised in MNI space. Differences
between each of the HBV phase and BASE were tested using paired-sample t-tests,
and voxelwise maps of delta CBF were computed. Subjective measures were
retrospectively assessed using the ASC domain of the 5-Dimensional ASC Rating
Scale and correlated to deltaCBF.
RESULTS AND CONCLUSIONS:
We observed time-dependent reductions of CBF by HBV, relative to BASE. CBF was
reduced by 30.6% and 41.9% during START HVB and SUSTAINED respectively.
ASC scores were correlated to deltaCBF in the left posterior insula both at the
start of HVB and SUSTAINED HVB, whilst they correlated to deltaCBF in the
anterior cingulate only in the SUSTAINED HVB. Our findings indicate that rCBF
reductions in areas critically involved in conscious and affective
representations of internal states, namely the dorsal and posterior insula and
the anterior cingulate cortex, are related to subjective reports of ASC. It is
plausible that the progressive disruption of insular - cingulate interactions
compromises central aspects of self-representation and ultimately leading to
short-lived ASC-like experience.
 
Poster number: T_PZ3_089 (PP)

Sub-Theme: Altered States of Consciousness: Insights from Brain
Connectivity and Anxiety Regulation Techniques

## The Effect of C02-Induced Anxiety on Functional Connectivity
Authors: Daniel Graham, University of Plymouth; Santra Mathews -
School of Psychology University of Plymouth; Gary Smerdon - DDRC Healthcare DDRC
Healthcare; Hannah Windmill - Brain Research Imaging Centre University of
Plymouth; Alastair Smith - School of Psychology University of Plymouth;
Johnathan Marsden - School of Health Professions University of Plymouth; Stephen
D Hall - Brain Research Imaging Centre University of Plymouth
Background
The CO2 challenge is an experimental model of anxiety in which participants
breathe in an increased level of CO2 (typically around 5-9%), which induces a
temporary state of increased anxiety. While the subjective and cognitive effects
of the CO2 model have been well studied, there is limited research showing how
the CO2 model affects the brain. Such a model has great potential for advancing
our knowledge of the neural basis and treatment targets for anxiety disorders.
Here we will characterise the brain networks underlying CO2 -induced anxiety by
measuring changes in functional connectivity (FC) using resting-state fMRI
during the administration of elevated levels of CO2.
Methods
Participants (n=20) will complete the State-Trait Anxiety Inventory (STAI) to
obtain an established measure of trait anxiety. Prior to participation in the
MRI component, a brief (2-minute) exposure to the CO2 model will be used to
screen for intolerance to the protocol. Participants will then complete the MRI
experiment consisting of a high- resolution structural scan (MPRAGE) followed by
blinded exposure to medical air and an elevated (6%) CO2 mixture. Gasses will be
delivered to a mouthpiece via a Douglas bag. Heart rate and blood oxygen levels
will be recorded continuously throughout the scan session, for both participant
safety monitoring and physiological analysis.
Subjective rating of state anxiety will also be recorded pre/post-inhalation
phase, using the STAI and a standard 10- point rating scale.
Proposed analysis.
A general linear model will be used to determine the relationship between FC,
[pre, peri, and post] anxiety measures, and physiological recordings. The
analysis will include: (i) whole brain voxel-wise analyses, (ii) Seed-based and
ROI-ROI (using limbic and HPA structures such as amygdala and hippocampi), and
(iii) Dynamic connectivity measures to observe the evolution of FC over time due
to CO2-induced anxiety. These findings will advance our understanding of the
neuropsychophysiological mechanisms of acute and pathological anxiety, and
further, validate the CO2 experimental model as a valuable research tool.

Poster number: T_PZ3_090 (TP)

Sub-Theme: Altered States of Consciousness: Insights from Brain
Connectivity and Anxiety Regulation Techniques

## The Effect of Mindset on Anxiety and Stress Regulation: A Virtual Reality
Biofeedback Intervention
Authors: Grace Y.S. Leung, University of Cambridge; Lucie
Daniel-Watanabe - Department of Psychiatry University of Cambridge; Johanna J.
Finnemann - Department of Psychiatry University of Cambridge; Paul C. Fletcher -
Department of Psychiatry University of Cambridge
As a promising tool to relieve anxiety and stress, game-based virtual reality
(VR) biofeedback represents individuals’ real-time physiological data within an
immersive, dynamic, and interactive environment. Users are required to learn to
monitor and regulate their physiological responses in order to successfully
overcome challenges posed by the game environment. While biofeedback aims to
facilitate favourable behavioural modification for emotion regulation,
performance in biofeedback training is variable across individuals, which could
be partly accounted for by implicit theories relating to individuals’ “mindset”:
the perceived stability of human attributes. This social-cognitive construct
suggests that individuals’ prior experiences, knowledge, and expectations may
profoundly shape their perception towards the malleability of emotional
regulation skills, and in the context of this study, whether the ability to
control physiological responses could be learnt through effort.
This study examined the effect of mindset on the ability to control heart rate
and regulate stress levels in a novel VR biofeedback game. Healthy participants
(n = 53) took part in a 5-minute biofeedback training and a subsequent 10-
minute stress-inducing game in which self-regulation was required to ensure
survival. Photoplethysmography was measured throughout the game experience to
extract heart rate recordings and stress scores. Mindset scores were assessed by
Implicit Theories scales at baseline and post-intervention. Pearson’s
correlations were used to examine the relationship among stress and
pre-intervention anxiety mindset as well as the overall mindset. Paired-sample
t- tests were used to further explore the possibility of a two-way relationship
by examining whether experience of the biofeedback training had an impact on
mindset. The biofeedback game was associated with a significant shift towards
growth mindset. The change in mindset was also associated with lower levels of
stress, regardless of their starting mindset. These early results suggest the
potential of biofeedback games for improving mindset and anxiety symptoms
warrants future investigation

Poster number: T_PZ3_092 (TP)

Sub-Theme: Light Exposure, Sleep, and Work Patterns: Impact on
Cognitive Function and Interoception

## Interoception and a 4-day working week
Authors: Sam Wray, University of Sussex; Joanna McLaren - Department
of Psychology University of Sussex; Sinead Moore - Department of Psychology
University of Sussex; Chris Racey - Department of Psychology University of
Sussex; Samira Bouyagoub - Clinical Imaging Sciences Centre University of
Sussex; James Livermore - Department of Psychology University of Sussex; Dan
Campbell-Meiklejohn - Department of Psychology University of Sussex; Sarah
Garfinkel - Institute of Cognitive Neuroscience University College London;
Charlotte Rae - Department of Psychology University of Sussex
1) Introduction
Interoception is the ability of the brain to track internal bodily states, with
the aim of responding appropriately in order to achieve homeostasis.
Interoception has been associated with cognitive and emotional processes, while
dysfunction in the interoceptive system plays a central role in the aetiology of
mental health disorders. Sleep quality and stress, which are influenced by
occupational status and working patterns, have been linked to changes in
specific dimensions of interoception. In the current study, we investigated
whether a 4-day working week impacted interoceptive function in a healthy
population.
2) Methods
20 employees in businesses switching from a 5-day to a 4-day working week with no
loss of salary were recruited. Participants performed an interoceptive focus
task while undergoing fMRI, in addition to out-of-scanner heartbeat perception
tasks and interoceptive questionnaires, before and after a 12-week trial of a
4-day working week.
3) Approach for statistical analysis
The fMRi data obtained during the interoceptive focus task was analysed with
first- and second-level models. We assessed which brain areas were active during
the interoceptive-focus task and if there was any significant change in
task-related activity after the 4-day working week trial period.
T-tests were used to investigate whether there were significant changes in the
heartbeat perception tasks and interoceptive questionnaires as a result of a
4-day working week. Linear regression was used to detect the presence of
subgroups that might benefit most from a 4-day working week.
4) Results and conclusions
The mid and posterior insula showed significant activity during the interoceptive
focus task compared to the control task. However, no significant changes were
observed as a result of the 4-day week.
A 4-day week was associated with close to significant changes in interoceptive
accuracy and sensibility. Results also suggested the presence of subgroups most
likely to benefit from a 4-day week in terms of interoceptive function.
Sample size likely limited statistical power (recruitment continues). Future work
can assess the fMRI data on a more fine-grained level, for instance utilising
participant ratings obtained during the focus task.
 
Poster number: T_PZ3_093 (TP)

Sub-Theme: Advancements in Neuroimaging: Exploring Perception,
Arousal, and Integration in the Human Brain

## Scene-selectivity in CA1/subicular complex: Multivoxel pattern analysis at
7T
Authors: Marie-Lucie Read, Cardiff University; Samuel C. Berry -
Department of Psychology Royal Holloway, University of London; Natalie L. Voets
- Wellcome Centre for Integrative Neuroimaging John Radcliffe Hospital; Kim S.
Graham - School of Psychology University of Edinburgh; Jiaxiang Zhang - Cardiff
University Brain Research Imaging Centre Cardiff University; Andrew D. Lawrence
- Cardiff University Brain Research Imaging Centre Cardiff University; John P.
Aggleton - Cardiff University Brain Research Imaging Centre Cardiff University;
Carl J. Hodgetts - Department of Psychology Royal Holloway, University of
London
Introduction: Univariate functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) studies in
humans suggest that the anteromedial subicular complex of the hippocampus
supports conjunctive scene representations (e.g. Hodgetts et al., 2017).
However, it is possible that univariate approaches were not sufficiently
sensitive to detect scene-related activity in other subfields that have been
implicated in spatial processing (e.g. CA1). Further, functional gradients in
the hippocampus (which may arise via patterns of extrinsic connectivity) do not
respect classical subfield boundary definitions, and it may be that category
sensitivity does not adhere to discrete anatomical boundaries but is distributed
across anatomical subfields. To address this, we applied searchlight
multivariate pattern analysis to 7T fMRI data of healthy adults who undertook a
perceptual odd-one-out task for scenes and other categories, hypothesising that
scene classification would be possible in multiple hippocampal regions within,
but not constrained to, distal subicular complex and CA1.
Methods: 25 young adults completed an odd-one-out discrimination task for scenes,
faces, objects, and size during 7T fMRI (voxel size: 1.2mm3; Fig 1A).
Approach for statistical analysis: Support vector machine searchlights (5 k-folds
2 repeats) were applied to each category pair (e.g. scenes vs. faces).
Permutation tests (FSL Randomise) were carried out on classification accuracies.
Masks of significant classification for scenes vs. non-scene categories
(p<0.01) were combined creating a ‘scene- sensitive’ map. To inspect
individual differences within subicular complex and CA1, individual searchlight
maps were binarized and overlaid, producing probabilistic overlap maps.
Results and conclusions: The scene-sensitive searchlight map overlapped with
subicular complex (distal subiculum, pre/para subiculum), proximal CA1, as well
as retrosplenial cortex and parahippocampal place area (Fig.1B).
Probabilistic overlap maps converged with searchlight findings (revealing partial
overlap in anterior subicular complex/CA1), but the lack of perfect overlap also
reveals inter-individual differences in exact locations of scene sensitive
regions. (Fig.1C). Our work helps to map the scene processing network within the
human hippocampus.
 
Poster number: T_PZ4_094 (PP)

Sub-Theme: Advancements in Neuroimaging: Exploring Perception,
Arousal, and Integration in the Human Brain

## Laminar responses to repeated faces in ventral visual stream using 7T
fMRI
Authors: Scott Lee, University of Cambridge
Repeated face images cause reduced neural activity in brain regions such as
occipital face area (OFA) and fusiform face area (FFA). A predictive coding
framework suggests that repetition increases the precision of “top-down”
predictions from higher to lower visual regions, reducing prediction errors that
are assumed to drive fMRI BOLD signal. Our recent study supports the theory by
showing that the effect of repetition modulated effective connectivity between
ventral visual regions. Nevertheless, the theory makes additional predictions
about the cortical layers involved, proposing that the decreased activity would
be observed in the superficial pyramidal cells that encode prediction error. The
study aims to test this prediction.
At least 8 participants will be recruited. The stimuli and procedures will be the
same with the face repetition paradigm on OpenfMRI (https://www.openfmri.org/dataset/ds000117/), which is a
multi-modal neuroimaging dataset and has been widely used for methodological
developments. Participants will make left-right symmetry judgments to novel and
repeated face images for 9 sessions. Imaging data will be acquired on a Siemens
7T Terra scanner with a 32-channel phased-array head coil. Structural images
will be acquired using MP2RAGE T1-weighted sequence. Functional images will be
acquired using a multi-band GE sequence, with 0.8mm isotropic voxel sizes, along
the ventral visual pathway. We will assign voxels to three layers (superficial,
middle, deep) using the equi- volume approach implemented in BrainVoyager.
Layer-specific time courses will be extracted from the OFA and FFA, and the GLM
used to estimate stimulus-locked fMRI responses to each condition.
We will use repeated-measures ANOVAs to compare across conditions (new vs
repeated). We predict greatest RS in superficial layers (after correcting for
any superficial haemodynamic bias using Deming regression), since it is the
superficial pyramidal cells that encode prediction error in the predictive
coding scheme. However, given the metabolic demand of cells in all layers, we
also expect some (albeit reduced) RS in middle and deep layers.

Poster number: T_PZ4_095 (PP)

Sub-Theme: Advancements in Neuroimaging: Exploring Perception,
Arousal, and Integration in the Human Brain

## Fast Periodic Visual Stimulation – Proof-of-concept for a novel EEG technique
for assessing visuoperception in dementia
Authors: Oliver Hermann, University of Bath
Introduction
Earlier diagnosis of dementia with Lewy bodies (DLB) requires the discovery of
biomarkers that differentiate it from other dementias and healthy ageing.
Promisingly, visuoperceptual impairments are more pronounced in DLB than in
other common dementias. This study aims to show that Fastball, a novel
electroencephalography (EEG) method that objectively and passively assesses an
individual’s ability to discriminate between different categories of stimuli can
capture visuoperception. This proof-of-principle study will test Fastball
visuoperceptual tasks in younger and older adults free of neurodegenerative
disease, with the view that they can subsequently be used to diagnose DLB.
Method
As shown in Figure 1, Fastball requires participants to passively view a stream
of standard (S) and oddball (0) images that periodically vary in their content
whilst their EEG is recorded. If participants can discriminate oddballs from
standard stimuli, two neural responses are elicited: F, a visual steady state
response, and f+, an oddball response.
Consequently, the presence and magnitude of the oddball response provide a
measure of participants’ ability to differentiate the stimulus categories. Based
on sample size calculations, an estimated 20 younger (18-40) and 20 older adults
(55+) will undergo three Fastball conditions that capture different facets of
visuoperception. The conditions will be structured as follows: Line orientation
discrimination – Vertical lines (standard) vs rotated lines (oddball); Object
perception – Scrambled objects (standard) vs complete objects (oddball); Spatial
attention – A triangle in location X (standard) vs a triangle in location Y
(oddball).
Statistical Analysis Approach
To determine ageing’s effect (younger vs older) across conditions, we will use a
2x3 mixed ANCOVA on the SNR of scalp-averaged f+, covarying the SNR of
scalp-averaged F. Bonferroni corrected post-hoc pairwise comparisons will be
performed. In addition, cluster permutation analysis with 1000 permutations and
an initial cluster formation alpha of ≤ 0.05 will explore differences in the
topographic distribution of oddball responses between younger and older adults.
Specifically, the difference in f+ between groups will be assessed across
electrodes per electrode.
 
Poster number: T_PZ4_096 (TP)

Sub-Theme: Advancements in Neuroimaging: Exploring Perception,
Arousal, and Integration in the Human Brain

## Reliability and reproducibility of sexual arousal fMRI paradigms in female
and male HSDD patients
Authors: Natalie Ertl, Invicro/ Imperial College London; Matt Wall -
Clinical Imaging Invicro/ Imperial College London; Ed Mills - Metabolism,
Digestion & Reproduction Imperial College London; Layla Thurston -
Metabolism, Digestion & Reproduction Imperial College London; Tia Salm -
Metabolism, Digestion & Reproduction Imperial College London; Alex Comninos
- Metabolism, Digestion & Reproduction Imperial College London; Waljit
Dhillo - Metabolism, Digestion & Reproduction Imperial College London
Introduction
Hypoactive Sexual Desire Disorder (HSDD) is loss of desire for sexual activities
causing marked distress and interpersonal difficulty. Understanding the neural
correlates of HSDD may improve our knowledge and treatment of the disorder,
however studying sexual desire/arousal with fMRI is complex, and few studies
exist (particularly in male HSDD). Three recent studies have investigated
pharmacological interventions into HSDD in women (x2) and men (x1), using tasks
which present sexual stimuli designed to provoke and measure arousal. The aim
was to use data from the placebo condition in these studies to investigate the
reliability and reproducibility of the tasks across separate samples of females
and identify any consistent differences with males.
Methods
Two fMRI tasks were used to measure desire and arousal in all three studies. The
first was a standard block design with sexual video clips and control clips.
Each clip lasted 20s which may not provide enough time for participants to
become aroused. The second was a naturalistic design where participants watched
an 8-minute-long sexual film.
Participants continuously rated their arousal throughout this task using a
hand-held analogue dial device. This arousal rating was used as a regressor in a
general linear model (GLM). Additionally, the long video was analysed using
Amplitude of Low Frequency Fluctuation (ALFF) and fractional ALFF (fALFF)
analysis which is a model free analysis method (MFAM).
Statistical analysis
Brain activation patterns from the long video (GLM and (f)ALFF analysis) and the
short video, from the three studies were compared using dice coefficients
(DC).
Results
The DC of the female-female and male-female comparisons were broadly similar. The
short video task produced the highest DC across all comparisons (0.57-0.71) and
the long video GLM analysis produced the lowest (0.02-0.33). (f)ALFF analyses
produced dice coefficients between 0.28-0.66.
Conclusions
When measuring arousal, block designs produce robust and reliable results but may
not provide as much ecological validity as naturalistic designs. Analyses using
subjective measures of arousal are less reliable. Using a naturalistic design
with a MFAM may provide better ecological validity without sacrificing
reliability

Poster number: T_PZ4_097 (TP)

Sub-Theme: Advancements in Neuroimaging: Exploring Perception,
Arousal, and Integration in the Human Brain

## Predictable task switching recruits task-active and resting-state
networks
Authors: Danielle Lauren Kurtin, University of Surrey; Garazi
Araña-Oiarbide - Department of Brain Sciences Imperial College London; Adam
Hampshire - Imperial College London Department of Brain Sciences; Ines R
Violante - Psychology University of Surrey
Switching is a difficult cognitive process characterised by slowed responses and
reduced accuracy. It is associated with the recruitment of a large coalition of
task-active regions collectively referred to as the Multiple Demand Cortex
(MDC), and occasionally, the characteristically task-negative Default Mode
Network (DMN). To unpick the role of the DMN during switching we collected fMRI
data from 24 participants playing a task switching paradigm that perturbed
predictability (i.e., cognitive load) across three switch dimensions –
sequential, perceptual, and spatial predictability (Fig 1A). General linear
models computed activity maps unique to switch vs. stay trials and all switch
dimensions, then computed pairwise mutual information functional connectivity
(miFC) between regional timeseries. Full factorial 2x2x2 repeated measures ANOVA
with the 3 predictability dimensions as factors assessed the effects of switch
dimensions on miFC. Results were FDR-corrected for the number of comparisons.
The large (>100) set of results prevents their complete sharing in this
abstract.
Linear mixed effects models (LMEM) showed switch trials exhibited an expected
cost in reaction time (F(1,5855)=151, p=3.4e-22) and that increased sequential
predictability produced a significant benefit to task accuracy (F(1,17996)=4.6,
p=0.03). Switch trials recruited a broader activity map than stay trials
including regions of the DMN, the MDC, and other task-active networks. The only
dimension-specific contrast capturing significant activity showed more
sequentially predictable trials recruited significantly increased activity in
the somatomotor and salience/ventral attention networks as compared to
sequentially unpredictable trials (Fig 2B). Increased sequential predictability
influenced higher miFC between regions in the MDC and DMN, as well as control,
visual, somatomotor, attention, limbic, and temporal parietal networks.
The improved task performance, unique activity, and increased miFC associated
with increased sequential predictability suggest that the DMN may coordinate
more strongly with the MDC to generate a temporal schema of upcoming task
events, which may attenuate switch costs.

Poster number: T_PZ4_098 (TP)

Sub-Theme: Advancements in Neuroimaging: Exploring Perception,
Arousal, and Integration in the Human Brain

## Audiovisual Integration of Social Information Across Space
Authors: Amit Khandhadia, University College London; Aidan Murphy -
Section on Cognitive Neurophysiology and Imaging National Institute of Mental
Health; Lizabeth Romanski - Department of Neuroscience University of Rochester
Medical Center; Jennifer Bizley - Ear Institute University College London; David
Leopold - Section on Cognitive Neurophysiology and Imaging National Institute of
Mental Health
Introduction
In the macaque, the superior temporal sulcus (STS) is a site of convergence of
many different streams of information including auditory, visual, spatial, and
social information. In the visual and social domain, the STS contains several
face patches, regions which respond more to faces than to non-face objects. We
recently reported the visual responses to social stimuli by neurons in the
anterior fundus (AF) face patch are modulated by the addition of auditory
information. However, the precise acoustic information encoded by this
modulation remains unknown.
Here, we investigated whether spatial factors such as sound direction, gaze
direction, or their interaction had an impact on neural responses in this
region.
Methods
We recorded single unit data from the AF face patch in two macaque monkeys during
presentation of audiovisual movies. Movies were presented within a hemispheric
virtual reality dome which allowed auditory and visual components to be
spatially separated. Subjects were required to fixate their gaze on one of three
locations before an auditory only, visual only, or audiovisual movie of a
vocalizing monkey was presented. The visual element arose from the fixation
location while the temporally coherent acoustic element played either directly
from the location of fixation, or at the same elevation, but shifted
30o to the right or left in azimuth, or at the same azimuth, but
45o above or below the position of fixation.
Statistical Analysis
To analyze these data, we obtained the spike rates of each neuron during
presentation. To understand the impact of the manipulated spatial factors, we
conducted a regression analysis on the spike rates with time window, eye
position, sound location, and their various interactions as factors, using LASSO
regularization to select variables.
Results and Conclusions
We made three key observations. Firstly, visual responses were strongly
influenced by eye position. Second, auditory and audiovisual interactions tended
to arise during later time windows. Finally, sound source position influenced
the presence and size of audiovisual interactions but the effects across the
population were heterogenous. Overall, these results indicate AF neurons
incorporate different spatial properties into their responses

Poster number: T_PZ4_099 (PP)

Sub-Theme: Fam20C Kinase: Uncovering Functions in Microglia and
Beyond

## Elucidating the role of Secreted Kinase Fam20C in microglia
Authors: Amy Dunne Miller, University of Dundee
Introduction
Very little was known about the kinases involved in the secretory pathway until a
member of the Family with sequence similarity 20 (Fam20), Fam20C, was found to
be secreted into the medium of osteosarcoma cells. Interestingly,
phospho-proteomic studies of human cerebrospinal fluid and plasma suggest that
two-thirds of phospho-secretome are Fam20C substrates. Since Fam20C is known to
be mutated in patients with osteosclerotic bone dysplasia, some strides have
been made in understanding the role of Fam20C phosphorylation in
biomineralization processes. However, the role of Fam20C in other cell types is
largely unknown. Macrophages and microglia express high levels of Fam20C. The
function of Fam20C in these cell types has yet to be explored.
Preliminary data shows that induction of macrophages by LPS increases Fam20C
expression, and Fam20C KO decreases macrophage phagocytotic capacity. In this
study I aim to understand the role Fam20C plays in microglial functions and how
Fam20C phosphorylation of microglia secretome may impact neurodevelopmental
processes.
Methodology
Two microglia cell lines will be used (HMC3 and BV-2). Fam20C expression will be
measured using qPCR and western blot. Data-independent acquisition
mass-spectrometry will be used to identify Fam20C substrates. Fam20C KO will be
performed using lentiviral GFP-tagged CRISPR constructs in BV-2 cells. These
will be used to assess migration, colony formation, phagocytosis, and
neurosphere formation. Lastly, immunohistochemistry will be used on sections of
embryonic telencephalon and early post-natal cortex of microglia-specific Fam20C
knock-out CX3CR1- Cre/Fam20Cfl/fl mice to study microglia population and
distribution, neural stem cell numbers and neuronal differentiation, cell death,
cortical patterning, gliogenesis and synaptic pruning.
Approach for statistical analysis
Statistical analysis will be performed using GraphPad Prism. Normality will be
tested using a Shapiro-Wilks test followed by a t-test or a Mann Whitney test
where appropriate.

## Sensory Processing & Perception

Poster number: S_PZ4_098 (TP)

Sub-Theme: Neural Adaptation and Modulation: Sensory Processing Across
Behaviors and Brain Regions

## Two disinhibitory circuits modulate the interaction between stimulus
habituation and fast contrast adaptation in primary visual cortex
Authors: Antonio J. Hinojosa, University of Sussex; Sina E. Dominiak
- School of Life Sciences University of Sussex; Leon Lagnado - School of Life
Sciences University of Sussex
Detecting novel stimuli among familiar ones is crucial for survival. One adaptive
strategy of sensory systems is to suppress responses to common stimuli while
enhancing responses to new ones. In primary visual cortex of mice (V1) about
half of pyramidal cells (PCs) adapt to a high-contrast stimulus within seconds
by reducing their gain (depression) while half become more responsive
(sensitize). These opposing forms of adaptation are controlled by inhibitory
interneurons. Adaptation in V1 also occurs on timescales of days as PCs
habituate to repeated stimuli. We have investigated whether the local inhibitory
circuits that generate fast adaptation are also involved in the long- term
changes underlying habituation.
We presented awake mice with a 10 s visual stimulus (high-contrast drifting
grating) repeatedly during 6 sessions (2 days apart) while monitoring calcium
signals using multiphoton microscopy. To test the role of interneurons, we
simultaneously modulated neuronal activity with inhibitory or excitatory opsins
in one of three types: somatostatin (SST), parvalbumin (PV) or VIP. We compared
different sessions using one-way ANOVA, parametric, or Kruskal-Wallis test,
non-parametric.
Habituation over days caused a decrease in the number of PCs responding to the
stimulus, accompanied by an increase in SST activity and a decrease in VIP and
PV. In responsive PCs, fast adaptation across the population shifted from
depression to sensitization. Direct interactions between SSTs and PCs were
identified by a decrease in PC activity when over-activating SSTs and these were
stronger after habituation. Indirect interactions through SST->PV- >PC
disinhibition were identified by an increase in PC activity when over-activating
SSTs and these were weaker after habituation. Silencing VIPs and monitoring SST
activity demonstrated that this interaction was also weakened by habituation,
consistent with reduced activity through the VIP->SST->PC disinhibitory
pathway also reducing PC responses. Finally, presenting a stimulus with
different orientation partly reversed the effects of habituation, demonstrating
its stimulus specificity. Together, these results reveal a concerted change of
cortical activity during habituation that is controlled by two distinct
disinhibitory circuits.

Poster number: S_PZ4_099 (TP)

Sub-Theme: Neural Adaptation and Modulation: Sensory Processing
Across Behaviors and Brain Regions

## How does stimulus saliency influence stimulus habituation?
Authors: Sina E Dominiak, University of Sussex; Antonio J Hinojosa -
School of Life Sciences University of Sussex; Leon Lagnado - School of Life
Sciences University of Sussex
Introduction: Neurons in the primary visual cortex (V1) undergo short- and
long-term changes in responsivity shaped by context and experience. We have
previously shown that on short timescales (seconds) pyramidal Cells (PCs) can
decrease (depress) or increase (sensitize) the gain of their response to a
high-contrast stimulus and that somatostatin expressing interneurons (SSTs)
modulate these fast adaptive properties in two ways: by direct inhibition and by
disinhibition via PV interneurons. Here we investigate the relation between
these fast adaptive changes and habituation occurring on timescales of days,
focusing on the saliency of the habituating stimulus.
Methods: We used two-photon microscopy to image L2/3 of V1 in awake mice
expressing GCaMP6f in PCs and ChrimsonR (an optogentic activator) in SST
interneurons. Mice head-fixed on a treadmill were exposed to drifting gratings
in repeated 10 s trials during 6 sessions over 2 weeks. Every second trial was
paired with optogenetic activation of SSTs. To change the relevance of the
stimulus from redundant to salient, a second group of mice was rewarded with
condensed milk at the end of each stimulus presentation.
Statistical analysis: Significant differences between data groups were tested
with a one-way ANOVA test. If the data was not normally distributed a
non-parametric Kruskal-Wallis test was used. Significance was defined as
p<0.05.
Results and conclusions: Whether or not the stimulus was rewarded, repetitive
exposure to the stimulus caused a shift from depressing to sensitizing fast
adaptation within the PC population. Simultaneously, the number of
stimulus-responsive PCs decreased in the non-rewarded condition, whereas they
appeared stable across sessions when the stimulus predicted a reward.
Optogenetic activation of SST cells allowed us to separate the population of PCs
into 3 groups showing a decrease in initial response to the stimulus, an
increase or no significant change. In the rewarded condition, there was a
significant increase in the number of PCs that increased their responsivity
during SST cell activation. We propose that the saliency of a repeated stimulus
weakens direct inhibition to PCs from SSTs and/or increases disinhibition via
the SST->PV->PC pathway.

Poster number: S_PZ4_280 (TP)

Sub-Theme: Neural Adaptation and Modulation: Sensory Processing
Across Behaviors and Brain Regions

## Impact of locomotion on adaptation in the mouse superior colliculus
Authors: M. Florencia Gonzalez Fleitas, University of Sussex; Liad
J. Baruchin - School of Life Sciences University of Sussex; Sylvia Schröder -
School of Life Sciences University of Sussex
Visual processing strongly depends on the recent stimulation history, a
phenomenon called adaptation, generally observed as decreasing sensitivity to a
constant input feature. Adaptation at the first stages of visual processing was
mainly studied ex-vivo or in anaesthetised animals assuming that behavioural
contexts play no role. However, we recently learned that locomotion and arousal
strongly impact visual processing as early as in the retina and its direct
target, the superior colliculus (SC), a key subcortical area for sensory
integration and orienting behaviour. Here, we aim to understand how locomotion
impacts visual adaptation in the SC. We recorded neuronal responses in the SC
using acute extracellular electrophysiology (Neuropixels probes) and
simultaneously tracked locomotor activity in awake head-fixed mice free to run
at will. To assess adaptation to a sustained stimulus, we randomly presented
sinusoidal gratings drifting in one of 12 directions for 2 s, with an
inter-stimulus interval of 0.5 s. Each trial was defined as active when 90% of
the running speed was above 1cm/s and as quiet otherwise. Orientation and
direction tuning were computed in collicular neurons by subtracting the baseline
from the visual response and then averaging between active or quiet trials.
Adaptation index in active or quiet states was calculated based on the average
evoked activity during the first and last 0.5 s of stimulus presentation.
Collicular neurons exhibited various responses to sustained stimulation: some
showed strong onset responses and fast adaptation, some showed slow adaptation,
while few neurons showed no adaptation. Neurons in the SC generally presented
either stronger and faster adaptation in active than quiet states or remained
unaffected by locomotion. As a first approach, we will evaluate statistical
differences of the adaptation index in response to the preferred direction
between active and quiet states by t-test. We are now acquiring more data and
analysing how behavioural states modulate different temporal dynamics observed
in the SC. Up to now, our results suggest that adaptation in the SC is affected
by locomotion, providing new insights into how organisms navigate their dynamic
surroundings.
Funded by: Wellcome Trust and the Royal Society.

Poster number: S_PZ4_281 (TP)

Sub-Theme: Neural Adaptation and Modulation: Sensory Processing
Across Behaviors and Brain Regions

## The influence of locomotion on the visual tuning properties of neurons in the
superficial superior colliculus in mice
Authors: Maria Cozan, University of Sussex; Liad Baruchin -
Neuroscience University of Sussex; Sylvia Schröder - Neuroscience University of
Sussex
Behavioural states influence neural activity in the cortex including sensory
areas. More recently, behavioural modulation has also been observed in
subcortical areas such as the superior colliculus (SC) . The purpose of this
modulation at these early stages of visual processing is largely unknown. To
approach a better understanding of the functional relevance of behavioural
modulations, we quantified how the tuning of functional cell types in the
superficial SC (sSC) of mice changes between locomotion and stationarity. To
record neural activity, we expressed GCaMP8f or GCaMP8m in neurons of the sSC
and imaged these through two-photon imaging in head-fixed mice free to run on a
treadmill while we recorded the mice’s running speed. To determine tuning
properties of the neurons, we presented drifting sinusoidal gratings, which
varied in temporal, spatial frequency, contrast, direction and orientation. To
functionally classify the cells, we presented sparse noise stimuli, frequency
and contrast chirps, and black, white, green and blue full field stimuli. For
analysis, we separated trials of stimulus presentation according to running
speed. Trials during which 90% of the running speed was above 1cm/s were
classified as a running state and anything below as a resting state. We
determined direction, orientation and frequency tuning curves by subtracting the
baseline (values 500ms pre-stimulus) from the visual response and then averaging
across trials belonging to running or rest trials. We will test statistical
differences using ANOVA (factors: stimulus parameter, behavioural state). Our
preliminary data show pronounced changes in responses of individual neurons
between running and rest. Some examples show increased responses during high
spatial frequencies (>8cycles/degree) and low temporal frequencies (<2
cycles/second) during running. We are now in the process of further data
collection, summarizing changes in visual tuning across large populations of sSC
neurons, and analysing whether different functional cell types are modulated
differently by running. So far, our results show that running affects the visual
responses of sSC neurons to all visual features we tested. This research was
supported by a Sir Henry Dale Fellowship (grant 220169/Z/20/Z to SS).

Poster number: S_PZ4_282 (TP)

Sub-Theme: Neural Adaptation and Modulation: Sensory Processing
Across Behaviors and Brain Regions

## Reward modulates visual responses in mouse superior colliculus independently
of arousal
Authors: Liad J. Baruchin, University of Sussex; Matteo Alleman -
Center for Theoretical Neuroscience Columbia University; Sylvia Schroeder - Life
Sciences University of Sussex
The superior colliculus (SC) is a visual area that controls innate approach and
avoidance behaviours. Neurons in its superficial layers receive direct retinal
input but do not only process visual stimuli. sSC neurons are also modulated by
the animal’s running speed and arousal. Here, we asked whether other behavioural
variables affect visual activity in the sSC when the animal is performing a
visual decision task. We trained mice in a visual detection task that required
them to detect a stimulus of varying contrast in the left or right visual field.
They had to interactively move the stimulus towards the centre of the visual
field (Panel A), or refrain from movement in case of no stimulus.
Correct choices were rewarded with water, incorrect choices were followed by
auditory noise. (Panel B). We then imaged the sSC of 4 well-trained mice over 16
sessions, using two-photon calcium imaging.
We quantified the contribution of various task events to the neuronal visual
response by their effect on the gain of a hyperbolic ratio function (p<0.05,
shuffle test; Panels C,D). We discovered that about 20% of sSC neurons were
positively modulated by previous reward (Panel E). Similar to previous studies,
we found that pupil size modulated the visual responses of sSC neurons,
positively or negatively (Panel F).
We showed that modulation by pupil size and reward act independent of each other.
First, the pupil size during stimulus presentation does not change between
trials following positive or negative feedback (p=0.76, t-test; Panel G).
Second, the modulation of the gain by the two factors is independent
(p<0.001;t-test; Panel H).
Lastly, using Neuropixels, we validated our results by recording from the entire
depth of the SC. We discovered that most reward modulated neurons were found in
the sSC rather than in deeper layers (Panel I).
Our findings show that sSC neurons’ visual response is strongly influenced by two
independent state variables: pupil- linked arousal and previous reward. Future
studies may reveal how these non-visual modulations help downstream processes in
guiding behaviour.
Funded by: European Commission, BBSRC and the Wellcome Trust
 
Poster number: S_PZ4_282 (TP)

Sub-Theme: Neural Adaptation and Modulation: Sensory Processing
Across Behaviors and Brain Regions

## Error Detection by the Olivocerebellar System and its Role in Motor
Adaptation
Authors: Hesho Shaweis, University of St Andrews; Pierce Mullen -
School of Psychology and Neuroscience University of St Andrews; Maarten Zwart -
School of Psychology and Neuroscience University of St Andrews
Introduction. The ability to refine and learn new movements is fundamental for
adapting to an everchanging environment. Crucial to this learning process is
thought to be the detection of a mismatch between predicted and true sensory
feedback during movements by the inferior olive. But how is sensory information
spatially represented in the inferior olive? Methods. To address this, we used
two-photon calcium imaging of inferior olive neurons expressing GCaMP6f in
5-7dpf zebrafish larvae during the presentation of different sensory modalities:
visual, flow and motion. We produced distinct neuronal maps for each sensory
stimulus by regressing neuronal responses with sensory regressors and quantified
directional tuning by computing the vector sum of neuronal responses to eight
different directions of stimuli. Statistical approach. Neurons were ranked by
t-score and slope from regression analyses with the 95th percentile being
classified as responsive to a sensory modality. Results and conclusions.
Strong responses were prevalent for flow and motion stimuli presented in
directions along the head-tail (anterior- posterior) axis. Interestingly, all
directions of visual stimulus elicited robust responses and revealed a highly
organised spatial representation and selective tuning of inferior olive neurons
in response to visual input. In similarity with flow and motion modalities, the
largest visual responses were seen in the direction of the head-tail axis. There
was a small degree of convergence between sensory modalities. Simultaneous
electrophysiological recordings of motor activity from the tail show increased
fictive swim bouts in response to forward (tail-to-head) moving visual stimuli.
Neurons which correlated with this motor onset also responded to forward moving
visual stimuli in the absence of behaviour. These findings suggest that sensory
information is represented in the inferior olive in a highly organised way and
that neurons may be biased towards a goal of stabilising the zebrafish’s
position in space along the anterior-posterior axis.
 
Poster number: S_PZ4_283 (TP)

Sub-Theme: Neural Adaptation and Modulation: Sensory Processing
Across Behaviors and Brain Regions

## Forward inhibition regulates selectivity for sensory inputs in Thalamic Relay
neurons
Authors: Deyl Djama, Imperial College London; Florian Zirpel - Life
Sciences Imperial College London; Zhiwen Ye - Biological Structure University of
Washington; Gerald Moore - Life Sciences Imperial College London; Polona Jager -
Basic and Clinical Neuroscience King's College London; Alessio Delogu - Basic
and Clinical Neuroscience King's College London; Stephen G Brickley - Life
Sciences Imperial College London
1) In the thalamus, fast & slow forms of inhibition arise from transient
activation of synaptic GABA-A receptors whereas a tonic form arises from the
activation of extra-synaptic GABA-A receptors. However, it is yet established
whether and how these forms of inhibition influence sensory processing. In this
study, we use the visual system as a model to study the effects of inhibition on
sensory information processing by relay neurons.
2) Dynamic clamp was used to model ON & OFF-type retinal ganglion cell (RGC)
inputs to the visual thalamus. Using whole-cell patch-clamp electrophysiology,
ON & OFF-type inputs were randomly interleaved at varying conductance levels
to mimic fluctuations in synaptic weight associated with RGC inputs. Similarly,
the fast, slow & tonic forms of inhibition were interleaved with the RGC
inputs at varying conductance levels to mimic physiologically relevant
fluctuations in inhibition strength.
3) Data was tested for normality using the Shapiro-Wilks test. Significance
testing for normally distributed data was assessed using a One-Way Repeated
Measures ANOVA. Post-hoc testing was done using a Bonferroni correction.
Non-normally distributed data was tested for significance using a Kruskal-Wallis
ANOVA along with post-hoc Dunn’s correction.
4) At baseline, we found OFF-type RGC inputs relaying information more reliably
compared to ON-type (p<0.001; z=- 5.78). Input frequency inspection showed
ON-type patterns contained more high frequency inputs which may underly this
difference.
Introduction of F1 & tonic forms of inhibition showed no significant
difference in ONs compared to baseline (p=1; z=- 0.16 & p=0.54; z=-1.68),
although, there was a significant decrease with F2 inhibition (p=0.004;
z=3.34).
Introduction of F1 & F2 in the OFFs showed no significant difference compared
to baseline (p=0.28; z=-1.97 & p=1; z=0.36). However, there was a
significant increase in information transfer with the addition of tonic
inhibition (p=0.014; z=-3.02).
In sum, our results show thalamic relay neurons can select for various RGCs based
upon the specific firing patterns associated with different RGC types.
Furthermore, the dynamic-clamp approach reveals how feedforward inhibition
generated by local interneurons alters this input selectivity.

Poster number: S_PZ4_284 (TP)

Sub-Theme: Neural Adaptation and Modulation: Sensory Processing
Across Behaviors and Brain Regions

## Modelling the transformations of sensory information across the processing
hierarchy
Authors: Michael Lohse, Sainsbury Wellcome CentreSainsbury Wellcome
Centre; Andrew J. King - Department of Physiology, Anatomy, and Genetics
University of Oxford; Benjamin D.B. Willmore - Department of Physiology,
Anatomy, and Genetics University of Oxford
Introduction
A major challenge for neuroscience is understanding how and where sensory
information is transformed as signals are passed along the sensory pathways of
the brain. Here, we demonstrate a novel approach to modelling the auditory
hierarchy, which substantially outperforms standard spectrotemporal models and
reveals how information is transformed at each stage of processing.
Methods
We presented complex synthetic sounds (dynamic random chords) to 31 awake or
anaesthetized mice, and extracellularly recorded populations of single neurons
in three brain regions: the inferior colliculus (IC, n=440), medial geniculate
body (MGB, n=362) and primary auditory cortex (A1, n=639). For each neuron, we
constructed a novel inter-area population communication model, which describes
the neuron's time-varying response as a linear combination of the responses of
neurons in other regions.
Approach for statistical analysis
We measured model performance using the normalized correlation coefficient
between model and real neuronal responses on a held-out test set, and compared
this with standard linear-nonlinear spectro-temporal receptive field (LN-STRF)
models.
Results and conclusions
Our inter-area population communication models provided excellent descriptions of
neural responses in all three areas, and substantially outperformed LN-STRF
models when applied to ascending communication. This suggests that neurons in
higher areas (e.g. A1) can be well described in terms of the population
responses of neurons in lower areas (e.g. IC), and that crucial nonlinear
transformations of auditory information occur at (or before) both IC and MGB,
and persist into A1.
We also built descending inter-areal population communication models, which
modelled neuronal responses in lower regions (e.g. IC) in terms of the responses
of neurons in higher areas (e.g. A1). Interestingly, we found that the
descending models provide relatively poor descriptions of neuronal responses,
and are generally inferior to LN-STRF models. This suggests that the
transformation of information across the auditory hierarchy is irreversible, and
that sound is encoded in a lossy fashion as it ascends the auditory
hierarchy.

Poster number: S_PZ4_106 (PP)

Sub-Theme: Neural Adaptation and Modulation: Sensory Processing
Across Behaviors and Brain Regions

## Computational modelling of age-related delays in audio-visual sensory
information processing using MEG
Authors: Pranay Yadav, University of Cambridge; Rik Henson - MRC
Cognition & Brain Sciences Unit University of Cambridge
Cognitive ageing in humans is marked by declines in vision and hearing and is
associated with changes in amplitude and latency of sensory-evoked potentials.
These changes manifest as delays in the neural response to stimulation, and
likely reflect a general slowing of information processing due to ageing.
Findings from animal experiments of age-related slowing have identified two key
mechanisms—reduced axonal transmission due to demyelination and reduced neural
responsiveness due to altered excitability. There has been evidence that both
mechanisms may drive delays in distinct ways—for instance, visual-evoked
responses are marked by a constant delay—suggesting reduction in transmission
mediated by white matter tracts; while auditory-evoked responses are marked by a
delay that accumulates over time—likely mediated by deficits in local processing
in grey matter [1].
In the proposed study, we investigate the causal role of these mechanisms
underlying age-related delays in visual and auditory evoked responses using
dynamic causal modelling (DCM) of magnetoencephalography (MEG) data from a large
(N=630) healthy population-derived sample from the Cambridge Centre for Ageing
& Neuroscience (Cam- CAN) [2]. Data was acquired during an audiovisual task
in which participants passively experienced 120 trials with either a visual
stimulus consisting of two circular checkerboards, or binaural auditory
tone.
We apply DCM to model evoked responses for visual and audio trials from MEG data
[3]. We model the bilateral extrastriate and primary auditory cortices as
generators of visual and auditory evoked magnetic fields respectively. We
hypothesize that age-related delays in transmission will result in reduced
strength of inputs to the generators, while age-related deficits in local
processing will result in reduced strength of intrinsic connections in the
generators. We test these predictions using Bayesian model comparison within the
Parametric Empirical Bayes (PEB) framework. Our findings will help elucidate the
different neural mechanisms that could result in distinct age-related delays in
different sensory systems.
1. D. Price et al, Nat Commun. 8, 15671 (2017)
2. J. R. Taylor et al, NeuroImage. 144, 262–269 (2017)
3. O. David et al, NeuroImage. 30, 1255-1272 (2006)

Poster number: S_PZ4_107 (TP)

Sub-Theme: Affective Touch Perception: Serotonin, Texture, and
Neural Mechanisms in Sensory Processing

## Acute tryptophan depletion alters affective touch perception
Authors: Susannah Walker, Liverpool John Moores University; Paula
Trotter - School of Psychology Liverpool John Moores University; David Moore -
School of Psychology Liverpool John Moores University; Francis McGlone - School
of Psychology Liverpool John Moores University
Affiliative tactile interactions help regulate physiological arousal and confer
resilience to acute and chronic stress. C- tactile afferents (CTs) are a
population of unmyelinated, low threshold mechanosensitive cutaneous nerve
fibres which respond optimally to a low force stimulus, moving at between 1 and
10 cm/s. As CT firing frequencies correlate positively with subjective ratings
of touch pleasantness, they are hypothesised to form the first stage of encoding
affiliative tactile interactions. Serotonin is a key modulator of social
responses with known effects on bonding.
The aim of the present study was to determine the effect of acutely lowering
central serotonin levels on perceptions of CT-targeted affective touch.
In a double blind, placebo-controlled design, the effect of acute tryptophan
depletion (ATD) on 25 female participants' ratings of directly and vicariously
experienced touch was investigated. Psychophysical techniques were used to
deliver dynamic tactile stimuli; some velocities were targeted to optimally
activate CTs (1-10 cm/s), whereas other, faster and slower strokes fell outside
the CT optimal range. Discriminative tactile function, cold pain threshold and
tolerance were also measured.
Ratings for directly experienced touch and vicarious touch were analysed using
mixed-effects models.
ATD significantly increased pleasantness ratings of both directly and vicariously
experienced affective touch, increasing discrimination of the specific hedonic
value of CT targeted velocities. While ATD had no effect on either tactile or
cold pain thresholds, there was a trend for reduced tolerance to cold pain.
These findings are consistent with previous reports that depletion of central
serotonin levels modulates neural and behavioural responsiveness to appetitive
sensory signals.

Poster number: S_PZ4_108 (TP)

Sub-Theme: Affective Touch Perception: Serotonin, Texture, and
Neural Mechanisms in Sensory Processing

## Tactile estimation of hedonic and sensory properties during active touch: an
EEG study
Authors: Jessica Henderson, University of Liverpool; Tyler Mari -
Department of Psychology University of Liverpool; Danielle Hewitt - Nuffiled
Department of Clinical Neuroscience University of Oxford; Alice Newton-Fenner -
Department of Psychology University of Liverpool; Andrew Hopkinson - N/A
Hopkinson Research; Timo Giesbrecht - Research and Development Unilever; Alan
Marshall - Department of Electrical Engineering and Electronics University of
Liverpool; Nick Fallon - Department of Psychology University of Liverpool
Perceptual judgements about our physical environment are informed by
somatosensory information. In real-world settings haptic exploration involves
dynamic hand movements to contact surfaces, termed active touch. Texture is an
important surface feature; estimation tasks have previously been used to
quantify subjective judgements of surface texture. Magnitude estimations of
roughness have been found to alter the haemodynamic response. Current EEG
studies collect subjective judgements of texture separately from stimulation
tasks. Therefore, it is unknown how subjective judgments modulate the
electrophysiological correlates of texture processing.
In the current study, we used EEG to investigate cortical oscillatory changes
during active exploration to inform estimation of surface properties and hedonic
preferences of two textured stimuli: smooth silk and rough hessian. A
purpose-built touch sensor quantified active touch, while EEG recorded
oscillatory brain activity from 129 channels. By fusing these data streams at a
single trial level, oscillatory changes within the brain were investigated while
controlling for objective touch parameters (i.e., friction). Time-frequency
analysis was used to investigate changes in cortical oscillatory activity in
alpha (8–12 Hz) and beta (16–24 Hz) frequency bands.
The analysis of EEG data was conducted using SPM12. A covariate representing the
combination of friction and load was included on a single trial level for each
condition, this accounted for potential confounds and allowed for a more precise
examination of the relationship between brain activity and texture
processing.
Results reproduce findings from our lab, whereby active exploration of rough
textures increased alpha-band ERD in contralateral sensorimotor areas (Henderson
et al., 2022). Hedonic processing of less preferred textures resulted in an
increase in temporoparietal beta-band and frontal alpha-band ERD, suggesting
that higher-order brain regions are involved in the hedonic processing of
texture. Overall, the current study extends our previous findings and provides
novel insight into the neural mechanisms underlying texture perception during
active touch and how this process is influenced by cognitive tasks.

Poster number: S_PZ4_109 (TP)

Sub-Theme: Hearing Loss: Mechanisms, Diagnosis, and Emerging
Therapies in Age-Related and Genetic Disorders

## Purinergic signalling in the non-sensory cells of the ageing cochlea
Authors: Sarah Hool, University of Sheffield; Jing-Yi Jeng -
Biosciences University of Sheffield; Daniel Jagger - Ear Institute University
College London; Walter Marcotti - Biosciences University of Sheffield; Federico
Ceriani - Biosciences University of Sheffield
INTRO: Hearing depends on the function of a specialised class of sensory cells,
the hair cells, located in the organ of Corti of the mammalian cochlea. The
unique physiological environment in which these cells operate is maintained by a
syncitium of epithelial and supporting cells, collectively termed non-sensory
cells. Among the different proteins expressed in the non-sensory cells,
metabotropic purinergic receptors (P2Y) have been shown to be critical for
cochlear development and function [1]. Considering that purinergic receptors are
known to undergo changes in expression during ageing in several tissues, we
hypothesized that similar changes could underpin age-related hearing loss
(ARHL), the causes of which are still largely unknown. Therefore, we
investigated potential progressive changes in the expression and function of P2Y
receptors in the non-sensory cells of the mouse ageing cochlea.
METHODS: We investigated the localisation of P2Y1, P2Y2 and P2Y4 receptors in the
aged cochlea by performing immunolabelling experiments. We also used ratiometric
calcium imaging as a readout of purinergic receptor function in cochlear
non-sensory cells. We compared both early-onset and late-onset ARHL mouse
strains, and animals of three age groups: postnatal day 7 (P7), adult (P30) and
aged (17-24 months).
APPROACH FOR STATISTICAL ANALYSIS: Statistical analysis was made using one-way
ANOVA followed by a suitable post hoc test or Student’s t-test; p < 0.05 was
selected as the criterion for statistical significance.
RESULTS AND CONCLUSIONS: Immunolabelling and calcium imaging experiments revealed
a downregulation of P2Y receptor expression and a decrease of
purinergic-mediated calcium responses after the onset of hearing, which in mice
occurs at around P12. Conversely, we observed an upregulation of P2Y receptor
expression in the non-sensory cells of aged mice when compared to P30 adults.
Moreover, aged non-sensory cells had significantly larger calcium responses and
displayed calcium oscillations to prolonged purine applications. We conclude
that the ageing cochlea undergoes alterations in purinergic receptor expression
and function, which may be involved in senescent mechanisms contributing to
ARHL.
[1] Housley et al (2009), Trends neurosci 32, 128-141.

Poster number: S_PZ4_110 (TP)

Sub-Theme: Hearing Loss: Mechanisms, Diagnosis, and Emerging
Therapies in Age-Related and Genetic Disorders

## In vivo gene-based therapy in mouse models of congenital and age-related
hearing loss
Authors: Ana E Amariutei, University of Sheffield; Marie-Jose
Lecomte - Hearing Institute Institut Pasteur; Anna Underhill - School of
Biosciences University of Sheffield; Adam J Carlton - School of Biosciences
University of Sheffield; Saaid Safieddine - Hearing Institute Institut Pasteur;
Walter Marcotti - School of Biosciences University of Sheffield
Hearing loss is the most common sensory disorder, and it is estimated that
approximately 2.5 billion people worldwide will be affected by 2050. Deafness
affects both children and adults and despite its clinical prevalence there are
currently no approved drugs for hearing loss therapy. Within the inner ear are
sensory receptors called hair cells, which transduce auditory information into
electrical signals that are transmitted to the brain. Genetic mutations can lead
to the loss or malfunction of the hair cells and can disrupt the normal pattern
of connectivity between the hair cells and the adjacent neurons. Myosin7a is a
key protein expressed in the hair cell body and stereociliary bundles. Mutations
in the gene encoding myosin7a (Myo7a) lead to congenital hearing loss observed
in patients diagnosed with Usher Syndrome Type I. Mice with mutations in Myo7a
show some changes that are similar to progressive or age-related hearing loss
and were used in this study as a model for these conditions.
The aim of the present project is to test whether viral mediated delivery of
Myosin7a to the dysfunctional hearing organ can aid in the restoration of hair
cell function. To address this aim, we first tested different AAV serotypes to
identify their transduction efficiency. Secondly, we designed the dual-AAV
vector containing Myo7a, and delivered the construct in vivo. Functional
recovery was performed using a combination of in vivo electrophysiology
(auditory brainstem recordings) and morphological approaches that included
immunostaining and scanning electron microscopy.
Statistical analysis of means were made using one-way ANOVA tests followed by a
suitable post hoc test; p < 0.05 was considered statistically
significant.
Data recorded shows that AAV-gene based therapy leads to the partial restoration
of hearing function in murine models for congenital and age-related hearing
loss. These results also show that the auditory system retains the ability to be
manipulated through the replacement of missing or mutated genes in the inner ear
organ. Overall, this study highlights the necessity for further improvement in
the efficiency of hair cell transduction prior to the implementation of this
therapeutic approach in patients diagnosed with deafness and hearing loss.

Poster number: S_PZ4_111 (TP)

Sub-Theme: Hearing Loss: Mechanisms, Diagnosis, and Emerging
Therapies in Age-Related and Genetic Disorders

## A machine-learning-based approach to predict early hallmarks of progressive
hearing loss
Authors: Federico Ceriani, University of Sheffield; Jing-Yi Jeng -
School of Biosciences University of Sheffield; Walter Marcotti - School of
Biosciences University of Sheffield
INTRODUCTION:
Age-related hearing loss (ARHL), the most common health condition in older
adults, is usually diagnosed only after patients start losing key hearing
abilities, such as being able to distinguish speech in noisy environments. This
is usually an indication that some irreversible damage has already happened to
the sensory cells and neurons.
Therefore, as we develop therapies to target ARHL, we also need to improve the
diagnostic tools to detect the disease at an early stage.
Here, we provide proof-of-principle, using mouse models, that machine learning
(ML) techniques applied to non- invasive electrophysiological recordings of
hearing function (auditory brainstem responses, ABRs) are well suited to detect
early signs of ARHL.
We used the common C57BL/6N mouse strain (6N), which suffers from early-onset
ARHL due to an hypomorphic allele of Cadherin23 (Cdh23ahl). The ARHL phenotype
becomes evident from around 3 months of age, when these mice develop a threshold
shift in ABRs compared to a co-isogenic mouse strain in which the normal Cdh23
has been reinstated (6N-Repaired).
METHODS:
We recorded ABRs from a cohort of 1-month-old 6N and 6N-Repaired mice (104 mice).
We trained ML algorithms through supervised learning using the ABR data as input
features and the genotype as target. The hyperparameters of the models were
optimised using random grid search and the performances were evaluated using
repeated k-fold cross validation (10 repeats, k=5).
APPROACH FOR STATISTICAL ANALYSIS:
The statistical significance of the cross-validated scores was evaluated using
permutation testing. Statistical analysis of experimental data was made using
ANOVA followed by a suitable post hoc test. P<0.05 was selected as the
criterion for statistical significance.
RESULTS AND CONCLUSIONS:
Despite no shift in auditory thresholds at 1 month of age, several ML algorithms
were successful in identifying the mice that had the Cdh23ahl allele (6N).
Interestingly, feature importance analysis indicated that subtle differences in
ABR waves I and V were employed by one of the models to discriminate between the
two genotypes.
Our strategy highlights the power of ML for the early diagnosis of ARHL and it
could dramatically improve the success rate of future treatments.

Poster number: S_PZ4_112 (PP)

Sub-Theme: Hearing Loss: Mechanisms, Diagnosis, and Emerging
Therapies in Age-Related and Genetic Disorders

## Is hearing loss a risk factor for Idiopathic Parkinson’s disease? A UK
Biobank and English Longitudinal Study of Ageing (ELSA) analysis
Authors: Megan Rose Readman, Lancaster University; Fang Wan -
Mathematics and Statistics Lancaster; Sally A. Linkenauger - Psychology
Lancaster University; Trevor J. Crawford - Psychology Lancaster University;
Christopher J. Plack - Psychology Lancaster University
Introduction: Hearing loss is oftentimes considered an inevitable sequela of
ageing. Additionally, hearing loss is a substantial risk factor for dementia.
Specifically, mild hearing loss almost doubles dementia risk, moderate hearing
loss dementia risk and severe hearing loss increases risk almost five times (Lin
et al., 2011). Whilst the mechanistic foundations of the relation between
hearing loss and dementia remains unclear, some suggest that this link may be
due to both hearing loss and dementia sharing a common cause (Griffiths et al.,
2020). The overproduction of α– synuclein or occurrence of oxidative stress are
potential candidates for such a common cause. Specifically, evidence has shown
that the occurrence of oxidative stress may be one of the earliest events in
dementia pathogenesis (Mao, 2013) and a central factor in acquired hearing loss
(Henderson et al., 2006). Moreover, the over-expression of α– synuclein has been
shown to lead to mild hearing loss (Akil, 2022) and is now considered to be
central in the neuropathology of multiple dementias, including Alzheimer’s
disease, dementia with Lewy Bodies and Frontotemporal dementia (Twohig &
Nielsen, 2019). Parkinson’s is also associated with the occurrence of oxidative
stress and over-expression of α–synuclein. As such, we predict that hearing loss
will be intricately linked, and a risk factor, for Parkinson’s.
Methods: This study will employ a secondary big-data analysis methodology, using
data held within the UK Biobank and ELSA dataset. The UK Biobank (N= 0.5
million) and ELSA datasets (N = 12,099) are biomedical database which contain
in-depth secondary health data pertaining to hearing loss and clinical diagnosis
for UK participants. We will include data from individuals diagnosed with
Parkinson’s and individuals without Parkinson’s as a control.
Analytical approach: To investigate whether hearing loss is a risk factor for
Parkinson’s we will conduct logistic
regressions with Parkinson’s diagnosis as the outcome measure, hearing loss as
the predictor variable, and age and sex as covariates. We will make inferences
about the association between hearing loss and Parkinson's disease based on the
p-values and the size of the regression coefficients of the hearing loss
variable (odds ratio).

Poster number: M_PZ4_291 (TP)

Sub-Theme: Diurnal Neuromodulation: Retinal Information Transmission
& Visually-Driven Behavior

## Neuromodulatory changes in the efficiency of information transmission in
retinal bipolar cells
Authors: Jose Moya-Diaz, University of Sussex; Patricio Simões -
Sussex Neuroscience University of Sussex; Leon Lagnado - Sussex Neuroscience
University of Sussex
Introduction.
Information processing in the retina is adjusted by neuromodulators (NMD) that
act on ion channels and synapses. Two of these are Dopamine (DA) and Substance P
(SP), which are regulated diurnally: DA levels peak during the afternoon (PM)
whereas SP levels are higher in the morning (AM). Here we investigate how these
NMD act on the information transmitted through the retina and their impact on a
visually-driven behaviour – the optomotor response (OMR).
Methods.
All visual information used by the brain is transmitted through the synapses of
bipolar cells (BCs). We measured this information in larval zebrafish by
multiphoton imaging of glutamate release from BC synapses using the reporter
iGluSnFR. Separately, the OMR was assayed in free-swimming fish using an IR
camera. For both behavioural and synaptic outputs we calculated the mutual
information (MI) with a set of 11 stimuli of varying contrast (drifting gratings
eliciting the OMR).
Approach for statistical analysis.
Contrast response functions were compared with ANCOVA and synaptic parameters
using one-way ANOVA or Kolmogorov-Smirnov test. Significance was defined as p
< 0.05.
Results and discussion.
There was an increase in synaptic gain of BCs in the PM compared to AM, which was
blocked either by injecting an antagonist of D1 receptors (D1R) or an agonist of
neurokinin-1 receptors (NK1R) into the eye. Simultaneously, three aspects of
synaptic “noise” were diurnally modulated: (i) spontaneous release of vesicles,
(ii) the variability of evoked release and (iii) the distribution of
multivesicular events of different amplitude. The combined effects of these
changes caused a 4x increase in the MI in the PM compared to AM. A causal
relation with the actions of DA and SP in the retina was demonstrated by a 2x
increase in the MI when a D1R agonist was injected in the AM while activation of
NK1R in the PM decreased MI by 40%. In behavioural experiments, the gain of the
OMR increased by a factor of 2.2x in the PM compared to the AM, and these
changes were also modulated by D1R and NK1R.
This study demonstrates how neuromodulators acting on information transmission in
the retina alter the strength of a visually-driven behaviour.

Poster number: M_PZ4_292 (TP)

Sub-Theme: Diurnal Neuromodulation: Retinal Information Transmission
& Visually-Driven Behavior

## Diurnal modulation of the information transmitted from the retina to the
optomotor response
Authors: Patricio Simoes, University of Sussex; José Moya-Díaz -
School of Life Sciences University of Sussex; Leon Lagnado - School of Life
Sciences University of Sussex
How much sensory information is extracted from the environment and how much is
lost in the generation of a behaviour? We investigate this in the context of the
optomotor response (OMR) of larval zebrafish which begins with contrast
detection in the retina.
Using multiphoton microscopy and the glutamate reporter iGluSnFR we counted
vesicles released from individual synapses of bipolar cells (BCs) and calculated
the mutual information (MI) between this output and a stimulus set of 11
different temporal contrasts. To assay the OMR, fish were put in a virtual
environment in which moving gratings were presented to elicit turning responses.
After each turn of the fish, the grating rotated to be always orthogonal to the
body orientation. Behavioural response was quantified as the cumulative angle
turned (CAT) by the fish over 2 s trials using the same set of contrasts used to
measure MI in the synaptic output. CAT is a continuous measure and the
conventional approach to calculate MI with a discrete variable (contrast) would
be to discretize by binning. The fundamental drawback of this approach is that
MI becomes dependent on the number of bins used. We overcame this issue by
calculating MI using the Nearest Neighbours algorithm for comparisons of
discrete and continuous variables.
Fish were tested in the morning (AM) and afternoon (PM) and contrast-response
functions compared with ANOVA. For testing MI differences, CAT measurements were
bootstrapped and compared using t-test. Significance at p<0.05.
The OMR was subject to diurnal modulation, with larger average CAT responses
observed in the PM compared to AM. In AM, individual BC synapses transmitted
information about contrast at an average of 0.45 bits/s but none of this
information was apparent in the behaviour (MI≃0). In PM, the MI in the behaviour
was 0.01 bits/s while single BC synapses transmitted 1.94 bits/s. Nonetheless,
diurnal changes in the amount of information extracted in the retina did change
the gain of the behavioural response (see Moya-Diaz et al.). This study
demonstrates the enormous loss of information between the retina and OMR and
provides an example of a general approach for how the flow of information
controlling behaviour is modulated, extendible to other visuo-motor
pathways.

Poster number: M_PZ4_109 (TP)

Sub-Theme: Olfactory System: Exploring Mechanisms, Interactions, and
Implications for Animal Behavior and Control

## Investigating the role of non-synaptic interactions in the peripheral
olfactory system
Authors: Lydia Ellison, University of Sussex; Cornelia Buehlmann -
Sussex Neuroscience and School of Engineering and Informatics University of
Sussex; György Kemenes - Sussex Neuroscience and School of Life Sciences
University of Sussex; Thomas Nowotny - Sussex Neuroscience and School of
Engineering and Informatics University of Sussex
Introduction: Insects, like many animals, rely strongly on their sense of smell
for locating potential food sources, mates and predators. Flying insects such as
Drosophila melanogaster possess an exceptional ability to interpret complex
odour plumes. In addition to identifying odorants and their intensities, plume
navigation also requires differentiating relevant odorant mixtures originating
from one source from irrelevant odorants emitted from separate sources. This
capacity is typically attributed to lateral inhibition in the antennal lobe.
However, we propose that non-synaptic “ephaptic” interactions (NSIs) between
olfactory receptor neurons (ORNs) co-located in sensilla on the antennae could
also play an important role by pre-processing olfactory information.
Methods: We are investigating the feasibility of this hypothesis using single
sensillum recordings and behavioural experiments of free-flying Drosophila in a
wind tunnel. In both approaches, we utilise a two-channel high-precision
olfactory stimulator to deliver precisely timed pulses of odours selective for
each of two co-localised ORNs in Drosophila sensilla.
Approach for statistical analysis: Paired t-test and repeated measures ANOVA were
used to compare ORN responses during single and double odour presentation.
Results and conclusion: We demonstrate in two different olfactory sensilla that
NSIs can occur on short timescales as seen in natural odour plumes. When a brief
pulse of one odorant is delivered at increasing delays from the start of a
second odorant, this inhibition increases as the delay increases, and eventually
saturates. We are now investigating the extent to which this inhibition can lead
to changes in flight behaviour whilst navigating overlapping odour plumes in a
wind tunnel. These results provide not only insights into the processing speed
of the insect olfactory system but may also elucidate the significance of
potential interactions in other examples of compartmentalised sensory neurons,
including mammalian taste buds and a wide range of invertebrate sensilla.
This work was funded by a Leverhulme Trust Research Project Grant.
 
Poster number: M_PZ4_110 (PP)

Sub-Theme: Olfactory System: Exploring Mechanisms, Interactions, and
Implications for Animal Behavior and Control

## Imaging ORCO-positive olfactory cells in Anopheles gambiae larvae
Authors: Iman Muktar, Durham University; Dr Olena Riabinina -
Department of Biosciences Durham University
Anopheles gambiae mosquito is a malaria vector in sub-Saharan Africa. Malaria is
responsible for thousands of deaths, especially among children under 5 years
old. Currently, there are many strategies of mosquito control, however the
increase the increased insecticide resistance and increased malaria incidences
require novel interventions. One of the promising approaches is targeting larva,
that reduces the number of mosquitoes emerging into adulthood. Mosquitoes depend
on the olfactory system to locate their host, therefore, targeting the sense of
smell is an effective strategy to prevent host finding. Larval mosquitos detect
smells via a sensory cone in the antenna, which houses multiple olfactory
sensory neurons (ORNs). ORNs express only 12 different olfactory receptors
(ORs). ORs are co-expressed with odorant receptor co-receptor ORCO to form
receptors which are either narrowly or broadly tuned to a variety of
host-derived odours. Previous studies on An. gambiae larvae have identified,
working in a heterologous system, some OR ligands (Xia et al., 2008), and
unpublished work from our lab established behavioural valence of these compounds
in the larvae. The aim of this project is to characterise in-vivo cellular
responses to behaviourally-relevant compounds via calcium imaging, and to
ascertain the OR-ligand pairings. I will using the new transgenic line that we
developed (Orco-QF2, QUAS-GCamp6s and others) to directly visualise responses of
ORCO neurons in the larval antennae. The outcomes of this project will be
two-fold. First, we will provide the first comprehensive characterisation of a
simple aquatic olfactory system if an insect. Second, understanding f the
cellular of molecular basis of odorant perception in An.gambiae larvae may lead
to the development of new olfaction-based methods of larvae control.

Poster number: M_PZ4_295 (TP)

Sub-Theme: Olfactory System: Exploring Mechanisms, Interactions, and
Implications for Animal Behavior and Control

## Direct and indirect olfactory threat cue memory in rats: dominance and
oxytocin
Authors: Emily R Sherman, University of Cambridge; Jialu Li -
Physiology, Pharmacology and Neuroscience University of Bristol; Emma N Cahill -
Physiology, Pharmacology and Neuroscience University of Bristol
Introduction
Social learning occurs when an “observer” animal, naïve to a conditioned
stimulus, is in the presence of a “demonstrator” animal that has been
conditioned to react to the stimulus. This project aims to elucidate the
mechanisms behind olfactory social learning to an aversive cue; namely, how
animals observe and internalize fear behaviour of other animals.
Methods
Male Lister hooded adult rats were housed in triads, and dominance was measured
through a resource competition task. The demonstrator animal was conditioned to
an otherwise neutral odour paired with three foot shocks (0.5mA, 0.5s). The
conditioned demonstrator rat was subsequently placed back in the conditioning
context with a naïve observer, and the conditioned odour was introduced. All
rats were then tested individually and freezing behaviour and ultrasonic
vocalizations were measured.
To understand the mechanism behind fear transmission, pharmacological
interventions and sensory modality manipulations were employed in different
experiments. Observers were injected with an oxytocin receptor antagonist
(L-368,899) or saline prior to social learning. Additionally, rats underwent
social learning through exposure to the odour in the presence of alarm
pheromones of the demonstrator. Conditioned and non-conditioned rat brains were
collected, and c-fos expression was analysed as a marker of activity in the
amygdala and BNST.
Statistics
In order to analyse the effects of groups and CS presentation on freezing,
repeated measures of two factor ANOVAs with post hoc Sidak correction tests were
performed. Statistical significance was taken to be at P<0.05.
Results and Conclusions
Rats were successfully aversively conditioned directly and indirectly to odours.
Rats were able to learn indirectly regardless of receiving the oxytocin receptor
antagonist. Dominance hierarchy was not a limitation on social learning. Ongoing
experiments are examining the role of the amygdala and BNST in social
learning.

Poster number: M_PZ4_112 (TP)

Sub-Theme: Olfactory System: Exploring Mechanisms, Interactions, and
Implications for Animal Behavior and Control

## No evidence for goal priming or sensory specific satiety effects following
exposure to ambient food odours
Authors: Miss Rachel Hagan, Liverpool John Moores University; Dr
Susannah Walker - Psychology Liverpool John Moores University; Professor Francis
McGlone - Psychology Liverpool John Moores University; Dr Ralph Pawling -
Psychology Liverpool John Moores University
Sensory specific satiety (SSS) describes a decline in the hedonic value of a food
as it is eaten relative to a food that has not been eaten. Implicit wanting of
the consumed food has also been shown to decline. Several studies have reported
that brief exposure to food odours can also produce a SSS effect, in the absence
of consumption, selectively reducing hedonic ratings and subsequent high calorie
food choices. In contrast, other studies have reported goal priming effects of
ambient odours.
The aim of the present study was to determine whether exposure to ambient food
odours would selectively reduce implicit motivation for associated foods.
Participants took part in either an ambient odour (N=40) or food consumption
(N=39) study. They were randomly assigned to an indulgent (chocolate) or
non-indulgent (orange) food group and completed two blocks of an incentive-force
task. One block was completed immediately before and the other immediately after
odour exposure/food consumption. A grip-force transducer was used to measure
effort exerted effort to win food prizes. The prizes were depicted in visual
images presented at both conscious (200ms) and non-conscious (33ms) levels.
A repeated-measures ANOVA containing three within subject factors: Block (one,
two), Image (Orange, Chocolate) and Duration (33ms, 200ms) and one between
subject factor: Group (Orange, Chocolate), was used to measure the difference in
exerted effort from block-one to block-two.
In both studies, greater effort was initially exerted to win the indulgent than
the non-indulgent food. While no significant satiety or priming effect was found
following ambient odour exposure, a classic sensory specific satiety effect was
found in the food consumption experiment. That is, force exerted for chocolate
images declined significantly following chocolate consumption, in the absence of
any decline in grip exerted for orange stimuli.
Thus, using an implicit measure of incentive motivation, we found no evidence of
either ambient odour induced sensory specific satiety or goal priming effects.
While this could be explained by factors such as odour concentration, timing,
and nature of exposure, it raises questions about the robustness of previously
reported odour induced satiety and priming.

Poster number: T_PZ4_296 (TP)

Sub-Theme: Pain Perception & Modulation: Insights from
Somatosensory Processing & Neuropathic Models

## Circadian gate control of pain in the medullary dorsal horn
Authors: Florian Zirpel, University Of Oxford; Tina Wei - Nuffield
Department of Clinical Neurosciences University of Oxford; Zameel Cader -
Nuffield Department of Clinical Neurosciences University of Oxford
Introduction
Circadian variation of pain is evident in humans and animals, but the underlying
mechanisms remain unclear. Our group has recently shown that mouse trigeminal
nociceptor activity and orofacial mechanical pain behaviour vary depending on
the time of day, with higher sensory thresholds during the inactive phase.
Methods
Patch clamp recordings were obtained from acute brainstem slices containing the
trigeminal nucleus caudalis, also called the medullary dorsal horn (MDH).
Animals were 6-12 weeks old and were kept on a 12h light : 12h dark cycle. All
mice were bred on a C57 BL/6/J background. Animals were sacrificed 4h after
lights on (inactive phase, ZT4) and 4h after lights off for (active phase, ZT16)
recordings.
Approach for statistical analysis
Data was assessed for normality using the Shapiro-Wilk test. Normally distributed
populations were tested using Student’s t-test or one-way ANOVA. Non-normally
distributed data was tested using the Kruskal-Wallis test. Two- way ANOVA was
used to test the significance of time point, genotype and their interaction.
Post-hoc testing for multiple comparisons was done using the Holm-Sidak test.
Data are shown as mean and standard error of the mean.
Results/Conclusions
Voltage clamp recordings from MDH layer I and II neurons revealed differences in
excitatory drive between the two time points assessed. We found increased
spontaneous input but reduced TRPV1/capsaicin-evoked synaptic activity during
the active phase, aligning with the time when animals display decreased pain
behaviour. Surprisingly, a third of the neurons at this time point showed
reduced EPSC rates in response to capsaicin. This unexpected response pattern to
TRPV1 activation was abolished in the presence of GABAA receptor blockade,
indicating a role of inhibitory interneurons in the circadian regulation of MDH
excitation. Global knockout of the clock genes Cry1 and Cry2, and sensory
neuron-specific ablation of Bmal1 abolished the variation of synaptic currents
between time points. Collectively, the data supports the role of circadian
mechanisms in intraspinal modulation of trigeminal nociceptive traffic. We
hypothesise that inhibitory interneurons act as a circadian gate on feedforward
excitatory circuits within the MDH.

Poster number: T_PZ4_297 (TP)

Sub-Theme: Pain Perception & Modulation: Insights from
Somatosensory Processing & Neuropathic Models

## Cortical and behavioural mapping of somatosensation and pain in awake
mice
Authors: Liam E. Browne, University College London; Isobel Parkes -
Wolfson Institute for Biomedical Research University College London; Ara
Schorscher-Petcu - Wolfson Institute for Biomedical Research University College
London
Introduction
The primary somatosensory cortex (S1) processes sensory information from the body
surface. Somatosensory stimuli are diverse, encompassing thermal, mechanical and
pain modalities, which often overlap. It is not known whether modality is
encoded in S1 by specific areas, dedicated cells or a combinatorial code. To
address this question, we used transdermal optogenetics to create a pure noxious
stimulus and compared this to a battery of naturalistic somatosensory inputs
while monitoring cortical activity and behaviour in awake head-fixed mice.
Methods
High-speed cameras were used to record mice that were awake and behaving.
Behavioural features – hind paw withdrawal, whisking, orbital tightening, pupil
dilation, and facial expressions – were extracted and compared across a diverse
array of hind paw stimuli. At the same time, S1 neural activity was recorded
using widefield imaging with CaMK2a-tTA::tetO-GCaMP6s and two-photon imaging
with AAV-GCaMP6s in hind limb S1.
Approach for statistical analysis
Data was compared using non-parametric statistical tests, cross-validation, and
shuffling. Results and Discussion
All hind paw somatosensory inputs, even weak innocuous stimuli, generated
behaviour. The nature of this behaviour depended on the saliency and abruptness
of the input. The saliency of input explained the degree of arousal and
withdrawal. Abruptness was reflected by the magnitude of whisking and orbital
tightening. These graded behavioural responses combined to reflect the overall
features of the stimulus. Facial expressions corresponded to general states
evoked by the stimulus (‘pain’, ‘non-pain’). Simultaneous S1 recordings showed
that input saliency translates into larger neural responses, but diverse inputs
generate signals that overlap in S1, even in the absence of movement during
anaesthesia. This suggests somatotopic coalescence of different somatosensory
modalities. We next examined how S1 layer 4 maps to different somatosensory
inputs using two-photon imaging. This demonstrated a lack of modality-specific
signals even in the major input layer of S1.

Poster number: T_PZ4_298 (TP)

Sub-Theme: Pain Perception & Modulation: Insights from
Somatosensory Processing & Neuropathic Models

## Closed-loop control of cutaneous inputs in freely exploring mice
Authors: Isobel Parkes, University College London; Ara
Schorscher-Petcu - Wolfson Institute for Biomedical Research University College
London; Liam E Browne - Wolfson Institute for Biomedical Research University
College London
Introduction
The current understanding of the relationships between somatosensation, pain, and
behaviour in animal models is principally derived from methods that use
restrictive and simplistic environments, often with rodent models that are
restrained or head-fixed. Here, we describe an optical approach that allows us
to precisely target cutaneous inputs in mice that are freely exploring within a
large environment. We deliver spatiotemporally precise stimulation to map
somatosensation and pain to nocifensive and protective behaviours in
real-time.
Methods
Behaviour was captured with a camera from below a glass floor using real-time
markerless pose estimation. Body part coordinates were converted to spatial
locations to target and trigger laser stimulation depending on conditions within
a pre-programmed behavioural task. The lasers produced either infrared heat
stimulation in wildtype C57BL/6J mice or optogenetic stimulation of
ChR2-expressing afferent fibres innervating skin, using TRPV1-Cre::ChR2 mice.
Diverse behavioural features were then calculated – from withdrawal reflexes to
behavioural motivation, learning and action – to map these to the context of the
cutaneous input.
Approach for statistical analysis
We examined mouse position and activity, along with response latency,
probability, and magnitude. Non-parametric tests were used to determine changes
in behaviour.
Results and conclusions
We first validated the optical approach, finding that real-time body part
tracking was accurate to 3.3 pixels. Second, we developed an approach to
automatically select and target one animal at a time when multiple animals are
present in separate chambers. Infrared heat and optogenetic afferent stimuli
caused withdrawals and whole-body behaviours. Third, we targeted mice in an open
field arena, finding that single-shot optogenetic stimulations disrupted
exploratory behaviour. Finally, we examined motivated exploration in a maze.
This makes it possible to establish the relationships between reflexes and free
behaviour during motivation, learning and action. The ability to deliver
context-dependent cutaneous inputs in freely exploring mice should pave the way
to establish neural mechanisms for somatosensation and pain that shape
behaviour.

Poster number: T_PZ4_299 (TP)

Sub-Theme: Pain Perception & Modulation: Insights from
Somatosensory Processing & Neuropathic Models

## Modulation of spinal somatosensory-evoked potentials by lacosamide pregabalin
and tapentadol in anaesthetised rats recorded with multielectrode arrays
Authors: Kenneth Steel, University of Bristol; Anthony Blockeel -
Physiology, Pharmacology & Neuroscience University of Bristol; Caterina
Leone - Department of Human Neuroscience Sapienza University; Andrea Truini -
Department of Human Neuroscience Sapienza University; Rolf Detlef Treede -
Department of Neurophysiology Heidelberg University; James P Dunham -
Physiology, Pharmacology & Neuroscience University of Bristol; Anthony
Pickering - Physiology, Pharmacology & Neuroscience University of
Bristol
Efforts to develop new treatments for chronic pain are hampered by the lack of
reliable translation from preclinical models. Translatable biomarkers improve
the success rate of the development of new treatments by demonstrating
modulation of the nociceptive system in vivo. Spinal somatosensory-evoked
potentials (SEPs) are one such class of biomarkers that may enable target
engagement within the spinal cord to be assessed. This study will characterise
the basic properties of the rodent response and their modulation by 3
“standard-of-care” treatments. Ultimately the translatability will be assessed
via comparisons with equivalent clinical data from partners in the IMI-PainCare
consortium.
Adult male Wistar rats (n=52, 250-375g) were anaesthetised with isoflurane.
Following a spinal laminectomy over L3- 4, a linear multi-electrode probe (64
channel) was inserted into the dorsal horn. Electrical stimuli (4Hz x 250s low-
intensity electrical stimuli and 3x stimulus ramps) were delivered to the
sciatic nerve in each 10min block, with recordings consisting of a 30min
baseline period and up to 90min post-dose. Drugs were administered in a blinded
manner following a block-randomised design (vehicle, 3, 10 and 30mg/Kg
i.p.).
Low-intensity SEPs within the spinal dorsal horn have a characteristic depth
profile (peak amplitude putatively lamina III/IV). The 4ms delay to the
principle negative peak (N4) is consistent with peripheral conduction via Aβ-
fibres. Waveform and multi-unit activity analyses of the ramp stimuli revealed
intensity dependent activation of multiple primary afferent fibres classes
(A/C-fibres), each exhibiting distinct dorsoventral distribution patterns within
the dorsal horn. 30min post-dose 30mg/Kg lacosamide significantly reduced the
amplitude of the N4 peak (p=0.0371, 2-way RM ANOVA, dose x time; primary
endpoint). 20min post-dose the N4 SEP was completely abolished by 10mg/Kg
tapentadol (P=0.0098, 2-way RM ANOVA, dose x time). Pregabalin did not show any
significant effect on the N4 SEP. This study shows peripherally and centrally
acting analgesics have a modulatory effect on the amplitude rat lumbar N4 SEP
and supports the case of the N4 SEP as a potential pharmacodynamic biomarker
that demonstrates mechanistic insight of analgesic action.

Poster number: T_PZ4_300 (TP)

Sub-Theme: Pain Perception & Modulation: Insights from
Somatosensory Processing & Neuropathic Models

## Modulation of laser evoked potentials (LEPs) by lacosamide, pregabalin &
tapentadol in awake rats
Authors: Anthony Blockeel, University of Bristol; Anna Sales -
School of Physiology, Pharmacology & Neuroscience University of Bristol;
Nicolás Marco-Ariño - Pharmacometrics & Systems Pharmacology University of
Navarra; Iñaki Trocóniz - Pharmacometrics & Systems Pharmacology University
of Navarra; Josep-Maria Cendros - PK/PD WeLab; Jose Miguel Vela - Pharmaceutical
R&D WeLab; Andrea Truini - Department of Human Neuroscience Sapienza
University; Andre Mouraux - Institute Of Neuroscience Université Catholique de
Louvain; Rolf-Detlef Treede - Mannheim Center for Translational Neuroscience
Heidelberg University; Anthony Pickering - School of Physiology, Pharmacology
& Neuroscience University of Bristol
Introduction
Current treatments for pain often provide incomplete symptom relief and can also
be accompanied by adverse effects and the potential for addiction, yet efforts
to develop new treatments are thwarted by the lack of reliable translation from
preclinical models. One approach to improve the success rate is to utilise
biomarkers to confirm target-engagement and demonstrate relevant modulation of
the nociceptive system in vivo. Laser-Evoked Potentials (LEPs) are one such
measure that could fulfil these requirements. Here we profile the effects of 3
standard-of-care compounds on LEPs in awake, behaving rodents in advance of
comparable clinical data being made available from the IMI-PainCare
consortium.
Methods
12 male, Wistar rats were implanted with multiple EEG electrodes to record
resting-state and evoked activity (LEPs/auditory-evoked potentials [AEPs]). For
each compound, dosing was performed according to a balanced, cross- over design
with a minimum of 5 days between treatments. On each recording day, a baseline
session was performed, followed by 3 post-dosing time points (1, 2 & 4hr).
At each time point, rats were stimulated with 12 laser pulses delivered to the
plantar surface of their hind paws and 60 auditory stimuli.
Approach for statistical analysis
Stimulus response curves were analysed using one-way repeated measures ANOVAs.
The time course of pharmacological effects was compared to vehicle using two-way
repeated measures ANOVAs. Post-hoc analyses were performed using the Bonferroni
adjustment.
Results and conclusions
In response to a 1.5J stimulus, all compounds (30mg/Kg ip) caused a reduction in
LEP amplitude relative to the vehicle group. This was typically associated with
a concomitant reduction in nocifensive behaviours and AEP amplitude. Notably,
the LEP & behavioural changes elicited by tapentadol were evident at both 1
& 2 hour timepoints, while the AEP effects were restricted to the 1 hour
session. This suggests that the relative effect of compounds on LEPs Vs AEPs may
be able to dissociate between specific effects on the nociceptive system versus
more global changes in nervous system function.

Poster number: T_PZ4_302 (TP)

Sub-Theme: Pain Perception & Modulation: Insights from
Somatosensory Processing & Neuropathic Models

## Silent cold-sensing neurons underpin cold allodynia in neuropathic pain and
are important targets for analgesia
Authors: Federico Iseppon, University College London; Donald Iain
McDonald - National Center for Complementary and Integrative Health National
Institute of Health; John Nicholas Wood - Wolsfon Institute for Biomedical
Research University College London
Introduction
Patients with neuropathic pain often experience excruciating cold allodynia
symptoms, where even mild cooling is perceived as severely painful. The cell and
molecular basis of cold allodynia is still poorly understood, as well as its
current treatment on patients has shown very mild results at best.
Methods
We used a combination of behavioural tests to assess cold and mechanical
thresholds in mice, as well as in vivo calcium imaging or different neuropathic
pain models and analgesic treatment with pregabalin injected intravenously. This
research satisfied the ARRIVE guidelines for in vivo experiments on animals.
Statistical Approach
We presented datasets accompanied by raw data points or a representation of the
underlying distribution.
For the statistical analysis, we used paired t-tests, Wilcoxon tests, or
Kolmogorov-Smirnov tests to compare two groups, and One-Way ANOVA or
Kruskal-Wallis tests for multiple comparisons. When comparing two factors over
multiple groups we used Two-Way ANOVA with post-hoc tests for multiple
comparisons.
Results/Conclusions
We discovered a new population of normally silent, NaV1.8-positive large diameter
neurons that becomes sensitive to cooling. Ablating these neurons diminished the
cold allodynia symptoms in a model of oxaliplatin-dependent neuropathy. We
furthermore examined the effect of analgesic drugs on the oxaliplatin-evoked
unmasking of these silent cold sensors: intravenous injection of pregabalin
relieved cold allodynia symptoms and significantly decreased the number of cold
sensitive neurons by altering their excitability and temperature thresholds. The
medium/large unmasked cold sensors were identified as the neurons that were
predominantly silenced by the treatment.
Furthermore, deletion of the α2δ1 subunit abolished both the behavioural and
functional effects of pregabalin. Taken together, these results underscore the
importance of peripheral sensitization and altered neuronal excitability in the
genesis of cold allodynia in diverse neuropathic pain states, as well as their
potential to be analgesic targets by highlighting a novel, peripheral effect of
pregabalin on oxaliplatin-dependent neuropathy.

Poster number: T_PZ4_302 (TP)

Sub-Theme: Pain Perception & Modulation: Insights from
Somatosensory Processing & Neuropathic Models

## Adaptive coding of pain prediction error in the anterior insula
Authors: Deborah Talmi, Robert Hoskin, University of Cambridge,
University of Manchester
Introduction. Understanding the mechanisms behind the influence of and context on
pain perception can improve analgesic treatments. Prediction error (PE) signals
how much a noxious stimulus deviates from expectation and is therefore crucial
for our understanding of pain perception. It is thought that the brain engages
in ‘adaptive coding’ of pain PE, such that sensitivity to unexpected outcomes is
modulated by contextual information. While there is behavioural evidence that
pain and also reward PE signals are coded adaptively, controversy remains
regarding the underlying neural mechanism of adaptively-coded pain PEs.
Methods and statistical analysis. A cued-pain task was performed by 19 healthy
adults while undergoing FMRI scanning. BOLD responses to the task were tested
using an axiomatic approach to identify areas that may code pain PE adaptively.
We constrained the search volume to regions that were activated by pain outcomes
compared to pain omission. Our main analysis, using SPM software, employed a
second-level 2 (pain magnitude: high/low magnitude) x 2 (pain probability:
expected, unexpected) flexible factorial design to examine signal associated
with the chance cues and with trial outcomes.
Given that we know that pain, especially when unexpected, increases the BOLD
response, we hypothesized that signal in an area demonstrating an
adaptively-coded pain PE would be greater when stimulations are delivered (vs.
omitted) and when they are unexpected (vs expected). Crucially, signal
associated with pain probability should not vary with the actual intensity of
the delivered stimulus. Furthermore, the signal associated with the cue should
be stronger for cues indicating high pain magnitude.
Results. The left dorsal anterior insula demonstrated a pattern of response
consistent with adaptively-coded pain PE. Signals from this area were sensitive
to predicted pain magnitudes on the instigation of expectation, and the
unexpectedness of pain delivery. The response at pain delivery was consistent
with the local trial context, rather than the absolute magnitude of delivered
pain.
Conclusions. The study advances understanding of the neural basis of pain
prediction, highlighting a distinct contribution of the left dorsal anterior
insula in pain processing.

Poster number: T_PZ4_303 (TP)

Sub-Theme: Pain Perception & Modulation: Insights from
Somatosensory Processing & Neuropathic Models

## Movement-evoked pain experimentally induced in the lumbar region increases
motor variability
Authors: Valter Devecchi, University of Birmingham; Deborah Falla -
Centre of Precision Rehabilitation for Spinal Pain (CPR Spine), School of Sport,
Exercise and Rehabilitation Sciences University of Birmingham; Helio V Cabral -
Centre of Precision Rehabilitation for Spinal Pain (CPR Spine), School of Sport,
Exercise and Rehabilitation Sciences University of Birmingham; Jacques Abboud -
Department of Human Kinetics Université du Québec À Trois-Rivières; Paul W
Hodges - School of Health and Rehabilitation Sciences The University of
Queensland; Alessio Gallina - Centre of Precision Rehabilitation for Spinal Pain
(CPR Spine), School of Sport, Exercise and Rehabilitation Sciences University of
Birmingham
Introduction:
Current pain adaptation theories predict that motor variability may increase in
response to acute pain in order to identify a motor strategy that limits pain.
In this study, we tested this experimentally by investigating whether the onset
or resolution of pain acutely increases motor variability of the movement that
induces pain.
Methods:
Thirty healthy adults performed 15 sets of 10 repetitions of a box lifting task.
During sets 3-13, pain was experimentally induced in the lumbosacral region
using electrical stimulation. The stimulation was modulated in real-time in a
way that participants experienced a pain intensity of 5/10 if they performed the
task with an amount of lumbar flexion comparable to baseline. Pain intensity
decreased scaled linearly to 1/10 if the participant performed the task reducing
their lumbar flexion by 33%. Participants were naïve to how the stimulation was
modulated. Motor variability was measured as the difference between peaks of
lumbar flexion in consecutive trials (inter-trial variability). We compared
motor variability during baseline (sets 1-2), early adaptation (sets 3-4), late
adaptation (sets 12-13), and post-pain (sets 14-15).
Approach for statistical analysis:
Differences in peak lumbar flexion and inter-trial variability were assessed
across conditions using one-way repeated-measures analysis of variance (ANOVA)
or Friedman test. Pairwise comparisons were conducted using paired t-tests if
data were normally distributed, or Wilcoxon signed-rank test if not. Bonferroni
correction was applied to the p values.
Results and conclusions:
Participants performed the task with less lumbar flexion over time (p<0.001),
reducing their lumbar flexion by 16.8±25.9% in the late adaptation phase
(p=0.006) and 15.0±20.4% post-pain (p<0.001). Motor variability depended on
the presence of pain (p=0.018). In the first two sets with pain, inter-trial
variability increased compared to baseline (p=0.03) and post-pain (p=0.02). No
significant differences were observed between late adaptation and post-pain
(p=1.00), meaning that inter-trial variability did not increase when the painful
stimulus was removed. Our results suggest that the onset of pain, but not pain
resolution, may prompt a search for new motor strategies.
Conflict of interest: This work was funded by Versus Arthritis, UK

Poster number: T_PZ4_304 (TP)

Sub-Theme: Pain Perception & Modulation: Insights from
Somatosensory Processing & Neuropathic Models

## How are different aspects of sensory processing in fibromyalgia affected
across modalities?
Authors: Hayley Shepherd, University of Manchester; Christopher
Brown - Psychology University of Liverpool; Ellen Poliakoff - Division of human
communication, development and hearing University of Manchester; Richard Brown -
Psychology and mental health University of Manchester
Fibromyalgia has predominantly been classified as a condition of disturbed pain
processing associated with impaired perceptual ability (detection and
discrimination of painful and tactile stimuli) and hypersensitivity (reduced
tolerance) to pain. Beyond disturbed pain processing, emerging evidence suggests
that fibromyalgia sufferers experience multisensory hypersensitivity. Limited
research, however, has investigated how discrimination and detection are
affected across sensory modalities. Understanding how basic perception is
affected, is crucial for informing the potential treatment of the condition
through perceptual training. This study investigated how different aspects of
sensory processing in fibromyalgia, including detection/discrimination and
tolerance, are affected across modalities via self-report methods. 188 people
with fibromyalgia and 121 controls completed the sensory hypersensitivity scale
(tolerance) (Dixon et al., 2016) and the sensory perception quotient
(discrimination/ detection) (Tavassoli, Hoekstra, & Baron-Cohen, 2014).
Group comparisons using a MANOVA revealed that the fibromyalgia group reported
hypersensitivity (reduced tolerance) across all measured sensory modalities and
an increased perceptual ability (discrimination/detection) on all modalities
except smell and taste. Exploratory cluster analysis identified two fibromyalgia
subgroups who primarily differed in reported perceptual ability suggesting
within-group differences in perceptual self-awareness. These findings suggest
that fibromyalgia is a heterogenous condition in which patients may benefit from
treatments focussing on different aspects of sensory processing.
Dixon, E. A., Benham, G., Sturgeon, J. A., Mackey, S., Johnson, K. A., &
Younger, J. (2016). Development of the Sensory Hypersensitivity Scale (SHS): a
self-report tool for assessing sensitivity to sensory stimuli. Journal of
Behavioral Medicine, 39(3), 537–550. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10865-016-9720-3
Tavassoli, T., Hoekstra, R. A., & Baron-Cohen, S. (2014). The Sensory
Perception Quotient (SPQ): Development and validation of a new sensory
questionnaire for adults with and without autism. Molecular Autism, 5(1), 1–10.
https://doi.org/10.1186/2040-2392-5-29

Poster number: T_PZ4_109 (TP)

Sub-Theme: Inner Ear Mechanisms and Synaptic Plasticity: Insights
into Cochlear Function and Learning Processes

## A critical period of spontaneous spiking is required for hair-bundle
maintenance in mouse cochlear inner hair cells
Authors: Adam J. Carlton, University of Sheffield; Jing-Yi Jeng -
School of Biosciences University of Sheffield; Fiorella Grandi - Institute of
Neurological Disease Gladstone Institutes; Francesca De Faveri - School of
Biosciences University of Sheffield; Federico Ceriani - School of Biosciences
University of Sheffield; Lara De Tomasi - School of Biosciences University of
Sheffield; Anna Underhill - School of Biosciences University of Sheffield;
Stuart L. Johnson - School of Biosciences University of Sheffield; Kevin Legan -
School of Life Sciences University of Sussex; Corné J. Kros - School of Life
Sciences University of Sussex; Guy P. Richardson - School of Life Sciences
University of Sussex; Mirna Mustapha - School of Biosciences University of
Sheffield; Walter Marcotti - School of Biosciences University of Sheffield
INTRODUCTION Hearing requires the correct development and function of the inner
hair cells (IHCs) of the inner ear. IHCs utilise their apical bundle of
stereocilia to transduce sound into graded changes in membrane potential, in a
process termed mechanoelectrical transduction (MET). Prior to the onset of
hearing at post-natal day (P) 12 in mice, IHCs fire spontaneous calcium-based
action potentials, and this intrinsic activity is modulated by intercellular
calcium waves from neighbouring non-sensory cells. These spikes refine IHC and
downstream auditory pathway development during pre-hearing ages. However, our
understanding of the role of the intrinsic activity in the development of the
IHCs themselves versus that controlled by the extrinsic modulation from
non-sensory cells is limited.
METHODS The aim of this project was to silence the intrinsic activity of the IHCs
while preserving external modulation from non-sensory cells. To do this, we
reversibly overexpressed the inwardly rectifying potassium channel Kir2.1
specifically in IHCs using a doxycycline dependent OtofrtTA driver to lower
their resting membrane potential. This overexpression was validated, and the
consequences investigated, using electrophysiology, 2-photon calcium imaging,
immunolabelling, scanning electron microscopy and RNAseq.
APPROACH FOR STATISTICAL ANALYSIS Depending on the data, statistical significance
was determined using a Student’s t-test or a one-/two-way ANOVA paired with a
suitable post-hoc test. Statistical significance was defined as P < 0.05.
RESULTS AND CONCLUSIONS Kir2.1 overexpression hyperpolarised the resting membrane
potential of the IHCs by ~10 mV, preventing intrinsic spontaneous action
potentials. Calcium waves from non-sensory cells could elicit calcium influx in
IHCs overexpressing Kir2.1, and thus external modulation could still influence
IHC action potential activity. Strikingly, blocking intrinsic spikes induced
rapid fusion of the stereocilia from P10 onwards, paired with collapse of the
MET current and the upregulation of gene pathways involved in stereocilia
morphogenesis, actin regulation, and Rho-GTPase signalling. Overall, the data
presented here indicate that the intrinsic spiking activity of pre-hearing IHCs
is essential for hair bundle maintenance.

Poster number: T_PZ4_306 (TP)

Sub-Theme: Inner Ear Mechanisms and Synaptic Plasticity: Insights
into Cochlear Function and Learning Processes

## Efferent re-innervation of mammalian inner hair cells is driven by impaired
mechanoelectrical transduction
Authors: Andrew O'Connor, University of Sheffield; Walter Marcotti -
Biosciences University of Sheffield Introduction
The inner hair cells (IHCs) are the primary sensory cells within the mammalian
cochlea and are responsible for detecting acoustic stimuli and converting them
into electrical signals for the brain to perceive sound. This conversion is
performed by the mechanoelectrical transducer (MET) channels that are found on
the stereocilia atop IHCs. During postnatal development IHCs receive transient
axosomatic innervation by the efferent fibres which is then lost after the onset
of hearing [1], which in mice is around postnatal day 12. Studies have shown
that IHCs become re- innervated by efferent fibres in ageing mice and in mouse
models with impaired MET channel function (Myo7afl/fl;Myo15 cre-/+) [2]. It is
currently unknown whether the re-innervation of the IHCs occurs as a consequence
of general cellular dysfunction or is specific to impaired MET function.
Method
Experiments were performed using Myo7afl/fl;Myo15 cre-/+ mice, and from two
additional conditional knockout (cKO) mouse models that specifically disrupted
neurotransmitter release in IHCs, whilst maintaining MET functionality
(Otoferlintm1c;Vglut3 cre-ER(T2) and Otoffl/fl;Myo15 cre-/+). Myo7a encodes for
the unconventional myosin 7a, which is required for MET function, while Otof
encodes for the Ca2+ sensor of neurotransmitter release otoferlin.
Immunofluorescence was used to determine the expression profile of the pre- and
post-synaptic proteins of the efferent system. Ex vivo whole cell patch-clamp
electrophysiology was used to identify the function of the re- innervating
efferent system. Two way ANOVA was used with a P value of 0.05 to determine
statistical significance.
Results and Conclusions
The results show that IHCs from Myo7afl/fl Myo15 cre-/+ mice were re-innervated
by the efferent fibres from about P24 onwards. Prior to the efferent
re-innervation, the IHCs re-express post-synaptic small conductance Ca2+
activated potassium channels (SK2). In both otoferlin cKO mice, there was no
visible return of axosomatic efferent innervation on IHCs, indicating that the
re-innervation is likely to be driven by impaired mechanoelectrical
transduction.
References
[1] GLOWATZKI, E. & FUCHS, P. 2000. Science, 288, 2366.
[2] CORNS, L. F. et al 2018. Nature Communications, 9, 4015.

Poster number: T_PZ4_307 (TP)

Sub-Theme: Inner Ear Mechanisms and Synaptic Plasticity: Insights
into Cochlear Function and Learning Processes

## A mechanistic study characterising the role of harmonin in the opening of
mechanically sensitive ion channels on cochlea outer hair cells
Authors: Samuel Webb, Sheffield University
Cochlea outer hair cells (OHCs) are instrumental for the detection of sound. For
this to happen, complex protrusions called stereocilia composed of a range of
proteins (≈50) must form correctly. Sounds cause deflection of stereocilia,
opening mechanically sensitive ion channels located within. A key protein called
harmonin is localised near the ion channels, and the prevailing hypothesis is
that it directly regulates channel opening. To investigate the role of harmonin
in OHCs, Tecta-/- floxed-Ush1c-/- Prestin-cre+/+ (control) and +/- (knockout)
were used. The floxed-Ush1c-/- combined with the tamoxifen inducible
Prestin-cre+/- strain enabled temporal control of harmonin expression. Mice were
injected with tamoxifen at postnatal day 10 (P10) and P11 (both 100µg/g), then
experiments performed at P20, P25 and P30. Immunolabelling and confocal
microscopy were combined to examine harmonin knockout, patch-clamp
electrophysiology and fluid jet stimulation were used to measure ion channel
current and resting open probability (Po), scanning electron microscopy (SEM)
was used to assess morphology and fast camera imaging was used to quantify
displacement. The variance across groups was unequal and sample sizes were low
due to technically challenging experiments. The data is therefore ranked,
recorded as median and interquartile range, then analysed using non-parametric
methods. Kruskal-Wallis H tests were used to analyse factorial comparisons and
interactions.
Wilcoxon signed-ranked and Mann-Whitney U tests were used for dependent and
independent group comparisons. Immunolabelling highlights harmonin was reduced
at P20 and completely knocked out by P30. Electrophysiology revealed P20
knockout mice had a slight reduction in current compared to controls, which
drastically reduced at P25 and diminished by P30. All knockout cells that had a
reduced current, unexpectedly had a Po similar to controls. SEM shows that the
loss of current was not due to gross structural defects (See Figure1), although,
fast camera imaging did detect that stereocilia displacement almost doubled in
knockout mice. Overall, these experiments highlight that harmonin is required
for correct OHC channel functioning, but contrary to the prevailing hypothesis,
has a secondary role in channel opening.
 
Poster number: T_PZ4_308 (TP)

Sub-Theme: Inner Ear Mechanisms and Synaptic Plasticity: Insights
into Cochlear Function and Learning Processes

## The role of protein arginine methyltransferase 8 in dendritic spine
plasticity and excitatory/inhibitory balance during learning
Authors: Wing Lam So, The University of Hong Kong
Introduction. Protein arginine methylation is a major post-translational
modification in synaptic proteins. Among the arginine methyltransferase (PRMT)
family, PRMT8 is the only member with brain-specific expression. In vitro
studies have shown the localization of PRMT8 in dendritic spines implicating its
role in dendritic spine maturation. However, the role of PRMT8 in dendritic
spine plasticity is poorly understood in vivo, which led to a significant gap in
understanding the mechanism of dendritic spine pathology and potential
therapeutic interventions in PRMT8- related neuropsychological diseases, such as
autism. Methods. We utilized Prmt8 knockout-first mouse model (Prmt8KOF) in
behavioural tests, in vivo transcranial two-photon imaging, electrophysiological
recordings, and awake photometric recordings. Approach for statistical analysis.
We used Welch’s t-test or one-way ANOVA followed by
Bonferroni’s multiple comparison test in experiments with 2 or more than 2
groups, respectively. Results and conclusions. Here we found that Prmt8KOF mice
exhibited a male-specific auditory-cued fear learning deficit. While the
dendritic spine plasticity was normal in Prmt8KOF during development, it
exhibited deficit in fear learning- induced dendritic spine formation of layer 5
pyramidal neurons (PNs) in the auditory cortex. Besides, we found that Prmt8KOF
showed a significantly higher percentage of c-fos positive parvalbumin
interneurons (PVINs) 1 hour after fear learning. Further electrophysiological
investigation revealed that Prmt8KOF had a significant reduction in membrane
excitability of PVINs. Using enriched environment (EE) or selective chemogenetic
activation of PVINs as an intervention to restore the excitatory-inhibitory
(E/I) balance, both rescued the fear learning deficits of in Prmt8KOF in
behaviour and spine plasticity. Collectively, our results suggest that PRMT8
plays critical roles in fear learning, PVIN excitability, and PV plasticity. The
loss of PRMT8 may lead to E/I imbalance that could be rescued via selective
activation of PVINs in fear learning.

## Author Index