pmcCryst Growth DesCryst Growth Des822acssd101261892cgCrystal Growth & Design1528-74831528-7505pmc-is-collection-domainyespmc-collection-titleACS AuthorChoicePMC11099919PMC11099919.111099919110999193876664210.1021/acs.cgd.4c002931ArticleFlavone Cocrystals:
A Comprehensive Approach Integrating
Experimental and Virtual Methods
PetrickTom L.GrünwaldAlexandrahttps://orcid.org/0000-0003-0503-4448BraunDoris E. Institute of Pharmacy, University
of Innsbruck, Innrain 52c, 6020 Innsbruck, Austria*Email: doris.braun@uibk.ac.at.0605202415052024241046254641954212280220242504202425042024170520241805202420052024© 2024 The Authors. Published by American Chemical Society2024The Authorshttps://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/Permits the broadest form of re-use including for commercial purposes, provided that author attribution and integrity are maintained (https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/). 
The dapsone/flavone cocrystal system served as a benchmark
for
both experimental and virtual screening methods. Expanding beyond
this, two additional active pharmaceutical ingredients (APIs), sulfanilamide
and sulfaguanidine, structurally related to dapsone were chosen to
investigate the impact of substituents on cocrystal formation. The
experimental screening involved mechanochemical methods, slurry experiments,
hot-melt extrusion, and the contact preparation method. The virtual
screening focused on crystal structure prediction (CSP), molecular
complementarity, hydrogen-bond propensity, and molecular electrostatic
potentials. The CSP studies not only indicated that each of the three
APIs should form cocrystals with flavone but also reproduced the known
single- and multicomponent phases. Experimentally, dapsone/flavone
cocrystals ACC, BCC, CCC, and DCC were reproduced, CCC was identified as a nonstoichiometric
hydrate, and a fifth cocrystal (ECC), a t-butanol solvate, was discovered. The
cocrystal polymorphs ACC and BCC are enantiotripically related,
and DCC, exhibiting a different
stoichiometric ratio, is enthalpically stabilized over the other cocrystals.
For the sulfaguanidine/flavone system, two novel, enantiotripically
related cocrystals were identified. The crystal structures of two
cocrystals and a flavone polymorph were solved from powder X-ray diffraction
data, and the stability of all cocrystals was assessed through differential
scanning calorimetry and lattice energy calculations. Despite computational
indications, a diverse array of cocrystallization techniques did not
result in a sulfanilamide/flavone cocrystal. The driving force behind
dapsone’s tendency to cocrystallize with flavone can be attributed
to the overall strength of flavone interactions in the cocrystals.
For sulfaguanidine, the potential to form strong API···API
and API···coformer interactions in the cocrystal is
a contributing factor. Furthermore, flavone was found to be trimorphic.

The influence of the functional groups
of structurally related
APIs on cocrystallization with flavone was investigated. Employing
a hybrid approach that incorporated both virtual and experimental
cocrystal screening methods, seven distinct cocrystals were identified
and thoroughly characterized. A meticulous investigation of the molecular
interactions contributed to an enhanced understanding of cocrystal
formation within this class of APIs.

Austrian Science Fund10.13039/501100002428I 4955-Npmc-status-qastatus0pmc-status-liveyespmc-status-embargonopmc-status-releasedyespmc-prop-open-accessyespmc-prop-olfnopmc-prop-manuscriptnopmc-prop-legally-suppressednopmc-prop-has-pdfyespmc-prop-has-supplementyespmc-prop-pdf-onlynopmc-prop-suppress-copyrightnopmc-prop-is-real-versionnopmc-prop-is-scanned-articlenopmc-prop-preprintnopmc-prop-in-epmcyespmc-license-refCC BYdocument-id-old-9cg4c00293document-id-new-14cg4c00293ccc-price1

## Introduction
Multicomponent systems,
such as cocrystals, offer a promising route
to enhance the physicochemical properties of active pharmaceutical
ingredients (APIs) while preserving their original composition. − Potentially effective substances often fail to reach the market
due to their low solubility and bioavailability, a problem that can
be mitigated through cocrystallization. − Pharmaceutical cocrystals
gained notable significance in 2018 when the Food and Drug Administration
recognized cocrystals as alternative crystal forms, alike to polymorphs. This allows drugs that have already been classified
as safe to be reapproved in the form of a cocrystal. However, it is
important to note that pharmaceutical cocrystals are primarily limited
to coformers classified as “generally regarded as safe”
(GRAS). The pool of over 370 potential GRAS coformers is expansive,
making the exhaustive screening of all conceivable combinations a
laborious task. Therefore, a deeper comprehension
of the mechanisms underlying cocrystal formation is required.
Numerous methods can be employed to produce cocrystals, with common
approaches including slurry-mediated transformation, antisolvent addition, solvent
evaporation, cooling crystallization, and neat and liquid-assisted grinding. Furthermore, contact preparation, − hot-melt extrusion, and freeze- and
spray-drying techniques have been used
successfully. , The selection of a specific method
can influence whether a metastable form or the thermodynamically stable
phase is obtained. 
In addition
to experimental approaches, computational methods play
a pivotal role in cocrystal screening. Knowledge-based methods, like
molecular complementarity (MC) and multicomponent hydrogen-bond propensity
(MCHBP) utilize the Cambridge Structural Database (CSD) to predict
cocrystallization based on a molecular and statistical basis, respectively. Alternatively, calculating the molecular electrostatic
potential (MEP) surface of isolated molecules allows for estimating
interaction energies in the solid state. Crystal structure prediction (CSP) generates numerous thermodynamically
feasible crystal structures. In contrast to the other virtual screening
methods, the molecular environment is considered in CSP studies. CSP,
though powerful, becomes increasingly complex and computationally
expensive as the size and number of molecules grow. As cocrystals
are inherently more complex systems, Z′ =
1 and 1:1 stoichiometric ratio calculations are predominantly employed. 
This study encompasses both experimental
and virtual cocrystal
screening, focusing on three structurally related APIs and flavone
(FL) as the coformer, as depicted in . Dapsone (DDS), known to form cocrystals
with flavone, , served as the basis for the selection
of the structurally related APIs—sulfanilamide (SA) and sulfaguanidine
(SG).
 DDS is a sulfone and aniline derivative similar
to the sulfonamides
in structure and action. The API is classified
by the WHO as an essential medicine and is used to treat leprosy in
combination with rifampicin. − Dapsone is known to exist in
five polymorphic forms (I, II, III, IV, V ), one hydrate, 15 solvates, , and 16 cocrystals
(with 5-nitroisophthalic acid; 1,3,5-trinitrobenzene; 1-pyridine-4yl-piperazine; 3,5-dinitro benzoic acid; urotropine; 1,3-benzothiazol-2(3H)-one; flavone; , sulfanilamide; caffeine; 2,2′-bipyridne; 4,4′-bipyridine; , caprolactam ). It has to be mentioned
that four distinct cocrystals have been identified for the combination
of DDS with FL, ACC, BCC, CCC, and DCC. Among these, ACC, BCC, and CCC are described
as 1:1 cocrystals, while DCC is characterized as a 1:2
cocrystal. , 
The antibiotic drug SA
belongs to the group of sulfonamides, which
competitively inhibit the dihydropteroate synthase by acting as substrate
analogues of p-aminobenzoic acid. Despite its historical relevance, SA is now largely replaced
by more advanced alternatives. Four polymorphic
forms (α, β, γ, δ ) and one hydrate are documented in the literature. SA is known to form cocrystals
with dapsone, caprolactam, antipyrine, oxymatrine, and sulfathiazole. 
SG, also a sulfonamide, acts locally in the gastrointestinal
tract
against bacterial pathogens and is commonly employed in animal treatment. Five polymorphic forms (I, II, III, IV, and V , ), two monohydrate forms, , nine solvates, and cocrystals with antipyrine, 1,10-phenantholine, thiobarbituric
acid, 1,2-di(4-pyridyl)ethylene, 4-nitrobenzoic acid, 3-nitrobenzoic acid, and phenazine are reported.
Flavone, a member of the
flavonoid class, exists in an anhydrous
form and is known to form cocrystals
with dapsone, , naringenin, and diethylstilbestrol. 
The goal of this study was to investigate cocrystal formation and
cocrystal stability, taking into consideration the diverse substitution
patterns featured by the three selected APIs. Moreover, this research
endeavored to bridge the gap between theory and experiment by conducting
a rigorous examination of cocrystal formation, allowing us to gain
deeper insights into the complex interplay of intermolecular forces
governing this process. Through a careful comparison of predictive
outcomes with experimental results, we thoroughly examined screening
techniques and, conversely, validated the reliability and applicability
of computational methods.

2

## Materials and Methods
2.1

## Materials
Sulfanilamide (form β;
purity > 99%) obtained from Merck, dapsone (form III; purity 97%)
from Alfa Aesar, sulfaguanidine (monohydrate I; purity > 99%) from
Apoka, and flavone (form II; purity > 99%) from Acros were used
as
received. All solvents used in this study met analytical quality standards.

2.2

## Experimental Cocrystal Screening
2.2.1

## Dry and Liquid-Assisted Grinding Experiments
Samples of 150 mg each, featuring molar ratios of 1:1, 1:2, and
2:1 (API/FL), were prepared. Approximately five drops of solvent [diisopropylether
(DIPE), n-heptane, water, t-butanol
(t-BuOH), isobutyl acetate (i-BuOAc)]
were added in case of the liquid-assisted grinding experiments. The
grinding process was executed using 5 mL stainless steel vessels,
three 5 mm stainless steel balls, and a Retsch Vario MM 500 instrument
(Retsch, Haan, Germany). Grinding was conducted at a frequency of
15 Hz for a duration of 60 min. At specific intervals (5, 10, 15,
30, 45, and 60 min), samples were retrieved and subjected to analysis
using powder X-ray diffraction (PXRD).

2.2.2

## Slurry Experiments in Organic Solvents
Mixtures of 150 mg each, with molar ratios of 1:1, 1:2, and 2:1
(API/FL), were prepared. To these mixtures, 300–400 μL
of saturated solution was added (DIPE, n-heptane,
or water). The resulting slurry was stirred at temperatures cycling
between 10 and 30 °C. At predefined intervals, samples were withdrawn
and subjected to analysis using PXRD.

2.2.3

## Contact Preparation Method
Following
the procedure described by Kuhnert–Brandstätter, contact
preparation was used as an efficient method for distinguishing between
eutectics and cocrystals. 

2.2.4

## Hot-Melt Extrusion
Mixtures containing
1.5 g of API and FL in a 1:1 molar ratio were prepared. The selection
of extrusion temperatures was guided by the differential scanning
calorimetry (DSC) curves of the mixtures (see section 1 in the Supporting Information). The extrusion process
was carried out using the Extruder Hybrid ZE 5/12 HMI (Three-Tec GmbH,
Seon, Switzerland) with a screw speed of 20 rpm.

2.3

## Preparation of the Solid-State Forms
The nomenclature for both neat and cocrystal polymorphs lacks uniform
standardization. In this work the polymorphs, hydrates, and solvates
of the different compounds were labeled as follows: FL—IFL, IIFL, and IIIFL; SA—αSA, βSA, γSA, δSA, and HSA (hydrate); DDS—IDDS, IIDDS, IIIDDS, IVDDS, VDDS, and HDDS (hydrate); SG—ISG, IISG, IIISG, VSG, and HSG (hydrate); DDS/FL (cocrystal)—ACC, BCC, CCC, DCC, and ECC, with CCC being a cocrystal hydrate and ECC a cocrystal solvate; SG/FL (cocrystal)—ICC and IICC. The subscripts indicate either the neat compound
or a cocrystal (CC).
Flavone form I (IFL) could only be obtained in small quantities by slow
solvent evaporation of a saturated (at RT) dimethyl carbonate solution,
while form II (IIFL) was obtained
from 23 other solvent evaporation experiments (see section 8 of the SI). Melting IIFL and quench cooling of the melt to RT resulted in IIIFL.
Similarly, the SA polymorphs could
be obtained via solvent evaporation
from saturated solutions at RT. Form α (αSA) crystallized from water, form β
(βSA) from butyl acetate,
diethyl ether, dimethylformamide, 1,4-dioxane, and methanol. Form
γ (γSA) crystallized
from dimethylacetamide.
The SG and
DDS , solid-state forms were prepared as previously
reported.
To produce the DDS/FL cocrystal A (ACC), 20 mg of CCC was weighed
in and subjected to three heating and cooling cycles spanning from
20 to 109 °C, each with a rate of 2 °C per min. Following
this, the sample was annealed isothermally at 108 °C for 3–5
days, resulting in ACC. Stirring
a 1:1 molar ratio of DDS (527.75 mg) and FL (472.30 mg) in 3 mL of
a saturated MeOH/water solution with a water activity of 0.23 or 0.85
for 1 week at RT resulted in BCC or CCC, respectively. Stirring
a 1:2 molar ratio mixture of DDS (358.42 mg) and FL (641.58 mg) in
DIPE for 2 days within the temperature range of 10–30 °C
led to DCC. Finally, ECC was obtained in liquid-assisted grinding
experiments. 736.20 mg of DDS, 763.70 mg of FL, and 50 drops of t-BuOH were ground at 15 Hz for 60 min.
SG/FL Form
I (ICC) was produced
by grinding a 1:1 mixture of SG (736.2 mg) and FL (763.70 mg). This
mixture was processed with 50 drops of t-BuOH for
120 min at 15 Hz. IICC could
only be obtained through melt recrystallization. To achieve this,
873.15 mg of SG and 1126.80 mg of FL were mixed and recrystallized
from the melt using a hot-melt extruder (see section 4 of the SI) at 185 °C and screw speed of 20 rpm.

2.4

## Virtual Cocrystal Screening
The virtual
methods described in (MC), (MCHBP), and (MEP) were performed for the low-energy
conformers of the APIs and FL (see section 5 of the SI). The conformers were optimized with the B3LYP method and
the 6-311++G(d,p) basis set using Gaussian09 
2.4.1

## Potential Energy Surface (PES) Scans
PES scans were performed at the PBE0/6-31G(d,p) level of theory using
Gaussian09. Dihedral angles ( ) were incrementally
rotated in 30° steps, while maintaining the p-aminobenzene and guanidine groups planar (refer to section 5 of
the SI).

2.4.2

## Molecular Complementarity (MC)
The parameters for molecular complementarity were calculated using
the “Molecular Complementarity screening Wizard” tool
built into Mercury 2023.3. This method relies on the evaluation of
distinct molecular descriptors. Among these descriptors, three pertain
to the dimensions of a rectangle encompassing the van der Waals volume.
Additionally, the dipole moment and the proportion of N and O atoms
within the molecules are considered. 

2.4.3

## Multicomponent Hydrogen-Bond Propensity
(MCHBP)
The MCHBP analysis was performed with the CCDC’s
“Multi_component_hydrogen_bond_propensity_report” python
script and standard settings available on GitHub. This method relies on statistical analyses drawn from an
extensive data set of structures within the CSD and involves the computation
of scores for various functional group interactions. To assess the
potential for cocrystal formation, the highest scores obtained from
interactions between coformers, APIs, and between APIs and coformers
are extracted. If the score of the prospective cocrystal exceeds that
of the homomeric interactions, it suggests a favorable propensity
for cocrystal formation. 

2.4.4

## Molecular Electrostatic Potential (MEP)
Calculations
Multiwfn 3.7 was
employed to map the MEPs onto their 0.002 e– Å–3 electron density isosurface. Using the determined
local maxima and minima, the H-bond donor parameter (α) and
H-bond acceptor parameter (β) were calculated, following the
methodology outlined in earlier investigations. To assess the potential energy gain (ΔEMEP, kJ mol–1, with greater negativity
indicating increased stabilization) associated with cocrystal formation, was applied, 1with CC, API, and FL representing the cocrystal,
API, and flavone, respectively, and m and n denoting the stoichiometric ratio.
The ΔEMEP value cannot exceed 0, as in the absence
of any preferred interaction, the energy of the cocrystal matches
that of the initial substances. Consequently, it becomes challenging
to establish a definitive threshold for determining cocrystal formation.
In the existing literature, a probability criterion has been outlined
for other compounds, suggesting that when ΔEMEP is −11 kJ mol–1, there is
approximately a 50% probability of cocrystal formation. Essentially, the lower the energy value, the
more probable the formation of a cocrystal.

2.4.5

## Crystal Structure Prediction (CSP)
CSP calculations for the selected conformations (NH2 groups
planar) were performed in the 59 most frequently encountered space
groups using CrystalPredictor v2.0.1. , For single-component
systems, Z′ = 1 and Z′
= 2 rigid-body searches were executed, generating 250 000 and
500 000 structures for each search, respectively. In the case
of multicomponent systems, calculations were carried out in Z′ = 1 with 500 000 generated structures for
each search. The 9999 lowest-energy structures within a range of 10–25
kJ mol–1 relative to the global minimum were reoptimized
using a distributed multipole model within
DMACRYS. Subsequently, CrystalOptimizer
v2.4.8 , was employed to optimize approximately 250
of the most stable structures (within a 13–25 kJ mol–1 energy range of the global minimum) for each system, allowing the
dihedrals marked in to readjust in the crystal structure. The conformational
energies and distributed multipoles used
were calculated at the PBE0/6-31G(d,p) level (Gaussian09), and all
other intermolecular forces were modeled in an atom–atom exp-6
form using the FIT potential. 
Following
this flexible optimization, the energies were initially recalculated
without optimization using the PBE-MBD* (DFT-d) method. − Subsequently, the most stable crystal structures within a 10–15
kJ mol–1 energy range were then fully optimized
(CASTEP v20.11 ). For more details, refer
to section 6 of the SI.

2.4.6

## Pairwise Intermolecular Energy Calculations
Crystal Explorer V17 and Gaussian
16 were employed to calculate the pairwise
intermolecular energies using the B3LYP/6-31G(d,p) wave function. For this purpose, the PBE-MBD*-optimized structures
(see previous section), employing a radius of 3.80 Å, were used
to determine the electrostatic, polarization, dispersion, and repulsion
energies.

2.5

## PXRD and Structure Solution from PXRD
An X’pert Pro diffractometer (PANalytical, Almelo, Netherlands)
equipped with a PIXcel1D detector and a Cu–Kα1,2 radiation source, operating at 40 kV and 40 mA was used. The diffractometer
was configured with a θ/θ coupled goniometer in a transmission
geometry setup. The measurements covered a 2θ range spanning
from 2 to 40°, with a step size of 0.013° and 40 s per step,
or alternatively from 2 to 70° with a step size of 0.007°
and 1600 s per step (multichannel mixed-signal) for structure determinations.
Structure solution was performed using the software programs DASH and TOPAS V7. The
first 20 reflections were used for indexing the background-subtracted
pattern with DICVOL. The absence of specific reflections was then
statistically analyzed to determine the space group. , Based on the unit cell’s volume and the determined space
group, the number of molecules in the asymmetric unit could be established.
The internal coordinate descriptions (Z-matrix) were
derived from the gas-phase minima. Simulated annealing was employed
to optimize the models directly in real space. O/N–H distances
were normalized to 0.9 Å and C–H distances to 0.95 Å.
For each structure, the optimization process involved 100 simulated
annealing runs, consisting of 2 × 108 moves per run.
In this optimization, each API molecule had 6 external and 2 internal
degrees of freedom, while FL had 6 external and 1 internal degree
of freedom. The best solution was then minimized (PBE-MBD*), and the
optimized structure, with N/O–H distances normalized to 0.9
Å and C–H distances to 0.95 Å, was used as the starting
point for rigid-body Rietveld refinements. For more details, refer to section 7 of the SI.

2.6

## Hot-Stage Microscopy (HSM)
An Olympus
BH2 polarization microscope (Olympus, Austria) equipped with a Kofler
hot-stage (Reichert, Austria) and an Olympus DP71 digital camera (Olympus,
Austria) were used for the investigations.

2.7

## Differential Scanning Calorimetry (DSC)
A DSC7 instrument (PerkinElmer, Norwalk, Connecticut) in conjunction
with the Pyris 8.0 Software was used to analyze the samples. The samples
were precisely weighed using a UM3 ultramicrobalance (Mettler, Greifensee,
Switzerland). Approximately 2–5 mg of the sample were used,
and the analysis employed a heating rate of 10 °C min–1, with a N2 purge gas flow of 20 mL min–1. Enthalpies were derived from hermetically sealed capsules with
a minimum of three measurements, and error estimation was performed
at a 95% confidence interval. The solvates were additionally measured
with pierced lids. The calorimeter underwent calibration using benzophenone
(48.0 °C) and caffeine (236.2 °C) for temperature calibration
and indium (28.45 J g–1) for enthalpy calibration.

2.8

## Thermogravimetric Analysis (TGA)
A TGA7 (PerkinElmer, Norwalk, Connecticut) controlled by the Pyris
8.0 Software was used to analyze approximately 3–5 mg of substance.
Two-point calibration of the temperature was performed with ferromagnetic
materials (Alumel and Ni, Curie-point standards, PerkinElmer). Heating
rates of 5 and 10 °C min–1 were applied and
N2 was used as purge gas (sample purge: 20 mL min–1, balance purge: 40 mL min–1).

2.9

## Karl Fischer Titration
A C30 coulometric
Karl Fischer titrator (Mettler Toledo, Schwarzenbach, Switzerland)
was employed to analyze the water content of approximately 20–30
mg of material.

3

## Results and Discussion
3.1

## Experimental Cocrystal Screening
Cocrystal screening experiments for SA, DDS, and SG with FL were
carried out using grinding and slurry experiments, as well as hot-melt
extrusion and the contact preparation method. The products were initially
analyzed using PXRD and IR, and the cocrystals were further characterized
using HSM, DSC, and TGA.
3.1.1

## Contact Preparation Method
Contact
preparations of the API/coformer combinations were produced and cocrystallization
was observed for SG and DDS, as illustrated in . The contact preparation of DDS and FL ( a) resulted in the
formation of the cocrystal DCC. Alongside the cocrystal formation, polymorphic transformations
of DDS and FL were observed upon heating the sample (section 3.4 of
the SI). FL exhibits a polymorphic transformation
from IIIFL to IIFL at approximately 70 °C, while DDS
undergoes a transformation from IIIDDS to IIDDS at around 80
°C. Upon further heating, the first
eutectic event becomes apparent at 90 °C (IIFL and DCC). Following this, FL undergoes complete melting at 96 °C. The
second eutectic event, involving IIDDS and DCC, occurs within
a narrow temperature range of 105–106 °C. This second
eutectic is somewhat challenging to distinguish because it almost
coincides with the melting point of the cocrystal at 106 °C.
During the initial contact preparation procedure, only traces of the
cocrystal were observable at the contact zone. However, through subsequent
cooling and reheating processes, the cocrystal zone can be significantly
increased.
 In the case of SG/FL, IICC formed in small quantities ( b). Upon heating, the first eutectic occurs
at 94 °C
(IICC and FL), immediately followed
by the melting of FL at 96 °C. The second eutectic event becomes
apparent at 173 °C, followed by the cocrystal’s melting
point at 174 °C. The contact preparation also confirmed that
FL is polymorphic (section 4 of the SI).
No cocrystallization was observed for SA/FL ( c). The SA polymorphs (βSA and γSA) crystallized concomitantly, with βSA slowly transforming into γSA, in agreement
with literature reports. The eutectic
temperature was determined as 76 °C. Subsequent reheating and
cooling processes did not yield a cocrystal (section 2.4 of the SI).

3.1.2

## Dry and Liquid-Assisted Grinding Experiments
(LAG)
The selection of solvents for the experimental cocrystal
screening was based on considerations of solubility, polarity, and
the potential to form H-bonds. Quick solubility tests were conducted
using 30 different solvents (section 1.2 of the SI). Solvents that exhibited related solubility properties
for both the API and the coformer were shortlisted. It has to be noted
that no ideal solvent could be found. As a result, for the LAG experiments n-heptane was chosen as a nonpolar solvent, while DIPE and i-BuOAc were selected as H-bond acceptor solvents. Finally, t-butanol and water were chosen as solvents that feature
H-bonding donor and acceptor groups. The dry and LAG experiments ( ) resulted in the
formation of three DSS/FL (CCC, DCC, ECC) and two SG/FL cocrystals (ICC, IICC).
 In the case of the DDS/FL experiments, the 1:2 cocrystal
(DCC) predominantly formed and
could
be produced phase pure through dry and LAG using DIPE or i-BuOAc, when the correct molar ratio was used. However, when n-heptane was used, a grinding time of 60 min was insufficient
for complete conversion into the cocrystal. This may be attributed
to the low solubility of the substances in n-heptane.
In the 1:2 grinding experiments involving water and t-BuOH, mixtures of cocrystals and/or educts were obtained, specifically CCC and ECC, respectively. Notably, the new cocrystal (ECC) could be synthesized phase pure by starting
with a 1:1 ratio and using t-BuOH, indicating the
formation of a 1:1 cocrystal. However, upon storage under ambient
conditions or with prolonged grinding, ECC underwent desolvation into ACC and DCC. It is worth
noting that CCC only formed in
the presence of water or DIPE. The DIPE used for these experiments
contained water as evidenced by the DDS anhydrate-to-hydrate transformation.
For further details, see section 3 of the SI.
Two new cocrystals, ICC and IICC, emerged when starting
with SG
and FL as reactants. The time-dependent LAG experiments (section 4
of the SI) revealed an interesting trend,
where IICC formed first and then
transformed into ICC (with the
exception of t-BuOH). In the case of dry grinding
experiments, no transformation was observed within the initial 60
min. Then, phase-pure ICC could
be obtained from the grinding experiments. Furthermore, the grinding
results suggest a 1:1 stoichiometric ratio for these two cocrystals.
However, it is evident that the 60 min duration and 15 Hz frequency
employed were often insufficient for complete cocrystal formation.
No cocrystallization was observed at all when water was used as the
solvent.
In the case of SA/FL, no cocrystal formation was observed
(see
section 2 of the SI).

3.1.3

## Slurry Experiments in Organic Solvents and
Water
The slurry experiments, conducted using a subset of
the solvents mentioned in , reproduced the previously described
DDS/FL cocrystals CCC and DCC, and
the two new SG/FL cocrystals ICC and IICC.
When using
molar ratios of 1:1 or 1:2 for DDS/FL in DIPE or n-heptane, DCC formed along with
an excess of reactants for most experiments. Conversely, using ratios
of 1:2 phase pure DCC was obtained
in DIPE. CCC was exclusively
obtained from slurry experiments in water (section 3 of the SI), in agreement with the results from the grinding
experiments. In the case of SG, both cocrystals were observed in the
slurry experiments, although only ICC could be obtained phase pure. Additionally, it was observed
that IICC transformed into ICC over time. This observation suggests
that at RT, ICC is the stable
polymorph of SG/FL (section 4 of the SI). Slurry experiments using SA did not yield any cocrystals ( ).
 When using molar ratios of 1:1 or 1:2 for DDS/FL in
DIPE or n-heptane, DCC formed
along with an excess of reactants for most experiments. Conversely,
using ratios of 1:2 phase pure DCC was obtained in DIPE. CCC was
exclusively obtained from slurry experiments in water (section 3 of
the SI), in agreement with the results
from the grinding experiments. In the case of SG, both cocrystals
were observed in the slurry experiments, although only ICC could be obtained phase pure. Additionally,
it was observed that IICC transformed
into ICC over time. This observation
suggests that at RT, ICC is the
stable polymorph of SG/FL (section 4 of the SI). Slurry experiments using SA did not yield any cocrystals ( ).
In light
of the fact that the presence of water led to the formation
of CCC for the DDS/FL system,
the influence of water activity on cocrystal formation was explored.
This investigation involved the use of various methanol/water mixtures and a 1:1 ratio of DDS/FL (section 3.2 of the SI). At lower water activities (≤0.43) BCC forms, whereas at higher water
activities (≥0.52) CCC forms, indicating that CCC might
be a hydrate and that the critical water activity lies between 0.43
and 0.52.

3.1.4

## Hot-Melt Extrusion Experiments
By employing hot-melt extrusion with a 1:1 molar ratio of API/FL,
it was possible to produce the cocrystals DCC, ICC, and IICC.
Processing of DDS/FL at
temperatures above 86 °C resulted in the formation of DCC. Given the 1:2 molar ratio in the cocrystal,
the coexistence of DDS and DCC is unsurprising. Furthermore, the formation of the IIIFL polymorph was seen in hot-melt extrusion
experiments above 86 °C (section 3.3 of the SI). The SG/FL experiments showed an appearance of ICC (as a mixture with IICC) above 100 °C. When the temperature was
increased further (165 °C), IICC formed predominantly (section 4.3 of the SI). Thus, HME can be used to produce phase pure IICC. No cocrystallization occurred for SA/FL.
Instead, depending on the extrusion temperature, either βSA or γSA was present, with γSA forming at 120 °C and above (section 2.3 of the SI).

3.2

## Virtual Cocrystal Screening
Potential
energy scans were employed to derive the global and local energy minima
of the three APIs and FL. Each two conformers were chosen for SA,
SG, and FL, and one for DDS (section 5 of the SI).
3.2.1

## Molecular Complementarity
The analysis
(SI section 5.3) suggests that SA and DDS
are suitable to form cocrystals with FL, while SG is not a suitable
candidate. The primary reason for deeming SG unsuitable is its guanidine
function, which contains more N atoms than the respective groups of
the other two APIs, causing it to exceed the threshold for polar atoms
in the molecule.
Additionally, it is worth noting that one conformation
of both SA and SG failed the ΔS/L (smallest/longest dimension). Thus, the choice of input conformation
can significantly influence the result, i.e., fail or pass.

3.2.2

## Multicomponent Hydrogen-Bond Propensity
The likelihood of cocrystallization with FL versus single-component
crystallization appears to be approximately equal for both SA and
DDS. A multicomponent H-bond propensity score close to 0 does not
favor one outcome over the other (section 5.5 of the SI). In contrast, for SG, a score of −0.25 was calculated,
which suggests that cocrystallization with FL is unlikely. However,
it has been experimentally demonstrated that both DDS and SG can form
cocrystals with FL. The discrepancy may arise from the limitation
that the MCHBP tool solely evaluates the strongest H-bonding interaction.
However, the selected APIs feature numerous groups capable of forming
strong interactions, which remain unaccounted for in this analysis.
Therefore, Manian and coauthors have addressed this issue by modifying
the tool to an “integrated” HBP method to account for
the competitive probabilities of H-bonding. 

3.2.3

## Molecular Electrostatic Potential Calculations
 shows the
MEP maps of the APIs and flavone, with red areas representing partial
negative regions and blue areas representing partial positive regions.
FL, a relatively flat molecule, features two oxygen atoms in its chromone
ring. The ketone oxygen carries a partial negative charge. Conversely,
the other oxygen is somewhat shielded by surrounding hydrogens, leading
to a partial positive charge on this side of the molecule. The DDS
hydrogen atoms of the amine group create a partial positive region,
while the oxygens of the sulphonyl group form a partial negative region.
SA and SG share structural similarities with dapsone. In the case
of SA, one of the p-substituted aniline groups is
replaced by NH2, essentially preserving the potential characteristics.
In SG, the guanidine group features four positive regions. Additionally,
the guanidine group, which lacks the symmetry of the functional groups
seen in the other APIs, also affects the potential of the sulphonyl
group’s O atoms.
 Energy gain estimations upon cocrystallization,
represented as
ΔEMEP, were calculated using for the stoichiometric
ratios of 1:1, 1:2, and 2:1 (API/FL). Regardless of the API used,
similar results were obtained. Specifically, all 1:1 and 2:1 combinations
exhibited energy gain values falling in the range of −12 to
−15 kJ mol–1, while the 1:2 combinations
showed values ranging from −22 to −25 kJ mol–1. Therefore, the 1:2 stoichiometric ratio appears to be the preferred
one, and all three APIs should be capable of forming cocrystals with
FL. For more details, refer to section 5.4 of the SI.

3.3

## Computationally Generated Crystal Energy Landscapes
Single-component crystal energy landscapes were computed for SA
and FL to complement the crystal energy landscapes previously generated
for DDS and SG. It should be highlighted that the energy landscape for DDS was recalculated
using the methodology outlined in . All of the experimental single-component
polymorphs that fell within the criteria of the search were successfully
located in the crystal energy landscapes.
3.3.1

## Single-Component Lattice Energy Landscapes
The DDS lattice energy landscape reveals VDDS as the global minimum structure, with IIIDDS as the second most stable structure.
All other characterized polymorphs (IDDS, IIDDS, and IVDDS), the isostructural HDDS dehydrate, as
well as a theoretical isostructural DCM desolvate, were found within a range of 10 kJ mol–1 of the global minimum ( a). As recently reported by us, the three structurally
characterized SG polymorphs (ISG, IIISG, and VSG) correspond to the three lowest-energy structures
in the crystal energy landscape ( b). 
 The SA search reveals that all four known polymorphs
were found
among the computationally generated structures, with αSA being the global minimum structure followed
by βSA (nearly equi-energetic).
Additionally, γSA and δSA were found within a range
of 5 kJ mol–1 of the global minimum ( c). Toscani et al. reported
the experimental stability order of the polymorphs as βSA (most stable) > αSA > γSA, with an energy difference of only 0.2 kJ mol–1 between βSA and αSA. , Thus, these two structures are very close in terms of energy, a
conclusion that aligns with our calculations. Concerning FL, the structurally
characterized form, IFL was identified
as the global minimum structure ( d). The second most stable structure, which
was found to be 0.5 kJ mol–1 less stable, was identified
through structural and PXRD comparisons as IIFL.

3.3.2

## Sulfanilamide/Flavone PES and Lattice Energy
Landscape
The PES analysis of SA revealed several minima
( a), which
can roughly be reduced to four minima regions: (1) dihedral angles
ϕ1: 210–270°/ϕ2: 240–300°,
(2) ϕ1: 210–270°/ϕ2:
60–120°, (3) ϕ1: 60–120°/ϕ2: 270–300°, and (4) ϕ1: 60–120°/ϕ2: 90–120°. These regions primarily differ in the
pyramidalization of the −NH2 groups. Depending on
the constraints, such as enforcing planar −NH2 groups,
it becomes possible to generate a PES map featuring four equal low-energy
regions, separated by energy barriers of approximately 15 kJ mol–1. Ignoring the pyramidalization of the aniline group,
all generated cocrystal structures can be related to one low energy
minimum and barely differ in ϕ2. Many conformations
of SA in unstable predicted cocrystals fall within the 0–5
kJ mol–1 range of the PES scan, while those in stable
cocrystals tend to be found between 4 and 9 kJ mol–1. This suggests that SA can adjust its conformation in favor of forming
strong intermolecular interactions.
 The lattice energies of the computationally generated
cocrystals
were then compared to those of the single-component structures. To
estimate the cocrystal formation enthalpy, was adapted by utilizing the respective Elatt values for ECC, EAPI, and EFL.
The SA/FL lattice energy landscape ( b) comprises seven structures, all of which
exhibit a lattice energy lower than the sum of αSA and IFL, and, thus, are potential cocrystals. Notably, one of these
structures surpasses the stability of the individual components by
13 kJ mol–1 and is 7.8 kJ mol–1 more stable than the second most favorable predicted structure.
This lowest-energy SA/FL structure adopts the Pbca space group, with all four H-bond donor groups of the SA molecule
forming strong intermolecular interactions with neighboring SA and
FL molecules. Furthermore, additional strong N–H···O,
N–H···N, and π···π
interactions are observed. For details, refer to section 11 of the SI.
A comparison of the thermodynamically
feasible cocrystal structures
reveals the presence of six distinct packing arrangements. Notably,
structures 3 and 5 are very similar, and it is conceivable that structure
5 may transform into structure 3, making it imperceptible as a distinct
packing arrangement. The majority of the structures form the strong
dimer motif A ( c). This H-bonding motif dominates the energy landscape of the predicted
cocrystals and only one of the lowest-energy packing arrangements
(i.e., structures 3 and 5) does not feature this interaction. Conversely,
in all six structurally distinct lowest-energy structures, unique
H-bonding interactions exist between the SA and FL molecules. These
include tetrameric [structure 1: R42(20); 3,5: R43(10); 4: R42(8)], pentameric [2: R53(18)], and hexameric [6: R64(16)] ring
motifs, as well as a D H-bonding motif observed in structure 7. In
all of these structures FL forms two strong H-bonding interactions,
each involving an aniline and a sulfonamide NH group, except for structure
7. Hence, the homomeric SA R22(8) motif appears to be the favored
building block in these cocrystals, which can also be found in 3 out
of the 4 experimental structures of sulfanilamide. This motif allows
a remarkable diversity of SO2NH2···FL
interactions, ultimately leading to distinct computed packing arrangements.

3.3.3

## Sulfaguanidine/Flavone PES and Lattice Energy
Landscape
For SG (planar −NH2 groups) two
minima were observed ( a). This means that the aniline group remains conformationally
identical when exceeding 180°, and the rotation of the guanidine
group results in an inversion symmetry relation, creating regions
A and B. In the cocrystal searches, two conformations were utilized:
the global minimum and a higher-energy conformation, in alignment
with our previous SG study. 
 The SG/FL crystal energy landscape encompasses
the predicted Z′ = 1 structures and IICC, a Z′
= 2 structure that was beyond
the scope of the search. As for ICC, its structure remains elusive, but there are indications
that ICC is a Z′ > 1 structure (from indexing and IR spectroscopy). The
calculations
suggest that seven of the structures depicted in b represent feasible cocrystal
packings, with IICC emerging
as the most stable structure. The stabilization energy of IICC is notably lower than that of the hypothetical
SA/FL cocrystal structures, specifically −3.8 kJ mol–1 compared to −13.1 kJ mol–1. One intriguing
aspect of b
is that the majority of the structures deviate significantly from
the gas-phase minimum conformation ( a). Nevertheless, none of these conformations
deviate by more than 18 kJ mol–1 in intramolecular
energy. This suggests that unfavorable conformations are offset by
the formation of strong intermolecular interactions, such as H-bonding
and aromatic interactions.
Among the seven thermodynamically
feasible cocrystal structures,
each is unique. Six out of these seven structures include at least
one of the three SG···SG motifs depicted in c. Two of these motifs
(B and D) can also be found in the polymorphs of SG. Among the seven
cocrystal structures, six distinct SG···FL H-bonding
interaction motifs are observed, encompassing a D-motif, a chain motif
(IICC), and four distinct ring
motifs: a dimeric [structure 6: R21(6)], two trimeric [2: R32(8); 4: R32(10)], and a tetrameric [3: R42(24)]. In
contrast to the SA/FL cocrystal structures, the additional H-bonding
capabilities of the SG molecule promote the formation of a wider range
of distinct SG···SG H-bonding interactions, alongside
the diversity of SG···FL interactions, as also observed
in SA/FL.

3.3.4

## Dapsone/Flavone PES and Lattice Energy Landscape
The PES scan for DDS revealed four minima, which are identical
when the −NH2 group is modeled as planar ( a). It has been previously
reported that the values of ϕ1 and ϕ2 can vary considerably with only a minimal energy penalty (ΔEintra). In the
DDS/FL (1:1) crystal energy landscape, there are seven structures
within 10 kJ mol–1 of the global minimum structure
(section 6 of the SI). These structures
are all potential cocrystals based on lattice energy estimations.
Notably, among these structures are the two (1:1) polymorphs of DDS/FL, ACC and BCC ( b).
The other three DDS/FL cocrystals lie outside specified search criteria.
 The intramolecular energy penalty for the observed
DDS conformations
in the computed cocrystal structures generally lies within 5 kJ mol–1 of the gas-phase minimum ( a). However, the ϕ1 and
ϕ2 angles deviate by approximately ±30°
across these conformations.
All lowest-energy (1:1) cocrystal
structures, DCC, and the anhydrates
of DDS form C(8) chain
motifs involving the amine and sulfone groups. Furthermore, C(12)
chain motifs are formed in DCC and ACC. In four of the cocrystal
structures (DCC, ACC, 2, and 3) the combination of chain motifs
translates into characteristic ring motifs ( c). Four DDS molecules form an R44(30) motif
in DCC and ACC, an R44(32) motif in structure 2, and
an R44(22) motif in structure 3. The flavone molecules of the cocrystals
are all bound through O···H–N to DDS, involving
the carbonyl O atom. In four of the lowest-energy structures heteromolecular
ring motifs are formed. Two DDS and two FL molecules form an R42(28) motif in DCC and ACC and an R42(8) motif in structure
3. A hexameric R64(34) ring motif, involving four DDS and two
FL molecules, is present in structure 6.
Overall, the DDS molecules
show preferential intermolecular interactions,
i.e., a chain motif; however, the packing diversity of DDS chains
is significantly increased through the addition of the flavone molecule
compared to the DDS anhydrate crystal energy landscape. Furthermore, the calculations suggest a strong
driving force for DDS/FL cocrystal formation.

3.4

## Flavone Polymorphism
3.4.1

## Thermal Analysis, IR Spectroscopy, and PXRD
PXRD characterization of the starting material revealed that it
did not correspond to the phase described by Waller et al. Instead, it represents a polymorphic form, IIFL, which exhibits a melting point
at 96.5 ± 0.1 °C along with a heat of fusion of 21.1 ±
0.2 kJ mol–1. Upon cooling the melt, another polymorphic
form, IIIFL, recrystallizes at
approximately 78 °C. Form IIIFL often recrystallizes concomitantly with IIFL. The melting point of IIIFL was determined at 95.6 ± 0.2 °C,
with a heat of fusion of 19.6 ± 0.2 kJ mol–1. Thus, based on the heat of fusion rule, , the polymorphs IIFL and IIIFL are monotropically related.
Hot-stage microscopic investigations showed the transition from IIIFL to IIFL (section 8.4 of the SI).
The IR spectra and PXRD diffractograms of IIFL and IIIFL polymorphs exhibit a high degree of similarity, whereas IFL can be easily distinguished from
the two polymorphs (section 8 of the SI). The crystal structure of IFL has already been published and is being
discussed alongside IIFL, which
was determined from PXRD data.

3.4.2

## Crystal Structures
IFL crystallizes in the orthorhombic space
group P212121 with
two molecules in the asymmetric unit. The conformations deviate by
less than 0.5 kJ mol–1 in energy from the global
minimum conformation. As shown in a, the FL molecules are arranged in a herringbone
motif, forming an angle of 108.7° with respect to each other.
The symmetry-independent molecules are stacked alternatively along
the crystallographic a axis, forming strong aromatic
interactions, which account for −42.9 and −41.3 kJ mol–1 in pairwise energy ( b, labeled as 1 + 2; section 11 of the SI). Furthermore, C–H···O
as well as C–H···π interactions ( b, labeled as 3–7)
are formed.
 The second polymorph, IIFL, crystallizes in the monoclinic space group P21/n, with Z′ = 2.
Similar to IFL, the conformation
of FL with torsion angles of 169.6 and 175.7° deviates by less
than 0.5 kJ mol–1 in intramolecular energy from
the global minimum conformation. A herringbone-like arrangement can
be observed for the flavone molecules, with each of the two symmetry-independent
molecules forming a distinct herringbone motif, one along the crystallographic a axis and the other along the crystallographic c axis. The strongest interaction is a C–H···O
close contact (−42.6 kJ mol–1 in pairwise
energy, contact 1 in c,d). For more details, refer to section 11 of the SI.
IIIFL could be indexed to
a potential monoclinic cell (P21, Z′ = 4), and based on the lattice parameters, appears
to be related to IIFL. However,
we were not able to solve the structure. Disorder may be present.

3.5

## Sulfaguanidine/Flavone Cocrystal System
The experimental cocrystal screening yielded two SG/FL cocrystals,
both displaying a 1:1 molar ratio of the two compounds, effectively
establishing them as cocrystal polymorphs.
3.5.1

## PXRD and IR Spectroscopy
The PXRD
patterns ( )
and IR spectra differ significantly from those of the parent compounds.
To offer a more concise representation, only the reactants and the
resulting cocrystals are presented. The cocrystal diffraction patterns
are distinct from all solid-state forms of the starting materials
(section 9 of the SI).
 The IR spectra (section 9 of the SI)
reveal significant shifts in the υ-NH bands, specifically at
3335 cm–1 in ICC and 3341 cm–1 in IICC. Both cocrystals exhibit a shift in the symmetric SO2 vibration, from 1120 cm–1 in ISG to 1126 cm–1 in ICC and 1129 cm–1 in IICC. Additionally, the υ(C=O)
vibration of FL at 1640 cm–1 shifts to 1635 cm–1 in both cocrystals. Furthermore, both cocrystal forms
display bands between 3420 and 3440 cm–1, indicating
the presence of H-bonding interactions.

3.5.2

## Thermal Analysis and Thermodynamic Stability
Thermal analysis techniques revealed that the ICC and IICC cocrystals are anhydrous forms. When subjected to heating from 25
to 205 °C at a rate of 10 °C min–1, they
exhibit minimal mass loss, amounting to less than 2% (TGA). This mass
loss can be attributed to the sublimation of FL from the cocrystals
( a, green).
The DSC diagram of ICC shows
the melting of the cocrystal at 171.3 ± 0.1 °C, with a heat
of fusion of 52.0 ± 0.3 kJ mol–1. Upon cooling
and/or reheating, either ICC or
a mixture of ICC and IICC crystallizes from the melt. This aligns
with the findings from the hot-melt extrusion experiments, where ICC was primarily obtained at lower
temperatures, specifically ≤145 °C, whereas IICC was formed at higher temperatures, generally
≥165 °C. The phase pure IICC melts at 174.6 ± 0.1 °C with an energy of fusion
of 47.5 ± 0.1 kJ mol–1. Therefore, following
the heat of fusion rule, , the cocrystal polymorphs
are enantiotropically related, with IICC being the high-temperature form. The heat of transition enthalpy
of ICC to IICC was calculated as 4.5 ± 0.4 kJ mol–1. Based on these results, a semischematic temperature/energy
diagram was constructed ( b), and the transition temperature could be estimated , as 142 °C.
 
3.5.3

## IICC Crystal Structure
IICC crystallizes in the space
group P212121 with
two SG and two FL molecules in the asymmetric unit. Each of the two
symmetry-equivalent SG molecules is stacked in the direction of the
crystallographic a axis, forming R21(6) motifs
between the SO2 and guanidinium functions ( b), which account for −62.5
and −59.6 kJ mol–1 in pairwise energy (section
11 of the SI). The guanidine and sulfonyl
groups of SG are arranged in a plane parallel to (001), with the strongest
interaction being an R22(8) motif (−105.9 kJ mol–1, b), formed
by the two crystallographically independent molecules (2× N–H···N).
The p-aminophenyl groups stick out of the planes
( ), and the
FL molecule interacts with them through N–H···O
and π···π interactions. Furthermore, the
SG molecules form strong C–H···π close
contacts. Adjacent layers of the SG planes are related by 21 symmetry.
 

3.6

## Dapsone/Flavone Cocrystal System
We were able to reproduce and characterize the four literature cocrystals , alongside a fifth novel cocrystal, ECC. The PXRD patterns differ significantly from those of the
starting materials and notable distinctions exist among the cocrystals.
Moreover, the IR spectra of the five cocrystals exhibit notable differences
in their ν(N–H), ν(S=O), and ν(C=C)
bands. For more details, see section 10 of the SI.
3.6.1

## Thermal Analysis and Lattice Energy Calculations
ACC melts at 112.4 ±
0.1 °C with a heat of 27.3 ± 0.4 kJ mol–1 ( , red
curves). When ACC is heated above
its melting temperature, IIDDS recrystallizes, and, upon cooling, DCC crystallizes. The cooling curve shows a sharp exotherm related
to the transformation of IIDDS to IIIDDS (red curve), and
the second, broad exotherm corresponds to the recrystallization of DCC, which is also observed upon reheating
the sample. The first endotherm upon reheating corresponds to the IIIDDS to IIDDS transformation, and
the second endotherm represents the eutectic temperature between DCC and IIDDS (86–87 °C), followed by the dissolution
of DCC in the melt. The mass
loss between 20 and 130 °C with a heating rate of 10 °C
min–1 is less than 0.2%, indicating the presence
of an anhydrate.
 BCC melts
at 109.5 ±
0.1 °C with a heat of 30.1 ± 0.4 kJ mol–1 ( , blue
curves). BCC displays similar
behavior to ACC, with IIDDS recrystallizing at the melting temperature
of BCC. Thermogravimetric analysis
showed a mass loss of about 0.1%, confirming that this cocrystal is
an anhydrate. Based on the heat of fusion rule it can be concluded
that ACC and BCC are enantiotropically , related (enthalpies were used despite the fact that recrystallization
of IIDDS occurred, but in same
quantities), with ACC being the
high-temperature form and BCC the RT and low-temperature form. This observation is in contrast
to the literature, where ACC and BCC were described as a monotropic
system, but agrees with the fact that BCC is obtained in slurry experiments
at RT, and ACC shows a higher
melting point than BCC. The relative
heat of fusion difference reported in the literature is in line with
our measurements; however, the melting point temperatures of ACC and BCC were reported reversed to what
we observed.
CCC exhibits
an inhomogeneous
melting behavior and decomposes into DCC and IIDDS. TGA reveals
a mass loss of 1.8%, which corresponds to approximately 0.5 mol of
water per mole of cocrystal ( , green curves), as additionally confirmed by Karl
Fischer titration. Subsequent moisture (de)sorption analysis unveiled
that CCC is not a neat cocrystal,
as previously described in the literature, but a nonstoichiometric cocrystal hydrate with 0–0.67 mol
of water per mole (1:1) cocrystal (section 10 of the SI).
DCC melts
at 106.2 ±
0.1 °C with a heat of fusion of 55.2 ± 0.1 kJ mol–1. No recrystallization of DDS is observed at the melting temperature
of DCC. Upon reheating the cooled
sample, DCC recrystallizes. TGA
indicates a mass loss of 0.2%, confirming that it is an anhydrate
( , orange
curves).
The cocrystal solvate, ECC, melts at approximately 81 °C. Thermogravimetric analysis
reveals
a mass loss of 13.1%, equivalent to 1.0 mol of t-butanol
per mole of 1:1 cocrystal. Therefore, ECC is a monosolvate. Storage of the cocrystal solvate at various
relative humidities (0, 50, and 100%) led to its decomposition into
cocrystal ACC, DCC, and IIIDDS.
Lattice energy calculations (DFT-d) were employed
to assess the stability order of three DDS/FL cocrystals, using different
dispersion corrections alongside two sets of pseudopotentials (CASTEP
standard and C19 OTF ultrasoft pseudopotentials). To enable a comparison
of the three cocrystals’ stability, the lattice energy of FL
was subtracted from DCC. Among
the six methods employed ( ), five consistently identified DCC as the structure with the lowest energy (stoichiometry
correction applied). Depending on the dispersion correction used,
either ACC or BCC emerged as the second most stable cocrystal.
Combining both, experimental and computational data, the thermodynamic
stability at 0 K is as follows: DCC (most stable) > BCC > ACC (least stable). Therefore,
the
calculated stability order of cocrystals ACC and BCC in b is incorrect. This
discrepancy is accurately described in qualitative terms by the PBE-TS
and PBE-D2 methods. Further investigation is required to precisely
calculate the energy difference; however, it is noteworthy that both
structures were predicted to be stable.
 
3.6.2

## ECC Crystal Structure
The crystal structures of cocrystals ACC, BCC, and DCC have already been published. Cocrystal ECC is described below, while CCC still remains elusive. As already described, ACC, BCC, and DCC share common H-bonding
motifs.
ECC crystallizes
in the monoclinic P21/c space group, with one molecule of DDS, FL, and t-butanol each in its asymmetric unit. Each of the four DDS H-bond
donor groups forms strong intermolecular interactions: two N–H···ODDS, one N–H···OFL, and one
N–H···Ot-BuOH. Consequently, all three distinct entities are interconnected through
H-bonding. The O atoms of the SO2 group serve as acceptors
for the two N–H···ODDS interactions,
resulting in tetrameric R44(32) ring motifs and interconnected layers
of DDS molecules ( ). These DDS layers align parallel to the (010) plane, and
the strong H-bonding interactions account for −33.2 and −33.6
kJ mol–1 in pairwise interaction energies. The FL···DDS
H-bonding interaction contributes −20.7 kJ mol–1, while the t-BuOH···DDS contributes
−32.0 kJ mol–1 in pairwise energy. In addition
to these classical and strong H-bonding interactions, aromatic interactions
play a significant role in stabilizing the ECC lattice. In ECC, π···π interactions of FL molecules are
the strongest contributors (−48.4 kJ mol–1 in pairwise energy).
 

3.7

## Comparison of API/Flavone Cocrystals
A comparison of the nature and strength of pairwise intermolecular
interactions within the API, coformer, and cocrystal structures was
performed, using CrystalExplorer. The
pairwise intermolecular interactions, all within a 3.8 Å radius
around the central molecule, were calculated. In cases of higher Z′ structures, average interaction energies were
used. Subsequently, the energies of individual components, specifically
the strongest interaction and the sum of all interactions, were contrasted
( ).
 Starting with the single-component crystals, there
is a notable
prevalence for strong π···π and C–H···O
interactions in the coformer (FL), accompanied by comparatively weaker
C–H···π interactions. In the DDS polymorphs,
strong N–H···N, N–H···O,
π···π, N–H···π,
and C–H···π interactions are observed.
On the other hand, the SA polymorphs rely significantly on H-bonds
for their stability. Across all four polymorphs, N–H···O
interactions emerge as the strongest, closely followed by C–H···π
and C–H···N interactions. SG stands out due
to its exceptional strength of the H-bonding interactions, particularly
involving the guanidine group and the sulfone oxygen atoms.
Notably among the DDS/FL cocrystals, the strongest interactions
observed in ACC and BCC involve aromatic interactions (DDS···FL),
contrary to the anticipated H-bonding interactions. Additionally,
a comparison of the sum of all DDS interactions in both single- and
multicomponent crystals revealed that DDS can form more stable interactions
in the single-component crystals than in the cocrystal. Conversely,
FL exhibits the opposite behavior, with the sum of FL interactions
being stronger in the DDS cocrystal structures. This difference can
be attributed to FL’s ability to form H-bonding interactions
only in the cocrystals. The DDS···FL interactions contribute
more to the lattice energy in ACC and DCC than the DDS···DDS
interactions. However, the sums of DDS···FL and DDS···DDS
interactions in BCC are of similar
strengths. When considering only the strongest intermolecular interaction
observed in DDS, FL, and DDS/FL, it was found that the strength of
intermolecular interactions is higher in the single-component forms
than in the cocrystals, a surprising outcome, especially for FL. Overall,
these findings highlight the importance and strength of aromatic interactions
and the importance of the interplay of all potential interactions.
The fact that FL can form stronger interactions in the cocrystals
overall (sum of interactions considered) may be the driving force
behind cocrystallization of DDS with FL. The inclusion of water or t-BuOH might even offer better interaction possibilities,
as evidenced by the strongest pairwise intermolecular interaction
found in the cocrystal solvate ECC.
In the case of the SG/FL IICC, where SG interactions are weaker than those observed in the
SG
polymorphs, the surprising finding is that FL interactions exhibit
comparable strength in both single- and multicomponent crystals. This
aligns with the lattice energy calculations of the cocrystals, i.e., IICC is less stabilized than ACC and the SA/FL 1 cocrystal (based
on lattice energies compared to the lattice energies of the individual
components). The motivation for cocrystallization becomes evident
when considering that SG molecules can engage in several strong intermolecular
interactions with both SG and FL in the cocrystal.
In the context
of the SA/FL 1 cocrystal (hypothetical cocrystal),
both the cumulative FL interactions and the strongest API interaction
favor cocrystallization. Consequently, in line with the results from
CSP, one should anticipate cocrystallization. The observation that
identical strong H-bonding motifs, including related conformations,
are present in both single- and multicomponent crystals may imply
that the choice of the solvent molecule for crystallization could
have a significant impact on the outcome. This highlights the importance
of a more thorough solvent screening to better understand and optimize
(co)crystallization conditions.
It is noteworthy that all cocrystals
significantly benefit from
aromatic interactions. This observation may provide an explanation
for the lack of success of the MCHBP predictions, as this method relies
exclusively on the best H-bonding interaction. On the other hand,
MEP calculations, which are based on partial charges, agree with the
CSP results.

4

## Conclusions
In this study, we effectively
reproduced known cocrystals using
traditional screening methods and identified new multicomponent forms,
a fifth DDS/FL cocrystal, along with the first SG/FL cocrystals. Hot-melt
extrusion, a nonconventional cocrystal screening method, enabled the
upscaling of the cocrystal IICC. Moreover, the study successfully resolved the thermodynamic relations
of the cocrystal systems at 0 K using a combination of experimental
and theoretical approaches.
The experimentally screened cocrystal
systems were used to assess
virtual cocrystal screening approaches. However, methods such as MCHBP,
MEPS, and MC did not yield consistent conclusions about cocrystal
formation. The MC method faced limitations, as the size and quantity
of heteroatoms proved unreliable as variables for the studied systems.
Conflicting results have already been reported for the MC method in
other studies, for example in the case of nitrofurantoin cocrystals. Aromatic interactions emerged as the primary
driving force for API/FL cocrystallization, explaining why the MCHBP
tool, relying on the best H-bonding interaction, indicated no preferentiality
for single- or multicomponent formation for SA/FL and DDS/FL, while
SG/FL was even wrongly predicted to crystallize as pure components.
In contrast, MEP calculations suggested cocrystal formation for all
three systems, consistent with the CSP studies. In agreement with
other virtual cocrystal screening outcomes, , − each of the three methods (MCHBP, MEPS, and MC) has
its limitations. The primary limitation lies in the fact that none
of these methods consider the 3D packing aspect.
Experimentally,
the DDS/FL and SG/FL combinations form cocrystals,
but SA/FL does not. This raises questions about the adequacy of the
experimental search space, especially considering the exceptional
stability of the predicted SA/FL cocrystal over single-component crystal
structures. Solubility differences between FL and SA posed challenges
in experimental approaches, suggesting the need for more specific
conditions for cocrystal production. Identical dimeric H-bonding motifs
in single-component (SA) and hypothetical multicomponent crystals
further indicate the crucial role of crystallization conditions for
the SA/FL system. The other two investigated cocrystal systems exhibited
more variability in H-bonding/aromatic motifs and packing arrangement
of identical motifs.
All three API/FL systems share the characteristic
of weaker API
interactions (sum of all interactions) in cocrystals compared to single-component
crystals. Conversely, FL interactions (sum) are stronger in cocrystals
than in FL. This discrepancy was attributed to FL’s lack of
H-bond donors. Notably, the coformer, not the API, appears to be the
driving force for cocrystallization. Moreover, this study points out
that the overall interaction possibility determines cocrystallization.
In conclusion, this multifaceted approach highlights the complexity
of cocrystallization processes and provides a valuable strategy for
systematically exploring cocrystals.

## Supporting Information Available
The Supporting Information
is available free of charge at https://pubs.acs.org/doi/10.1021/acs.cgd.4c00293.Experimental solid form screening: grinding, slurry,
hot-melt extrusion, and contact preparation; virtual solid form screening:
crystal structure prediction studies, structure similarity dendrogram;
pairwise intermolecular energy calculations; solid form characterization:
powder X-ray diffraction, IR spectroscopy, moisture sorption desorption;
and crystallographic information (PDF)

## Supplementary Material
cg4c00293_si_001.pdf

## Author Contributions
The manuscript
was written through contributions of all authors. All authors have
given approval to the final version of the manuscript.
FWF, project
I 4955-N
The authors
declare no competing financial interest.

## Acknowledgments
The authors are grateful to C.C. Pantelides
and C.S. Adjiman
(Imperial College London) for the use of the CrystalPredictor and
CrystalOptimizer programs and to S.L. Price (University College London)
for the use of the DMACRYS program. This research was funded in whole
by the Austrian Science Fund (FWF) [grant DOI: 10.55776/I4955]. For
open access purposes, the author has applied a CC BY public copyright
license to any author accepted manuscript version arising from this
submission. The computational results presented here have been achieved
using the LEO HPC infrastructure of the University of Innsbruck.