4348gbbGenes, Brain, and BehaviorGenes Brain BehavWileyPMC1233242212332422123324224077685110.1111/gbb.70031Simultaneous RNA Sequencing and DNA Methylation Profiling Reveals Neural Mechanisms That Regulate Sensitive Period Behavioral Learning
LondonSarah E HauberMark E McKim‐LouderMatthew I BalakrishnanChristopher N 
1
Department of Psychology and Institute for Mind and Biology, University of Chicago, Chicago, Illinois, USA
2
Advanced Science Research Center and Programs in Psychology and in Biology, Graduate Center of the City University of New York, New York, New York, USA
3
Department of Evolution, Ecology, and Behavior, School of Integrative Biology, University of Illinois at Urbana‐Champaign, Urbana, Illinois, USA
4
Department of Biology, East Carolina University, Greenville, North Carolina, USA
5
Division of Environmental Biology, National Science Foundation, Alexandria, Virginia, USA*

Correspondence:
 
Sarah E. London (london@uchicago.edu)

✉Corresponding author.
882025244e70031e70031882025© 2025 The Author(s). Genes, Brain and Behavior published by International Behavioural and Neural Genetics Society and John Wiley & Sons Ltd.This is an open access article under the terms of the http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/ License, which permits use and distribution in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited, the use is non‐commercial and no modifications or adaptations are made.

## ABSTRACT
Developmental processes emerge from both maturational and experience‐dependent mechanisms. Experience at the proper maturational stage is essential for the acquisition of many complex cognitive and behavioral processes. A striking example of this is a critical period, a restricted developmental phase during which experience is required for both behavioral acquisition and period closure. Juvenile male zebra finches (Taeniopygia castanotis) possess a critical period for song learning; hearing an adult “tutor's” song between posthatch days 30–65 is necessary for each male to produce a socially functional adult song. However, if tutor song is not experienced in this age range, juveniles can still learn beyond posthatch day 65. Our broad objective is to decipher the neurogenomic mechanisms that promote or limit the ability to learn, leveraging the known parameters of the critical period in the male zebra finch's sensory song learning ontogeny. Here, we manipulated juvenile males' tutor exposure and provided song playback experience at two ages, at the beginning or end of the critical period. We probed the relationship between DNA methylation and transcriptional profiles from the same individual and tissue samples to enhance interpretation across different levels of biological organization. Our findings uncovered specific genes and processes that may regulate aspects of critical period learning, as well as aspects of DNA methylation dynamics and how they correspond to RNA measures. Because we distinguished effects of age and experience, outcomes provide insight into fundamental links between epigenetic and molecular properties as the developing brain shifts its ability to learn.
Keywords: epigenetics, social ontogeny, songbird, song‐learning, zebra finch

DNA methylation helps determine the RNAs (“Genes”) available to shape brain structure and function, especially across development, when cells and circuits are organizing (“Brain”). Genomic and neural changes can thus inform on fluctuations in learning ability across a sensitive periods, as in juvenile zebra finch song learning (“Behavior”).
 
statusreleaseddisplay-pdfyesis-olfnois-manuscriptnois-preprintnois-journal-matternois-scannednois-retractednoRevised 2025 Jul 16; Received 2024 Nov 16; Accepted 2025 Jul 22; Collection date 2025 Aug.

1.

## Introduction
Developmental events can have profound consequences on fitness, as many complex adult behavioral patterns are shaped via early life experiences [ , , ]. In turn, in many cases, particular experiences have the most influence during specific developmental stages (termed a “critical period” [ , , , , ]), implying that maturation and experience‐dependent mechanisms are separable yet intersectional. A general question of developmental neurobiology and behavioral ontogeny is thus: how do maturation and experience, two processes underlain by neural plasticity, converge to give rise to stable patterns of behavior?
Here, we used juvenile male zebra finch (Taeniopygia castanotis) songbirds to address these questions because they have a well‐defined developmental critical period during which social experience influences adult behaviors. When juvenile males are able to hear an adult “tutor” male's song during the critical period, they grow up to sing a similar song. The critical period invokes a mechanistic intersection of maturational and experiential processes; the end of the critical period for sensory song learning depends on the bird being exposed to adult tutor song during the preceding sensitive period, not only the absolute age of the individual [ , , , , , , , ]. We investigated the auditory forebrain specifically because it is required for juvenile males to memorize tutor song during the critical period [ ]. While female zebra finches cannot sing, their preferences for conspecific adult male songs also reflect auditory song experiences that they had as juveniles, during a similar developmental phase as seen in males [ , ]. However, it is not yet known if female sensory song learning is limited by a critical period. Thus, while questions of sex differences are of interest (e.g., [ , ]), we performed this initial ontogenetic experiment with only juvenile zebra finch males for clarity of interpretation.
An integrative approach to linking juvenile experiences with adult patterns of behavior requires the consideration of several levels of neurobiology and timescales of action. Stable memories require experience‐dependent transcription, and epigenetic modifications to histones and genomic DNA regulate the probability of RNAs being transcribed. Epigenetic modifications can be acquired across sustained phases of experience, essentially accumulating before effects on RNAs are detectable [ , , ]. The examination of the relationship between epigenetics and transcriptional states based on the combination of maturation and experience is thus essential for understanding how developmental learning phases such as critical periods occur. Currently, however, nearly all epigenetic, genomic, and molecular effects of song experience have been tested in normally reared adult songbirds, leaving the convergence and interaction of ontogenetic maturation with song experience largely uninvestigated across development (but see [ , , , , , , , ]).
Here, we employed juvenile male zebra finches as a model to address three aims towards our broad goal of elucidating new factors that may contribute to baseline and activity‐dependent auditory forebrain properties related to the ability to learn. First, we attempted to dissociate the effects of maturation (age) from those of accumulated external song experience (tutoring) using an experimental treatment to assess these two factors that combine to define development, but which are rarely separable in research models. We assessed the potentially differential effects of age and tutoring using an acute song playback paradigm. Although zebra finch males do not acquire song from song playback alone [ , , , ], initial responses provide insight into the first wave of mechanisms that may be components of processes necessary for sensory song learning from tutoring. A simplified playback paradigm approach can elucidate processes that are consistent with learning and memory formation, some of which were subsequently demonstrated to be required for tutor song memorization [ , , ]. Second, we set out to probe how DNA methylation mechanisms and RNA profiles differ before and after acute auditory experience, and depending on age and experience. We were further interested in determining relationships between levels of biology, here processes of DNA methylation and RNA regulation. To increase the scope of this analysis, we assayed both from the same auditory forebrain samples. Third, we endeavored to generate data that might be of relevance not only to zebra finches, but for comparative work in other(s) species of songbirds, representing half of extant avian diversity, that also learn their songs but are less amenable to lab manipulations [ , ]. Beyond the commonly investigated immediate early genes, our approach provides new insights, thus opening novel avenues for further investigation [ ].

2.

## Materials and Methods
2.1.

## Birds
Our protocols followed the National Institutes of Health guidelines for the care and use of animals for experimental procedures and were approved by the University of Chicago Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee (ACUP #72220). All juveniles used were hatched locally in our breeding aviaries, where birds were housed on a 14 h:10 h light: dark cycle, with seed and water provided ad libitum.
Because of a focus on the known critical period for tutor song memorization in males, females were not included in this experiment. In total, we had eight groups of males who differed by age, rearing condition, and acute song playback experience. Using daily hatch logs, we separated brothers into distinct experimental groups to minimize the potential for genetic relatedness to skew findings.

2.2.

## Ages
Birds were assayed at two ages: P32 (n = 12 total) and P67 (n = 24 total) to capture the opening and closing of the critical period. The inclusion of these ages in statistical comparisons is noted with the term “byAge.”

2.3.

## Rearing Conditions
To assess the effect of longer‐term exposure to hearing song across the critical period, half of the males at each age were reared under two distinct conditions: Tutored (Tut; n = 6 P32, n = 12 P67) or Isolate (Iso; n = 6 P32, n = 12 P67), controlled conditions that standardize the complexity of social experience while permitting only one group to experience song (Figure  ). For both conditions, males, identified with genetic sexing [ ], were removed from their home aviary 1 day after fledging (P21–23) and placed with 1–2 other juvenile males plus two adult foster females in a cage housed within a sound attenuating chamber. At P30, each male was placed with either one adult male and one adult female (Tutored, “‐Tut”), or two adult females (Isolate, “‐Iso”). Each bird triad lived in a cage within its own sound attenuating chamber. For the P32 males, they were in these conditions for 2 days; for the P67 males, it was 37 days. When statistical comparisons separate Tutored‐ and Isolate‐reared birds, it is denoted with the term “byCondition.”
 
2.4.

## Acute Song Playback Paradigm
To assess the effect of acute song experience on the auditory forebrain at both ages, we assayed males who had been placed in either the Tut or Iso condition, who then were further divided into the acute song experience they received immediately prior to brain collection. On the evening before their final age (P31 for P32 males, P66 for P67 males), all birds were removed from their companion adults and placed alone in a sound isolating chamber overnight. The next day, ~16 h later, males were either played 30 min of a novel zebra finch song (“song”) via speaker or left in silence (“sil”), as in [ , ]. The statistical comparison of birds that experienced either song playback or silence conditions reference “bySong.”
Together, the ages, rearing conditions, and song paradigm generated the eight final treatment groups: P32‐Tut‐song, P32‐Tut‐sil, P32‐Iso‐song, P32‐Iso‐sil (n = 3 for each P32 group), P67‐Tut‐song, P67‐Tut‐sil, P67‐Iso‐song, P67‐Iso‐sil (n = 6 for each P67 group).

2.5.

## Auditory Forebrain Collection
For “‐song” condition males, the auditory forebrain (including the caudomedial nidopallium, caudomedial mesopallium, and field L, defined in [ ] was rapidly bilaterally dissected and flash frozen within 2 min after the end of song playbacks). The same rapid dissection process occurred for “‐sil” birds but without any playbacks having been conducted. Sex was confirmed at the time of dissection with visual examination of gonads. All auditory forebrain samples were collected 3.5–5 h after the lights came on and were stored at −80°C until processing.

2.6.

## Total RNA and Genomic DNA Isolation and Sequencing
To assay RNA and DNA methylation profiles from the same samples, we isolated total RNA and DNA with the AllPrep Mini system (Qiagen), following the manufacturer's protocol.
We used a TagSeq approach (3′ localized RNAseq) to quantify genome‐wide transcription [ ]. TagSeq library preparation and sequencing were conducted at the University of Texas at Austin Genome Sequencing and Analysis Facility. Briefly, high quality RNA (RIN ≥ 9.70) was fragmented via hydrolysis, first strand cDNA synthesis was done using SmartScribe RT kit (Takara(Clontech)/639,537), cDNA was synthesized using poly dT oligo, PCR amplified using Klentaq polymerase, barcoded, pooled in equimolar amounts, and size‐selected (400–500 bp). The 36 libraries were sequenced together on an Illumina HiSeq2500 (SR100).
For reduced‐representation bisulfite sequencing (RRBS), DNA quantity was measured with Qubit. The Roy J. Carver Biotechnology Center at the University of Illinois, Urbana‐Champaign fragmented and verified the DNA using MspI and AATI Fragment Analyzer, performed bisulfite conversion, and generated libraries (NuGen). For control, a shotgun genomic DNA library was also sequenced from a composite of all 36 samples. 100 bp Single‐End reads were generated with Illumina HiSeq 2500 on SR100 mode, after a titration run on a MiSeq NANO v2 to balance final sequencing pools.

2.7.

## TagSeq Analysis
Raw reads were quality checked with MultiQC [ ]. TagSeq data was then processed using the pipeline described in [ ]. Reads were mapped to zebra finch GCF_003957565.1 and associated annotation. We tested for differential expression primarily using pairwise contrasts in DESeq2 [ ]; we used pairwise contrasts to match those conducted for the RRBS analysis in methylKit (see below). RNAs were considered differentially‐expressed using a p‐adjusted < 0.05 threshold. Because pairwise analysis revealed a major effect of rearing condition on the responses to song playback, we also formally tested for a statistical interaction between rearing condition and song response at P32 and P67 in the TagSeq data (such analyses are not possible for the RRBS data). Code for DE‐Seq analysis is available at https://github.com/chrisbalakrishnan/SensitivePeriod.

2.8.

## RRBS Analysis
Raw reads were checked with MultiQC to ensure high quality before further processing with R and python [ ]. Reads were then analyzed with a combination of Nugen (now Tecan)‐supplied python scripts (scripts required deprecated python v 2.7.18) and R (v 3.6.1). Barcodes were appended using the Tecan python script append_barcodes.py, and then sample reads from two sequencing runs were merged. Low quality bases and library adapter contamination were trimmed using Trim Galore! v 0.6.5 with the – rrbs option and otherwise default parameters (https://github.com/FelixKrueger/TrimGalore), after which the library adaptors were trimmed with trimRRBSdiversityAdaptCustomers.py. Reads were aligned to a male zebra finch genome assembly (GCA_003957565.2_bTaeGut1_v1.p_genomic.fa) using Bismark v.0.22.3 and glocal options, which also call methylated sites [ ]. Samtools (v 1.4.1) was used to sort and index the alignment BAM file, duplicates were removed with nudup.py, and called methylation outputs retrieved with bismark_methylation_extractor.py and bismark2report.py [ ]. Statistical differences in called methylation sites using 10‐fold differences and q‐value < 0.01 were processed with methylKit v 1.16.1 after normalization to remove bases derived from PCR bias and coverage between samples. An exception is the analysis of differential sites at P32 in the bySong comparison. Due to a very large number of sites (~10,000) that returned using our standard criteria, similar to those we obtained when we created the background gene lists for Gene Ontology analysis (with meth.diff = 2.5 and q‐value = 1), we increased the stringency to include only sites with a 25‐fold difference.
Genomic location of differential sites was annotated, and gene names using CpG islands and shores were predicted, based on RefSeq v103 (Taeniopygia_guttata.bTaeGut1_v1.p.103.gff3). NCBI gene names were converted to HGCN symbols via DAVID 2021 to use in GO analysis and to compare with TagSeq results [ , ]; the number of predicted genes reported is based on methylKit analysis.

2.9.

## Statistical Analysis
The methylKit approach restricted statistical analyses to pair‐wise comparisons, thus we had three major factors to test: development (byAge: P32 and P67), rearing condition (byCondition: Tutored and Isolate), and acute song experience (bySong: Silence and Song). To examine the major contributions of each of these factors, while taking into account effects of the others, we focused on analysis of groups categorized by the combinations of these three major factors. For example, the bySong analysis compared song versus silence effects within samples categorized by the age and rearing condition of the bird (P32‐Tut song versus P32‐Tut sil). The one exception, the relationship between tutor experience and song‐playback response in the TagSeq data, is already described above, as are the specific statistical processing steps and criteria for TagSeq and RRBS data.

2.10.

## Functional Analysis
We used a two‐list GOrilla analysis [ ] to determine overrepresented categories. For TagSeq, genes meeting the criteria of p‐adjusted < 0.05 were the target list, with the complete output of genes as the background. For RRBS, one list was the NCBI gene names after conversion in DAVID that were associated with statistically significant output from methylkit; the background list was generated by setting methylkit criteria to difference = 2.5 and q‐value = 1 and running the same annotation steps. In interpretation steps, we considered Gene Ontology (GO) categories that met an FDR < 0.05 statistical cutoff. In addition to functional GO category analysis, we endeavored to identify potential “hub” network genes. Here, we consider hub genes to be those that have a higher number of connections to other genes within each differential gene list and therefore may be particularly important players in effects of age, tutor condition, and song playback response [ , , ]. To generate gene networks, we entered gene lists from both RRBS and TagSeq analysis into the String database and examined the number of node connections for each annotated gene based on mouse data [ ].

2.11.

## Comparison of RRBS‐Based Predicted Genelists and Differentially Abundant RNAs
We cross‐referenced the genelists that resulted from the RRBS and TagSeq analysis pipelines to assess how much they overlapped. To standardize the gene annotation across analyses, we put the TagSeq‐based genelists through the same DAVID annotation step as for the RRBS analysis, then cross‐referenced lists.

3.

## Results
We analyzed the auditory forebrain samples of males at P32 and P67, after they were either reared with or without live tutors and exposed to acute song playback or not (Figure  ). After isolating RNA and genomic DNA from the same auditory forebrains, we sequenced and analyzed data to identify differentially abundant RNAs and sites of differential DNA methylation. This design permitted evaluation of novel processes and factors that are distinct when males hear song at the beginning and close of the sensitive period for tutor song memorization (the bySong analysis), and thus may be relevant for the ability to perform this learning. Examination of specific genes and processes that differ based on age and condition (byAge and byCondition comparisons, respectively) provides novel insight into auditory forebrain properties that may influence the ability of these cells to mount the response to hearing song.
3.1.

## Data Quality Assessment—TagSeq
RNA sequencing yielded an average of 5.2 million reads per sample (range 3.9–6.2 million reads), consistent with design recommendations for TagSeq experiments [ ]. All TagSeq samples had high quality base calls across the reads (quality score > 27.5 across all bases). After reads were trimmed and deduplicated, on average 1.5 million reads unambiguously mapped to known genes in each sample, with another 934,705, on average, mapping outside of gene models. We detected 12,388 genes with an average of 5 or more reads per sample, and 15,475 genes with an average of 1 read per sample out of 21,955 annotated genes. As a benchmark, the most abundant RNAs were shared across all comparisons, including CALM1, UBB, CALM2, CKB, HSP90AA1, HSPA8, MAP1B, MAP2, OLFM1, RTN4, and SPTBN1. All are known to be abundant in brains, including during development [ , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , ]. TagSeq reads are publicly available under BioProject ID PRJNA1177253.

3.2.

## Data Quality Assessment—RRBS
Sequencing returned 21.4–29 million raw read counts across all RRBS samples. Reads were of high quality across base pairs (≥ 31.36), preserving our counts even after trimming. RRBS samples had the expected skewed QC content compared to that in the control gDNA sample (Figure  ). RRBS enriches sequencing of CpG‐rich regions, though it is possible to capture a small portion of non‐CpG sites; in our samples, only 0.9%–1.1% methylation was identified in the CHH context, and 1.0%–1.2% in the CHG context [ , ]. This is in contrast to the average of 28.9% (range 26.2%–32.6%) in the CpG context across all of the RRBS samples. Based on methylation levels in non‐CpG contexts and comparing methylation rates in the WGS sample, we estimated the conversion efficiency to be high, 98.8%–99.3%. We then continued analysis using only the CpG sites. Approximately 50% of the methylated sites were localized to CpG islands and shores and showed selective patterning within gene models (Figures  , Table  ). Our RRBS data are publicly available under BioProject ID PRJNA1177253.

3.3.

## The Effects of Age Were Modulated by Rearing Condition and Acute Song Experience
First, we assessed how the developmental landscape differed based on age (byAge). To do this, we compared RNA populations and DNA methylation profiles across the two ages, considering whether the birds were reared in the Tutored or Isolate conditions and if they had experienced acute song playbacks or not.
From the TagSeq analysis, we generally found few differentially abundant RNAs in the byAge comparisons (Figure  ). Interestingly, for the birds that had been tutored and exposed to song playbacks (Tut‐song), age comparisons returned roughly twice the number of differentially expressed RNAs than the other conditions (Figure  , Table  ). We noted two genes, YBX1 and JADE2, that were significantly different in all P32 > P67 or P67 > P32 comparisons, respectively, regardless of rearing condition or song playback exposure. Protein products of both genes interact with key epigenetic regulators that affect brain maturation [ , ]. In the RRBS analysis, the byAge comparisons revealed more differentially methylated sites at P67 than P32 in both Tutored and Isolate auditory forebrain (Figure  , Table  ).
 Axon, cytoskeleton, and synaptic function Gene Ontology categories were overrepresented in all four byAge TagSeq comparisons (Tables  and ). Regulation of transcription, RNA stability, and processing categories were also overrepresented in three of the four comparisons. There were also some chromatin‐related categories (PRC1 complex, CHD‐type complex, NuRD complex) overrepresented in the Isolate P32 > P67 and Tutored P67 > P32 comparisons. In the P67 > P32 comparisons, protein synthesis and processing‐related categories, as well as the collagen type IV trimer categories, were significantly overrepresented, regardless of rearing condition.
When we considered the functional enrichment among the genes predicted from differentially methylated CpG sites, several predicted processes, such as development, including cellular differentiation, and transcriptional regulation, emerged consistently across all comparisons (Tables  and ). Some categories were overrepresented only in P67 > P32 comparisons, including chromatin (Iso‐sil, Tut‐sil, and Iso‐song groups) and calcium ion binding (Iso‐sil and Tut‐sil groups). Categories related to plasma membrane components were represented in a subset of P32 > P67 comparisons (Tut‐song, Iso‐song, and Iso‐sil groups).
Overall, gene network analysis of the TagSeq byAge comparisons revealed few or, sometimes, zero known connections (Table  ). Tut‐song groups returned the highest number of connections; two essential developmental genes—DCX (a microtubule‐associated protein [ ]) and S100b (a calcium binding protein [ ]) in the P32 > P67 Tut‐song comparison and SNAP25 (a key pre‐synaptic protein that may also function post‐synaptically [ ]) in the P67 > P32 Tut‐song comparison had the highest number of connections. In the RRBS data, very few (2 and 1) known connections were returned in network analysis from the P67 > P32 Isolate comparisons (Table  ). All other byAge comparisons had network hub genes with at least 19 connections. These included transcription factors (Stat3, Stat5a, Gata3, Gata4, Smad3, Smad4, Pax6, Jun, Fos), proteins involved in development (Notch, Sox2, APP), as well as proteins like PTEN that are well‐studied due to their connections to human disease, including the developmental autism spectrum disorders [ , , , , ].

3.4.

## Rearing Condition Had a Greater Influence on CpG Methylation at P32 Than at P67, and Little Effect on RNA Profiles
We then examined the difference between rearing conditions (byCondition) at each age, taking into account whether the birds had been placed in silence or heard acute song playback. Here, too, the number of differentially expressed genes is modest (< 110 in all contrasts), whereas there were generally thousands of differentially methylated CpG sites (between 842 and 4860 sites; Figure  , Tables  and ). The P32 auditory forebrains showed roughly 4‐fold more changes in methylated CpG sites associated with rearing condition than the P67 auditory forebrain (Figure  , Table  ).
Functional analysis on the differentially expressed genes only revealed significantly overrepresented categories in only one comparison: P67‐song Isolate > Tutored. Those categories indicated regulation of Histone H3 Lysine 4 methylation (H3K4me) and ATP‐dependent microtubule motor activity (Tables  and ).
Functional analysis of the RRBS data revealed several significantly overrepresented categories only at P32, where we observed large numbers of differentially methylated sites (Tables  and ). Cell–cell adhesion was overrepresented in the Tut > Iso comparisons in the P32‐sil and P32‐song groups, and in the Iso > Tut comparison of the P32‐song group. Development and transcriptional regulation categories were also overrepresented in the Tut > Iso comparison in P32‐sil birds and the Iso > Tut comparison of the P32‐song group. Categories related to excitatory synapses and channels are also present in the contrasts of Tutored versus Isolate birds (Tables  and ).
The TagSeq byCondition network analysis (Table  ) revealed few abundantly‐connected node genes, but those with at least 2 connections include those involved in the cytoskeleton and kinesin/dynein‐mediated transport (Dnali1, Flnb, dync1h1, dync1i2, kif1a, kif1b), G protein structure and signaling (gng3, rgs4, kcnj3), hormone signaling (CRHR2), and synaptic regulation (Snap25, Gria2, Nptxr). Genes with the most connections in the RRBS byAge analysis were of a variety of types. These types included transcription factors (Gata3, Gata4, Stat3, Stat5a, Nanog, Fos) and transcription‐related genes (Polr2e, ppargc1a), growth factor‐related genes (Egfr, Kdr), cellular signaling components (Shh, Rem1, Calb2, Grin2b, BMP4), and those that regulate the cell cycle (Ccnb1, Hras). Many of these have known roles in neural development and plasticity (Table  ) [ , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , ].

3.5.

## The Epigenetic and Genomic Response to Hearing Song Playback Was Affected by the Developmental State of the Auditory Forebrain
For tutor song to become memorized and guide mature song structure, the experience of hearing song must initiate mechanisms for learning and memory. We aimed to gain insight into how the combination of maturation (age) and experience with a live male tutor (rearing condition) influenced the rapid processes invoked by hearing acute song playbacks at the beginning and end of the critical learning period.
This analysis revealed a small set (~50–150) of differentially expressed RNAs in all groups (Figure  ).
 Further, immediate early genes that reliably show increases in the song playback paradigm in the adult auditory forebrain revealed a diversity of interactions between age, rearing condition, and acute playbacks here (Figures  and S5, Table  ). For example, levels of fos RNAs are significantly higher in the auditory forebrains of Song compared to Silence birds at both P32 and P67, and in both Tutored and Isolate conditions. However, Arc and egr‐1 RNAs are higher in the Song compared to the Silence condition only in the P67‐Tut group, and junD RNAs are only higher after song playback in the P67‐Iso group. Further, junD shows a strong response to song in Tutored birds at P32, but at P67, junD only shows a strong response in Isolate birds. RNAs for immediate early genes jun and NR4A3 also displayed distinct patterns of song playback effects based on age and rearing condition.
From GO analysis based on RNAs identified from the bySong comparisons, we observed that all but one category type, related to axons and synaptic function, was either exclusive to P32 comparisons or to P67 comparisons (Tables  and ). Within P32, the silence > song contrasts returned two significantly overrepresented categories, development and neuron part. Song > silence comparisons revealed significantly overrepresented categories related to chromatin and transcriptional regulation, cellular differentiation and development, cell–cell adhesion, and signal transduction (Tables  and ). At P67, only one category, the transcriptional complex AP‐1, was significantly overrepresented in the P67‐Iso song > silence comparisons (Tables  and ). In the bySong P67‐Tut comparisons, several categories related to electron transport, translation, protein processing and targeting, amide processing, and mRNA catabolism were significantly overrepresented in both the song > silence and silence > song comparisons. The category of axon was exclusive to the P67‐Tut silence > song comparison.

3.6.

## RNA Data of IEGs Known to Show Significant Induction in the Adult Auditory Forebrain Upon Acute Song Playback Experience
Normalized read counts show a diversity of effects of age and rearing condition on the effect of song playbacks for Arc, egr‐1, fos, jun, junD, and NR4A3. Data for each gene is shown in two side‐by‐side panels, one for each age. Box plots show median count and the 25th and 75th percentile; whiskers extend based on the inter‐quartile range in both directions. Circles depict individual data points. * p adjusted < 0.05, ^ p value < 0.05. Please note different y‐axes.
Scatterplots of differentially expressed RNAs indicated that rearing condition substantially influenced profiles. For example, at P67, DUSP28 (implicated in protein homeostasis [ ]) and FAM15B (which may contribute to dendritic branching [ ]) genes respond in the opposite direction to song playback, depending on rearing condition (Figures  and S5). Therefore, to gain an overall picture of how tutoring experience influences the song response, we also tested for a statistical interaction between rearing condition and song playback effects in TagSeq data in P32 and P67 auditory forebrains. Interaction analysis confirmed a large effect of rearing condition on the song playback response; at P32, 332 genes responded differently to song, and P67, 470 genes responded differently (Figures  and S5, Table  ).
At P32, genes from interaction analysis revealed functional enrichment in terms of cellular components, with overrepresentation of GO terms related to synapses and neurons (Table  ). GO Process‐related terms were not significant after FDR correction but showed weak enrichment related to synaptic plasticity, axon guidance, learning and memory, and cognition and other related terms. A subset of the genes associated with these terms showed statistically significant interactions (synaptic plasticity: AKAP9, PTN, CALB1, PPP1R9A, CRTC1, axon guidance: UNC5a, UNC5c; Table  ) [ , , , , , ]. At P67, genes that showed a significant statistical interaction were less cohesive in terms of GO categories. However, there was a signature of cell projections, especially dendrites, and some of the top genes have key roles in brain development, including CHL1 and NF1 (Figure  , Tables  and ) [ ].
From the RRBS data, we found 1000s of differentially‐methylated CpG sites in the bySong comparisons (Figure  ). Prediction of the genes affected by differential methylation generally also returned 1000s of genes in the P32 comparisons and hundreds in the P67 comparisons (Figure  , Table  ).
Based on the gene sets predicted from differentially methylated CpG sites, many more functional categories were significantly overrepresented after hearing song playbacks in P32 compared to the P67 auditory forebrain (Table  ). Cell–cell adhesion was overrepresented in all P32 comparisons except P32‐Tut silence > song and was the only significantly overrepresented category in the P67 comparisons, emerging from the P67‐Tut silence > song predicted gene set. The predicted gene list from the song > silence contrast in P32‐Tut auditory forebrains was the only one overrepresented in channel activity and extracellular matrix categories. Development and the related category of cell differentiation were significantly overrepresented in the P32‐Iso comparisons but not the P32‐Tut comparisons. Transcriptional regulation categories were overrepresented in both P32‐Tut and P32‐Iso silence > song comparisons. Three categories, related to axons and synaptic function, membranes, and chromatin regulation, were overrepresented only in the song > silence contrast in P32‐Tut auditory forebrain and the silence > song comparison in P32‐Iso auditory forebrains.
Besides transcription factors that are known IEGs, hub genes that emerged from TagSeq bySong network analysis included those involved in G‐protein signaling (Gng2, Gng3), myelin function (Mbp), cell adhesion (Cdh2, Nrxn3, L1cam), protein assembly and stabilization (Hsp90ab1, Hsp90b1, Yrdc, Grpel1), and elements of glutamate signaling (Slc1a2, Slc6a1, Gria2; Table  ). The top connected genes in the RRBS data were known transcription factors (Smad2, Smad3, Smad4, Gata2, Gata3, Gata4, Stat3, Stat5a, Pax6), and those that are involved in apoptosis (Bcl2, Casp3), receptor‐based intracellular signaling (Grin1, Grin2b, Gria1, Gnia2, Bmp4, Wnt2, PTEN, Rem1; Table  ). These functions are integral to brain development and neural plasticity [ , , , , , , , , ].

3.7.

## There Was Very Little Overlap in Differentially Methylated and Differentially Expressed Genes
To determine the possible direct connection between DNA methylation and RNAs, we examined the extent to which the predicted gene sets from differential CpG methylation sites corresponded to the differentially expressed RNAs from the same comparisons across age, rearing condition, and song playback paradigm experience. This analysis revealed a low level of overlap (Figures  , , and ). We also considered that increased DNA methylation typically corresponds to lower rates of transcription and assessed the overlap between opposite contrasts in RNA and predicted gene sets (e.g., a P32 > P67 RNA gene list compared to a P67 > P32 RRBS‐based gene list). This comparison changed the number of genes that overlap between RNA and RRBS‐based data by at most a few genes (data not shown), preserving the overall pattern described.

3.8.

## The Relationship Between the Number of Differentially‐Methylated CpG Sites and Predicted Genes Changed Depending on Age, Rearing Condition, and Song Playback
Because genes are associated with more than one CpG site, and sites can either loss or gain a methyl group, we assessed some of the complexity of the relationship between differential CpG site analysis and gene annotation using two simple comparisons.
First, we calculated the extent of overlap between the predicted annotated genesets derived from the bidirectional analysis of the major factors, for example P32‐Iso song > sil and P32‐Iso sil > song (Figure  , Tables  , , and ). Overlap here indicates that there were CpG sites that were differentially methylated on both sides of the contrast that were annotated to the same gene, and thus complexity in the dynamic regulation of individual sites for those genes. With the byAge predicted genesets, we calculated a 26%–52% overlap between P32 > P67 and P67 > P32 genesets in the Tut‐sil, Tut‐song, Iso‐sil, Iso‐song groups (Figure  ). The percent of overlap was higher in the P32 > P67 (8%–24%) than P67 > P32 (7%–17%) comparisons. From the byCondition analysis, we found 22%–43% overlap between Tut > Iso and Iso > Tut gene lists, with the P32 comparisons all at ~40% and the P67 comparisons at ~22% (Figure  ). The bySong analysis also showed greater overlap in the P32 gene lists (from 43% to 64%) than the P67 gene lists did (21%–31%; Figure  ).
Second, we asked if the proportion of predicted genes compared to differentially methylated sites depended on the age, rearing condition, or exposure to acute song playbacks. This would provide a global indication of some DNA methylation dynamics. If, for example, there was a condition in which there were notably more differentially methylated CpG sites normalized to the number of annotated genes, this would suggest more epigenetic regulation of those particular genes. Generally, the number of genes annotated for each comparison tracked with the relative number of differentially methylated sites (Figures  and ). In the byAge comparisons, each gene had an average of 1.8 associated CpG sites that were differentially methylated in the P32 > P67 comparisons and a range of 1.3–2.3 in the P67 > P32 contrasts. In the byCondition analyses, each gene had an average of approximately 2.3 differentially methylated sites in P32 auditory forebrains and 1.6 in P67 auditory forebrains. The bySong comparison also showed a greater average proportion of differentially methylated sites for each gene at P32, 2.3, while that average is 1.6 in P67 auditory forebrains.

4.

## Discussion
Specific adult patterns of behavior often reflect both maturational processes and developmental experiences. Characterizing mechanistic links between life stages is complicated not simply because of the passage of time, but also because bridging relevant biological scales – epigenetic through whole‐organismal analyses – requires a tractable model that can disambiguate the effects of programmed maturation and experience‐dependent processes, and can also functionally link them with behavior. Here, we used male zebra finch songbirds because, as adults, they produce a song that reliably reflects sensory learning that occurs months and years prior, during a developmental critical period. Because the critical period is influenced by a combination of age and song experience, our primary prediction was that both DNA methylation and RNA profiles in the song playback comparisons would be affected by age and tutor experience. Indeed, our analyses revealed several features of molecular function that may affect and reflect the effects of age and prior tutor song experience on the acute response to hearing song. Results thus present promising new targets for further investigation into the potential role for specific genes and processes in which they are involved in modulating the ability for sensory song learning across age and accumulated tutor experience.
We specifically examined immediate early genes (IEGs, e.g., fos, egr‐1, NR4A3) in our bySong comparisons. IEGs are some of the most commonly studied genes for experience‐dependent plasticity. They are often transcription factors that function to initiate cascades of gene expression that can coordinate neural plasticity events necessary for learning and memory [ , , , , ]; it is unsurprising that they also emerged as highly connected genes in our network analysis. In the auditory forebrain, a subset of IEG mRNAs is well known to increase in adults upon novel song playbacks like in the paradigm here [ , ]. There is also some evidence of IEG induction at a few developmental points [ , , , ]. Here, song playbacks significantly increased IEG RNAs over silence condition levels at P32 and P67, indicating the data were overall of high quality and positioned to also provide novel insights. We also noted that the pattern of gene response was distinct across age and rearing condition, demonstrating a complexity in how RNAs regulated by song experience may come “on‐line” based on maturation and tutoring experience across the critical period.
Besides confirmation that IEGs and genes associated with functional categories such as synaptic plasticity were regulated by song playbacks, analysis of the bySong comparisons also revealed as‐yet unexplored processes and genes that may facilitate tutor song memorization in the three groups that have sensory learning capacity: P32‐Tut, P32‐Iso, and P67‐Iso. They may also limit tutor song memorization in the P67‐Tut auditory forebrain. For example, protein processing emerges as a significantly overrepresented category in the P67‐Tut auditory forebrain, and heat shock proteins are highly connected bySong genes at P32. These findings are intriguing because long‐term memory formation requires new protein synthesis [ ]. It may be that in addition to initiating translation, song experience may trigger mechanisms that protect proteins that participate in the neural plasticity of learning and memory. It would be interesting to test this postulation after live tutoring experiences that support sensory song learning.
Hub gene analysis also revealed the regulation of several transcription factor families such as Gata (Gata2, Gata 3, Gata 4), Stat (Stat3, Stat5a), and SMAD (SMAD2, SMAD3, SMAD4) that are currently unstudied in the auditory forebrain. In the bySong comparisons, Gata proteins are hub genes at P67, but not at P32, when SMAD and Stat proteins are represented. Despite involvement in brain development, Gata proteins are not currently understood to influence experience‐dependent plasticity [ , ]; additional investigations will be needed to understand their potential role in processing song experience at P67. Interestingly, the set of Gata, Stat, and SMAD transcription factors is also represented in byAge and byCondition comparisons, highlighting the complexity of untangling mechanisms that regulate responses to experience across the critical period. While the specifics of each transcription factor are unique, these three families share a central role in cellular proliferation and differentiation [ , , ]. It is thus possible that these proteins, regulated by age and prior tutor experience, alter the composition of the cellular network in the auditory forebrain such that its responsivity to hearing song is altered. These transcription factor families then take on greater potential broader interest because there is known crosstalk between the signaling cascades that modulate their activity and the ERK and mTOR cascades already demonstrated to be essential for male juvenile sensory song learning [ , , , , ].
By P67, the effects of tutor exposure or isolation create males who have closed their critical period or continue to remain capable of memorizing tutor song, respectively [ ]. At P67 but not P32, genes associated with histone H3 lysine 4 methylation (H3K4me) are significantly overrepresented in the TagSeq byCondition comparisons. H3K4 can be methylated once (H3K4me1), twice (H3K4me2), or three times (H3K4me3). Each modification is associated with distinct functions, but all are enriched at regulatory regions where the transcription factors that alter the probability of transcription occurring bind [ , , , ]. Altering genes that modulate H3K4 methylation thus may generally contribute to the diversity and number of RNAs the auditory forebrain genome can synthesize. The current data thus contribute to the idea that regulation of “transcriptional plasticity,” the baseline ability of the genome to respond dynamically to song experience, is part of what regulates learning during and at the close of the critical period [ ]. In fact, we observed that hundreds of genes, for example DUSP28 and FAM15B, show opposite regulation directions after song playback at P67 depending on the bird's rearing condition, and that the single GO category overrepresented in the P67‐Iso song > silence TagSeq data is for AP‐1 transcription factors. The effect of rearing condition was evident by P32. Together, these gene sets may thus be particularly relevant targets to test the contribution of transcriptional plasticity to critical period learning and closure.
It is established that tutor experience has epigenetic, genomic, cellular, and functional consequences for the auditory forebrain by P67 [ , , , ], but here we also discovered that even 2 days of differential exposure to tutoring led to distinct DNA methylation and RNA song playback response profiles. At P32, nearly all of the differentially abundant bySong RNAs were exclusive to either the Tut or Iso groups, and the P32‐Iso silence auditory forebrain had an obviously greater number of differentially methylated CpG sites than the other P32 comparisons in the bySong analysis. This pattern is reminiscent of a prior finding that isolating juvenile males from tutor song at the beginning of the critical period results in an elevated molecular response to song playback compared to auditory forebrains from age‐matched males [ ]. Because all males were moved at P30, the effects of rearing condition at P32 are not attributable to differences in generalized stress caused by this element of the protocol. We therefore postulate that these results reflect the rapid dynamics of DNA methylation (e.g., [ ]).
Our byAge analysis suggested that DNA methylation accumulates across the critical period to regulate genes involved in cell differentiation, cell–cell adhesion, and extracellular matrix, all features of maturation and signatures of critical periods [ ]. However, RRBS data also revealed a lower number of modified CpG sites associated with each bySong gene at P67 compared to P32. This age effect was also observed in the byCondition comparisons. Thus, despite the overall greater DNA methylation levels at P67, genes that are specifically regulated by tutor and song playback experiences may have increased capacity for modulated transcription, consistent with prior reports that constitutive auditory forebrain transcription transitions into experience‐dependent regulation across development [ ].
One of the challenges of elucidating genes and molecular processes that alter the ability for sensory song learning across the critical period is that biological mechanisms have distinct timeframes of action and usually do not operate alone. Further, how these mechanisms function often shifts across development. Here, we found weak correspondences between specific P32 and P67 DNA methylation and gene expression profiles. For example, it could be hypothesized that the genes predicted from differentially methylated CpG sites at P32 would overlap with the differentially expressed RNAs measured at P67 in the same contrasts. We did not, however, observe this relationship. Further, we saw a very low correspondence between differentially expressed RNAs and the genes predicted from differential CpG methylation status within the same comparisons, despite generating both datasets from the same samples. It is formally possible that bioinformatic pipeline differences explain these observations. However, these findings are consistent with data from other systems and likely reflect the fact that RNA populations result from mechanisms other than DNA methylation‐regulated transcription, including other epigenetic mechanisms such as histone modifications and posttranscriptional stability [ , ]. Ultimately, methylated CpG sites and RNAs are likely to inform distinct processes that are linked in time, with the former occurring rapidly and in advance of the latter. Additional work connecting specific time periods in the auditory learning and song development in the male zebra finch will be needed to test mechanistic relationships between DNA methylation and transcriptional regulation across age, rearing conditions, and acute experience.
It is an open question whether there is a core set of mechanisms that direct at least the early sensory learning phases in the auditory forebrain that are robust across species and methods of measurement. The zebra finch is just one of approximately 5000 extant species of songbirds, all of which are characterized by their ability to generate vocalizations that reflect their early social (acoustic) environment. As such, they all rely on sensory learning to produce their songs. Sensory learning can occur solely during development, like in the zebra finch, or seasonally and even continuously in other species; it is unclear how generalizable the learning mechanisms are across these systems. However, in obligate brood parasitic species, such as the brown‐headed cowbird (
Molothrus ater
; which lays its eggs, and whose offspring develop, in other species' nests), fledged juveniles may rely on an adult cowbird's chatter call to open their learning phase so that they memorize the songs of their own species and not of their host species [ , ]. Interestingly, hearing the conspecific parasite's chatter call regulates very similar functional categories in the auditory forebrain as the acute song exposure did here in P32 zebra finches, including developmental processes and those related to axons and cell adhesion [ ]. Additional experiments can test the extent to which specific mechanisms control critical period learning, within and across species.

5.

## Conclusion
Collectively, the current findings reveal insights into the relative dynamics of epigenetic DNA methylation mechanisms and the RNA populations that result from transcriptional and post‐transcriptional regulation. Our experimental design allowed us to disambiguate the contributions of the two constitutive components of development, age and accumulated experience, to baseline and stimulus‐dependent molecular profiles. Using the same samples for both DNA methylation and RNA measures increased our ability to begin to link these levels of cell biology with the broad function of learning and memory, with the caveat that these findings need to now be evaluated with live tutor experiences that support sensory song learning. Further, we find some similarities across two songbird species that acquire song during development, suggesting that male zebra finches may provide generalizable mechanisms of sensory song learning in juveniles [ ].

## Conflicts of Interest
The authors declare no conflicts of interest.

## Supporting information

Data S1: G2B Author Checklist.

FIGURE S1: Supporting Figures.

TABLE S1: Distribution of differential CpG sites across genomic features. Sites were mapped promoter > exon > intron > intergenic. CpG islands (CpGi) and shores were mapped in a separate process to determine the percentage of differential CpG sites that overlap with each feature.

TABLE S2: Significant genes (p‐adj < 0.05) based on the TagSeq byAge comparison, considering rearing condition and song experience.

TABLE S3: Differential genes predicted from RRBS analysis in the byAge comparison, considering rearing condition and song experience.

TABLE S4: Significant GO categories (FDR < 0.05) overrepresented in gene lists resulting from the TagSeq (“RNA”) and RRBS byAge comparison, considering rearing condition and song experience.

TABLE S5: Major statistically significant (FDR < 0.05) GO categories across comparisons for TagSeq‐identified RNAs and genes predicted to be affected by DNA methylation.

TABLE S6: Results of String network analysis showing genes (#node) and number of connections (node_degree) in gene lists resulting from the TagSeq and RRBS (1) byAge comparison, considering rearing condition and song experience, (2) byCondition comparison, considering age and song experience, (3) bySong comparison, considering age and rearing condition.

TABLE S7: Significant genes (p‐adj < 0.05) based on the TagSeq byCondition comparison, considering age and song experience.

TABLE S8: Differential genes predicted from RRBS analysis in the byCondition comparison, considering age and song experience.

TABLE S9: Significant GO categories (FDR < 0.05) overrepresented in gene lists resulting from the TagSeq (“RNA”) and RRBS byAge comparison, considering rearing condition and song experience.

TABLE S10: Significant genes (p‐adj < 0.05) based on the TagSeq bySong comparison, considering age and rearing condition.

TABLE S11: Significant GO categories (FDR < 0.05) overrepresented in gene lists resulting from the TagSeq (“RNA”) and RRBS bySong comparison, considering age and rearing condition.

TABLE S12: Significant genes (p‐adj < 0.05) based on interaction statistics of the TagSeq bySong comparison.

TABLE S13: Significant GO categories (FDR < 0.05) overrepresented in gene lists resulting from the interaction statistics of the TagSeq bySong comparisons.

TABLE S14: Differential genes predicted from RRBS analysis in the bySong comparison, considering age and rearing condition.

## Acknowledgments
This work was supported by a collaborative NSF grant (IOS 1456524 to Mark E. Hauber and IOS 1456612 to Christopher N. Balakrishnan) and by NIH (R01NS128286 and R56NS110951 to Sarah E. London). Thanks are due to Drs. Mischa Matz and Hans Hofman for consultation on TagSeq methodology and Dr. Alvaro Hernandez for consultation on RRBS methods.

London S. E., Hauber M. E., McKim‐Louder M. I., and Balakrishnan C. N., “Simultaneous RNA Sequencing and DNA Methylation Profiling Reveals Neural Mechanisms That Regulate Sensitive Period Behavioral Learning,” Genes, Brain and Behavior
24, no. 4 (2025): e70031, 10.1111/gbb.70031.

Funding: This work was supported by a collaborative NSF grant (IOS 1456524 to Mark E. Hauber and IOS 1456612 to Christopher N. Balakrishnan) and by NIH (R01NS128286 and R56NS110951 to Sarah E. London).

## Data Availability Statement
The data that support the findings of this study are openly available in NCBI's BioProject at http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/bioproject, reference number PRJNA1177253.

## References
 

## Associated Data

## Supplementary Materials

Data S1: G2B Author Checklist.

FIGURE S1: Supporting Figures.

TABLE S1: Distribution of differential CpG sites across genomic features. Sites were mapped promoter > exon > intron > intergenic. CpG islands (CpGi) and shores were mapped in a separate process to determine the percentage of differential CpG sites that overlap with each feature.

TABLE S2: Significant genes (p‐adj < 0.05) based on the TagSeq byAge comparison, considering rearing condition and song experience.

TABLE S3: Differential genes predicted from RRBS analysis in the byAge comparison, considering rearing condition and song experience.

TABLE S4: Significant GO categories (FDR < 0.05) overrepresented in gene lists resulting from the TagSeq (“RNA”) and RRBS byAge comparison, considering rearing condition and song experience.

TABLE S5: Major statistically significant (FDR < 0.05) GO categories across comparisons for TagSeq‐identified RNAs and genes predicted to be affected by DNA methylation.

TABLE S6: Results of String network analysis showing genes (#node) and number of connections (node_degree) in gene lists resulting from the TagSeq and RRBS (1) byAge comparison, considering rearing condition and song experience, (2) byCondition comparison, considering age and song experience, (3) bySong comparison, considering age and rearing condition.

TABLE S7: Significant genes (p‐adj < 0.05) based on the TagSeq byCondition comparison, considering age and song experience.

TABLE S8: Differential genes predicted from RRBS analysis in the byCondition comparison, considering age and song experience.

TABLE S9: Significant GO categories (FDR < 0.05) overrepresented in gene lists resulting from the TagSeq (“RNA”) and RRBS byAge comparison, considering rearing condition and song experience.

TABLE S10: Significant genes (p‐adj < 0.05) based on the TagSeq bySong comparison, considering age and rearing condition.

TABLE S11: Significant GO categories (FDR < 0.05) overrepresented in gene lists resulting from the TagSeq (“RNA”) and RRBS bySong comparison, considering age and rearing condition.

TABLE S12: Significant genes (p‐adj < 0.05) based on interaction statistics of the TagSeq bySong comparison.

TABLE S13: Significant GO categories (FDR < 0.05) overrepresented in gene lists resulting from the interaction statistics of the TagSeq bySong comparisons.

TABLE S14: Differential genes predicted from RRBS analysis in the bySong comparison, considering age and rearing condition.

## Data Availability Statement
The data that support the findings of this study are openly available in NCBI's BioProject at http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/bioproject, reference number PRJNA1177253.