pmcNAR Mol MedNAR Mol Med4789narmolmed9918752080106676narmolmedNAR Molecular Medicine2976-856XOxford University PressPMC12429966PMC12429966.112429966124299664125570710.1093/narmme/ugaf012ugaf0121AcademicSubjects/SCI00030AcademicSubjects/SCI00980AcademicSubjects/SCI01060AcademicSubjects/SCI01140AcademicSubjects/SCI01180Standard ArticleThe role of RNA in the nanoscale organization of α-synuclein phase separation
https://orcid.org/0000-0003-2695-4999ZapponeSabrinaMolecular Microscopy and Spectroscopy, Istituto Italiano di Tecnologia, Via Enrico Melen 83 Bldg. B, 16152 Genoa, ItalyDipartimento di Informatiche, Bioingegneria, Robotica e Ingegneria dei Sistemi, University of Genoa, Via All’Opera Pia 13, 16145 Genoa, Italyhttps://orcid.org/0000-0002-1700-584XPeregoEleonoraMolecular Microscopy and Spectroscopy, Istituto Italiano di Tecnologia, Via Enrico Melen 83 Bldg. B, 16152 Genoa, Italyhttps://orcid.org/0000-0002-0879-1594RupertJakobRNA Systems Biology, Istituto Italiano di Tecnologia, Via Enrico Melen 85 Bldg. B, 16152 Genoa, ItalyDepartment of Biology and Biotechnologies “C. Darwin,” Sapienza University of Rome, Piazzale Aldo Moro, 00185 Rome, Italyhttps://orcid.org/0000-0002-3593-6023ZaccoElsaRNA Systems Biology, Istituto Italiano di Tecnologia, Via Enrico Melen 85 Bldg. B, 16152 Genoa, Italyhttps://orcid.org/0000-0002-6757-1372SlendersEliMolecular Microscopy and Spectroscopy, Istituto Italiano di Tecnologia, Via Enrico Melen 83 Bldg. B, 16152 Genoa, Italyhttps://orcid.org/0000-0001-7524-6310TartagliaGian GaetanoRNA Systems Biology, Istituto Italiano di Tecnologia, Via Enrico Melen 85 Bldg. B, 16152 Genoa, ItalyDepartment of Biology and Biotechnologies “C. Darwin,” Sapienza University of Rome, Piazzale Aldo Moro, 00185 Rome, Italyhttps://orcid.org/0000-0002-3085-730XVicidominiGiuseppeMolecular Microscopy and Spectroscopy, Istituto Italiano di Tecnologia, Via Enrico Melen 83 Bldg. B, 16152 Genoa, Italy ]. While the amyloidogenesis of aggregation-prone proteins, such as amyloid β and α-synuclein (aS), has been extensively studied and characterized in vitro [ ], the precise mechanisms governing these processes within the cellular context have initially remained less clear. In recent years, protein aggregation has been increasingly linked to liquid–liquid and liquid-to-solid phase transitions [ ]. Liquid–liquid phase separation (LLPS) is a thermodynamically driven process whereby biomolecules self-organize into a dense liquid-like phase by establishing weak intermolecular interactions, co-existing with a surrounding dilute liquid-like phase [ ]. The accumulation of molecules in the dense phase gives rise to micron-sized condensates, often referred to as membrane-less organelles (MLOs). MLOs play critical roles in cellular organization, enabling spatial and temporal tuning of reactions, sequestering potentially toxic molecules, or compartmentalizing cellular content [ ].
Among the many proteins capable of undergoing such phase transitions, aS is an intrinsically disordered protein abundantly expressed in mammalian cells [ ]. It has been associated with various cellular processes, including synaptic vesicle trafficking, exocytosis, and DNA repair [ ]. Of particular interest is its involvement in a group of neurodegenerative diseases collectively known as synucleopathies [ ]. The pathological transition of aS from a soluble, monomeric state to an insoluble, irreversible state results in the accumulation of amyloid aggregates within cells. This phenomenon, known as liquid-to-solid transition, has long been accepted as the pathological pathway behind the deposition of aS monomers into amyloid aggregates [ ]. More recently, LLPS and the subsequent maturation of liquid-like condensates into solid-like aggregates have emerged as a potential alternative pathological pathway [ ]. Indeed, the high local concentration and confinement of molecules inside liquid-like condensates may facilitate primary nucleation and formation of solid aggregates under physiological conditions, a process further exacerbated by the uptake of pre-aggregated forms of aS [ , ].
The aS phase transitions are significantly influenced by its interactions with various molecular partners, including proteins and nucleic acids [ , ]. In fact, aS has been found in several multi-component MLOs in living cells, such as synaptic condensates [ ] and processing bodies [ ]. Apart from consisting of a number of different proteins, processing bodies are also enriched by substantial quantities of RNA, a molecule that plays pivotal role in the initiation and regulation of protein phase separation [ , ]. Despite this, the effect of RNA in modulating aS phase transition remains incompletely understood. Most studies on aS phase separation have focused on its interaction with polynucleotides, such as poly(U) and poly(A). On one hand, poly(A) promotes the recruitment of aS on the condensate surface and accelerates its aggregation [ ]. On the other hand, the aS fibril growth slows down in cationic peptide/poly(U) condensates due to the weak binding between poly(U) or peptides and aS monomers, oligomers, or fibrils [ ]. Recently, specific interactions between aS and G-quadruplex RNA structures have been reported both in vitro and in cells, with G-quadruplex RNA shown to accelerate both aS liquid–liquid and liquid-to-solid phase transitions [ ]. In contrast, misfolded and aggregated forms of aS exhibit an enhanced RNA-binding propensity, sequestering RNA molecules within aggregates [ ]. Nevertheless, there is little evidence on how RNA can influence aS LLPS across nano- and microscale dimensions, or how such interactions contribute to pathological liquid-to-solid phase transitions. Recent studies suggest that the ability to undergo LLPS is not exclusive to the components of MLOs but occurs at a wide range in the cellular proteome [ ] and a much lower scale than the micrometer scale [ ]. Nanoscale condensates, also termed nanoclusters, have been identified as critical intermediates in the aS phase transitions [ ]. These nanoclusters rapidly form in solution and persist even in the presence of macro-condensates, suggesting that LLPS may underline both aggregate formation and propagation [ ]. Even though the phase separation of certain proteins can be regulated or disrupted at the nanocluster level [ ], their impact on aS LLPS, particularly in relation to RNA, has not been investigated yet.
The investigation of LLPS systems has been predominantly focused on the dense phase. However, characterizing the dilute phase is fundamental for achieving a comprehensive understanding of these systems. This task poses significant technical challenges due to the inherent heterogeneity of the dilute phase and the potential formation of nanoclusters. Phase-separated systems have been conventionally studied using several methods, such as mass spectrometry [ ], dynamic light scattering [ ], nuclear magnetic resonance spectroscopy [ ], and fluorescence microscopy techniques. While fluorescence confocal microscopy imaging has been extensively used for visualizing macro-condensates, it suffers from poor temporal (in terms of frame rate) and spatial resolution for quantifying the diffusivity of sub-diffraction-sized species such as nanoclusters. Fluorescence recovery after photobleaching (FRAP), typically implemented in a confocal laser scanning microscope, is widely used for characterizing intra-condensate diffusivity. However, FRAP measurements are often difficult to interpret as they depend on the optical system, laser power, and sample geometry [ ]. They are mostly suitable for investigating the immobile fraction or very slow-moving molecules, making FRAP ineffective for studying the fast mobility in the dilute phase. Phase-separating proteins like aS show diverse temporal diffusivities, with very fast movement in the dilute phase and slower movement in the dense phase. As a result, relying solely on FRAP does not reveal all the underlying phenomena.
These limitations can partially be overcome by fluorescence fluctuation-based methods. Among them, fluorescence correlation spectroscopy (FCS) measures the mobility of the molecules by statistically analyzing the temporal correlation of fluctuations in fluorescence intensity [ ]. To retrieve diffusion properties with FCS, molecules must move within a well-defined observation volume, such as one created by focusing a laser beam in a confocal microscope. FCS has already been applied to various LLPS scenarios, including identifying nanoclusters in the phase-separated system of pyrenoid [ ] and amyloid [ ] proteins. Both cases demonstrated that, due to its high single-molecule sensitivity, FCS is a suitable method for studying molecular interactions in nano- and macro-condensates.
While valuable for characterizing molecular species based on their different mobility, conventional FCS cannot distinguish the spatial heterogeneity inherent in LLPS systems. Spot-variation FCS (svFCS) addresses this limitation by performing FCS measurements with increasing observation volumes. This FCS variant allows for the determination of both molecular diffusion coefficients and movement types within the sample, thereby resolving heterogeneity in the molecular process investigated [ ].
Here, we enhance conventional confocal FCS measurements by replacing the typical single-element detector of confocal microscopy, such as a photomultiplier or a single-photon avalanche diode (SPAD), with a SPAD array detector [ ]. The array detector preserves the spatial distribution of the fluorescent signal generated by the observation volume within the sample, which would otherwise be lost with a single-element detector. This spatial information allows for a straightforward and instantaneous implementation of svFCS [ ]. Moreover, the single-photon timing capability of each SPAD element facilitates photon time-tagging recording, which allows for sampling of the fluorescence signal photon-by-photon and with high temporal precision (down to the sub-nanosecond scale) [ ]. This high temporal precision allows for the quantification of fluorescence lifetime changes. In the context of phase transitions, fluorescence lifetime has proven valuable in distinguishing molecular packing densities of proteins within MLOs [ ] as well in studying the aggregation process of amyloidogenic proteins [ ].
We have already shown that this suite, referred to as photon-resolved microscopy [ , ], facilitates analysis across spatial scales from micrometers to nanometers and temporal scales from seconds to nanoseconds, enabling multiplexed analysis of condensate mobility with a single measurement [ ]. The simultaneity and relatively short duration (tens of seconds) of the measurements guarantee reduced complexity and lower phototoxicity while preserving temporal heterogeneity.
By employing this platform, we characterized the heterogeneity of aS mobility across different temporal scales, identified the nanocluster formation, and discriminated freely diffusing and domain-constrained molecules both in and out of macro-condensates. We have also successfully investigated the effect of RNA on the aS phase transition. Strikingly, our results show that the presence of RNA drastically alters the shape and the internal mobility of aS condensates towards a solid-like state. These findings further suggest that RNA acts as a strong modifier of aS aggregation, by influencing not only the direct prion-like conversion into an amyloid state [ ] but also the liquid–liquid and liquid-to-solid phase transitions of aS condensates.

## Materials and methods

## α-Synuclein purification and labeling
Wild-type α-synuclein (aS) and aS with the addition C141 (aSC141) were respectively purified as described in [ ]. Briefly, both proteins were recombinantly produced in Escherichia coli. The pT7-7 aS C141 plasmid was a gift from Gabriele Kaminski Schierle (Addgene plasmid #108866; RRID: Addgene_108866). After lysis with boiling, ammonium sulfate precipitation, and dialysis, the proteins were subsequently purified via anion-exchange and size-exclusion chromatography with HiTrap™Q and HiLoad™16/600 Superdex™75 columns (Cytiva, MA, USA). The cysteine in position 141 was labeled aSC141 with atto-488 via a maleimide reaction according to the manufacturer’s instructions. Briefly, the dye is dissolved into water-free DMSO (dimethyl sulfoxide, Thermo Fisher, MA, USA) to a concentration of 10 mM. aSC141 dissolved in 20 mM phosphate buffer was incubated with 1.3 molar excess of atto-488-maleimide (ATTO-TEC GmbH, Germany) for 120 min at room temperature. After the incubation, the labeled protein is separated from the free atto-488 molecules via PD-10 desalting columns (Cytiva). The tagged protein was immediately checked for concentration and labeling ratio by UV–vis absorption spectroscopy (Nanodrop ND-1000, Thermo Scientific Technologies), then aliquoted, frozen, and kept at −80○C.

## Glass surface passivation
μ-Slide 8-well or 18-well (Ibidi GmHb, Germany) was passivated with methyl-poly-ethylene glycol silane 5000 kDa (mPEG-silane 5K, Sigma-Aldrich, JKA3037), as shown in [ ]. Briefly, multi-wells were cleaned by incubating them in 100% ethanol (Sigma–Aldrich) for 15 min, and then sonicated for 10 min. After rinsing with ultra-pure water, multi-wells were incubated in 2% (v/v) Alconox detergent (Sigma–Aldrich) in ultra-pure water for 2 h. Finally, μ-Slide 8-well were incubated in 1 g/l mPEG-silane 5K in 96 % ethanol and 0.02% (v/v) hydrochloric acid (Sigma–Aldrich) overnight, in agitation. After rinsing sequentially in ethanol and ultra-pure water, multi-wells were incubated in 1% (v/v) Tween-20 (Sigma–Aldrich) in T50 buffer (10 mM Tris–HCl, 20 mM NaCl, pH 8) for 10 min, then rinsed in T50 buffer and ultra-pure water. Multi-wells were dried using nitrogen gas flow and stored at +4○C for a maximum of 1 week.

## In vitro liquid–liquid phase separation assay
The LLPS assay was performed by diluting 50 μM full-length aS and 2.5 μM (labeling ratio: 1:20) aS C141 atto-488-maleimide into the LLPS buffer [20% (wt/vol) polyethylene glycol 8000 kDa (PEG 8K, Sigma–Aldrich, Germany), 20 mM phosphate buffer (PB), 100 mM KCl, and 5 mM MgCl2 (Sigma–Aldrich)]. Only for in vitro phase separation assay of RNA or aS-RNA, dry powder of total yeast RNA (yRNA, Roche) was dissolved in 20 mM PB. After determining the concentration of the total yRNA mixture by UV–vis absorption spectroscopy (NanoDrop Microvolume Spectrophotometer, ThermoFisher Scientific), it was added to the LLPS buffer supplemented or not with aS. For the phase separation assay of RNA-only or aS-RNA, total yeast RNA was labeled with 200 nM SYTO™13 or SYTO™85 nucleic acid stain (ThermoFisher Scientific). The sample was immediately poured onto a previously passivated μ-Slide 8-well or 18-well (Ibidi GmHb, Germany) and imaged. All measurements were performed at room temperature.

## Optical microscopy experiments

## Confocal microscopy imaging
Fluorescence confocal images were acquired with a Leica SP5 (Leica Microsystems, Mannheim, Germany) inverted laser scanning microscope. Atto488/SYTO™13 and SYTO™85 were excited at 488 and 570 nm, respectively. We performed the experiments with a Leica 100× APO objective lens, NA = 1.40, oil dipping. We detected the fluorescence through a Leica HyD detector in the spectral region 510–550 nm and 580–620 nm, respectively for atto488/SYTO™13 and SYTO™85. Atto488 and SYTO™85 signals were acquired sequentially to avoid any cross-talk artifact. Phase contrast images and fluorescence confocal images in Fig.  were acquired with a Nikon TiE inverted confocal microscope equipped with three excitation lasers (405, 488, and 561 nm) and three alkaline photomultiplier tubes. We performed the experiment with a Nikon 100× APO objective, NA = 1.25, oil dipping. Atto488 was excited at 488 nm. The 488 nm laser was a CW diode semiconductor laser (Coherent).

## Image analysis
The shape and circularity [defined as 4π(area/perimeter2)] analysis was performed with Fiji software as described in [ ].

## Fluorescence fluctuation spectroscopy
All the fluorescence fluctuation-based experiments have been performed on a custom laser-scanning microscope designed for photon-resolved microscopy with a SPAD array detector described in detail in [ , , , ]. The microscope uses a 5×5 SPAD array detector fabricated with a 0.16 μm BCD technology [ ] and cooled to −15○C, resulting in a reduced background [ ]. Briefly, the microscope excites the sample with a triggerable 485 nm pulsed laser diode (LDH-D-C-485, PicoQuant, Berlin, Germany). We coupled the laser beam into a polarization-maintaining fiber before sending it to the microscope. The laser is controlled by a laser driver, which can be synchronized via an oscillator module (PDL 828-L “SEPIA II,” Picoquant). The oscillator provides also the synchronization signal to feed into the time-tagging module to measure the photon-arrival times. The excitation beam is deflected by a pair of Galvo mirrors and focused on the sample using a 100×/1.4 numerical aperture objective lens (Leica Microsystems, Wetzlar, Germany). The fluorescence signal is collected by the same objective lens, de-scanned by the two Galvo mirrors, and focused on the SPAD array detector. The measurements of monomeric aS have been acquired with the same optical system but using a single-element SPAD detector (PDM-050-CTC-FC, Micro Photon Devices, Bolzano, Italy) instead of the SPAD array detector.

## Control and data-acquisition system for photon-resolved microscopy
The microscope is controlled by the BrightEyes microscope control suite (BrightEyes-MCS) [ ], which operates through an FPGA-based data acquisition board (NI FPGA USB-7856R, National Instruments). The BrightEyes-MCS drives the galvo mirrors and the axial piezo stage. It also records the signals collected by the SPAD array detector, all synchronized with the scanning beam system. The core of the software, built on LabVIEW (National Instruments), is an upgrade of the original Carma application [ ]. It also provides a graphical user interface for choosing the acquisition parameters and visualizing recorded signals in real-time. When fluorescence lifetime measurements are combined with imaging or spectroscopy, we integrate the BrightEyes-TTM module [ ] between the SPAD array detector and the FPGA-based control unit, as described in [ ]. In this setup, the BrightEyes-MCS also supplies the synchronization signals for the scanning process (i.e., pixel clock, line clock, and frame clock) to the BrightEyes-TTM. The BrightEyes-TTM also receives synchronization signals from the pulsed laser to measure photon arrival times relative to the fluorophore excitation event.

## Fluorescence correlation calculation and analysis
We calculated the correlations directly on the lists of absolute photon times [ ]. For spot-variation analysis, the photon lists from different subsets of SPAD array elements (chosen to mimic increasing detection volumes) were merged, and correlations were calculated for each observation volume. The temporal data was split into chunks of 5 or 10 s, and for each chunk, the correlations were calculated. The individual correlation curves were visually inspected, and all curves without artifacts were averaged. For both single-point and circular scanning [ ] FCS, the correlation curves were fitted with a one- or two-component model, depending on the sample, assuming a Gaussian detection volume, as described in [ ]. A detailed description of the fitting functions can be found in the . For measurements with fluorescent beads, a one diffusing component model was used; for aS measurements, typically, a two diffusing components model was necessary (it is stated in the manuscript when another model is used). When the two-component model was used, we approximated the components to have the same brightness, as the low labeling ratio used (∼1.4%) prevented us from seeing many fluorescent labels per cluster. We kept a low aS labeling ratio to not interfere with the phase separation process of aS [ , ]. The goodness of the fit was always checked by evaluating the reduced chi-squared and the Bayesian information criterion. For all FCS measurements acquired with the SPAD array detector, the correlation curves shown in the manuscript are related to the sum of the 25 SPAD channels (i.e., the largest detection volume). For the circular FCS measurements [ ], the periodicity and radius of the scan movement were kept fixed while the autocorrelation amplitude, diffusion time, and focal spot size were fitted. This procedure was used for the fluorescent beads and allowed the different focal spot sizes to be calibrated. For the conventional FCS measurements, the focal spot size was fixed at the values found with circular scanning FCS, and the amplitude and diffusion times were fitted. The diffusion coefficient D can be calculated from the diffusion time τD and the focal spot size ω0 via D = /(4τD). For the fluorescence lifetime measurements, we measured the instrument response function of the complete setup (microscope, detector, and BrightEyes-TTM) using a solution of atto-495 (fluorescence lifetime in H2O = 1 ns).

## Detection volumes calibration
The detection volumes of the SPAD array detector were calibrated by circular scanning FCS [ ]. Specifically, we measure the diffusion times of a sample of FluoroSpheres (YG, REF F8787, 2% solids, 20 nm diameter, actual size 27 nm, exc./em. 505/515 nm, Invitrogen, Thermo Fisher, Waltham, MA, USA) diluted in ultrapure water 1 to 5000 and drop-casted on top of a glass coverslip. The fluorescence intensity was acquired for ∼120 s and analyzed offline. All measurements were performed at room temperature. The detection volumes ω0 are 350, 370, 404, and 420 nm for the SPAD array detector, respectively, from the smallest to the largest ω0, Supplementary Fig. S1, and 338 nm for the single-point SPAD.

## Statistical analysis
Statistical analysis was performed through OriginLab software, Version 2020 (OriginLab Corporation, Northampton, MA, USA). For each dataset, we performed a Shapiro–Wilk test to check the normality of the data distribution. When the hypothesis of normality was rejected, a non-parametric test (Mann–Whitney or Kruskal–Wallis tests) followed by a post hoc test (Dunn’s or Conover’s tests) was performed. When the hypothesis of normality was accepted, an ANOVA one-way parametric test followed by a Tukey’s test was performed. The exact P-values are reported in .

## Results

## In vitro reconstitution of α-synuclein phase separation
We first characterized the diffusivity of purified full-length aS via FCS in phosphate buffer (PB), under non-LLPS-inducing conditions (Fig.  , top). A one-diffusing component model was sufficient to fit the FCS autocorrelation data, hinting at a uniform, noninteracting population of freely diffusing molecules (Supplementary Fig. S2). The retrieved diffusion coefficient, Dapp = 134 ± 4 μm2/s, and its related hydrodynamic radius, rH = 1.65 ± 0.05 nm (calculated with the Stokes–Einstein formalism), are both compatible with literature values for monomeric aS [ , ].
Regarding the aS LLPS assay, the protein has been reported to undergo LLPS at concentrations ranging from 5 to 500 μM upon different concentrations of the molecular crowder polyethylene glycol (PEG-8000, henceforth referred to as PEG). Only at high concentrations (500 μM), spontaneous LLPS occurs in the absence of a crowder [ ]. These extremely high concentrations are far from endogenous levels, making them biologically less relevant. Therefore, we performed all LLPS measurements at an aS concentration of 50 μM, which approximates its reported concentration in synapses [ ]. At 50 μM, LLPS was observed only in the presence of PEG, which acts to reduce the energy barrier for phase separation [ ]. For PEG to function as a suitable molecular crowder, it should promote aS LLPS by lowering the threshold concentration required for phase separation while not inducing phase separation in biomolecules that do not inherently undergo this process. To assess the suitability of a 20% PEG buffer (20% PEG in 20 mM PB) for LLPS, we used GFP as a negative control [ ]. GFP is a stably folded protein that lacks intrinsic phase-separating properties and is expected to remain homogeneously distributed in solution without forming condensates or aggregates. As expected, confocal microscopy images of GFP in 20% PEG buffer confirmed a homogeneous distribution of the protein (Supplementary Fig. S3A).
Next, we measured the effect of PEG on aS LLPS at two different concentrations (10% and 20%). In the presence of 10% PEG, the protein at the concentration of 50 μM has been reported not to undergo immediate and spontaneous macroscopic phase separation, while at the higher concentrations (20% PEG) it is supposed to form micrometer-sized, optically resolvable liquid-like condensates [ ]. As expected, confocal images do not reveal the formation of a visible, macroscopic dense phase at 10% PEG (Supplementary Fig. S3B). Although macroscopic phase separation does not occur, FCS measurements detect multiple diffusing components. This may suggest that small, diffraction-limited condensates or nanoscale assemblies may be present, even under sub-saturation conditions. Specifically, upon the addition of PEG, the autocorrelation function G(τ) could not be described anymore by a one-diffusing component model (Supplementary Fig. S5A). By employing a two-diffusing component model, we detected the presence of a fast diffusing component with Dapp = 66 ± 4 μm2/s and a slow diffusing one with Dapp = 0.66 ± 0.19 μm2/s (Supplementary Fig. S5A).
Further increasing the concentration of PEG to 20% triggers macroscopic LLPS, which is confirmed by the formation of spherical, micron-sized condensates (Fig.  , middle and bottom). To characterize the diffusivity of aS at the nanoscale, we performed FCS measurements in the dilute and dense phases (Fig.  ; Supplementary Fig. S5B and C). Compared to the dilute phase, the autocorrelation curve G(τ) of the dense phase shows a smaller amplitude G(0) and a shift towards longer time delays. The amplitude of the autocorrelation curve is inherently linked to the average number of molecules within the observation volume, confirming a higher concentration of molecules in the dense phase (Supplementary Information). The observed shift of G(τ) of the dense phase toward longer time delays suggests slower diffusivity compared to the dilute phase, potentially indicative of protein oligomerization or increased viscosity (Fig.  – ). Notably, the characteristic diffusion time τD of the autocorrelation curve (the time at which the correlation amplitude halves) is directly related to the diffusion coefficient and, consequently, the diffusivity of the sample. A longer τD suggests slower diffusivity, whereas a shorter τD indicates faster molecular motion.
As for 10% PEG, two distinct diffusing components are detected in the FCS curves for both phases (Supplementary Fig. S5B and C). To characterize them further, we analyzed their diffusion modes by performing svFCS. If the diffusing species moves with Brownian motion, the diffusion time will decrease or increase correspondingly as the observation area changes. If the diffusion time τD does not scale proportionally with the observation area , the type of movement in the sample is no longer described by free diffusion. By plotting the diffusion law τD) (the diffusion time versus the observation area), we can evaluate the type of movement with linear regression: if the intercept of the linear regression τD is 0, molecules are freely diffusing; if negative, molecules are highly restricted in mobility (such as inside the dense meshwork of the cytoskeleton); if positive, molecules are moving in a domain-confined sample (Fig.  ) [ ]. In the latter, the intercept value is directly proportional to the confinement strength, which reflects the energy barrier needed for the molecules to exit the micro-domain [ ].
 The svFCS analysis revealed a free diffusion mode for the fast diffusing component ( 
ms for the dilute phase, 
ms for the dense phase, Fig.  ). We hypothesized that the fast component refers to monomeric aS, freely diffusing in both dilute and dense phases. To validate our hypothesis, we analyzed the τD distribution for the fast diffusing component in both phases (Fig.  ). Overall, the diffusion time τD can be influenced by changes in viscosity and/or hydrodynamic radius (Supplementary Information). Assuming that the viscosity of the dilute phase (20% PEG buffer) is constant over time, τD is mainly affected by changes in the hydrodynamic radius and, ultimately, in the mono- or oligomeric state of aS. To estimate τD of the monomeric aS in LLPS buffer (20% PEG), we measured the one of GFP in both PB and LLPS buffer (Supplementary Fig. S4). Since it does not phase separate or oligomerize, GFP is commonly used to study changes in viscosity in phase separation buffers [ ]. Thereby, potential changes in the GFP diffusion time between PB and LLPS buffers are exclusively due to a difference in the buffer viscosity (Supplementary Fig. S3A). Comparing τD of GFP measured in both buffers, we retrieved the viscosity of the 20% PEG buffer and, ultimately, the expected τD of monomeric aS for the same buffer ( 
ms, Supplementary Fig. S4). The median of the τD distribution of the dilute phase (τD = 1.80 ms, Fig.  ) corresponds well to the τD associated with the monomeric protein, confirming that aS is mainly organized in a freely diffusing monomeric state within the dilute phase. On the other hand, the heterogeneous τD distribution of the dense phase reflects a more complex micro-environment (Fig.  ). Comparing the percentage of the fast diffusing component for both phases, we measured a higher percentage of the aS fast component for the dilute phase, hinting again at a more complex micro-environment inside the condensates (Fig.  ).
 Regarding the slow diffusing component, svFCS revealed non-Brownian motion for the dense and dilute phases, as, in both, the intercept of the linear regression of the diffusion law is not zero ( 
ms for the dilute phase,  ms for the dense phase, Fig.  ). Regarding the non-Brownian component present in the dilute phase, several studies have shown that crowded environments, such as those mimicked by PEG, can induce anomalous diffusion of proteins or molecular complexes that would otherwise freely diffuse in solution [ ]. This phenomenon is generally attributed to factors such as the temporary, dynamic mesh-like network formed by PEG molecules, excluded volume effects, or the combination of these elements. Interestingly, anomalous diffusion becomes more pronounced as the size of the molecular complex increases [ ]. This explains why only the slow-diffusing component of the dilute phase, rather than the fast component, is affected. In addition to the crowder effect, nanoclusters may interact with aS molecules in the surrounding solution or with other clusters, especially in scenarios where they act as precursors to macro-condensates. These interactions can further explain or contribute to deviations from the free diffusion behavior.
Apart from the non-Brownian diffusion, the slow-diffusing component in the dilute phase exhibits Dapp of 0.60 ± 0.08 μm2/s, corresponding to clusters with rH = 69 ± 12 nm. Mass photometric studies on aS phase-separated systems already proposed the presence of diffraction-limited assemblies, referred to as nanoclusters, under the same conditions (50 μM aS in 20% PEG buffer) [ ]. Along with the nanoscale size, the slow-diffusing component in the dilute phase has all the properties attributed to nanoclusters: (i) the formation is immediate and spontaneous; (ii) the assembly also occurs upon sub-saturated concentrations, where no instantaneous macroscopic LLPS is triggered (10% PEG buffer) [ ]. All these observations allow us to associate the slow diffusing component in the dilute phase with nanoclusters. Notably, at subsaturated conditions (10% PEG), nanoclusters are larger than the ones in 20% PEG buffer (rH = 93 ± 9 nm for 10% PEG).
While the non-Brownian motion of nanoclusters can be attributed to obstacles in the surrounding solution (e.g. PEG-induced crowding, nanocluster fusion), the domain-confined diffusion of aS in the dense phase arises from a different mechanism. In the dense phase, FCS measurements of aS were performed in internal regions of non-moving macro-condensates. The non-Brownian diffusion observed for aS within these condensates reflects their heterogeneous internal structure, with certain micro-domains where aS diffusion is restricted. For the dense phase, we speculate that domain-confined aS reflects the portion of aS forming weak intermolecular interactions, which are essential for condensate formation. In contrast, the freely diffusing portion is the one readily exchanged with the external environment.

## RNA does not affect the α-synuclein dilute phase
Once we had characterized the diffusivity of aS under LLPS conditions, we studied the potential effect of RNA on the same in vitro system. In this work, we used total yeast RNA (henceforth referred to as RNA), which is known to undergo phase transitions in a PEG-based buffer. Depending on the concentration and the molecular weight of PEG, total RNA undergoes phase separation, forming either liquid-like, round-shaped condensates or irregular-shaped structures (tangles) [ ]. To confirm the behavior of RNA in LLPS buffer (20% PEG), we tested three different concentrations of RNA (5, 50, and 500 ng/μl) labeled with SYTO™13 under the same LLPS conditions used for aS. By confocal imaging, we confirm the spontaneous formation of spherical condensates at all RNA concentrations (Fig.  , first column).
 Next, aS and RNA were combined, and phase separation was triggered in the LLPS buffer. When aS LLPS is induced in the presence of RNA, the dense phase shows an irregular shape rather than the spherical one obtained for RNA- or protein-only condensates (Figs and  , and Supplementary Fig. S3C). In the presence of RNA, aS forms smaller droplets attached in a longer chain, a sign that the coalescence into larger condensates is impaired [ ]. Similar structures, or tangles, have been already observed in RNA-only conditions upon high salt concentrations [ ].
Liquid-like condensates commonly exhibit a spherical shape due to surface tension, while aggregated aS is packed in irregular-shaped and fibrillar structures. For this reason, circularity is an ideal parameter for discriminating between liquid-like and solid-like condensates [ ]. We analyzed several confocal images to quantify the circularity [4π(area/perimeter2)] of condensates in the presence or absence of total RNA (Supplementary Fig. S8A). We observed a strong reduction of the parameter (1 indicates a perfect sphere, 0 indicates a more elongated shape) upon adding RNA (Supplementary Fig. S8B). The loss in the circularity and the structural transition towards an irregular shape suggests that aS, in the presence of total RNA, phase separates into tangles. Interestingly, these structures were never observed for the aS-only condensates. Moreover, no visible concentration-dependent effect regarding the size and number of tangles can be appreciated by confocal images (Fig.  ). The RNA staining with the nucleic acid dye SYTO™85 revealed the co-localization of RNA with the protein, confirming the actual recruitment of the nucleic acid within the aS dense phase (Fig.  ).
We performed svFCS in both dilute and dense phases to explore the effect of RNA on aS LLPS at the nanoscale. As an initial step, we ruled out any potential changes in the viscosity of the LLPS buffer caused by the addition of RNA, as this could affect τD and thus future considerations regarding the molecular organization of aS in the dilute phase (Supplementary Fig. S6). Measurements were acquired at all three previously tested RNA concentrations to assess any potential concentration-dependent effects on molecular mobility. As for the protein-only LLPS system, conventional FCS measurements within the dilute phase revealed the presence of two diffusing components (Supplementary Fig. S7A–C). Regarding the fast diffusing component in the dilute phase, svFCS analysis indicated that aS freely diffuses in the sample ( 
ms, respectively for 5, 50, and 500 ng/μl RNA, Fig.  ). The distribution of the diffusion times τD associated with the fast component shows that the freely diffusing protein within the dilute phase is mainly monomeric. Additionally, the median of the distributions is comparable with the one measured for aS-only dilute phase (Fig.  for 500 ng/μl RNA, Supplementary Fig. S7D for 5 and 50 ng/μl RNA). Possibly, this component represents the monomeric aS not participating in the condensate formation. Surprisingly, while no differences are seen in the dilute phase in terms of diffusivity when RNA is present, the average percentage of aS monomers (fast diffusing component) is higher at low RNA concentrations (5 and 50 ng/μl). This effect disappears when RNA concentration increases up to 500 ng/μl. Indeed, at the highest tested RNA concentration, the aS diffusivity does not change compared to the protein-only condition (Fig.  ).
The slow diffusing component in the dilute phase exhibits micro-domain confinement as diffusion mode across all tested RNA concentrations ( 
ms for 5, 50, and 500 ng/μl RNA, respectively, Fig.  ). Apart from anomalously diffusing , this component represents nanometer-sized aS clusters (rH = 71 ± 10, 62 ± 9, and 75 ± 6 nm for 5, 50, and 500 ng/μl RNA, respectively, Fig.  ). The aS slow-diffusing component exhibits all the features previously attributed to nanoclusters, and its detection provides evidence that nanocluster formation occurs even in the presence of RNA. No significant differences in the confinement strength τD(0) are observed across the three RNA concentrations (Fig.  ). Despite no significative changes in size upon RNA addition (Fig.  ), we observed an increase in the confinement strength of nanoclusters from the aS-only to the aS+RNA condition. We speculate that RNA may induce a more heterogeneous surrounding medium or promote transient interactions at the nanocluster surface, thereby further constraining their mobility.

## RNA alters material properties of α-synuclein dense phase
Fibrillar structures similar to the ones obtained for aS and RNA were already observed for the phase separation of RNA-binding proteins in the presence of RNA and were associated with a less dynamic state [ ]. However, while the irregular shape of these tangles suggests a solid-like nature, neither confocal imaging nor svFCS can offer insights into the dense phase of aS when RNA is present. Specifically, FCS measurements show no correlation in any RNA condition. We speculate that the absence of correlation among fluorescence fluctuations stems from reduced liquid-like properties inside the tangles. The highly constrained environment of aS molecules within solid-like condensates hints toward the presence of a substantial immobile fraction, which makes FCS an unsuitable method to study diffusivity. The presence of a significant immobile fraction and the irregular shape of the dense phase further support the hypothesis that RNA actively contributes to the transition towards solid-like aS condensates. For this reason, alternative approaches beyond FCS and related methods should be considered.
As a sensor of the molecular environment, fluorescence lifetime is a promising alternative for probing the different material properties of biomolecular complexes. Certain dyes exhibit changes in fluorescence lifetime in response to a variety of physical parameters, including quenching, molecular crowding, viscosity, pH, and ion composition [ , , ]. The effect on the fluorescence lifetime trend, whether shorter or longer, is highly dependent on the intrinsic properties of the fluorophore and the underlying mechanisms. From an instrumental point of view, the SPAD array detector combined with the time-tagged detection allows the analysis of the photon-resolved dataset at both the micro-second scale requested by FCS and the sub-nanosecond scale requested by fluorescence lifetime. This allows us to correlate diffusion and fluorescence lifetime analysis on the same measurement [ , ].
We measured the fluorescence lifetime (τL) of aS-atto488 both in dilute and dense phases, with and without RNA. In the dilute phase, we observed no variations in the fluorescence lifetime for all the conditions, except for the 5 ng/μl RNA condition (Fig.  ). Interestingly, svFCS measurements revealed that the dilute phase is mainly composed of monomeric aS, with the 5 ng/μl RNA condition differing in the percentage of fast-diffusing monomers over nanoclusters. In the 5 ng/μl RNA condition, the monomer ratio is indeed higher than that observed for aS-only (Fig.  ). For the dense phase, shorter average lifetime values were measured within condensates for all conditions when compared to the dilute phase. Surprisingly, a significative reduction in the fluorescence lifetime values is also observed between protein-only condensates and aS-RNA tangles. This observation agrees well with the scenario in which RNA actively contributes to the liquid-to-solid transition of aS. The trend in the fluorescence lifetime is independent of the RNA concentration, suggesting that RNA increases the overall condensation/aggregation propensity of the protein irrespective of its concentration (Fig.  ).
 The reduction of aS-atto488 fluorescence lifetime within condensates cannot be universally attributed to the condensation degree, as multiple factors may contribute to this effect. As liquid-like condensates mature into aged or solid-like condensates, molecules and their attached dyes are brought into closer proximity. For certain dyes, this increased molecular packing can lead to shorter τL values due to self-quenching [ ]. While the exact mechanism underlying the changes in aS-atto488 fluorescence lifetime remains unclear, self-quenching and a higher packing density of aS molecules in condensates (compared to monomers) and tangles (compared to aS-only condensates) represent a possible explanation. In this context, the increased percentage of monomers in the 5 ng/μl RNA condition correlates well with the longer retrieved lifetime.
We acknowledge that the fluorescence lifetime alone may not be a definitive indicator of the physical state of condensates. Thereby, in addition to the morphological differences between aS condensates and tangles already discussed, we also tested the liquid-like properties by assessing the reversibility of the aS condensates under all four conditions. We diluted the 20% PEG buffer twice in PB. After 20 min upon dilution, we observed the almost complete dissolution of the aS-only condensates, while the aS–RNA tangles reduced their size but did not fully disappear (Fig.  ). As the dilution reduces the crowding effect of the buffer (by effectively reducing the PEG concentration), if the condensates are purely liquid-like, they will dissolve; if they are partially or completely solid-like, they will not.

## Discussion
Our study demonstrates the significant impact of RNA on the phase separation and aggregation of aS at the nanoscale using photon-resolved microscopy.
In the absence of RNA, we showed that aS immediately and spontaneously forms nanoclusters in the dilute phase, even below the saturation concentration required for macroscopic phase separation. This aligns with recent findings that phase separation can occur at much lower concentrations within cells than previously assumed [ ]. The role and eventual maturation of nanoclusters in LLPS systems remain unknown, with some remaining independent, metastable structures, and some others coalescing into larger condensates [ ]. For aS, it has been proposed that they act as precursors to macro-condensates, thus potentially having an active role in the protein phase transitions [ ].
When RNA is introduced, aS still exhibits two diffusing components in the dilute phase: freely diffusing monomers and anomalously diffusing nanoclusters. Although RNA does not significantly alter the nanocluster size, it modulates the monomer/nanocluster ratio. Lower RNA concentrations reduce nanocluster prevalence, indicating a potential negative impact of RNA on nanocluster formation. Moreover, RNA enhances the confinement strength experienced by aS nanoclusters. While monomeric aS in the dilute phase likely does not interact with RNA, as suggested by the absence of diffusion changes, it remains unclear whether RNA is present within nanoclusters. However, the observed differences in confinement strength could provide a basis for possible interactions between of RNA and aS in nanoclusters, potentially affecting their diffusion mode. This nuanced role of RNA in modulating aS diffusivity suggests that the effect of RNA on aS dilute phase probably depends more on its sequence and structure rather than its concentration.
In the dense phase, RNA promotes the liquid-to-solid transition of aS, as evidenced by the reduced circularity of the dense phase and the formation of irregular, more solid-like tangles. Additionally, both the resistance to buffer dilution of aS–RNA tangles and the absence of aS fluorescence intensity fluctuations in aS–RNA condensates hint at immobile molecules and support the hypothesis of their solid-like nature. While the different morphology suggests changes at the microscale, the shorter fluorescence lifetime observed within these tangles (compared to aS-only condensates) indicates that RNA incorporation also influences aS condensates at the nanoscale. Similar behaviors have been observed for other organic dyes in phase transition studies, where a shorter fluorescence lifetime has been linked to more aged condensates [ , ] or aggregates [ , , ]. Although further investigation is needed to identify the mechanism underlying the change in aS-atto488 fluorescence lifetime, the higher degree of molecular compaction in aS–RNA condensates may provide a potential explanation for the observed fluorescence lifetime trend.
In a more general context, RNA is known to significantly impact protein aggregation, with certain RNA structures promoting or inhibiting these processes depending on their interaction with the protein [ ]. We have previously observed that certain RNA species are relevant for LLPS, but it is also plausible that other species are crucial for the liquid-to-solid phase transition [ , , ]. This distinction underscores the complexity of the role of RNA in protein aggregation and highlights the need for further research to delineate these effects.
In its monomeric form, the intrinsic flexibility of aS typically prevents stable interactions with RNA, except for RNA G-quadruplexes structures [ ]. While aS is not traditionally classified as an RNA-binding protein, computational predictions indicate a potential for RNA binding [ ], which becomes biologically relevant during aggregation. Under aggregation conditions, the N-terminal region of aS is exposed to the solvent and available for RNA interactions. This results in RNA acting as a molecular bridge between the N-terminus of different aS molecules, bringing them closer [ ].
Condensates create a chemically diverse environment where RNA can partition due to multiple factors. RNA incorporation into condensates can be influenced by its own solubility and self-interaction properties, as well as by conformational changes of aS within the dense phase that enhance its affinity for RNA. As for aggregates, we speculate that aS adopts an RNA-binding conformation even under the conditions investigated here, promoting the formation of aS–RNA tangles. Within liquid-like condensates, the extremely high concentrations of aS [ ] may induce structural changes that expose RNA-binding regions, facilitating more specific interactions, such as those with G-rich RNA, that are otherwise transient in solution. This shift from non-binding to RNA-binding states underscores the dynamic nature of aS and its functional versatility in different aggregation and, eventually, phase-separated states.
Under stress conditions, G-quadruplex RNAs, especially synaptic mRNAs, phase separate and, as a result, directly interact with the aS N-terminal region, accelerating protein aggregation and synaptic dysfunction [ ]. As with many amyloidogenic proteins, aS is also predicted to interact with its cognate RNA, thus modulating its own expression and aggregation rate [ ]. Even non-coding RNAs seem to have the potential to interact with aS [ ]. Taking into consideration the complexity of RNA in aS phase transitions, this work employs total RNA, thus ensuring an even distribution in terms of RNA structures and compositions. Our study elucidates the role of total RNA in in vitro aS phase transitions and provides an initial foundation for understanding how aS exploits liquid–liquid and liquid-to-solid transitions in its physiological and pathological roles.
The presence of aS in multicomponent MLOs, such as processing bodies [ ], and its in vitro LLPS dependence on molecular crowders, suggest that aS alone probably does not spontaneously drive LLPS like canonical phase-separating proteins (e.g., TDP43 and FUS) [ , ]. Biomolecular condensates are indeed composed of scaffold molecules, which initiate the phase separation process, and client molecules, which are subsequently recruited into the condensate [ ]. In this context, it is plausible that aS acts as a client, as has been shown for aS/Tau condensates [ ]. However, the ability of aS to partition into condensates indicates that it can leverage LLPS to mediate both physiological and pathological functions. Notably, interactions with lipids and other cellular components promote the aS liquid-to-solid transition, reinforcing the hypothesis that aS acts in synergy with other biomolecules to regulate its phase transitions [ ].
Finally, given the complex, multiscale nature of LLPS processes, integrating multiple quantitative methods is crucial for uncovering the underlying mechanisms. Our photon-resolved platform represents a powerful tool for studying protein phase transitions [ ]. Furthermore, as this framework is compatible with living cells, it is also suitable for studying aS LLPS in more complex environments where it is physiologically coupled with RNA. This understanding could ultimately facilitate the development of therapeutic strategies targeting the early stages of protein aggregation in neurodegenerative diseases.

## Supplementary Material
ugaf012_Supplemental_File

## Acknowledgements
We thank all members of the Molecular Microscopy and Spectroscopy group and the RNA Systems Biology group at the Istituto Italiano di Tecnologia (IIT); Simone Civita and Matteo Mariangeli (Nanoscopy & NIC@IIT, IIT) for valuable discussions; Dr. Michele Oneto and Dr. Marco Scotto (Nikon Imaging Center, IIT) for support on the experiments; Prof. Alberto Tosi, Prof. Federica Villa, Dr. Mauro Buttafava (Politecnico di Milano), Dr. Marco Castello, and Dr. Simonluca Piazza (Genoa Instruments) for the realization of the single-photon-avalanche-diode detector array; all members of the RNA Initiative at the Istituto Italiano di Tecnologia, Prof. Stefano Gustincich (non-coding RNAs and RNA-based therapeutics, IIT) and Dr. Francesco Nicassio (Genomics Science, IIT) for their contribution to the long-term vision of this project.
Author contributions: G.V. and S.Z. conceptualized the study. E.P., E.S., and G.V. developed the methodology. E.S. designed the software and resources, and both E.S. and E.P. performed data curation. Formal analysis was conducted by E.P. and S.Z. The investigation was carried out by S.Z. and J.R., who prepared the protein samples, with S.Z. conducting the experiments. E.Z., G.G.T., E.P., and G.V. supervised the project. G.V. also managed project administration. S.Z., E.P., and J.R. wrote the original draft of the manuscript, and all authors contributed to reviewing and editing the final version.

## Supplementary data
Supplementary data is available at NAR Molecular Medicine online.

## Conflict of interest
G.V. has a personal financial interest (co-founder) in Genoa Instruments, Italy.

## Funding
This project has received funding from: the Compagnia San Paolo, “Augmented fluorescence correlation spectroscopy with a novel SPAD array detector to observe complex biological processes in living cells,” Trapezio No.71100 (E.P.); the European Research Council, “BrightEyes,” ERC-CoG No. 818699 (G.V.), “ASTRA,” ERC-SyG No. 855923 (G.G.T.); the European Innovation Council, “ivBM-4PAP,” Pathfinder No. 101098989 (G.G.T.); the NextGeneration EU PNRR MUR - M4C2 - Action 1.4 - Call ‘Potenziamento strutture di ricerca e creazione di ‘campioni nazionali di R&S’ (CUP J33C22001130001), “National Center for Gene Therapy and Drugs based on RNA Technology,,” No. CN00000041 (S.Z, G.G.T., and G.V.).

## Data availability
All the codes used for analyzing the photon time-tagging measurements (fluorescence lifetime fluctuation spectroscopy) have been deposited in the GitHub BrightEyes-TTM repository as a part of a larger open-hardware/software project that aims at democratizing single-photon laser-scanning microscopy based on SPAD array detector [ ], and it is available also on Zenodo (https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.7064910) [ ]. All the data, images, and file measurements used for the manuscript have been deposited on the IIT Dataverse repository (https://doi.org/10.48557/SFXH9V).

## Notes
Present address: Laboratory of Molecular Neuroscience, German Center for Neurodegenerative Diseases, Venusberg-Campus 1/99, 53127 Bonn, Germany