319nihpaCell reportsCell RepPMC132072081320720813207208NIHMS21707604186536910.1016/j.celrep.2026.117103Gene regulatory network determinants of rapid recall in human memory CD4+ T cells
KatkoAlexander KorinfskayaSvetlana BejjaniAnthony T OwoeyeSeyifunmi M YangZi F RudrapatnaAkshata N PotterSarah WaymanJoseph A KotliarMichael KottyanLeah C BarskiArtem MiraldiEmily R 1Division of Immunobiology, Cincinnati Children’s Hospital Medical Center, Cincinnati, OH 45229, USA2Division of Allergy and Immunology, Cincinnati Children’s Hospital Medical Center, Cincinnati, OH 45229, USA3Division of Human Genetics, Cincinnati Children’s Hospital Medical Center, Cincinnati, OH 45229, USA4Department of Pediatrics, University of Cincinnati College of Medicine, Cincinnati, OH 45267, USA5Division of Biomedical Informatics, Cincinnati Children’s Hospital Medical Center, Cincinnati, OH 45229, USA6These authors contributed equally7Lead contactAUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS
A.B. and E.R.M. conceived the study. A.B. and E.R.M. designed the experiments, which were executed and optimized by S.K. and S.P. A.K. and E.R.M. designed the computational analyses, which were executed by A.K. with support from A.T.B., S.M.O., Z.F.Y., A.N.R., J.A.W., and M.K. A.K., S.K., A.B., and E.R.M. analyzed the experimental data and modeling results. A.K., S.K., A.B., and E.R.M. wrote the manuscript. All authors provided feedback on the manuscript.
*Correspondence: artem.barski@ccchmc.org (A.B.), emily.miraldi@cchmc.org (E.R.M.)
20320264541171031171032752026This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/).The publisher's version of this article is available at Cell RepPrevious version available: This article is based on a previously available preprint posted on bioRxiv on November 24, 2025: "
Gene regulatory network determinants of rapid recall in human memory CD4+ T cells
".

## SUMMARY
Rapid recall is the hallmark of memory T cells. While naive cells require days to mount effector responses to new threats, antigen-experienced memory cells produce cytokines within hours of a repeat encounter. Compared to naive cells, memory cells exhibit enhanced chromatin accessibility proximal to rapid-recall genes, but the transcription factors (TFs) that establish, maintain, and utilize these putative regulatory elements are unknown. We leverage single-nuclei multiome sequencing (gene expression and chromatin accessibility) to characterize the dynamic activation responses of CD4+ T cells and reconstruct the underlying gene regulatory networks. Memory-associated TFs (MAF, PRDM1, RUNX2, SMAD3, and KLF6) are predicted to orchestrate rapid recall. KLF6 binding to its predicted target genes is confirmed by chromatin immunoprecipitation sequencing, while the memory-associated activities of all five factors replicate in independent single-cell RNA sequencing studies. Integrating genome-wide association study data, we nominate CD4+ T cell populations and gene regulatory mechanisms that might underlie genetic risk to immune-mediated diseases.

## Graphical Abstract

 

## In brief
Katko et al. construct the gene regulatory network governing the “rapid-recall” ability of memory CD4+ T cells to quickly mount an immune defense upon repeat encounter with pathogens. A core of transcription factors, active in resting memory cells, prime chromatin proximal to rapid-recall genes and drive their expression.

statusreleaseddisplay-pdfyesis-in-collection-domainyesis-olfyesis-manuscriptyesis-preprintnois-journal-matternois-scannednois-retractednohas-published-versionno

## INTRODUCTION
Memory CD4+ T cells are critical for protective immunity and tolerance. Upon initial antigen encounter, naive CD4+ T cells undergo clonal expansion and, over several days, differentiate into cytokine-producing T helper (Th) cells. Depending on cytokine cues, differentiating naive cells acquire diverse immune capabilities: defense against intracellular pathogens (type 1 Th cells [Th1]), extracellular microbes (Th17) and large extracellular parasites (Th2), , antibody class switching and affinity maturation (T follicular helper cells [Tfh]), – and tolerance (induced regulatory T cells [iTreg]). Most effector cells die following pathogen clearance, but some survive as memory cells. – Memory cells possess a “rapid recall” (RR) ability to secrete cytokine and initiate clonal expansion within hours of antigen re-exposure, enabling pathogen defense. , In the absence of antigen, memory cells persist in a near-quiescent state, across decades and even lifespan, their powerful defense capabilities latent. Dysregulation of RR poses serious health threats: failure to mount contributes to chronic or life-threatening infections, while inappropriate, excessive responses drive allergic and autoimmune conditions. , 
The mechanisms underlying RR and its long-term maintenance are poorly understood. Both naive and memory CD4+ T cells can be activated by antigen-presenting cells (APCs). T cell receptor (TCR) stimulation by class II major histocompatibility (MHC class II)-antigen complex and co-stimulation are sufficient to activate both cell types. While differences in ZAP70, LAT, and SLP76 are described, – the activation kinetics of TCR signaling proteins are similar between naive and memory T cells, and these signals converge to activate common downstream transcription factors (TFs), including AP-1, NFAT, and NF-ĸB. , 
Naive T cell activation and differentiation dramatically alter the epigenome. Early single-gene and recent omics studies report differences in DNA methylation, – histone marks, – chromatin accessibility, , and 3D chromatin conformation. , In resting memory cells, histone modifications proximal to the cytokine , genes correlate with their rapid, activation-dependent expression, , suggesting that RR is regulated epigenetically (i.e., via chromatin state, which influences TF binding). , , , Multiple TFs regulate the expression of “rapid-recall” genes, including TCR-inducible factors (AP-1, , NFATs, and NF-ĸB ), cytokine-induced STATs, , Th subset-specific regulators (TBET, GATA3, RORC, and FOXP3 , ), and non-inducible factors (ETS and RUNX – ).
Given the large number of potential regulators, gene regulatory network (GRN) modeling is an ideal tool to elucidate TF orchestration of RR. GRNs describe gene expression control by TFs. CD4+ T cell biology has inspired novel GRN inference methods, but they have mainly focused on naive cell activation/differentiation. , , – Multi-modal, single-cell (sc) genomics technologies are needed for GRN modeling of RR, given the heterogeneity of human CD4+ T cells. Memory population includes various types of central (TCM) and effector (TEM) memory cells, distinguished by their homing, proliferation capacity, and ability to produce cytokines. , It has been notoriously difficult to resolve resting human TEM populations based on sc-transcriptomics alone. , 
Here, we apply single-nuclei multiome sequencing (sn-multiome-seq) technology (parallel transcriptome and chromatin accessibility) to a T cell activation time course of naive and memory human CD4+ T cells, to elucidate the molecular drivers of RR. Multi-modal analyses enabled the resolution of CD4+ T cell subsets across the time course, including at rest. Thousands of RR genes and accessible chromatin regions exhibited faster activation dynamics in memory versus naive cells. We built genome-scale GRNs to identify the regulators of gene expression and chromatin state across the CD4+ T cell populations, at rest and activated. Integration of genome-wide association study (GWAS) risk variants with our sc-resolved chromatin accessibility maps implicated memory Th subsets and their RR ability in inflammatory and autoimmune diseases.

## RESULTS

## Resolution of naive, TCM, and TEM populations across a T cell activation time course
To unravel the GRNs governing RR, we designed a T cell activation time course, using human blood-derived CD4+ T cells ( – , ). Cells were activated with anti-CD3/28 beads for early (2.5 h), peak memory (5 h), and late (15 h) activation time points or remained resting. We selected sn-multiome-seq to simultaneously characterize the chromatin landscape (accessibility by sn assay for transposase-accessible chromatin using sequencing (snATAC-seq) and gene expression (snRNA-seq) at single-cell resolution. To control for batch effects, resting cells from a fifth control donor were “spiked” into each experiment immediately before cell lysis; this strategy improved downstream statistical inferences ( and – , ).
 The resulting multiome-seq analyses yielded 65,862 high-quality CD4+ T cell nuclei, which comprised 15 clusters ( , see ), reproducibly recovered from each donor ( – ). Next, we aggregated gene expression or accessibility signal from individual cells to generate pseudobulk profiles per CD4+ T cell subset (e.g., Th2), time point, and donor.
We used principal component analysis (PCA) to identify the major sources of variation in the gene expression and chromatin accessibility data. Activation was the dominant source of variation (PC1) in both data types ( – ). However, for the transcriptome, PC1 was composed of genes peaking at 2.5–5 h, while for accessibility, the major trend corresponded to peaks monotonically gaining or losing accessibility. For gene expression, distinct temporal patterns dominated PCs 1–3, and PC4 was the first PC to distinguish cell types: effectors (e,g., Th1 and Th2) from non-effectors (naive, TCM, and Treg). In contrast, for ATAC-seq, the second most important trend, PC2, separated effectors from non-effectors. Hierarchical clustering complemented PCA. While transcriptomes formed four main clusters corresponding to the time points (resting, 2.5, 5, and 15 h) ( ), clustering of accessible chromatin profiles was driven by both cell type and time: all resting populations clustered together, while for activation time points, effectors and non-effectors clustered separately ( ). Thus, activation dynamics between the two assays differed, as did the relative importance of cell type versus activation-dependent variability.
Although transcriptome alone distinguished activated naive, TCM, and TEM, chromatin accessibility was key to resolving (1) resting naive versus TCM and (2) resting Th1, Th2, and Th17 populations ( and ). In the resting state, TCM and naive cells share common signatures ( ), but were distinguished by accessible chromatin proximal to, e.g., IL2 and CXCR5 ( and ). Similarly, the transcripts of signature cytokines and TFs were difficult to detect in resting Th1, Th2, and Th17 ( ), but accessibility at these loci supported our annotations ( ).
In addition to Th1/2/17, we identified two small TEM populations, “MHC class II” and “cytotoxic T lymphocyte (CTL).” Both expressed the activation markers IRF4 and CD44 and lacked the expression of the homing TCM co-stimulatory molecule CD27 ( , , and ). The MHC class II population was distinguished by elevated expression of MHC class II and antigen presentation genes (CD74, CIITA, and PSD4), at baseline and upon activation ( and ).
The CTL populations expressed markers of cytotoxicity (EOMES, GNLY, and PRF1), and activation further induced GNLY and PRF1. Mirroring Th1 and Th17 cells, CTL expressed Th1 and Th17 hallmark genes upon activation (TBX21, IFNG, and RORC, ). Activated CTL expressed RORC as robustly as Th17 cells, but without concomitant IL17A/F.
Finally, the “TCM/TEM” population was uniquely detected at activation timepoints, with cell numbers increasing from 2.5 to 15 h ( and ). The TCM/TEM cells expressed activation markers (IRF4 and CD44, and ), but with mixed central and effector memory features: expression of TCM markers SELL and LEF1 and the cytokine IL21 ( ). Globally, by both transcriptome and accessible chromatin, TCM/TEM clustered more closely with TCM than TEM, suggesting that TCM/TEM are a TCM population that gains TEM features upon TCR activation ( – ).
These CD4+ populations—and their associated transcriptomes and accessible chromatin profiles, resolved by donor and time point—served as input to the Inferelator algorithm for GRN inference ( ). , From the chromatin accessibility, we derived putative regulatory elements, using state-of-the-art neural network models, maxATAC for TF binding site (TFBS) prediction and experimentally measured promoter-enhancer interactions, , to associate the predicted TFBS with potential target genes. The resulting “prior” of TF-gene interactions was used to estimate protein TF activities (TFAs) and guide gene expression modeling (GRN inference) ( ). , The GRN describes 123,314 regulatory (TF-gene) interactions between 428 TFs and 12,314 genes ( ). GRN analyses nominated TFs involved in memory maintenance, activation responses, and subset-specific gene expression programs. To validate and refine the GRN predictions, we tested whether they (1) extrapolated to a substantially larger CD4+ T cell activation dataset (655,349 cells and 119 donors) and antigen-specific CD4+ T cell activation and (2) were substantiated by TF chromatin immunoprecipitation sequencing (ChIP-seq) and perturbation data.

## Thousands of rapid-recall genes exhibit faster, more extreme activation dynamics in memory cells
Across the CD4+ T cell populations, we identified 10,042 dynamic, activation-dependent genes: 2,086 unique to memory populations, 21 unique to naive cells, and 7,935 common to both (|log2(FC)|>0.58, false discovery rate [FDR] = 10% for ≥1 time point relative to t = 0 in ≥1 population, ). A total of 5,831 RR genes were defined by faster, more extreme dynamics in memory versus naive cells ( ). RR genes clustered according to dynamics (time point of peak expression, increasing or decreasing), and whether the trends were observed in TCM and/or TEM populations (Th1, Th2, Th17, MHC class II, and/or CTL, , , and – ). We functionally annotated the RR clusters and queried the GRN for predicted regulators ( , , and ; ).
 TEM and TCM shared several upregulated gene clusters with maximal expression at early, middle, early and middle (“early+middle”) or late time points. As swift cytokine production is a defining RR feature, early, “early+middle,” and middle RR genes are enriched in pathways essential for cytokine production, including ribosome biogenesis, translation, and protein folding. For the early and middle RR genes, the GRN identified known regulators (e.g., IRF4, BATF, NFATC1, , and NFAT5 ) but also other regulators (e.g., KLF6, POU2F2, and HIVEP3) of cytokine response and immune effector processes (clusters C1, 3, 5, and 8, ). The GRN also identified regulators of protein synthesis and transport pathways with “early+middle” cluster dynamics ( ). For example, YBX1 targets include ribosome assembly genes (URB1 and DDX46), protein folding chaperones (CCT5, CCT7, and VAPA), nucleoporins (NUP93 and NUP188), and importins (IPO11 and IPO7). Targets of IRF4, MYC, and MAX are also enriched for ribosome biogenesis. BATF, HIVEP3, MAX, PRDM1, and MNT are predicted to regulate protein localization via induction of intracellular transport (COP1 and XPOT) and protein exocytosis (CDC42 and SCFD2) genes. Many of the predicted regulators are themselves early (NFAT5, NFATC1, and BACH2), early+middle (CDC5L and GLIS3), or middle (XBP1, TBX21, and IRF4) RR genes (clusters T3–T5, and ).
The “late” RR cluster, maximal at 15 h, includes a second wave of genes supporting protein production (enriched in protein transport and folding, ER stress, and cytokine production) and a new wave of genes involved in cell proliferation (enriched in DNA replication and cell cycle, – ; ). Many regulators (e.g., VDR, NFE2L1, PLAGL1, and ATF5) of late-upregulated genes are themselves late-upregulated RR genes (cluster T7, and ).
Two gene clusters were specific to T effector memory: “TEM up” and “TEM down” ( ). TEM-up genes are dramatically upregulated (on average 3.4-fold) in TEM, relative to naive and TCM, across all time points, and display mixed dynamics, with most (87%) upregulated following activation. TEM-up genes are enriched for signaling pathways associated with canonical effector functions, including cytokines (IL2 and IL22), chemokine receptors (CCR2, CCR5, and CCR6), TFs (MAF, RORA, RUNX2, and MYBL1), and costimulatory molecules (LIGHT, CD58, and CD2). Many predicted regulators ( ) exhibit high GRN-predicted TFA in resting TEM, with a subset dynamically increasing (e.g., MAF, KLF6, and PRDM1) or decreasing (SMAD3 and RUNX2) (cluster T5, ). The TEM-down genes are more lowly expressed in resting TEM and rapidly repressed further by 2 h; they include naive-associated LEF1 and TCR signaling genes (ZAP70, TEC, and MALT1).
RR downregulated genes are nearly as numerous as upregulated genes. The “down late recovery” cluster comprises genes repressed at the 2.5 and 5 h time points, with return to baseline at 15 h. These genes are enriched for cell cycle processes, including DNA polymerases, cyclin-dependent kinases, double-stranded break repair enzymes, and origin recognition complex genes. The “down weak recovery” cluster shows similar dynamics, but these repressed genes only recover to ~50% of baseline expression by 15 h. They are enriched for endocytosis and macroautophagy genes. “Down” genes monotonically decrease. Some (PTPRC, FYB1, PIK3CA, TRAT1, and TNFRSF21) are involved in TCR signaling. Others implicate pathways that may interfere with activation: protein ubiquitination (TRIM5, BIRC2, and PRKN), autophagy (TOM1, SESN3, and SIRT1), and heterochromatin formation (MECP2 and PPM1D).
Nearly half of all RR genes were uniquely detected in a single memory subset ( – ). Although individual genes were induced in the expected populations (e.g., IL17A/F in Th17), we detected few pathway enrichments in the subset-specific RR genes. In addition to the RR genes, there were 4,694 genes with similar activation dynamics in naive and memory cells ( ; ). Mirroring RR, genes upregulated at early and middle time points were enriched for processes supporting large-scale protein production. Their predicted regulators are IRFs, STATs, XBP1, KLFs, and E2F4 ( ). Notably, RR regulators (PRDM1, MAF, RUNX2, FOXK2, KLF6, etc.) were not predicted to regulate genes with memory-naive shared activation dynamics.
We examined whether the dynamic GRN predictions extrapolated to a larger-cohort single-cell RNA sequencing (scRNA-seq) study (119 donors) profiling anti-CD3/28 activation of CD4+ T cells at 0, 16, 40, and 120 h. The zero and 16 h time points enabled comparison with our first and last time points (0 and 15h), for four populations (naive, TCM, TEM, and Treg, ). TFA dynamics replicated in the larger study, with a median Pearson correlation of 0.63 across 188 activation-dependent TFs ( ). Importantly, the Soskic et al. cohort (67 males and 52 females, ages ranging from 19 to 79 years) enabled examination of TF dependence on sex and age ( ). Age was a significant source of variation for TFs within the naive compartment only (62 out of 378 TFs), and a limited number of TFs had sex-dependent activities ( and ).

## Activated TCM diverges into highly proliferative and TEM-like cell states
Compared to TEM, TCM cells are more restricted to lymph nodes, exhibit an increased proliferative capacity and reduced production of effector cytokines. , Our study enabled the exploration of activation-dependent TCM function and regulatory mechanisms, relative to TEM. The TCM were composed of three populations: TCM, TCM/TEM, and “proliferating TCM” ( ), which were reproducibly detected in the larger-cohort study ( ).
 Relative to TEM populations at 15 h, the induced RR genes of TCM were enriched for cell-proliferation genes ( ; ). This enrichment is driven by the “proliferating TCM” subpopulation. Proliferating TCMs are a transcriptional state, apparent only from clustering cell transcriptomes, independently of accessible chromatin data ( ). This result mirrors our earlier finding that proliferation genes are poised (i.e., have a chromatin environment similar to expressed genes) in resting T cells. The proliferating TCM state was primarily detected at 15 h (95% of cells) and accessed by both TCM and TCM/TEM cells ( ). Multiple analyses suggest enhanced proliferative potential: the proliferating TCM had increased expression of DNA replication genes ( ), the largest proportion of cells in predicted S, G2, or M phases at 15 h (padj < 0.1, pairwise t tests, ) and the strongest expression of cell cycle genes with “late-increasing” RR dynamics (black box, ). From the GRN, five TFs (SP4, ZNF749, ZBTB14, ZNF704, and NPAS2) were predicted to enhance cell cycle progression in TCM; these TFs had higher TFA in TCM than TEM, and their targets were enriched in cell cycle genes ( ). Some of these factors (SP4, ZNF704, , and NPAS2 ) were associated with proliferation in other cell types.
Cytokine-stimulated human TCM can be polarized into a “pre-TEM” state, suggesting that TCM might replenish TEM in inflammatory conditions. , Our TCM/TEM population may represent a “pre-TEM” state. By genome-scale transcriptome and accessibility analysis, TCM/TEM most closely resemble TCM ( – ), suggesting that activation caused a subset of TCM cells to adopt effector features. Relative to TCM, the TCM/TEM have increased expression of cytokine genes ( and ) and increased accessibility at effector loci ( ). From the GRN, we uncovered a core of underlying TFs, distinguishing TCM/TEM from TCM ( ). Several TFs from the TEM core ( ), including MAF, KLF6, PRDM1, and RORA, were predicted to promote TCM acquisition of effector phenotypes. Additionally, our analysis implicated TET2, whose transcript was increased in TCM/TEM relative to both TEM and TCM populations ( ). TET2’s DNA demethylation activity reshapes the chromatin landscape during Th differentiation. , Thus, TET2 may likewise remodel chromatin in the putative transition of TCM to TCM/TEM. In addition to the TCM/TEM-defining gene transcripts, most of the TFAs distinguishing TCM/TEM from TCM were reproduced by analysis of TCM from Soskic et al. ( and ), and the predicted transition of TCM to TCM/TEM was supported by a compositional increase in TCM/TEM cells from 16 to 40 h ( ).
Collectively, our findings suggest that activated TCM have greater proliferative potential than TEM and may serve as a reservoir for TEM cells. GRN analysis identified potential regulators of both processes.

## Accessible chromatin regions exhibit rapid-recall dynamics
Having characterized transcriptional activation responses, we next investigated the underlying chromatin accessibility landscape. Of the 324,074 accessible chromatin regions (“peaks”) identified in our study, 157,355 were dynamic (83,317 unique to memory, 5,452 unique to naive, and 68,586 dynamic in both, ). Mirroring RR genes, 46,134 “rapid recall peaks” were defined based on faster, higher-amplitude activation-induced opening or closing in memory versus naive cells ( ). Unlike RR genes, which compose most dynamic genes (58%), RR peaks are a smaller fraction of all dynamic peaks (29%). In addition, while RR genes comprised nearly equal numbers of up- and downregulated genes, RR peaks primarily gained accessibility during activation (78%).
The RR peaks clustered into seven dynamic patterns ( and ). Accessibility in the “early open” cluster peaked at 2.5 h and diminished slightly at subsequent timepoints. The “middle open” cluster monotonically gained accessibility. The “middle open TEM” cluster was elevated in resting TEM and gained accessibility across the time course. There were two “late-opening” clusters with maximal accessibility at 15 h. They were distinguished by the magnitude of accessibility increase between 0 and 15 h, which was 9-fold for the “late open strong” cluster and 2-fold for the “late open weak” cluster. Finally, activation rapidly diminished accessibility in the “rapid closed” and “rapid closed TEM” clusters. These peak dynamics are exemplified within RR gene loci: CD58 (early open), VIM (middle open), MAF (middle open TEM), and LEF1 (rapid close) ( ). We also identified 39,622 activation-dependent peaks with similar dynamics between memory and naive cells ( ).
 We linked RR peaks (putative enhancers) with their potential gene targets. Fifty-three percent of the RR peaks were promoter-proximal (±5 kb of a gene TSS). Relative to all accessible chromatin regions in our study, RR peaks were more frequently gene-distal (odds ratio [OR] = 2.1, p < 0.001) and likely to form promoter-enhancer interactions , (OR = 1.4, p < 0.001). Similarly, naive-memory shared activation peaks were enriched for gene-distal regions (OR = 2.1, p < 0.001) and promoter-enhancer interactions (OR = 1.4, p < 0.001). Fifty-five percent of RR peaks and 54% of activation-shared peaks were linked to genes, with nearly half mapping distally. , 
As expected, RR peak clusters were strongly associated with RR genes exhibiting similar dynamics but not naive-memory shared dynamic genes ( ). In contrast, shared activation-dependent peaks were strongly enriched proximal to both RR and activation-shared genes.
To identify TF drivers of activation-dependent chromatin remodeling ( and ), we built a multivariate modeling framework. While TF motif enrichment analyses provided some clues about TF regulation of the accessibility patterns, they do not leverage the important relationship between TF activities and chromatin accessibility signal. Post-hoc assessment of this relationship is not trivial when considering the complex, context-specific interactions of TFs across the 122 pseudobulk ATAC profiles (e.g., ). Thus, we explicitly modeled chromatin accessibility as a function of GRN-derived protein TFAs, using regularized regression to incorporate TFBS predictions ( ). We built models for each of the twelve dynamic accessibility patterns (seven RR and five naive-memory shared peak clusters), nominating 84 TF regulators of chromatin dynamics ( ). Most exhibited either TEM-associated activities (25 TFs, increased relative to naive) or naive-associated (30 TFs, , ). Regulators of RR peaks were enriched for TEM-associated TFs (padj = 0.07, OR = 3.2), consistent with a role for memory-specific regulators in accelerating the chromatin dynamics characteristic of RR. TEM-associated regulators of RR peaks included PRDM1, RARG, RORA, RORC, MAF, IRF4, TBX21, RUNX2, and ZBTB17. In contrast, TEM-associated TFs were underrepresented among the regulators of naive-memory shared peaks (padj = 0.03, OR = 0.3), suggesting distinct regulatory mechanisms.
Among regulators of the shared dynamic peaks, there was an enrichment trend (padj = 0.15, OR = 2.1) for TFs active in both memory and naive cells. Nevertheless, some TEM- or naive-associated TFs were predicted to regulate the shared regions of activation-dependent accessibility. Memory-associated MYBL1, NFATC3, RBPJ, and ZNF263 were predicted to regulate shared activation peak sets, suggesting memory-specific regulatory mechanisms. Members of the TF families (AP-1, ATF, and ATF-like) were predicted regulators of shared activation-dependent peaks, with distinct family members associated with memory (BATF3, FOSL1, and ATF3), naive (FOSB, FOS, JUNB, and JUN), or both cell types (BATF, FOSL2, and JUND). Naive-associated TFs LEF1, KLF7, PATZ1, NFIA, and ZNF460 were predicted to maintain accessibility of rapidly closing regions in naive cells. Thus, the model highlights roles for memory- and naive-associated as well as shared TF activities in the regulation of activation-dependent chromatin accessibility dynamics.
In summary, hundreds of thousands of accessible chromatin regions exhibit activation-dependent dynamics, and many are linked to genes with corresponding dynamics. GRN modeling prioritized specific TFs, unique or common to naive and memory populations, responsible for orchestrating activation-induced chromatin dynamics.

## TFs governing memory maintenance at rest
To uncover memory persistence mechanisms from the high-resolution multiome data, we first identified accessibility chromatin regions distinguishing resting memory from naive populations ( ; ). Our analysis yielded 32,661 candidate regulatory elements, potentially encoding T cell memory. The majority exhibited increased accessibility in memory populations (23,055 peaks, 71%), which were resolved into four clusters based on memory subset-specific patterns. The Th1/Th17/CTL cluster had the greatest accessibility in CTL, followed by Th17 and Th1 populations, while the Th2/MHC class II cluster was most accessible in Th2 and MHC class II cells. These clusters were enriched for binding sites of their associated master regulators (TBX21, RORC, EOMES, or GATA3) as well as regulators of the TEM activation response (PRDM1, MAF, and RUNX2), nominated by GRN ( ) and accessibility network ( ) analyses ( ; ). The other memory-associated clusters were distinguished by relatively low or high accessibility in Tregs. By motif enrichment and transcript expression, BATF, MAF, and RUNX2 were implicated in the resting maintenance of both clusters. Finally, two clusters exhibited increased accessibility in naive cells, were moderately accessible in TCM, and were distinguished by moderate or low Treg accessibility (“naive+Treg” and “naive” clusters, respectively). TFBS enrichment and gene expression criteria nominated several TFs, including LEF1, ETS1, TCF7, and EGR1, as regulators of the naive-associated peak clusters.
 We next explored how regions of resting memory-associated chromatin might underlie RR dynamics. The phenomenon is exemplified by the IFNG locus, in which an RR peak, linked to IFNG by Trac-loop, exhibited low-level but significantly increased accessibility in resting Th1 relative to naive cells (green box, ). Indeed, most RR peak clusters with opening dynamics were significantly enriched for resting memory-associated peaks ( ), supporting that pre-existing chromatin accessibility in resting memory cells contributes to rapid recall. Likewise, the RR peak cluster with closing dynamics (close TEM) was enriched for peaks with less accessibility in resting memory versus naive cells, suggesting epigenetic mechanisms for RR closing dynamics. As expected, activation-dependent peak sets with shared memory-naive dynamics were not enriched for resting memory-associated accessible chromatin ( ).
Prior studies found little evidence that RR was driven by enhanced expression of canonical TCR signaling proteins. We reexamined this possibility, taking advantage of sc-resolved memory subset transcriptomes. In total, there were 1,907 genes differentially expressed between resting naive and memory cell populations ( ; ). The resting memory-up peaks were enriched for enhancer links , to resting memory-up genes (one-sided Fisher’s exact test, p < 0.01). Gene set enrichment analysis (GSEA) revealed a common theme of cell adhesion, activation, and migration among resting memory-associated genes. The “Treg” gene cluster was enriched for immune regulation pathways and included FOXP3, CTLA4, and IKZF2. Naive-upregulated genes included TCR signaling molecules (LAT, LCK, and PLCL1) and naive-associated (FOXO1, LEF1, and TCF7) and other TFs (ETS1 and EGR1).
Using the GRN, we further prioritized TFs ( ), based on their regulation of the resting memory-associated genes ( , ). The resulting candidates were tested in the larger-cohort Soskic et al. dataset , and 10 of 12 TF predictions replicated ( ). KLF6, MAF, RUNX2, NR2C2, SMAD3, PRDM1, RORA, and RORC were broadly active across multiple resting TEM populations, and their steady-state regulation of co-stimulatory molecules may contribute to RR ( ). For example, baseline increase in CD58 and CD2 expression may drive RR responses in vivo, as CD58-CD2 interactions increase T cell responsiveness to activation and downstream cytokine production. Collectively, our analyses nominate accessible chromatin regions, transcripts, TFs, and GRNs, uniquely utilized by resting memory cells to enable RR.

## Memory-associated TFs are implicated in the early differentiation of naive cells
We explored heterogeneity in the naive compartment across resting and activated time points. The pseudotemporal ordering of naive cells correlated with our time course design, except that some unstimulated cells (low IRF4 and CD44, from all time points) concentrated early in the trajectory ( and ). A subset of naive cells at late pseudotime, mostly from 15 h, gain accessibility in regions associated with resting memory cells (e.g., from ) and lose accessibility in regions defining resting naive cells ( and ). These so-called “precocious” naive cells acquire memory-associated chromatin features faster than other activated naive cells. This trend extends beyond the resting memory-specific regions to include accessibility changes in the RR and shared activation peak sets ( ). Several TF transcripts correlated with pseudotime, including KLF6, RUNX3, and TET2, but not memory-associated RUNX2 ( and ). Relative to other 15-h-activated naive cells, precocious naive cells exhibit significant differences in gene expression (667 genes) or proximal accessibility (397 genes) ( ; ). Some effector (MAF and CCR5) and chromatin remodeling (TET2, RORC, and TBX21) genes were already elevated in precocious naive, while other genes (IL2, IFNG, RORC, and TBX21) had a significant increase in proximal accessibility but not expression, suggesting transcriptional priming.
 Thus, some of the putative memory-encoding peaks gain accessibility in activated naive cells by 15 h, suggesting importance for early differentiation, in addition to RR in memory cells. Both processes implicate shared (KLF6 and MAF) and unique TFs (RUNX2 unique to memory, TET2 and RUNX3 unique to precocious naive cells).

## Testing of memory-associated TF regulatory interactions and their implication in antigen-specific activation
We generated ChIP-seq data to validate the predicted TF-gene interaction for KLF6, a predicted regulator of resting memory maintenance, RR, and the acquisition of TEM transcriptional signatures in activated TCM and naive populations. In the activated CD4+ T cells, we detected thousands of KLF6 binding sites, with many proximal to predicted KLF6 target genes. Integration of the sc-resolved chromatin accessibility profiles provided insights into the dynamics and cell type specificity of TF binding at KLF6 binding sites ( ). In the RORA locus, KLF6 bound RR closing regions (green boxes). Accessibility at KLF6 binding sites in CD58, MIAT, and MAF was already elevated in resting memory cells, with activation-induced accessibility gain in precocious naive and TCM/TEM populations. KLF6 binding sites at the CCL5 locus exhibited subset-specific, activation-increased accessibility in Th17 and precocious naive cells (purple boxes). In contrast, the KLF6 binding site in RAD50, within the Th2 cytokine locus, was accessible across CD4+ T cell populations, in both resting and activation contexts.
To assess predicted TF-gene regulatory interactions genome-wide, we used our KLF6 ChIP-seq, along with publicly available ChIP-seq and TF knockout (KO) data for two other GRN-predicted, memory-core TFs, MAF and PRDM1. , Following the field standard, we evaluated precision (fraction of GRN TF-gene interactions supported by KO or ChIP-seq data) and recall (fraction of KO or ChIP-supported interactions recovered by the GRN) as a function of GRN interaction confidence scores. For reference, we compared our method (Inferelator) to other popular GRN methods, , demonstrating on-par or superior performance ( ).
The GRN-predicted TF dynamics derived from our sn-multiome-seq (n = 4 donors) were first replicated using scRNA-seq of a similar anti-CD3/CD28 activation time course in a larger cohort (n = 119 donors, , , , , , , and ). Next, we examined whether the GRN predictions were supported in the more physiological context of antigen-specific T cell activation. For the comparative analysis, we estimated TFAs from scRNA-seq of peanut-activated CD4+ T cells, isolated from peanut-allergic individuals undergoing peanut oral immunotherapy (n = 12 donors). In their design, peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMCs) were incubated with peanut antigen for 20 h, and activated conventional CD4+ and Tregs were enriched based on CD154 and CD137 induction, respectively. CD4+ T cells, double-negative (DN) for these markers, served as a control. Accounting for antigen processing and presentation time, the activated TEM and Treg in their dataset roughly corresponded to 5–15 h activation timepoints in our study. As TCM and naive cells compose the majority of peripheral CD4+ T cells, we compared TFAs from their DN cells to the average TFA of resting naive and TCM in our dataset.
For the memory core (KLF6, MAF, PRDM1, RUNX2, and SMAD3), there was qualitative agreement between the predicted TFAs of activated TEM and Treg and resting DN cells between antigen-specific (peanut) and aCD3/CD28 activation ( ). For example, we predicted that MAF and PRDM1 TFAs would be highest in activated TEM, followed by activated Tregs, and lowest in resting DN cells. Similarly, we predicted that RUNX2 activity would be lowest in activated Treg and highest in resting DN cells. For KLF6, our dataset predicted that the three populations would have overlapping ranges of activity, and for SMAD3, our analysis predicted slightly elevated activity in DN. Both trends were consistent with the antigen-specific TFA estimates.
In an unbiased genome-scale comparison, we identified TFs with variable TFA across the three groups (activated Treg, activated TEM, and resting DN), in the peanut study or as simulated from our dataset ( ). Side-by-side comparison of the resulting 90 TFs confirmed agreement between the predicted TF dynamics in antigen-specific and aCD3/CD28 contexts for most TFs (64 TFs, ).
Based on the reproducibility of GRN predictions in external cohorts and orthogonal evaluation of TF-gene interactions by TF perturbation and ChIP-seq data, we were emboldened to use the GRN to identify potential molecular mechanisms for human genetic risk variants in CD4+ T cells.

## Integrated GWAS-GRN analyses nominate disease regulatory mechanisms in CD4+ T cells
CD4+ T cells and their activation states are likely mediators of genetic risk for autoimmune and inflammatory diseases. , – Genetic risk variants for these and other complex diseases are predominantly noncoding, enriched in regulatory elements and, if causal, thought to alter TF binding and gene expression. To examine whether accessible chromatin regions defined by our study (e.g., rapid recall-associated) might mediate genetic disease risk, we assessed the colocalization of GWAS-identified sets of genetic risk variants with accessible chromatin regions ( , ). Of the 387 disease risk variant sets (phenotypes) tested, 44 significantly colocalized with at least one snATAC-derived peak set (FDR = 10%, ). Accessible chromatin regions distinguishing resting memory from naive populations were most significantly enriched for genetic risk variants, followed by the activation-opened chromatin regions, both RR and memory-naive shared.
 Clustering of disease-peak set enrichments yielded four phenotype groups ( ). The “Th2/MHC class II disease” cluster had the strongest enrichments in peaks defined by high accessibility in resting Th2 and MHC class II cells. Diseases in this group were atopic, allergic, or respiratory, underscoring the well-established role of type 2 immunity in these conditions. The “Treg disease” cluster, which included autoimmune and inflammatory conditions (e.g., hypothyroidism, rheumatoid arthritis, type 1 diabetes), was most enriched in resting memory-associated peaks shared by Treg and TEM. Primary biliary cholangitis (PBC) was in the Treg-driven disease group; in support, PBC has been associated with an altered Th17/Treg balance. , A third cluster involved less significant enrichments, lacked coherent patterns, and was not analyzed further. The fourth cluster, “TEM/TCM shared diseases,” encompassed both allergic and inflammatory diseases. Diseases in this cluster overlapped resting memory “TEM+TCM shared” peaks but also RR peaks (“middle open” and “late open strong”), suggesting that RR might be impacted in these diseases. A subset also overlapped peaks with naive-memory shared opening dynamics.
To explore potential CD4+ T subset-specific gene regulatory mechanisms for these diseases, we linked risk variants, co-localized with accessible chromatin, to genes. Using promoter-enhancer interactions , and a stringent proximity rule (±1 kb of TSS), 60% of overlapped risk variants were linked to putative target genes. Within an intron of FGFR1OP, the PBC-associated risk variant rs12529876 was linked to the CCR6 promoter 131 kb downstream ( ). In PBC patients, the frequency of CCR6+ immune cells in the hepatic portal tracts correlated with the severity of inflammation. Our analysis positions rs125892876 within a memory-associated chromatin region, exhibiting elevated accessibility in resting memory populations (belongs to the “TEM+TCM shared” cluster) and RR dynamics (“late open strong”). The putative enhancer’s accessibility correlates with CCR6 expression (ρ = 0.65, p < 0.01, ). Chemokine receptor CCR6 and its ligand CCL20 play important roles in several other inflammatory diseases, – potentially enhancing Th17 migration to tissue lesions. In our data, CCR6 expression and the accessibility of its putative enhancer are highest in Th17 and the Th17-polarized CTL populations.
We next used GRN to predict the underlying regulatory mechanisms, focusing on risk variants for the first disease cluster (asthma, atopic, respiratory) that co-localized with resting memory Th2/MHC class II-defining chromatin regions ( green box, , and ). Of the thirteen risk-variant-linked genes, eight displayed Th2- or MHC-class-II-specific expression at rest or upon activation ( ), and we queried the GRN for regulators with elevated TFA in the Th2 and MHC class II populations at rest ( ). The genes elevated in resting MHC class II and/or Th2 populations (KIF1B, TH2LCRR, HLA-DQB1, AHI1, and IQGAP1) also exhibited MHC class II and/or Th2-specific dynamics upon activation, suggesting potential enhancer activity for the risk-variant-linked putative regulatory regions. RAD50, IL10, and IL13 were not elevated in resting Th2 or MHC class II but exhibited Th2-specific RR dynamics, suggesting a role for the risk-variant-linked enhancers in Th2 poising of these genes. The GRN predicted regulators of these risk-variant-linked genes, with varying degrees of support from the literature. For example, GATA3 is a well-known IL13 regulator, while RUNX1 is not. The predicted interaction between KLF6 and the Th2 cytokine locus is supported by a ChIP-seq peak at RAD50 within the locus ( ). TFs and regulatory interactions particular to the MHC class II population have yet to be explored.
As a second example, we explored the risk variant mechanisms for the second disease cluster (autoimmune and inflammatory conditions) enriched in resting memory and Treg-defining accessible chromatin regions ( blue box and S7). Of the seven risk-linked genes, six displayed Treg-specific expression ( ). IL2RA, CTLA4, ZNF292, and ZC3H12D exhibited both Treg-specific expression at rest and upon activation, suggesting Treg-specific activity for the linked risk variant-containing regulatory elements. FOXP3, PRDM1, XBP1, and ATF4 were predicted to maintain baseline expression and RR poising of these risk-associated Treg genes ( ).
Our analysis of GWAS variants connected disease-associated polymorphisms to diverse and dynamic accessible chromatin regions, defining T cell states. Within CD4+ T cell populations and contexts, the GRN enabled identification of gene regulatory mechanisms that potentially contribute to genetic risk and pathogenesis of inflammatory and autoimmune diseases.

## DISCUSSION
Memory CD4+ T cells protect against repeat infections via rapid cytokine production and clonal expansion upon antigen re-exposure. Bulk omics studies highlighted epigenome regulation of memory CD4+ T cell responses , , , but were unable to resolve regulatory elements active in heterogeneous subsets. For example, in prior analyses of resting TEM, we detected positive chromatin marks proximal to lineage-defining cytokines (e.g., IL4 and IL17A). , Here, sn-multiome-seq confirmed that these resting chromatin accessibility regions were indeed subset-specific.
Multiome-powered GRN inference revealed regulatory circuits governing RR. Integration of TFBS predictions from chromatin accessibility improves GRN inference from gene expression data. , Here, we used maxATAC to generate genome-wide “in silico ChIP-seq,” from snATAC-seq, for hundreds of TFs in resting and activated CD4+ T populations—a scale and resolution infeasible with existing TFBS measurement technologies. These TFBS predictions, along with promoter-enhancer interactions, , enhanced GRN inference and are released for exploration, alongside accessibility profiles.
Our analysis implicated TFs (RUNX2, KLF6, MAF, and others) in resting memory maintenance. These factors orchestrate programs targeting survival, cell cycle, and signal transduction genes, including enhanced expression of costimulatory molecules. Except for RUNX2 and SMAD3, these TFs maintain high activity post-activation, driving RR gene expression dynamics, in addition to memory maintenance.
Using a larger CD4+ T cell activation study (n = 119 individuals), most, but not all, memory-associated TF predictions replicated, leading to model refinement. The larger cohort enabled examination of biological variables, sex and age. We identified age-dependent TFs within the naive but not memory compartments, including KLF6 and PRDM1. These age correlations, although significant, were minor relative to activation- and cell-type-dependent differences (as shown in ), suggesting that the memory-associated core is robust across the age groups tested. Individual regulatory interactions were benchmarked using newly generated KLF6 ChIP-seq data and curation of TF ChIP-seq/perturbation data for MAF and PRDM1.
Some GRN predictions extrapolated to a more physiological, antigen-specific CD4+ T cell activation context, involving APCs and peanut-stimulation of CD4+ T cells from peanut allergic individuals. Comparison of aCD3/CD28 versus antigen-specific activation-dependent TFs identified many with qualitatively similar TFA predictions. Those with divergent TFA predictions were often highly active in peanut-activated Treg ( ). Differences may be attributable to the unique biology of allergen-specific T cells in the context of peanut oral immunotherapy. Through comparative analyses, our GRN serves as a base model to dissect distinct modes of T cell activation.
Comparison of GRNs across in vivo and in vitro contexts is also a valuable means to identify limitations of the aCD3/CD28 T cell activation model and an opportunity to iteratively design better in vitro human models (e.g., by identifying key regulatory interactions driving cell behavior in vivo but missing in vitro). Many genomics assays (including the TF binding and promoter-enhancer interaction measurements used here) require large numbers of cells, limiting their direct application to physiological settings. Thus, reliable, well-characterized, and reproducible in vitro and in silico human models are needed. , Our GRN can serve as a base model to develop higher-fidelity models of human CD4+ T cell activation.
Finally, the GRN may have utility in deciphering the impact of human genetic variation on T cell behavior. Accessible chromatin-defining resting memory Th subsets significantly colocalized with genetic risk variants for many immune-mediated diseases, and GRN analysis implicated memory-associated TFs, including RUNX2 and KLF6, as regulators of genes targeted by genetic risk variants.
In conclusion, we describe a genome-scale GRN governing rapid recall and early activation time points in human naive and memory CD4+ T cell subsets. This sn-multiome-inferred model provides a foundation for future studies aimed at deciphering the transcriptional networks governing T cell responses in health and disease. Here, we highlight but a subset of regulatory mechanisms from the GRN and rich, underlying data. To maximize the resource, the GRNs and sn-multiome data are interactively available, along with open-source codebases to reproduce results: https://github.com/MiraldiLab/RapidRecall.

## Limitations of the study
Some GRN predictions may not extrapolate to physiological and/or disease contexts, due to limitations of the (1) underlying training data (acute aCD3/CD28 activation of peripheral blood CD4+ T cells from healthy adults) and/or (2) computational model (which approximates the complex regulation of gene expression by TFs as a multivariate linear). Although we tested the reproducibility of GRN-estimated TF activities in external datasets, protein TFAs were never directly measured (in model construction or validation). TFAs and regulatory interactions are context- and subset-dependent, and therefore single-cell (as opposed to population-level) assays are better suited for their evaluation.

## RESOURCE AVAILABILITY

## Lead contact
Requests for further information and resources should be directed to and will be fulfilled by the lead contact, Emily R. Miraldi (emily.miraldi@cchmc.org).

## Materials availability
This study did not generate new, unique reagents.

## Data and code availability
The multiome-seq, KLF6 ChIP-seq, and whole-genome sequencing (WGS) data generated in this study are hosted on Gene Expression Omnibus (GEO: GSE282266 [multiome-seq, KLF6 ChIP-seq] and GSE287942 [WGS]) and are publicly available as of the date of publication. Accession numbers are listed in the .
The codebase to reproduce results and interactively explore the data and GRNs is available from GitHub (https://github.com/MiraldiLab/RapidRecall) and is publicly available as of the date of publication. Accession numbers are listed in the .
Any additional information required to reanalyze the data reported in this paper is available from the upon request.
 

## STAR★METHODS
Detailed methods are provided in the online version of this paper and include the following:

## EXPERIMENTAL MODEL AND STUDY PARTICIPANT DETAILS
The study used samples from de-identified healthy male donors who donated blood at University of Cincinnati Hoxworth Blood Center, Cincinnati, Ohio. The study is not considered to be human subject research per determination of Cincinnati Children’s Hospital Medical Center Institutional Review Board (IRB). Beyond sex, we lack information about donor age, gender, race or ethnicity. These limitations were mitigated by testing study findings in larger, published human datasets (described below). For example, using scRNA-seq data from Soskic et al. (n = 119 donors, 67 male, 52 female, ages ranging from 19 to 79 years), we investigated the dependence of our findings on biological variables sex and age.

## METHOD DETAILS

## Cell processing
Five leukocyte depletion filters containing cells from de-identified male donors were obtained from the University of Cincinnati Hoxworth Blood Center, Cincinnati, Ohio. Filters were back-flushed with PBS, and PBMCs were prepared by Ficoll centrifugation. Human CD4+ T cells were isolated from PBMCs using CD4 isolation magnetic beads (STEM CELL #19052). To increase the fraction of TEM cells, naive and TCM cells were partially depleted using anti-CD27-biotin coated streptavidin magnetic beads (Invitrogen Dynabeads Biotin Binder 11047; CD27 antibody Biolegend 302804). Cells were cryopreserved in 50% CTS OpTmizer medium (A1048501), 40% human serum (Sigma H4522), 10% DMSO (ThermoFisher) and stored in liquid nitrogen. Cells were prepared for 16 multiome-seq experiments (4 donors × 4 time points). Thawed, purified cells were plated in CTS OpTmizer with 1% Penicillin-Streptomycin (Gibco 15140122) and incubated at 37°C for the activation duration time: 15h/5h/2.5h. Activation was performed using Dynabeads Human T-Activator CD3/CD28 (Gibco 11131D). Resting cells were incubated in the same medium and temperature for the same time as activated, but without activation beads added. To prevent cell-free DNA contamination originating from dead cells, DNase I (1:100) was added directly into the medium (NEB M0303S) during the last 30min of incubation. After incubation, cells were washed with PBS +0.1% BSA twice. For each multiome experiment, cells from the spike-in control donor (resting timepoint) were mixed with cells from the experimental donor at the time point of interest at a ratio of 8% (ctrl) to 92% (each test donor), immediately preceding the nuclei prep. Nuclei were prepared according to the modified 10X Genomics protocol: 100ul of cold lysis buffer (10mM Tris-HCl (pH 7.4), 10mM NaCl, 3mM MgCl2, 1% BSA, 0.025% Tween 20, 0.025% Nonidet P40, 0.00125% Digitonin, 1mM DTT, 1 U/μL RNase inhibitor (Roche)) was added to cell pellets. Samples were incubated for 40s on ice, washed with 1mL of cold wash buffer (10mM Tris-HCl (pH 7.4), 10mM NaCl, 3mM MgCl2, 1% BSA, 0.025% Tween 20, 1mM DTT, 1 U/μL RNase inhibitor) and filtered with Flowmi cell strainer (Bel-Art H13680-0040).

## scRNA and scATAC libraries preparation
The Chromium Next GEM Single Cell Multiome ATAC + Gene Expression assay was performed according to the manufacturer’s instructions (10x Genomics) with the Chromium Next GEM Single Cell Multiome ATAC + Gene Expression Reagent Bundle (PN-1000283) kit. Briefly, nuclei suspended in the multiome buffer were combined with a transposition mix and incubated for 1h. The transposition reaction was combined with the kit’s master mix and loaded together with partitioning oil and gel beads into the Chromium Next GEM Chip J Single Cell Kit (PN-1000234) to generate a gel bead-in-emulsion (GEM). The GEMs were incubated to produce 10x-barcoded DNA from the transposed fragments (for ATAC) and 10x-barcoded, full-length cDNA from poly-adenylated mRNA. Next, the GEMs were broken, the barcoded DNA and cDNA were purified, and the purified products were subjected to a pre-amplification PCR step. The pre-amplified material served as starting material for ATAC and RNA library construction per 10x protocol. ATAC libraries and GEX libraries were pooled separately. The pools were sequenced on the NovaSeq 6000 sequencer with SP or S1 flow cells, using the following sequencing parameters: R1: 50 cycles, i7: 8 cycles, i5: 24 cycles, R2: 49 cycles (for ATAC) or R1: 28 cycles, i7: 10 cycles, i5: 10 cycles, R2: 90 cycles (for RNA).

## Whole-genome sequencing and variant calling
DNA was isolated using a PureLink Genomic DNA Kit (Thermo Fisher, K182001). Whole-genome sequencing was performed using DNBseq next-generation sequencing technology. Libraries were sequenced on an Illumina NovaSeq to generate 150-base paired-end reads. Sequencing reads were aligned, and variants were identified using the Genome Analysis Toolkit (GATK) Unified Genotyper following GATK Best Practices. – 

## KLF6 ChIP-seq
Whole blood was obtained under IRB2008-0090 at Cincinnati Children’s Hospital Medical Center. PBMCs were isolated using a Ficoll density gradient. Human CD4+ T cells were enriched by negative magnetic selection (Invitrogen; 11346D) and plated at 10 million in 1mL per 6-well flat bottom plate and stimulated with plate bound anti-CD3 (2 μg/mL BE0001-2; Bio X Cell) and soluble anti-CD28 antibodies (2 μg/mL; BE0248; Bio X Cell) in RPMI containing 10% FBS for 5h, then crosslinked and subsequently processed through ChIPmentation, library creation and DNA sequencing as previously described 43, except that sonication was conducted without SDS in a 1X Tris-EDTA (TE) buffer containing 0.1% NP40 and 0.1% Triton X-100.
The ChIP procedure was performed on the Diagenode IP-Star Compact automation system. Antibodies against KLF6 (2 μg; 39–6900; Invitrogen or AF3499; R&D systems) were bound to 4.5μL of Protein G Dynabeads and incubated with 2μg of activated CD4+ chromatin. Sequential washes with RIPA-150 (buffer 1), RIPA-300 (buffer 2), LiCl (buffer 3) and TE + 0.2% Triton X-100 (buffer 4) ended in the elution in 10mM Tris-HCl containing 0.25M NaCl. Next the complexes were washed with cold 10mM Tris-HCl and incubated with loaded Tn5 transposase (C01070012; Hologic Diagenode) per an established ChIPmentation protocol with an incubation for 20 min to accomplish tagmentation of ChIPed DNA. The tagmented ChIPed DNA were washed with RIPA-150, decrosslinked (with proteinase K in TE with 150mM NaCl and 0.3% SDS; incubated at 42°C for 30 min, 65°C for 4h, then 15°C for 10 min) and purified from beads using the Qiagen MinElute DNA kit per the manufacturer’s instructions. The library was amplified using a cycle number based on side reaction to stop amplification prior to saturation. The product was cleaned with AMPure beads, and the size and distribution were checked on TapeStation (Agilent). Sequencing was performed using the Illumina NextSeq 2000 at the Genomics, Epigenomics, and Sequencing Core, University of Cincinnati.
Reads were trimmed from the raw fastq files using TrimGalore (v0.6.6). Trimmed fastqs were then aligned using Bowtie2 (v2.4.2, additional params: –very-sensitive –maxins = 2000 –B). Aligned bam files were deduplicated using samtools (v1.9) markdup (additional params: -r) and then indexed with samtools. Finally, peak calling was performed with macs2 (v2.1.4, addional params –nomodel –extsize 147 –q 0.01). The data passed our quality-control criteria : average read length >20bp, FASTQC report passing for per-base N content, >500 peak regions (54506 total), and motif enrichment analysis identified the KLF motif family as the second most enriched transcription factor binding motif within the called peaks (−log10(Padj) = 340).

## QUANTIFICATION AND STATISTICAL ANALYSIS
In figures, asterisks denote significance (Padj < 0.1), as determined by the appropriate test (e.g., two-tailed t test for continuous variables, modeling using the negative binomial distribution for sequencing counts data, Fisher exact test for overrepresentation analysis), as indicated in the Figure Legends and detailed below. The Benjamini-Hochberg procedure was used to correct for multiple hypothesis testing, unless stated otherwise.

## scRNA-seq and scATAC-seq quality control
Initial alignment, filtering and UMI counting were performed using cellranger-arc-2.0.2 and the 10x genome GRCh38 reference genome within the Scientific Data Analysis Platform (https://scidap.com). Then, using Seurat v5.1.0, the following quality thresholds were used to select quality cells: detected genes >400, transcript unique molecular identifiers (UMI) > 750, percent mitochondrial transcripts <20%, ATAC fragments >2000, fragments in blacklist <5%, nucleosome signal <2.5, TSS enrichment > 2. Initial clustering revealed small populations of non-CD4+ T cells, including Natural Killer, CD8+ T and myeloid cells based on either CD8A or lack of CD3E expression. These cells were removed from the analysis. We then used several criteria to filter likely doublet nuclei. We removed nuclei (1) predicted to be doublets based on both RNA (scDblFinder v1.15.2) and ATAC (ArchR v1.0.2) modalities and (2) those with unexpectedly large RNA (>10k UMI) and ATAC (>50k fragment) libraries. , For scDblFinder, a merged SingleCellExperiment object was used for input (additional params: Cluster = TRUE, samples = “Dataset”). For ArchR, the 16 individual fragment files were used as input, as well as each samples expected number of doublets. The expected number of doublets was calculated by multiplying the average doublet rate reported by the Cell Ranger User Guide by the number of cells in the sample. Across the 16 multiome-seq experiments, our QC pipeline yielded 65,862 quality, CD4+ T cell nuclei.

## Sample integration and clustering
Prior to sample integration, each sample’s Cell Ranger fragment file was modified to include both transposase cut sites. , Cut sites were filtered if they overlapped ENCODE GRCh38 blacklist regions. Peak calling was performed by MACS2 V2.1.4 , on initial clustering of each Seurat dataset individually (MACS2 parameters: –shift −25 –extsize 50 –tsize 50 –pvalue 1E-8 –keep-dup all). A reference peak set was generated by taking the union of peaks called across all samples and merging overlapping peaks. A (peaks × cells) counts matrix was then generated using FeatureMatrix from Signac v1.13.0. This counts matrix replaced the original counts data generated from Cell Ranger.
Next, the Seurat v5.1.0 pipeline was applied to the RNA and ATAC data in parallel. For RNA, the data was log-normalized, centered and scaled by z-scoring, and then dimensionality reduced to the first 30 PCs. For ATAC, data was first normalized using run term frequency inverse document frequency (the RunTFIDF function) followed by latent semantic indexing (LSI) dimension reduction (the RunSVD function) using components 2–30. Component 1 was removed due to high correlation with library size (fragments per nucleus). Peaks with ≥1 cut site in 20 or more cells were included in the dimension reduction. After dimensional reductions for both RNA and ATAC were calculated, each data modality was then separately batch-corrected using Harmony v3.8. The batch variable provided to Harmony was dataset (1–16), with either the PCA or LSI reduction as input. The output of Harmony is a batch-corrected data dimension reduction (harmony_rna, harmony_atac). The two data modalities were integrated using Seurat’s weighted nearest neighbor (WNN) method using the Harmony dimension reductions as input. Cells were clustered using the smart local moving (SLM) algorithm. Other clustering algorithms (Louvain and Leiden) gave comparable results. After clustering, another round of peak calling was performed with MACS2 (see above parameters), with cells aggregated per cluster-timepoint. These peak sets were merged (union) to generate a penultimate reference peak set. The above ATAC-seq steps (normalizing, dimension reduction, harmony integration) and combination with transcriptome (wnn, clustering) were repeated to achieve the final clustering solution: 15 clusters and 65,862 cells. Cluster identities were determined based on gene markers and accessibility near effector genes and genome-scale analyses, as described in results ( – and ). A cluster of “stressed” cells (3.1% of total) bore markers of cell stress (TXNIP, PDCD4), lacked activation markers (CD44, IRF4) and was excluded from downstream analyses.

## Identification of “Donor0” spike-in control cells
To distinguish the spike-in control (“Donor0”) from experimental donor cells in each multiome-seq experiment, we used genetic variant calls, available from our WGS of the spike-in control (Donor0) or inferred from the RNA and ATAC multiome modalities for the four experimental donors, using the standard GATK pipeline (v4.2.4.1). First, we identified high-confidence experimental donor cells from each sample using Souporcell v2.5. Souporcell was run independently for the RNA and ATAC data, using Cell Ranger BAM files as input. To improve Souporcell speed and performance, we provided a single nucleotide variant (SNV) reference of common variants occurring in at least 5% of individuals from the 1000 Genomes Project ; additional Souporcell parameters included: –skip_remap True, –ignore True, -k 2, –no_umi True (ATAC only). Second, to further improve genotype-based mapping of cells to experimental donors (lacking WGS), donor-cell predictions supported by both RNA and ATAC analyses were used to infer genotypes for the experimental donors, serving as valuable input to a second round of Souporcell analysis. For variant calling in these experimental donors, the Cell Ranger BAM files from each sample were filtered based on predicted experimental cell barcodes (supported by RNA and ATAC) and variants were called using the standard Freebayes v1.3.7 pipeline applied to the RNA sequencing data. Finally, another round of Souporcell was performed on each sample, this time using the full gene expression BAM file and each donor’s predicted VCF files as input.

## Pseudobulk batch correction, data normalization, and differential analyses
We aggregated gene expression or accessibility signal from individual cells to generate pseudobulk profiles per CD4+ T cell subset, time point and donor. Importantly, the spike-in control donor cells provided a pseudobulk sample condition (“Donor0”, resting cells) that remained constant across all 16 multiome-seq experiments (donor-timepoints). This batch-control design is required to distinguish biological from technical variation across experiments, as standard batch correction methods (ComBat, DESeq2, EdgeR) , , require at least one common control sample across experiments. However, the use of spike-in donor control cells is not common practice in sc-genomics study designs. Inclusion of a spike-in donor (8% of nuclei per experiment) (1) slightly reduces sequencing data available for the experimental donor-condition of interest (i.e., incurs expense) and (2) the processing of the spike-in cells introduces additional steps and therefore risk to sensitive nuclei prep protocols, which may not be feasible or acceptable for, e.g., challenging tissue samples or rare patient samples.
We therefore evaluated the impact of our spike-in study design on inference quality, both visually and quantitatively. As described above, single-cell Harmony batch correction was critical to resolving nuclei across experiments into cell populations ( – ). The pseudobulk gene expression counts resulting from Harmony batch-corrected cell integration and WNN clusters served as input to three pseudobulk batch-correction approaches: (1) no pseudobulk batch correction, (2) spike-in informed batch correction, where each of the 16 multiome-seq experiments was treated as a batch with a common pseudobulk (spike-in) sample, (3) batch correction ignoring the spike-in control pseudobulk (for we supplied an incorrect design in which the four timepoint experiments per donor were treated as a single batch (“batch = donor”), resulting in 4 batches that preserved timepoint information). Option (3) is commonplace in the absence of spike-in control cells, but problematic for several reasons: (a) Biological variability due to donor differences is modeled as technical and subtracted off as a batch effect. (b) Despite targeting similar numbers of nuclei for input to the 10x instrument, the number of quality nuclei and their per-nucleus library sizes are often variable across experiments. Lumping four experiments into a single batch, based on donor, makes it difficult to control for this important technical covariate (among others). For batch correction, we used Combat-Seq from sva v3.46.0, using “option 2” spike-in informed parameters (batch = dataset, group = celltype-timepoint) or “option 3” parameters (batch = donor, group = celltype-timepoint).
For data normalization and differential analysis, we used DESeq2 (v.1.38.3) and the variance stabilizing transformation (VST). We also leveraged the single-cell nature of our data for differential gene expression analysis, filtering genes that met our DESeq2 statistical cutoffs (FDR = 10%, log2|FC|>0.58) but were detected in fewer than 5% of nuclei within one condition of a comparison (2.5h activation versus resting in Th2 cells). As previously, this additional sc-based differential criterion improved biological signal, removing low-quality differential genes supported by pseudobulk analysis alone. For differential analysis of the accessible chromatin data, we performed no filtering based on % nuclei with peak signal, because peak signal per nucleus is limited by DNA copy number and extreme signal from a small number of cells cannot occur. This rationale was supported by visual inspection of ATAC signal quantification ( , , and ). For differential analysis of ATAC signal, FDR = 10%, log2|FC|>0.58 were also applied.
To visually compare the three pseudobulk batch-correction strategies, we identified the top 1000 most batch-dependent dynamic genes resulting from the “no batch correction” strategy for visualization. First, from the “no batch correction” analysis, dynamic genes were identified as those differential for at least one activation timepoint relative to t = 0, for at least one cell type. Next, we identified those dynamic genes with the greatest batch effects, using the following strategy: (1) We calculated the coefficient of variation (CV) for each gene at each celltype_timepoint across the four donors, using VST counts from the “no batch correction” strategy. (2) For each gene, the CVs were averaged, and the 1000 genes with the highest average CV were visualized in the heatmap ( – ). As expected, performing no pseudobulk batch correction resulted in the largest batch effects. We quantitatively assessed the three pseudobulk batch-correction strategies by comparing the number of differential genes resulting from each strategy. In addition, we considered that the incorrect “batch = donor” assumption is only likely for experiments lacking spike-in control cells, and, in that case, a “batch = donor” design would benefit from additional experimental donor cells (i.e., a slight signal gain, as the experimental donors would contribute 100% (as opposed to 92%) of cells in the experiment). For this reason, we added a simulation condition to our comparisons, randomly replacing spike-in donor cells with experimental donor cells for each experiment. (Similar to bootstrapping, our up-sampling simulation underestimates gene variance, providing a challenging comparator for the spike-in strategy). For all comparisons, the spike-in batch control strategy resulted in the most differentially expressed genes. The relative increase in DEGs was dependent on the strength of the biological signal: While the spike-in strategy increased activation-dependent DEGs by 8–12%, depending on cell population timepoint ( ), the spike-in strategy increased DEGs between difficult-to-distinguish memory populations at rest by 20–30% ( ). Not only do these results demonstrate the benefit of the spike-in design in our study, but they also provide support for this batch-control approach in future sc-genomics studies.
For the scATAC-seq data, the same processing steps were followed, with the exception that we did not run ComBat-seq to control for batch effects, as visual inspection of the data (analogously to analysis) did not identify gross batch effects.
Pseudobulk samples that were too sparse (library size <150k for RNA, <400k for ATAC) were excluded from downstream analyses, with the following exception: at the 2.5h timepoint, no donor met the RNA or ATAC cutoff for the Th2 and Th17 populations. Given the importance of these populations at this time point, we took the following approach: Following batch correction with ComBat-seq (RNA) and proceeding DESeq2 normalization, RNA counts were combined for donors “1 and 2” and donors “3 and 4”, resulting in two pseudobulk gene expression and chromatin accessibility estimates at 2.5h for Th17 and Th2 cells.
For visualization of pseudobulk chromatin accessibility tracks ( ), data were library size normalized following the method used in Signac. 

## Dendrograms
Raw pseudobulk RNA and ATAC counts matrices were downsampled to 150,000 reads and 400,000 fragments, respectively, to account for differences in library sizes across populations. Following the batch correction and normalization strategies describe above, downsampled counts matrices were batch-corrected (RNA only) and VST-normalized prior to z-scoring (both). Features with a coefficient of variation of <0.01 for expression and <0.001 for accessibility were filtered out, resulting 12,225 genes and 23,136 ATAC peaks. Hierarchical clustering was performed using ComplexHeatmap (v 2.14.0) with Ward’s method and Euclidian distance.

## Identification of rapid-recall genes and accessible chromatin regions
Rapid recall genes or peaks were defined as features with faster, more extreme activation dynamics (up or down) in memory populations than in naive cells. Therefore, a feature is rapid recall if.
It is dynamic in at least one memory population (differential at 2.5h, 5h or 15h relative to t = 0h) AND
at the above dynamic timepoint(s) in the corresponding memory population(s), the feature is differential relative to naive cells.
The sign of the log2(FC) estimates for (1) and (2) are the same (thereby ensuring that at least one memory population has faster, more extreme dynamics than naive).
Differential analysis criteria are as described above.

## GSEA
We conducted gene set enrichment analysis (GSEA) using the Gene Ontology (GO) Biological Processes pathways obtained from the Molecular Signatures Database (mSigDB, accessed April 8, 2024). Statistical significance was assessed using Fisher exact test, with the analysis restricted to pathways containing a minimum of 5 genes. The background gene set comprised all genes present in the above pathways. Pathway enrichments were considered statistically significant at a (FDR) threshold of 10%. Multiple testing correction was applied using the Benjamini-Hochberg procedure.

## Motif scanning and enrichment
We performed motif scanning using CIS-BP motifs (v2.0.0) on all peaks in our reference set (described above) using FIMO from Meme Suite version 5.4.1 (raw P-value threshold = 0.00001, first-order Markov model background). Enrichment of TF binding sites in peak sets compared to background (all peaks) was calculated using a Fisher exact test (FDR = 10%) and Benjamini-Hochberg procedure to correct for multiple hypothesis testing.

## Cell cycle scoring
To score cell-cycle phase for each cell, we downloaded genes associated with each cell phase from tinyatlas (update from 9/13/17). We then used Seurat’s CellCycleScoring function to assign scores at the single-cell level, using the phase with the highest score to classify cells.

## GRN model construction

## Selection of target genes for GRN
We selected 15,169 target genes for GRN inference, based on differential expression (FDR = 10%, log2|FC|>0.58) within CD4+ T cell subsets across timepoints, as well as across subsets at a particular timepoint.

## Selection of potential regulators
We intersected a curated list of 1639 human TFs, with our list of target genes (above), yielding an initial set of 761 regulators. RORC did not meet our definition of a target gene but was added as a potential regulator, given its known importance to CD4+ T cell biology. 
CTCF was a target gene, but we removed it from consideration as a potential regulator, given its mode of regulation as an insulator. Thus, we considered a total of 761 potential regulators for GRN inference.

## maxATAC prediction of TFBS
We used maxATAC (version 1.0.5) to generate genome-wide in silico TF binding site (TFBS) predictions for human TFs that met our potential regulator criteria and had maxATAC models available. To ensure biological relevance, we only included maxATAC predictions for TFs that were expressed in at least 5% of cells within the cell type of interest. This expression filtering resulted in TF-specific predictions for each of the fourteen CD4+ T cell populations, with the final set comprising 110 TFs: ARID3A, ARNT, ATF1, ATF2, ATF3, ATF7, BACH1, BHLHE40, CEBPB, CREB1, CREM, CUX1, E4F1, EGR1, ELF1, ELF4, ELK1, ESRRA, ETS1, ETV6, FOS, FOSL1, FOSL2, FOXK2, FOXP1, GABPA, GATA3, GATAD2B, HSF1, IKZF1, IRF3, JUN, JUNB, JUND, KMT2A, LEF1, MAFF, MAFK, MAX, MAZ, MBD2, MEF2A, MNT, MXI1, MYB, MYC, NFATC3, NFE2L2, NFIA, NFIC, NFXL1, NFYA, NFYB, NKRF, NR2C1, NR2C2, NRF1, PBX3, PKNOX1, RELA, REST, RFX1, RFX5, RUNX1, SETDB1, SKIL, SMAD5, SP1, SREBF1, SREBF2, SRF, STAT5A, TBP, TCF7, TCF7L2, TCF12, USF2, YBX1, YY1, ZBED1, ZBTB7A, ZBTB11, ZBTB33, ZBTB40, ZEB1, ZFX, ZHX2, ZKSCAN1, ZNF24, ZNF143, ZNF207, ZNF217, ZNF274, ZNF282, ZNF384, ZNF407, ZNF569, ZNF592, ZSCAN29, ZZZ3. We generated maxATAC predictions for each of the fourteen CD4+ T cell populations in , as they all met the recommended minimum library size (5M fragments) for maxATAC prediction from snATAC-seq data. We followed default data processing of ATAC signal for input to the pre-trained maxATAC models. The total number of genome-wide “in silico TF ChIP-seq” tracks varied by population based on TF expression, with predictions generated only for TFs meeting the 5% expression threshold in each respective population. To arrive at a final set of TFBS, we prioritized precision over recall, thresholding maxATAC scores to achieve an expected recall of 10%, as reported per TF model. 

## Association of putative regulatory regions (ATAC peaks) with target genes
Human CD4+ T cell Trac-loop data was downloaded from GSE8725441. We combined unique Trac-loop regions from both resting and activated cells into one list. Genomic regions were lifted from hg19 to hg38 using UCSC’s Lift Genome Annotation tool with a minimum ratio of remapped bases of 0.95 (6 of 38812 regions could not be mapped to hg38). To infer enhancer-promoter interactions in our data, we overlapped our reference ATAC peak set with Trac-loop regions directly connected to a gene promoter. Similarly, we downloaded the Micro-C data from DDBJ (ascension PRJDB13816 ) and combined all detected loops from both resting and activated cells. A loop was linked to a gene if either side of the loop overlapped a TSS for a gene. Then, if an ATAC-seq peak intersected either side of that loop, it was linked to that gene.

## Prior network of TF-gene interactions inferred from ATAC data
A TF-gene interaction was included in the prior if a predicted binding site for that TF (derived from maxATAC or TF motif scanning, see above) overlapped an ATAC-seq peak (from our reference peaks set) that was within 5kb of the gene TSS or linked distally to the gene via Trac-loop or Micro-C (see above).

## GRN inference
Gene expression is modeled as a multivariate linear combination of transcription factor activities (TFAs):

(Equation 1)xij=Σk∈TFsbikakj,
where corresponds to the expression of gene in pseudobulk sample biological replicate (“resting Th1, Donor 2”), is the activity of TF in condition , and describes the regulatory effect of TF on gene ). , , While gene expression is directly measured in our multiome-seq study design, protein TF activities ( ) are not. Based on previous GRN benchmarking in CD4+ T cells (bulk RNA-seq and ATAC-seq and scRNA-seq and scATAC-seq ) we used two complementary TFA estimation strategies:
Prior-based TFA assumes that protein TFAs can be estimated based on the expression of a TF’s target genes, using partial prior knowledge of TF-gene interactions (as inferred from ATAC-seq and Trac-loop above). TFA is calculated from the normalized gene expression matrix and the prior network matrix using the least-squares solution of the equation :
(Equation 2)X=P⋅A,
TF mRNA serves as an estimate of protein TFA; this is a reasonable assumption for some TFs, whose major mode of regulation is transcriptional (as opposed to post-transcriptional).
For each TFA estimation strategy separately, TF-gene regulatory interactions, , were identified via optimization of the following objective function :

(Equation 3)B=argmin|X−BA|22+Λ|B|1,
where is the gene expression matrix, is the TF activity matrix, is the matrix of TF-gene interaction coefficients, and is the matrix of penalties associated with each interaction. The penalty matrix incorporates prior information via a decreased penalty ( ) for interactions with prior support ( with prior support, for no prior support). While the adaptive LASSO penalty encourages selection of TF-gene interactions supported by the prior, novel interactions, strongly supported by the gene expression model, can be inferred. In this way, the two sources of error in the prior (false positive and false negative interactions) can be corrected through the inference procedure. The ability to infer novel interactions is especially critical for TFs lacking a maxATAC or TF motif model (e.g., TET2) and therefore ATAC-derived prior information. The LASSO regularization parameter λ using StARS, with 220 subsamples and a subsample fraction of 0.05. Confidence scores for TF-gene interactions were defined as the sum of (1) subsamples in which the edge was nonzero and (2), to break ties between equally stable edges, the correlation between the TF’s activity and its predicted target gene’s TFA. We evaluated the GRN’s predictive performance (predictive R2 on left-out test gene expression data) as a function of model complexity (average number of regulators per gene) ; this analysis identified an average of 10 regulators per target gene as optimal for GRNs derived using both prior-based TFA and TF mRNA. Confidences from these two networks were rank-combined using the maximum, then the top 151,140 interactions were selected and reranked and signed, using partial correlation between genes and their TF regulators to determine interaction sign.

## GRN analyses

## Final transcription factor activity
Estimates were calculated by substituting the signed, ranked confidences from the final GRN for the prior matrix in . This procedure was applied to our dataset and also when evaluating TFA in the independent scRNA-seq studies. , 

## Functional annotation of TFs using the GRN
To determine whether a TF activated (or repressed) gene pathways (e.g., ), we tested for significant overlap between its positive (or negative) target genes and gene pathways, using GSEA (described above).

## GRN subnetworks regulating proliferation genes in TCM
To identify the GRN subnetwork driving enhanced proliferation in TCM ( ), we compared estimated transcription factor activity between TCM and TEM, with TEM activity represented as the average across Th1, Th2, and Th17 subsets. Transcription factors with an average Z score difference of at least 1.5 (higher in TCM) were retained. We then assessed these TFs for enrichment of their target genes in the Gene Ontology Cell Cycle pathway; since all TFs were enriched, none were excluded. Finally, we restricted the network to high-confidence regulatory interactions that were observed in a minimum of 200 out of 220 GRN construction subsamples (see above).

## GRN subnetworks of TCM/TEM
To identify the GRN subnetwork driving TCM/TEM expression of effector genes ( ), we selected TFs that were differentially active between TCM/TEM and TCM in the same direction at all 3 activation timepoints (FDR = 10%). Target genes for this network included genes upregulated in TCM/TEM compared to TCM in at least one activation timepoint.

## GRN subnetworks encoding memory at rest
To generate the resting memory GRN subnetwork ( ), TFs were prioritized based on several criteria.
The TF’s motif is enriched in a peak cluster with increased accessibility in memory versus naive cells (e.g., clusters Th1/Th17/CTL, Th2/MHCII).
The TF is differentially expressed between at least one memory population and naive cells at rest
The TF has at least two predicted upregulated target genes (positive edge) that show differential expression between naive cells and at least one memory population at rest, where the expression is higher in the memory population.
The TF had significantly higher estimated activity in TEM cells compared to naive in Soskic et al.
Nine TFs met these criteria: PRDM1, RORC, RUNX2, NR2C2, KLF6, RORA, SMAD3, MAF. Target genes were upregulated in memory cells compared to naive at rest and involved in the biological pathways enriched in memory upregulated genes ( ).

## Disease GRN subnetworks
We constructed GRNs centered on the accessible chromatin peak set most significantly overlapping the “Th2/MHCII” or “Treg” phenotype variant sets (green and blue boxes in ), to arrive at Th2/MHCII ( ) and Treg ( ) disease GRNs. We first collected all risk variants with an overlapping peak from the peak-cluster of interest (Th2/MHCII or Shared Treg). These peaks were linked to genes using the method described in Prior network of TF-gene interactions inferred from ATAC data, with the exception that the proximity rule was based on a more stringent criterion +/− 1kb promoter ( ). Any SNP-linked target genes detected in <5% cells of the relevant cell-type (Th2/MHCII or Treg) were excluded from the analysis. We then visualized the expression dynamics of the target genes as well as the activities of all predicted TF regulators from the GRN. Target genes and their TF regulators were retained in the GRN if their expression and TFA were elevated in the cell-type of interest at rest or their activation dynamics were specific to the cell-type of interest.

## Modeling chromatin accessibility as a function of TF activities
We designed a multivariate model to infer TF regulation of activation-dependent chromatin accessibility ( and ). TF motif enrichment analyses nominate potential TF regulators of accessibility patterns, but do not directly leverage important relationships between TF activities and chromatin accessibility signals. Post-hoc assessment of this relationship is non-trivial, when considering the multivariate, context-specific interactions of TFs across the 122 pseudobulk ATAC profiles (as shown in ). Thus, we explicitly modeled chromatin accessibility as a function of GRN-derived protein TF activities, using regularized regression to incorporate the TFBS predictions.
Similar to GRN inference, we modeled chromatin accessibility as a multivariate linear function of TF activities, constructing a model for each dynamic accessibility pattern in our dataset:

(Equation 4)yij=Σk∈TFscikakj,
where corresponds to pattern in pseudobulk sample biological replicate (e.g., “resting Th1, Donor 2”), is the activity of TF in condition , as estimated from the final GRN (described above), and describes the regulatory effect of TF k on accessibility pattern . In total, we constructed models for 12 dynamic accessibility patterns, pertaining to the median peak accessibility per cluster (7 RR clusters from , and 5 naive and memory-shared activation-dependent clusters from ).
The prior information was derived from motif-based TFBS prediction in each peak cluster (parameters and motif database as described above). We first counted the fraction of peaks per cluster with at least one binding site and calculated enrichment relative to the background of all reference peaks (one-sided Fisher exact test). For each cluster independently, each TF is ranked according to p-value, yielding adaptive LASSO penalty weighting factors in which the most enriched TF k receives the smallest weight and therefore smallest penalty:

(Equation 5)penalty=γik⋅λik.The resulting penalty matrix is used to guide network inference using an adaptive elastic net objective function:

(Equation 6)C=argmin|Y−CA|22+Λα|C|1+1−α2|C|2,
where is the accessibility matrix, is the activity matrix, is the matrix of penalties associated with each interaction and is parameter that controls the relative importance of the ridge (L2) versus LASSO (L1) penalty. A small L2 penalty stabilizes the optimization, and we set to prioritize the L1 penalty and model sparsity. Regularized regression was performed with GLMNet v0.7.0 in julia. 
 selection and network interaction confidences were estimated using StARS, as described for GRN inference.

## Visualization of accessibility networks
In and similar, we visualized any regulatory interaction between TF and peak cluster observed in 75 out of 100 subsamples.

## GWAS trait genetic risk variants and chromatin accessibility co-localization analysis
Mirroring the approach in, we utilized a curated set of 538 human diseases and phenotypes that had ≥20 independent risk loci from GWAS in European ancestry. We removed the 136 phenotypes associated with lab-collected values, leaving 387 for testing ( ). We applied the Regulatory Element Locus Intersection (RELI) algorithm to identify CD4+ T cell context-specific chromatin accessibility regions that significantly co-localized with genetic risk variant sets. Bonferroni correction was applied to account for multiple hypothesis testing. Disease phenotype variant and chromatin accessibility sets were reported as significantly co-localized, if the enrichment achieved Padj < 0.1 and was supported by peak-variant overlaps in at least three independent risk loci. In , phenotypes were clustered using k-means and a distance metric based on Pearson correlation.

## Precision-recall evaluation of GRN target genes for KLF6, MAF, and PRDM1

## Gold standard TF-gene interactions
PRDM1 TF ChIP-seq data from CD4 T cells was processed as described above for KLF6 ChIP-seq. For the human interactions, genes were linked to ChIP-seq peaks by taking all TSSs within 5kb of a peak. Murine “gold-standard” TF-gene interactions for Prdm1 and Maf were derived from , and mapped to human orthologs using biomaRt (v2.54.1). For mouse genes mapping to multiple human genes, all mappings were retained. Following the standard in the field, we evaluated precision (fraction of GRN TF-gene interactions supported by KO or ChIP-seq data) and recall (fraction of KO or ChIP-supported interactions recovered by the GRN) as a function of GRN interaction confidence scores. As a point of comparison, we generated GRNs from our multiome data using two other popular methods. In brief, for CellOracle, per their protocol: We generated a base GRN representing potential TF–gene interactions, derived from our snATAC-seq reference peaks. Distal regulatory interactions were inferred based on co-accessibility using Cicero (default parameters), while proximal regulatory regions were identified by locating peaks near transcription start sites (TSSs) using CellOracle’s HOMER-based motif analysis module. , We then integrated the distal (Cicero) and proximal (TSS) peaks and retained only those with a co-accessibility score ≥0.8. Using the filtered peak set, we performed motif scanning to identify TF-binding motifs using the CIS-BP motif database (v2.0.0). The resulting TF–gene interaction network served as the base GRN for building cell type-specific GRNS. Following the construction of cell type-specific GRNs, the confidence ranking of regulatory interactions were derived as described in Kamimoto et al. : Across subnetworks, we retained regulatory interactions p ≤ 0.001 and interactions were ranked based on the absolute value of the regression coefficients, with p-values used to break ties. Finally, we selected high-confidence TF–gene interactions such that, on average, each gene was regulated by 20 TFs, consistent with Inferelator model complexity. For SCENIC+: Enhancer gene regulatory networks were inferred using the SCENIC+ workflow with default parameters unless otherwise specified. Chromatin accessibility topic modeling was conducted with pycisTopic using Mallet (150 iterations), testing 11 topic models (2 topics and 5 to 50 in increments of 5). The optimal model, which included 45 topics, was chosen based on SCENIC+ model selection criteria. Differentially accessible regions between cell types were defined as those with a log2(fold-change) > 0.58.

## Analysis of the larger-cohort T cell activation scRNA-seq data
Processed scRNA-seq data from Soskic et al. were downloaded as a Seurat object from https://trynkalab.sanger.ac.uk. Gene feature Ensembl IDs were converted to human gene symbols using biomaRt (v2.54.1). Ensemble IDs mapping to the same gene were summed. The single-cell expression profiles were aggregated to generate pseudobulk count matrices per donor for each of eight cell type-timepoint combinations (naive, TCM, TEM or Treg at 0 or 16h), which were filtered for a minimum library size of 30,000. Differential gene expression analysis was performed using the pseudobulk analysis pipeline above (“Pseudobulk batch correction, data normalization and differential analyses”). TFA was estimated from the pseudobulked expression profiles using the GRN constructed from our multiome-seq data (see “ ” in the “ ” section). For each of the eight cell type-timepoint combinations, we used a two-tailed t test to assess TFA sex-dependence and Pearson correlation between TFA and donor age to assess age-dependence. P-values were adjusted for multiple hypothesis testing using the Benjamini–Hochberg procedure.

## Examination of biological variables, age, and sex
The Soskic et al. cohort (119 donors, 67 male, 52 female, over a range of ages: 19 to 79) enabled examination of TF dependence on sex and age. For the 378 TFs in our GRN that were also nominally expressed in the Soskic et al. dataset, time and cell type were the major sources of variation in the estimated TF activities. Limiting PCA to donor samples within a cell type-timepoint (e.g., TEM at 16h), age was a major source of TF variability only in naive cells, at both 0h and 16h, as PC2 correlated significantly with age (ρ = 0.39 and ρ = 0.46, respectively, Padj < 0.001). To identify individual TFs with sex- or age-dependence, we performed ANOVA and correlation analyses, respectively, for each TF ( and ). Mirroring the global analyses, 62 TFs exhibited age-dependent activities across multiple timepoints in naive cells, but only one TF was similarly age-dependent in a memory cell type (TSHZ2 in TCM). The top-ranked TFs with age-increased activities were TSHZ2, PRDM1, KLF6, STAT3 and NFIX, while the top-ranked age-decreased TFs were HMGA1, ZEB2, BACH2, NFKB1 and PA2G4 ( ). Among the 23 TFs exhibiting sex dependence, all were significantly sex-associated within the naive compartment, while a subset were also sex-associated in memory cells ( ). Only two TFs (HMGA1, ZBTB10) were elevated in males across the four populations (naive, TCM, TEM, Treg), and ZNF496 was the only factor elevated in females, across the populations. Analysis of the larger study identified age as a significant variation source for TF activities within the naive compartment only (62 out of 378 TFs) and a limited number of TFs with sex-dependent activities across cell types.

## Analysis of antigen-specific T cell activation scRNA-seq data
Processed scRNA-seq data from Monion et al. were downloaded as an H5AD file from GEO (GSE158667). The h5ad object was converted to a Seurat object using the Convert function in Seurat (v5.1.0). Only cells annotated as high quality from the original publication (HighQ = TRUE) were retained for downstream analysis. Single-cell expression profiles were aggregated per donor for each time point and CD4+ T cell population (CD137+, CD154+ and DN) to generate pseudobulk expression profiles, which were filtered for a minimum library size of 30,000. TFA was estimated using the GRN constructed from our multiome-seq data (see “ ” in the “ ” section). For each CD4+ T cell population, we treated each donor-timepoint as a biological replicate, reasoning that each timepoint in the peanut oral tolerance study provided insights into distinct T cell states, based on timing since last antigen encounter and the frequency and number of those encounters proceeding the peanut stimulation timepoint. For example, baseline and avoidance timepoints could be years to decades since last encounter, while build up and maintenance corresponded to recent encounter but clinically important differences in the frequency and number of encounters proceeding stimulation. For , we used two-sided t-tests with Benjamini–Hochberg correction for multiple testing to assess differences in TFA between the three CD4+ T cell population (CD137+, CD154+ and DN).
We compared TF activities of the three CD4+ T cell populations in the Monian et al. dataset to simple simulations from our dataset: Assuming a minimum of 5h for antigen processing and presentation for their 20h timepoint (post peanut protein incubation with PBMCs), their CD137+ cells were compared to our activated Treg (average TFA of 5 and 15h timepoints), their CD154+ cells were compared to our activated TEM (average TFA of 5 and 15h timepoints) and their DN cells, assumed to be majority naive and TCM, were compared to resting TCM and naive cells (i.e., TF activity estimates were averaged between TCM and naive cells). Our activated TEM population was constructed by averaging TFA across our five TEM populations (Th1, Th2, Th17, MHCII, CTL). We used ANOVA with Benjamini-Hochberg correction to identify TFs whose activities were not constant across the three groups from both the Monian et al. dataset and our simulated groups (CD137+, CD154+ and DN, Padj < 0.1). We visualized the top 50 most group-dependent (based on Padj) from both datasets, resulting in 90 unique TFs. We defined good agreement between TFAs based on their correlation between the two datasets (ρ > 0.5).

## ADDITIONAL RESOURCES
The resources developed in our study have been made interactively available from https://github.com/MiraldiLab/RapidRecall. These resources include: (1) GRN Visualization: All subnetworks described can be interacted with through cytoscape v3.10 by loading cytoscape session files. (2) Data Visualization: We used RShiny (v1.7.4.1) to enable interactive visualization of gene expression, transcription factor activity and data dimension reduction. (3) Genome browser of accessibility chromatin and maxATAC TF binding site predicitons: A track data hub was generated to visualize both chromatin accessibility data and the maxATAC predictions in the UCSC Genome Browser (see the “ ” section). All maxATAC-predicted TFBS were first aggregated into subpopulation-specific BED files across all TFs, resulting in a total of 16 BED files. These BED files were then converted into bigBED format using the bedToBigBed utility from version 466 of UCSCtools, and the data hub was compiled following the format described in the Basic Track Hub Quick Start Guide: (https://genome.ucsc.edu/goldenPath/help/hubQuickStart.html). (4) Codebases: The codebases to generate all figures in the manuscript are freely available from the repo as well.

## Supplementary Material
12345678SUPPLEMENTAL INFORMATION
Supplemental information can be found online at https://doi.org/10.1016/j.isci.2026.115076.

## Highlights
sn-multiome CD4+ T cell activation time course informs gene regulatory network
1000s of genes and chromatin regions show memory-associated rapid recall dynamics
A core set of transcription factors is predicted to underlie rapid recall
The core network is supported by other studies and implicated in immune disease genetic risk

## ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This project was supported by National Institutes of Health funding: R01AI153442 (A.B. and E.R.M.), U01AI150748 (E.R.M. and L.C.K.), R01AI173314 (E.R.M. and L.C.K.), R42HG011219 (A.B.), and P30AR070549 (L.C.K.). We thank D.A. Hildeman, M.T. Weirauch, and Y. Baglaenko for advice and the CCRF Single Cell Genomics Facility (RRID: SCR_022653) for assistance with multiome-seq optimization. was created using BioRender.com.

## Footnotes
DECLARATION OF INTERESTS
A.B. is a co-founder and M.K., S.K., and A.B. are part-time employees of Datirium, LLC. A.B. is an unpaid member of the Scientific Advisory Board of LDRTC, LLC.

## REFERENCES
 

## Associated Data

## Supplementary Materials
12345678

## Data Availability Statement
The multiome-seq, KLF6 ChIP-seq, and whole-genome sequencing (WGS) data generated in this study are hosted on Gene Expression Omnibus (GEO: GSE282266 [multiome-seq, KLF6 ChIP-seq] and GSE287942 [WGS]) and are publicly available as of the date of publication. Accession numbers are listed in the .
The codebase to reproduce results and interactively explore the data and GRNs is available from GitHub (https://github.com/MiraldiLab/RapidRecall) and is publicly available as of the date of publication. Accession numbers are listed in the .
Any additional information required to reanalyze the data reported in this paper is available from the upon request.