J Cell BiolJ. Cell Biol482jcellbiolThe Journal of Cell Biology0021-95251540-8140The Rockefeller University PressPMC2112570PMC2112570.121125702112570688591610.1083/jcb.97.3.692832912871ArticlesAcidification of phagosomes is initiated before lysosomal enzyme activity is detected
191983973155427692702010319840105200821102019https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-sa/4.0/This article is distributed under the terms of an Attribution–Noncommercial–Share Alike–No Mirror Sites license for the first six months after the publication date (see http://www.rupress.org/terms). After six months it is available under a Creative Commons License (Attribution–Noncommercial–Share Alike 4.0 Unported license, as described at http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-sa/4.0/).We have measured changes of pH in a protein's microenvironment consequent on its binding to the cell surface and incorporation into pinosomes. Changes of pH were measured from single, living cells and selected regions of cells by the fluorescence ratio technique using a photon-counting microspectrofluorimeter. The chemotactic agent and pinocytosis inducer, ribonuclease, labeled with fluorescein (FTC- RNase), adsorbed to the surface of Amoeba proteus, and was pinocytosed by cells in culture media at pH 7.0. The FTC-RNase entered an apparently acidic microenvironment, pH approximately 6.1, upon binding to the surface of amoebae. Once enclosed within pinosomes, this protein's microenvironment became steadily more acidic, reaching a minimum of pH approximately 5.6 in less than 10 min. FTC-RNase pinocytosed by the giant amoeba, Chaos carolinensis, entered pinosomes whose pH was correlated with their cytoplasmic location during the initial 30-40 min after pinocytosis. The majority of pinosomes containing FTC-RNase clustered in the tail ectoplasm of C. carolinensis during this interval and had a pH of approximately 6.5; those released into endoplasm and carried into the tip of cells had a pH below 5.0. As pinosomes became distributed at random in C. carolinensis (1-2 h after initial pinocytosis), differences in pH between tip and tail pinosomes vanished. We have also measured the pH within single phagosomes of A. proteus. Phagosomal pH dropped steadily to approximately 5.4 within 5 min after particle ingestion in 70% of the cells measured, and reached this level of acidity within 10 min in 90% of the cells measured. By contrast, stain for the lysosomal enzyme, acid phosphatase, was evident within only 20% of 5-min-old phagosomes visualized by light microscopy, and within only 40% of 10-min-old phagosomes. A microfluorimetric assay was used to simultaneously record changes in pH, and the initial deposition of lysosomal esterases, within phagosomes of single, living Amoeba proteus. Near complete acidification of the phagosome was recorded from some cells before phagosomal fusion was evident by this microfluorimetric assay. From other cells, however, continued acidification of phagosomes was recorded after lysosomal fusion was initiated. We conclude that acidification of phagosomes by A. proteus is initiated but not necessarily completed prior to phagosome-lysosome formation, and that the two events are closely linked in time. Initial acidification of endosomes is a property intrinsic to the plasma membrane which envelops particles at the cell surface, rather than the result of lysosomal fusion with phagosomes.

pmc-status-qastatus0pmc-status-liveyespmc-status-embargonopmc-status-releasedyespmc-prop-open-accessyespmc-prop-olfnopmc-prop-manuscriptnopmc-prop-legally-suppressednopmc-prop-has-pdfyespmc-prop-has-supplementnopmc-prop-pdf-onlyyespmc-prop-suppress-copyrightnopmc-prop-is-real-versionnopmc-prop-is-scanned-articlenopmc-prop-preprintnopmc-prop-in-epmcyespmc-license-refCC BY-NC-SA
 Acidification of Phagosomes Is Initiated
before Lysosomal Enzyme Activity Is Detected
PAUL L. McNEIL, LERSON TANASUGARN, JAMES B. MEIGS, and
D. LANSING TAYLOR
Department of Biological Sciences,Centerfor FluorescenceResearchin BiomedicalSciences,Carnegie-
Mellon University, Pittsburgh,Pennsylvania 15213
ABSTRACT We have measured changes of pH in a protein's microenvironment consequent
on its binding to the cell surface and incorporation into pinosomes. Changes of pH were
measured from single, living cells and selected regions of cells by the fluorescence ratio
technique using a photon-counting microspectrofluorimeter. The chemotactic agent and
pinocytosis inducer, ribonuclease, labeled with fluorescein (FTC-RNase), adsorbed to the
surface of Amoeba proteus, and was pinocytosed by cells in culture media at pH 7.0. The
FTC-RNase entered an apparently acidic microenvironment, pH --,6.1, upon binding to the
surface of amoebae. Once enclosed within pinosomes, this protein's microenvironment
became steadily more acidic, reaching a minimum of pH "---5.6 in <10 min. FTC-RNase
pinocytosed by the giant amoeba, Chaos carolinensis, entered pinosomes whose pH was
correlated with their cytoplasmic location during the initial 30-40 min after pinocytosis. The
majority of pinosomes containing FTC-RNaseclustered in the tail ectoplasm of C. carolinensis
during this interval and had a pH of ,~6.5; those released into endoplasm and carried into the
tip of cells had a pH below 5.0. As pinosomes became distributed at random in C. carolinensis
(I-2 h after initial pinocytosis), differences in pH between tip and tail pinosomes vanished.
We have also measured the pH within single phagosomes of A. proteus. PhagosomalpH
dropped steadily to "--5.4 within 5 min after particle ingestion in 70% of the cells measured,
and reached this level of acidity within 10 rain in 90% of the cells measured. By contrast, stain
for the lysosomal enzyme, acid phosphatase, was evident within only 20% of 5-min-old
phagosomes visualized by light microscopy, and within only 40% of 10-min-old phagosomes.
A microfluorimetric assaywas used to simultaneously record changes in pH, and the initial
deposition of lysosomal esterases,within phagosomesof single, living Amoeba proteus. Near
complete acidification of the phagosome was recorded from some cells before phagosomal
fusion was evident by this microfluorimetric assay. From other cells, however, continued
acidification of phagosomeswas recorded after lysosomal fusion was initiated. We conclude
that acidification of phagosomes by A. proteus is initiated but not necessarilycompleted prior
to phagosome-lysosome formation, and that the two events are closely linked in time. Initial
acidification of endosomes is a property intrinsic to the plasma membrane which envelops
particles at the cell surface, rather than the result of lysosomal fusion with phagosomes.
Binding of appropriate ligands to the cell surface can initiate
many cellular responses including chemotaxis. The free-living
amoebae exhibit chemotaxis in gradients of some basic pro-
teins such as ribonuclease (Our unpublished observations,
and reference 16). These same proteins induce adsorptive
pinocytosis when applied uniformly to amoebae, a response
characteristic of other chemotactic cells (35).
Once endocytosed, many substances are degraded by lyso-
somal enzymes. These enzymes are delivered into the endo-
some by fusion of its membrane with the membranes of 1"
and 2* lysosomes. However, not all particles and molecules
endocytosed are subsequently digested. Many symbiotic and
parasitic organisms can, for example, prevent fusion of lyso-
somes with the endocytic vesicles containing them, and can,
as a result, avoid digestion while living within host cytoplasm
(7, 13, 17). Furthermore, there are severe restrictions on the
THE JOURNAL OF CELL BIOLOGY * VOLUME 97 SEPTEMBER1983 692-702
692 (c) The Rockefeller University Press * 0021-9525/83/09/0692/11 $1.00
fusion of lysosomes with cellular membranes other than those
of newly formed endosomes. Healthy organelles would oth-
erwise be needlessly destroyed, and an excess of lysosomal
enzymes delivered into the aging endosome.
It is not presently known how lysosomal fusion with en-
dosomes is regulated. Answers to this fundamental question
may depend on well-defined spatial and temporal characteri-
zations of the cellular, macromolecular, and ionic events
leading up to fusion of lysosomes with endosomes. Changes
in the pH of endosomes occur soon after initial endocytosis,
and may therefore have relevance to the problem of endo-
some-lysosome fusion. Numerous studies since Metchnikoff
(20) confirmed that initially phagosomal contents are acidic
and that subsequently they may return to near neutral pH (6,
14, 15, 19). Using the fluorescence ratio technique (23), it has
recently been possible to accurately quantify pH changes
within endosomes over time. Thus, rapid drops in phagosomal
pH have been recorded within newly formed phagosomes of
the amoeba, C carolinensis (9), and within the phagosomes
of macrophages (6). Less is known about the kinetics of
phagosome-lysosome fusion, because no techniques have
been available to quantitatively measure this event in the
living cell.
The kinetics of pH changes within pinosomes have not
been recorded with good temporal resolution. However, Hei-
pie and Taylor (9) showed that a subpopulation of pinosomes
in C carolinensis was acidic 1 h after initial endocytosis and
Tycko and Maxfield (32) showed that pinosomes of fibroblasts
are acidic at 20 min after initiation of pinocytosis.
We have employed a photon-counting microspectrofluori-
meter, improved from a previous design (8, 10), to record the
pH within pinosomes of single A. proteus as soon as 5 min
after initial endocytosis, and for up to 24 h thereafter. We
have, moreover, measured the pH at the surface glycocalyx
of amoebae, to which chemotactic proteins adsorb prior to
their uptake by pinocytosis. Temporal records were also made
of the pH within pinosomes of the giant amoeba, Chaos
carolinensis, and, in addition, we characterized differences of
the pH within pinosomes correlated with their initial location
after uptake in this cell. Finally, we recorded the early (2.5-
20 min) time course of pH changes within phagosomes of
single A. proteus, and, in parallel, determined the time course
by which lysosomal enzyme activity is detectable within the
newly formed phagosomes of A. proteus, both by conventional
light- and electron-microscopic cytochemistry as well as by a
microfluorimetric assay used to study phagosome-lysome fu-
sion in single, living cells.
MATERIALS AND METHODS
Cells: .4. proteus and C carolinensis (Connecticut Valley Biological
Supply Co., Southampton, MA) were cultured in the following medium: 0.3
mM K2HP40, 0.3 mM KH:PO4, 0.08 mM CaCI2,0.08 mM KCI, 0.008 mM
MgSO,, and 0.17 mM NaCI, adjusted to pH 7 with 0.1 N HCI or0.1 N KOH.
Amoebae were fed as previously described (24) three times weeklywith Tetra-
hymena pyriformis (Carolina BiologicalSupply, Burlington, NC) grown axeni-
callyin 1.5%protease peptone, 0.1% yeastextract, and0.2% dextrose.Amoebae
were starved for ~48 h before all experiments.
Protein Labeling with fluorescein: Chick ovalbumin, 2 times
crystallized (Worthington Biochemicals, Freehold, NJ) and ribonuclease-A
(fraction III, Sigma Chemical Co., St. Louis, MO) were labeled with fiuorescein
isothiocyanate isomer I (Sigma Chemical Co.) according to published methods
(33). The dye-to-protein ratio of FTC (fluorescein~)-ovalbuminwas 1;for FTC-
ribonuclease it was 0.2.
Abbreviations used in this paper: CFD, carboxyfluorescein diace-
hate; FTC, fluorescein; FTC-RNase, ribonuclease labeled with fluo-
rescein.
Microspectrofluorimetric Measurement of Fluorescence In-
tensity Ratios: Fluorescence intensity ratios (Ex~9/Ex4s2)from singlecells
containing FTC-labeled proteins or from microcapillary tubes containing the
proteins were measured with a microspectrofluorimeter based on the design of
Heiple and Taylor (10). As shown previously with their apparatus, this ratio of
fluorescenceintensity is highly dependent on pH in the range 5 to 7, but is not
affected by the ionic strength or buffering species in the solvent, or by photo-
bleaching (10). Further details specificto the individual experiments are given
in the figure legends.
The present microspectrofluorimeter was improved in four areas to increase
both spatial and temporal resolution (seeFig. 1):
Excitation beam. The heat-filtered beam was gated by a filter holder driven
by a stepping motor (Superior Electric Co., Bristol, CN), controlled by a
Rockwell AIM-65 microcomputer (Rockwell International Corp., Newport
Beach, CA). This gate blocks the excitation beam completely or selectsone of
the two excitation wavelenths (Ex45~or Ex~9) by swinging the appropriate
excitation filter (10-rim bandwidth, Spectro-Film, Inc., Winchester, MA) into
the fightpath. The three-position gate prevents bleachingof fluorescentproteins
within cellsby the excitation beam before and after the experiment, but allows
rapid (10-110 ms programmable) switching to excitation filters. The stepping
motor is remotely controlled by the microcomputer (Fig. 1 b) through a slow-
syn translator. Excitation beam intensity is adjusted by a set of Zeiss neutral
density filters. The microscope and filter assembly have separate vibration-
damped supports.
Emission beam. Light from the photometer head was gated by an electro-
mechanical shutter (22512AOX5, Vincent Associates, Rochester, NY) driven
by the microcomputer through a power supply energizer (100-2, Vincent
Associates), and collected by a 3.18-mm-diam light guide (randomized fiber
arrangement, Galileo Electro-Optics, Sturbridge, MA), which delivers the light
to the photomultiplier.
Photon counter. Instead of the analog-to-digital conversion of Heiple and
Taylor (8, 10),sensitivityand signal-to-noiseratio were maximized by reducing
various forms ofexcessnoise through photon counting (1). The RCA8852 end-
window multi-alkali photomultiplier tube (Bertan Associates, Syosset, NY)
was operated at 2,000 V direct current, and housed in a water-cooled thermc~
electrically-refrigeratedchamber, which is radio-frequency shielded and main-
rained at -30"C (TE-104-RF, Products for Research, Inc., Danvers, MA). A
set of defocusing magnets (PR411, Products for Research, Inc.) was placed
inside the cooling chamberto decrease the effectivephotocathode to ~ 15 mm
in diameterto match the emission beam, which fallswithin a spot of ~ 10 mm
in diameter on the photocathode. The anode current was fed into model 631
pulse amplitude discriminator (EMR Photoelectric, Princeton, NJ). The fre-
quency of the pulses from the photomultiplier was prescaled before counting
bya "versatile interface adapter" chip in the AIM-65 microcomputer (4),giving
a linear response up to 100,000counts/see.
Supervising control. The AIM-65 synchronized stepping motors, shutters,
and photon counter, and provided statistical analysis of the data.
These improvements have resulted in much better spatial and temporal
resolution. Measurements maybe madein regionsassmall as20#m in diameter
for relatively stationary cells. The time required for a single measurement has
been cut down to 300 ms (Fig. 1 b). Excitation intensity has been reduced to
the point that no autofluorescence was measured from the prepinocytotic
amoebae.
Pinocytosis and Phagocytosis: Fluorescent pinosomes were
formed when amoebae were immersed at 22"C for 2 to 20 min in culture
medium, pH 7.0, containing 0.1 mg/ml ribonuclease labeled with fluorescein
(FTC-RNas). At the end of this period, FTC-RNase bound to the glycocalyx
was removed by four washes in culture medium pH 10.7 followed by two
washesin culture medium pH 7.0. These washeswereaccomplished in <2 min
by pipetting the amoebae from one pool (2 ml) to another of six washes on a
plastic petri dish viewed under a dissecting microscope. In cells not given time
to pinocytose (immersed for <10 s in the FTC-RNase before washing), such
washing removed all but 0.1 to 0.3% of surface bound FTC-RNase from A.
proteus and all but 0.5 to 1.0% of it from C. carolinensis. Washed cells
containing pinocytosed FTC-RNase were transferred for microspectrofluori-
metric measurements to microscope chambers consisting of a coverslip sup-
ported on a slide by clay feet and containing culture medium pH 7.0. Initiation
of pinocytosis was defined as time zero in all measurements, but formation of
pinocytotic channels and pinosomes is not immediate, so this definition gives
a maximum ageforthe pinosomes. Pbagosomescontaining living Tetrahymena
and FTC-ovalbumin ingested together in culture medium at pH 7.0 were
induced in A. proteus as previously described for C. carolinensis (9). We took
apparent sealingof the phagosome as time zero.
Detection of Lysosomal Enzymes within Phagosomes by
Light and Electron Microscope Cytochemistry: Stain for the
lysosomal enzyme acid phospbatase was deposited in the lysosomal compart-
mentsofA. proteus by a modification ofGomori'sclassicalmethod (3). Several
MCNEILETAL. Endosomal
AcidificationandLysosomalFusion 693
A
,o,.o-..
I ;
._ :s4 Co.,.,.r
[ ~ ~ Shutter "11"--"~ S3 Monuoi
AIM-65 l -- -- AP
Microcoml~te( I Select EFI,EF2, ~ ~
~ (see"e")~ ~ .A~ '
eFz ~ oeJ
SA
TU HF IF
[!J
B ~ Data Acquicltion Time (Photon counting)
~ t ycoe -'-~ Ne,tCyc~ ~S
Start
'~,l--so ~ , o o ~ ~o -,~ ,oo -I so--*.-,oo~
' Oor~k; ~ ~{ First Filter 7 ~ '0 Second
FFt(,)"1) Move Forword EF2(~'2) M EFI(~t) )1
OVt Bockwofd to * - MoveFocw~d
take ratio E~2 take ratio E~k2
[Xt [~,
thousand amoebae, settled on the bottom of plastic petri dishes, were presented
with 100 times their number of living Tetrahymena.Within 2 min after this
presentation, 5-10% of the amoebae had phagocytosed one Tetrahymenaand
were firmly adherent to the dishes. Those Tetrahymenanot taken up during 2
min were removed from the dishes by four rinses of culture medium. The time
of removal of excess Tetrahymenawas taken as time zero, though obviously
phagocytosis may have been completed as much as 2 min earlier. At selected
intervals after phagocytosis, all but a residue of culture medium was aspirated
from the dishes, to which were added 2 ml of 2.5% paraformaidehyde and
4.5% glutaraldehyde in 200 mM cacodylate buffer, pH 7.0. Amoebae were
fixed for 30 min at 22"C, washed three times by centrifugation at 100 g for 2
min in 200 mM Tris-maleate buffer, pH 5.0, and incubated for 15 min at 37C
in a filtered Gomori stain, pH 5.0, that had been warmed for 1h to 37C. The
modified Gomori stain contained: 10 ml of 1.25% Na-/%glycerolphusphate,10
ml of glass-distilled H20, l0 ml of 200 mM Tris-maleate buffer, and 20 ml of
0.2% lead nitrate, which was added dropwise to the previous components.
Controls for nonspecific staining contained 0.2 M NaF, in addition to the
above ingredients. After staining, amoebae were washed with 100 mM caco-
dylate buffer pH 7.0, 1% acetic acid, and again with buffer. Amoebae to be
examined by light microscopy were immersed in 1.0% ammonium sulfide for
2 min, washed once with glass distilled H20, and mounted in chambers on
glass slides. The presence or absence of the black stain in phagosomes of
amoebae were scored single blind. Cells for electron microscopy were postfixed
(without immersion in ammonium sulfide) in 1% 0sO4in 150 mM cacodylate,
pH 7.0, for 20 min at 4C, dehydrated in ethanol and propylene dioxide, and
embedded in Spurr's resin (27). Sections were examined and photographed on
a Philips 300 electron microscope without further staining.
Stain foresteraseswasdeposited in the lysosomal compartmentsofA. proteus
by a modification of Shnitka and Seligman's method (26). Amoebae that had
phagocytosed heat-killed Tetrahymena(as above for Gomori staining) were
fixed for 2 h in 10% (vol/voi) formalin and then stained with a solution of
naphthol-AS acetate (Sigmal Chemical Co). and fast blue salt BB (Sigma
Chemical Co.) as described (26), but without NaF added, for 15 min at room
temperature.
694 THe JOURNAL OF CELL BIOLOGY - VOLUme 97, 1983
Time in
MillisOco~ls
FIGURE 1 (A) Schematic representation
of the microfluorimeter used to quantify
fluorescent signals. The dotted line rep-
resents the epi-excitation light from a
quartz-halogen lamp (QH), the heavy solid
line represents the path of fluorescent
light from the sample (SA),and the lighter
solid line represents light from a substage
tungsten lamp (TU). A substage interfer-
ence filter (IF)selects a wavelength of light,
for bright-field observation, that will not
pass through the barrier filter (BF) to the
photomultiplier (PMT). The fluorescent fil-
ters, EF1and EF2,select the wavelength of
the excitation light, and 5, blocks the light
beam. Other symbols are as follows: HF,
heat filter set; FDt and FD2, field dia-
phragms; DM, dichroic mirror; OBJ,objec-
tive; BC, bright field condenser; OC, ocu-
lar; D and AP, variable apertures; PAD,
pulse amplitude discriminator; FF, pre-
scribing flip-flops; NDF, neutral density fil-
ter; FB, fiber bundle. (B) Timing diagram
for operation of the stepping motor and
data acquisition. The time scale is given
on the horizontal axis. Shaded areas sig-
nify the duration of photon counting (53
and 54 are open). When the operation is
started, either manually or automatically,
there is a short, programmable lag time
(10 to 100 ms). Then data acquisition takes
place in a periodic fashion. One complete
cycle only is shown in the diagram. In each
cycle, photon counts (selected through a
520-560-nm barrier filter, BF) are inte-
grated over 50 ms for each excitation filter
takemt~-Exz (EF, or EF2).The ratio of these two sums
t k t (EFJEFT)is computed twice per cycle.
Detection of Lysosomal Esterases within Phagosomes of
Living Cells by a Microfluorimetrjc Assay: Living, washedTetra-
hymenawere suspended in a test tube in 4 mI of amoeba's culture medium,
immersed for 10 min in a boiling water bath, and washed twice in 10 ml of
culture medium. At least 10 min before the initiation of phagocytosis, the
washed pellet of heat-killed Tetrahymenawas suspended in 4 ml of culture
medium (pH readjusted to 7)containing 0.06 mg/ml of 5 [6] earboxyfluorescein
diacetate (CFD; Molecular Probes, Piano, TX) and 1.25% dimethyl sulfoxide.
Phagocytosis by the amoeba of the heat-killed Tetrahymenawas induced as
previously described for C.carolinensis(9), and the phagocytotic amoebae were
then washed through three pools (2 ml) each of culture medium. The amoeba
membrane is impermeable to CFD so that, unlike the situation in many
mammalian cells, CFD does not readily cross the membrane to be hydrolyzed
and trapped (see Results below). Similarly, when CFD is physically trapped in
a phagosome it does not diffuse across the phagosomal membrane.
The net photon counts excited at wavelengths 489 and 452 nm, and the
fluorescence ratio of these counts were recorded from the phagosome through
a x 16 objective (ZCIssx 16, NA = 0.35) and the microspectrofluorimeter
operated in its normal mode (see above). An increase in the net photon counts
excited at 452 nm occurred when CFD included in the phagosomes was
hydrolyzed to highly fluorescent carboxyfluorescein; a change in the fluores-
cence ratio (Ex489/Ex4s2)occurred when the pH changed within the phagosomes.
As we show below in the Results, CFI:) was hydrolyzed to carboxyfluorescein
by esterases delivered into the phagosome by phagosome-lysosome fusion, and
the increase in net fluorescence counts excited at 452 nm was therefore an
unambiguous indicator of this event. The presence of a small amount of
fluorescence at the beginning of the experiment was due to minimal hydrolysis
of CFD during preparation.
Measurements of net photon counts were also recorded on the micruspec-
trofluorimeter from heat-killed Tetrahymenaand from homogenates of living
and heat-killed Tetrahymenaenclosed within 50-,m thick, rectangular micro-
capillaries. Living and heat-killed Tetrahymenawere homogenized by sonifi-
cation with four 50-W pulses of 10 s each (Ultrasonics with Microtip, model
W 185, Plainview, NY). Homogenates were stored on ice until used. Cell counts
were made with a standard microscope hemocytometer.
RESULTS
Pinocytosis and Subsequent Intracellular Location
of Fluorescein-labeled Ribonuclease
FTC-RNase was ingested by A. proteus and C. carolinensis
at pH 7.0 by adsorptive pinocytosis. The positively charged
RNase bound to the highly acidic glycocalyx of amoebae,
inhibited normal locomotion, and rapidly initiated the for-
mation of numerous pinocytotic channels leading from the
cell surface into the cytoplasm (Fig. 2). Vesicles containing
FTC-RNase pinched off from the intracellular bases of these
channels. Pinocytotic channels disappeared and normal lo-
comotion resumed when amoebae were washed free of FTC-
RNase in culture medium, pH 10.7 (see Materials and Meth-
ods). Pinocytotic vesicles containing FTC-RNase were ran-
FIGURE 2 Nomarski (A) and fluorescence (B) images of a pinocy-
totic channel (arrow) of C. carolinensis induced in 0.1 mg/ml rho-
damine-RNase. Fluorescence images in this and the remaining
figures were recorded with an RCA TC1030/H image intensifier as
described elsewhere (29). Bar, 100/~m. x 300.
domly distributed in the cytoplasm of A. proteus as soon as it
was possible to make observations after washing. By contrast,
pinosomes of C. carolinensis were concentrated in the tail
ectoplasm immediately after initial pinocytosis, where they
did not flow with the endoplasm of the locomoting cell (Fig.
3). With time (30-60 min), however, these pinosomes were
released from the tail ectoplasm and entered streaming en-
doplasm with the result that, at 1-2 h after initial pinocytosis,
vesicles were evenly distributed throughout the whole cell. At
no time in either species was FTC-RNase observed as diffuse
cytoplasmic fluorescence.
Standard Curves
The ratio of fluorescence emission excited at 489 nm and
452 nm from FTC-labeled proteins is highly sensitive to pH
between 5 to 7 (8, 23). To duplicate as closely as possible in
our standard curve the conditions for measuring such ratios
from the endosomes of living cells, we collapsed the gradient
of pH across endosomes of amoebae by immersing them in a
series of weak acid-base buffers (100 mM NH4OAc, 10 mM
Tris-maleate), ranging from pH 5.0 to pH 7.5, and allowed
the measured ratio to reach a new and stable value (usually
20-30 min after immersion). The resulting curve of fluores-
cence intensity ratios versus pH for FTC-RNase in pinosomes
is given in Fig. 4. A critical evaluation of this method for
calibration using amoebae may be found in Heiple and Taylor
(io).
Surface-bound FTC-RNase
Binding of the FTC-RNase to the surface glycocalyx of
amoebae reduced its fluorescence intensity ratio on average
by a factor of 2.0 ratio U from that measured by the protein
in culture medium pH 7.0 (Table I). If this change on binding
reflects a pure pH measurement by the FTC-RNase, then the
microenvironment at the cell surface of A. proteus is main-
rained as ~0.9 pH U lower then culture medium, or, in the
present case, at pH ~6.1. Table I shows that chilling cells to
4"C raised the ratio of surface-bound FTC-RNase by as much
as 1.03 ratio U, or ~0.5 pH U. It did not, however, restore
surface pH to 7.0. Ratios measured from surface-bound FTC-
RNase varied considerably from one amoeba culture to an-
other but were always lower than that measured from FTC-
RNase in culture medium and lower than ratios measured at
FIGURE 3 Nomarski (A)
and fluorescence (B and
C) images of C. carolinen-
sis photographed 30 min
(A and B) and 80 min (C)
after initial pinocytosis of
0.1 mg/ml rhodamine-
RNase. At 30 min, the
majority of the pino-
somes are sequestered in
the tail (7) of this Ioco-
moting cell, but at 80 min
they are distributed over
the length of the cell. TP,
tip of Iocomoting cell.
Bar, 100/~m. (A) x 50; (B
and C) x 25.
McNFIu ETAL. EndosomalAcidification and LysosomalFusion 695
pH 7.0 in the in situ calibration. When cells with surface-
bound FTC-RNase were rinsed into culture medium pH 6.0,
the ratio dropped by 1.3 U (Table I). Thus, surface-bound
FTC-RNase is sensitive to changes in the external pH of the
medium. If cells with surface-bound FTC-RNase were rinsed
in culture medium at pH 10.7 after measurements, all but
0.7% of the fluorescence emitted under 489-nm excitation
was removed from the cell. Therefore, the above measure-
ments reflect the ratio of surface-bound probe, not of probe
pinocytosed by the cells. Binding of FTC-RNase to the gly-
cocalyxof C. carolinensis also reduced the fluorescenceinten-
sity ratio (Table I), indicating that this cell too maintains an
acidic pH at its surface.
Kinetics of pH Changes within Pinosomes
Pinosomes containing FTC-RNase acidified rapidly in A.
proteus. In the record of Fig. 5, for example, the pH within
the pinosomes of a single cell is less than that at the cell
surface as soon as measurement was possible, 5 min after
7
v
.9 5
"= 4
5
2
u. 0
4.5 5'.o s'.5 6'.o 6'.5 ;o ;.s
pH
FIGURE 4 Standard curve of fluorescence intensity ratio (Ex~9/
Ex4s2)versus pH for FTC-RNase within pinosomes (0). A. proteus
that had pinocytosed FTC-RNase were washed three times in 100
nM NH4OAC, 10 mM Tris-maleate buffer, pH 5.0 to 7.5, mounted
in a microscope chamber containing the buffer, and the fluores-
cence ratios measured from the pinosomes until it was fixed at a
new stable value, usually <30 rain after initial immersion in buffer.
Ratios could not be measured from pinosomes of cells immersed
in buffers below pH 5.0 or above pH 7.5, since leakage of FTC-
RNase from pinosomes was evident under such conditions. Each
point respresents the mean of measurements from 3 to 12 cells;
the bar represents the standard deviation of the mean.
TABLE I
Effect of Binding to Cell Surfaceon FluorescenceIntensity Ratio
of FTC-RNase
Ratio (No. of
FTC-RNase Cells Measured) ~pH
In culture medium:
25C, pH 7.0 6.3* 7.0
On cell surface:
A. proteus, 25"C, pH 7.0 4.3 (6) 6.1'
A. proteus, 25"C, pH 6.0 3.0 (3) 5.7
A. proteus, 4"C, pH 7.0 5.4 (4)m 6.6
C. carolinensis,25C, pH 7.0 4.8 (2) 6.3
C. carolinensis,25"C, pH 6.0 2.8 5.6
* In capillary tube.
Calibrated from standard curve of Fig. 4.
! Cells were preincubated for 3e rain at 4"C, exposed to FTC-RNase at 4"C,
washed in culture medium pH 7.0 at 4"C, and then transferred to culture
medium in an unchilled chamber, and measured immediately.
696 THE JOURNAL OF CELL BIOLOGY - VOLUME 97, 1983
A
v
0
Z
z
,.=,
u
tn
o
..I
5
4
3 \
2
7.0
6.5
6.0
pH
: II U--
! /
2 , ~ ~ ,o ,2 ,, ,~--~o
AGE OF PINOSOMES (mini
FIGURE S Earlytime course for pH changes within pinosomes of a
single A. proteus (0). This cell pinocytosed for 2 rain before it was
washed free of surface bound FTC-RNase with culture medium,
pH 10.7. The ratio measured at the surface of A. proteus (A} is also
provided for comparison. The bars in this and the following curves
represent the standard deviation of the mean of 20 measurements
made in a 3-s interval from single cells.
m =
o
Z
W
~. ~ ,~ ,'6 2'0:' 3'~ ~o,o
AGE OF PINOSOMES(i~)
7.5
7.0
6.5
6.0
pH
5.5
5.0
FIGURE 6 Long term time course for changes in the pinosomal pH
of a single A. proteus (Q).This cell pinocytosed 15 rain before it was
washed. The ratio measured from FTC-RNase bound to the surface
of A. proteus is also indicated (&).
initial endocytosis, and the pinosomal pH drops steadily in
this cell to a minimum value of pH 5.6 within 8.5 rain.
Indeed, at 10 min after an initial 2 min of pinocytosis, the
contents of pinosomes in 80% of the cells measured was not
greater than pH 5.6. After this initial acidification, the pH of
pinosomal contents rose steadily during the following 8-10 h
reaching pH ~6.4, above which it was maintained for up to
24 h (Fig. 6). A. proteus was capable of acidifying its pino-
somes in culture medium, pH 10.7 (data not shown). Its
pinosomal contents were, therefore, well protected from the
high pH of the external environment during washing.
Pinosomal contents of C. carolinensis also acidified after
initial pinocytosis, but interpretation of the data is compli-
cated by the initially nonrandom distribution of pinosomes
in this cell (see above). The pH within pinosomes of whole C.
carolinensis dropped to ~ 5.1 at 1-2 h after initial pinocytosis
(Fig. 7). But a pinosome's pH in C. carolinensis was not
simply a function of its age; its cytoplasmic location was also
,It ~"
K K
v 8
o
w
~ 7
>- 6
p-
z 4
~ 3
z
w
~ 2
J 0
,I,/
7.5
7.0
6.5
pH
6.0
515
5.0
I II I
AGE OF PINOSOMES (h)
FICURE 7 Time course for pH changes in pinosomes of C. caroli-
nensis. Two kinds of measurement of pinosomal pH are shown: a
whole-cell measurement (O) using an x 10 objective, and measure-
ments of selected regions, occupying one-fourth of the whole cell's
length, using an x 25 objective. Those regions of the amoebae
measured with the x 25 objective are: Iocomoting tip
(@-----e), tail (O..... e), and mid-region (O~---O). Records from cel-
lular tip, tail, and mid-region are recorded from the same amoeba.
For clarity, only values of pinosomal pH in cell mid-region are
reported after 1.5 h: the ratios measured from tips and tails after
1.5 h were equivalentto one another and to those measured in the
mid-region. The record of whole-cell pinosomal pH was made on
a separate amoeba. Both cells pinocytosed for 20 min in 0.1 rag/
ml FTC-RNase before the wash in culture medium, pH 10.7. The
ratio measured by FTC-RNasebound to the surface of C. carolinen-
sis is also indicated (a).
important during the first 50-60 min after initial pinocytosis.
The pH of pinosomes initially concentrated in the tail of C.
carolinensis (see above) was ~6.5, a value maintained for up
to 45 min in some cells (Fig. 7). By contrast, pinosomes
streaming within the tip endoplasm of C. carolinensis were
acidic, pH <5.0, as soon as measurement was possible (15
min) (Fig. 7). With time (1.2-1.5 h), pinosomal pH in tips
and tails became indistinguishable at pH ~5.1, and pino-
somes were no longer concentrated in the tail ectoplasm. The
pH within pinosomes from all parts of the cell then rose
continually during the next 24 h, reaching slightly alkaline
values above pH 7.5 (Fig. 7).
Changes of pH in the culture medium (from pH 7.0 to pH
6.0 or to 9.0) were without effect on the ratio measured from
20-30-min-old tail pinosomes of C. carolinensis. Further-
more, washing in culture medium pH 10.7 removed all but
0.5 to 1.0% of surface-bound FTC-RNase from C. carolinen-
sis. We conclude that FTC-RNase at the tail of Chaos is truly
enclosed within pinosomes, where it is inaccessible to culture
medium.
Kineticsof pH Changeswithin Phagosomes
Phagosomal contents, like pinosomal, acidified rapidly in
A. proteus. Typically, phagosomal pH dropped steadily to pH
~5.4 within 5-10 min of initial phagocytosis, a value 1.6 pH
U below the initial pH of the culture medium and FTC-
ovalbumin ingested along with the living Tetrahymena (Fig.
8).
LysosomalFusionwith Phagosomes
At various intervals after phagocytosis of living Tetrahy-
mena, A. Proteus were fixed and their lysosomes (1" and 2*)
were stained by a modification of Gomori's method (3). A
black reaction product (Fig. 9) was evident by light micros-
copy within 20% of the phagosomes at 5 rain after initial
phagocytosis, and within 40% at 10 rain (Fig. 10). By com-
parison, 70% ofthe phagosomes had reached a near minimum
value of <pH 5.6 at 5 min after initial phagocytosis, and
acidification was complete in 90% at l0 rain (Fig. 10). 100%
of the phagosomes had undergone a measurable acidification
at 5 min after initial phagocytosis. Counts from a much
smaller sample of phagosomes, recorded in electron micro-
graphs of thin sections, gave slightly higher values (than fight
microscopy) for the presence of acid phosphatase in phago-
somes but confirm that more phagosomes are maximally acid
at 5 and l0 min than have detectable deposits ofblack reaction
product. Electron microscopy revealed, in addition, that at 5
and 10 min, when lysosomal fusion is proceeding most rap-
idly, lysosomes become localized around the phagosome (Fig.
11).
A direct temporal comparison of acidification with the
appearance of lysosomal enzyme activity requires tl~t these
phenomena are measured simultaneously within a living cell.
This was possible with a microfluorimetricassay for lysosomal
enzyme activity. It has the following basis: esterase hydrolysis
of nonfluorescent CFD yields highly fluorescent carboxyflu-
orescein (25), and lysosomes characteristically contain such
esterases (28). Therefore, upon delivery oflysosomal esterases
into a phagosome containing CFD, CFD is hydrolyzed to
carboxyfluorescein. This in turn gives rise to an increase in
the fluorescenceintensity ofthe phagosome, which can readily
be measured with the microspectrofluorimeter. We assume
that the esterase activity is optimal at the time of lysosomal
fusion.
Living Tetrahymena were not suitable particles for phago-
cytosis in this microfluorimetricassay because of their perme-
ability to CFA and their cytoplasmic esterases. Heat-killing of
Tetrahymena inactivated their esterase activity, as is shown
in Fig. 12 (inset) for whole heat-killed Tetrahymena and for
homogenized extracts of the heat-killed cells. We therefore
induced phagocytosisby amoebae of heat-killed Tetrahymena
suspended in CFD. Fig. 12 shows how the fluorescenceinten-
t~" 17o
o la
o ~,.5
~ 3.0
3 pH
5..5
u~ 5.0
AGE OF PHAGOSOME (rain)
FIGURE 8 Time course for pH changes within a single phagosome
of A. proteus (@).The indicated values for pH are derived from an
in vitro calibration: fluorescence intensity ratios were measured
from FTC-ovalbumin (0.1 mg/ml) in 100 mM NH4OAc, 10 mM Tris-
maleate buffer, ranging in pH from 5.0 to 7.5. The ratio measured
by FTC-ovalbumin in culture medium pH 7.0 is also given (1).
McNEILETAL. EndosomalAcidification and LysosomalFusion 697
"/I00/
901-
C, 80
Lg
Z
~ 7o
6O
~ 5O
T
I
I
I
~5
vl
o
o
t
!
J
! j
Y
30 ~.
20
I0
% ,'o2'0~'o,'o ~o ~o ~o 8'ogo
AGE OF PHAGOSOMES (min)
FIGURE 10 Time course for the appearance of lysosomal enzymes
in the phagosomes of A. proteus as visualized by light microscopy
(O) or electron microscopy (A), as well as for acidification of pha-
gosomes to pH <5.6 (0). Each time point for phagosomal staining
visualized by light microscopy represents an average of two exper-
iments in each of which 30 cells were scored for the presence or
absence of stain in the phagosomes. The 5- and 10-min intervals
for electron microscopy represent, respectively, counts of 16 and
15 phagosomes, all amoebae of which were processed in the same
experiment. Each time point for acidification represents a mean for
measurement of the fluorescence intensity ratio of 12 cells (pha-
gosomes).
sity and fluorescence intensity ratio (measured simultane-
ously) emitted by the phagosomes of two out of dozens of
such amoebae varied as a function of phagosomal age. Fluo-
rescence intensity and fluorescence intensity ratio from the
phagosome of amoeba "A" do not change significantly during
the initial 3-7 min of measurement; then, at 8 min after
phagocytosis, the fluorescence intensity begins to increase
steadily for the next 20 min. We interpret this steady increase
in fluorescence intensity from phagosomes as an indication
of hydolysis of CFD by lysosomal esterases of the amoebae,
and the initiation of the increase in fluorescence intensity as
marking the initiation of phagosome-lysosome fusion. The
near constant fluorescence intensity often measured in 3-7-
min-old phagosomes such as that of amoeba A is interpreted
as an indication of phagosomes not yet fused with lysosomes.
An increase in fluorescence intensity, or the initiation of
lysosomal fusion, was recorded in phagosomes only 3-min-
old, and was delayed by no longer than 8 min after initial
phagocytosis. Increases of fluorescence intensity were re-
corded in 29% (7 measured) of 5-min-old phagosomes and in
100% (14 measured) of 10-min-old phagosomes.
The fluorescence intensity ratio emitted by phagosomes
was measured simultaneously with fluorescence intensity.
Since the fluorescence intensity ratio of carboxyfluorescein is
a sensitive indicator of pH (25, 31, and our observations),
changes of pH could also be recorded from phagosomes
containing CFD and heat-killed Tetrahyrnena.The record of
FIGURE 9 Nomarski images of A. proteus stained for the lysosomal
enzymes: acid phosphatase at 5 min (A), and 20 min (B); and
esterases at 10 min (C) after initial phagocytosis of living Tetrahy-
mena. The 5-min-old phagosome in A did not stain for the acid
phosphatase; the 20-min-old phagosome of B did stain. The 10-
min-old phagosomes of C were heavily stained blue for esterases,
whereas heat-killed Tetrahymena (HT) processed along with this
amoeba showed no such staining. T, living Tetrahymena; L, lyso-
somes; arrowheads point to deposits of stain within phagosomes.
Bar, 100 ~m. x 150.
698 THE IOURNAL OF CELL BIOLOGY * VOLUME 97, 1983
amoeba A in Fig. 12 shows that, in this particular cell, near
complete acidification of the phagosome was achieved before
phagosomal fusion was evident as an increase in fluorescence
intensity. However, records such as that of amoeba B of Fig.
12 indicate that considerable acidification continued in other
cells after lysosomal fusion was evident. These two processes,
acidification and lysosomal fusion, are therefore closely cou-
pled in time.
The increase in fluorescence intensity measured by the
microfluorimetric assay was produced by phago-lysosomes of
the amoebae, not by their cytoplasm and its associated ester-
ases. Amoebae immersed in CFD for 5 min but not allowed
to phagocytose did not show any increase in fluorescence
intensity (Fig. 12).Furthermore, the fluorescenceratios meas-
ured from cells with phagosomes were always <3.0 at 10 rain
after phagocytosis. This would be expected of carboxyfluores-
cein trapped in acidic phagosomes but not of carboxyfluores-
cein trapped in cytoplasm whose pH is 6.85 (8). Lastly, the
fluorescence of amoebae viewed through the microscope was
confined initially to the phagosome containing the heat-killed
Tetrahymena. The plasma membrane of Amoebaproteusis
apparently not permeable to CFD, in contrast to the plasma
membrane of many cells.
A conventional cytochemical stain for lysosomal esterases
was heavilydeposited within 10-min-old phagosomes contain-
ing heat-killed Tetrahymena,but was absent within heat-killed
Tetrahymena not phagocytosed but stained along with the
phagocytoticamoebae (Fig. 9 c). This is independent evidence
to confirm that esterases were delivered into phagosomes by
the lysosomes of amoebae, and that such esterases were not
present in the heat-killed Tetrahymenabefore phagocytosis.
DISCUSSION
We have recorded rapid temporal variations of pH within
endosomes of single cells using an improved microspectro-
fluorimeter and the fluorescein fluorescence ratio technique.
Advantages of the fluorescence ratio technique for measuring
endosomai pH have been adequately discussed in general
elsewhere (8, 10). Our photo-counting microspectrofluori-
meter has enhanced the sensitivity with which fluorescence
emission can be quantitatively recorded from single cells. This
allowed us to record the pH of a small population of pino-
somes (numbering as few as 5-10), well defined in time, with
signal to noise ratios >10, and to measure small changes in
the fluorescenceintensity of single phagosomes. Furthermore,
enhanced sensitivity provided excellent spatial resolution
within cells: by measuing through higher power objectives,
cells could be "scanned" for variations of pinosomal pH at
different locations within the cytoplasm.
Cell SurfacepH
We found that RNase, on binding to the cell surface,
entered a microenvironment of apparently reduced pH rela-
FiGure 11 Electron microscope images of 5-min- (A) and 10-min-
(B and C) old phagosomes in A. proteus stained for the lysosomal
enzyme, acid phosphatase. Stain (arrowheads) is not evident in the
5-min-old phagosome (A), but is clearly present in the 10-rain-old
phagosome of C. In B, lysosomes are concentrated around the
perimeter of the lO-min-old phagosome, although no staining, and
thus no lysosomal fusion, is evident. Sections were not stained with
uranyl acetate or lead citrate. L, lysosomes; T, Tetrahymena. Bar, 10
p,m. (A and C) x 3,000; (B) x 6,000.
McNEILETAL. EndosomalAcidificationand LysosomalFusion 699
I 1,000
I0,000
9,000
2,000
J 1,000
E 500
0
~ ~ I1,000
~ ,o,ooo
z
- , 4
=~ 9,000
t,~ ~
=
~ ~ 8,000
E o
_ 7,ooo
z 6,000
5,000
4,000
5,000
2,OOO
1,000
Time (rain)
\Xxll
llA B
I
I
I
I
o
6.0
5.0 ~ ~ -~-
-- ~o to
~" ,a-
z
4.0 ~
5,0
2.0
1.0
. . . . . " " " 0
0 4 6 8 I0 12 14 16 18 20 Z2 24 26 28 50
A
G
E O
F P
H
A
G
O
S
O
M
E (MIN)
FIGURE12 Fluorescence
intensityandfluorescenceintensityratios
recordedovertime from phagosomescontainingCFD (0.06 mg/
ml) and heat-killedTetrahymena.Two amoebae,A (O) and B (0),
phagocytosedheat-killedTetrahymenaand CFDat timezero.Also
shown as a function of time is the fluorescence intensity of an A.
proteus immersed for 5 min in CFD but not allowed to phagocytose
(A). Time zero for this control was recorded upon washing of the
cell into culture medium not containing CFD. The pH within a
phagosome (containing a heat-killed Tetrahymena and fluorescent
carboxyfluorescein) was clamped in a fourth amoeba at pH 7.0
(usingas above 100 mM NH4OAc,10 mM Tris-maleate buffer).The
fluorescence intensity ratio measured from this phagosome is indi-
cated at time zero ([2).Inset: Fluorescence intensity of heat-killed
Tetrahymena in vitro (upper trace, I). Heat-killed Tetrahymena
(preincubated as for phagocytosis experiments in 0.06 mg/ml CFD)
were loaded into a rectangular capillary 50 #m in diameter at time
zero and the fluorescence intensity measured from a field contain-
ing 15 of the cells. Eachequivalent of the measured field along the
length of the capillary contained one or more Tetrahymena.There-
fore, diffusion of fluorescent carboxyfluoresceinaway from the 15
cells measured cannot account for the absence of increasing fluo-
rescence in the record. When a homogenateof living Tetrahymena
was added to another sample of this suspension of heat-killed
Tetrahymena,the fluorescence intensity increased over 10-fold in
5 min, showing that unhydrolyzed CFD was present. Also tested
for esterase activity (lower traces) were amoeba's culture medium
(O) and homogenates of heat-treated (e) and living Tetrahymena
(ix). Eachof these were mixed at time zero with CFD to give a final
concentration of 0.06 mg/ml and then loaded into 50-#m-thick,
rectangular capillaries. The concentrationof the homogenateswere
such that the equivalent of 0.75 intact heat-treated and living
Tetrahymenawere measured.
tive to culture medium. Although a reduced pH at the cell
surface has long been predicted from what is known of cell
surface chemistry (34), the phenomenon, to our knowledge,
has not been subject to direct experimental validation. Acidic
700 TIIE JOURNAL OF CELL BIOLOGY * VOLUME 97, 1983
pH at the cell surface could result from an energy independent
"Gibbs-Donnan type" equilibrium. Thus, the fixed surface
charges present on amoeba's glycocalyx (estimated to number
0.5 mEq/l of amoebae) are sufficient, in theory, to lower pH
at the glycocalyx by 1.3 pH U from that of a defined culture
medium (12). Alternatively, vigorous outward pumping could
concentrate protons at the cell surface. Although not studied
in amoebae, proton pumps are a common feature of the
plasma membrane of other cells, where their apparent func-
tion is to reduce cytoplasmic acidity by ejecting protons across
the plasma membrane into the culture medium. Whatever
may be the mechanism of its maintenance, acidic pH at the
cell surface is of interest, because it could affect the character-
istics of ligand-receptor binding, the induction of cellular
processes in relation to calcium fluxes (30), and because,
when the cell surface is incorporated into the endosome, it
could provide one means for acidifying endosomal contents.
We cannot presently exclude possible contributions of all
physical phenomena other than pH to the reduced ratios we
measured from surface bound FTC-RNase, and we cannot,
as is possible for endosomal pH, corroborate our surface
measurement of pH with those done by a different method.
However, Heiple and Taylor (10) showed that the concentra-
tion of FTC-ovalbumin, the ionic strength of its aqueous
solvent and lowered temperature do not significantly affect
the ratio measured at a given pH. Furthermore, we showed
that the ratio of FTC-RNase bound to cell surface is sensitive
to changes in the pH of the culture medium, and to changes
in its temperature, both of which are properties consistent
with a pH measurement.
Pinosomal pH
We show that the contents of pinosomes are rapidly and
steadily acidified after their initial formation at the cell sur-
face. The pH within pinosomes of whole A. proteus dropped
to a minimal value of ~5.6 within 5-10 min after initial
endocytosis; and the pH within pinosomes of the tip endo-
plasm of C. carolinensis dropped below pH 5.0 within 15
min. While, in part, this acidification began on binding of the
protein to the cell surface (see above), it continued in the
pinosome, whose contents reached a pH at least 1 pH U
below that measured on the cell surface. However, acidic pH
within pinosomes was temporary in both species: by 24 h
after initial pinocytosis the pH within pinosomes ofA. proteus
was ~6.4, and within those ofC. carolinensis it was ~7.5. In
this alkalization, as well as in their rapid initial acidification,
pinosomes appear to resemble phagosomes of amoeba (9).
No such alkalization of endosomes has been measured from
other cells. Because lysosomes fuse with the phagosomes of
amoebae in < 10 min (see below), the phago-lysosomes or 2*
lysosomes of amoebae can assume a pH near or slightly above
neutrality. Thus, in amoebae, at least, a subpopulation of 2*
lysosomes does not appear to have an acidic pH. By contrast,
the 2* lysosomes of macrophages containing FTC-dextran
were acidic at 8-36 h after initial pinocytosis (23).
We found that the pH within a pinosome was highly
correlated with its location in the cell. Tail pinosomes of C.
carolinensis were initially pH ~6.5; those in the cell's tip
were less than pH 5.0. The release of pinosomes initially
concentrated in the tail of C. carolinensis corresponds in time
to a decline in pH of the total population of pinosomes, and
an acid pH was always recorded in the tip of C. carolinensis
at 0 to 2 h after pinocytosis. We speculate, therefore, that a
pinosome ofpH ~6.5 may be trapped by tail ectoplasm until
it acidifies, and that acidification could regulate its release
into endoplasm.
PhagosomalpH
The pH within phagosomes of A. proteus dropped in 10
min or less from 7.0 to a minimal pH of 5.3-5.6. In a
qualitative sense, the phagosomes of amoeba initially resem-
ble those of all other cells studied (6, 9, 14, 15, 18), and, in
fact, our minimal phagosomal pH is remarkably close to
Mast's (18), who, 40 years earlier, provided an estimate of pH
~5.6. Despite such qualitative similarities, the rates at which
phagosomes acidify vary considerably between cells. The pH
within phagosomes of C. carolinensis, for example, did not
reach a minimum value of ~4.9 until 20-30 min after initial
phagocytosis(9). Similarly, the pH within pinosomes ofwhole
A. proteus dropped considerably faster than the pH within
pinosomes of whole C. carolinensis. Since in both our study
and in Heiple and Taylor's (9) the amoebae phagocytosed
one living Tetrahymena, differences between the two species
in their kinetics of acidification of phagosomes cannot be a
function solelyofparticle type, or ofthe extent ofphagocytosis
by the cells. Instead, the rate of endosomal acidification is
probably a property peculiar to cell species or type. Such
differences in rates of acidification between cells may reflect
their use of fundamentally distinct mechanisms of endosomal
acidification, or use of a common mechanism that precedes
at various rates.
Initiation of LysosomalI~usionwith Phagosomes
It is obviously no longer the phenomenon but the mecha-
nism of phagosomal acidification, and its role in the phago-
some, which remain to be determined. Endosomes could
acidifyby two general mechanisms: (a)) lysosomes could fuse
with endosomes, mixing their acidic contents (23) with those
ofthe endosome and/or delivering into endosomal membrane
those proton pumps now known to reside in membranes of
2* lysosomes (22); or (b) endosomes could acidify by means
intrinsic to the plasma membrane, which originally encloses
the molecule or particle at the cell surface. Our preliminary
evidence, concerning the acidifying potential of cell surface,
is consistent with the second mechanism. Further evidence
compatible with the second mechanism comes from our time
course for the appearance of lysosomal enzyme activity in
phagosomes. As judged by cytochemical staining, lysosomal
fusion with phagosomes was rapid, but was slightly slower
than acidification. However, cytochemical staining is at best
a semi-quantitative assay for lysosomal fusion. Neither light
microscopy of whole phagosomes, nor electron microscopy
of thin sections through phagosomes, provide unambiguous
criteria by which to judge that no lysosomes had fused with
the phagosome in question. In both cases stain can be present
in the phagosome but missed by the microscopist. In addition,
using cytochemical techniques, comparisons of the rates of
lysosomal fusion with rates of acidification cannot be made
within a single cell, but require averaging of the data from
populations of cells.
Our microspectrofluorimetric assay for lysosomal esterase
activity minimized these problems. We used it to show that
near complete acidification of the phagosome was achieved
in some cells before phagosomal fusion with lysosomes was
detectable (defined operationally here as the appearance of
lysosomal esterase activity). But in measurements from other
cells the microfluorimetric assay indicates that acidification
continued after lysosomal fusion was initiated. We conclude
that acidification of phagosomes by A. proteus is initiated but
not necessarily completed prior to phagosome-lysosome fu-
sion, and we suggest that the two events are closely linked in
time. Evidence from the cytochemical and fluorescenceassays
are both not consistent with the concept that acidification of
a phagosome depends on its fusion with lysosomes.
The microspectrofluorimetricassay can make simultaneous
and unambiguous records of acidification, and of initiation
of phagosome-lysosome fusion, within the phagosomes of
single, living cells. Initiation of fusion of 1" and/or 2* lyso-
somes with phagosomes is recorded as a highly reproducible
and quantitative rise in fluorescence intensity. Nevertheless,
as we have used it, the technique is limited in its application.
Because Amoeba proteus is impermeable to CFD, its cyto-
plasm does not become fluorescentduring a 5-min immersion
in the CFD. This is not the case for many cells, including
most mammalian phagocytes. We have, however, used car-
bodiimide to couple CFD to latex beads possessing surface
amino groups (unpublished observations). Such CFD-latex
could be presented for phagocytosis to other cell types in the
absence of CFD free in the culture medium, and phagosome-
lysosome fusion could then be followedmicrophotometrically
as here for A. proteus. Alternative fluorogenic substrates are
now being developed in Dr. Alan Waggoner's laboratory
(Carnegie-Mellon University) which will, we hope, enable us
to measure lysosomal fusion with pinosomes.
The suggestion that endosomes are acidified prior to en-
dosome-lysosome fusion has been made before. Geisow et al.
(6) showed that agents believed to perturb fusion of 2* and/
or acidic lysosomes with phagosomes (5) had little effect on
acidification of the phagosomes of macrophages. Tycko and
Maxfield (32) presented light and electron micrographs show-
ing that little Gomori stain was present in pinosomes of
fibroblasts at 5-20 min after interiorization of a2-macroglob-
ulin at the cell surface. These 5 to 20 min old pinosomes had
an average pH measured from a population of fibroblasts of
~5.0. Unfortunately, since quantitative data for Gomori
staining was not presented for a large sampling of individual
fibroblasts, it is not possible to determine whether those
micrographs presented were representative of the pattern of
lysosomal staining and/or of a cell with an average pinosomal
pH of 5.0. It was our experience with amoebae that both the
staining patterns and the kinetics of acidification of phago-
somes varied considerably from one cell to another. Flow
cytometric analysis has indicated that pinosomes containing
insulin fused with lysosomes of 3T3 cells 30 min after initial
endocytosis (21).
Studies by Bainton and co-workers (2, 15) on the degran-
ulation of leukocytes stand in noteworthy contrast to those
just reviewed above. Bainton (2) visualized stain for alkaline
phosphatase, a marker enzyme for the leukocyte's "specific"
granules, within phagosomes as soon as 30 s afterthe initiation
of phagocytosis, whereas the pH of these phagosomes did not
drop to ~6.5 until 3 min after phagocytosis and did not drop
to a minimum value of pH ~4.0 until 7-15 min after
phagocytosis (15). Whether the counterpart of these "specific"
granules exists in other cells has not been determined.
Conceivably, acidification of the phagosome could regulate
its subsequent fusion with lysosomes, which appear by elec-
tron microscopy to cluster around the phagosome prior to
MCNEIL ET AL. EndosomalAcidification and LysosomalFusion 701
their fusion with it (Fig. 11 b). Semlicki Forest virus fuses
with host cell membranes when the pH of its microenviron-
ment is reduced to <6 (11, 18). But this system cannot serve
as an adequate model for endosomes, since, if pH changes
occurring within the endosome are supposed to regulate fu-
sion with lysosomes, they must somewhat affect the interac-
tion of the outer surface of the endosomal membrane with
the outer surface of the lysosomal membrane. Transmem-
brane signaling is often accomplished by rapid changes in ion
gradients. A proton gradient is clearly established across the
endosomal membranes of amoebae, since the pH of the
cytoplasm in these cells is ~6,8 (8). The close temporal
relationship which we show exists between initial endosomal
acidification and lysosomal fusion with endosomes is, there-
fore, compatible with a role for endosomal acidification,
perhaps as a trans-membrane signal, in regulating endosome-
lysosome formation. The near neutral pH of older phago-
somes and pinosomes could, conversely, act as a signal pre-
venting further delivery of superfluous lysosomal enzymes
into the endosome. These possible roles for changing endo-
somal pH in regulating lysosomal fusion are not incompatible
with the previous suggestion that such pH changes regulate
the activity of the numerous pH-sensitive enzymes of the
digestive endosomal vacuole.
We thank G. Bright, M. Fechheimer, J. Heiple, F. Lanni, K. Luby-
Phelps, J. Swanson, and A. Waggoner for criticizing the manuscript,
and B. Chojnacki for excellent thin sections. We also thank Alan
Waggoner, Bob Murphy, J. Heiple, and Fred Lanni for stimulating
conversations. We gratefully acknowledge the suggestions of R. M.
Zeh in designing the microspectrofluorimeter.
The work was supported by National Science Foundation grant
PCM-8119187 to D. L. Taylor. P. L. McNeil was a Fellow of the
American Heart Society. The initial experiments were performed in
The Biological Laboratories, Harvard University.
Receivedfor publication 7 February 1983, and in revisedform 9 May
1983.
Note Added in Proofl--Galioway et al. (Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA.
1983, 80:3334-3338) show that 1-5-rain-old pinosomes of macro-
phages and fibroblasts can be separated from lysosomes on density
gradients, and that such pinosomes are capable of self-acidification.
They suggest that these 1-5-min-old pinosomes represent an acidic,
prelysosomal compartment. This compartment therefore resembles
that of the 3-5-min-old acidic, prelysosomal phagosomes of amoeba
studied in the present paper.
Murphy et al. (personal communication) used fluorescence flow
cytometry to show that endosomes of single, living cells containing
insulin and a2-macroglobulin are both acidic as soon as l0 min after
initial pinocytosis.
REFERENCES
1. Arnold, S. 1977. Measuring the light infinitesmal. TheSpex Speaker.22: I-6.
2. Bainton, D. F. 1973. Sequential degranulation of the two types of polymorphonuclear
leucocyte granules during phagocytosis of microorganisms. J. Cell Biol. 58:249-264.
3. Barka, T., and P. S. Anderson. 1962. Histochemical methods for acid phosphatase
hexazonium pararosarilinc as coupler. Z Histochem. Cytochem. 10:741-753.
4. De Jong, M. L. 1980. AIM 6522 based frequency counter. The Best of Micro. 3:10- l I.
5. Giesow, M. J., G. H. Beaver, P. D'Arcy Hart, and M. R. Young. 1980. Site of action of
a poly-anion inhibitor of phagosome-lysosome fusion in cultured macrophages. Exp.
CelI Res. 126:159-165.
6. Geisow, M. J., P. D'Arey Hart, and M, R. Young. 198 I. Temporal changes of lysosome
and pbagosome pH during phagolysosome formation in macrophages: studies by fluo-
rescence spectroscopy. Z Cell Biol. 89:645--652.
7. Goren, M. B. 1977. Phagocyte lysosomes: interactions with infectious agents, phago-
somes and experimental perturbations in function. Annu. Rev. MicrobioL 3t :507-533.
8. Heiple, J. M., and D. L. Taylor. 1980. Intracenular pH in single motile cells. Z Cell
Biol. 8@885-890.
9. Heiple, J. M., and D. L. Taylor. 1982. pH changes in pinosomes and phagosomes in
the ameba, Chaos carolinensis. .L Cell Biol. 94:143-149.
10. Helple, J. M., and D. L. Taylor. 1982. An optical technique for measurement of
intracenular pH in single livingcells. In, IntracellularpH: Its Measurement, Regulation,
and Utilization in Cellular Functions. Alan R. Liss, Inc., New York. 22-54.
l 1. Hellenius, A., S. Kartcnback, K. Simons, and E. Fries. 1980. On the entry of Semlicki
Forest virus into BHK-21 cells. Z Cell Biol. 84:404-420.
12. Hendil, K. B. 1971. Ion exchange properties of the glycocalyx of the ameba Chaos chaos
and its relation to pinocytosis. C. R Tray. Lab. Carlsberg 38:187-211.
13. Hohman, T. C., P. L. McNeil, and L. Muscatine. 1982. Phagosome-lysosome fusion
inhibited by algar symbionts of Hydra viridis. ,L Cell Biol. 94:56-63.
14. Jacques, Y. V., and D. F. Bainton. 1978. Changes in pH within the phagocytic vacuole
of human neutrophils and monocytes. Lab. Invest. 39:179-185.
15. Jenson, M. S., and D. F. Bainton. 1973. Temporal changes of pH within the phagocytic
vacuole of the polymorphonuclear neutrophilic leukocy~..L Cell Biol. 56:379-388.
16. Jeon, K. W., and L. G. E. Bell. 1965. Chemotaxis in large, free-living amoebae. Exp.
Cell. Res. 38:536-555.
17. Karakashian, S. J., and M. A. Rudzinska. 1981. Inhibition of lysosomal fusion with
symbiont-containing vacuoles in Paramecium bursaria. Exp. Cell Res. 13l:387-393.
18. Marsh, M., J. Wellsteed, H. Kern, E. Harms, and A. Helenius. 1982. Monensin inhibits
Semlicki Forest virus penetration into culture cells. Proc. NatL Acad Sci. USA. 79:5297-
5301.
19. Mast, S. O. 1942. The hydrogen ion concentration of the content of the food vacuoles
and the cytoplasm in Ameba and other phenomena concerning the food vacuoles. Biol.
Bull. ( Woods Hole) 83:173-204.
20. Metchnikoff, E. 1893. Lectures on the Comparative Pathology of Inflammation. Kegan
Paul, Trench, Truber & Co., London.
21. Murphy, R. F., S. Powers, M. Vcrderame, C. R. Cantor, and R. Pollack. 1982. Flow
cytometric analysis of insulin binding and internalization by Swiss 3T3 cells. Cytometry.
2:402-406.
22. Ohkuma, S., Y. Moriyama, and T. Takano. 1982. Identification and characterization
of a proton pump on lysosomes by fluorescein isothiocyanate-dextran fluorescence.
Proc. NatL Acad Sci. USA. 79:2758-2762.
23. Ohkuma, S., and B. Poole. 1978. Fluorescence probe measurement of the intralysosomal
pH in living cells and the pertubation of pH by various agents. Proc. NatL Acad Sci.
USA. 75:3327-3331.
24. Prescott, B. M., and T. W. James. 1955. Culturing of Amoeba proteus on TetrahTmena.
Exp. Cell Res. 8:256-258.
25. Rotman, B., and B. W. Papermaster. 1966. Membrane properties of living mammalian
cells as studied by enzymatic hydrolysis of fluorogenic esters. Proc. NatL Acad. Sci. USA.
55:134-141.
26. Shnitka, T. K., and A. M. Seligman. 1961. Role of estaratic inhibition on localization
of esterase and the simultaneous cytochemical demonstration of inhibitor sensitive and
resistant enzyme species. J. Histochem. Cytochem. 9:504-527.
27. Spurr, A. R. 1969. A low viscosity epoxy resin embedding medium for electron
microscopy. J. Ultrastruct. Res. 23:326-347.
28. Tappel, A. L. 1969. Lysosomal enzymes and other components. In Lysosomes in
Biology and Pathology. J. T. Dingle and H. B. Fell, editors. American Elsevier, New
York. 2:267-244.
29. Taylor, D.-L., Y. L. Wang, and J. Heiple. 1980. The contractile basis of amoeboid
movement. VII. The distribution of fluorescently labeled actin in living amoebae. J.
Cell Biol. 86:590-598.
30. Taylor, D. L., J. R. Blinks, and G. T. Reynolds. 1980. Contractile basis of amoeboid
movement. VIIi. Aequorin luminescence during amoeboid movement, endocytosis, and
capping, J. Cell BioL 86:599-607.
31. Thomas, J. A., R. N. Buchsbaum, A. Zimniak, and E. Racker. 1979. lntracellular pH
measurements in Ehrlich ascites tumour cells utilizing spectroscopic probes generated
in situ. Biochemistry. 18:2210-2218.
32. Tycko, B., and F. R. Maxfield. 1982. Rapid acidification ofendocytic vesicles containing
a2-macroglobulin. Cell. 28:643-65 I.
33. Wang, Y.-L., and D. L. Taylor. 1979. Distribution of fluo~ocently labeled actin in living
sea urchin eggsduring early development..L Cell Biol. 81:672--679.
34. Weiss, L. 1963. The mammalian tissue cell surface. In The Structure and Function of
the Membranes and Surfaces of Cells. D. J. Bell and J. K. Grant, editors. Cambridge
University P~ss, New York. 32-50.
35. Zigmond, S. H. 1981. Consequences of chemotactic peptide receptor modulation for
leukocyte orientation. J. Cell Biol. 88:644-647.
702 THE JOURNAL OF CELL BIOLOGY * VOLUME 97, 1983