J Exp MedJ. Exp. Med483jexpmedThe Journal of Experimental Medicine0022-10071540-9538The Rockefeller University PressPMC2186796PMC2186796.121867962186796612555610.1084/jem.156.3.703822677471ArticlesProducts of the IgT-C region of chromosome 12 are maturational markers for T cells. Sequence of appearance in immunocompetent T cells parallels ontogenetic appearance of Tthyd, Tindd, and Tsud
1919821563158592703718010319831704200821102019https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-sa/4.0/This article is distributed under the terms of an Attribution–Noncommercial–Share Alike–No Mirror Sites license for the first six months after the publication date (see http://www.rupress.org/terms). After six months it is available under a Creative Commons License (Attribution–Noncommercial–Share Alike 4.0 Unported license, as described at http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-sa/4.0/).Monoclonal antibodies specific for three T cell alloantigens linked to the immunoglobulin complex on chromosome 12 were used to establish the order of expression of these antigens on immunocompetent cells and in ontogeny. Modification of monoclonal antibodies with fluorescein isothiocyanate (FITC) and use with anti-FITC and complement has amplified lytic capacity of the monoclonals and allowed us to complete a distribution study of Tsud, Tindd, And Tthyd alloantigens on immunocompetent cells. Tthyd is expressed on both cortisone-sensitive and cortisone-resistant thymocytes; Tsud and Tindd are on "mature" cortisone-resistant cells. Tthyd is also expressed on a Thy-1.2-bearing recirculating marrow cell but is undetectable in the peripheral T cell pool. In contrast, resting spleen and lymph node T cells express Tsud and Tindd; antigen-activated populations express these two cells in high frequencies. These antigens must be markers for relatively differentiated cells because "nude" animals, which have pre-T cells, fail to express these determinants. All three antigens segregate independently in our T cell hybrids, arising from adult peripheral node cells, supporting the hypothesis that these are three separate structural products of a gene complex. In contrast, fetal T cell hybrids fail to express these antigens. The appearance of all three antigens on the cell surface in ontogeny is postnatal; Tthyd is expressed at days 1-2, Tindd at days 2-3, and Tsud at days 5-6. If the T cell isotype genes are organized similar to the immunoglobulin loci, then the parallels in maturational expression on immunocompetent cells and in ontogeny would lead one to speculate a gene order of Tthyd leads to Tindd leads to Tsud. Orientation with respect to the centromere is unknown.

pmc-status-qastatus0pmc-status-liveyespmc-status-embargonopmc-status-releasedyespmc-prop-open-accessyespmc-prop-olfnopmc-prop-manuscriptnopmc-prop-legally-suppressednopmc-prop-has-pdfyespmc-prop-has-supplementnopmc-prop-pdf-onlyyespmc-prop-suppress-copyrightnopmc-prop-is-real-versionnopmc-prop-is-scanned-articlenopmc-prop-preprintnopmc-prop-in-epmcyespmc-license-refCC BY-NC-SA
 PRODUCTS OF THE IgT-C REGION OF CHROMOSOME 12
ARE MATURATIONAL MARKERS FOR T CELLS
Sequence of Appearance in Immunocompetent T Cells Parallels
Ontogenetic Appearance of Tthy d, Tind d, and Tsu d*
By FRANCES L. OWEN
From the Tufts Medical School, Departments of Patholog~and CancerResearch Center,
Boston, Massachusetts 02111
The existence of multiple isotypes of T cell receptors has been hypothesized (1, 2).
A biological role for individual isotypes could be linked to the effector function of
their constant regions. A cytotoxic T cell may effectivelyuse a different molecule than
does a suppressor T cell. Alternatively, T cell isotypes may be characteristically
distributed on cells at different stages in immune competence, i.e., a pre-T cell may
use a different isotype than an antigen-triggered effector cell. The experiments
described here use monoclonal antibodies, specific for products of the IgT-C region of
chromosome 12 (G. M. Spurll, M. Frye, L. Riendeau, A. Finnegan, and F. L. Owen,
manuscript in preparation), to address the later question.
Three T cell alloantigens linked to Igh-1, but separable by recombination from
these genes, have been described (2, 3). These antigens may be allotypic determinants
in the constant regions of antigen-specific receptors (1-5). Tthyd, Tindd, and Tsud are
expressed preferentially on thymocytes or Lyt 2+ peripheral cells or Lyt-1+ cells,
respectively. In this study, cells at different stages in immunological maturation were
examined by cytotoxicity for expression of these three antigens. The order of appear-
ance from the marrow to the antigen-triggered cell is Tthyd, Tind d, or Tsud. This
parallels the order of appearance of these antigens in ontogeny. Tthyd is a thymocyte
surface marker at days 1-2 after birth, Tindd is detectable at days 2-3 after birth, and
Tsud appears at days 5-6 after birth.
These studies illustrate a maturational sequence for the appearance of Tthy, Tind,
and Tsu but are also consistent with some functional compartmentalization of the
receptor repertoire because none of these alloantigens are present on cytotoxic or
mixed leukocyte-reactive (MLR) 1 cells (G. M. Spurll et al., see above). It seems
probable that acquisition of isotypes is not the biological pressure for functional
differentiation because all these antigens are acquired postnatally, and functional
preT cells are already present in embryonic thymus (6).
These studies show that Tthy, Tind, and Tsu segregate independently in T cell
hybrids, demonstrating that they are products of separate genes and not individual
* Supported by grants R01 AI-15262 and R01 AI-17442 from the National Institutes of Health.
1Abbreviations used in this paper: BAT, brain-associated thymocyte antigen; BSA, bovine serum albumin;
CFA, complete Freund's adjuvant; FITC, fluorescein isothiocyanate; HAT, hypozanthine, aminopterine,
thymidine; KLH, keyhole limpet hemocyanin; nude, athymic mouse; PEG, polyethylene glycol; TNBS,
picrylsulfonic acid.
J. Exp. MED.(c) The Rockefeller University Press * 0022-1007/82/09/0703/16 $1.00 703
Volume 156 September 1982 703-718
704 MATURATIONAL MARKERS FOR T CELLS
allotypic determinants on the same polypeptide. However, some hybrids (15%) show
Tthyd coexpression with Tindd or Tsu d. This stable dual expression is reminescent of
the B cell that expresses both IgM and IgD (7). The data are consistent with a
maturational model for T cells in which Tthy d antigen is expressed on a precursor cell
for the antigen-triggered cells bearing Tsu d and Tindd; evidence for Tsu and Tind
being separate lineages of cells is presented. Although the Tthyd-bearing cell may be
a precursor for the Tindd and Tsud-bearing cells, it is not a pre-T cell (8, 9).
Materials and Methods
Mice. C.AL-20 mice, bred at Tufts Medical School since 1978, originated from stock
developed by M. Potter, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD. A/J and AKR nude
streaker mice (nu/nu and age-matched nu/+) were purchased from The Jackson Laboratory,
Bar Harbor, ME. BALB/c AnN animals were purchased from Charles River Breeding
Laboratories, Inc., Wilmington, MA.
Productionof MonoclonalCellLines. Clones of cells producing monoclonal antibodies directed
against T cell products were selected by fusion of BALB/c anti-C.AL-20-immunespleen cells
with the BALB/c P.3U1 hypoxanthine, aminopterin, thymidine (HAT)-sensitivecell line (10).
BALB/c AnN males were immunized with C.AL-20 blast cells. Donor cells were stimulated
with 5 #g/ml concanavalin A (Con A) for 48 h in complete culture media, harvested, and
separated on bovine serum albumin (BSA) discontinuous density gradients (5). Cells were
washed five times in phosphate-buffered saline (PBS), resuspended, and injected intraperito-
neally.
Spleen cells from immunized donors were tested between frosted glass slides, erythrocytes
(RBC) were lysed with Tris ammonium chloride, and the cells were washed in serum-free
media. One spleen equivalent was pelleted with 1.2 x 107 P.3U1 cells in serum-free Dulbecco's
H-21. Polyethylene glycol (PEG) (Sigma Chemical Co., St. Louis, MO), 1,000mol wt, in a 30%
solution (0.5 ml), was added to the drained pellets. Cells were resuspended and immediately
repelleted by 1,000 g centrifugation at room temperature. PEG was removed, and 10 ml of
Dulbecco's H-21 was added slowly over 5 min. Cells were pelleted and resuspended in 60 ml of
media, used to maintain the P.3U1 parent line, and incubated at 37C overnight. On day 1,
1 x 10-4 M hypoxanthine, 4 x 10-v M aminopterine and 1.6 x 10-5 M thymidine were added,
and cells were aliquoted into 96-well microtiter plates (Costar Data Packaging, Cambridge,
MA). On day 7, cells were fed media containing HAT. Clones were visible on day 8. The fusion
frequency was -50% but variable for each fusion.
Tissue culture supernatant was screened for clones secreting antibody by a cell surface
radioimmunoassay. Con A was used to activate either BALB/c or C.AL-20 T cells grown in
RPMI 1640 with 2% horse serum, not fetal calf serum, which was used in the growth of blast
cells for immunization. Con A-activated blast cells were harvested in PBS and washed
extensively in serum-free PBS before aliquoting (2 x l0s cells/100 #1) into each well of a 96-
well polyvinyl chloride tray. Plates were centrifuged to increase the adherence of cells, and
supernatant was removed. The plates were placed on ice, and 100/~1of 0.05% glutaraldehyde
was added for 5 min and followed by addition of 0.05% ammonium chloride (100 #1) and
washed four times with PBS. Horse serum (2% in PBS) (0.04 M NaNs) was added overnight at
4C. Plates containing either C.AL-20 or BALB/c cells were incubated with tissue culture
supernatants (50 ~./well) for 2 h at room temperature. The plates were washed and incubated
125 125 0
with 100/~gof I goat anti-mouse IgGxor I goat anti-mouse IgM overnight at 4 C. Labeled
plates were washed in PBS and separated on a hot wire cutter for counting. Positive clones
were selected on the basis of binding of the antibody to C.AL-20 ceils and not to BALB/c cells.
AmplificationofAntibody-mediatedCellLysis byFluoresceinIsothiocyanate(FITC)-modified Monoclonal
Antibody and Mouse Anti-FITC Immunoglobulin. Monoclonal antibody was collected from the
ascites of mice primed with ~pristane and inoculated with hybrids of P.3U1 and BALB/c AnN
anti-C.AL-20-immunecells. Ammonium sulphate-precipitated protein (10 mg/ml) was mod-
ified by incubating with 0.5 M sodium carbonate (pH 9.5, containing 10 mg/ml FITC) for 1
h at 4C. Labeled protein was eluted from a G-25 Sephadex column in 0.1 M sodium
phosphate. Antibody was stored at 4C in 0.04 M NAN,. Limiting dilutions of FITC-modified
FRANCES L. OWEN 705
antibody were incubated with thymoeytes from either C.AL-20 or BALB/c animals for 30 min
at 37C. Affinity-purified mouse antibody specific for FITC was incubated with washed cells
for 30 min at 37C without NaNs, and pelleted cells were resuspended in selected rabbit
complement. After incubating at 45C for 30 min, cells were resuspended in PBS, pelleted, and
stored at 4C, while being scored by eosin red dye exclusion under visual microscopy. FITC
anti-Tthya was used at 0.005 #g/105 cells. This is a 20-fold lower concentration than the
unmodified antibody and permitted adsorption by fewer numbers of cells. Data are expressed
as cytotoxic index. This represents the percent dead cells in samples treated with antibody and
complement minus the percent dead cells in samples treated with complement divided by the
percent dead cells in samples treated with rabbit anti-brain-associated thymocyte antigen
(BAT) minus the percent dead cells in samples treated with complement times 100%.
Adsorption. Monoclonal antibody modified with FITC (0.005 #g) was incubated with
limiting numbers (1 x 106 to 1.5 x 107) of lymphoid cells in an Oudin centrifuge tube (Fisher
Scientific Co., Pittsburgh, PA) for 45 min at 4C. Cells were centrifuged, and clarified
supernatant was incubated with target cells to evaluate the extent of depletion of antibody.
BSA GradientSeparationof Thymocyte.The methods used have been described (5).
Cortisone-resistantThymocytes. Adult (8-10 wk) male A/J animals were injected intraperito-
neally with 2.5 mg of cortisone phosphate (Merck, Sharp & Dohme, West Point, PA) in
suspension. Animals were killed at 48 h.
Antigen Primingof Lymph Nodes. Keyhole limpet hemocyanin (KLH; Calbiochem-Behring
Corp., San Diego, CA) was modified with picrylsulfonic acid (TBNS). Antigen (50 #g in PBS)
was emulsified in 50 #1 of complete Freund's adjuvant (CFA; Difco Laboratories, Detroit, MI)
and injected into footpads of adult animals on days 0 and 7. The draining popliteal nodes were
removed at day 10 and used as targets for antibody- and complement-mediated lysis.
SelectionofFetalThymocyteandFetalLiverHybrids. Thymocytes were removed microscopically
from 17-d embryos (pregnancies were timed from the appearance of vaginal plugs). Thymocytes
(2 X 108cells/8 embryos) and fetal liver cells (107 cells/8 embryos) were fused with 107 BW5147
HAT-sensitive tumor cells by incubating in 0.1 ml of 40% PEG (Kochlight Laboratories, Inc.,
Coinbrook, England) for 1 min. Serum-free Dulbeeeo's high glucose minimal essential media
(Microbiological Associates, Bethesda, MD) was used to dilute cells to 10 ml over a 10-min
period. Cells were pelleted gently at 25C and resuspended in media containing 10% FCS for
24 h in a 100-ram petri dish. At 24 h, cells were collected by centrifugation and resuspended in
media containing HAT (1 x 10-4 HAT (1 x 10~4 M hypoxanthine, 1.6 x 10-5 M thymidine,
and 4 x 10-7 M aminopterine)). Clones (4/150 wells per 8 embryos for thymocytes and 2/500
wells per 8 embryos for fetal liver) appeared at 14 d and were screened with antibody and
complement to see whether they expressed the Thy-l.2, H-2a, Lyt-l.2, and Lyt-2.2 antigens.
Lines were used to adsorb anti-Tthya, anti-Tinda, or anti-Tsud.
SelectionofHybridT CellLinesOriginatingfrom Antigen-primedLymphNodeCells. Lymph nodes
from C.AL-20 mice secondarily immunized in the footpads with KLH-trinitrophenyl (TNP) in
CFA were removed and fused with BW 5147 cells (AKR HAT-sensitive T cell tumor) (10).
Resulting hybrids were scored for surface markers characteristic of the C.AL-20 mice and not
a
the AKR tumor parent (Thy-l.2, Lyt-l.2, Lyt-2.2, H-2 ). Hybrid lines were subcloned by
d d d
limiting dilution analysis and screened for expression of Tsu , Tthy, and Tind alloantigens.
The AKR tumor parent, BW5147, is surface negative for these antigens.
Results
Tthya Is expressedon Equal Numbers of Cortisone-sensitive and Cortisone-resistant Thymo-
cytes. The observation (3) that only 35% of thymocytes can be lysed by anti-Tthy d
and complement suggested this T cell alloantigen might be a subpopulation marker
in the thymus. Monoclonal antibodies specific for Tthy d (clone 17IIC6,/~), Tind d
(clone 9IIIA2, ya, ~), and Tsu d (clone 13III B4, yl, i) were modified with FITC
(methods) and used with mouse anti-FITC antibodies and complement to estimate
the frequency of positive cells in mice treated with 2.5 mg of cortisone phosphate 48
h before surgical removal of the thymus. These values were compared with the
706 MATURATIONAL MARKERS FOR T CELLS
percentages of cells expressing each T cell alloantigen in normal animals evaluated at
the same time (Table I). Tthyd is expressed on 25-35% of cells, but anti-Tsua or anti-
Tinda do not detect any positive cells in the thymus by direct lysis. The frequency of
Tthyd-positive cells is neither enhanced nor decreased in the cortisone-resistant
population, which represents 20% of total thymocytes in the A/J animal. This suggests
that an equal frequency of cells in the cortisone-sensitive and -resistant populations
are positive (25-35%), although density of determinants per cell might limit the
accuracy of frequency estimates. Fluorescence experiments (not shown) were unsuc-
cessful, suggesting the number of surface determinants per cell might be limiting.
Cortisone-resistant Thymocytes Preferentially Express Tinda and Tsua. Anti-Tindd and
anti-Tsud do not lyse thymocytes (Table I). However, adsorption of anti-Tinda with
thymocytes depletes the lytic antibody tested on antigen-activated popliteal lymph
node cells (Fig. 1). The absorption with spleen cells parallels that with thymocytes, in
contrast to cortisone-resistant thymocytes, which are 10-fold enriched in adsorbing
cells (frame A). Anti-Tsud could also be adsorbed by a comparable number of
TABLE I
Thymocytes Expressing Tthya Are Not Restricted to a Subpopulation Defined
by CortisonePhosphate Sensitivity
Cortisone-resistant
FITC-modified antibody Control thymocytes thymocytes
Tthy d (17IIC6) 23 1" 15 + 4:~
Tsud (13IIIB4) 2 1 1 + 1
Tind d (9IIIA2) i 1 1 1
Thy-l.2 85 5 90 5
* Cytotoxic index.
:~A/J (3-wk-old males, six experimental and six control) were treated with 2.5
mg cortisone phosphate (i.p.) 48 h before killing. Thymocytes surviving (2-
4 X 107 cells/mouse) were 20% of the yield from normal age-matched mice.
-A
3C
"--Anti - Tlnd
2C
g B
O
~- Anti - Tlu
b
2d~ _
I0 ~ IO 6 107
N
U
M
B
E
RO
FA
D
S
O
R
B
I
N
GCELLS
Fxo. l. Thyamocytes from cortisone-treated (C)) or control (0) mice were used to adsorb anti-Tsua
or anti-Tind . Residual antibody was tested on antigen-activated lymph node cells. The ability of
splenic T cells to adsorb these antibodies is compared with thymocytes (0).
FRANCES L. OWEN 707
cortisone-resistant thymoeytes (frame B). Therefore, Tsu d and Tind d are both prefer-
entially expressed on the cortisone-resistant population.
Thy-l.2-sensitive Cells in Bone Marrow Express Tthy a. Cells in the bone marrow
absorb anti-Tthyd monoclonal antibody with an efficiency 15-25-fold lower than that
of thymocytes (3). Pretreatment of the adsorbing cell with anti-Tthy-1.2 monoclonal
antibody (11) and complement or anti-rabbit anti-brain-associated antigen (BAT)
(12) antibody and complement depletes an adsorbing cell (Table II). Pretreatment of
bone marrow cells with complement and adsorption of anti-Tthy d does remove the
lytie activity (reduced from C.I. 17 to C.I. 5), showing that complement above does
not lyse this cell. The use of cytotoxic index to display data corrects for spontaneous
lysis of thymocytes by complement (5%). Four experiments showing that both anti-
BAT and anti-Thy-l.2 lyse the Tthy-bearing cell in marrow were done in double-
blind experiments. In one experiment, anti-Thy-l.2 alone did not block this adsorp-
tion. These results might imply that the positive cell in marrow is a recirculating cell
because prothymocytes are reputed to be Thy-l.2 negative (8).
BSA Gradient Fractionation of Tinda- and Tsua-bearing Thymocytes. Discontinuous
sedimentation of thymocytes on BSA gradients separates the populations into char-
acteristic groups (13), which correlates with ability to respond to phytohemagglutinin
(PHA) (14). These groups show differences in the levels of H-2 antigens and Thy-l.2
per cell (15), and a decrease in surface density might be associated with more
"mature" cell populations on the basis of surface characteristics. These characteristic
bands suggest there are a small number of thymocytes (2%) that are low density cells
expressing Tsud and/or Tind d but not Tthy d (Table III).
Antigen-activated Lymph Node T Cells Express Tinda and Tsu a Antigens but Not
Tthya. Monoelonal antibodies specific for Tthy d, Tind d, and Tsu a do not lyse
popliteal lymph node cells from virgin mice. However, secondary immune lymph
node cells from footpad-challenged mice can be lysed with antibody and complement
(Table IV). The frequency of Tsu d- or Tindd-expressing cells is not <15% of viable
cells on day 3 after a secondary immunization with KLH-TNP in CFA. Tthy d cannot
be detected on these cells. When GFA alone was used to inject the mice, increased
frequencies of cells expressing Tind or Tsu could not be detected (data not shown).
Although CFA contains mycobacterium, a potential antigen, the quantity of antigen
might be too low to stimulate T cells.
Spleen cells activated with Con A adsorbed antibody nonspecifically to an extent
that did not permit examination of the expression of Tsu d, Tind d, or Tthy d on
TABLE II
BoneMarrow Adsorptionof Anti-Tthy a Is Dependenton a T Cell That is
BAT and Thy-1.2 SurfacePositive
Number Thymocyte
adsorbing Antibody G' target cells
Pretreatment
adsorbingbone
marrowcells cells cytotoxicindex
-- 0 Thy-l.2 + 78 + 1
-- 0 Tthyd + 17+ 3
-- 10 7 Tthyd + 1+ 1
Anti-Thy-l.2 + C' 107 Tthyd + 21:1:3
Anti-BAT+ C' 107 Tthyd + 13-1-3
C' 10 7 Tthyd + 5 + t
708 MATURATIONAL MARKERS FOR T CELLS
TABLE III
Absorptionof Tthya, Tinda, and Tsua by ThyrnocytesSeparatedon BSA
Discontinuous Gradients
Percent BSA- Cytotoxic index
separated adsorbing
cells Tthyd Tindd Tsud
None 15 2:2 28 + 5 25 - 5
23 11 + 1 241 16-t-1
26 >1 10 1 7 +- 3
29 >1 9 1 72:2
35 >1 15 :t: 2 26 + 1
Unfraetionated >1 24 + 2 29 + 4
TABLE IV
EnhancedExpressionof Tsua and Tinda on Antigen-activatedT cells
FITC-modified antibody Normal lymph Immune lymph
node node*
Anti-Tindd (9IIIA2) 1 + 1~: 19 + 2
Anti-Tthyd (17IIC6) 1 ~ 1 2 "4- 1
Anti-Tsud (13IIIB4) 1 1 12 + 3
* A/J (8-wk-old males) were immunized in the footpad with 50 #g of KLH-
TNP in CFA (1:1 in PBS) on days -10 and -3. Popliteal nodes from three
animals were pooled for each group.
z~Cytotoxic index on direct visual eytotoxicity experiment.
mitogen-activated cells. C.AL-20 or BALB/c cells grown for 96 h in complete culture
media with 5 #g/ml Con A failed to express these T cell alloantigens in a way
detectable by direct cytotoxicity. Adsorption of antibody with either allelic form of
antigen (C.AL-20 or BALB/c) removes all activity, suggesting Fc-nonspecific adsorp-
tion has obscured any results.
Expression of Tsu d, Tthy d, and Tindd in the Homozygous AKR "Nude Streaker" and
Heterozygous AKR Littermates. Because Tthy d is expressed on a cell in marrow, it was
possible that a pre-T cell also expressed this determinant. The nude animal is a rich
source of pre-T cells. An animal that had the Igh-1 d or Igh-1 e type and a nude gene
on the same genetic background was required to complete this experiment. The AKR
(Igh-1 d) animal has been bred for expression of the nu/nu streaker phenotype. The
streaker mutant genetic phenotype arose as a spontaneous mutation event separate
from the original nude mutation. The genetic trait is in the same complementation
group as the original nu/nu gene (16). In breeding experiments, this gene was shown
to be allelic with nude. The phenotypic and development characteristics of the
nuStr/nustr animals are currently inseparable from those of the nu/nu.
Bone marrow cells from the AKR 4-/nustr or nuStr/nustr animal were used to adsorb
FITC-modified anti-Tthy d monoclonal antibody (Fig. 2). Cells from the thymus of
the heterozygous animal (+/nu str) were used as a positive control. Cells from the nude
animal (nuStr/nuStr) failed to adsorb anti-Tthy d in contrast to cells from the heterozygote
(+/nu~tr). These data suggest that Tthy a is not a marker for pre-T cells present in the
nude animal. Splenic cells from both animals were also used for adSorption; both
were negative (data not shown).
Expression of Tindd, Tthy d, and Tsu d Alloantigens on Hybrid T Cell Lines Constructed
FRANCES L. OWEN 709
4G
30
X
b.l
a
Z
2C
X
0
0
). K]
t.)
L.T ....
. nu/+ Tl~mocytes ~, ~ .
" ~ nu/+ BoneMorrow
I I I I I
0 IxJoS 5xloS Ixlo7 3xlo7
ADSORBING CELL NUMBER
FIc. 2. Bonemarrow cellsfromAKR nu/nu (D) or littermate heterozygous(nu/+) (m) animals
wereusedto adsorbFITC-modifiedanti-Thydmonoclonalantibodies.AKR nu/+ thymocytes,used
as adsorbingcells (&),are shownfor comparison.Adsorbedantibody was used for eytotoxieityon
A/J (5wk) thymocytes.Unabsorbedantibody (~) was the positivecontrol.
between BW5147 and C.AL-20 Antigen-activated Lymph Node Cells. Hybrid T cell lines
express Tsud, Tthy d, and Tind d alloantigens (Table V). The lines express these three
determinants independently, supporing the concept that these antigens are carried on
separate structural products, in contrast to the possibility that they might be three
antigenic sites on the same molecule. The 27 lines typed showed random association
between Lyt- 1 and Lyt-2 and these antigens. We had reported earlier (2, 5) that Tind d
was preferentially associated with Lyt-l-bearing cells and that Tsu d was associated
with Lyt-2+ cells. Those determinations were made by adsorbing antibody with virgin
cell populations. The cells used for fusion originated from the lymph node of
KLH.TNP CFA secondarily immunized mice. The immune cell populations could be
vastly different from the virgin, and/or fusion to the tumor cell (BW5147) could result
in gene inactivation or activation so that an unexpected product is expressed on the
surface. These data, however, lend little support for a maturation pathway in which
Tsud- or Tindd-bearing populations parallel the Lyt differentiation schemata. No lines
coexpress both Tsu d and Tind d, suggesting these are distinct and possibly nonoverlap-
ping lineages. In contrast, we found four (15%) lines where Tthy d was coexpressed
with either Tsu d or Tind d, which is in agreement with but does not prove that the
Tthyd-bearing populations could be precursor populations for both the Tind d- and
Tsud-bearing cells. It is also possible that double expressing cells could be the result of
triple cell fusions and not be characteristic cells in the developmental pathway. The
presence of multiple copies of chromosome 12 per cell could identify trisomatic
hybrids. Those karotyping experiments have not been done. The frequency of positive
cells in any line varied from 10-50% and fluctuated in response to addition of new
culture media. This might indicate that the antigens are expressed with a low surface
density per cell, and the unsynchronized growth pattern of each line could lead to
disparate densities from cell to cell.
Tthyu, Tinda, and Tsud Appear Sequentially in Ontogeny. Thymocytes from neonatal
mice (1-27 d) were used as targets for direct cytotoxicity with anti-Tthy d FITC (Fig.
3, frame A), anti-FITC, and complement. Thymocytes from 3-d-old mice express
Tthy d, but the adult frequencies of cells are not detected until after day 19. When
710 MATURATIONAL MARKERS FOR T CELLS
TABLE V
Independent Expression of Tthy d, Tindd, and Tsu d in T Cell Hybrids
Clone Thy-l.2 Lyt-l.2 Lyt-2.2
T cell phenotype*
Tthy d Tind a Tsua
JT,~3 - - + - + -
JTq~4 - + - - - +
JT~6 + - + + - -
JTq~7 - + - - + -
JTq~8 - + + + - -
JT~9~ + + + + - +
JT~ll + - + - + -
JTOl3 + . . . . +
JT~14 - + - - - +
JT~I5 - - - + - -
JT~16:I: - - - + + -
JPD - - + - - +
JPE:~ + + - + + -
JT~19 - - - + - +
JTq~21 + + - - - +
JTep22 - - - + - -
JT~23 . . . . . +
JT~24 - + - + - -
JTqJ26 - + + + - -
JTq~27 - + + - - +
JTq~28 + - + - + -
JTq~30 - + + + - -
JTq~3l~: - + + + - +
* Phenotyping was executed with antibody and complement. The percentage
of positive cells in each hybrid line varied from 10-50% and may result from
surface antigen density variations in unsynchronized cell populations.
d d d
:~Four lines were positive for both Tthy and Tsu or Tind. This dual
expression in JT~9 has been maintained for 9 mo in vitro and appears to be
a stable characteristic of the cell.
neonatal thymocytes were used to adsorb anti-Tthy a and the residual antibody was
scored on adult thymocytes, Tthy a could be detected on days 1-2 (Fig. 3, frame B).
It is possible that Tthy a is expressed on fetal thymocytes as a surface determinant but
our assay is too insensitive to detect these determinants. One might predict a gradual
increase in surface density as the positive cells appear in ontogeny. There is a linear
increase in the percentage of positive cells between day 2 and day 5 (Fig. 3, frame A).
Extrapolating that line back to the origin would suggest the frequency in fetal cells
should be <0.1%. It seemed of interest to look for surface expression of Tthy a on fetal
thymocytes because functional studies by Ceredig et al. (17) have shown that day 14
fetal cells have antigen receptors for histocompatibility antigens. To overcome the
problems of low yields of fetal cells from dissection, coupled with an expected, low
frequency of positive cells, hybrid T cell lines were constructed by fusing BW5147
HAT-sensitive cells with 17-d fetal thymocytes (Table VI). Three lines were estab-
lished, all of which failed to adsorb these antigens. Statistcally, one would have to
examine 10,000 lines, if the frequency of positive cells is 0.1%, to conclude that day-17
thymocytes do not express Tthy a as a surface antigen. It is, however, apparent that
some fetal cells that express Thy- 1.2 do not express Tthy d. Two fetal T lines originating
FRANCES L. OWEN
B
~.) Absorption
4o
,~- NOAdsorbing Cells
2C
IC
2 a 4 5 s 7 s 9 io ,5 30
DAY AFTER BIRTH
711
Flo. 3. Ontogeny of surface expression of Tthyd detected by direct cytotoxicity on neonatal
th~mocytes or adsorption of antibody onto neonatal thymocytes. Cells from neonatal thymus (5 X
10 cells/microtiter well) were incubated with 10 ~tl of tissue culture supernatant containing
monoclonalanti-Tthydmodified with FITC. Percent dead cells was enumerated after an incubation
with complement (frame A). In contrast, 5 x l0nneonatal thymocytes were used to adsorb 40/d of
d
monoclonal anti-Tthy (frame B). Residual antibody was scored by cytotoxicity on 4-wk-old
thymocytes.
TABLE VI
Tthy a, Tinda, and Tsua Are Not Expressed on Day-17 Fetal T Cell Hybrids
Clone Thy-l.2 Lyt-l.2 Lyt-2.2 Tthyd Tindd Tsud
FTT 17-1 + . . . . .
FTT 17-2 + . . . . .
FTT 17-3 + + . . . .
FTL 17-1 + . . . . .
FTL 17-2 . . . . . .
* Surface phenotyping was done with antibody and complement. All are
surface immunoglobulinnegative.
from fusion of BW5147 with fetal liver cells are reported in Table VI. It is possible
that these cells are precursor T cells because one line expresses Thy-l.2 with high
densities at all times in the cell cycle, one is negative for Thy-1.2, but both fail to have
detectable levels of Lyt- 1 and Lyt-2. However, the ability to express Lyt- 1 and Lyt-2
could be dependent, either directly or indirectly, upon the expression of chromosomes
that are lost in these hybrid lines. All the fetal lines experienced 4-wk crisis periods
early in establishment. Similarly, only one of the three lines that originated from fetal
thymus fusion with BW5147 expressed Lyt-l.2. Because Thy-l.2 and Lyt-l.2 should
be expressed on fetal thymocytes at 17 d, it is unclear why our hybrids do not display
these antigens. This might be a result of the statistical frequency of positive cells,
BW5147 might have a preferential fusion partner, or Lyt-l.2 might be on a chromo-
712 MATURATIONAL MARKERS FOR T CELLS
A
TSU d
15--
No Adsorption
z
a
L
L
j
X
ICi - - ~
.
c~
2a_B
Trod
d
0
I-- No Adsorption
>" 15 B - - - -
10
I I I I I 1
i 2 3 4 S 6 7 8 9 I0
DAYAFTERBIRTH
Fro. 4. Ontogeny of surface expression of Tsua and Tinda. In frame A, monoclonal anti-Tsua
(0.005#g), FITC modified, was adsorbed with 5 x 106spleen cells. Residual antibody was tested by
direct cytotoxicity on antigen-primed lymph node cells. In frame B, 0.05 #g of monoclonal anti-
Tindd-FITC in 40 #1was absorbed with 5 x 108unfractionated spleen cells. Residual antibody was
incubated with KLH-TNP-primedlymph node cells.Previousexperiments determinedthe optimum
number of adsorbing cells and the best concentration of antibody.
some that segregates and is easily lost.
Tind a is expressed on neonatal splenic cells at days 2-3 (Fig. 4, frame A). Anti-
Tind a can be adsorbed by 5 x 106 neonatal spleen cells, and the lytic activity of that
antibody on antigen-activated popliteal node cells is depleted by day-2 cells. In
contrast, anti-Tsu a could not be adsorbed by splenic T cells (5 x 106) until days 5-6
postnatally (Fig. 4, frame B).
Discussion
If multiple isotypes of T cell receptors exist (1), then the expression of distinct
isotypes might be characteristic of the maturational level of the cell and not the
functional subpopulation (18). B lymphocytes have been shown to undergo a differ-
entiation pathway from IgM ---* IgM + IgD --~ IgD or IgG (19) in response to
antigenic pressures. It is possible that T cells undergo a similar pathway in which a
primitive receptor-bearing cell is the precursor (pre-T) for all T cells. As that cell
matures ontogenetically and functionally, it might acquire new isotypes that make it
FRANCES L. OWEN 713
functionally more efficient (20).
Fetal thymocytes express receptors for alloantigens. At day 14 of gestation, thy-
mocyte precursors for CTL- or MLR-alloreactive cells exist, and these cells can mature
functionally in organ cultures (21, 22). These are the earliest known T cell functions
(6). Because alloreactivity parallels the development of the thymic rudiment (23) and
the earliest expression of Thy-l.2 (24), the antigen receptor on alloreactive T cells
could be considered the primitive T cell ~ analogue. In contrast to these data, we
found that Tthyd, Tindd and Tsud, all of which are expressed postnatally, are markers
on late-maturing cells. It is, therefore, not surprising that monoclonal antibodies
specific for Tthy, Tsu, and Tind do not react with cytotoxic effector cells for
alloantigens or precursors of MLR-reactive cells. (G. M. Spurll, L. Riendeau, A.
Finnegan, and F. L. Owen, manuscript in preparation).
Congenitally athymic mice (BALB/e nu/nu) have pre-T cells that can be induced
to mature to functional cytotoxic T cells in the presence of T cell growth factor
(TCGF) (9). One would expect that they have antigen receptors and, therefore, the
presence of a thymus is not a prerequisite for expressiOn of antigen receptors. Because
the Tthyd alloantigen is expressed preferentially on thymocytes and marrow cells and
lost on functionally mature T cells, it seemed a likely candidate for a pre-T cell
antigen receptor. This is not the case; adsorption studies with marrow and spleen cells
show that the AKR nu/nustreaker does not have the Thyd-bearing cell population.
The data showing that the marrow cell bearing Tthyd is a Thy-l.2, BAT-positive cell
also suggest that this cell is a more mature recirculating T cell and not a pre-T cell
(8). In addition, experiments depleting Tthyd by in vivo injection at birth with #g
quantities of monoclonal anti-Thyd do not produce a T-cell-depleted mouse, although
Tthyd-, Tsud- and Tind-bearing cells do not develop (S. K. Keese and F. L. Owen,
manuscript in preparation). Other immunization protocols have been initiated to look
for a pre-T cell receptor coded for by a gene linked to Tsu, Tind, and Tthy on
chromosome 12. One would predict that a fetal T cell should express that isotype by
day 15 in gestation and that the precursor for the cytotoxic T cell in nude animals
might retain that isotype.
That T cell receptor isotypes are characteristic of functionally diverse cells has been
hypothesized (1, 25). This speculation is based on experimental data showing that
Tsu and Tind are preferentially expressed on either Lyt-2 or Lyt-1 cells (1, 2) and on
the finding that antisera made with a similar immunization protocol distinguishes
between antigen:specific augmenting and suppressing factors (26). Contrasting data
from the studies of Binz and Wigzell (27) show that alloreactive antigen receptors on
Lyt-1- and Lyt-2-bearing cells are identical. These data are compatible when func-
tional diversification occurs before receptor isotype acquisition. It is possible that the
T cell lineage is branched; a pre-T cell could mature into a cytotoxic precursor (Tpc)
and, from that line, a group of regulatory cells (Ts, Th, Tind) could diverge. If Ts,
Tc, Th develop in ontogeny much later than To, the receptor isotypes could be
acquired after Lyt-1- and Lyt-2-bearing cells functionally diversify (28). The isotypes
of the late-maturing population would appear to be distinctive of the Lyt functional
type, whereas an early maturing alloreactive cell would use the same isotypes for Lyt-
1 or Lyt-2 cells. If one isotype is more efficient for a particular functional cell,
antigenic pressures would expand the most appropriate clone. One would expect to
see T suppressor cells with a spectrum of isotypes, one of which might predominate
714 MATURATIONAL MARKERS FOR T CELLS
because these clones have been selectively expanded. In nature, one might expect to
see most suppressor receptors associated with the Tsu isotype, whereas individual
clones, some of which would be functionally more competent, would have random
isotypes.
The latter interpretation fits the data obtained with our T cell hybrids. In the 27
clones examined, cells express either Tsu or Tind. No clone showed simultaneous
expression of both antigens, although 3 of 27 clones showed Tthyd co-expressed with
Tsu or Tind. These data are consistent with our initial observations that Tsu-bearing
cells and Tind cells represent two separate lineages of cells and that the Tthy
population may be a precursor for both these cells. Tsu and Tind show random
association with Lyt-1 or Lyt-2 in the hybrids. No functional data is available for
these clones. It is possible that association of an appropriate T cell isotype with an
appropriate I-A or I-J phenotype is necessary for function (29-30). I region-encoded
products may contribute to the quaternary structure of these polypeptides. If this is
the case, many of our hybrids may be nonfunctional; only a clone that has the
appropriate random association of Tind, I-A, and/or Lyt-1 chains would be biologi-
cally functional. This model necessitates waste of many precursor clones that might
have the appropriate variable region specificity but does account for the observed Ia-
associated restrictions on T cell factors.
Some of our "T cell" hybrids (Table V) do not express Tthy-1.2. It is possible that
segregation of chromosomes takes place, independently leading to loss of Thy-l.2,
Lyt-1.2, and Lyt-2.2. These clones were selected for expression of Tsu, Tind, or Tthy.
None express surface immunoglobulin. Mature T cells are frequently low theta dense,
and the hybrids might have few alloantigens per cell, escaping detection by direct
lysis. The surface expression ofTsu, Tind, and Tthy is a stable phenotype; chromosome
12 may be vital for growth of the cell and, therefore, would not be deleted in viable
cells.
The maturational schemata for T cells (Fig. 5) illustrates the acquisition of Tthy,
Tind, or Tsu at characteristic points in development. Many thymocytes express Tthyd
(35% C.I.), although it is a subpopulation marker. Studies of Keese and Owen show
that this is not a determinant on all cells in the thymus. Both cortisone-sensitive and
-resistant cells express Tthyd, although a low density thymocyte, which is Thy-l.2
sparse and H-2k dense, lacks this antigen. Cortisone-resistant thymocytes, in contrast,
express Tind and Tsu. Tsu is preferentially expressed on thymocytes in the least dense
BSA fraction. As cells exit the thymus, Tthy is lost. We know it must be present
genetically in some of the cells in the periphery because our hybrids, which originate
from lymph node, rescue this specificity. This might be due to genetic complemen-
tation, assuming Tthyd is not deleted, and Tthyd need not be assumed to be a surface
marker in lymph node in vivo for the results to be consistent. Resting spleen cells can
adsorb Tsu and Tind but the frequency of cells and/or density of antigen per cell
prevents visualization of direct killing. In contrast, 15-20% of popliteal node cells
from antigen-primed, footpad challenged mice express Tind or Tsu. The populations
appear to be numerically nonoverlapping. Tthy-, Tind-, and Tsu-bearing populations
might represent a progression of cells undergoing differentiation pressures, which
parallel acquisition of immunocompetence.
B lymphocytes express surface isotypes after antigenic maturation in a prepro-
grammed order that follows the order of the constant region genes on chromosome 12
SWITGH
/
T
b,/
-
~
T
s
u
d
+
Nu/Nu
(AKR
STREAKER)
......'"~
"
x
"
"
"
.
.
FIG
5.
T
h
e
differentiation
spectra
of
T
cells
expressing
Tthy,
Tind,
and
Tsu
in
normal
vs.
athymic
mice.
;>
O
Z
716 MATURATIONAL MARKERS FOR T CELLS
(~ ?~y~ ~'1 y2b 72a a E) (31). That same order is followed in the ontological expression
of the isotypes (7). It is possible that variable region genes must be translocated
sequentially by inserting into characteristic switch sites rather than being randomly
translocated to a constant region gene downstream from/~. The order of expression of
Tthyd, Tind d, and Tsu a on maturing T cells (not proven to be antigen triggered) also
parallels the ontological order of appearance of these antigens. This suggests a similar
organization of genes within a T cell-receptor gene complex. Because cDNA probes
do not yet exist for T cell-constant regions, one can only speculate that a mechanism
for biological preservation of VH genes could dictate the use of characteristic switch
mechanism for T cell antigen receptors.
Summary
Monoclonal antibodies specific for three T cell alloantigens linked to the immu-
noglobulin complex on chromosome 12 were used to establish the order of expression
of these antigens on immunocompetent cells and in ontogeny. Modification of
monoclonal antibodies with fluorescein isothiocyanate (FITC) and use with anti-
FITC and complement has amplified lytic capacity of the monoclonals and allowed
us to complete a distribution study of Tsu a, Tind d, and Tthy d alloantigens on
immunocompetent cells. Tthy d is expressed on both cortisone-sensitive and cortisone-
resistant thymocytes; Tsu d and Tind d are on "mature" cortisone-resistant cells. Tthy d
is also expressed on a Thy-l.2-bearing recirculating marrow cell but is undetectable
in the peripheral T cell pool. In contrast, resting spleen and lymph node T cells
express Tsu d and Tindd; antigen-activated populations express these two cells in high
frequencies. These antigens must be markers for relatively differentiated cells because
"nude" animals, which have pre-T cells, fail to express these determinants. All three
antigens segregate independently in our T cell hybrids, arising from adult peripheral
node cells, supporting the hypothesis that these are three separate structural products
of a gene complex. In contrast, fetal T cell hybrids fail to express these antigens. The
appearance of all three antigens on the cell surface in ontogeny is postnatal; Tthy d is
expressed at days 1-2, Tind d at days 2-3, and Tsu d at days 5-6. If the T cell isotype
genes are organized similar to the immunoglobulin loci, then the parallels in matu-
rational expression on immunocompetent cells and in ontogeny would lead one to
speculate a gene order of Tthy d ~ Tind d --> Tsu d. Orientation with respect to the
centromere is unknown.
The technical assistance ofJohn Fontana and Lauren Riendeau is appreciated.
Receivedfor publication30 March 1982 and in revisedform 17 May 1982.
References
1. Owen, F. L., and G. M. Spurll. 1981. Evidence for a T cell constant region gene family:
characterization of cell surface antigens by immunoprecipitation with alloantisera and
monoclonal antibodies. In Immunoglobulin Idiotypes. C. A. Janeway, E. E. Sercarz, and
H. Wigzell, editors. Academic Press, Inc., New York. 419.
2. Spurll, G. M., and F. L. Owen. 1981. A Family ofT-cell alloantigens linked to Igh-1. Nature
(Lond.). 293:742.
3. Owen, F. L., R. Riblet, and B. A. Taylor. 1981. The T suppressor cell alloantigen Tsud
FRANCES L. OWEN 717
maps near immunoglobulin allotype genes and may be a heavy chain constant-region
marker on a T cell receptor.J. Exp. Med. 153:801.
4. Owen, F. L., G. M. Spurll, and E. Panageas. 1982. Tthya, a new thymocyte alloantigen
linked to Igh-1. Implications for a switch mechanism for T cell antigen receptors. J. Exp.
Med. 155:52.
5. Owen, F. L., A. Finnegan, E. R. Gates, and P. D. Gottlieb. 1979. A mature T lymphocyte
subpopulation marker closely linked to the Ig-1 allotype CH locus. Eur.J. Immunol. 9:948.
6. Owen, J. J. T., T. Andrew, R. K. Jordan. P. McElroy, J. H. Robinson, U. Singh, and H.
N. A. Willeox. 1977. Factors Influencing the Primary Differentiation of Lymphocyte
Populations. J. D. Soloman, and J. D. Hortan, editors. Elsevier/North-Holland Biomedical
Press, Amsterdam, Holland. 139.
7. Lawton, A. R., and M. D. Cooper. 1974. Modification of B-lymphocyte differentiation by
anti-immunoglobulins. Contemp. Top. Immunobiol. 3:193.
8. Basch, R. S., and J. L. Kadish. 1977. Hematopoietie thymocyte precursors II. properties of
the precursors.J. Exp. Med. 145:405.
9. Hunig, T., and M. Bevan. 1980. Specificity ofcytotoxie T cells from athymic mice.J. Exp.
Med. 152:688.
10. R. Hyman. 1973. Studies on surface antigen variants.J. Natl. CancerInst. 50:415.
11. Marshak-Rothstein, A., P. Fink, T. Gridley, D. H. Raulet, M. J. Bevan, and M. L. Gefter,
1979. Properties and applications of monoclonal antibodies directed against determinants
of the Thy- 1 locus. J. Immunol. 122:2491.
12. Golub, E. S. Brain associated theta antigen. 1971. Cell, Immunol. 2:353.
13. Steinman, R. M., S. J. Blumencranz, B. G. Machtinger, J. Fried, and Z. A. Cohn. 1978.
Mouse spleen lymphoblasts generated in vitro: their replication and differentiation in vitro.
J. Exp. Med. 147:297.
14. Stobo, J. D., and W. E. Paul. 1973. Functional heterogeneity of murine lymphoid cells. III.
Differentiation responsiveness of T cells to phytohemagglutinin and Con A as a probe for
T cell subsets..]. Immunol. 10:362.
15. Cantor, H., and I. Weisman. 1976. Development and function of subpopulations of
thymocytes and T lymphocytes. Progressin Allergy. 20:1.
16. Schultz, L. D., H.-J. Heiniger, and E. Eicher. 1978. A remutation to nude in the AKR/J
strain, In Animal Models of Comparative and Developmental Aspects of Immunity and
Disease. E. L. Gershwin, and E. L. Cooper, editors. Pergamon Press, New York. 211.
17. Ceredig, R. H., E. J. Jenkinson, H. R. MacDonald, and J. J. T. Owen. 1982. Development
of cytolytic T lymphocyte precursors in organ-cultured mouse embryonic thymus rudi-
ments.J. Exp. Med. 155:617.
18. Cantor, H., and E. A. Boyse. 1975. Functional subclass of T lymphocyte-bearing Ly
antigens..]. Exp. Med. 141:1376.
19. Black, S. J., W. van der Loo, M. R. Loken, and L. A. Herzenberg. 1978. Expression of IgD
by murine lymphocytes. Loss of surface IgD indicates maturation of memory B cells. J.
Exp. Med. 147:984.
20. Owen, F. L. 1982. Acquisition of diverse T cell isotypes. Immunology Today. 3:95.
21. Owen, J. J. T., R. K. Jordan, J. H. Robinson, U. Singh, and H. N. A. Wilcox. 1977. In vitro
studies on the generation of lymphocyte diversity. Cold Spring Harbor Syrup. Quant. Biol.
41:129.
22. Chakravartz, A., L. Kubai, Y. Sidky, and R. Auerbach. 1975. Ontogeny of thymus cell
function. In Thymus factors in immunity. H. Friedman, editor. Ann. N. E Acad. Sci. 249:34.
23. Rugh, R. 1968. The Mouse. Burgess Publishing Co., Minneapolis, Minnesota.
24. Owen, J. J. T., and M. C. Raft. 1970. Studies on the differentiation of thymus-derived
lymphocytes.J. Exp. Med. 132:1216.
25. Kronenberg, M., M. M. Davis, P. W. Early, L. E. Hood, and J. D. Watson. 1980. Helper
718 MATURATIONAL MARKERS FOR T CELLS
and killer T cells do not express B cell immunoglobulin joining and constant region gene
segments.J. Exp. Med. 152:1745.
26. Tokuhisa, I., and M. Taniguchi. 1982. Two distinct allotypic determinants on the antigen-
specific suppressor and enhancing T cell factors that are encoded by genes linked to the
immunoglobulin locus.J. Exp. Med. 155:126.
27. Binz, H., and H. Wigzell. 1981.T cell receptors with alio-major histocompatibility complex
specificity from rat and mouse. Similarity of size, plasmin susceptibility, and localization
of antigen-binding region. J. Exp. Meal. 154:1261.
28. Mathieson, B.J., S. O. Sharrow, P. S. Campbell, and R. Asofsky. 1979. An Lyt differentiated
subpopulation of thymocytes detected by flow microfluorometry. Nature (Lond.). 227:478.
29. Hiramatsu, K., S. Miyatani, M. Kim, S. Yamada, K. Okumura, and T. Tada. 1981.
Unique T cell Ia antigen expressed on a hybrid cell line producing antigen-specific
augmenting T cell factor.J. Immunol. 127:1118.
30. Taniguchi, M., I. Takei, and T. Tada. 1980. Functional and molecular organization of an
antigen-specific suppressor factor from a T-cell hybridoma. Nature (Lond.). 283:227.
31. Honjo, T., and T. Katavka. 1978. Organization of immunoglobulin heavy chain genes and
allelic deletion model. Proc.Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 75:2140.