J Exp MedJ. Exp. Med483jexpmedThe Journal of Experimental Medicine0022-10071540-9538The Rockefeller University PressPMC2124500PMC2124500.1212450021245001986696910.1084/jem.6.2.1191ArticleCONTRIBUTION TO THE PATHOLOGICAL ANATOMY OF MALARIAL FEVER
EwingJamesProfessor of Pathology, Cornell University Medical College, New York City.11190262155814119180010719021804200821102019Copyright © Copyright, 1905, by The Rockefeller Institute for Medical Research New Yorkhttps://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-sa/4.0/This article is distributed under the terms of an Attribution–Noncommercial–Share Alike–No Mirror Sites license for the first six months after the publication date (see http://www.rupress.org/terms). After six months it is available under a Creative Commons License (Attribution–Noncommercial–Share Alike 4.0 Unported license, as described at http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-sa/4.0/).pmc-status-qastatus0pmc-status-liveyespmc-status-embargonopmc-status-releasedyespmc-prop-open-accessyespmc-prop-olfnopmc-prop-manuscriptnopmc-prop-legally-suppressednopmc-prop-has-pdfyespmc-prop-has-supplementnopmc-prop-pdf-onlyyespmc-prop-suppress-copyrightnopmc-prop-is-real-versionnopmc-prop-is-scanned-articlenopmc-prop-preprintnopmc-prop-in-epmcyespmc-license-refCC BY-NC-SA
 CONTRIBUTION TO THE PATHOLOGICAL ANATOMY OF
MALARIAL FEVER.
BY JAMES EWING, M.D.,
Professor of Pathology, Corneal University .][edical College, New York City.
PLXT.ES X-XV.
CONTENTS.
PAGE
INTICODUOTION ............................................................ 119
PART I .................................................................. 120
Reports of cases ...................................................... 120
PART II ................................................................. 153
I. Technics ................................. = ............................ 153
II. The viscerM lesions ................................................... 154
Liver .............................................................. 154
Spleen .............................................................. 157
Marrow ............................................................. 158
Relation of lesions of marrow to malarial anaemia ................... 159
Leucocytosis ........................................................ 161
Lymph nodes ........................................................ 163
Lungs ............................................................. 163
Cardiac muscle ..................................................... 164
Kidney .......................................................... 165
Gastro-intcstinM tract ............................................... 167
Central nervous system .............................................. 168
Coma in pernicious malaria ...................................... 172
Malarial pigments .................................................... 174
INTRODUCTION.
As with many other infectious diseases, the pathological anatomy
of malarial fever had been thoroughly studied long before the dis-
covery of the parasitic cause of the disease. Of the early studies it
may be said, from the standpeint of our present know]edge, bat
they had nearly exhausted the subject of the more evident patho-
logical changes in the viscera, and were essential, indeed, to the
final discovery of the parasite, but that in the absence of a knowledge
of Plasmodium malarice their numerous misconceptions greatly de-
tract from their value for present purples. Of current writers,
190 Pathological
Anatomy of Malarial Fever
Laveran is probably most familiar with the value of these studies,
and in the last edition of his work properly honors them with abun-
dant reference. Since the discovery of the parasite the entire field
has been extensively reviewed, principally in Italy and France, and
to some extent in America, Germany and England.
Nevertheless the records of close microscopic study of the lesions
of ordinary malarial infection are bv no means excessively numerous;
much yet remains to be learned, possibly from a microscopic study
of the visceral lesions, concerning the parasitology of the disease,
while its numerous irregular forms still offer one of the most inviting
fields for pa~hoaogical research. An increased value still attaches to
such records from the fact that malaria is seldom fatal in localities
where a full clinical history can be supplemented by a complete
microscopic examination of the viscera.
Considerations o.f this nature seem to justify the detailed char-
acter of the present conta'ibution, which consists of the available
clinical histories and the records of the gross and microscopic changes
in the viscera of several cases of malaria, together with a discussion
of any important features that the cases may present and their bear-
ing on previous studies.
Most of the material was collected at Camp Wikoff, Montauk
Point, Long Island, and the remainder was secured at Roosevelt
IIospital or elsewhere in New York City. For the clinical records
and notes of some autopsies of the Mentauk cases, I am greatly in-
debted to Dr. Delafie]d of _N~ewY-ork, and to Drs. Cotton, Allen, and
Mosher of Boston. Case I, at Roosevelt Hospital, was under the
care of ])r. W. H. Thomson, who kindly placed the clinical records
at my disposal. Dr. Eugene Hodenpyl asad Dr. John H. Larkin
have each kindly contributed material and autopsy notes of one case.
PART I.
REPORTS OF CASES.
CASE I.--?E,~tivo-Aut*m~al Malaria. Sub-Acute Course. Blood Containitzg
o~ly Crescents for two weeks before death. Prolonged Coma. Absence of Paq'a-
sites in the Brain. Peculiar Deposit.s of Pit~ment in Renal Epithelium.
F. H., 64 years. No important previous illness. Spent some time in Long
Island City, N. Y., shortly before Hlness, which developed in New York City.
James Ewing 121
September 25, had a chill followed by fever and sweat. Chills recurred
every other day till October 2-3, when they became irregular and less
marked. Admitted to Roosevelt Hospital, service of Dr. W. H. Thomson,
Oct. 6, 1896. Diagnosis, malaria. Treatment, quinine and ginger, ca. grs.
XXV-XL daily. Arsenic later, Fowler's solution, gt. XV. daily.
The patient seemed to improve slightly, the temperature falling gradu-
ally, reaching 99 F. on Oct. 10, and remaining at about that point until
Oct. 20. There was from the ilrst marked insomnia and tendency toward
mild delirium at night, partly controlled by sedatives, until Oct. 11, when
the delirium increased, and periods of mild coma supervened. About Oct;
16, the coma deepened and became continuous till death. There were no
evidences of urmmia, and the coma was clearly of the malarial type. There
was one slight paroxysm of fever on Oct. 20-21 (101.4), and on the 23rd
the temperature began to rise steadily, reaching 108 on the 25th, just
before death.
The urine was passed in considerable quantity, of acid reaction, 1020 sp.
g., and in the last two weuks of the disease contained a trace of albumin
and a few hyaline and granular casts. No mention was made of pigment
in the urine.
I had no opportunity to examine the blood until Oct. 12, when it was
found to contain an enormous number of spheroidal, ovoidal, and young
crescentic bodies, as many as ten appearing in one field of the immersion
lens. Prolonged and repeated search (4-5 hours) failed to show any rings.
There were the changes of secondary, an,-emia with marked loss of Hb.
and moderate variation in the size of the red cells. The leucocytes were
slightly reduced in numbers. Mononuclears 35%; polynuclears 60%;
eosins 5%. A few richly pigmented mononuclear cells were seen. Oct. 13.
The parasites were as numerous as before but there were now some
elongated and apparently full grown crescents, while the spheroidal bodies
were less numerous. No rings seen. Oct. 15. The adult crescents now
outnumbered the smaller forms, which were however still rather abundant.
/go rings could be found. The anaemia appeared rather more pronounced.
There was no leucocytosis, but the cosins were still increased. Oct. 21.
The numbers of parasites were still large and the forms were about equally
divided among elliptical bodies and adult crescents. Oct. 25. Eight hours
before death the blood was found to contain very few parasites. In the
course of this search 8-10 young crescents and spheroidal bodies were
encountered, but no rings. There was a moderate polynuclear leuco-
cytosis.
Autopsy.--12 hours after death. The aneemia appeared slight. No
(edema. No jaundice. Lungs, moderately congested and (edematous.
Spleen, slightly enlarged, very soft, of characteristic slate color. Liver,
slightly enlarged, of characteristic slate eolor. Stamacl,. cbnd intestSne,
negative. Serous .membranes, slightly discolored in places. Kidneys, size
about normal; capsules adherent in places, elsewhere surface is smooth;
cortex slightly irregular; markings distorted in places. The cortex is
light red in color, the medulla and papillae very dark red, or rusty. The
marrow of ribs and vertebrm is hypermmic, and of slight chocolate tinge.
Brain, moderately (edematous; not discolored; shows no petechim; the
basal vessels appear normal.
122 Pathological Anatomy of Malarial Fever
Microscopic Examination.--L~vvr.--There is a very extensive deposit of
pigment, in the form of discrete and conglomerate grains and masses, in
the endothelial cells, macrophages, and occasionally in the liver cells.
Much of this pigment is very compact and dark, and is evidently of rather
old formation. The numbers of pigmented spheroidal or ovoid bodies are
considerable, and many of these lie free in the capillaries, but all stages
of the ingestion and destruction of parasites by phagocytic cells can be
followed. Some peculiar bodies, possibly derived from malarial organisms,
are to be seen. One of those rather frequently seen is spheroidal, a little
larger than a red cell, with a thick shiny hyaline outer border, and show-
ing a central mass of yellowish pigment granules. In some of the larger
vessels there are several spheroidal bodies twice as large as a red cell,
hyaline and faintly bluish stained throughout, and exhibiting a moderate
number of central pigment granules. A good many small pigmented
parasites were seen.
~p/een.--The deposit of pigment is extreme. ~ineh of this is old pigment
in compact masses within phagocytes, but there is a considerable number
of free pigmented parasites, and aal stages of their ingestion and destruc-
tion can be seen. Neither rings nor rosettes are seen. There is the
usual cellular hyperplasia of the pulp cords.
Marrow.--Thc marrow of the ribs and vertebrm contains a moderately
rich deposit of pigment which is usually limited to the phagocytes. Very
little pigment is seen in the vessels, and very few parasites were identified
either in smears or sections. The eosinophile cells and giant cells are
increased. The nucleated red cells are abundant and some are slightly
increased in size.
Kid~ey.--There is a moderate chronic diffuse nephritis with growth of
new connective tissue in small wedge-shaped masses in the cortex. The
giomeruli are apparently normal. The tubules show swelling of the lining
cells, and in a few places the cells of the convoluted tubules are necrotic.
They all contain much granular yellowish pigment giving the reaction of
hmmosiderin. Yery few parasites could be identified. The deposit of pig-
ment, however, is very abundant and of peculiar distribution. The glo-
meruli contain more than the usual number of pigmented cells of the
usual character. The larger vessels of the cortex are sometimes injected
with blood in which are considerable ~eposits of brown granular or crys-
talline pigment. In the neighborhood of these vessels there are often
many clumps of similar pigment and these are sometimes found in the
lining cells of the convoluted tubules which are elsewhere entirely free
from brown pigment. The limitation of this pigment in the cortex to
the vicinity of vessels, strongly indicates that the crystalline deposits ha~e
resulted from the diffusion of dissolved ttb. or of escaped red cells.
Throughout tlenle's loops, and especially in the ascending arms and in
the collecting and discharging tubules the number of clumps of pigment
is enormous. The vessels here, while injected with blood, are nearly free
from pigment, which lies exclusively in the lining epitt~elial cells of the
tubules, some cells containing 40-50, or more, elmnps in a single section
(Plate XL Fig. 9). These cells, moreover, fail to show marked evidences
of granular or fatty degeneration, or of fragmentation, but their proto-
plasm is uniformly finely granular, their edges are unbroken, and their nu-
James Ewing 123
clei unchanged. On close inspection these pigment clumps are found to be
composed usually of small blunt~pointed crystals, sometimes of granules,
of dark brown color, arranged usually in a rather eompact circle or
sphere. Some of the pigment is more diffuse. Occasionally a clear space
surrounds the pigment clump, but the great majority of the pigment
circles lie bare in the cell.
BraiJ~.--Throughout the medulla, cerebrum, and cerebellum, the vessels
arc nearly free from pigment and parasites. In some sections from the
frontal cortex there are a few pigmented endothelial cells and an occas-
ional pigmented parasite, but most capillaries, though considerably in-
jected, are free from all traces of parasites or their derivatives. In many
of the pericellular lymph spaces throughout the cortex there were peculiar
structures, the nature of which I have been unable to determine. These
bodies consisted mostly of elongated fibrils or rods with tapering ends,
about 0.5 to 1 /z in thickness, and 5-15 tt in length. They were sometimes
single, more often multiple, aad arranged in rosettes, or spirals, or in
concentric layers, or irregularly clumped. They stained densely with
methylene blue, faintly with hmmatoxylin. Similar deposits were found
in other cases of malaria, and in one case of tuberculous meningitis. They
may for the present be classed with the artifacts of nervous tissue.
EPICRITIC2~L:--In the above somewhat anomalous ease there are
several features of interest. The development of a ease of fatal mala-
ria in a patient who for twenty-five years had not been away from the
vicinity of New York City is unusual. While autopsies on cases of
malaria are not extremely rare in this locality, they are usually cases
which were infected in southern latitudes.
While quinine in moderately large doses, with arsenic, controlled
the active sporulation of the parasite and reduced the temperature,
the treatment failed as usual to have any effect upon the crescentic
forms, which persisted in enormous numbers until, rather suddenly
in the last few days of the disease, they disappeared almost entirely,
although the patient died in hyperpyrexia. This pyrexia is no indica-
tion of a failure of quinine to control the infection, as none of the
ymmg forms were seen after Oct. 12, and the terminal fever must be
referred to other causes.
The prolonged delirium and coma are the chief clinical features of
the case. There seemed little ground for doubting that the mental
condition was referable to the malarial infection, because the coma
wa~ established before the urine contained casts and albumin; the
changes in the urine were never marked; there were none of the usual
concomitant signs of chronic urmmia, such as cedema, muscular twitch-
ings, etc. The general condition of the patient was typically that of
malaria; microscopic evidences of extreme mMarial infection were
9
124 Pathological Anatomy of Malarial Fever
found in the blood, liver, spleen, marrow, and kidneys, while the evi-
dences of nephritis were very much less marked than those usually found
in cases dying in chronic urmmia. RTeithercan the coma be referred
to the presence of organisms in the cerebral vessels, as none were found
there, and it becomes necessary to regard the cerebral symptoms as
dependent upon other conditions, probably toxic, associated with the
severe malarial infection. This conclusion is in accord with the evi-
dence furnished by other cases of the present series, which fails to
support the view that malarial coma is always dependent on the pres-
ence of parasites or embolic processes in the cerebral vessels. (See
especially Case II.)
The most striking pathological ieature of the case is the massing
of pigment in the kidneys, especially in the cells of Henle's loops. A
careful review of the microscopic studies of the viscera in malarial
infection, which is believed to be fairly complete, fails to show the
report of any similar condition in uncomplicated malarial fever. In
the studies of Bignami,~ Guarnieri,~ Marchiafava and Celli (1887),'
Kelsch and Kiener,* Stieda,' Bastianelli (1894),~ Barker,~ Ben-
venuti, Thin,' and others, the number of parasites and deposit of
pigment in the kidneys are described as moderate. This general rule
is explained by Bignami by the rapid renal circulation. The condition
in the present case appears to resemble that found in the kidneys in
hwmoglobinuric malarial fever, in some cases of which large deposits
of pigment have been found, but differs from them in the peculiar dis-
tribution of the pigment, and in the absence of h~ematuria.
On first observing the pigment deposits in the epithelial cells I was
inclined to regard them as the remnants of recent parasites, on account
of the close resemblance of many of the pigment circles to those of
~he crescentic bodies, and from the presence of vacuoles about some
clumps. Further observations on this and other cases, notably Case
II, led to the conclusion, however, that most of such pigment wreaths
here and elsewhere have never been associated with parasites, but are
derived from altered red cells. In the present instance this conclusion
1Attl d. R. Accad. reed. di t~oma, ]890 ; 1893.
Ibid., 1887.
:~Ibid., 1887.
4Maladies des pays ebauds, Paris, 1889.
Centralbl. f. allg. Path. u. path. Anat., 1893, iv, p. 321.
Ball. d. 22. Acca~l. reed. di Roma, 1893 ; 1894.
~,Johns tTopkins .TTosp. Rep., 1895, v.
s Lancet, 1896, i~ p. 1414.
James Ewing 125
is based upon the absence of any trace of the body of a parasite about
the pigment clumps, the abundance of the clumps about the injected
vessels of the medulla, and the crystalline form and peculiar arrange-
ment oi the grains of pigment in many of the clumps.
CAS~ II.--~'sti~o-Autum.nal Malaria. Extreme Malarial Infection. Very
large numbers of Parasites in Viscera, especially in the Heart Muscle. Rosettes
in the Peripheral Blooct. Extene$v'e Pigmentation of Serous Membranes.
J. B., 40 years. Went to Santiago in June, 1898, and remained about
five weeks. During the last two weeks he felt feverish in the afternoon
and complained of abdominal pain and diarrhoea. Never had a chill. The
same symptoms continued during four weeks after his return to New York,
when he took no medicine. Lately his chief complaints have been weak-
ness and increasing pallor, but he has noficed no recent paroxysms. On
August 15, he felt much worse and walked to the hospital with difficulty.
When first seen he was apparently moribund but could answer a few
questions as above. He soon became comatose. The pulse was very feeble,
124 per minute; temperature 101.6; respiration 40. Extreme pallor and
slight jaundice were noted. On physical examination the heart sounds
were very feeble. The spleen was not palpable but the area of splenic
dullness was enlarged. The urine was alkaline, sp. g. 1014; it contained
a little albumin, but no casts were seen. During the night he vomited
occasionally; delirium alternated with stupor; the pulse failed steadily;
the temperature rose to 103.8 F., and he died 14 hours after admission.
Autopsy.--lO hours after death. Externally, extreme pallor, slight jaun-
dice, no cedema. Subcutaneous tissues show a peculiar brownish yellow
discoloration. Lungs, moderately congested and (edematous. Heart, size
normal; muscle very flabby and pale; valves normal; chambers slightly
dilated. Liver, surface and section of dark slaty color; outlines of lobules
indistinct; size and consistence normal. Spleen, ll/z lbs., uniformly en-
larged, of very dark chocolate color, pulp diffluent. Kidmeys show signs
of acute degeneration. Gastro-intesti~al tract shows throughout a moderate
catarrhal inflammation, but no hmmorrhages or erosions. Serous mem-
brwnes all show small areas of black pigmentation. Peritoneum is of a
dark slaty color and in the parietal pleura there are some large irregular
patches of dense black pigmentation, l~[arrow of ribs and vertebrm is
very hypermmic and of dark chocolate brown color. The blood is very
anmmic and of distinct chocolate tinge. The bra~n could not be examined.
M~croscop4z Exarnination.--Bloo~.--Smears taken on admission showed a
large number of mstivo-autumnal parasites. Most were o~ the signet-ring
form, without pigment, and all except the earliest stages were about
equally representecf. In a few of the larger rings one or two fine pigment
grains were noted. Besides the rings there were a good many elder forms
with clumps of pigment. A few rosettes were found in the blood. The
red cells showed the changes of a severe secondary chlorotie anmmia.
Heart Musc/e.--The. number of parasites in the red cells filling most of
the capillaries is enormous. At many points nearly every red cell con-
tains one or more organisms and the vessel appears to be distended with
masses of infected red cells and pigmented leucocytes (Plate X, Fig. 7).
126 Pathological Anatomy of Malarial Fever
The forms of the parasites are about equally divided between non-pig-
mented ring's, pigmented spheroidal bodies, and rosettes; but no crescents
or distinct ovoids could be found. There are in the vessels a few pig-
mented endothelial cells of the usual appearance, and many richly pig-
mented leucocytes.
Most of the muscle cells contain a moderate deposit of large greenish
yellow granules. There are no evidences of fatty or other form of degen-
eration of the muscle cells.
Lungs contain a great many richly pigmented phagocytes with parasites
in all stages of degeneration. The capillaries are frequently distended and
sometimes apparently occluded by masses of red ceils, pigmented endo-
thelial cells, leucocytes, and macrophages. The vesicles contain a few large
pigmented cells. Parasites are not more numerous than in the peripheral
blood.
Kidney.--The capillaries everywhere contain a moderate number of red
cells harboring parasites. Most of these are the non-pigmented, ring-
shaped organisms. A great many richly pigmented spheroidal parasites
were seen in the same situation as the rings, and a few segmenting bodies
were noted. In no place were the capillaries distended or occluded by
masses of infected red cells and pigmented leucocytes, as was noted in the
heart muscle. Evidences of phagoeytosis are raoderately abundant and
extremely distinct, especially in the g'lomeruli. The phagocytic cells are
always either mononuclear leucocytes or endothelial cells, the tubule
cells being free from pigment. The observed phases of the process inclu-
ded the inclosure of an entire red cell infected with an unpigmented ring;
the inclosure of one or many pigmented spheroidal bodies; all stages of
the destruction of the bodies of inclosed parasites; and finally the circles
and clumps of fine pigment grains, which remain after the destruction of
parasites and red cells. From one to twenty circles were counted in large
macrophages lying free in the capillaries. The glomeruli and the capil-
laries of the medulla contain more pigmented cells and parasites than do
the cortical vessels. There is a marked acute degeneration of the lining
cells of the convoluted tubules, but no signs of chronic nephritis. The
tubules are slightly dilated, and contain either casts, or coagulum, or
fragments of epithelial cells.
Marrow.--The deposit of pigment is very marked but much less than in
the liver and spleen. The pigment is found in the endothelial cells, and
especially in the large and giant monomlclear cells of the pulp cords. In
these cells all stages of the ingestion and destruction of parasites could
be followed. The number of parasites withhl red cells is considerable and
larger than in the liver and spleen.
In sections of ribs and vertebral bodies very few fat cells are present,
the marrow being" excessively cellular. Nucleated red cells are abundant
and some are of sligtitly increased size. The eosins and giant cells axe
distinctly increased.
In smears of the expressed marrow the same conditions were seen
distinctly. Minute intracellular rings are very abundant, many cells con-
taining two, and some three, or four, such parasites. Twin parasites were
found in the cells, also, in the form of large vesicular bodies, one-third
the diameter of the cell, and sometimes showing one or two very minute
James Ewing 127
pigment grains, but beyond this size, no twin parasites could be found.
Well pigmented parasites were always single, and no cell was found con-
taining two well developed spheroidal bodies.
A few minute rings and a great many pigmented spheroidal bodies were
found apparently extracellular, a position which I am inclined to refer
principally to post-mortem and artificial processes. Rosettes were abun-
dant, and in several which were considerably flattened 18 spores could
be accurately counted. A moderate number of young and middle-sized
crescents were seen.
The phases of phagocytosis were quite distinct. The great nmjority
of pigmented cells, and the only ones containing excessive pigment de~
posits, were the large mononuclear cells of the pulp cords. The pig-
ment was found in the form of discrete grains, or often in compact
clumps, or circles. From one to thirty or more of these pigment-clumps
were seen in the larger cells. In many instances the circle of pigment
surrounded a vacuole somewhat larger than the body of a parasite. In
heavily pigmented cells irregular masses of granular pigment were usu-
ally found in the pcrinuelear region and elsewhere. The parasites seen
within phagocytes included a few non-pigmented rings and many faintly
staining pigmented spheroidal bodies. Many stages of the degeneration
of parasites were seen in the bodies of these cells.
The frequent appearance of a circle of pigment grains around a small
vacuole is probably referable to the complete destruction of the red cell
(Plate X, Figs. 1 and 4). Many of these large circles of pigment grains
surrounded a central compact clump, as though the englobed cell had
contained a pigmenteit parasite. A great mazay small spherical masses
of tlne pigment grains, identical in appearance with the pigment clumps
of full grown parasites or rosettes, were seen, and traces of the bodies
of the parasites were often detected about the clumps. Many discrete
coarser grains and clumps without vacuoles or surrounding" granules
seemed to represent that pigment which had been absorbed from the
plasma after its discharge from the parasite. Larger conglomerate masses
of older pigment were abundant, but even in these masses a granular
structure was usually visible.
Finally, in the marrow smears, the formation of peculiar vacuolated leuco-
cytes could be traced from the smaller and medium-sized mononuelear cells
of the marrow. In these cells the nucleus gradually lost its affinity for
methylene blue and became indistinguishable from the cell-body. At the
same time, in the nucleus and cell-body, hyaline globules developed and
gradually increased in size until the entire cell was reduced to a coarsely
reticulated faintly staining mass, identical in appearance with the vacuolated
leucocytes seen in the circulation (:Plate XI, Fig. 8). This process affected
both pigmented and non-pigmented cells.
On the other hand no resemblance could be traced between any of the
"stages of these degenerating eells and the various forms of parasites to be
found in the marrow, none of which, when admitting of positive identifi-
cation in stained specimens, exhibited similar degenerative changes. In
tl~e fresh marrow juice these leucocytes very closely resembled the forms of targe
vaouolated parasites described by some writers.
1~8 Pathological Anatomy of Malarial Fever
8p/een.--The black color of the spleen is found to be referable to very
heavy deposits of pigment, lying in endothelial cells, large mononuclear
cells of the pulp and sinuses, and leucocytes in the Sinuses, a~adin parasites
infecting red cells. The outlines of the sinuses arc no longer visible, being
choked by the influx of pigmented cells, or distended or ruptured thereby.
The Malpighian bodies are much reduced in size. No foci of large cells
free from pigment were to be seen in the pulp tissue.
The parasites are very numerous and of all forms except crescents, but
the majority appear to be inclosed in various phagocytes.
IAver.--The pig~nent deposits are extremely rich and are found in the
long swollen endothelial cells of the capillaries and in large mononuclear
cells lying often apparently free in the capillaries, and some of which are
probably leucocytes. The parenchyma cells are free from pigment. The
number of parasites is very large. Most of them are inclosed within the
above phagocytic cells, in which all stages of their degeneration are to be
seen (Plate X, Figs. 1 and 2).
In the red cells a moderate number of rings, pigmented spheroidal bodies,
and a few rosettes are seen. In the capillaries of Glisson's capsule the
numbers of parasites within red cells are very much greater than in the
intralobular capillaies. The chromatic network of the liver cells stains
faintly with methylene blue and is very ragged and irregular. There arc
no signs of fatty degeneration. The cells usually contain a deposit of large
greenish granules.
]~PICRITIOAL:---Among the features of this case, attention may be
drawn to the rather sudden termination after a period of comparative
freedom from severe symptoms, in which respect there is nothing very
anomalous; to the prominence of the cardiac symptoms; to the acute
degeneration of the kidneys; and to the activity and extent of the
phagocytic process. These features may best be considered in connec-
tion with the pathological conditions found in the viscera.
As the patient's condition had not led him to seek medical assist-
ance until a few hours before his death, it must be supposed that the
paroxysms immediate]y preceding the fatal attack were mild, as is also
indicated by the further history obtained. Such pronounced heart
weakness occurring early in the first severe paroxysm of the relapse
would seem to class the case with those of acute cardiac failure in per-
nicious malaria. It was noted in the physical examination on entrance
that the first sound of the heart was barely audible, and the pulse
extremely feeble. The microscopic examination showed the presence
of unusually large numbers of parasites in the visceral capillaries, the
heart muscle containing an excessive proportion of them. All the
small vessels in this locality were filled or distended with blood con-
raining a colossal nmnber of parasites in all stages of development,
with an abundant admixture of pigmented leucocytes. A considerable
;[ames Ewing 129
mechanical effect of such a massing of parasites in obstructing the cir-
culation can hardly be doubted, although no signs of complete throm-
bosis of small vessels could be found. On the other hand, no inflam-
matory reaction in or about the vessels or in the muscle fibres or sup-
porting tissue, no h~emorrhages, or evidences of degeneration or necro-
sis of cells, could be found. Yet if the mere presence of the bodies of
parasites in a tissue is capable of exciting any such inflammatory reac-
tion or causing cellular degenerations, this was an unusually favorable
situation to demonstrate these effects. No such changes existing, their
absence appears to furnish some evidence that the bodies of malarial
parasites do not exert any marked local toxic influence, but that their
local action is largely mechanical. Granting that a considerable dis-
turbance of the heart results from the general toxic condition, it seems
probable that the extreme cardiac failure observed in the present case
resulted from the mechanical obstruction of the circulation by the
masses of parasites in the capillary vessels, hut the evidence that such
a relation existed can hardly be claimed as demonstrative.
In the kidneys, on the other hand, where the effects of a toxic agent
were very marked, the number of parasites was comparatively small,
hardly exceeding that found in the peripheral blood. In these organs
there were distinct signs of severe acute degeneration, referable, not to
the presence of parasites, but to the general tox~emia.
The phagocytic process was extremely active in the li~er, spleen, and
marrow, where the great majority of parasites were englobed in phago-
cytic cells. The leucocytes were everywhere actively engaged in the
process. In the kidney the majority of phagocytic cells were leuco-
cytes. In the heart muscle, and in the connective tissues generally,
the parasites were very abundant and were multiplying rapidly, unre-
strained by any phagocytic tendency in the endothelial cells.
CASE III.--2~:~tivo-Autumnal Malaria. Marked Cerebral Symptoms and Con-
eentrat$on ot Parasites in Capillaries of Central Nervous System. Infection ~zith
a s~ngle well defined group of Para~tes. Developmental stages fully apparent
thraughout a 48 hr. eyele. Severe degenerative changes Cn the cells of the Convo-
lute~ Tubules, ~ith absence of parasfte~ in the renal vessels. Capillary ~'arieos-
~tes in the Liver, with atrophy of parenehvma.
B. T., 32 years. While in Cuba he had attacks of chills, fever, and diar-
rhoea, but partly recovered under quinine. On the transport the same
symptoms returned. After arrival at Camp Wikoff he suffered from nearly
continuous fever without chills, and the diarrhoea became more profuse.
On admission to the General tIospitM, September 6, he was considerably
emaciated, slightly jaundiced, and completely prostrated. ]=Ie was given
2~z ~o~r.of bimuriate of urea and quinine, subcutaneously, t. i. d., and
130 Pathological Anatomy of Malarial Fever
opium. He passed a restless night and the temperature remained high.
At 10 A. M., September 7, examination of the blood showed a recent sporu-
lation of parasites. The temperature fell steadily during the day but ~he
patient became delirious in the afternoon, and (.omatose by night, and
never recovered consciousness. There was a moderate rise of temperature
on Sept. 8, while the coma deepened and the pulse gradually failed. Death
occurred at 3 A. M., Sept. 9.
Blood Examination, September 7, 10 A. M., showed a great many mstivo-
autumnal ring-shaped parasites, 2-3 !z in diameter, lying in shrunken red
cells. Most of them are entirely free from pigment, but rarely one or
more fine pigment grains may be detected. A great many of the rings are
less tha.n 2/~ in diameter. Multiple infection of cells is not unusually fre-
quent. In the fresh condition the parasites exhibit rapid changes in
outline but few distinct pseudopodia.
The red eells show the changes of a severe secondary anaemia with
beginning changes in the size of the cells. The leucocytes are reduced in
number. No eosins seen. No pigmented leucocytes.
Sept. 8, 10 A. M., the parasites are much less numerous. They are nearly
all of larger size, 4-5 /, and maintain the form of a ring with thickened
irregular segments. A few show one or two fine pigment grains. The
ehromatin is variously subdivided and usually displaced from the peri-
phery of the ring, being often found as a small group of very fine granules
in the centre of the ring, or arranged in the form of a crescent or figure
8, or as an irregular mass or group of granules lying at some distance
from the ring. No spheroidal bodies with compact pigment mass and no
rosettes were seen in this ease. Several hours were spent, at various times
in the study of these specimens and during" that time two crescents were
encountered. The unity of the group of parasites is to that extent imper-
feet.
In the fresh condition the formation of pseudopodia and the amoeboid
motion are very active, and the pigment grains show slio'ht vibratory
motion. The leucocytes are as before.
Autopsy.-- hours after death. Body markedly enmeiated, slightly jaun-
diced; no (edema. Lungs show old emphysema and hypostatie congestion.
IIeart, rather small; valves and muscle normal; pericardium distended with
clear sermn. Spleen, slightly enlarged, moderately pigmented, dark brown,
rather soft. Kid~teys, about normal in size, consistence reduced, capsules
not adherent, surface smooth, cortex somewhat thickened, pale, markings
regular but indistinct. Stomach, contains bile, otherwise negative. Intcs-
tins, normal. Brain, no increase of serum, no venous congestion, no dropsy
of ventricles; cortex slightly brownish on section; no peteehim.
M:fcroscopic Examination.--Liver.--The liver cells are very fatty, and con-
tain many coarse yellowish granules, some of which give the reaction of
hmmosiderin. No necrotic loci were seen. In many lobules the cords of
liver cells are partly or completely a~rophic and the capillaries are much
widened, forming a variety of cavernous tissue. These changes are of
irregular distribution in the organ, being sometimes most marked about
central veins, but more often affecting large irregular portions of lobules.
Pigmentation of endothelial cells and of leucocytes is marked but not
extreme. Parasites are very scarce, but a few small spheroidal bodies
and minute rings could with difficulty be identified.
James Ewing 131
Spleen.--Appearances similar to those of Case II; but very few parasites
could be identified.
Marrow.--The marrow of the vertebrm is very fatty. In the cellular
cords, there is in places moderate proliferation, and the cells appear in
compact masses. Generally, however, the cords appear normal or deficient
in colorless cells. The pigment deposit is slight and no parasites could
be identified. In smears of the marrow a few ring-shaped parasites within
red cells were identified. The nucleated reds, eosins, and giant-cells are
very deficient.
Kid~teys.--The convohted tubules are mal-kedly dilaled and filled with
granular coagulum. The cells are flattened, or broken and degenerated,
and nearly all contain great numbers of large and small light yellowish
granules which give the Prussian blue reaction of hmmosiderin. The
capsules of the glomeruli are considerably dilated. The capillary tufts
contain a moderate number of pigmented cells and a few spheroidal
parasites. In a few of the ascending limbs of Henle's loops there are a
good many clumps o~ pigment lying within the lining cells, but this con-
dition is not a all frequent.
Brain.--Throughout the cerebrum, cerebellum, medulla, and upper cer-
vical cord, the capillaries contain a very large number of red blood cells
harboring parasites. Most of these are small pigmented spheroidal bodies;
some exhibit the large ring form with little pigment, and a very few
rosettes were identified. The pigment deposit, outside of the parasites,
is slight. A considerable number of capillaries were found completely
filled and apparently occluded by masses of infected red cells, pigmented
leucocytes, and swollen pigmented endothelial cells. In the same regions
the small arterioles and all the larger vessels were almost entirely free
from parasites. The ganglion cells everywhere show reduction in size,
irregularity, splitting, or loss, o chromatic bodies. These changes are less
marked in the large stichoehromes of the bulbar nuclei than in the cere-
brum and cerebellum.
EPIcm~IC~L:--Although further evidence is hardly required to
demonstrate the fact that in many cases of pernicious malaria of the
cerebral type the capillaries of the brain contain an excessive number
of parasites, the present case is such a striking example of this condi-
tion as to be worthy of record.
The relation of the cerebral symptoms can apparently be closely
connected with the development of the parasites as followed in the
examinations of the blood. Sporulation occurred during the night of
September 6, when the temperature was at its highest point, 10~. At
10 A. M., September 7, when the patient wa~ extremely restless, the
blood and presumably the brain contained a large number of small ring-
shaped parasites. Delirium and partial stupor began on the same after-
noon. At 10 A. lI., September 8, when the patient was comatose, the
parasites had markedly increased in size and many had retired from the
general circulation. At this time it is reasonable to infer that the
132 Pathological Anatomy of Malarial Fever
increased size of the parasites and probably their increased numbers
in the central nervous system had seriously impaired the capillary
circulation. At death, 3 A. M., September 9, preceded for several
hours by profound coma, the sections of the brain show that the major-
ity of the parasites had reached their full development, some were
segmenting, and many cerebral capillaries were occluded.
The presence of a single group of parasites, the development of which
could be followed throughout the cycle, is one of the interesting lea-
tures of the case. Sporulation appears to have been completed during
the night of September 6, when the temperature reached its highest
point, 104. At 10 A. M., September 7, the blood contained a large
number of rings nearly all under 3/2 in diameter, with a single large
chromatin body, and without pigment. These parasites ~ppeared to
have had at least 6-10 hours' growth. At 10 A.M., September 8, the
parasites had increased in size, measuring about 4-5y. i~ diameter;
numerous outgrowths bad appeared on the circumference of the rings;
~he chromatin (Nocht's method) was invariably increased in quantity,
subdivided, and irregularly placed, and a few parasites showed slight
pigmentation. There were still no spheroidal bodies, with compact
pigment, to be found, after 30 hours' growth. The patient died at
3 A. M., September 9, and the great majority of parasites found in the
cerebral capillaries were of large size and abundantly pigmented, and
a few rosettes were seen, indicating the approach of general segmenta-
tion at the end of 48-50 hours' growth. Judging from the appearance
of the parasites found in the sections of the brain it would appear
~hat about 6-10 hours' growth separated considerable numbers of the
youngest from the oldest members of the group, although between a
few individuals the intervals must have been much longer.
The severity of the renal lesion, with the absence of parasites in the
renal vessels, also requires mention. The changes in the ceils of the
renal tubules were more advanced than in any other nneomplicated
case of the series and appeared to be purely of the type of acute degen-
eration. The lining cells were markedly eroded and largely composed
of a multitude of light yellow granules giving the reaction of h~emo-
siderin. This destruction of the lining ceils caused the dilated tubules
to be more or less filled with granular detritus, but there was no fur-
~her evidence of an exudativc process. The kidney was free from
chronic changes. In the absei~ce of parasites and of signs or causes
of acute inflammation, this lesion must be referred to a toxic condi-
tion associated with ~he malarial infection.
James Ewing 133
The evidence of the present case, therefore, fully accords with the
conclusion drawn from other cases of the series, that the usual renal
lesions of pernicious malaria ure referable to the effects of a toxic
process and not to the direct action of parasites.
CASE IV.--_~stivo-Autumnal Malaria. Extreme Malarial Infection. Locali-
zation of Parasites ~n Bone Marrow. Infection with only one graup of Parasites.
Pernicious Anvemia.
F. J., 27 years, private, U. S. Army. No important details of the history
of this case were obtainable. It was learned that the patient had suffered
severely from malarial fever in Cuba and on the transport, and was
received at the hospital at Montauk in a precarious condition, dying a few
hours afterward in spite of stimulation and subcutaneous injections of
quinine.
Autopsy.--6 hours after de-th. Body very much emaciated, markedly
jaundiced. Lungs, lower lobes cedemateus; commencing hepatization of
lower part of right upper lobe. Heart, flabby, pale; valves normal; peri-
cardium distended with clear serum. /An)er,of moderate size, almost black;
gall-bladder distended with bile. Spleen, moderately enlarged, soft, black.
KiEneys, slightly enlarged, surface smooth, capsule not adherent, cortex
thick, yellowish, markings regular, indistinct. Gastro-4ntestinal tract, nega-
tive. Peritoneum, slate colored. Marrow of ribs and vertebrm chocolate
colored.
Microscopic Ex~minat~on.--Blood.--The only specimens secured were
squeezed from the incised finger-tip at the autopsy, six hours after death.
The red cells are extremely deficient in number and usually fail to form
rouleaux. The plasma stains slightly. There are extreme, differences in
the size of the red cells, which vary from small microcytes to very large
megalocytes; most are larger than normal. Nearly all cells contain an
increased quantity of Hb. and many are polychromatophilic. Nucleated
red cells are abundant and nearly all fall in the class of megaloblasts or
gigantoblasts. There is a pronounced polynuclear leucocytosis (a~te-
mortem?), but eosinophile cells are scarce. Many leucocytes, both
mononuclear and polynuclear, are pigmented. Comparatively few para-
sites could be found, and these were all small rings, as seen in the smears
of the marrow.
Liver.--There is slight fatty degeneration of the liver cells; the chromatic
network is irregular and indl~tinct, and the cells all contain large greenish
granules which give the reactions of bile pigment. There are no areas of
necrosis. The deposits of malarial pigment are abundant and very similar
to those described in Case II, but the evidences of inclosure and destruc-
tion of parasites are very much less marked. Very few parasites could
be identified.
Spleen shows the usual changes of acute malarial infection.
Mann'ow.--That of the ribs and vertebral bodies is very cellular. The
hyperplasia affects principally the myelocytes, many of which show mitotic
figures, other small mononuclear cells, and giant-cells, of which there are
many groups of five, six, or more. No fat cells were seen. The sinuses
134 Pathological Anatomy o[ Malarial Fever
are gorged with red cells and pigmented leucocytes. Nucleated red cells
are very abundant but no "islands " of these cells could be found. The
pulp cords contain a great many heavily pigmented endothelial and large
mononuclear cells. A few parasites were identified in the sections with
difficulty.
In smears of the marrow, all stages of the inclosure and destruction
of parasites could be followed in the large mononuelear and endothelial
ceils. The nnmber of parasites found in these smears is enormous, and
nearly all are the small ring-shaped forms without pigment. They are
much more numerous in the marrow than in the blood smears or in any
other tissues of the ease, and much more numerous than in the smears
made from the marrow of any other ease of the series. Examples of multi-
ple infection of the same red cell are very numerous, three and four rings
being very frequently seen; five and six were sometimes encountered, and
one cell was found containing seven distinct young rings2 In spite of the
enormous nmnber of parasites and the abundance of nucleated red cells,
none of the latter were found infected. No crescents were seen. Of the
nucleated red cells many are of 1;ormal size and appearance, but a great
many darkly staining megaloblasts and giganfohlasts are present. The
eosinophile cells are about normal in numbers, while the giant-cells are
distinctly increased.
The kidneys show the lesions of acute degeneration similar to tlmse of
Case II, but the number of parasites in the capillaries is small, and no
rosettes were seen. Pigmentation is moderate.
In the heart-m~scle a few ring-shaped and a very few small spheroidal
parasites were found.
The gastro-intesti.r~al tract exhibited no lesions of importance; its wall
contained a moderate number of small parasites without pigment.
The brain was not examined.
EHCmTIC~tL:--In this case there are several isolated features of
interest. The localization of an enormous n,mber of parasites in tile
marrow of the ribs and vertebrge is a peculiarity not encountered in
any other case of the series. It has appeared from smears and sec-
tions of the marrow of other eases that the activity of phagocytes in
this tissue, as in the liver and the spleen, greatly reduces the numbers
of parasites ~hat can be demonstrated in smears of these tissues. This
general rule, first formulated by guarnieri and Bignami, has applied
in all other eases of my series, but in the present instance no large
number of parasites was demonstrated in any other tissue except the
marrow, wherc the excessive pigmentation is iurther evidence of
nmlsnal activity of the parasites in this locality.
Attention may here be drawn to the necessity of relying only upon
s>w-ars of the tissues and not upon the examination of sections to
9Shown in Plate XXX, Fiff. 2, in .Ionrn~tl of F'xperi~e~*tag M,dicine, 1901, v.
James Ewing 135
determine the number of parasites present in tissues which are actively
engaged in phagocytosis. Although formalin as used in fixing the
tissues proved to be a very superior agent for this purpose, it has
always seemed to me difficult and hazardous to attempt to identify
parasites in stained sections of the liver, spleen, or marrow, and in
many instances where none could be identified in sections, smears of
the tissues revealed their presence in abundance. In the kidney, heart-
muscle, brain, and all tissues where phagocytosis is less active, the
results of examination of stained tissues appear to be fully reliable,
especially if Nocht's method is used.
A further point of interest in the present case is the evidence point-
ing to the existence of a single very compact group of parasites in the
blood and viscera. The forms found in the blood and in the smears
of the viscera included only the smaller non-pigmented ring-shaped
parasites. Neither pigmented spheroidal bodies, nor rosettes, nor cres-
cents, were anywhere seen. This condition is the more remarkable
since the pigmentation of the viscera, the grade of anaemia, and the
general condition of the patient indicated a somewhat prolonged course
of the infection.
The changes in the blood in this ease are of special interest, illustrat-
ing the rapid development, as a result of malarial infection, of a con-
dition identical in morphological character with that of primary per-
nicious anaemia. As the first cases of malaria among the troops at
Santiago developed in the second week of July, this patient, dying on
September 10, could not have been ill longer than eight, or possibly
nine, weeks. Yet in this period a condition of the blood was established
indistinguishable from that of primary pernicious anaemia, including
the abundance of large megalocytes with excess of Hb. and the pres-
ence of many megalob]asts. Even the smaller red cells exhibited an
apparent excess of Hb. Apart from the lesions directly referable to the
growth of malarial parasites, the changes in the marrow included a
well-marked cellular hyperplasia affecting principally the myeloeytes
and other small mononuclear cells, and giant cells; disappearance of
fat cells; increase in size of the nucleated red cells, the majority of
which were megaloblasts; and disappearance of "islands" of nucleated
red cells.
CASE V.--~stivo-Autumnal Malaria. Massing of Parasites in Kidneys. Acute
Hwmorrhag~c Nephritis. Ca~ts Entangling Infected Re4 Cells and Pigmented
Leucocytes in Discharging Tubules. Infectia~ with a single very compact Brood
ot Parasites.
136 Pathological Anatomy of Malarial Fever
IV[. S., female, aged 17, contracted malaria on Long Island, and after a
short period of mild paroxysms was completely prostrated on Sept. ]2,
1900. On admission to hospital, Sept. 15, the chief symptoms were pros-
tration, restlessness, vomiting, and moderate cedema of legs. Temperature
104.2 1~. Urine, of high color, sp. g. 1018, contained many epithelial cells,
detritus, and many red blood cells. Diazo-reaction marked. Widal's
reaction absent. Bowels costive. Restlessness aald vomiting were partly
controlled by sedatives. The vomiting of a round worm led to the admln-
istration of three full doses of santonin on Sept. 19. Mild delirium devel-
oped into coma on Sept. 20, and with failing pulse and diminished, bloody
urine the patient died on Sept. 20. There were two complete remissions
of fever on Sept. 18 and 20, but no chill occurred. UlinicaI diagnoais, ty-
phoid fever and acute hmmorrhagie nephritis.
Autopsy.--By Dr. Otto Schult~e, 14 hours after death. Body well nour-
ished, rigor firm, slight osdema of legs. Heart, lungs, stomach, and pan-
ereas normal. There was one ounce of straw-colored serum in the peri-
cardium, and a few ecehymoses in the visceral pleura and pericardium.
Intestine, ileum congested, lymph-follicles slightly enlarged; colon normal.
Liver, without gross indications of malarial infection, was pronounced
normal. Brain normal. Spleen, 16 oz., firm, dark red, with prominent
Malpighian bodies. Kid,neys weighed together 16 oz.; cortex much thick-
ened, capsule free, markings obscured, color very light; medulla intensely
congested, in places rusty; in cortex of right kidney a superficial anmmic
infarct with surrounding hmmorrhagic zone, measuring 3 x 21/~ cm. in area,
and 3 tara. in depth.
No gross evidences of malaria were detected.
Anatomical diagnosis.--Acute hmmorrhagic nephritis.
Cultures from liver and spleen yielded Bacillus colt communis, but no
growth of t~acillus typhosus was obtained.
Through a misunderstanding all the viscera except the kidneys were
thrown away. The kidneys were hardened in 5 per cent formalin.
M~croscopgc E.~amination (Plate XIII).--The lining cells of the convoluted
tubules exhibited a very advanced stage of degeneration of a peculiar
type. The cells were greatly swollen, their outlines obliterated, so that the
distended tubules were filled with a coarsely reticulated mass of cell-
detritus in which pyknotic nuclei were irregularly scattered. The degener-
ative process was principally hydropic, little fat or stainable protoplasm
being present (Plate XIII, Fig. 13). There were many minute foci of
necrosis, especially in the right kidney. The infarcted area was in an
early stage of coagulatlve necrosis, and throughout this area, especially in
the hmmorrhaglc zone, the vessels were distended with blood containing
enormous numbers of small pigmented parasites. Many small vessels
leading to the infarct were distended to two or three times their normal
calibre by thrombi of infected red cells. The capslfles of the glomeruli
were distended with granular coagulum (Plate XIII, Fig. 13). 5lost of the
cortical eapiIlaries were collapsed by the distended tubules and free from
blood and parasites. Throughout the medulla were many miliary hmmor-
rhages, and most of the capillaries were distended with red cells, most of
which contained parasites, or with thrombi of pigmented parasites which
games Ewing 137
had nearly destroyed the red cells. The parasites were remarkabIy uniform
in size, being full grown mstivo-autumnal forms with abundant pigment.
A very few rings and rosettes were seen. The discharging and many
higher tubules were distended with granular, epithelial, or blood casts.
Some of these casts had entangled leucocytes, often pigmented, and in-
fected red cells, while some infected red cells lay free in the lowest dis-
charging tubules. From their low position in the tubules all of these
casts must have reached the urine in at least moderate numbers. The
remarkable massing of parasites in the renal capillaries is shown in the
photographs (Plate XIII, Figs. 14 and 15).
EPIC~IT~CAL:--The absence of microscopic examination of the other
viscera, while greatly to be deplored for the sake of completeness in
the report of this case, cannot seriously detract from the importance
of the findings in the kidneys. Doubtless there were many parasites
in the other viscera, but in the absence of gross evidence of their pres-
ence it is safe to conclude that these viscera were not .the seat of any
special localization of parasites. This conclusion is rendered more
trustworthy from the fact that the single compact brood in the kidney
was composed of full-grown forms which were richly pigmented.
Moreover, numerous miliary h~emorrhages, and thrombosis of vessels
with infarction, are the usual mechanical results of the presence of
enormous numbers of parasites in a tissue, and the great extent of these
lesions in the kidneys throws this case in the same class with the coma-
tose and choleraic cases, with localization of parasites in the brain and
gastro-intestinal mucosa respectively. The extreme degeneration of
the tubule cells seems in part referable to the general tox~emia of the
disease, but its extreme degree and peculiar character were not seen
in any other case of the series, and may, with considerable certainty,
be attributed to the obstruction of the circulation by the thrombi of
infected red cells. Since the discharging tubules contained, among a
large number of casts, some entangling infected red cells and pigmented
leucocytes, while a few infected red cells were found free in the lamina
of the tubules, it seems possible that a diagnosis of such a case might
be established d~ring life from the examination of the urine, which
should show marked diminution in quantity, considerable albumin and
blood, many granular, epithelial, some blood casts, and infected red cells
and pigmented leucocytes, both free and adherent to casts.
CASE VI.--z~stivo-Autunvnn~ Malaria (?). No Parasites found in Blood. Few
Parasites an~ u~nusually little evidence o~ malavta~ infection found in the Viscera.
B., age 32. Served with regiment in Santiago campMgn and contracted
malarial fever in Cuba. Stated that he had four attacks in Cuba, marked
138 _Pathological Anatomy of Malarial Fever
by chills and fever. The last and longest illness lasted three weeks. Was
treated always by quinine with good results, but on omitting treatment
the disease promptly relapsed. Recently he had suffered from mild chills
daily, with more continued fever. On Sept. 4, the day of admission, he had
a slight chill at 8 A. ]~f. and f.hat afternoon the temperature was 101.6;
pulse, 80.
Physical examination was negative, the spleen not being found notably
enlarged. The patient was not markedly emaciated or anmmic. All symp-
toms pointlng distinctly to malaria the patient was given quinine, but
next morning, September 5, he had another chill and the temperature rose
to 104% Quinine was then increased, and given subcutaneously in large
doses. On September 8, there was a moderate chill and rise of tempera-
tnre. The stools were now diarrh(eal, tbe abdomen moderately distended,
the skin slightly jaundiced, and as the fever did not yield to quinine the
blood was examined.
Blood Examination. Sept. 8.--The red cells showed the changes of well
marked secondary chlorotic anaemia. The leucocytes were reduced in num-
bers. :No eosinophilcs. No distinct pigmented leucocytes, but a few con-
tained single grains of pigment apparently malarial. In spite of prolonged
search no parasites could be found. This result was confirmed by several
subsequent examinations of the same and other specimens. The dissolved
blood in the proportion of about 1 to 10 of water was mixed with a broth
cldture of B. typhosas, yielding prompt and typical clumping.
On the evidence of a temperature resisting' quinine, of typhoidal stools
and abdominal symptoms, absence of parasites from the blood, and pres-
ence of Widal's reaction, the administration of quinine was stopped from
September 9 to l0 inclusive. The temperature declined, but the other
symptoms persisted and the patient grew steadily weaker.
Blood examination, Sept. 9, gave the same result as before, but the Widal
test was not repeated. Sept. 10, temperature fell to 99.6, but the patient's
condition was not improved. Quinine was again administered subcutane-
ously. Sept. 11, abdomen more distended; diarrhoea continues; no eruption;
patient at times mildly delirious; pulse very weak. Blood examination,
Sept. ]], showed no parasites, but a few characteristic pigmented leuco-
cytes were seen. Sept. 12, patient died. The diagnosis was at this time
regarded as probably typhoid fever.
Autopsy.--lO hours after death. Body moderately emaciated, slightly
jaundiced. Lu~gs, moderately congested and (edematous. Heart, left yen-
tricle slightly dilated, wall rather thin, flaccid; old thickening of mitral
and aortic valves. L$ver, moderately enlarged, moderately dark brownish
in color, but not slaty. Spleen, moderately enlarged, firm, dark red in
color. Kidneys, enlarged, capsule free, surface smooth, cortex thickened,
pale; markings regular but indistinct. Gastro-intestinal tract, shows no
lesions of importance; Peyer's patches are not enlarged or congested;
mesenteric lymph nodes are not enlarged. The stomach contains blackish
fluid but there are no evidences of gastro-duodenitis. Brain, in the absence
of cerebral symptoms, was not examined. Marrow, hypermmie, but shows
no gross indications of lnalarial infection. Blood., inoderately anemic, but
not otherwise changed in color.
James Ewing 139
Microsvopie Examination.--Spleen shows the usual changes of acute ma-
larial infection. The deposit of pigment, although considerable, is much
less than usual in fatal cases of malaria. Smears oi the splenic pulp made
at the autopsy showed the presence of a very few ring-shaped parasites
in red cells. The pigmented leucocytes and endothelial cells are of the
usual character in acute malarial infection.
Liver.--The deposit of pigment is rather less abundant than in the spleen
and is limited to the leucocytes and endothelial cells. The liver cells show
destruction of chromatic network, and ~ moderate deposit of greenish
granules; some contain fat globules. In the smears from the liver, no
parasites could be identified, but some atypical intracellular, pigmented
spheroidal bodies were noted which may have been malarial parasites.
Marrow.--The deposit of pigment is scanty. Fat cells are moderately
abundant in the ribs, but the evidences of cellular hyperplasia are distinct.
In the smears some typical macrophages engiobing parasites in all stages
of digestion, are found. A few infected red cells are seen. The nucleated
red cells, eosins, and giant cells, are deficient in number.
In the other viscera the deposit of pigment was much less abundant
~han in most cases of fatal malaria, and no parasites cou]d be found.
EP~CRI~ICAL:--While the data in this case must be regarded as incon-
clusive in important respects, the facts demonstrated render the case
one of unusual interest and obscurity.
The most important feature is the absence of parasites from the
blood, as repeatedly demonstrated, in a patient who nevertheless died
with a typical temperature curve of fatal mstivo-autumnal malaria.
The absence of parasites in this instance is not fully explained by the
previous treatment with quinine, as in all other cases of my series in
which all parasites disappeared promptly after quinine, the patient
improved. Moreover, it is an almost invariable experience that cases
of malaria that die without parasites demonstrable in the blood are
more chronic cases complicated by severe anaemia or cachexia. All the
other fatal cases of acute malaria seen at Montauk showed many para-
sites in the blood at death, although many of them had been treated
with very large subcutaneous injections of quinine for as long a period
as in the present case. Accordingly the absence of parasites from the
blood, under the conditions existing, at once raised a doubt regarding
the nature of the disease.
The possible existence of typhoid fever was completely set aside by
~he autopsy, unless one assumes an infection by B. typhosus without
intestinal lesions.
Both the gross and the microscopic examinations of the viscera,
however, as well as the clinical history, indicate as the cause of death
an acute malarial infection in the fourth or fifth relapse, proving fatal
10
140 Pathological Anatomy of Malarial Fever
with very few parasites ill the blood, which disappeared promptly on
the administration of quinine. The present ease therefore seems to
fall properly in a rare and obscure class described by 3iarchiafava,
Bignami, and Bastianelli ~o (1894), in which few parasites were found
in the blood during an acute fatal attack of malaria, and in which no
distinct gross signs of malarial infection were found at autopsy, the
diagnosis requiring a microscopic examination of the viscera.
These eases occurred in July or late in the summer. They usually pre-
sented the rather typical clinical symptoms of pernicious malaria, espe-
cially the cerebral symptoms. On examination of the blood, however, even
early in the disease, very few parasites (one or two in a single slide) or,
later, none at all, were to be found, while the viscera showed no distinct
gross lesions of a previous severe malarial infection. On microscopic ex-
amination of the viscera, pigment deposits were unusually scanty and few
or no parasites were fbund.
These cases, according to the authors, are not to be classed with those
in which the parasites gradually disappear in severe acute infections, none
being found in the finger blood at death although the viscera exhibit abun-
dant evidence of malarial infection; nor yet with those in which the para-
sites disappear after a long infection has spent itself. They believe that
the fatal issue is rather to be referred to general debility of the patient,
or to an unusually virulent infection, or to an occasional combination with
sunstroke.
In my case the patient had not suffered from the campaign more
than had many others, and although he had undoubtedly been living
under very unfavorable conditions, this fact, though important, seems
insufficient of itself to explain the unusual features of the disease.
Neither was there any indication that the patient suffered unusually
from the heat which prevailed at that time, even at Camp Wikoff.
Finally, a virulent malarial infection usually produces very large num-
bers of parasites, severe anmmia, and heavy deposits of pigment, all of
which were absent, at least in the fatal attack.
If the present case is to be accepted as one of pernicious nmlaria,
and it is essentially similar to those of the Italian authors, the conelu-
sions must then be drawn that mstivo-autumnal malaria may pass
through four or five relapses without leaving marked deposits of pig-
ment in the viscera and may end in a fatal attack in which very few
parasites, which soon disappear under quinine, are to be found in the
b]cod or viscera.
After referring to their own cases of this character Marchiafava
10loc. cit.
James Ewing ].4~I
and Bignami take pains to slate that after years of experience they
believe that fatal malaria does not exist without parasites in the finger
blood. The present case cannot be regarded as an exception to this
rigid rule, and I would particularly point out the fact that the patient's
blood was not examined until 72 hours after the beginning of treat-
ment by subcutaneous injections of quinine.
CASE VII.--Fatal Malaria from Infection with Large Tertian Parazite (Golg4).
Extreme Anemia. Prolonged Coma without Parasites in Brain. Catarrhal
Colitis. H(emoglobin.urie Malarial Fever.
G. F., aged 32, private, U. S. Army, contracted malarial fever at Santiago
in July, 1898, and had had repeated relapses with short intervals of im-
provement, when he had felt able to return to duty. Had often experienced
severe shaking chills at somewhat irregular intervals. Had steadily lost
flesh and becorae very anmmic. About Sept. 11, was again prostrated with
severe chills and fever which failed to respond to quinine administered
by the mouth or subcutaneously. On admission to General Hospital at
Camp Wikoff, Sept. 13, the patient was comatose, and remained so until
death at 3 A. M., Sept. 16. When seen by me, Sept. 15, the patient was
comatose and moribund. The foregoing items of history were obtained
from Dr. S. W. Allen, of Boston, who had seen the patient on admission,
and to whom I am indebted for the opportunity of studying the case.
Autopsy.--8 hours after death. Body much emaciated, excessively anm-
mic, and slightly jaundiced. Chocolate-colored fluid exudes from mouth.
Lungs, anterior portions anmmic, posterior much congested, moderately
(edematons, and "unusually dark in color. Heart muscle very flabby, of
pale brownish tinge; valves normal. Blood, very watery, of slightly brown-
ish tinge, coagulating feebly. Liver, not distinctly enlarged; of slaty color
but not extremely dark; outlines of lobules very indistinct; gall-bladder
distended with bile. Spleen, greatly enlarged, soft, but not diffiuent; of
typical chocolate brown color. Pancreas, small, dark salmon in color, rather
soft. Kidneys, slightly enlarged, surface smooth, cortex thick, deep red, in
places rusty, markings indistinct; organ very greatly congested. Stomach,
partly digested in places, contains some dark bloody fluid. Small intestine,
exhibits no abnormalities. Colon, lower third the seat of an intense catar-
rhal inflammation with superficial erosions, and swelling of solitary folli-
cles. Mesenterie lymph-nodes are not enlarged. Serous membranes, slightly
darkened and jaundiced, and contain slight serous effusions. Marrow, very
hypermmic, of chocolate brown color. Brain, white matter perhaps slightly
darker than usual; dura and pia yellowish; no effusions, no petechim. Spe-
cimens preserved in 5% formalin.
Microscopic Examination.--Blood, Sept. 15. Smears contain a very large
number of tertian parasites in all stages of development. These parasites
are of large size, richly pigmented, except in the very young forms; their
nuclei fail to stain by methylene blue, and the infected cells are much
swollen and distinctly pale. A prolonged search, repeated on several sub-
sequent occasions, failed to show the presence of any bodies that could be
classed with the mstivo-autumnal parasite. All the ring forms were coarse,
142 Pathological Anatomy of Malarial f'ever
usually pigmented, with a large achromatic spot (methylene blue), and the
infeeted cells were swollen.
The red cells show the changes of a severe secondary ehlorotie anmmia.
There was no leucoeytosis, but the eosinophile cells are not relatively nmn-
erous. A moderate number of pigmented leueoeytes were seen.
At the autopsy, smears upon glass slides were made from the expressed
marrow of the ribs, and from the splenic pulp.
Smvars from the marro~c contained an abundance of pigmented cells. The
piginent is usually darker and finer than that seen in oestivo-autumnal in-
fections. When occurring in dumps, the clumps are rather more compact,
but most of the phagocytic cells eontain more diffusely scattered pigment
grains than are seen in mstivo-autumnal eases. Many rods and elumps,
however, are indistinguishable froul the eestivo-autumnal pigment. Very
few infected red cells could he found, but there were a few small pig-
mented intracellular bodies staining faintly with methylene blue. Nucle-
ated red cells, eosinophile cells, and giant-cells are distinctly deficient.
Smea,rs from the spl.cen contain a great number of pigmented cells similar
to those of the marrow. There are a large number of distinctly stained
pigmented parasites of considerable size. Very few or none of the younger
parasites seen in the blood could be identified in these smears. No vaeuo-
lated parasites could be found, but there was a considerable variety of
small, vaeuolated leucocytes, many of which were pigmented (Plate XI.
Fig. 8).
Spleen.--There is extreme pigmentation of all the larger cells, the pig-
ment showing the same characteristics as in the marrow and liver. No
parasites could be identified. There is a well-marked cellular hyperplasia
of the pulp tissue; the large and small sinuses are choked with pigmenti-
ferous and other cells; the Malpighian bodies are reduced in size, and the
blood content of the organ is increased.
Abdomina~ l/ymph nodes show moderate hyperplasia, slight pigmentation
of endothelial eells, many mast-cells, but no parasites.
Marrow (rib).--The pigment deposit is very heavy, but few parasites
could be identified. The cellular elements are very abundant and in places
there seems to be some proliferation. There are marked congestion of all
vessels and a few small hmmorrhages.
Liver.--There is extreme pigmentation of endothelial cells, macrophaffes,
and leucocytes, but the parenehyma cells are almost entirely free from
brownish pigment. The deposit of pigment in the former cells differs from
that seen in zestivo-autumnal cases, in being finer and more diffuse (Plate
X, Fig-. 3). Although there are many cellular inclusions in the phagocytes.
no parasites could be positively identified. The liver cells are not fatty,
but the chromatic retieulum is faint and irregular, and many cells con-
tain coarse greenish granules. A few small loci of necrosis were found.
in the neighborhood of which dilated capillaries filled with large phago-
cytic cells were sometimes noted.
K$dney.--The blood content of the organ is enormously increased. All
the large vessels are gorged with blood, the intertubular capillaries in
numerous small areas are greatly dilated and distended with blood. The
capillary walls are usually intact, but in many places there are small
hvemorrhages into the tubules. Everywhere, especially in the medium-
James Ewing 143
sized and larger vessels, there are peculiar collections of pigment to be
described later. The quantity of ordinary malarial pigment is not large.
The cells of the convoluted tubules show advanced stages of degeneration.
In the less congested areas the cells are moderately eroded, and contain a
large deposit of fine yellowish granules of hmmosiderin. Near the h~mor-
rhages and between markedly dilated capillaries, the tubule cells are often
necrotic, the nuclei fail to stain, and the protoplasm is broken up into
shiny opaque globules staining with eosin. Sometimes the entire cellular
lining is fused into a homogeneous opaque mass entirely detached from
the membrana propria. In some lining cells and in some tubules there are
a few pigmented pa.rasites, which are also to be seen in the capillaries.
Lit~gs.--All capillaries contain an enormous quantity o~ granular and
crystalline pigment in leucocytes, endothelial and epithelial cells, and free
in the vessels. No parasites were identified.
Stomach and small it~testine, negative. The inflamed colon shows intense
congestion of mucosa, exfoliation of epithelial lining in places, moderate
pigmentation of leucocytes and of endothelial cells. No malarial parasites
identified and no Amcebm dysenterim found.
Heart m~scle.--In the capillaries of the heart muscle there are ~ good
many richly pigmented leucocytes, considerable deposits of crystalline pig-
ment, but very few parasites could be found, either in the red cells or
leucocytes, or in the plasma. There is considerable artificial separation
of muscle cells in some places, but the tissue shows no evidence of inflam-
mation nor the cells any marked signs of degeneration. Many of them
show a deposit of greenish granules about the nucleus. There are a great
many huge mast-cells in the endomysium.
Brain.--Throughout the cortex, medulla, and cerebellum, there is the
usual hypermmia, but the great majority of all vessels are entirely free
from pigment and parasites. In a good many capillaries an isolated, pig-
mented, intracellular spheroidal body is found, of slightly larger size than
those seen in ~estivo-autumnal cases. The pigment in these bodies usually
appears in coarse dark grains. In a very few capillaries, there are masses
composed of a few pigmented spheroidal parasites, pigmented leucocytes
and swollen pigmented endothelial cells, capable of partly obstructing the
circulation in the capillary, but these obstructed vessels are so scarce that
it seems hardly possible to refer the cerebral symptoms to this condition.
There is a uniform reduction in the size and number of chromatic bodies
in the ganglion cells and considerable post-mortem clouding.
EPlCl~ITICAL:--While the statement of Italian authorities has long
held true that no autopsy has been reported in a case of malaria with
infection by the large tertian parasite, as the infection is never fatal,
the present case requires a modification of this view, offering an
instance of fatal uncomplicated malaria with infection by the large,
and so-called "benign " tertian parasit% demonstrated in the blood
during life in large numbers and without admixture with other varie-
ties, and indicated further by the somewhat peculiar character of the
pigment deposits in the viscera
PathoIogical Anatomy of Mala~'ial tZever
The above claim of the Italian observers, although based on a very
wide knowledge and experience, must be regarded as too sweeping,
since almost any condition may occasionally prove fatal through acci-
dental complications. Thus, Barker 11 has reported a ease of tertian
malaria with autopsy, in which death was referable to general infection
with Streptococcus pyogenes.
In another case seen by me at Montauk, death occurred in the third
relapse when the blood contained a great many large tertian parasites,
and no other organisms were found after repeated and prolonged
examinations. Death in this case was undoubtedly due to the growth
of this usually benign parasite, but in a ~ubsequent review of one of
the specimens, a single crescent was encountered, necessarily throwing
the case in ~he class of double infections, according to the present
theory of malarial species, but not seriously vitiating its value as a
proof that the large tertian parasite is occasionally malignant.
The severity of the anaemia in the present ease also deserves men-
tion, in view of the general rule that the large tertian parasite is less
active in impoverishing the blood than the malignant tertian. Although
the Hb. was not estima{ed nor the cells counted, the pallor of the
patient, the anmmia of the viscera, and the watery condition of the
blood in the large vessels indieated a state of anmmia which was not
exceeded in any other case of the series.
The prolonged coma, with very few parasites and very little pigment
in the brain, classes this case with others which indicate that pro-
fmmd cerebral disturbance in acute malaria is not necessarily con-
nected with the localization of parasites or pigment in the cerebral
capillaries.
The catarrhal colitis and its cause are a feature of interest in this
ease. The microseopic examination failed to reveal any evidence that
the malarial infection was directly concerned in this lesion, as few
parasites and little pigment were found in the wall of the colon.
The character of the pigment in the case deserves special attention.
As already mentioned, its oecurrenee in finer and darker grains more
diffusely scattered throughout most phagocytes, especially in the he-
patic endothelium, appears as a feature which may serve to distinguish
the deposits of tertian from those of most ~estivo-autumnal infections.
Throughout the viscera, in the small and medium-sized vessels and in
some capillaries there were deposits of a peculiar form of pigment
somewhat similar in color to, but different in form from, that elabor-
tl Op. eit.
James Ewing 145
ated by the malarial parasite. Sections of some of the injected vessels
appeared almost black from deposits of this material. On examina-
tion this pigment appeared in the form of fine .or coarse grains, or
short rods, or short acicular crystals of dark brown color. It was
usually attached to the surface of the red cells, but much was free in
the plasma. Various stages of its formation could be followed in the
blood vessels of the kidney, pia mater, and heart-muscle. In the earli-
est stage noted the red cells were found to be fringed with a row of
small dark granules, while the body of the cell exhibited a faint yellow-
ish-brown tinge. This appearance was often limited to the central
portions of the mass of blood in the vessels, while adherent to the walls
were leucocytes containing malarial pigment of the ordinary character
(Plate XII, Fig. 11).
When more abundant, the pigment grains were usually of larger
size and in quantity sufficient to fill the interspaces between the red
cells. In this case the section of the injected vessel sometimes ap-
peared opaque and brownish. Usually the deposit was very abundant
and the red cells were covered with rod-shaped granules or short acicu-
lar crystals lying in or on the cell, or in the plasma (Plate XII, Fig. 12).
Such cells sometimes exhibited a diffuse dark-brown color. Radiating
groups of finer acicular crystals were commonly found in the richer
deposits. In the kidney and heart muscle many arterioles were almost
black with the deposits. No parasites were found in any of the red
cells affected by the process. The bodies of the leucocytes were usually
free from pigment grains of this character, but many were surrounded
by numerous crystals, especially in the capillaries.
The distribution of the deposits was peculiar. They were found
most abundantly in the heart muscle and kidney; the earlier stages
were noted in the lungs, pia mater, and abdominal fat and lymph
nodes; a few crystals were seen in the marrow; while the liver and
spleen, containing an unusual quantity of ordinary malarial pigment,
failed to show any trace of this crystalline variety.
These extensive deposits of pigment which were found in nearly
all parts of the general circulation seem, without doubt, to be referable
to a greatly increased globulicidal action of the plasma, and taken in
connection with the renal lesions, indicate that the patient was suffer-
ing from that extreme form of destruction of blood which character-
izes hsemoglobinuric malarial fever.
CASE VIII.--~stil~-Autumnat Malaria. Amosbic Co~itis. Extreme Malarial
Infectivn. Absonos of Pigment and Parasites from the WaU of the Golon. Ex-
tensive Growth of Amosbcs.
146 Pcdhological Anatomy of Malarial Fever
J., aged 21, private, U. S. Army. When received at the General Hospital,
Sept. 9, on his return from Santiago, the patient was too ill to give an
account of himself. He was then in a typhoid state, extremely emaciated,
with incontinence of traces, and mild delirium. Temperature 103 , pulse
feeble. The temperature fell to 97 in the course of 48 hours, but the
patient showed no tendency to improve, lie was given moderate doses of
quinine by mouth, and the diarrhoea was imperfectly controlled by astrin-
gents. The condition was at all times hopeless and he died Sept. 19.
Autopsy.--Two hours after death. Body extremely enmciated and anm-
mie. Lu.~lgs, show areas of oedema and hepatization. He~lrt, no gros~
changes. Liver, not enlarged; color very dark brownish, slaty; outlines or"
]obules indistinct; gall-bladder distended with bile. ~pleen, very large,
ra~her firm, of very dark chocolate color. Stomach, small, contracted.
,~mtlll i~testine, negative. Colon, lower third the seat of numerous ulcers.
of moderately large dimensions; bases and edges necrotic and undermined,
covered with bloody necrotic material; vicinity in some areas covered with
fibrin. Fmces greenish gray in color; semi-solid; contain little mucus; mi-
croscopically, they contain a little p(ls and epithelium, many bacteria,
many fat crystals, no pig~nented leucocytes, a little food detritus. No
amoebm could be found. Mesenter~c lymph nodes, much enlarged, hypermmic,
very slightly pigmented. Marro~e, hypermmic, of chocolate tinge. Blood,
watery; shows a chocolate tinge.
:lli('t'o.~'eopie Ese(lminati~n.--Spleen. Shows the usual lesions of active ma-
]aria.
Liven--There arc advanced degenerative changes in the liver cells. The
deposit of pigment in various cells is extremely abundant. -k moderate
number of pigmented spheroidal parasites in the red cells, free in the
capillaries, and englobed in macrophagcs were identified.
Merrow.--In the marrow of the ribs there is an abundant deposit of fresh
pigment and several pigmented parasites were identified. Nucleated reI
cells, eosins, and giant-cells, are deficient.
Blood.--At autopsy found to contain a moderate number of ring-shapecI
restivo-autumnal parasites. Red cells showed the changes of severe chlo-
rotie anmmia. There was a moderate polynuclear leucocytosis.
Col0~.--The ulcers extend through the mucosa, often to the museularis,
and are floored by a partly necrotic tissue infiltrated with pus and blood.
Muscularis is often infiltrated with rows of large round cells. There is.
very little attempt at heali~g, and the process seems everywhere to be
advancing.
Amoeba dysenterim is found in considerable numbers in the submucosa.
The amoebm are most abundant beyond the edges of the inflamed areas~
groups of them being found where there are no signs of exndative inflam-
nmtion. In ~he bases of the ulcers and in the neerosing portions they are
absent or very scarce. Evidences of the malarial infection here are very
scanty, most of the vessels being entirely free from parasites and pigment.
Rarely an isolated slightly pigmented leucocyte is encountered, but no
parasites could be found.
There is an extensive growth of bacilli, apparently post-mortem, in and
on the ulcerating areas. No c6cei could be found in the sections. The
complete preservation of the amoebic, and the absence of post-mortem
James Ewing 147
changes beyond the walls of the ulcers, as well as the absence of pigment,
precludes the possibility that malarial parasites could have been present
in the ulcers during life and disappeared very shortly after death (2 hours).
E~Ic~ITIc.~L:--The present case illustrates a condition rather com-
monly encountered among the sick at Camp Wikoff on their arrival
from Santiago. In the present instance the two protozoan infections
appear to have limited themselves strictly to their natural situations
and to have had little influence upon each other.
The wall of the colon contained large numbers of amoebae, while
exhibiting almost no indications whatever of the coincident malaria.
The liver, spleen, marrow, and peripheral blood, on the other hand,
showed the changes referable to an extreme malarial infection quite
~s severe as that demonstrated in some cases of fatal uncomplicated
malaria. If there is any special tendency of an inflamed and ulcerated
colon to gather malarial parasites or pigment from the blood, it failed
entirely to show itself in this case.
It may be specially noted that while amcebm were very abundant in
~he wall of the colon, none whatever were found in the fmces although
they were carefully examined under favorable conditions at the autopsy.
It should be said that there was very scant mucus, though considerable
bloody necrotic material attached to the f~cal matter.
CAsE IX.--Tert~a~ Malaria. Chro~tic E~docarditis. Dispositian of pigment
three mo~lths after sulJside~lce of the octit'e infeetio~.
J. H., aged 48 years. Had suffered considerably for two years past from
dyspnoea on exertion, palpitation, attacks of bronchitis, and transitory
(edema of extremities. In June 1897 he had a sharp attack of chills and
fever, but recovered under quinine. These attacks were repeated at inter-
vals during the summer but no acute attacks occurred during the winter of
1897-98. In June, 1898, the attacks recurred and the patient was admitted
to hospital in a very debilitated condition. The spleen was much enlarged,
the anemia marked, and many tertian parasites were found in the blood.
The last acute attack occurred early in July, 1898. Quinine was admin-
istered constantly and no further relapses occurred. )Ieanwhile the symp-
toms of endocarditis had steadily progressed and on October 11, the patient
died.
Autopsy.--One hour after death, by Or. John ]-I. Larkin, to whom I am
indebted for the material from the case.
Heart, much enlarged, chambers dilated, and the mitral and aortic valves
markedly stenosed. Luttgs, very emphysematous. Liver showed chronic
congestion and fatty degeneration, but no gross indications of malarial
infection. 2pleen, much enlarged, firm, and unusually dark in color.
Kid twys, the seat of chronic congestion and slight chronic diffuse nephritis.
.llicro.scopic Exam~tation.--,k'pleelt. The Spleen shows moderate evidences of
148 Pathological ~natomy of Malarial Fever
chronic congestion, in the widening of the pulp sinuses. The ~ialpighian
bodies are distinctly outlined. Most of the pigment is gathered in large
conglomerate masses of dark coarse grains lying in and distending the
endothelial cells and macrophages about the MMpighian bodies, or in the
walls of the splenic arterioles, or in the septa and walls of the veins (Plate
XV, Fig. 18). A moderate number of endothelial cells and macrophages
in the pulp tissue contain a scanty deposit of yellowish discrete grains.
The red cells in both liver and spleen are well preserved, and some contain
pigment grains and bluish stained spheroidal bodies which cannot be cer-
tainly identified as malarial parasites.
Lteer.--There are well-marked lesions of chronic congestion with dilataion
of the capillaries in the centres of lobules, with atrophy of the adjoining
cells, and fatty degeneration of central and peripheral cells. Most of the
pigment is collected in very large intracellular masses either in the portal
canals or in the centres of lobules (Plate XV, Fig. 19). A few endothelial
cells throughout most lohules contain scattered grains of apparently fresh
pigment. The liver cells appear to be entirely free from malarial pigment
which is confined to the endothelial cells and large macrophages lying lo(~se
in the capillaries, or between the connective-tissue fibres of the portal
canals. The pigment grains are usually coarse, dark, and thickly coil-
glomerate, but less often are small, yellowish and discrete.
Marrow.--A few endothelial cells containing coarse black pigment grains
were found.
Lt~lgs.--Any malarial pigment present could not be distinguished from the
anthracotic pigment of the septa and the fresh blood detritus in the epi-
thelium of the vesicles, belonging to the chronic congestion of the organ.
E~cmTIc~L:--The present case is reported to illustrate the condi-
tion of the malarial pigment three months after the subsidence of the
acute infection. It will be seen that this period had sufficed to remove
the traces of ma]arial infection from most of the viscera, while in the
chief depots of pigment, the spleen and liver, the pigment had been
targe]y transferred from the parenchyma to the connective tissue struc-
tures, giving sections of these organs a very characteristic appearance
(Plate XV, Figs. 18 and 19).
It is to be noted that the above period was slot sufficient to enable
all the endothelial cells of the liver and spleen to become entirely free
from pigment, some of them still presenting the usual appearance of
the phagocytes of acute malarial infection. It is possible, however,
that these cells were further signs of a partly-suppressed growth of the
parasite, uncertaiu indications of which were also noted in the pres-
ence of bluish-s~Mning pigmented bodies found in a few red cells. In
appearance the old pigment was considerably blacker than the fresh
deposits. It was astrally gathered in snore compact and somewhat
larger spheroidal masses. About the clumps the outlines of an enclos-
James Ewing 149
ing cell, often enormously distended, could nearly always be discovered,
but some of the pigment appeared to be lying free in the lymphatic
spaces of the connective tissue.
l~{ost forms of pigment deposited in tissues undergo gradual solution
in their inclosing cells, yielding, in the ease of iron-holding pigment,
a diffuse reaction of h~emosiderin (Ziegler, Thoma, Neelsen). When
submitted to the test for h~emosiderin, the cells in the neighborhood
of the pigment clumps often gave a more intense blue reaction than
was found in the other portions of the liver and spleen. On the out-
skirts of the clumps the granules appeared very fine, translucent, and
of a yellowish tint, but none of these granules gave the blue reaction.
CAs~ X.--Acute metritis. Purulent peritonitis, from .infection ~v~th Strepto-
cocc~s pyogenes. E~treme d~poeits of pigment in alt v~scera, closely resvmblCng
tl~ose of ~nalar~a.
B. D., aged 25. There was no previous history of malarial infection. The
patient had always enjoyed good health since childhood. Jan. 2, 1899, the
patient was delivered of a healthy infant. She felt well until Jan. 6, when
she was suddenly seized with a chill and fever, while the loehial discharge
increased in quantity. The physician in charge regarded the condition as
referable to malaria and administered quinine by mouth in large doses.
The fever persisted and the chills were repeated, but there" was no distinct
periodicity in their occurrence. A digital exploration of the uterus was
made on Jan. 7, and its cavity was found to be free from placental remains.
A severe diarrhoea developed but yielded to opium, and was succeeded by
constipation on Jan. 12. Jan. 13, another physician was called in, who
found signs of general peritonitis, advising removal to hospital, tie gave
no quinine on Jan. 13 and 14, and it could not be learned how long this
treatment had been continued. No local treatment had been used at any
time. On admission to Roosevelt Hospital, Jan. 15, the patient was in
collapse, with signs of general peritonitis and a moderate discharge from
the uterus of chocolate-colored fluid of slight odor. The symptoms were
entirely those of peritonitis from puerperal infection. Temp., 104; pulse,
160; respiration, 38. The urine was acid, sp. g. 1024, contained a trace of
albumin, pus, blood, many vesical and renal epithelial cells, but no casts.
Death followed a few hours after admission.
A~ttopsy.--By Dr. Eugene liodenpyl, 20 hours after death. Body of fairly
nourished anmmic and jaundiced subject. No (edema. Lu~;gs, much con-
gested, oedematous, with a few small areas of hepatization. Heart, muscle
pale, flabby, valves normal, chambers slightly dilated. /Aver, size slightly
increased, section smooth, rather darker than usual, outlines of lobules
indistinct. Gall-bladder contains 2 oz. of dark bile. Spleen, moderately
enlarged, very soft, of well-marked slate color. Kidneys, slightly enlarged
and softened, markings swollen, indistinct; cortex irregularly congested and
mottled. Peritonea~ oavity contains a half-pint of sero-purulent fluid and is
everywhere highly inflamed and granular. Gastro-intestina~ tract, no lesions.
Morrow of ribs and vertebree, very hypermmie, and of dark brown color.
150 Pathological Anato~y of Malarial _~~,er
Brain, pia slightly cedematous, vessels gorged with blood, brain tissue
jaundiced; no ecchymoses or other abnormalities noted. Uterus, slightly
involuted, wall rather friable, pale; mncosa deeply congested, of dark red
color, covered with a thin chocolate-colored layer of mucus, blood and pus.
No remnants of placental tissue to be seen in the cavity of the uterus.
Cervix moderately lacerated. No thrombi or pus in vessels of broad
ligament.
No cultures were made from the peritoneum or uterus. In smears of the
pus from the peritoneum and from the uterine discharge large numbers of
cocci in short chains were found. In sections of the wall of the uterus
large numbers of cocci in short chains were found, but only on the surface
or superficial portions of the mucosa. These cocci were identical in mor-
phology with the ordinary form of Streptococcus pyogenes seen in pus.
Microscopic Extzm~atioyt.--Spleelt. There is a very abundant deposit of
pigment in he endothelial cells and macrophages of the pulp. In the
sinuses there are many richly pigmented leucocytes. The pigment is
mostly in the form of grains, short rods, or longer acicular masses. It is
very frequently arranged in the form of a small mass of fine brownish
grains or crystals. In some places it is more compact and darker. About
some of the nmsses there are minute vacuoles. No malarial parasites could
be seen within the red cells, but many contain one or more coarse pigment
grains.
Smears of the spleen show abundant pigment, principally in the large
mononuelear cells. The pigment is principally granular, but many short
crystals are seen. No malarial parasites could be identified.
Liver.--The pigment in the liver is very abundant, occurring in the same
form as in the spleen. The liver cells contain consider:lble pigmen~ in the
form of granules, spheroidal or wreath-shaped masses, or elongated rods.
Many of the elongated, rod-shaped collections lie in small clear spaces within
the liver cells, which contain also much greenish granular bile pigment and
show moderate fatty degeneration. No malarial parasites were seen.
Kidncy.--There are evidences of acute degeneration of the tubule cells.
The convoluted tubules and adjoining capillaries are nearly free from pig-
ment. In the glomeruli are a few pigmented endothelial cells and lenco-
cytes. In the medulla and medullary rays, ninny of the lining cells contain
numbers of wreath-like masses of granular and crystalline pigment. The
adjoining vessels are injected with blood containing many pigmented leuco-
cytes, apparently free pigment granules, and a few pigment wreaths, but
no parasites.
Hcart-m~lsele.--A considerable number of pigmented leucocytes are present
in the capillaries but no parasites could be fonnd.
Lnngs eontain a rich deposit of pigmeut lying principally in the capillary
endothelium and outlining the vesicles in a pigment network. Some of
these endothelial cells or macrophages are of extreme length and contain
small wreaths of brownish pigment granules and crystals. Other cells show
larger, denser clumps of pigment. In the pneumonic areas the exudate is
composed largely of polymmlear leucocytes among which lie many pigmented
cells.
Uteru,q.~The large superficial u:terine sinuses contain blood-clots in many
stages of organization. Over the inner surface of the uterus there is a thin
James Ewing 151
layer of pus and granular detritus entangling many pigmented leucocytes
and a ~oTeat many cocci in short chains. The evidences of exudative inflam-
mation are limited to the superficial tissues. In the deeper tissue there is
an extremely abundant deposit of wreath-shaped masses of pigment within
capillaries, endothelial, large and small mononuclear, and connective-tissue
cells. In many foci, especially in the neighborhood of large vessels, the
pigment is quite as abundant as in the spleen. The sinuses and capillaries
are injected with blood containing a large amount of free pigment and
many pi~oTaented leucocytes (Plate XI, Fig. 10). No malarial organisms
could be identified. No smears were made from this organ.
Marrow.--The marrow sections and smears contain a moderate number of
pigmented macyophages and endothelial cells. No infected red cells could
be found. Nucleated red cells are abundant;the myeloeytes are in excess;
the giant cells are slightly increased; there are very few eosinophile cells.
Brain and Medutla,--A few pigmented endothelial cells and leucocytes were
found, but no parasites.
Blood smears were made at the autopsy from the finger tip, mesenteric
veins, and cerebral sinuses. The red cells exhibited the changes of a severe
chlorotic anmmia with leucocytosis. A few pigmented leucocytes were seen.
In spite of prolonged and repeated search no parasites could be identified
in the blood smears.
The blood-~;vssels throughout many of the viscera contain an abundant
deposit of pigment in granular and crystalline form, lying outside of and
adherent to the red cells. Many of the red cells have a peculiar brownish
tinge. Much pigment lies within leucocytes and endothelial cells, and the
tissues in the neighborhood of such vessels sometimes contain a moderate
deposit of pigment granules and crystals.
EPICRITICAL:--The present ease is inserted in this connection for
the purpose of illustrating the great similarity which the pigment
deposits of septic conditions may show to those of malaria.
In this case the possibility of malarial infection may be ruled out
on the previous history, the distinct onset and course of ordinary septic
metritis and peritonitis, by the failure of quinine to control the dis-
ease, and by the absence of parasites from the blood and viscera. 0n
the other hand, the gross appearance of the spleen was identical with
that of acute malarial infection, the liver and marrow exhibited a
distinct brownish tinge, while the microscopic appearance of the pig-
ment deposits was in many respects identical with that of malaria]
pigmentation.
On comparing these deposits with those of malaria some differences
were to be noted. In the case of septic~emia the pigment grains were
more often distinctly crystalline, and large, spheroidal, homogeneous
black grains were more abundant than in acute malaria] cases, while
the fresh, yellowish, finely-granular pigment was much less abundant.
The concentration of pigment deposits in the tissue about blood-vessels
1152 Pathological Anatomy of Malarial Fever
was a somewhat characteristic feature. The wall of the uterus con-
tained nearly as nluch pigment as the spleen. Tile pulmonary exudate
contained an abundance of pigment, but in malaria pulmonary exudates
have always been found nearly free from pigmented leucocytes. In
tile present case a considerable number of liver cells contained large
and small vacuoles partly filled with brownish acicular crystals. In
malaria this condition of the liver eells is rather rarely, though occa-
sionally, encountered. In both cases the crystals fail to give Gmelin's
test, ihey dissolve in ammonium sulphide, but not in ether, chloroform,
or carbon bisulphide. The condition of the blood in sections of vessels
showed that extensive destruction of blood ceils was in progress
throughout the viscera in the present case, and offers an ample source
for the visceral deposits.
Nevertheless it would be impossible from a study of the pigment
deposits alone to deny the coexistence of malarial infection, for as is
shown in the description of other cases a similar destruction of blood
may and in some degree li'equently does accompany malarial infection.
In Case VII the pigment deposit resulting from solution of blood cells
completely overshadowed that derived from the mMarial parasite.
The destruction of blood cells in various septic conditions may be
confidently referred to the increased globuticidal action of the plasma
which has long been known to characterize these conditions.
From the examination of this and many other cases I have become
convinced t]~at it is frequently impossible to distinguish between the
pigment deposits of malaria and those resulting from increased globMi-
tidal activity of the serum in other diseases. It follows that it is rarely,
if ever, possible to establish the diagnosis of malaria from the presence
of pigment deposits in the viscera. For in various other diseases there
may be a deposition of pigment which is practically indistinguishable
from that of malaria in color, form, intracellular position, general dis-
tribution, and chemical reactions. Moreover the slafe color of the
spleen in this case and the dark brownish tinge of the liver indicate
that these are by no means pathognomonic gross signs of malarial infec-
tion. A further important inquiry concerns the extent to which the
solution of blood cells in septic conditions is referable to post-mortem
action of the globulicidal serum.
James Ewing 153
PART II.
I. TECHNICS.
Fixation :--The majority of investigators have preferred alcohol as
a fixative agent in the study of tissues in malaria, placing small pieces
in weak solutions for preliminary fixation, or using strong or absolute
alcohol from the first. There seems to be nearly complete agreement
that this is the best method to employ in this particular field. In addi-
tion to alcohol, a great variety of metallic solutions have been used
with varying success, but none of them has been urgently recommended
over alcohol.
In the present cases the fixatives used were alcohol, 80%,Lung's fluid,
1%, aqueous bichloride, and formalin 5-10%. The bichloride solutions
may at once be discarded for the present purpose, on account of their
tendency to leave metallic precipitates. In other respects they yielded
geod but not superior results. The tissues fixed in alcohol 80% gave
satisfactory preservation of red cells and parasites, but less success-
ful results as regards the tissues, which suffered the usual shrinkage.
Hardening in formalin, 5-10%, proved most satisfactory. Shrinkage
did not disturb the sections, the preservation of red cells and parasites
was even better than that by alcohol, while the proved excellence of
formalin as a fixative for general cytological study was very constantly
apparent. Formalin seems to have a distinct advantage over some
other fixatives in precipitating and rendering insoluble the pigments
derived from dissolving red blood cells.
Staining :--Malarial parasites and their derivatives are well demon-
strafed in thin sections by staining 5 rain. in 1% aqueous methylene
blue, gently warmed, followed by moderate decolorization in strong
alcohol, and clearing in oil of cajeput. This staining fluid may per-
haps be slightly improved by adding a trace of alkali (.01% caustic pot-
ash), as used by Guarnieri. This method is practically that of Nissl
and gives excellent demonstrations of changes in visceral as well as in
ganglion cells.
Intraeellular parasites are somewhat more deeply stained if the sec-
tions are previously treated for one hour with a moderately strong
solution of h0ematoxylin, which also intensifies the nuclei of tissue
cells. The use of h~ematoxylin clearly demonstrates the nuclei of the
young and the segmenting parasites which are faintly or not at all
stained in sections by methylene blue. A,noJba dysenterice in sections
stained by hmmatoxylin and methylene blue is very clearly demon-
154 Pathological Anatomy of Malarial Fever
strated, and may readily be identified by low magnification (Leitz No. 3).
The nucleus of this protozoon fails to stain by methylene blue, but is
sharply developed by hmmatoxylin. On several grounds, therefore,
the combination of lJmmatoxylin aud methylene blue may be strongly
recommended for the present purposes.
Attempts were made to stain the nucleus of the malarial para,site
in tissues by the methods of Romanowsky, Ziemann, and Noeht. The
results were not successful in demonstrating the chromatin, but Nocht's
method brought out the body of the parasite very much better than any
other method employed.
ery striking demonstrations of ,tm~d)a dyse~derice were obtained
by the application of this method to thin sections of the colon.
These sections were stained for 2t hours and slightly deeolorized 10-15
rain. in 95 alcohol. The nucleus of the amoeba then appears deep red,
the body blue, the vacuoles are distinct and their contents variously
stained.
In the study of pigment deposits in the viscera h~emosiderin was
demonstrated by the common method, that of Perls. Sections were
placed for one hour in lg watery solution of potassium ferroeyanide
and mounted in glycerine containing 1 hydrocbloric acid. A useful
procedure may sometimes be found in dissolving the nialarial pigment
by ammonium sulphide, which at the same time blackens the granular
or diffuse h~emosiderin.
Formalin-fixation is a reliable means of identifying bilirnbin, which
is converted to the green biliverdin, but under the microscope the
green tinge is not marked and the hiliarv derivatives may be mistaken
for the yellow hmmosiderin granules.
I would strongly recomniend the employment of smear preparations
of the viscera, treated as blood specimens, ~ for the study of minute
eelhflar changes, phagoeytosis, and the demonstration of parasites.
In the actively phagocytic viscera--liver, spleen, and marrow--it is
often hazardous to attempt the identification of parasites in sections,
whereas the examination of a smear made from these tissues furnishes
cenvincing evidence of the number and type of parasites present.
II. THE VISCERAL LESIONS.
LIVER.
The gross lesions of the liver were usually but not always indicative
of malarial infection. The organ was generally slightly swollen, but
~eFor the methods of staining smear specimens, see Ewing, Malarial parasitology,
Journal of Experimental ~]fedicine, 1901, v, p. 429.
James Ewing 155
this fact was not distinctly apparent at the autopsies, and in one case
(]II), with marked atrophy of liver cords and development of cavern-
ous tissue, the liver was reduced in size. The consistence of the organ
was usually slightly reduced. Fatty changes were seldom apparent to
the naked eye. The pigment deposits were in the present cases always
sufficient to give to the section of the organ a slightly brownish tint,
but this change was sometimes far from characteristic and failed to be
~oted. In other cases the liver was slaty or black. The outlines of
lobules were generally indistinct. Distension of the gall-bladder was
commonly seen. That fatal malaria may leave inappreciable changes
in the gross appearance of the liver is evident from Case I, and es-
pecially from the cases of Marchiafava and Bignami in which very few
or no parasites were found in the blood at death, and in which no micro-
scopic evidences of a previous severe infection were found. It appears
also that the pigmentation of the liver may be very slight when the
parasites are massed in the intestinal mucosa.
The microscopic exami~atio.n of the liver in the foregoing cases
showed that the lesions varied but little from those described in acute
malarial infection by Guarnieri in 1887, and Bignami in 1890.
Parasites, in the majority of cases, were comparatively scarce. They
~vere usually englobed by phagocytic macrophages and endothelial
cells, together with red cells, leucocytes, and pigment, and in these
situations they almost invariably presented evidences of degeneration
and solution. They were not positively identified in the liver cells.
Ill Case II, dying just after sporulation of one of two or more very
numerous broods of parasites, very large numbers of parasites were
found in the liver, mostly within phagocytes and degenerating. In
~he other cases the hepatic phagocytes contained only scanty traces of
the bodies of parasites, but many vacuoles and fresh pigment clumps.
:It is difficult to explain this difference except on the ground that the
englobement of parasites in the liver is more active at certain periods
of the cycle, or occurs intermittently, and that the destruction of en-
globed parasites may be completed very rapidly, i. e. within a few
hours. Otherwise the livers of all acute cases with rich infection, ought
to show abundant traces of the bodies of englobed parasites, which
they did not show, with one exception, in this series of cases. It is
o be noted that the exception was the only case of the series in which
Immerous rosettes were found in the tissues. There are several obser-
vations pointing to an increased phagocytic activity in the blood at the
height of the paroxysm. Possibly the same rule holds in the liver.
11
156 Pathological Anatomy of Malarictl Fever
However that may be, it is certain that the livers of acute cases with
rich infection, exhibiting about an equal quantity of recent pigment,
contain a very variable number of parasites in the early stages of de-
struction by phagocytes.
Among the active phagocytes could be identified the large mono-
nuclear cells of the capillaries, endothelial cells, and leucocytes (Pilate
X, Figs. 1-6). There were often evidences of a fusion of large
mononuclear cells, endothelial cells and leucocytes into large proto-
plasmic masses inclosing several infected red cells. Occlusion of ca-
pillaries by these masses or by many discrete cells was often observed,
in the neighborhood of which the capillaries were sometimes found
dilated.
Various lesions of the liver cells were observed. The normal liver
cell stained by methylene blue, in sections and especially in smears,
exhibits a coarse but regular and distinct chromatic reticulmn. This
reticulum was often found to be indistinct, its meshes uneven, and
sometimes obliterated or displaced by various granules, indicating the
changes of acute degeneration. Necrotic cells were rarely discovered
in the present cases. I found many cells in advanced stages of degen-
eration, but few in which the nucleus was not demonstrable by h~ema-
toxylin or methylene blue, although the staining reaction was often
faint.
Fatty infiltration of the liver cells was remarkably slight. In one
case there were large areas in which the capillaries of irregular por-
tions of lobules or of entire lobnles were greatly dilated at the ex-
pease of the liver cords, which were markedly atrophic or had disap-
peared. The resulting appearance was that of cavernous tissue, as
described in a few eases by Guarnieri, Bignami, Nepveu,TM Lodigiani,'~
and Monti.' These dilated capillaries do not radiate from a central vein,
as in the nutmeg liver of ordinary chronic congestion. Guarnieri re-
fers this lesion to the disordered nutrition of liver and endothelial cells
resulting from the obstructed circulation, partly also to direct pressure,
conditions which existed prominently in my ease. Bignami connects
it especially with a previous necrosis of the liver cells. In the present
cases these cells were not necrotic
The liver cells usually contained man3, large and small greenish
granules of bile pigment, They were most abudant in Case VII, which
exhibited externally the most intense jaundice, hut were abundant in
~.~2tfarseille mgdical, 1894, xxxi, p. 649.
~4-1~Cited by Barbacci in Centralbl. f. all.q. :Path. u path. Anat., 1899, x, p. 64.
James Ewing 157
Case II, in which the jaundice was slight. That the intercellular bile
capillaries were extensively ocehded by pressure of swollen endothelial
cells and macrophages in distended capillaries was evident, and to this
condition the biliary pigmentation of the liver cells may be referred.
In all eases the liver cells presented a variable number of fine, light
yellow granules which gave the reactions of hcemosiderin, while a diffuse
reaction for hmmosiderin was obtained in some endothelial cells and in
the connective tissue of the portal canals.
I was unable to find evidences of the hyaline transformation of the
nuclei of liver cells described by Guarnieri, except in a few isolated
instances. A variety of nuclear changes were observed in the liver
cells which did not differ from those seen in other infectious diseases.
Many nuclei were found in the process of direct division, while mitotic
figures were rare. In some eases the evidences of regeneration on the
part of the liver cells seemed to justify the use of the term "' diffuse
vicarious hypertrophy," employed by Guarnieri.
The portal canals were sometimes markedly infiltrated with round
cells. Mast-cells were rather numerous in some areas, and sometimes
these cells were pigmented.
While the present eases do not bear directly upon the question of
cirrhotic processes in the liver following malaria, it was strikingly
apparent that the infection had exhausted itself in producing vascular
and cellular alterations, while there was an entire absence of the
changes of beginning fibrosis.
SPLEEN.
The spleen was increased in size in all cases, the change being gen-
erally proportionate with the length and, to a less extent, with the
severity of the infection. It was noted at Montauk that the spleens of
the malarial cases were as a rule much smaller than those of the
typhoid eases. The organ was usually much softened and sometimes
diffluent. The capsule was tense. In one case (Vii) the spleen was
rather firm and dark red. In the color there was usually distinct
evidence of malarial infection, but this was sometimes slight, and the
spleens of cases of typhoid fever in malarious subjects often gave no
gross evidence of considerable pigment deposits demonstrable micro-
scopically. In all the frank acute malarial eases the spleen was moder-
ately enlarged, soft, and of dark brown, chocolate, or slate color.
The most prominent microscopic features were the pigment deposits
and the cellular hypcrplasia and distension of the pulp cords.
158 Pathological A~atomy of Malarial Fever
It was always difficult to identify positively parasites in the sections
whereas they were always found in larger numbers in smears of the pulp
tissue. They appeared to be more abundant than in tile liver, and the
same description of their inclosure and destruction in phagocytes
applies to both liver and spleen. The macrophages were much more
numerous and of larger size in the spleen than in the liver.
In all eases the sinuses and cords contained an excessive number of
cells. The evidence of proliferation of splenic cells was most apparent
in the frequent presence of islands of 8 Go 10 cells of small size, compact
grouping, deeply staining nuclei, and free fronl pigment. The Mal-
pighian bodies participate largely in this process, as their dimensions
were sometimes increased, and their outlines often irregular, and
fringed at time.~ with these islands of young cells.
Marked obstruction to the circulation in the spleen must have
existed front the distension of sinuses by maerophages, swollen endo-
thelial cells, leucocytes, and infected red cells. A pronounced condi-
tion of cedema was therefore nearly always present, and a few inter-
stitial h~emorrhages, with necrosis of cells were found.
The deposit of pigment was usually more abundant in the spleen
than in any other situation, and in acute eases was uniformly distributed
in the maerophages, endothelial cells, and leucocytes of the pulp, while
the Malpighian bodies were almost invariably free (Plate XIV, Fig. 16).
In the acute eases, the distribution of pigment was very uniform
throughout the pulp. In a case of fatal typhoid fever which had been
free from malsrial paroxysms for three weeks, the pigment had been
gathered in a network, with rather coarse meshes, throughout the pulp
(Plate XI~, Fig. 17); while in another case of chronic malaria three
months after the last acute seizure, the pulp was nearly free from
pigment, which was gathered in large black intra- or extra-cellular
blocks in tile septa and walls of arterioles, and about the follicles
(Plate XV, Fig'. 18).
5[AftlIOW.
A chocolate tinge of the marrow expressed from ribs and w~rtebrm
was a characteristic change observed in the acute eases, and, in gen-
eral, this change in the marrow kept pace with the similar alteration
of the spleen. In Cases I and Ii there was chocolate-colored marrow
in the middle third of the humerus an& clavicle, indicating an exten-
sive increase in tile natural limits of red marrow. Bignami demon-
strated such a hyperplasia throughout the femur.
Of the changes in the marrow referable to the o'rowth of parasites,
James Ewing 159
cellular hyperplasia, obstruction to the circulation, and deposit of pig-
ment, it may be said that they are very similar to and of equal extent
with those of the spleen. In Case IV there was an excessive accumu-
lation of parasites in the marrow, the majority of red cells being in-
fected with one or more rings, and multiple infection being very fre-
quent. No infected nucleated red cells could be found.
Usually the number of parasites demonstrable in smears was mod-
erate, though larger, as a rule, than in the liver or spleen. Crescents
were not abundant in the tissues of any of the fatal cases, and when
present they were not seen in unusual numbers in the marrow, as
found by Councilman, ~ Marchiafava, Bastianelli and Bignami ('94), nor
iT~ the spleen, as stated by Bignami. In Case I, in which enormous
numbers of crescents were found in the blood for two weeks, largely
disappearing before death, there were very few crescents to be found
in the marrow smears, and the pigment deposits in the marrow were
comparatively scanty. This condition is not entirely in accord with
the observations of the authors mentioned. In one case (VII) there
were numerous small capillary h~emorrhages in the marrow.
Relation of lesions in marrow to malarial an~mia.--The chief interest
in the lesions of the marrow in malaria lies in their relation to malarial
anaemia, and in this field the studies of Bignami and Dionisi ~ are
most complete. The c.hanges in the blood and marrow in the writer's
cases accord in a considerable degree with the classification given by
these observers.
The most striking of the series in this regard is Case IV, in which
there were the lesions of pernicious anemia in the blood and marrow,
and an excessive accmnulation of parasites in the marrow. Besides
the changes referable to the presence of many parasites and much pig-
ment, the marrow showed well-marked cellular hyperplasia, leading to
atrophy and disappearance of fat cells, which are normally present ia
the marrow of the vertebral bodies. In sections, this hyperplasia
seemed to affect principally the large and small mononuclear cells,
while in smears the new cells could be divided among the neutrophile
myelocytes and the lymphocytes. These cells, together with macrophages
and swollen endothelial cells, appeared to cause more than the usual
obstruction to the circulation of the marrow, yet no necroses were
discovered. The islands of nucleated red cells commonly seen in nor-
mal marrow were, in this case, entirely lacking in sections and smears.
16 Ame~'. Journ. ilYed, Sciences, 1885, lxxxix, p. 416.
17Atti d. XI. Congr. reed. internaz., Roma, 1894~ it, p. 235.
160 Pathological Anatomy of Malarial Fever
In their place there was a considerable number of megaloblasts with
increased Hb. A peculiar abnormality, first noted in sections and
fnlly verified in the smears, was the superabundance of giant cells,
which occurred in groups of eight or ten. Bignami and Dionisi found
this peculiarity in their fourth type of anemia as occurring in malarial
cachexia, and which was marked also by a condition termed by them
sclerosis of the marrow. No changes to which the term sclerosis could
be applied were found in the marrow in any of the present cases. The
examination of the blood, showing the presence of a majority of megalo-
eytes with increased ttK, and of many megaloblasts, together with the
condition demonstrated by smears and sections of the marrow, indi-
cates that the fetal type of blood formation had been established in
this case, and warrants its classification as pernicious anaemia.
That such changes in the marrow are rather frequently initiated by
malarial infection there c~n be no doubt, as shown by the pathological
studies of Bignami and others. In my series of blood-examinations
in mMaria at Montauk and elsewhere there are no less than 19 cases
in which prcnounced features of primary pernicious anmmia were ob-
served.
Some regard such evidence as demonstrating the lack of specific
quality in the changes commonly regarded as pathognomonic of pri-
mary pernicious anaemia. Bignami, however, believes that these cases
are still to be regarded as true examples of primary pernicious anaemia,
claiming that the reversion of the marrow to the embryonal type of
blood-formation, as seen in some cases of malarial anemia, is not re-
ferable exclusively to the infection, but partly results from other asso-
ciated causes not definitely understood. With this view I am in ac-
cord. The majority of cases of pernicious malaria develop the changes
of secondary ch]orotie or pernicious anmmia, but some show those of
the primary pernicious anaemia. The essential difference is not in the
cause but in the character of the anatomical changes in tile bone mar-
row. In each instance the changes are initiated by malarial infection.
Jn one case they are maintained almost exclusively by that infection,
w~th which they are more or less proport,ionate, but in the other they
are maintained by the peculiar changes in the marrow which when
once initiated may progress independently. This view of he pathology
of malarial anaemia, instead of weakening the evidence in favor of the
specific nature of the changes in primary pernicious anaemia, furnishes,
on the contrary, very strong proof of the specific quality of this con-
dilion of the blood.
James Ewing 161
The lesions found in the present cases, and in some others not re-
ported in this series, indicate that the changes in the marrow in fatal
cases of acute malaria follow one of two types:
(1) The cellular hyperplasia is pronounced, the nucleated red cells
are abundant and tend to increase in size, the eosinophile cells, giant
cells, and lymphocytes are over-abundant, while the fat cells are com-
pressed and atrophic. With these changes, the blood shows moderate
or severe anmmia of the chlorotic type, with a marked tendency to de-
velop the signs of pernicious anaemia, which not infrequently become
distinct. Pigment deposits and parasites are often unusually abund-
ant as in Cases II and VI.
(2) The cellular hyperplasia is moderate, fat cells being abundant in
the vertebrae and persisting in the ribs. Nucleated red blood cells,
eosinophile cells, and giant-cells are deficient. The blood shows severe
anaemia of chlorotic type. There may be considerable differences in
the size of the red cells, but the Hb. is very deficient. The leucocytes
are usually diminished, and eosinophile cells are scarce. Pigment de-
pesits and parasites are usually not very abundant (Cases III and I).
In attempting to draw these general distinctions it must be admitted
that the present obseivations are too limited to fully establish general
rules.
The natural limits of red marrow in the normal subject are rather
variable, and the quantity of fat in the ribs and vertebrm decidedly so.
Moreover, in a series of routine cases coming to autopsy from various
causes I have found great dissimilarity in the appearance of the
marrow cords, and of smears therefrom, which it is difficult to con-
nect with the various states of nutrition and disease in the subjects.
There will be no harm in describing the above types of changes in the
marrow of pernicious malaria, if it is understood that it presents a
tentative classification which is to be readjusted on the evidence of
ft~ture investigations.
LEUCOCYTOSIS OF MALARIA.
Most observers have found very little change in the number of leucocytes
in the finger blood during acute malarial attacks of average severity. This
absence of ]eucocytosis with a rapidly rising temperature may be found of
considerable corroborative value in the diagnosis of malarial fever.
A slight leucocytosis at the beginning of the paroxysm has been noted
by Kelsch, Billings,TM Vincent,TM and others, but the numbers usually remain
lS Bulletin of the Johns Hopkins Hospital, 1894, v, p. 89.
19Annales de l' fnstitut Pasteur, 1897, xi, p. 891.
162 Pathological Anato,m,y of Malarial Fever
below 10,000, while the percentage of polynuelear cells is increased. Vincent
finds that quinine tends to increase the polynuelear leucocytes, during the
entire paroxysm. With the falling temperature and during apyrexia the
leucocytes are usually distinetly diminished (2000-4000), especially the poly-
nuclear forms, giving a relative lymphoeytosis.
Except during" the 3 to 4 hours immediately following the chill, there-
fore, malarial blood usually shows a diminished number of leucocytes, and
a distinct relative lymphoeytosis. The lymphoeytes, small and large, may
sometimes become quite numerous, especially in well-established eases. This
fact accords with the inereased eellular activity of the lymphoid tissues
shown by microscopic examination of the viscera.
Bastianelli refers the loss of polynuelear leucocytes to the increased
phagocytic activity of these cells. Vincent noted a periodical decrease in
the number of large mononuelear cells, which he refered to the same process.
In the severer ~estivo-autumnal paroxysms many observers have noted tt
distinct leueoeytosis. Kelseh found that the leueoeyto.sis of pernieious
malarial attacks often consists in marked lymphoeytosis. Bastianelli and
Bignami find that in addition to various inflammatory complications, leueo-
eytosis in peruieious malaria may result from rapidly progressive anmmia.
They find it to be of frequent occurrence in hmmoglobinurie fever, and ii1
eases attended with severe diarrhoea.
The presence of eosinophile cells may be noted in most eases of malarial
fever, and these cells .are usually increased in number during afebrile
periods. Grawitz rightly regards this feature as of diagnostic importance.
as in most diseases likely to be confused with malaria eosinophile cells are
long absent or scarce. Bastianelli and Bignami found that eosinophile cells
diminish during the paroxysm, and increase during apyrexia, while the
blood is re~'enerating. In two eases of pernicious malaria, with many
parasites, they found many mononuelear leucocytes and a very few eosino-
phile myeloeytes, similar to those seen in myelogenous leukemia.
In the present eases the usual behavior of the leucocytes was noted
Jn the majority of instances.
In some severe and prolonged eases the lymphoeytosis was a marked
feature, these cells being distinctly increased in nmnber. Eosinophile
cells were never found greatly h~creased, but their nearly constant ap-
pearance in patients who were suffering from continuous or intermit-
tent fever furnished a somewhat peculiar feature of the blood of ma-
larial infection.
In some pernicious eases moderate polynuelear leueocytosis was ob-
s(rved; and Jn a few eases complicated by pneumonia, colitis, or severe
eaehexia, a considerable leueocytosis was found. In two of the fataI
eases reported in this study, and in others, ante-mortem leucoeytosis
was observed, but the majority of fatal eases failed to show distinct
leueoeytosis. These estimates were all based on the examination of
dry specimens.
James Ewing 163
Pigmented leucocyteswere seen in the majority of cases, most abund-
antly in the severe and long-established fevers. They were found in
nearly all fatal cases, but were most abundant in a case which recov-
ered (No. 238). It appeared that pigmented leucocytes were more
closely related to the severity of the antecedent paroxysms than to the
extent of the pigment deposits in the viscera.
They were most abundant during and shortly after the febrile period,
but were repeatedly found in afebrile cases and after parasites had
disappeared from the blood. The phagocytic cells seen in the blood
included mononuclear and polynuclear leucocytes and endothelial cells.
The large and small mononuelear cells were most often found to con-
tain pigment or parasites (Plate X, Fig. 6), but in a few cases, for
reasons not clear, large numbers of polynuclear leucocytes were found
harboring rosettes, other forms of parasites, and pigment (Plate X,
Fig. 5). In a few cases very large endothelial maerophages were found
in the blood containing parasites in all stages of degeneration (Plate
X, Fig. 4).
The objects englobed by phagocytes as seen in the circulation in.
cluded: (1) Parasites, free or inclosed in red cells; (2) Pigment elabo-
rated by parasites, usually in small clumps, sometimes in large
masses; (3) H~ematoidin derived from the destruction of red cells;
(4) H~emosiderin derived from the detritus of red cells; (5) Intact or
broken red cells; (6) Other leucocytes. Crystalline pigment was often
seen in leucocytes in sections of tissues but never in the circulating
blood during life. The degenerative changes in phagocytic leucocytes
mentioned by Bastianelli and Bignami, including vacuolation and di-
minished staining capacity of nuclei, were noted in many severe cases.
The number of vaeuolated leucocytes (Plate XI, Fig. 8) found in
the blood was always considerable and sometimes very large.
LYMPH NODES.
The abdominal lymph nodes were examined in all cases, and usually
found moderately swollen, but always without signs of pigmentation.
Microscopic examination was made in two cases only; in these the
nodes were hyperp]astic, the lymph sinuses were invisible, the stroma
contained many mast-cells, and there was a scanty deposit of pigment,
mostly in the endothelial cells.
LUNGS.
In gross appearance the lungs in pernicious malaria, both in these
and in other reported eases, presented little that is characteristic of
164 Pathological
Anatomy of Malarial Fever
the disease. They commonly contain a considerable deposit of pig-
ment and are often very dark colored, but this feature is usually not
distinctly characteristic, owing to the simultaneous presence of anthra-
cotic pigment, hypostatic congestion, and frequently of jaundice.
Somewhat peculiar areas of lobular pneumonia were found in two
cases, and have been described by Bignami, but the exudate was com-
posed of the ordinary elements, and the inflammation was not specially
connected with the growth of parasites.
Microscopically, the lungs are usually found to contain a very large
nmnber of pigmented cells, sifted from the general circulation, and
in some cases a moderate additional deposit elaborated by the parasites
in the pulmonary capillaries. Some large pulmonary macrophages,
probably derived from other viscera, were found, filling a considerable
length of the capillary. Thrombi composed of such cells, with pig-
mented leucocytes, swollen endothelium, and infected red cells were
not infrequently found in the pulmonary capillaries of Case II. The
lungs were cedematous but free from hepatization.
There appear to be no recorded instances of an excessive growth of
parasites in the lungs comparable with that found in other viscera.
Bignami speaks of a rusty color of the sputum in some cases of bron-
chitis in pernicious malaria, which he regards as of little clinical im-
port, and I can find no report of the microscopic examination of such
sputum, or of the lungs and bronchi in such cases, to show that an
excessive growth of parasites in the lungs may give this character to
the sputum.
From what has been shown of the action of the lungs in sifting bac-
teria and leucocytes from the blood in infectious diseases, it might be
expected that the lungs would suffer severely in malarial infection.
Their comparative immunity in this instance may perhaps be referred
to the rapidity of the capillary circulation and the abundance of
oxygen.
CARDIAC MUSCLE.
French writers especially (quoted by Laveran) have laid emphasis on
the pallor and flaccidity of the myoeardium in pernicious malaria.
That condition was noted in nearly all the present cases at autopsy.
In Case II nearly all tissues, including the heart muscle, were more or
less discolored by malarial pigment. In Case VII, the heart muscle
was generally light colored, but exhibited a slight brownish tinge re-
ferred at the time to the jaundice.
Microscopically, there were no pronounced changes found in the
James Ewing 165
muscle cells, but the perinuclear mass of large greenish granules was
sometimes very abundant. Mast-cells were sometimes found in un-
usual numbers in the endomysimn. Distinct fatty changes were not
observed. With one exception, little pigment and few parasites were
found in the capillaries. In Case II there was a notable exception
to the usual rule and very large numbers of young parasites and pig-
mented cells were found completely filling distended capillaries through-
out the heart wall (Plate X, Fig. 7). Although numerous parasites
were found in other viscera and the brain was not examined, there was
an excessive proportion in the heart muscle, while cerebral symptoms
were late and cardiac failure was the most prominent clinical symptom.
Of similar cases, Benvenuti "0has reported one in which the heart's
capillaries were filled with infected red cells, the endothelium pig-
mented and degenerated, the muscle fibres swollen, their striation in-
distinct and the yellow pigment increased. In the brain it appears
that there were as many parasites as in the heart, and many were also
found in the kidney. Coma and cardiac dyspncea were the principal
symptoms. In another ease Benvenuti found many parasites in brain,
kidney, and heart, while the principal symptom was stupor. The
clinical histories accompanying these reports are meagre for the pres-
ent purpose, and it is difficult to judge of the relative number of para-
sites in the different viscera. I have been unable to find in the litera-
ture any other reports of such cases. Theobald Smith, however, finds
that in Texas cattle fever very large numbers of parasites are com-
monly found in smears made from the heart muscle.
The available evidence, therefore, hardly seems to warrant a positive
conclusion that acute cardiac failure in pernicious malaria may result
from a massing of parasites in the cardiac muscle, and it would be safer
to conclude from the present case merely that the condition of the
cardiac and skeletal muscles demands more attention than is generally
paid to these tissues in pathologicM studies of malaria.
KIDNEY-
Grossly, the kidneys in pernicious malaria usually give evidence of
acute degeneration in their slightly increased size, diminished consist-
ence, rather pale cortex, and indistinct but regular markings. There
are usually no characteristic signs of malarial infection. In Case I
the medulla and papillae exhibited a somewhat peculiar darkening of
color, from the unusual deposits of pigment. In some cases of black-
~oPoliclinico~ 1896, iii-M., p. 390.
166 Pathological Anatomy of Malarial Fever
water fever the presence of extra-vascular blood in cortex and medulla
considerably alters the above description, as in Case VII. In Case V
the cortex was very light colored, ,while the medulla and papillae were
deep rust-colored from the large numbers of parasites in the capillaries
in these areas. In this case there ~as also a large superficial anaemic
infarct.
Nicroscopically, the usual lesions, well illustrated in the present
cases, consist in granular, hydropic, and fatty degeneration, pigmenta-
tion by h~emosiderin granules, and sometimes isolated or diffuse ne-
crosis of convoluted-tubule cells. The intertubular capillaries usually
contain moderate numbers of pigmented leucocytes, macrophages, and
infected red cells, while the glomeruli gather a larger nmnber of simi-
lar elements.
The kidney rarely suffers from the accumulation of growing para-
sites, as does the brain, the mucous membranes, etc., a fact referred
by Bignami to the rapid circulation in the organ. In blackwater fever
I can find no reports of excessive numbers of parasites in the kidney,
and in other cases, as a rule, the nmnbers of parasites have not ex-
ceeded those in the peripheral blood.
On the other hand, the eliminative function of the kidney exposes it
to the effects of the tox~emia of malaria, so that albuminous urine is a
very common clinical sign in acute pernicious malaria, especially if pro-
tracted, while the condition of the renal cells in the present cases, and
in most others reported, shows nearly constantly a considerable damage
to the organ from this cause. The lesions, however, were, in most of
the present eases, of a purely degenerative type, without evidence of
exudation into the stroma or other changes in the connective tissue.
In Case II[ the degenerative changes were very intense, many cells were
extensively eroded, and some necrotic, aml although the tubules were
dilated, and casts and granular eoagulum were present in considerable
abundance, indicating a near approach to cxudative nephritis, yet there
were no leucocytes in the tubules and no leucocytes or serum in the
stroma.
With the minor exception of a slight glomerulitis, described in one
ease by Bignami, no more serious lesions have been found in the kidney
in uncomplicated acute malaria. That the lesions are entirely out of
proportion to the number of parasites in the organ and are probably
of toxic origin has been generally accepted. The peculiar very abund-
ant deposit of h~emosiderin granules in the renal cells, as illustrated in
extreme degree in Cases III and VII, is a somewhat characteristic
feature of the malarial kidney, but is sometimes seen in other diseases.
James Ewing 167
The anomalous condition of the medullary tubules in Case I, the
lining cells containing enormous numbers of pigment wreaths, has
already been considered in the report of that case (p. 12~). Changes
characteristic of "blackwater fever" were found in Case VII, and
consisted in extreme congestion, numerous small h~emorrhages, exces-
sive deposits of granular and crystalline pigment, probably derived
from dissolved h~emoglobin, and peculiar necrosis of tubule-cells. In
Case V the intense and peculiar degeneration of the tubule cells seems
referable in part to the obstructed circulation from thrombi of in-
fected red cells, while the h~emorrhagic type of the nephritis was dis-
tinctly the result of localization of parasites in the renal capillaries.
GASTRO-INTESTINAL TRACT.
In six of the present cases no gross lesions in the gastro-intestinal
mucosa were to be found. In one case (rlI) considerable diarrhoea of
long standing failed to leave any traces of inflammation in the intestine
or colon. In Case VII an intense catarrhal colitis was apparently not
caused directly by the malarial infection, as only moderate traces of
parasites and pigment were found in the intestinal wall.
In Case VIII amoebic dysentery of moderate extent was combined
with intense general malaria] infection, but sections of the ulcers,
while showing large numbers of the amoebae, exhibited very scanty
traces of malarial infection, no parasites and few pigmented leucocytes
being found.
These cases indicate that marked diarrhoea in pernicious malaria
may occur without anatomical changes in the intestinal mucosa, or
may result from a secondary catarrhal colitis not directly caused by
the malarial parasite, or may result from amoebic colitis, in which the
malarial infection is not directly concerned. It has already been
shown also that hmmatemesis, severe diarrhoea, and paroxysms resem-
bling Asiatic cholera occur as the result of the massing of parasites in
the gastro-intestinal mucosa.
According to Marehiafa~a, in the choleriform malarial cases, the parasites
are very abundant in the mucosa of the small intestine, but scarce or absent
elsewhere. Infected red cells may be identified in the stools, which are
often bloody. The intestine contains bloody fluid and fiocculi of mucus.
The mucosa is swollen, congested, and shows superficial hmmorrhages and
erosions. It is often dark brown or chocolate colored, while the unaffeeted
light solitary follicles project prominently. Microscopic examination shows:
(1) injection of vessels of mucosa and especially of villi with blood con-
taining many parasites; (2) necrosis of epithelium of villi and mucosa, in
which areas neither nuclei nor parasites can be stained; (3) infiltration with
168 Pathological
At~atomy of Malarial Ferer
leucocytes beneath the necrotic areas; (4) bacterial invasion of necrotic
tissue; (5) mitotic division of nuclei of sound epithelial cells; (6) freedom
from parasites of vessels of submucosa, which contain ninny pigmented
leucocytes.
In Case II, although a considerable number of parasites was found in
~he intestinal mueosa, there were no changes referable to their pres-
ence, and the patient did not suffer from diarrhoea.
There has apparently been little opportunity to ascertain the character
of reparative processes which may follow the acute lesions in choleriform
pernicious malaria, sinee such eases are usually fatal. Pensuti, ~ however,
has furnished one observation of interest in this connection. A pafient who
had suffered in November, 1892, from severe malaria with vomiting and
profuse diarrhoea, was treated actively by quinine, but the diarrhoea per-
sisted and he died of broncho-pneumonia in February, 1893. In the intes-
tine, especially in the ileum, the mueosa was hypermmic, and showed some
amyloid changes in tIie vessels. In many places there was complete dis-
appearance of the glandular layer, which was replaced by young" connective
tissue. The remaining- islands of glandular tissue showed marked hyper-
trophy of alveoli. A good deal of pigment (eharaeter not. stated) was found
in the mueosa. Pensuti regarded the lesion as referable to the toxic effects
of malaria.
There seems to be little pathological evidence on which to discuss
the relation to malaria of some forms of tropical colitis not amoebic,
but often associated with pernicious malaria.
CENTRA:L NERVOUS SYSTESf.
Gross appeara~ces.--In some cases of comatose malaria with rich
infection the brain presents a characteristic brownish discoloration,
most marked in the gray matter, which results from deposits of pig-
merit. This condition has been found in a considerable number of
cases, but by no means in all. In 40 cases Kelsch and Kiener found
marked discoloration of the cortex in 9, and faint changes in 11 cases.
When present it invariably indicates the presence of a very large num-
ber of parasites and much pigment in the brain tissue. Its absence, on
the other hand, by no means excludes the presence of a large number
of pigment-free parasites in the gray matter, a fact which was apparent
in some of my cases not reported here, and which is referable to several
causes. The wstivo-autumna] parasite is not always a very active pig-
ment-producer, and Guarnieri and Bignami haxe depicted cerebral
capillaries completely thrombosed by pigment-free rosettes. Very large
21 Gazz. meal. di Roma, 1893, xix, p. 121.
James Ewing 169
numbers of young parasites may therefore be present in a tissue
which shows very little gross evidence of pigmentation. The discolor-
ation resulting from jaundice, which frequently complicates fatal ma-
laria, may obscure the effects of malarial pigmentation. Finally, as
will subsequently be shown, the majority of cases of comatose malaria
do not exhibit a massing of parasites and pigment in the brain, so that
the characteristic discoloration of the gray matter sometimes found is
not to be expected in these cases. Accordingly of eight cases of coma-
rose pernicious malaria in which I was able to examine the brain a
brownish discoloration, which could be regarded as absolutely char-
acteristic of malaria, was not found in any. Most of the cases were
jaundiced, but in two others showing many parasites the discoloration
present was too faint to be regarded as pathognomonic of the disease.
Multiple h~emorrhages in the gray matter have been described in
comatose malaria by Guarnieri, Bignami, Marchoux,= Monti, Bastia-
nelli, Blanc, and Spiller.~ These lesions were not discovered in any
of my cases. In Bastianelli's case the h~emorrhages were limited to
the cerebellum, while disturbances of equilibrium were said to have
been prominent symptoms during life. In a case reported by Blanc,
in addition to numerous capillary h~emorrhages, there was a large sub-
cortical clot.
Pial cedema of moderate grade has been found in the majority of
cases, but cannot be regarded as of special significance.
Blanc and Borrut claim to have observed true inflammatory exuda-
tire lesions in the brain in pernicious malaria, but their observations
have not been confirmed. Maillot, in 1851, mentioned two cases of red
softening of the lower dorsal cord.
Microscopic changes.--The microscopic appearances of the brain tis-
sue in the typical cases of pernicious malaria of cerebral type are too
well known to warrant minute description here. The principal feat-
ure is the massing of red cells infected with various forms of a~stivo-
autmnnal parasites in the capillaries. Usually the parasites have been
found uniformly distributed in the brain and cord, but Marchiafava ~
observed a case with bulbar symptoms, in which there was special
localization in the medulla, and in a case of Bastianelli's the limitation
of h~emorrhages to the cerebellum indicated a special massing of para-
sites in that region. The numbers of these parasites are sometimes
'2,2Annales de l'Institut .Pasteur, 1897, xi, p. 640.
~3Amer. 3"ourn. l]Ted. Sciences, 1900, cxx, p. 629.
24 Lavori d. IS[. Congr. di reed. int., Roma, I890, p. 142.
170 Pathological Anatomy of Malarial Fever
enormous, often partly or completely occluding tile lumen of the vessel.
Complete thrombosis frequently results from the agglutination of in-
fected red cells, pigmented leucocytes, and swollen endothelial cells.
Capillary h~emorrhages result in the neighborhood of such thrombi,
and are probably preceded by degenerative changes in the capillary
endothelium. While most of the fixed pigment is found in the endo-
thelium and in cireumvaseular lymph spaces, parasites are rarely seen
in the endothelial cells. Monti, however, describes well preserved
parasites in degenerating endothelia and believes that tile parasites
are sometimes capable of development in these cells. Such an occur-
fence is at least unusual.
To the general condition of obstructed circulation it is probably safe
to refer the marked cerebral symptoms of such cases of acute perni-
cious malaria.
The infiltration of pericellular lymph spaces with small round cells,
which is seen in many infectious diseases, was noted in some of the
present eases, but not in excessive degree:
The deposit about the ganglion cells of peculiar masses of variously
twisted threads and rods staining densely with methylene blue, was
noted in the description of Case II.
Considerable attention has been paid in recent years to the condition
of the ganglio,J cells in comatose eases of malaria. Monti studied the
changes in the ganglion cells in several eases by means of Golgi's
method. In some instances no important alterations of the ganglion
cells were found. In others, with severe nervous symptoms, extensive
changes were discovered, of focal distribution, affecting principally the
dendrites. These processes were thinned in places and beset with many
small swellings, and the changes affected either the finest twigs only,
or the entire dendritic system, or the cell body itself was shrunken
and irregular. Some dendrites showed the usual changes of varicose
atrophy. The axis cylinder processes were sometimes found normal~
but in the severe comatose eases extensive changes of the above types
affected the axis cylinder as well as the dendritic processes. ~{onti
referred the changes to occlusion of capillaries, finding them very
similar to the lesions produced by multiple emboli produced by intra,
vascular injection of lyeopodimn.
The lesions in the ganglion cells demonstrated by Nissl's method
have appeared in the present eases not to differ essentially from those
seen in other infectious diseases with marked cerebral symptoms.
These changes consist principally in varying degrees of ehromatolysis
James Ewing 171
affecting the cortical cells rather uniformly, but the cells of the bulbar
nuclei more irregularly. [['he earlier stages of the lesions include re-
duction in size, irregularity and subdivision of the chromatic bodies,
usually beginning in the dendrites, later involving the cell body. In
more advanced stages the chromatic bodies are largely destroyed, and
a moderate number of cells may be entirely bereft of chromatic sub-
stance. The more serious lesions of true acute degeneration, such as
destruction of eyto-reticulum, shrinkage and cleavage of cell body,
vacuolation, and nuclear changes, were seldom seen in my eases.
As to causation of these lesions, probably local disturbances of cir-
culation are a more important factor in malaria than in most other
diseases, but the comparative uniformity of the lesions noted indicates
that a general toxeemia is, even in cerebral cases, the more important
pathogenic agent.
A great variety of ~vrvous eymptom~ referable to disturbances of the
central nervous system have been attributed to malarial infection by early
writers whose reports lack the evidence, now demanded, of a positive blood
examination. The rather extensive literature of this subject has been
fully considered by Mannaberg, and in a recent article by Bardellini. 25
Since the discovers/ of the parasite, there is good clinical and in some
cases anatomical evidence indicating that many of the nervous symptoms
early referred to malaria may really be dependent on mechanical or toxic
lesions resulting from this infection. Authentic cases have been reported
showing hemiplegia (Marchiafava, Vespa); general convulsions (Marchia.
lava, Bignami, Baccelli) ; tetanic spasms after acute malaria (De Francesco) ;
athetoid movements (Boinet and Salebert); disturbances of equilibrium
(Bastianelli, Bignami) ; trismus, nystagmus, various toxic and clonic spasms
(by many writers); post-malarial psychical disturbances (Pasmanik, Sggard,
and many others); symptoms of disseminated sclerosis, paresis, increased
reflexes, ataxia, bulbar paresis, in two cases (Angelini and Torti); electric
chorea of Dubini (Bastianelll and Bignami); paralysis of the bladder from
spinal lesions (Bardellini); hyperidrosis from affection of the sympathetic
(Bardellini); and polyneurltis somewhat resembling Landry's paralysis
(Bardellini, Torti, Mesrtard). Biardellini concludes that when nervous
lesions are transitory they are probably embolic, but when permanent they
are probably complicated by multiple h~emorrhages. In a review of the
recent literature he could find no satisfactory evidence that periodic neu-
ralffias may be directly referable to malarial infection.
It must be admitted that while the etiology in most of the above
cases was probably malarial, yet the evidence is generally unsatisfac-
tory and, usually lacking anatomical support, is inconclusive, while
in some instances the malarial infection was clearly secondary and had
nothing to do with the chronic lesions.
es Annali di medicina navale, 1898, iv, p. 919.
12
;~72 Pathological Anatomy of Malarial _Fever
Coma in pernicious malaria.--From the study of 64 cases of malarial
coma at Montauk and in New York, some of which are included in the
present series, it appears that this cerebral symptom in malaria occurs
in three rather distinct clinical pictures and under three entirely differ-
ent pathological conditions.
(1) Malarial coma may be referable to massing of young amoeboid para-
sites in the cerebral capillaries.
This type of coma, which has long been recognized as a frequent
form of pernicious malaria, is illustrated in Case III in which the
cerebral symptoms were found to be associated with an extensive mass-
ing of paxasites in the cerebral capillaries, while the deepening stages of
coma could apparently be connected with the increase in size of the
parasites and the gradual filling of the vessels with thrombi of infected
red cells, pigmented leucocytes, and swollen endothelial ceils. No capil-
lary hmmorrhages were discovered.
Clinically, the coma resulting from this pathological condition is
rather slowly established in the course of active infections, when many
young parasites are found in the finger blood and when the tempera-
ture is elevated. The patient is usually first delirious, then mildly
comatose, then deeply comatose, finally stuporous, with abolition of
pupillary and other reflexes, and almost always dies within 48 hours
after the beginning of marked cerebral symptoms. Of 11 such cases
observed at )~ontauk 10 died, and very vigorous treatment succeeded
in saving only one.
(2) Malarial coma may be referable to embolic processes with temporary
occlusion of vessels in small areas of the brain, and without unifor~n mass-
ing of parasites in cerebral capillaries.
In these cases the coma develops suddenly and may be as suddenly
recovered from. In a case previously reported the patient three times
in five days fell back unconscious in bed, his pipe dropping from his
mouth, but after a variable period he recovered consciousness, picked
up his pipe and resumed smoking. From this very transient form the
duration of the coma may be much more prolonged and serious, but it
is seldom fatal. It may occur in febrile or afebrile eases and may
exhibit distinct symptoms of focal irritation or meningitis. In the
blood, few or many crescents, sometimes tertian parasites, but very
few rings are usually found, and occasionally no parasites can be dis-
covered. Emboli of parasites, pigmented leucocytes, and visceral ma-
crophages, seems to be the only anatomical lesion which can explaiu
such symptoms. They arise in established cases of the disease and
James Ewing 173
on microscopic examination extensive malarial lesions are found in the
viscera but few or no parasites are to be found in the brain. Although
crescents or tertian parasites may be abundant in the peripheral blood
in these cases, I have not seen, nor been able to find in the literature
report of any case in which large numbers of crescents or tertian para-
sites were found occluding cerebral vessels, and it appears that these
parasites do not exhibit the tendency to unequal distribution in any
degree comparable with the fertile ~estivo-autumnal forms.
(3) Malarial coma may be referable to the general toxcemia of the il~-
fection.
In these cases the coma usually develops slowly but may in cachectie
cases be ushered in suddenly, apparently by some embolic process. It
is often of prolonged duration and not being caused by massing of
yeung parasites in cerebral vessels it is unaffected by quinine. Occur-
ring only in severe cases and being associated with serious toxic lesions
in many viscera it is nearly always fatal.
Cases I and IV of the present series illustrate this type of coma.
These patients were comatose, one at least three days and the other
for two weeks before death. As no other cause for the coma was
found it had to be referred to the malarial infection, which was very
severe and long established. These cases differed radically from the
classical type of comatose malaria, as in one only a few crescents, and
in the other only tertian parasites, were present in the blood, and no
parasites and comparatively little pigment were found in the brains.
They show conclusively that the coma of pernicious malaria is not
always referable to the presence of parasites in the cerebral capillaries.
In the Montauk series : there were four other fatal cases of comatose
~estivo-autumnal malaria in which crescents only were found in the
blood, and one other fatal tertian case with prolonged coma. Janes5
and Rosenberger"7 also have reported a fatal comatose case in which
the brain contained few parasites, which were abundant in the other
viscera, the coma being referred by the authors to a toxic origin. It is
possible that too little attention has been paid to the opinion of Guar-
uteri that malarial coma may sometimes be caused by obstruction to
the portal circulation. This opinion was based upon the evident ob-
struction to the hepatic circulation commonly found in the liver of
pernicious malaria, and upon the experimental production in dogs of
coma without convulsions by ligature of the portal vein.
-~6Ewing, ~V. Y. M'ed..four., 1899, lxix, pp. 114; 149.
~7]Deutsches Arch. f. klin: i]Ied., 1896, lvii, p. 449.
174 Pathological Anatomy o1"Malarial Fever
Urmmia may possibly be held partly responsible for some cases o[
this type but the clinical picture is not that of ur~emia and the renal
changes are not such as are commonly associated with urmmia.
Distinct differences in prognosis belong to these three varieties of
coma.
Of eleven cases in which coma supervened during the development
of a numerous brood of parasites, ten were fatal. Some of these, but
not all, were of the classical cerebral type with massing of parasites in
the brain. The energetic use of quinine has some influence in such
eases.
When coma develops gradually in severe and long established eases,
with few young parasites in the blood, it is usually of toxic origin, is
unaffected by quinine, and is almost invariably fatal.
Of 33 cases of coma developing, often suddenly, in eases with cres-
cents only in the blood, there were but three fatalities.
"]:HE 5[~kL:kRIAL PIG~[ENTS.
Two forms of malarial pigment have long been recognized. One of
these, melanin, is granuiar, brownish, elaborated directly by the para-
site, according to Saeharoff from the nuclear remnants in the red
cell, and fails to give the Prussian blue reaction of h~emosiderin. It
is not, on that account, necessarily free from iron. This pigment is
dissolved by ammonium sulphide and readily by heat, but long resists
the action of strong acids and alkalis, and I have found it to be insol-
uble in hardened tissues by chloroform, ether, or carbon bisulphide.
The other described form of malarial pigment occurs more abund-
antly in protracted cases, as small yellowish granules, loeated prin-
cipally in the tissue ceils, especially in the liver, kidney, spleen, and
marrow. It yields, when fresh, the reaction of Prussian blue, but
gradually loses this reaction. It is probably the hydrated oxide of
iron (Thoma).
When the ttb. of red cells is dissolved in the plasma, as occurs in
poisoning by potassimn chlorate, arsenic, etc., and in diseases such as
pernicious anaemia, scorbutic ailments, malaria, septicemia, etc., it may
be found in the tissues in granular or crystalline form and of dark
brown or reddish color. Sometimes such Hb. granules are soluble in
water, but more often they are altered in some way and become insolu-
ble in water, when they have been called "parahmmoglobin" by Nencki.
Parah~emoglobin is very nearly identical with h~ematoidin, which is fre-
quently precipitated in granular or crystalline form from blood extra-
James Ewing 175
vasations, and both are soluble in chloroform and carbon bisulphide.
Perls, Thoma, and Ziegler, on whose authority these statements are
made, leave one to infer that since melanin, the black malarial pigment,
is insoluble in chloroform, etc., this test furnishes a chemical reaction
which may distinguish h~ematoidin from malarial pigment. On sub-
mitting formalin-hardened tissues containing old blood extravasations
to the action of chloroform, I find that two weeks' exposure has no
effect upon the granules and crystals of hsematoidin. Possibly they had
been altered by age, or by the action of formalin, but the same result
~vas obtained in tissues hardened in alcohol. Both hsematoidin and
black malarial pigment were dissolved by ammonium sulphide. Accord-
ingly I failed to find the described chemical reactions of h~ematoidin of
practical value, at least in hardened tissues, in distinguishing between
malarial pigment and the granular and crystalline deposits derived
from destruction of red blood cells.
Another difficulty arises in the identification of malarial pigment in
tissues. Many cases of pernicious malaria are attended with marked
jaundice. In many cases of jaundice from other causes bilirubin, now
regarded as identical with hsematoidin, is deposited in granular or more
often in crystalline form, and is identical in color with hmmatoidin and
with much pigment found in the bodies of malarial parasites. In scc-
tiens of two cases of marked janndice following pneumonia, one in a
young infant, the other in an adult, I found many crystals and gran-
ules of bilirubin (?) (Perls, Ziegler) in the hepatic endothelium. In
the ease of the infant, they were found in large masses in the liver
cells also, as well as in many leucocytes in various organs, which very
closely resembled the pigmented leucocytes of malaria. Now bilirubin
in fresh bile is turned green by formalin and gives Gmelin's reaction,
but the crystals in neither of these cases turned green in formalin nor
gave Gmelin's reaction. There were, however, other greenish particles
in the formalin-hardened sections of both livers. In both eases chloro-
form failed to alter the crystals in two weeks, and they failed to give.
the Prussian blue reaction. That the crystalline deposits in the liver
cells of the new-born infant were derived from the bile there can be
little doubt, and the failure of the reactions may be explained, as is
done by Gerhardt and others (quoted by Perls), who find that in many
forms of jaundice urobilin and not bilirubin is formed. Urobilin fails
to give Gmelin's reaction. Formalin-hardened sections of these tissues
were treated for 24 hours, also, in carbon bisulphide, and in ether, but
no change in the pigment was obser~Ted. The same negative result
was obtained with sections of malarial tissues.
176 Pathological Anatomy of Malarial Fever
These cases are briefly referred to in order to point out that the
jaundice of infectious diseases may cause deposits of pigment which
are indistinguishable morphologically, and by all ordinary chemical
procedures, from much malarial pigment. Various reports of the find-
ing of malarial pigment in the liver cells in pernicious malaria have
possibly not been made with full recognition of this fact. The positive
identification of malarial pigment therefore becomes a matter of great
difficulty, for it appears from the above considerations that in malarial
fever one may meet with granular, sometimes crystalline pigment par-
titles, free in the vessels or englobed in various cells, not giving the
P:,ussian blue reaction, nor dissolving in chloroform, ether, or carbon
bisulphide, but dissolving in ammonium sulphide, which may have any
one of the following origins:
(1) Pigment elaborated by the intraeellular parasite.
(2) Hmmatoidin derived from the remnants of infected red cells.
(3) H~ematoidin or altered h~emoglobin deposited in granular or
crystalline form from red cells dissolved in ~he plasma. (H~emoglobi-
mlric fever, jaundice, extravasated blood, post-mortem processes.)
(4) Bilirubin or urobilin granules or crystals.
Throughout the study of the present cases, in addition to the dark
brownish granular pigment inclosed in cells or parasites, larger dark
brown particles exhibiting more or less crystalline forms were fre-
quently found. When scanty they were usually limited to the spleen,
but in Case VII there were excessive deposits in all viscera except the
liver and spleen. Since the pigment in parasites is invariably granular
and not crystalline--possibly there are rare exceptions in the crescentic
bodies--the above considerations render it extremely probable that
the strictly malarial pigment, i. e., that derived from parasites, is never
found in crystalline form, and that all such erysta]s ought to be referred
to some other origin. Moreover as the detritus from dissolved red cells
may be found as brownish granules in the bodies of phagocytes, it can-
not be claimed, even for the pigmented macrophages, that all granular
pigment is derived from parasites.
When one follows the changes that occur in degenerating parasites
and red cells within a maerophage, there are, however, certain long-
retained characters which often ser~;e to distinguish the pigment de-
rived from parasites from that resulting from the destruction of red
cells.
In sections of tissues, the pigment within parasites is invariably
finely granular, first appearing as one or two fine grains, later as a
James Ewing 177
larger, more or less irregular clump, while in mstivo-autumnal rosettes
the pigment appears in a rather compact spheroidal mass of fine gran-
ules. In sections, the pigment is usually less compact than in blood
smears, in which it may often be found in a single large block with
outlying grains. When these pigmented parasites are englobed in
macrophages the body of the parasite rapidly disappears, in 4 to 5
hours according to Marchiafava, leaving a small vacuole about the pig-
ment clump, and usually leaving the pigment undisturbed in arrange-
ment of granules for some days. When the pigment clump is englobed
after its discharge from the rosette into the plasma, it appears some-
times to retain its compact arrangement, in which case the englobed
mass fails to show a surrounding vacuole. In the leucocytes of the
peripheral blood, which appear to absorb most of their pigment from
the plasma, it is seldom possible to detect any vacuole surrounding
the clump. When a red cell is englobed in a macrophage, the Hb. is
frequently reduced to brownish granules skirting the periphery of the
space originally occupied by the red cell, or sometimes showing a less
regular arrangement of fine granules within a large vacuole.
Finally, when a red cell infected by a pigmented parasite is englobed,
the destruction of the red cells may leave a peripheral ring of granules,
while the larger compact mass from the parasite occupies a central or
peripheral position (Plate X, Figs. 1 and 4).
From a minute study of the appearances of intracellular pigment
clumps in sections, and especially in smears of tissues, it is possible
to follow degenerating parasites and red cells through all the stages
just described, and to distinguish in many instances pigment derived
from parasites from that resulting from the destruction of red ceils.
After a variable time all englobed pigment appears to concentrate in
more compact perinuclear masses, and the above features can no longer
be ~dentified. Some of the larger masses appear to form by the coales-
cence of two or more vacuoles.
When one compares the deposits of h~emoglobin which occur, in
inflamed tissues infiltrated with blood, with deposits of malarial pig-
ment, certain characters are often distinctly apparent which serve to
distinguish the one from other. Chief among these is the crystalline
form of much of the pigment in the inflammatory deposits. In many
such cases the formation of intra- and extra-cellular circles of crystal-
line pigment may be traced from whole or subdivided reel cells. Such
features were noted especially in the renal tubules of Case I of the
present series (Plate XI, Fig. 9). Sometimes the pigment circle repro-
178 Pathological Anatomy of Malarial Fever
duces the original size of the intact red cell, usually it is smaller, the
red cell having been subdivided before its final alteration, while fre-
quently the crystals are isolated and elongated, or of small size resem-
bling granules. No spheroidal clumps of finely granular pigment like
that of the ~estivo-autumnal rosette were seen in several inflamed
mucous membranes with disintegrating blood, examined for this pur-
pose. In cases of pneumonia, septicmmia, and blood extravasations
from various causes, along with the crystalline pigment there was much
coarsely granular pigment in leucocytes and endothelial cells, but none
or very few of the clumps exhibited the finely granular character of
fIesh malarial pigment.
Since malarial pigment as seen in the parasite is practically never
found in crystalline form, and there seems to be no good reason to
assume its transformation into crystals after englobement by phago-
cytes, crystalline pigment must be referred to other sources, princi-
pally the destruction of red cells.
According to Thoma, h~emosiderin probably results when the detri-
tus of red cells is acted upon by living tissue cells, while hmmatoidin
is produced in the bulk of a blood extravasation where living phago-
cytes are absent.
The study of hepatic macrophages in malaria shows, however, that
englobed red cells may be reduced to h~ematoidin as well as to h~emo-
siderin. Not infrequently one finds in the bodies of such macrophages
red cells which give the hmmosiderin reaction, but show in addition
some black h~ematoidin grains. This fact has also been noted by
Barker. The two pigments appear to form, in malaria, under nearly
identical conditions, and in the large macrophages it appears certain
that the majority of eng]obed red cells are reduced to h~ematoidin.
Not having found in chloroform, ether, carbon bisulphide, acidified
potassium ferroeyanide, or ammonium sulphide, any chemical reagent
that will distinguish malarial pigment from parah~emoglobin, hmma-
toidin, bilirubin, or urobilin, etc., one must apparently rely upon mor-
phology alone for its identification in hardened specimens.
In pernicious malaria, the formation of pigment b~ the parasite,
the intracellular destruction of red cells, the solution of Hb. in the
plasma, occurring most extensively in hmmoglobinuric fever, but seen
to some extent probably in all fatal cases, the deposit of bilirubin or
urobilin crystals or granules in jaundiced cases, all are processes which
are variously intermingled in the disease, and in the study of the tissues
it is of prime importance (see Cases I and VII) to distinguish as far ~s
possible between them.
James :Ewing 179
Case X has been reported here in order to illustrate the practical
importance of the foregoing observations.
Certain alterations of interest were noted in the deposits o3 pigment
in liver and spleen after subsidence of the infection. Throughout the
periods of active infection the pigment was richly and uniformly dis-
tributed in all parts of the organs. In a case of typhoid fever in a
malarious subject dying from perforation three weeks after the dis-
appearance of parasites under quinine, the pigment in the liver was
found in less numerous but larger and more compact clumps within
the capillaries, but very little had yet reached the portal canals. In
the spleen the beginning concentration of pigment had caused the
appearance of a pigment network with large meshes, within which were
newly-formed cells free from pigment (Plate XIV, Fig. 17).
In another case, dying three months after subsidence of the infec-
tion, the greater concentration of pigment is clearly indicated in the
photograph (Plate XV, Fig. 18).
Ferrier," in a case dying one month after cessation of fever, found
a moderate amount of pigment in the cells of the pulp cords only.
In another case, after a similar period, much pigment in nodular blocks
2-3 times the diameter of the splenic cells was found in the splenic
cords. Rather less pigment was found in the arterial walls and peri-
pheries of follicles. In a third case, six weeks after acute symptoms,
most of the pigment was found in very large cells in the centres of the
pulp cords.
DESCRIPTION OF PLATES X-XV.
PLATE X.
Fig. 1. Appearance of hepatic macrophage in Case II. Various stages of destruction
of infected and uninfected red cells and of parasites.
Fig. 2. Hepatic endothelial cell in established ~estivo-autnmnal fever, containing
pigment.
Fig. 3. Hepatic macrophage in Case VII, fatalinfection with large tertian parasite.
The pigment is distributed in fine granules and in blocks.
Fig. 4. Endothelial macrophage of circulating blood, containing rings and masses
of pigment and degenerating parasites. Red blood corpuscle at the side.
Fig. 5. Polynuclear leucocyte of circulating blood with eng]obed rosette and full
grown parasite.
Fig. 6. The usual pigmented monouuclear leucocyte of the circulating blood.
Fig. 7. Capillary in muscle of the heart, showing numerous intra-corpuscular
parasites. Case II.
PLATE XI.
Fig. 8. Appearance when stained of vaeuolated, pigmented leucocyte, common in
malarial blood.
~SArch. de m~d. exp$r., 1897, ix, p. 87.
180 Pathological
Anatomy of Malarial Fever
Fig. 9. Pigmentary deposits in cells of renal tubule, from disintegrating red
corpuscles. Case I.
Fig. 10. From section of uterine submucosa of Case X, puerperal septic~emia.
Deposits of wreaths of granular and crystalline pigment, resembling malarial pig-
ment, in tissue infiltrated with blood.
PLATE XII.
Fig. 11. Early stages of destruction of red corpuscles with deposit of peripheral
rings of hzematoidin. Pigmented leucocytes. Case VII and others.
Fig. 19. Later stages of destruction of red corpuscles with deposit of crystals of
h~,matoidin. Case VII.
PLATE XIII.
Fi~. 13. Photograph of section of kidney, Case V. Degeneration of renal
epithelium and granular coagulum around glomerulus. x 250.
Fig. 14. Photograph of section of kidney, Case V, showing massing of malarial
parasites in renal capillaries. x 250.
Fig. 15. Photograph of section x 1000, same case, showing pigmented parasites
in renal capillary.
PLAT~ XIV.
Fig. 16. Photograph of section of spleen, Case vii, showing distribution of pig-
mel,t in acute pernicious malaria.
Fig. 17. Photograph showing reticular arrangement of pigment in the spleen,
three weeks after subsidence of acute malarial infection.
PLATE XV.
Fig. 18. Photograph showing disposition of pigment in the spleen, three months
after acute malarial infection. Case IX.
Fig. 19. Photograph showing distribution of pigment in the liver, three months
after acute malarial infection. Case IX.
THE JOURNAL OF EXPERIMENTAL MEDICINE. VOL. VI. PLATE X.
THE JOURNAL OF EXPERIMENTAL MEDICINE. VOL. VI. PLATE XI.
THE JOURNAL OF EXPERIMENTAL MEDICINE. VOL. Vl. PLATE Xll.
THE JOURNAL OF EXPERIMENTAL MEDICINE. VOL. Vl. PLATE Xlll.
THE JOURNAL OF EXPERIMENTAL MEDICINE. VOL. Vl. PLATE XIV.
FIG. 16.
FIG. 17.
THE JOURNAL OF EXPERIMENTAL MEDICINE. VOL. Vl. PLATE XV.
FIG. 18.
FIG. |9~