J Cell BiolJ. Cell Biol482jcellbiolThe Journal of Cell Biology0021-95251540-8140The Rockefeller University PressPMC2200005PMC2200005.122000052200005749028810.1083/jcb.131.4.833960747531ArticlesIdentification of the chromosome localization domain of the Drosophila nod kinesin-like protein
21119951314159143833843020519960105200821102019https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-sa/4.0/This article is distributed under the terms of an Attribution–Noncommercial–Share Alike–No Mirror Sites license for the first six months after the publication date (see http://www.rupress.org/terms). After six months it is available under a Creative Commons License (Attribution–Noncommercial–Share Alike 4.0 Unported license, as described at http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-sa/4.0/).The nod kinesin-like protein is localized along the arms of meiotic chromosomes and is required to maintain the position of achiasmate chromosomes on the developing meiotic spindle. Here we show that the localization of ectopically expressed nod protein on mitotic chromosomes precisely parallels that observed for wild-type nod protein on meiotic chromosomes. Moreover, the carboxyl-terminal half of the nod protein also binds to chromosomes when overexpressed in mitotic cells, whereas the overexpressed amino-terminal motor domain binds only to microtubules. Chromosome localization of the carboxyl-terminal domain of nod depends upon an 82-amino acid region comprised of three copies of a sequence homologous to the DNA-binding domain of HMG 14/17 proteins. These data map the two primary functional domains of the nod protein in vivo and provide a molecular explanation for the directing of the nod protein to a specific subcellular component, the chromosome.

pmc-status-qastatus0pmc-status-liveyespmc-status-embargonopmc-status-releasedyespmc-prop-open-accessyespmc-prop-olfnopmc-prop-manuscriptnopmc-prop-legally-suppressednopmc-prop-has-pdfyespmc-prop-has-supplementnopmc-prop-pdf-onlyyespmc-prop-suppress-copyrightnopmc-prop-is-real-versionnopmc-prop-is-scanned-articlenopmc-prop-preprintnopmc-prop-in-epmcyespmc-license-refCC BY-NC-SA
 Identification of the Chromosome Localization Domain of the Drosophila
Nod Kinesin-like Protein
Katayoun Afshar, Jonathan Scholey, and R. Scott Hawley
Section of Molecular and Cellular Biology, University of California at Davis, Davis, California 95616
Abstract. The nod kinesin-like protein is localized
along the arms of meiotic chromosomes and is required
to maintain the position of achiasmate chromosomes
on the developing meiotic spindle. Here we show that
the localization of ectopically expressed nod protein on
mitotic chromosomes precisely parallels that observed
for wild-type nod protein on meiotic chromosomes.
Moreover, the carboxyl-terminal half of the nod pro-
tein also binds to chromosomes when overexpressed in
mitotic cells, whereas the overexpressed amino-termi-
nal motor domain binds only to microtubules. Chromo-
some localization of the carboxyl-terminal domain of
nod depends upon an 82-amino acid region comprised
of three copies of a sequence homologous to the DNA-
binding domain of HMG 14/17 proteins. These data
map the two primary functional domains of the nod
protein in vivo and provide a molecular explanation for
the directing of the nod protein to a specific subcellular
component, the chromosome.
T
HEkinesins constitute a family of microtubule-based
motors that use the energy of ATP hydrolysis to
produce force and transport cargo along microtu-
bules (Goldstein, 1993; Bloom and Endow, 1994). Kinesin
holoenzymes are assembled from kinesin-like polypep-
tides that consist of a conserved motor domain linked to
divergent tail domains. The motor domains bind to micro-
tubules and generate force, whereas the tails are thought
to function both as oligomerization and cargo-binding do-
mains (Vale and Goldstein, 1990; Cole and Scholey, 1995).
Although different kinesins are known to transport dif-
ferent types of cargo (e.g., membrane-bounded vesicles or
chromosomes), the mechanisms by which kinesins recog-
nize and attach to their specific subcellular cargoes is not
understood. For example, although the carboxyl-terminal
tail domain of conventional kinesin has been shown to
bind saturably to membranes in vitro (Skoufias et al.,
1994), the molecular nature of the interaction between
KHC and its membranous cargo in vivo has not been char-
acterized. Clearly, if we want to understand mechanisms
of intracellular transport, it will be important to identify
the mechanisms that specify the targeting and binding of
each kinesin and kinesin-like protein (KLP) to its cargo.
In this paper we provide a description of the mechanism
by which one kinesin-like protein (nod) is localized to its
proper cellular compartment, namely the chromosomes.
The nod protein is required for correct segregation of the
nonexchange chromosomes during Drosophilameiosis (Car-
Address all correspondence to R. Scott Hawley, Section of Molecular and
Cellular Biology, University of California at Davis, Davis, California
94546. Tel.: (916) 752-5146. Fax: (916) 752-1185.
penter, 1973; Zhang and Hawley, 1990; Theurkauf and
Hawley, 1992). Cytological studies have shown that the
nod protein is required to control the proper movement of
nonexchange chromosomes during spindle assembly at
prometaphase and, in doing so, determines the position of
these chromosomes on the metaphase spindles.
Sequence analysis revealed that the presumptive motor
domain is localized at the amino-terminal end of the 666-
residue nod polypeptide (Zhang et al., 1990). The car-
boxyl-terminal domain of nod shows no extensive homol-
ogy to any other protein in the data base. However, it does
contain three repeated sequences with homology to the
25-amino acid DNA-binding domain of the High Mobility
Group (HMG) 1proteins 14/17 (Afshar et al., 1995). HMG
14/17 proteins are members of a group of small nonhistone
chromosomal proteins that, as predicted for the tail of
nod, do not display obvious secondary structure but do
bind DNA in a sequence-specific manner (Johns, 1982;
Bustin et al., 1990). The significance of this homology is
supported by the observation that the tail of the nod pro-
tein binds to AT-rich DNA efficiently in vitro (Afshar et
al., 1995). Taken together these findings suggest that the
tail of the nod protein binds to the DNA component of its
chromosomal cargo.
Immunolocalization studies have demonstrated that the
nod protein is localized along the entire length of meiotic
chromosomes in stage 14 oocytes (Afshar et al., 1995).
This discovery is consistent with genetic studies which
identified multiple regions within a small region of X chro-
1. Abbreviations used in this paper. HMG, high mobility group; nod, kine-
sin-like protein.
(c) The Rockefeller University Press, 0021-9525/95/11/833/11 $2.00
The Journal of Cell Biology, Volume 13I, Number 4, November 1995 833-843 833
mosomal heterochromatin whose deletion increases the
instability of a mini-chromosome in heterozygous nod/+
oocytes but not in otherwise wild-type oocytes (Murphy
and Karpen, 1995). This result has been interpreted to
mean that a minichromosome with fewer nod-binding sites
competes less well for a reduced number of nod molecules
and is thus functionally impaired (Murphy and Karpen,
1995). These data strongly suggest, as do the immunolocal-
ization experiments cited above, that meiotic chromosomes
interact with nod proteins at a very large number of sites
along their length.
To improve our understanding of the mechanism of nod
function in particular, and to gain insights into the mecha-
nisms by which kinesins bind cargo in general, we have un-
dertaken in vivo studies to map those regions within the
carboxyl-terminal tail of the nod protein that direct its
binding to chromosomes. We demonstrate that the nod
protein, expressed under the control of the heat shock pro-
moter, can associate with mitotic chromosomes in em-
bryos, that the carboxy-half of the nod protein directs the
nod protein to the chromosomes, and that a 82- residue
segment of the tail (which contains three copies of the se-
full length nod eDNA in the CasPeR transformation vector
I) DNA i///////,
Protein
t 2340
Hmdln Spll
100g 1796
l 666
N-terminalcDNAin theCasPeRtransformationvector
1 234o
x 3
Protein
1 320
C-terminaleDNAintheCasPeRtransformationvector
1063 2340
3) DNA ' / ~ / +"+"~"/" ~-~-~" ~'~xxxxx+"x
330 666
Key
t~,'~v~ =hsp70promoler
~ , . / / / ~ ~ White+
~xxx\\x'~ . nodcDNA
I i =nodpolypeptidc
I =flagepitope-tag
I =13aaon N-lerminal
fragment
observedMr=67kD
pI=10.4
observedMr=33.2kD
pl=g.26
observedMr=36kD
pI=10.9
Figure 1. Expression of flag
epitope-tagged full-length,
amino-terminal or carboxyl-
terminal domains of the nod
protein in embryos. (A)
Schematic representation of
the transformation con-
structs carrying coding se-
quence for the full-length
nod protein (1), the amino-
terminal domain of nod (2)
and the carboxyl-terminal
domain of nod (3). The dia-
gram of the respective pro-
teins is shown below each
construct. The transforma-
tion vector, phspCasPeR
was used for expressing fu-
sion proteins consisting of
the expressed proteins fused
to the flag epitope at their
amino-terminal end. The
proteins are expressed under
the control of the heat shock
70 promoter. The white +
gene served as a selection
marker for transformation.
The numbers refer to nucleo-
tide residues in the nod
cDNA sequence and amino
acid residues in the nod pro-
tein sequence. (B) Immuno-
blot analysis of protein ex-
tracts from embryos
expressing the full-length
nod protein (lane 2; M r pre-
dicted from sequence 67.4
kD, migrates at 67 kD), the
NH2-terminal domain of the
nod protein (lane 3; pre-
dicted Mr=34.9 kD, mi-
grates at 33.2 kD), and the
COOH-terminal domain of
the nod protein (lane 4, pre-
dicted Mr=33.8, migrates at
36 kD). Fusion proteins were
detected using the anti-flag
antibody. Estimates of ap-
parent M r values were ob-
tained from the blots using
rainbow molecular weight
markers as standards. The carboxyl-terminal domain of nod appears slightly larger than the size predicted from the sequence for un-
known reasons. The same effect was seen with some of the truncated forms of the nod carboxyl-terminal domain (see Fig. 5 B). Ex-
tracts from nontransformed embryos were used as a control for the specificity of the anti-flag antibody (lane 1).
The Journal of Cell Biology, Volume 131, 1995 834
Figure 2. Localization of epitope-tagged nod protein in 2--6-hembryos, a and b represent confocal images of mitotic cells in an embryo
double stained with anti-flag (green) antibody and anti-tubulinantibody (red). The relative position of anti-flag stainingwith respect to
spindle microtubules indicates that the overexpressed nod protein is associated with chromosomes in mitotic cells, c and d present an
embryo double stained with anti-flagantibody (c), and propidium iodide (d). Note that the stainingshown in c and d overlaps almost ex-
actly as indicated by arrows, confirmingthe localizationof nod protein on mitotic chromosomes. Bar equals 5 Ixm.
Afsharet al.Nod ChromosomeLocalizationDomain 835
,-]
5-
<
o
Y~
o~
Figure
3.
Overexpression
of
the
nod
protein
causes
spindle
abnormalities.
Images
a
and
b
show
mitotic
domains
in
the
embryos
in
which
nod
is
overexpressed,
nod
staining
is
shown
in
green
and
microtubule
staining
is
in
red.
Note
the
presence
of
asymmetric
spindles
(yellow
arrows)
and
monopolar
spindles
(white
arrows)
in
these
embryos.
Such
spindle
abnormalities
were
absent
in
wild-type
embryos
that
were
heat
shocked,
fixed,
and
stained
under
identical
conditions.
Bar
equals
5
i~m.
quence homologous to the DNA binding domain of HMG
14/17 proteins) is necessary for the localization of nod on
chromosomes.
Materials and Methods
PlasmidConstruction
The construction of plasmid pflag-nodhspTOCasPeR expressing full-length
nod has been reported before (Afshar et al., 1995). The construct p-flag-
Nnodhsp70CasPeR, expressing the flag epitope tagged amino-terminal
domain of nod was made by cutting pflag-nodhsp70CasPeR with SplI re-
striction enzyme and filling the recessed ends by Klenow enzyme, produc-
ing a fragment that was cut with BglII, and then ligated to a HindIII-
blunt-ended BglII fragment of the nod cDNA. This created a stop codon
41 bp downstream of the Spll site. The construct pflag-Cnodhsp70CasPeR,
expressing the COOH-terminal domain of nod was made as follows: a
745-bp sequence was amplified by PCR using primers flagC-nod and AK-
12. Primer flagC-nod contains the sequence CGGGATCCCGCATGG-
ATTACAAGGACGATGACGATAAGAAGCAATCGCTGGCC that
has a BamHI restriction site, 4 bp from the nod 5' untranslated sequence
followed by 21 bp encoding the flag epitope-tag and 16 bp of nod se-
quence, from nucleotide 1063 to 1079, that encodes the start of the
COOH-terminal domain. Primer AK-12, CACAACAACGGAGGTG-
GCATGT, is derived from nucleotides 1743 to 1777 in the nod cDNA se-
quence. The 745-bp PCR fragment was cut with SphI and BamHI and was
exchanged for a BglIf-SphI fragment of pnodhspTOCasPeR. The con-
struct expressing nod protein containing amino acids 460-666 (pCN3) was
made similarly by using primer flag-nod1452, whose sequence is CGG-
GATCCCGCATGGATTACAAGGACGATGACGATAAGGAGCC-
CAAGGAATCG, i.e., the same design as primer flagC-nod but different
in the last 16 bp in having sequence drived from bp 1452 to 1468, and
primer AK-4, whose sequence is AGCTCTTAGAAAAAGT'FCAGTF,
containing nucleotides 1983 to 2006 of nod eDNA. These primers were
used to amplify a 554 fragment that was eventually cut with BamHI and
SplI and exchanged with a BglII~plI fragment of the pnodhsp70CasPeR.
The construct expressing nod protein from amino acids 513 to 666 (pCN4)
was made exactly the same way, except for the use of primer flag513nod,
whose sequence is CGGGATCCCGCATGGATTACAAGGACGAT-
GACGATAAGCGTACGGTAGTGGCTTCGCCA, that contains the
sequences from nucleotide 1611 to 1627 of the nod eDNA following the
flag epitope encoding sequence. To construct the plasmid expressing re-
gions of the nod protein from amino acid 330 to 522 (pCN1) primer
pflagC-nod was used in combination with primer AK-08, GGAAT-
TCAGCATGGCTGCTGTGGCGA, that contain EcoRI restriction site
and residues 1620-1638 of the nod eDNA. Similarly, the plasmid express-
ing polypeptide 330 to 594 (pCN2) was made using primers pfiagC-nod
and primer Ak-09, GGAATTCACATCCAGGCCTTGGGCGC, con-
taining EcoRI restriction site and the sequence 1836-1854 of the nod
eDNA. The resulting fragments from PCR were treated with EcoRI re-
striction enzyme and then with Klenow enzyme, to produce blunt-ends,
followed by treatment with BamHI restriction enzyme. Those fragments
were then ligated individually to pflag-nodhspTOCasPeRthat was cut with
BglI! and SplI restriction enzymes, where the recessed end from the SplI
cut was filled. This created a stop codon 8 bp downstream of SplI site. All
the constructs were sequenced to confirm the absence of mutations result-
ing from errors during PCR.
Transformation, Heat Shock Treatment,Embryo
Collection,and ProteinAnalysis
Constructs were injected into white embryos according to established pro-
cedures (Rubin and Spradling, 1982). For each construct at least 15 inde-
pendent lines were generated. To select for the best transformed line, be-
tween twenty and thirty embryos were heat shocked on a grape juice agar
plate in a 37C water bath for 1 h. Because the hsp 70 promoter cannot be
induced in embryos at early preblastoderm stages (Zimmerman et al.,
1983), we performed all of our experiments on 2~5-h embryos. The em-
bryos were allowed to recover from the heat shock for 1 h at room tem-
perature, and then homogenized in 50 ml of the SDS-PAGE sample buffer
for further protein analysis by immunoblotting. Those lines that expressed
the protein were used for immunostaining. The Western blotting was per-
formed by the procedure described by Sambrook et al. (1989). The protein
extracts containing the full-length nod, COOH-terrrfinal and NH2-termi-
hal domains of nod were run on 8% SDS-PAGE, whereas 12% SDS-
PAGE was used to analyze the protein fragments derived from the
COOH-terminal domain of nod. Proteins were transferred to PVDF mem-
brane for immunoblotting and detected using M5 anti-flag antibody and
horse radish peroxidase-conjugated anti-mouse antibody. Antibody bind-
ing was visualized using the ECL system (Amersham Life Science, Arling-
ton Heights, IL).
EmbryoPreparationand Immunostaining
2-6-h embryos were collected and heat shocked as described previously.
The embryos were dechorionated in 50% chlorox for 90 s, and washed
several times with distilled water. They were then placed in 1:1 methanol-
heptane solution with moderate shaking. After 5 min the heptane layer
was replaced with methanol and fixation was continued for another 5 min.
Embryos were rehydrated in 60% methanol in PBST (Phosphate buffered
saline, PBS + 0.1% Triton X-100), 30% methanol-PBST, and then PBST
alone. Nonspecific protein binding was blocked by placing embryos in
PTB solution (3% BSA in PBST) for at least 1 h at room temperature.
Embryos were incubated for 3 h at room temperature or overnight at 4C
with M5 anti-Flag Ab at 1:100 dilution in PTB, and then washed in PBST
three times for 20 min and incubated with fluorescein-conjugated horse
anti-mouse IgG (Vector Laboratories, Burlingame, CA) at 1:200 dilution
in PTB. The secondary antibody was preincubated for at least 2 h with Or-
egon R embryos that were fixed in methanol and blocked for more than
30 min in PTB to block nonspecific reaction with endogenous fly proteins.
After 3 h incubation, the embryos were washed three times in PBST, once
in PBS, and mounted in 90% glycerol +10% of 10 mg/ml p-phenyldiami-
dine in PBS. For double-labeling experiments, rabbit anti-tubulin Ab was
added, along with M5 anti-Flag Ab followed by Texas red-conjugated
horse anti-rabbit IgG (Vector Laboratories) and horse anti-mouse Ab to
the staining solutions. For double staining with propidium iodide, em-
bryos were first incubated with 2 mg/ml RNAase A solution, 1 h, followed
by incubation in I mg/ml of propidium iodide solution at 1:100 dilution for
5 rain right before the last wash with PBS. Embryos were mounted as be-
fore and examined using an MRC-600 confocal microscope (BioRad Labs.,
Hercules, CA).
Results
Immunolocalization of the Nod Proteinin Mitotic Cells
The nod protein can be immunolocalized to chromosome
arms in meiotic cells (Afshar et al., 1995). Using the same
anti-nod sera, we were not able to detect nod protein in
wild-type embryos either on mitotic chromosomes by im-
munofluorescence (data not shown) or on immunoblots of
the crude extract from embryos (Afshar et al., 1995). These
observations suggest that either there is not enough nod
protein to be detectable by our anti-nod sera in mitotic
cells, or that meiotic, but not mitotic cells contain factors
necessary for the binding of nod to chromosomes.
To test whether overexpressed nod protein can localize
to mitotic chromosomes, we constructed transgenic lines
that express Flag epitope-tagged nod protein under the
control of the heat shock 70 promoter (Fig. 1 A). As
shown in Fig. 1 B, the anti-flag antibody specifically recog-
nizes a single band of 67 kD in protein extracts from in-
duced transgenic embryos, but no signal is detected in ex-
tracts from control noninduced or nontransformed ~mbryos.
Two- to six-hour-old transgenic embryos were induced by
heat shock and processed for double label immunofluores-
cence with anti-flag antibody and anti-tubulin antibody
(Fig. 2 a and b). Nod staining was examined in mitotic do-
mains (a cell or clusters of cells undergoing synchronous
mitosis; Foe, 1989)'containing a single cell (Fig. 2 a), two
cells (Fig. 2 b) or clusters of cells (Figs. 2, c and d, 3, a and
b). We observed an almost exact correspondence in the
Afshar et al. Nod Chromosome Localization Domain 837
Figure 4. Localizationof overexpressed carboxyl-terminaland amino-terminaldomains of the nod protein in mitotic cells, a and b repre-
sent embryos expressing the flag epitope-tagged COOH-terminal domain of nod protein stained with anti-flag antibody to detect nod
protein (green) and with antitubulinantibody to detect microtubles (red). This image shows that COOH-terminal domain of nod associ-
ates with chromosomes. This conclusionis supported by double stainingof similarembryos with anti-flagantibody (c) and propidium io-
TheJournalofCellBiology,Volume131,1995 838
dide (d). e-h represent embryos expressing the flag epitope-tagged NH2-terminal domain of nod that were double stained with anti-flag
(e and g) and anti-tubulin (fand h). Note the association of the NH2-terminal domain of nod with microtubules of the mitotic spindle (e
and/') and interphase cytoplasm (g and h) in the embryos. Bar equals 5 I~m.
Afsharetal.Nod Chromosome Localization Domain 839
staining pattern-of expressed nod protein (detected using
the anti-flag antibody) (Fig. 2 c), and the staining pattern
of DNA (detected using propidium iodide) (Fig. 2 d), indi-
cating that nod protein is localized all over the chromo-
some arms. Identical results were obtained using antisera
made against E. coil-expressednod protein and described
in Afshar et al. (1995) (data not shown). This result dem-
onstrates that nod protein binds to mitotic chromosomes
in a similar (or identical) fashion to that exhibited by na-
tive nod protein in meiotic cells. Our data also show that
nod-binding sites on the arms of mitotic chromosomes are
unoccupied, and thus are available for binding of overex-
pressed nod protein. Therefore, no specific factor in mei-
otic cells appears to be required for nod to bind to chro-
mosomes.
The overexpression of full-length nod protein driven by
the hsp 70 promoter in embryonic cells results in a high fre-
quency of spindle abnormalities. Approximately 70-80%
of the spindles examined in 1,000 embryos overexpressing
full-length nod construct were morphologically abnormal
and no mitotic domain composed of clusters of cells with
entirely normal bipolar spindles was observed. Most of the
abnormal mitotic spindles are highly asymmetric, and in
some extreme cases, apparently monopolar (Fig 3, a and
b). Such abnormalities were rarely observed in either heat
shock-treated wild-type embryos or in heat shock-induced
embryos expressing either the COOH- or NH2-terminal
domains of nod (see below).
EctopicExpressionand Localizationof the NH2-and
COOH-terminalDomainsofNOdin EmbryonicCells
To test the hypothesis that the carboxyl-terminal domain
of nod protein functions as a cargo binding domain, whereas
the amino-terminal presumptive motor domain binds to mi-
crotubules, plasmids containing flag epitope-tagged NH2-ter-
minal or COOH-terminal domains of nod in the phsp70-
CasPeR vector were constructed, and embryos transformed
with these recombinant plasmids were induced to express
the corresponding fusion proteins by heat shock (Fig. 1).
Double-label immunofluorescence of the transformed
embryos revealed that the COOH-terminal domain of nod
protein alone binds efficientlyto chromosomes (Fig. 4, a-d),
consistent with our previous in vitro DNA-binding studies
(Afshar et al., 1995). The pattern of staining from the
COOH-terminal domain of nod in embryos largely over-
laps with the staining by propidium iodide (Fig. 4, c and d).
Thus, like the full-length nod protein, the COOH-terminal
domain of nod binds along the length of chromosomes
rather than being restricted to a specific region. This sug-
gests that all of the information necessary for chromo-
somal localization of nod is contained in the tail domain.
Double-label immunofluorescence of embryos express-
ing the NH2-terrninal domain of nod revealed that this pro-
tein fragment is bound to microtubules throughout the cell
both in interphase and mitotic cells (Fig. 4, e-h), consistent
with its proposed function as a motor domain (Zhang et al.,
1990). As shown in Fig. 4, e-h, in the absence of the
COOH-terminal domain, the NH2-terminal domain of nod
binds to astral microtubules and cytoplasmic microtubule
networks, as well as the spindle microtubules.
These experiments argue that the nod protein can be
broken down into two functional domains, an NH2-termi-
nal motor domain that binds to microtubules and a COOH-
terminal chromosome binding domain that directs and links
this putative motor to the chromosomes.
Mappingthe ChromosomeLocalizationDomain ofNod
To identify the regions of the COOH-terminal domain of
nod that are important for chromosome localization, we
tested the chromosome-binding ability of a series of four
epitope-tagged truncated proteins (pCN1, pCN2, pCN3,
and pCN4) derived from the COOH-terminal domain of
nod (Fig. 5 A). The expression of the truncated proteins
was tested by immunoblotting (Fig. 5 B).
As summarized in Fig. 5 A, the anti-flag staining ob-
served in cells expressing constructs pCN3 and pCN4 was
similar, if not identical, to the pattern of staining observed
in cells expressing the entire COOH-terminal domain of
nod. These results show that deletions encompassing the
amino-terminal regions up to residue 513 have no effect
on the chromosome-binding activity of nod. Similarly, frag-
ment pCN2 associated with chromosomes, demonstrating
that the last 70 amino acids of nod also are dispensable for
binding of nod to chromosomes. In contrast, the pCN1 frag-
ment which possesses residues 330-522, but lacks amino ac-
ids 522 to 666, did not display chromosome-binding activity.
Taken together, these results show that the minimal
chromosome-binding region of nod is located between
amino acid 513 to 594, since this portion of the protein is
necessary for localization of nod to chromosomes. As shown
in Fig. 5 A, this region exactly brackets the three HMG 14/
17-like putative DNA-binding domains. This finding pin-
points the significance of the sequence homology between
this region and the DNA-binding domain of HMG 14/17
proteins.
Discussion
Here we show both that the tail of nod protein binds to chro-
mosomes in vivo, and that the tail is required to localize
the full-length nod protein to chromosomes since the puta-
tive motor domain alone simply binds to microtubules
throughout the cell. These studies confirm the importance
of the COOH-terminal domain of nod for its chromosomal
localization and are consistent with our previous finding
that the nod COOH-terminal domain binds to AT-rich se-
quences of cloned satellite DNA in vitro, under conditions
where the NH2-terminal domain did not (Afshar et al.,
1995). Moreover, we have also mapped the minimal DNA
localization domain of nod (residues 522-594) to an 82-
amino acid sequence that encompasses the three sequences
homologous to the DNA-binding domain of the HMG 14/17
proteins.
We observed that a nod construct lacking this 82-amino
acid sequence did not localize to chromosomes, whereas
constructs containing this region but lacking any flanking
residues on their carboxyl or amino-terminal ends (Fig. 5)
were capable of localizing to chromosomes just as well as
the full-length nod tail. This is consistent with data show-
ing that the homologous region of HMG 14/17 proteins
also physically interacts with DNA (Abercrombie et al.,
1978; Cary et al., 1980; Crippa et al., 1992). The simplest
TheJournalofCellBiology,Volume131,1995 840
A
Truncated Proteins From the C-terminal Domain of nod
pCN1
pCN2
pCN3
pCN4
B
330
1
330
I
460
I
Chromosome
Binding
522
Mr--26.9 kD
I
594 Mr=30 kD 4-
666
r~'~ "~'~ I Mr=20 kO +
513 666
I~.%~.'v~ I Mr=14.8 kD +
46K
30K
21K~
14K
1 2 3 4
efficient binding of chromokinesin to DNA in vitro. DNA
binding of the Xklpl protein is thought to be mediated by
a cysteine-rich domain similar to that found in zinc-finger
type transcription factors (although there is no direct evi-
dence for interaction of this region with DNA). This ob-
servation suggests that there are multiple evolutionary
paths by which motors may have become appended to
DNA and that these differences may have functional sig-
nificance in terms of when and where these motors be-
come localized to their chromosomal cargo.
In the absence of such a chromosome localization domain,
one might expect chromosomal motors to be localized only
by their microtubule-binding domains, and thus promiscu-
ously attach to microtubule-containing structures through-
out the cell. Indeed, our results show that in the absence of
the cargo-binding domain, the nod motor domain associ-
ates with microtubules throughout the cytoplasm.
The proper association of the nod protein with meiotic
chromosomal DNA is crucial for the correct positioning
and control of movement of the nonexchange chromosomes
on meiotic spindles. In the absence of functional nod, achi-
asmate chromosomes are ejected from the mass of the kary-
osome usually resulting in chromosomal loss. Thus, nod
protein associated with the chromosome arms may act as a
component of the "polar ejection force" which opposes the
poleward directed force on chromosomes. In the absence
of nod function therefore achaismate chromosomes move
precociously toward the spindle pole (for reviews see
Hawley and Theurkauf, 1993; Fuller, 1995).
Figure5. Expression of COOH-terminal fragments of nod and
mapping of the chromosome localization domain of nod. (A) Di-
agram of protein fragments derived from the COOH-terminal
domain of nod, with numbers indicating residue position in the
nod protein. Amino acid 330 marks the motor domain-tail bound-
ary within the 666-residue nod polypeptide. The hatched box de-
picts the region of the nod protein that contains three repeated
sequences related to the DNA-binding domain of the HMG 14/
17 proteins. All the protein fragments are tagged with the flag-
epitope at their amino terminal end. Chromosome-binding activ-
ity of these fusion proteins was assayed by immunofluorescence
and the results are summarized on the right. (B) Detection of
COOH-terminal nod fragments in transformed embryos by im-
munoblotting. Lanes 1--4,protein extracts from embryos express-
ing pCN2, pCN1, pCN3, and pCN4, respectively. Note that the
pCN1 protein is highly expressed in embryos, but it cannot be de-
tected on chromosomes by immunofluorescence (not shown).
interpretation of these results is that the region corre-
sponding to residues 522-594 of the nod polypeptide is
necessary for binding of nod to chromosomal DNA although
we cannot rule out the possibility that flanking sequences
might also play some accessory role in mediating interac-
tions between the nod protein and the chromosomes.
Curiously each of the three chromosomal kinesins (nod,
Chromokinesin, and Xklpl) possesses a different DNA-
binding domain (Afshar et al., 1995; Vernos et al., 1995;
Wang and Alder, 1995). As noted above, nod contains
three copies homologous to the DNA-binding domain of
the HMG 14/17 proteins. Chromokinesin contains a basic-
leucine zipper DNA-binding domain that is required for
Functional Domains of Nod
Based both on sequence homologies (Zhang et al., 1990)
and on the expression studies reported here, we conclude
that residues 1-320 comprise the microtubule-binding do-
main of nod. This observation is also consistent with ge-
netic studies of a dominant, potentially "rigor-binding,"
mutant of nod (nodDrw) and three of its missense in-
tragenic revertants (Rasooly et al., 1991, 1994). The nodrw
mutation results in a single amino acid change in the puta-
tive ATP-binding domain. Two of the revertants, which be-
have as loss-of-function nod alleles, map within the puta-
tive microtubule-binding domain, while the third lies in
the conserved region between the putative ATP- and mi-
crotubule-binding domains. The phenotypic analysis of these
mutations strongly suggests that amino acid substitutions
in the NH2-terminal half of the nod protein alter the abil-
ity of nod to bind microtubules.
The function of the portion of the nod protein between
residues 330 and 512 is unknown, but it may serve as a
linker between the motor domain and the cargo-binding
domain of nod, as a site of interaction with other mole-
cules, or for proper folding or structural integrity of the
protein. None of the existing point mutants in the nod
gene map within this region, and thus there is no basis on
which to assign it a function.
As noted above, the region between 512 and 594 is nec-
essary for DNA binding and thus comprises the cargo
(DNA)-binding domain of nod. We also note that the ex-
ons encoding the putative DNA-binding domain of nod
are repeated three times within a 5-kb sequence at the 3'
end of the nod gene (Rasooly et al., 1994). Although only
Afshar et al. Nod Chromosome Localization Domain 841
the first of these repeats is used by the nod gene, prelimi-
nary studies suggest that the next two repeats are part of
another gene with an exon located some 20 kb upstream of
the beginning of the nod gene (i.e., nod lies within the in-
tron of this gene) (Afshar, K., and R. S. Hawley, unpub-
lished data). This observation suggests that there may be a
second protein which also carries a DNA-binding domain
virtually identical to that borne by nod.
The function of the last 70 amino acids of nod is also un-
known. We show here that this region is not essential for
the binding of nod to chromosomes. However, previous
work has shown that two alleles of nod, noda and nodbl,
carry mutations that affect this portion of the protein and
give rise to chromosome loss and nondisjunction (Zhang
and Hawley, 1990; Rasooly et al., 1994). Therefore, this re-
gion does contain important information for the function
of nod. Further structure-function analysis of the nod pro-
tein will be important for better defining the role of this
region in nod function,
Is There a Mitotic Function for the Nod Protein?
In situ hybridization studies demonstrate that the nod tran-
script is present in most, if not all, populations of dividing
mitotic cells (Zhang et al., 1990). The mitotic phenotype of
the nodDrw mutation also provides evidence for a role of
the nod protein in mitosis as well as in meiosis. This muta-
tion exhibits a cold-sensitive lethality due to frequent chro-
mosome breakage and loss during mitosis (Hawley et al.,
1993).
Hemizygous nodrW/y males (or nodOrW/nodDrW fe-
males) die when raised at 16C, regardless of whether they
received the nodDTw mutation from their father or their
mother and thus the observed mitotic phenotypes are not
simply due to perdurance of the maternal meiotic product
(Rasooly et al., 1991). Given that the transcription pattern
of nodrw females is identical to that of nod +females (Ra-
sooly et al., 1991), these genetic studies strongly argue that
the nod locus is expressed in mitotic cells.
Despite this evidence for mitotic expression of nod, we
were unable to detect nod protein in embryonic mitotic cells
from either wild-type or nodrw embryos, using the same
antibody that readily detects nod protein on meiotic chro-
mosomes (Afshar, K., and R. S. Hawley, unpublished
data). One explanation for this conundrum is the possibil-
ity that the nod protein is present in mitotic ceils in a only
a very low concentration, perhaps because levels similar to
those observed in meiotic cells might be harmful to the cell.
In support of this hypothesis, we note that the overex-
pression of the full-length nod protein causes high levels of
spindle abnormalities, whereas spindle morphology in em-
bryos containing overexpressed NH2-terminal or COOH-
terminal fragments of nod is normal. These results suggest
that it may be necessary to maintain the concentration of
nod at a low level. Perhaps the binding of large amounts of
nod protein to mitotic chromosomes sterically hinders
chromosome binding by other proteins that are important
for mitotic spindle assembly. For example, inhibition of
function of the chromosomal kinesin, Xklpl is reported to
interfere with spindle morphology in vitro (Vernos et al.,
1995). Thus, one might imagine that the full-length nod
protein could interfere with the chromosomal localization
and function of an Xklpl homologue in Drosophila mi-
totic cells, thereby causing the observed spindle abnormal-
ities. Alternatively, the overexpressed full-length nod pro-
tein may provide an excess of plus end-directed force
which interferes with the balance of motor forces that are
necessary for spindle assembly. For example, we note that
spindles with abnormal morphology can result from deple-
tion of the normal activity of plus end--directed motors
such as KLP61F or minus end-directed motors such as dy-
nein (Heck et al., 1993; Vaisberg et al., 1993). In this con-
text, it should be noted that determining the polarity of
nod driven motility is an important problem that remains
to be solved.
Common Problem for Kinesin Targeting
In addition to the nod kinesin-like protein which associ-
ates with chromosomes (Afshar et al., 1995), several mem-
bers of the kinesin super-family have been localized to dif-
ferent components of meiotic or mitotic spindles, such as
microtubules, spindle vesicles, chromosomes, and spindle
poles (Sawin et al., 1992a,b, 1995; Houliston et al., 1994;
Wright et al., 1991; Henson et al., 1995; Vernos et al., 1995;
Wang and Alder, 1995; Hogan et al., 1993; Hagan and
Yanagida, 1992; Yen et al., 1992; Nislow et al., 1992). How
all these kinesins are targeted to different sites within the
spindle is not understood. We do not know, for example, if
cargo-localization is a property of the kinesin-like polypep-
tides themselves or whether accessory proteins are also re-
quired for cargo binding.
Our study suggests that cargo localization is a property
of a discrete sub-region of the nonmotor region of the nod
kinesin-like polypeptide itself. Similarly, a discrete region
of the conventional kinesin has also been shown to play a
crucial role in attachment to membranes at least in vitro
(Skoufias et al., 1994). These results suggest that such dis-
tinct "cargo-localization" domains may be a general fea-
ture of the nonmotor "tail" regions of those kinesins that
function like nod, by cross-linking microtubules to a non-
microtubular cargo.
However, it may not be possible to generalize our result
to all kinesins. In a recent study, Sawin and Mitchison
(1995) observed that the COOH-terminal tail of the Eg5
kinesin-like polypeptide was needed for spindle localiza-
tion but did not localize to spindles when ectopically ex-
pressed in cultured cells without an intact NHe terminus,
leading to the conclusion that the COOH-terminal tail of
Eg5 does not have any distinct "spindle localization" sig-
nal. These results might reflect the fact that Eg5 and its
close relatives must oligomerize via head-tail interactions
into higher order structures, in order to associate with spin-
dle microtubules and cross-link them (Cole et al., 1994;
Sawin and Mitchison, 1995).
In summary our data allow us to describe the nod protein
simply as a motor-like domain appended to a DNA-bind-
ing domain. While this picture improves our understand-
ing about the linkage between the track (microtubules)
and the cargo (chromosomes), it does not explain the man-
ner in which nod-dependent chromosome movement is
regulated. We imagine that a number of other proteins
serve to regulate the activity of the nod motor-like domain
and to control the expression of the nod gene. The identifi-
The Journal of Cell Biology, Volume 131, 1995 842
cation of these proteins will require biochemical assays for
proteins that physically interact with nod, and genetic
screens for mutations that enhance or suppress existing
nod alleles. Such efforts are currently underway in our lab-
oratories.
We are grateful to members of the Hawley and Scholey labs for advice
and encouragement. We especially thank Drs. Tamar Arbel, Ken Burtis,
Kim McKim, Jeff Sekelsky and Frank McNally for a critical reading of the
manuscript, and Janet Jang and Trish Wilson for technical assistance. We
also thank Drs. Bill Brizzard and John Henson for kindly providing the
anti-flag and anti-tubulin antibodies.
This work was supported by a University of California at Davis collab-
orative research grant to R. S. Hawley and J. M. Scholey, a grant from Na-
tional Science Foundation to R. S. Hawley, and by an American Cancer
Society grant to J. M. Scholey.
Received for publication 23 June 1995 and in revised form 28 July 1995.
References
Abercrombie, B. D., G. G. Kneale, E. M. Bradbury, G. H. Goodwin, J. M.
Walker, and E. W. Johns. 1978. Studies on the conformational properties of
high mobility group chromosomal protein HMG 17 and its interaction with
DNA. Eur. J. Biochem. 84:173-177.
Afshar, K., N. R. Barton, R. S. Hawley, and L. S. B. Goldstein. 1995. DNA
binding and meiotic chromosomal localization of the Drosophila nod kine-
sin-like protein. Cell. 81:129-138.
Bloom, G. S., and S. A. Endow. 1994. Motor proteins I: kinesins. In Protein
Profiles. Vol. 1. P. Sheterline, editor. Academic Press, London. 1066--1116.
Bustin, M., D. Lehn, and D. Landsman. 1990. Structural features of the HMG
chromosomal proteins and their genes. Biochern. Biophys. Acta. 1049:231-
243.
Carpenter, A. T. C. 1973. A meiotic mutant defective in distributive disjunction
in Drosophila rnelanogaster. Genetics. 73:393-428.
Cary, P. D., D. S. King, C. Crane-Robinson, E. M. Bradbury, G. H. Rabbani, G. H.
Goodwin, and E. W. Johns. 1980. Structural studies on two high mobility
group proteins from calf thymus, HMG 14 and ubiquitin, and their interac-
tion with DNA. Eur. J. Biochern. 112:577-588.
Cole, D. G., and J. M. Scholey. 1995. Structural variations amongst kinesins.
Trends Cell Biol. 5:259-262.
Cole, D. G., W. M. Saxton, K. B. Sheehan, and J. M. Scholey. 1994. A slow ho-
motetrameric kinesin-related motor protein purified from Drosophila em-
bryos. J. Biol. Chem. 269:22913-22916.
Crippa, M. P., P. J. Alfonso, and M. Bustin. 1992. Nucleosome core binding re-
gion of chromosomal protein HMG-17 acts as an independent functional do-
main. J. MoL BioL 228:442-449.
Foe, V. E. 1989. Mitotic domains reveal early commitment of cells in Drosophila
embryos. Development. 107:1-22.
Fuller, M. T. 1995. Riding the polar winds: chromosomes motor down east. Cell,
81:5-8.
Goldstein, L. S. B. 1993. With apologies to Scheherazade: tails of 1001 kinesin
motors. Annu. Rev. Genet. 27:319-351.
Hawley, R. S., and W. Theurkauf. 1993. Requiem for distributive segregation:
achiasmate segregation in Drosophila melanogaster. Trends Genet. 9:310-
317.
Hawley, R. S., K. S. McKim, and T. Arbel. 1993. Meiotic segregationin Drosophila
rnelanogaster females: molecules, mechanisms, and myths. Annu. Rev. Genet.
27:281-317.
Heck, M. M., A. Pereira, P. Pesavento, Y. Yannoni, A. C. Spradling, and L. S.
Goldstein. 1993. The kinesin like protein KLP61F is essential for mitosis in
Drosophila. J. Cell Biol. 123:665-679.
Henson, J., D. G. Cole, M. Terasaki, D. Rashid, and J. M. Scholey. 1995. Immu-
nolocalization of the heterotrimeric kinesin, KRP 85/95 in mitotic spindle of
sea urchin embryos. Dev. Biol. 171:182-194.
Hagan, I., and M. Yanagida. 1992. Kinesin related cut7 protein associates with
mitotic and meiotic spindles in fission yeast. Nature (Lond.). 356:74--76.
Hogan, C. J., H. Wein, L. Wordeman, J. M. Scholey, K. E. Sawin, and W. Z.
Cande. 1993. Inhibition of anaphase spindle elongation in vitro by a peptide
antibody that recognizes kinesin motor domain. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA.
90:6611-6615.
Houliston, E., R. Leguellec, M. Kress, N. Philippe, and K. Leguellec. 1994. The
kinesin related protein Eg5 associates with both interphase and spindle mi-
crotubules during Xenopus early development. Dev. Biol. 164:147-159.
Johns, E. W. 1985. History, definitions and problems. In The HMG Chromo-
somal Proteins. E. W. Johns, editor. Academic Press, New York. pp. 1-7.
Murphy, T. D., and G. H. Karpen. 1995. Interaction between nod+ kinesin-like
gene and extracentromeric sequences are required for transmission of a
Drosophila minichromosome. Cell. 81:13%148.
Nislow, C., V. A. Lombillo, R. Kuriyame, and J. R. Mclntosh. 1992. A plus end-
directed motor enzyme that moves antiparallel microtubules in vitro local-
izes to the interzone of mitotic spindles. Nature (Lond.). 359:543-547.
Rasooly, R. S., C. M. New, P. Zhang, R. S. Hawley, and B. S. Baker. 1991. The
lethal(I) TW-6~smutation of Drosophila melanogaster is a dominant antimor-
phic allele of nod and is associated with a single base change in the putative
ATP-binding domain. Genetics. 129:409-422.
Rasooly, R. S., P. Zhang, A. K. Tibolla, and R. S. Hawley. 1994. A structure-
function analysis of nod, a kinesin-like protein from Drosophila rnelano-
gaster. MoL Gen. Genet. 242:145-151.
Rubin, G. M., and A. C. Spradling. 1982. Genetic transformation of Drosophila
with transposable element vectors. Science (Wash. DC). 218:348-353.
Sambrook, J., E. F. Fritsch, and T. Maniatis. 1989. Molecular Cloning. A Labo-
ratory Manual. Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press, New York. pp. 18.64-
18.66.
Sawin, K. E., and T. J. Mitchison. 1995. Mutations in the kinesin-like protein
Eg5 disrupting localization to mitotic spindle. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA. 92:
4289-4293.
Sawin, K. E., T. J. Mitchison, and L. J. Wordeman. 1992a. Evidence for kinesin-
related proteins in mitotic apparatus using peptide antibodies. J. Cell Sci.
101:303-313.
Sawin, K. E., M. Leguellec, M. Philippe, and T. J. Mitchison. 1992b. Mitotic
spindle organization by a plus-end-directed microtubule motor. Nature
(Lond.). 359:540--543.
Skoufias, D. A., D. G. Cole, K. P.Wedaman, and J. M. Scholey. 1994. The car-
boxy-terminal domain of kinesin heavy chain is important for membrane
binding. J. Biol, Chem. 269:1477-1485.
Theurkauf, W. E., and R. S. Hawley. 1992. Meiotic spindle assembly in Drosophila
females: behavior of nonexchange chromosomes and the effects of mutations
in the nod kinesin-likeprotein. J. Cell Biol. 116:1167-1180.
Vaisberg, E. A., M. P. Koonce, and J. R. Mclntosh. 1993. Cytoplasmic dynein
plays a role in mammalian spindle formation. J. Cell Biol. 123:849-858.
Vale, R. D., and L. S. B. Goldstein. 1990. One motor many tails. Cell. 60:883~85.
Vernos, I., T. Raats, T. Hirano, J. Heasman, E. Karsenti, and C. Wylie. 1995.
Xklpl, a chromosomal Xenopus kinesin-likeprotein essential for spindle or-
ganization and chromosome positioning. Cell. 81:119-128.
Wang, S. Z., and R. Adler. 1995. Chromokinesin: a DNA-binding, kinesin-like
nuclear protein. J. Cell Biol. 128:761-768.
Wright, B. D., J. H. Henson, K. P. Wedaman, P. J. Willy, J. N. Morand, and J. M.
Scholey. 1991. Subcellular localization and sequence of sea urchin kinesin
heavy chain: evidence for its association with membranes in the mitotic ap-
paratus and interphase cytoplasm. J. Cell Biol, 113:817-833.
Yen, T. J., G. Li, B. T. Schaar, I. Szilak, and D. W. Cleveland. 1992. CENP-E is
a putative kinetochore motor that accumulates just before mitosis. Nature
(Lond.). 359:536--539.
Zhang, P., and R. S. Hawley. 1990. The genetic analysis of distributive segrega-
tion in Drosophila melanogaster. II. Further genetic analysis of the nod lo-
cus. Genetics. 125:115-127.
Zhang, P., B. A. Knowles, L. S. B. Goldstein, and R. S. Hawley. 1990. A kine-
sin-like protein required for distributive chromosome segregation in Dro-
sophila. Cell. 62:1053-1062.
Zimmerman, J. L., W. Petri, and M. Meselson. 1983. Accumulation of a specific
subset of D. melanogaster heat shock mRNA in normal development with-
out heat shock. Cell. 32:1161-1170.
Afshar et al. Nod Chromosome Localization Domain 843