3815pheelsevierInternational Journal of Antimicrobial AgentsInt J Antimicrob AgentsPMC7126403712640371264031205120010.1016/S0924-8579(02)00033-XECC-4 Abstracts
164200219S1S1–S105842020© 2000 Since January 2020 Elsevier has created a COVID-19 resource centre with free information in English and Mandarin on the novel coronavirus COVID-19. The COVID-19 resource centre is hosted on Elsevier Connect, the company's public news and information website. Elsevier hereby grants permission to make all its COVID-19-related research that is available on the COVID-19 resource centre - including this research content - immediately available in PubMed Central and other publicly funded repositories, such as the WHO COVID database with rights for unrestricted research re-use and analyses in any form or by any means with acknowledgement of the original source. These permissions are granted for free by Elsevier for as long as the COVID-19 resource centre remains active.statusreleaseddisplay-pdfyesis-in-collection-domainyesis-olfnois-manuscriptnois-preprintnois-journal-matternois-scannednois-retractednoIssue date 2002 May.

Brief oral abstracts
 
Following state-of-the-art lectures
 
The effect of chlortracycline treatment on enteric bacteria in pigs
 
SoA1.3
 Delsol AAa, Anjum Mb, Cooles Sb, Woodward MJb, Roe JMa
a
Department of Clinical Veterinary Science, University of Bristol, Langford, UK, b
Department of Bacterial Diseases, Veterinary Laboratories Agency, New Haw, Addlestone, UK
 

Purpose: There are concerns within the medical profession that antimicrobial agents used in livestock production contribute to the increased antibiotic resistance observed in zoonotic bacterial pathogens. To minimise this risk, evidence-based control strategies need to be implemented. We investigated the effect of chlortetracycline treatment on a tetracycline resistant population of Salmonella
typhimurium DT104 and the commensal Escherichia coli population in pigs.

Results: Our results show that pigs treated with chlortetracycline consistently shed higher numbers of resistant S. typhimurium DT104 than untreated pigs for up to 6 weeks post-treatment. We also identified a 30% increase in E. coli with a chlortetracycline MIC>16 mg/l and a 10% increase in E. coli with an MIC>50 mg/l. These effects persisted for up to 2 weeks post-treatment. The tetracycline resistance gene was characterised by gene probing and PCR. The level of chlortetracycline in the pig faeces, as measured by HPLC, fell below our detection limit 5 days after treatment.

Conclusion: This study provides direct evidence that oral administration of chlortetracycline to pigs significantly increases the proportion of resistant enteric bacteria, and this shift in resistance outlasts any residual chlortetracycline in the pig faeces. 
 
Analysis of
Helicobacter pylori
resistance to antimicrobial agents in Polish children
 
SoA4.2
 Dzierzanowska-Fangrat Ka, Rozynek Eb, Celinska-Cedro Dc, Jozwiak Pa, Madalinski Ka, Dzierzanowska Db. a
Children's Memorial Health Institute, Clinical Immunology, Warsaw, Poland, b
Children's Memorial Health Institute, Clinical Microbiology, Warsaw, Poland, c
Children's Memorial Health Institute, Gastroenterology, Warsaw, Poland
 

Background:
Helicobacter pylori resistance to antimicrobial agents is an important factor compromising the efficacy of therapy. Since initial treatment for H. pylori infection is often empirical, therefore it is very important to monitor the local resistance pattern. Objectives: The aims of our study were: to determine the prevalence of H. pylori resistance to clarithromycin, metronidazole and amoxycillin in children prior to eradication therapy, and to detect mutations responsible for clarithromycin resistance. Material and methods: During 2000–2001, 57 H. pylori strains were isolated from gastric biopsies. Susceptibility to antimicrobials was determined by the E-test. Mutations in the 23S rRNA gene associated with clarithromycin resistance were analysed by PCR-RFLP and direct sequencing. Results: Overall, 24 strains (42%) were resistant to metronidazole, 25 strains (44%) were resistant to clarithromycin, and 14 strains (25%) were simultaneously resistant to both drugs. All cultured isolates were sensitive to amoxicillin. Primary resistance to clarithromycin was mainly associated with an A2143G mutation in the 23S rRNA gene of H. pylori. However, isolates containing an A2142G mutation had higher MICs of clarithromycin. Conclusion: Our results show the high prevalence of H. pylori resistance to clarithromycin in Polish children, which implies a need for pretreatment susceptibility testing. 
 
23S rRNA genotype in
Helicobacter pylori
strains resistant to clarithromycin in children
 
SoA4.3
 Alarcon T, Vega AE, Domingo D, Lopez-Brea M. H.U. la Princesa, Microbiology, Madrid, Spain
 

Objectives: To study the primary resistance to clarithromycin (CLA) in children, to analyse the point mutations associated with CLA resistance and to compare these data with the resistance obtained from adults.

Methods: Thirty-six resistant strains from children and 30 from adults were obtained from gastric biopsies. In vitro susceptibility to CLA was determined by an agar dilution method. DNA from the isolates was extracted by the Ge and Taylor method. A2142G and A2143G mutations were determined by PCR-RFLP (Versalovic, 1996). A 1.4 kpb of the 23S rRNA gene was amplified and digested with BsaI or MboII.

Results: The MICs obtained from children strains were: five with MIC 1.5–2 mg/l; four with MIC 4 mg/l; nine with MIC 8 mg/l; nine with MIC 16 mg/l; six with MIC 32 mg/l and three with MIC 64 mg/l and the MICs obtained from adults were: 12 with MIC 8 mg/l; eight with MIC 16 mg/l; seven with MIC 32 mg/l and three with MIC 64 mg/l. The A–G transition mutation at position 2143 was higher in children (80.55%) that in adult patients (46.66%) (P<0.05); while at position 2142 was higher in adults than in children, 36.66 vs 5.55% (P<0.05).

Conclusion: The prevalence of the A2143G>A2142G mutation in H. pylori population of children showed significant statistical differences respecting to H. pylori isolates of adult patients. A higher level of resistance (16–64 mg/l) in children was observed when A–G mutation in 2143 was detected. However, in adult patient higher MICs were observed when mutation in 2142 (A–G) was detected. 
 
Contribution of
rdxA
and
frxA
mutations to metronidazole resistance in
Helicobacter pylori
: an examination of multiple-isolate patient sets SoA4.4
 Chisholm SA, Owen RJ. Central Public Health Laboratory, Laboratory of Enteric Pathogens, London, UK
 

Purpose: Mutations in rdxA and frxA genes, encoding NADPH nitroreductase and NADPH flavin oxidoreductase, respectively, reportedly lead to metronidazole (Mtz) resistance in Helicobacter pylori. As no single mutation type has been identified that directly correlates with resistance acquisition, we examined rdxA and frxA in paired Mtz sensitive (S) and resistant (R) isolates and in mixed Mtz-S/R strain populations. Isolates from nine dyspeptic patients that had different Mtz susceptibilities (S and R) before and after therapy and mixed Mtz-S/R subpopulations that were separated were tested. Both rdxA and frxA from each isolate population was sequenced. Results: Several different mutations were identified in rdxA, but rarely in frxA, of Mtz-R strains (post-treatment) that were absent in matched Mtz-S strains (pre-treatment). In contrast, sequences from pre-treatment Mtz-R sub-populations were identical to Mtz-S strains in 5/9 cases for rdxA and in 8/9 cases for frxA. Conclusions: Data suggest mutations in rdxA were not always essential for acquisition of Mtz resistance. Observed mutations in the post-treatment Mtz-R isolates may therefore be coincidental and not contributing to the Mtz-R phenotype. For most strains, frxA mutations were not a factor in Mtz resistance of these isolates. Other mechanisms therefore may contribute to Mtz resistance in H. pylori. 
 
Accuracy of 23S ribosomal RNA gene mutation analysis for predicting high level clarithromycin resistance in
Helicobacter pylori
in the United Kingdom
 
SoA4.5
 Elviss NC, Owen RJ. Central Public Health Labortory, Laboratory of Enteric Pathogens, London, UK
 

Pre-treatment resistance of Helicobacter pylori to clarithromycin (CLA) and metronidazole (MTZ) is a key factor in eradication therapy failure. Adenine (A) to guanine (G) or A to cytosine (C) mutations at nucleotide 2142, or A to G at 2143 in the 23S rDNA confer in vitro CLA resistance. Our aims were to determine if mutation type and high level CLA resistance was linked and to test for cross-associations with high level MTZ resistance. One thousand one hundred and fifty-one UK isolates from routine endoscopies were tested for susceptibility to CLA and MTZ using E-test. PCR-RFLP identified rDNA mutations in the 92 CLA resistant isolates using MboII and BsaI, respectively for the A2142G and A2143G mutations, and by PCR assay for the A2142C mutation. Mutation frequency was: A2142G, 22.8%; A2143G, 63.0%; and A2142C, 3.3%. In addition, 3.3% were heterozygous for A2142G and A2143G. No mutation was detected in 7.6% of resistant strains (confirmed by sequencing). High level CLA resistance (MIC >256 μg/ml) occurred in 43.3% strains representing 17/21 A2142G mutations. Fifty-six isolates were both CLA and MTZ resistant, of these 30 strains had high level CLA resistance and 27 high level MTZ resistance. No single mutation predominated in dual resistant strains. Our findings indicate that an A2142G mutation predicts a 81.4% likelihood of high level CLA resistance. Our mutation assays provide a specific basis to obtain CLA resistance data for treatment and surveillance. 
 
Real-time PCR detection of 23S rDNA mutations conferring clarithromycin resistance in
Helicobacter pylori
using the Roche LightCycler
 
SoA4.6
 Lawson AJ, Elviss NC, Owen RJ. Central Public Health Laboratory, Laboratory of Enteric Pathogens, London, UK
 

Helicobacter pylori colonizes the gastric mucosa of ∼50% of the worlds human population. In a significant subgroup of infected hosts, H. pylori is associated with the aetiology of a number of gastric diseases, most notably gastric and duodenal ulceration. The macrolide antibiotic clarithromycin is a key component of many combination therapies used to eradicate H. pylori infection. However, resistance to clarithromycin is an important cause of treatment failure. Clarithromycin resistance is associated with mutations in 23S rRNA nucleotides 2142 and 2143 that inhibit the binding of the drug to the ribosome. A rapid, real-time PCR assay for the detection of 23S rDNA mutations conferring clarithromycin resistance was developed using the Roche LightCycler. The assay utilized a pair of biprobes, one specific for the A2142G mutation and one for the wild type sequence (A2142C and A2143G mutations were detected by characteristic reduction in biprobe Tm). The PCR assay was applied to DNA extracted from 150 selected H. pylori isolates from UK patients and identified the 23S rDNA as wild type (45), A2142G (17), A2142C (3), A2143G (70) and heterozygous (15). These results correlated (95%) with those obtained by disk diffusion sensitivity testing and PCR-RFLP based methodologies. The LightCycler assay was successfully applied to DNA extracted from 20 gastric biopsy samples, thus offering the potential to inform patient management without the necessity of culture. 
 
Efficacy and tolerability of different triple macrolide-containing anti-
Helicobacter pylori
treatment regimens in children
 
SoA4.7
 Gratsianskaya ANa, Belousov YBa, Safonov ABb, Semin SGb, Semina SVb, Tatarinov PAa. a
Russian State Medical University, Clinical Pharmacology, Moskva, Russian Federation, b
Russian State Medical University, Children Diseases, Moskva, Russian Federation
 

Purpose of this open, non-randomized study was to compare efficacy and tolerability of five triple macrolide-containing anti-Helicobacter pylori treatment regimens in children with upper gastrointestinal tract disorders. Methods: Eighty-one patients aged from 9 to 15 years with endoscopically confirmed H. pylori-associated (by urease test and PCR) upper gastrointestinal tract disorders were divided into five comparable groups treated with: roxithromycin, metronidazole, omeprazole—RMO-group (15); clarithromycin, metronidazole, omeprazole—CMO-group (18); azithromycin, amoxicillin, omeprazole—AAmO3-group (15); azithromycin, furazolidone, omeprazole—AFO-group (16); azitromycin, amoxicillin, omeprazole—AAmO7-group (17). RMO, CMO, AFO regimens were 7 days long; AAmO3—3 days long; AAmO7—7 days long, but azythromycin was given during first 3 days only. Results: In 6 weeks after completion of treatment H. pylori eradication (by urease test and PCR) was achieved in 60 (9/15), 94.4 (17/18), 46.7 (7/15), 75 (12/16) and 88.2% (15/17) in groups RMO, CMO, AAmO3, AFO, AAmO7, respectively. Mild gastrointestinal side effects were recorded in 6.7 (1/15), 11.1 (2/18), 12.5 (2/16), 13.3 (2/15), 17.6% (3/17), in groups RMO, CMO, AAmO3, AFO, AAmO7, respectively without significant difference between groups (P>0.05) and with no treatment discontinuation. Conclusion: CMO, AFO and AAmO7 regimens are well-tolerated and more effective (without significant difference between them, P>0.05). 
 
Helicobacter pylori
culture and histological susceptibility from pediatric patients with gastrointestinal tract disorders
 
SoA4.8
 Alabaz Da, Yýlmaz HLa, Tuncer Rb, Kocabaþ Ea, Uguz Ac, Alhan Ea, Aksaray Na. a
Department of Pediatric Infection, University of Cukurova, Adana, Turkey, b
Department of Pediatric Surgery, University of Cukurova, Adana, Turkey, c
Department of Patology, University of Cukurova, Adana, Turkey
 

Helicobacter pylori (Hp), that effects half of the population, is known to be an etiological agent of chronic gastritis and peptic ulcer disease. Childhood appears to be a high risk period for H. pylori infection.
The children included to the study had admitted to the hospital with upper gastrointestinal tract disorders. All underwent biopsies for histology, while undergoing an upper gastrointestinal endoscopy and also detected for H. pylori antigens in stools (HpSA) and anti-Hp anticors in blood using serology.
Nineteen children (aged between 1.5 and 5 years) were included in the study. The application symptoms in the children were recurrent abdominal pain (100%), nausea-vomiting (84.2%), anorexia (94.7%), weight lose (94.7%), regurgitation (21%), dyspepsia (73.6%), GIS bleeding (2%) and anemia (68.4%).
The diagnosis were chronic gastritis in nine, duodenitis in four and both gastritis and duodenitis in six patients. Sixteen patients were Hp-positive in the stool test and 11 patients had evidence of H. pylori seropositivity.
Based on these results, the Hp stool test has a sensitivity of 96%. The HpSA is a non-invasive test that can be easily performed in all routine laboratories and can be used in epidemiological studies. 
 
Clinical significance of
Helicobacter pylori
detection in gastric juice by polimerase chain reaction in children
 
SoA4.9
 Semin SGa, Gratsianskaya ANb, Semina SVa, Scherbakov PLa, Schipulin GAa, Belousov YBb, Safonov ABb, Filin VAa. a
Russian State Medical University, Children Diseases, Moskva, Russian Federation, b
Russian State Medical University, Clinical Pharmacology, Moskva, Russian Federation
 

Purpose of the study was to evaluate clinical significance of Helicobacter pylori detection in gastric juice by polimerase chain reaction (PCR) in children with upper gastrointestinal tract disorders.

Methods: Two groups of patients aged from 9 to 15 years (mean age 13.5 years) were included. I Group—20 children with chronic gastritis before anti-H. pylori treatment. II Group—20 children in 6 weeks after the end of anti-H. pylori treatment. During endoscopy performed to all children, gastric juice and antral biopsy (I group) or gastric juice, antral and fundal biopsies (II group) for PCR were taken.

Results: In I group H. pylori presence in gastric juice was obtained in 80% (16/20) patients and in antral biopsy specimens—in 18/20 (90%) patients; in II group H. pylori presence in gastric juice and in antral biopsy specimens was not obtained (0/20), but in fundal biopsy specimens H. pylori presence was obtained in 4/20 (20%) patients.

Conclusion: There was no significant difference in PCR susceptibility in gastric juice and in antral biopsies (P>0.05). Thus, gastric juice, which extraction is less traumatic, then biopsy, may be used for H. pylori detection, but not for eradication control in children. 
 
Leucocytes in
Helicobacter pylori
infections
 
SoA4.10
 Ozyilkan Ea, Yilmaz ASb, Sezer Sc, Akbulut Sc, Ustun Hd. a
Ankara State Hospital, Gastroenterology, Ankara, Turkey, b
Ankara State Hospital, Hermatology, Ankara, Turkey, c
Ankara State Hospital, Internist, Ankara, Turkey, d
Ankara State Hospital, Phatology, Ankara, Turkey
 

Helicobacter pylori (H. pylori) has generally been accepted as a pathogen in gastritis, peptic ulcer, gastric cancer and mucosa associated lymphoid tissue lymphoma. The aim of this study was to evaluate the relation between H. pylori infection and white blood cell (WBC) counts and leucocyte subgroups.
A total of 81 subjects (52 female and 29 male) with dyspepsia were evaluated by upper gastrointestinal system endoscopy (CH-2 Olympus). Histopathological assessment for H. pylori was conducted using biopsy samples from antrum and corpus. Biopsy specimens were also evaluated for local neutrophil and mononuclear cell infiltrations. WBC count was analysed by Coulter GEN System. Peripheral blood smears were stained by May Grünwald and examined by an experienced haematologist.

H. pylori infection was detected in 67 subjects. There was no significant difference in age, sex, and smoking habits between H. pylori positive and negative patients (P>0.05). We did not find difference in total WBC counts, neutrophil, monocyte, lymphocyte, and basophil counts between H. pylori positive and negative cases (P>0.05). Peripheral blood eosinophil counts were significantly increased in H. pylori negative subjects compared to positive subjects (P<0.01). Superficial and lamina propria neutrophil grades, intraepithelial lymphocyte grades, and lamina propria eosinophil grades in antral biopsy specimens were found increased in H. pylori positive patients compared to negatives (P<0.001).
We concluded the H. pylori is a local infection and does not affect peripheral blood total WBC counts and differentials. The statistically found difference in eosinophil counts could not be explained and must be further evaluated in larger patient groups. 
 
Distribution of
Streptococcus pyogenes
M types in Spain by sequencing
emm
-specific PCR products and its relationship with erythromycin susceptibility
 
SoA5.2
 Alberti Sa, Garcia-Rey Cb, Aguilar Lb, Cercenado Ec, Gobernado Md, Garcia-Perea Ae, the Spanish Surveillance Group for Respiratory Pathogensf. a
Medical Department, Hospital Son Dureta, Research Unit, Palma de Mallorca, Spain, b
GlaxoSmithKline, Tres Cantos, Madrid, Spain, c
Microbiology Department, Hospital Gregorio Maranon, Madrid, Spain, d
Microbiology Department, Hospital La Fe, Valencia, Spain, e
Microbiology Department, Hospital La Paz, Madrid, Spain, f
Spain
 

Introduction: The prevalence of erythromycin resistance (ER-R) in group A streptococci (GAS) has increased in Spain since early 90s with current rates exceeding 40% in some regions. This study determined the emm-types associated to erythromycin resistance in Spain.

Material and methods: Isolates belonged to the SAUCE* surveillance collection. Rapid sequence analysis of specific PCR products was used to deduce emm-types corresponding to the majority of the known GAS M serotypes. PCR primers used: GASM1 (5′-TATTGCGCTTAGAAAATTAA-3′) and GASM2 (5′-GCAAGTTCTTCAGCTTGTTT-3′). Sequencing was done with the Big Dye terminator mix and autosequenator (Applied Biosystems). DNA sequences were subjected to homology searches against the bacterial DNA database.

Results: Overall, 670 GAS isolates (345 ER-R) were analysed. Three M-types (M4, ST1812 and M12) accounted for 66.4% of the ER-R isolates, whereas they just represented a 16.7% of the Ery-S. For ER-R isolates the strongest association was seen with M4 (OR=12; 95% CI 6.7–22.1), and M75 was second after M4 only in the last temporal period of the study (1998–1999). No homogeneous distribution of ER-R M-types by centres was seen.

Conclusions: Few M-types (leading by M4) are responsible for the ER-R in Spain. But for M4, the remaining ER-R M types (ST1815, M12 and M75) did not show a temporally nor geographically homogeneous distribution.
*SAUCE is an acronym standing for ‘Sensibilidad a los Antimicrobianos Utilizados en la Comunidad en Espana' (Susceptibility to the Antimicrobials Commonly Used in the Community in Spain) and is the Spanish word for the willow tree.
 
 
Significant increase in the prevalence of erythromycin-resistant, clindamycin and miocamycin-susceptible (M-Phenotype)
Streptococcus pyogenes
in Spain (1998–2001)
 
SoA5.3
 Alós JI, Aracil B, Oteo J, Gómez-Garcés JL, I Spanish Group IAP-SEIMC. Hospital de Móstoles, Servicio de Microbiología, Madrid, Spain
 

Using the standard agar dilution method we studied the prevalence of susceptibility to 14, 15, and 16-membered macrolides, and clindamycin in Streptococcus pyogenes isolated in Spain in 2001 in 21 laboratories. We also determined the different susceptibility phenotypes. The results were compared with those obtained by the same methodology in 1998 (Alós et al. J Antimicrob Chemother 2000;45:605–609). A total of 529 nonduplicated isolates was used. Throat swab samples provided 383 (72.4%). One hundred and fifty-seven (29.7%) was resistant to erythromycin (MIC breakpoint 1 μg/ml). Resistance to azithromycin, a 15-membered macrolide, was also 29.7%, whereas to miocamycin, a 16-membered macrolide, this was 1.5%. Prevalence of resistance to clindamycin was 1.3%. One hundred and forty-nine (94.9%) of the 157 erythromycin-resistant strains were susceptible to clindamycin and miocamycin, a 16-C membered macrolide (M-phenotype). The remaining eight erythromycin-resistant strains had an MLSB phenotype. If we compared the results obtained in 1998 and 2001 we observed a statistically significant increase in the prevalence of resistance to erythromycin and azithromycin (P=0.02, χ
2-test). Our study provides one of the highest erythromycin resistance, clindamycin and miocamycin susceptibility rates for a country in the world for S. pyogenes. Strains with the M-phenotype account for the great majority of these isolates, and have significantly increased since 1998. 
 
Macrolide, lincosamide, oxazolidinone and ketolid resistance in
Streptococcus pneumoniae
 
SoA5.4
 Köseoðlu Ö, Özenen Ý, Hasçelik G, Sener B. Department of Clinical Microbiology, Hacettepe University Medical Faculty, Ankara, Turkey
 

Penicillin resistant Streptococcus pneumoniae strains are frequently resistant to other unrelated antimicrobials and resistance to macrolides is also emerging.
In this study, the in-vitro activities of penicillin, erythromycin, clarithromycin, clindamycin, linezolid and telithromycin were tested against 264 S. pneumoniae isolates. Susceptibility testing was carried out by agar dilution, according to NCCLS guidelines. The overall intermediate+resistance rates, MIC50 and MIC90 (μg/ml) values were as follows, respectively: penicillin 44.7, 0.06, 1%; erythromycin 16.3, 0.125, 4%; clarithromycin 14.1, 0.125, 4%; clindamycin 15.2, 0.125, 16%; telithromycin 1.2, 0.03, 0.125%. For linezolid MIC range was 0.03–16 μg/ml, MIC50 1 μg/ml, MIC90 2 μg/ml. Among the erythromycin resistant 42 isolates, five were susceptible to clarithromycin, 15 susceptible or intermediate to clindamycin, all except one were susceptible to telithromycin.
According to these results telithromycin seems to have the best in-vitro activity against macrolide resistant pneumocci. 
 
Addition of fusidic acid in bone cement to systemic teicoplanin treatment of rat osteomyelitis
 
SoA6.3
 Ersoz Ga, Oztuna Vb, Coskun Bc, Eskandari MMb, Bayarslan Ca, Kaya Aa. a
Faculty of Medicine, Mersin University, Clinical Microbiology and Infectious diseases, Icel, Turkey, b
Faculty of Medicine, Mersin University, Orthopaedic Surgery, Icel, Turkey, c
Faculty of Medicine, Mersin University, Histology and Embryology, Icel, Turkey
 

This study investigates the effect of local fusidic acid in bone cement besides systemic teicoplanin therapy in rat osteomyelitis model. Methicilline-resistant Staphylococcus aureus (MRSA) was given on cortex of tibia of rats, then foreign bodies were placed on cortices. Macroscopic and microbiologic evaluation of infected areas was performed at 21st day. CMW1 bone cements, which contained fusidic acid at 1/10 g ratio, were administered proximal to the area where foreign bodies placed in 15 rats. Other 15 rats were used as the control group. Teicoplanin was given intramuscularly at 20 mg/kg/day doses bid for 14 days in both groups. At the end of treatment, rats were sacrificed and infected tibias were examined macroscopically, microbiologically and histopathologically. Ten rats were excluded because of no growth or polimicrobial growth. Intramedullar polimorphonuclear leukocyte infiltration, granulation tissue at surrounding soft tissues and bone marrow vasculature were evaluated histopathologically. Statistical analyses were performed using Fisher's exact test. Recovery rates were 81.8% in teicoplanin+fusidic acid group and 55.6% in teicoplanin only group (P=0.33). There were no significant differences between study and control groups with respect to histopathologic changes. In conclusion, local fusidic acid besides the systemic teicoplanin therapy for osteomyelitis caused by prosthesis has no significant therapeutic effect. 
 
Function of the transmembrane domain of VanT serine racemase from vancomycin-resistant
Enterococcus gallinarum
BM4174
 
SoA7.2
 Arias CAa, Pena Ja, Reynolds PEb. a
Bacterial Molecular Genetics Unit, Centro de Investigaciones, Universidad El Bosque, Bogota, D.C., Colombia, b
Department of Biochemistry, University of Cambridge, Cambridge, UK
 

Purpose of study: Investigation of the role of the transmembrane domain of VanT.

Methods:
Enterococcus gallinarum BM4175 (a vancomycin-susceptible derivative with insertional inactivation of the vanC-1 gene) was transformed with plasmid constructs pJP1 (containing the genes necessary for resistance, C1-XYc-T) or pJP2 (with a fragment lacking the transmembrane region of VanT-C1-XYc-δT-). Minimal inhibitory concentrations and analysis of accumulated peptidoglycan precursors were performed on BM4175, BM4175/pJP1 and BM4175/pJP2 grown in the presence of l-Ser, d-Ser or in the absence of any supplement. Uptake of 0.1 mM [14C]-l-serine was determined in all strains over a 240 s time course.

Results: Vancomycin resistance was restored in BM4175 transformed with pJP1(C1-XYc-T). Peptidoglycan precursors were similar to those in BM4174 under all conditions. pJP2(C1-XYc-δT) failed to restore resistance in BM4175. Pentapeptide[d-Ser] was detected only when l-Ser (50 mM) was present in the growth medium. A 40% decrease in uptake of [14C]-l-Ser at 240 s was observed in BM4175 compared to BM4174. pJP1 restored uptake of [14C]-l-Ser at 240 s in BM4175 similar to values obtained with BM4174, whereas pJP2 did not have any effect.

Conclusions: The results indicate that the transmembrane domain of VanT is necessary for resistance and that it is likely to function as an l-Ser transporter. 
 
Influence of conjugative plasmids from
Enterococcus faecium
on the outcome of typing methods
 
SoA7.3
 Werner Ga, Willems RJLb, Hildebrandt Ba, Klare Ia, Witte Wa. a
Department of Nosocomial Infections, Robert Koch Institute, Wernigerode Branch, Germany, b
Research Laboratory for Infectious Diseases, National Institute of Public Health and the Environment, Bilthoven, The Netherlands
 

Purpose: A variety of methods is used for a molecular typing of Enterococcus spp. and related gram-positive bacteria. These include DNA-based methods such as macrorestriction analysis using pulsed-field gel electrophoresis (PFGE), ribotyping, and amplification-based methods such as rapid amplification of polymorphic DNA (RAPD) and amplified fragment length polymorphism (AFLP). We used a homogeneous strain collection of 24 transconjugants resulting from filter-matings with different antibiotic-resistant E. faecium and a recipient isolate from our lab. The influence of transferred antibiotic-resistance determinants on the outcome of different typing methods was investigated. Results: Fragment patterns resulting from PFGE indicated minor differences between the transconjugants and the recipient. In respect to different primers used for RAPD, none or only a single fragment shift was detected in the resulting fragment patterns. AFLP clusters all transconjugants into a group of major relatedness, but the result was strongly dependent on the mathematical method used for cluster analysis. Fragment patterns of digested plasmids showed the possession of different or only widely related plasmids in the transconjugants. Conclusions: The results of this study clearly show that under certain situations typing methods commonly used for enterococci and related gram-positive bacteria come to their limits. 
 
Bacteremia due to vancomycin resistant enterococci in Slovakia
 
SoA7.4
 Hanzen Ja, Roidova Ab, Trupl Jb, Bilikova Ec, Lamosova Jd, Liskova Ae, Macekova Jf, Szevenyova Zg, Svetlansky Ie, Krcmery Vc. a
Department of microbiology, University Hospital, Bratislava, Slovakia, b
Department of microbiology, St. Elizabeth Cancer Institute and National Cancer Institute, Bratislava, Slovakia, c
Department of Pharmacology, St. Elizabeth Cancer Institute, Bratislava, Slovakia, d
Department of Pharmacology, National Institute of Respiratory Diseases, Bratislava, Slovakia, e
Department of Microbiology, University Hospital, Nitra, Slovakia, f
Department of Microbiology, University Hospital, Trnava, Slovakia, g
Department of Microbiology, University Hospital, Kosice, Slovakia
 

Methods: We performed a nation-wide survey of enterococcal bacteremia. All 132 episodes of enterococcal bacteremia between 3 years (1997–1999) in all six University Hospitals were described by a prospective protocol. Enterococci were tested in six laboratories and reconfirmed in National Reference Laboratory of Antibiotic Resistance of the Ministry of Health. National Committee for Clinical and Laboratory Standards (NCCLS) recommended disk diffusion method for testing of antibiotics was used in all local and in the reference laboratory. Strains from blood cultures were isolated through semi-automated system Bactec or Bact-Alert (Becton–Dickinson) and identified with Vitek Jr. system (Bio Mérieux, Hazelwood, MU, USA). Enterococcus faecium were reconfirmed with API 20 STREP (Bio Mérieux, Mercy Etoile, France). We used univariate analysis to assess risk factors for enterococcal bacteremia. Results: Among 132 enterococcal bacteremias, VRE appeared in 6.8% and teicoplanin resistance in 5.3% of all enterococcal bloodstream isolates (88.6% E. faecalis, 9.1% E. faecium, 4.3 E. gallinarum). However, vancomycin resistance in E. faecium was 33.3% and teicoplanin resistance 16.7%. Also resistance to chloramphenicol, tetracycline, ampicillin and gentamicin was higher among E. faecium than in E. faecalis. Conclusion: In conclusion, VRE among enterococci is increasing also in CEE from 0.1 to 6.8%. Our survey showed 6.8% vancomycin resistance and 5.3% teicoplanin resistance among bloodstream isolates. 
 
The incidence of the CTX-M-15 extended-spectrum beta-lactamase (ESBL) in Poland
 
SoA8.2
 Baraniak Aa, Fiett Ja, Nordmann Pb, Gniadkowski Ma. a
Sera and Vaccines Central Research Laboratory, Molecular Microbiology, 00725 Warsaw, Poland, b
Hopital de Bicetre, Faculte de Medecine Paris-Sud, 94275 Le Kremlin-Bicetre, France
 

CTX-M-15 was recently identified in Enterobacteriaceae isolates in India and demonstrated the increased activity against ceftazidime when compared to other CTX-M enzymes. CTX-M-15 differs by a single amino acid (ABL238 aspartate to glycine) from CTX-M-3, which is widely spread in Poland. In this work, the first CTX-M-15 producers from Polish hospitals were analyzed. Eighteen cefotaxime-resistant, ESBL-producing enterobacterial isolates were collected in 1998 and 2000 in two hospitals in different cities. The majority of them expressed CTX-M-3 but a single Escherichia coli isolate from one center, and two Serratia marcescens isolates from the other produced CTX-M-15. These isolates demonstrated clearly higher ceftazidime MICs than CTX-M-3 producers, which was also observed when the transconjugants were compared. Apart from the coding sequence mutation, the E. coli blaCTX-M-15 gene differed from blaCTX-M-3 only by a single mutation in the upstream region of approximately 350 bp. Although the isolates were discriminated from CTX-M-3-producing E. coli and S. marcescens isolates from the same and other hospitals, they contained plasmids that were related to blaCTX-M-3-carrying molecules. CTX-M-15 probably appeared in the hospitals due to independent events of convergent evolution, which modified CTX-M-3 into an enzyme with a significant ceftazidime-hydrolyzing activity. This data, together with other recent findings, demonstrate the danger of the use of ceftazidime against CTX-M-producing strains. 
 
Antimicrobial resistance and molecular epidemiology of
Stenotrophomonas maltophilia
 
SoA8.3
 Köseoölu Öa, Sener Ba, Gür Db, Günalp Aa. a
Department of Clinical Microbiology, Hacettepe University Medical Faculty, Ankara, Turkey, b
Hacettepe University Medical Faculty, Yhsan Doöramacy Children's Hospital, Ankara, Turkey
 

Nosocomial colonization and subsequent infection by multiresistant strains of Stenotrophomonas maltophilia have resulted in outbreaks that require epidemiologic characterization. The specific aim of this study was to determine the genetic relatedness between S. maltophilia strains isolated from our paediatric wards to compare these genotypes with the antibiotic susceptibility patterns.
A total of 38 S. maltophilia strains were included to the study. The in-vitro susceptibilites were determined by agar dilution method, according to NCCLS guidelines. The genotypes of the isolates were included by ERIC-PCR.
The rates of resistance, when intermediate concentrations included, were as follows: piperacillin 86.9%, piperacillin/tazobactam 73.7%, ceftriaxone 97.4%, ceftazidime 50%, cefepime 81.6%, ciprofloxacine 97.4%, imipenem 97.4%, meropenem 39.5%, amikacin 73.7%, gentamycin 68.4% and trimetophrim/sulfamethoxazole 5.3%. The strains revealed 11 different susceptibility patterns. When these phenotypically similar isolates were genotype, 25 different DNA patterns existed, indicating the presence of many patient-unique strains, but also clustering of infections due to isolates of the same DNA type.
The results suggested possible nosocomial transmission of S. maltophilia, indicating the need to enforce infection control and antimicrobial use policies to limit the spread of S. maltophilia. 
 
Imipenem resistance in infections due to
Pseudomonas aeruginosa
in Greek hospitals
 
SoA8.4
 Giakkoupi Pa, Vatopoulos Ab, Tzouvelekis Lc,  Tsonas Sb, Legakis Nc, I WHONET networkb, Petrikkos Ga. a
Medical School, Athens University, Infectious Diseases and Antimicrobial Chemotherapy, Athens, Greece, b
Medical School, Athens University, Hygiene and Epidemiology, Athens, Greece, c
Medical School, Athens University, Microbiology, Athens, Greece
 

Data from the Greek System for the Surveillance of Antimicrobial Resistance (WHONET, Greece) revealed that imipenem resistant Pseudomonas aeruginosa are isolated all over Greece with increasing frequency (from 4.7% in 1996, up to 12.1% in 2001 [January–June]). In this study the possible contribution of VIM metallo-â-lactamases in the increase of imipenem resistance in P. aeruginosa is investigated. All imipenem resistant strains of P. aeruginosa isolated during a 1-month period (May 2001) in the hospitals of the System were collected and tested for the presence of blaVIM and the respective integron by PCR. VIM(+) strains were typed by Random Amplified Polymorphic DNA (RAPD) analysis. Seventeen laboratories from all over Greece participated in this study and 59 multiresistant P. aeruginosa strains were isolated. Strains resistant to imipenem were always found resistant to meropenem, penicillins/inhibitors and aminoglycosides. Moreover, resistance to ceftazidime, aztreonam and cefepime was detected in most isolates. blaVIM was detected in 36 strains from nine hospitals. Spread of blaVIM was clonal in four hospitals and horizontal through the spread of the same integron in different clones in two cases. The spread of type VIM metallo-â-lactamases seems to be an important mechanism for P. aeruginosa resistance in carbapenems in Greece. This fact underlines the necessity and the urgency for developing a strategy for the containment of resistance. 
 
Survey of extended spectrum beta-lactamases in a paediatric oncology unit, first report of a cefotaxime hydrolysing beta-lactamase in a
Klebsiella oxytoca
isolate from the United Kingdom
 
SoA8.5
 Alobwede Ia, Todd Nb, Hawkey Pc, Allen Md, M'Zali FHa. a
University of Leeds, Microbiology, Leeds, UK, b
Leeds General Infirmary, Microbiology, Leeds, UK, c
Division of Immunity, University of Birmingham, Birmingham, UK, d
Wyeth Laboratories, Clinical Trials, Maidenhead, UK
 

Purpose of this study: During a survey investigating the prevalence of extended spectrum beta-lactamases (ESBLs) in the Paediatric Oncology Ward in St. James's University Hospital, Leeds (UK), a clinical isolate of Klebsiella oxytoca T6768 was found to harbour an ESBL conferring a higher Minimum Inhibitory Concentration (MIC) to cefotaxime (16 mg/l) than to ceftazidime (2 mg/l).

Results: Polymerase Chain Reaction (PCR) revealed the presence of an SHV-type enzyme as well as a cefotaxime hydrolysing beta-lactamase (CTX-M-like enzyme) in this isolate. Molecular characterisation of the resistant determinants using Southern blotting, PCR-restriction fragment length polymorphism and nucleotide sequence determination showed the presence of a chromosomal bla
SHV-1 and a plasmid-mediated bla
CTX-M-9 genes.

Conclusion: CTX-M-9 beta-lactamase has been reported in Spain and China. This is the first report of a CTX-M ESBL in the United Kingdom and thus highlights the continuing global emergence of this new group of class A beta-lactamases. 
 
Three year study on an incidence of extended-spectrum beta-lactamases-producing strains of Enterobacteria at University Hospital in Košice, Slovakia
 
SoA8.6
 Siegfried La, Kmetova Ma, Sandorcinova Za, Molokacova Mb, Bober Jc, Andrasina Id. a
Institute of Medical Microbiology, Kosice, Slovakia, Faculty of Medicine, University of P.J. Safarik, b
Department of Clinical Microbiology, University Hospital Tr.SNP, Kosice, Slovakia, c
Faculty of Medicine, University of P.J. Safarik, University Hospital Tr.SNP, 1st Clinic of Surgery, Kosice, Slovakia, d
Faculty of Medicine, University of P.J. Safarik, L. Pasteur University Hospital, Clinic of Radiotherapy and Oncology, Kosice, Slovakia
 

The purpose of the study was to get information on an incidence of extended spectrum beta-lactamases (ESBL) in 1125 strains of gram-negative bacteria (870 Klebsiella spp., 115 Escherichia coli, 60 Enterobacter spp., 45 Serratia spp. and 35 Pseudomonas spp.) isolated from patients of three Intensive Care Units, Clinic of Anesthesiology and Intensive Medicine and Clinic of Radiotherapy and Oncology at University Hospital in Košice, Slovakia. ESBL production was determined based on both phenotype characteristics (double disk synergy test, three dimensional test, and E-test) and the presence of specific blaSHV and blaTEM gene sequences by PCR in isolated bacteria. The results obtained. Of 870 Klebsiella spp. isolates the production of ESBL was detected in 120 strains (13.79%) and five E. coli strains. In majority of ESBL producing isolates blaSHV sequences were detected. In our collection of strains any Enterobacter, Serratia and Pseudomonas clinical isolate was detected to produce ESBL. In our work we demonstrated that the most important ESBL producers at the University Hospital were Klebsiella spp. isolates carrying blaSHV genes. 
 
Nationwide surveillance of antibiotic resistance in Saudi Arabia Saudi Antibiotic Susceptibility Surveillance Study (SASSS)
 
SoA8.7
 Ohaly Ya, Ishaq ARa, Memish ZAb, Kambal AAc, Al Balla SRd, Shibl AMd. a
Ministry of Health, Microbiology, Riyadh, Saudi Arabia, b
King Fahd National Guard, Riyadh, Saudi Arabia, c
King Saud University, Riyadh, Saudi Arabia, d
King Saud University, Microbiology, Riyadh, Saudi Arabia
 

The SASSS network aims to set up a national surveillance study to obtain standardized information on antimicrobial susceptibility to various bacterial pathogens. Currently, 25 hospitals are participating in the project from different geographical regions in Saudi Arabia. During the 1st year (2001), the SASSS focused on setting up this network.
Overall, high frequencies of resistance to antibiotics to different bacterial pathogens in Saudi Arabia were seen. Geographical variations of resistance were noticed, which could be related to different prescribing practices. Approximately, 9 and 32% of Escherichia coli and K. pneumoniae, respectively, were Extended Spectrum â-Lactamases (EBLs) producers. Resistance of Enterobacteriacae group to Carbapenem and Pipracillin/tazobactam is low. Resistance of Pseudomonas aeurginosa to various anti-Pseudomonal antibiotics including Carbapenem is high and alarming. Methicillin Resistant Staphylococcus aureus (MRSA) comprised 36% of S. aureus isolates. No Vancomycin Intermediate S. aureus (visa) was detected. High level resistance to Gentamicin in Enterococcus were seen in 12% of the isolates and only 2% of Enterococcus facieum were glycopeptide resistant. Resistance of Streptococcus pneumoniae to penicillin ranged between 2% to almost 52%.
Surveillance of antibiotic resistance on a national level is necessarily to give guidance to practicing physicians on the best agents to use. 
 
Evolution of antibiotic resistance in
Streptococcus pneumoniae
(Sp) in France from 1995 to 1999 SoA8.8
 Roussel Delvallez Ma, Dupont MJb, Fauchère JLc, Fosse Td, Laberki MFe, Lemozy Jf, Maugein Jg, Péchinot Ah, Ploy MCi, Vaucel Jj, Vergnaud Mk, Vernet-Garnier Vl, Weber Mm, Laurans Gn, Murbach Vo, Cattier Bp, Chardon Hp, Chomarat Mp, Cottin Jp, Demachy MCp, Romaszko JPp. a
Laboratoire de Bactériologie, Hôpital Calmette, Lille, France, b
Laboratoire de Bactériologie, CHU, Besançon, France, c
Laboratoire de Bactériologie, CHU, Poitiers, France, d
Laboratoire de Bactériologie, CHU, Nice, France, e
Laboratoire de Bactériologie, CHU, Montpellier, France, f
Laboratoire de Bactériologie, CHU, Toulouse, France, g
Laboratoire de Bactériologie, CHU, Bordeaux, France, h
Laboratoire de Bactériologie, CHU, Dijon, France, i
Laboratoire de Bactériologie, CHU, Limoges, France, j
Laboratoire de Bactériologie, CH, Saint-Brieuc, France, k
Laboratoire de Bactériologie, CHU, Caen, France, l
Laboratoire de Bactériologie, CHU, Reims, France, m
Laboraroire de Bactériologie, CHU, Nancy, France, n
Laboratoire de Bactériologie, CHU, Amiens, France, o
Institut de Bactériologie, CHU, Strasbourg, France, p
Laboratoire de Bactériologie, CHU, Tours, France
 

Every 2 years from 1995, Pneumococcal Regional Observatories (PROs) carried out a prospective study on pneumococcal resistance to antibiotics. The studies required a multicenter collecting of strains sent to one of the Regional Coordinating Centers (CCRs). Erythromycin (ERY), tetracycline (TET) and cotrimoxazole (SXT) were tested locally and interpreted according to the CA-SFM criteria. MICs for penicillin G (P), amoxicillin (AMX) and cefotaxime (CTX) were determined locally and confirmed by the CCRs using the agar dilution reference method. All pneumococci with diminished susceptibility to P (PSDP; MIC>0.06 mg/l) were serotyped by the CCRs. In 1995, 1997, and 1999, 4.575, 13.471 and 16.909 strains were tested by 8, 18 and 21 PROs, respectively. In 1995, 1997, and 1999, the percentages of intermediate and resistant strains increased steadily: ERY: 30, 46.9, 53; TET: 19, 27.9, 32.9; SXT: 28, 40.2, 42; P: 23, 40.5, 44; AMX: 16, 25.4, 26; CTX: 8, 17.9, 17.1. For β-lactam agents strains exhibiting a high level of resistance were rare (P<15%, AMX<5%, CTX<0.5%). The study of the results by specimen and by age showed that the evolution of resistance seemed to be constant for invasive strains while a stationary level was reached in 1997 for non-invasive strains. For example, in adults, the percentage of PSDP in blood cultures was 20 in 1995, 29 in 1997 and 37 in 1999; for strains isolated in respiratory samples, the percentages were 23, 44.6 and 41.5. 
 
Therapeutic failure and drug resistance in invasive pneumococcal infection
 
SoA8.9
 Dalhoff Ka, Schaaf BMa, Boehnke Fa, Maass Mb. a
Medical University Luebeck, Medicine, Luebeck, Germany, b
Medical University Luebeck, Microbiology, Luebeck, Germany
 

Purpose: Drug resistant pneumococcal infection (DRPI) is a growing problem. Clinical data regarding the association between resistance and the development of invasive infections are limited. We evaluated the incidence of penicillin and macrolide resistance and of unsuccessful antibiotic pretreatment in patients with invasive pneumococcal infections. Results: Sixty-four hospitalized patients with culture proven pneumococcal infections (pneumonia: n=56, meningitis: n=5, pneumonia and meningitis: n=3) were prospectively enrolled in the study. Susceptibility testing of isolates was performed according to NCCLS. Comorbidities, disease severity, antibiotic treatment and complications were assessed in a standardized manner. Resistance to penicillin was found in 2/64 patients, to macrolides in 4/64 patients, one of them showing multidrug resistance. Oral antimicrobial chemotherapy of >48 h duration before admission had been delivered to 8/64 patients, most frequently with ciprofloxacin (n=3). DRPI was found in 3/8 cases with therapeutic failure (37.5%) and 2/56 cases without antibiotic pretreatment (3.6%, P<0.05). Conclusion: A history of unsuccessful antibiotic pretreatment was associated with penicillin and/or macrolide resistance in patients with invasive pneumococcal infections. In addition, an important reason for therapeutic failure was suboptimal choice of ambulatory chemotherapy. 
 
Penicillin and Fluoroquinolone resistance in
Streptococcus pneumoniae
: a joint venture?
 
SoA8.10
 Carsenti H, Dunais B, Pradier CH, Mancini G, Sabah M, Dellamonica P. Infectious Disease Department, Archet Hospital, Nice, France
 

The world-wide problem of betalactam resistance (R) in Streptococcus pneumoniae (SP) has been complicated by increasing R to macrolides and some older fluoroquinolones (FQ) (ciprofloxacin CIP). Aim of our study was to evaluate rate of acquisition of resistance to different FQ: CIP, sparfloxacin (SPX) and levofloxacin (LEV) of SP strains with different levels of susceptibility to penicillin (P). Fifteen strains were serially and daily passaged in subinhibitory concentrations of these four antibiotics by a gradient plate method until acquisition of resistance. Clinical strains isolated from children in day-care centers were used. Five strains were susceptible (S) to penicillin (P) (one reference strain, four clinical isolates: P MICs<0.064 mg/l): five were intermediate (I) to P (one reference strain: P MIC 0.19 mg/l, four clinical strains P MICs: 0.5–1 mg/l), five were resistant (R) to P (P MICs 1.5 mg/l). Mean of number of passages (n) necessary to reach I or R level with each FQ as selecting agent are in the following table: 

 
 SPX and LEV induced resistance but more slowly than CIP. Our results show that rate of acquisition of resistance to FQ is strongly related to alteration of susceptibility to P, probably by modification of cell wall. These results are concordant with clinical results. 
 
Clinical relevance of phase variation in pneumococcal opacity: nasopharyngeal (NP) colonization in children from day care centers (DCC)
 
SoA8.11
 Carsenti H, Mancini G, Bensoussan M, Dunais B, Pradier CH, Dellamonica P. Archet Hospital, Infectious Disease, Nice, France
 

Streptococcus pneumoniae (SP) adherence to nasopharyngeal (NP) epithelium is a prerequisite for induction of otitis Transparent SP (T) have been shown to colonize the NP of infant rats better than opaque (O) SP. Opaque SP has proven more virulent than the T form during systemic infection in a mouse model. Aim of this study was to evaluate phase variation in the nasopharynx of children. SP strains were isolated during a winter epidemiology study of NP samples in children from family DCC. MICs determinations were performed by E-test for penicillin (P), amoxicilline (AMX) and ceftriaxone (CRO). Serotypes were performed using the Quellung reaction. Upon oil immersion microscopic examination short chains of six to eight cocci were noted as 0, +, ++, +++ for absence, 1, 2, >3 chains by field, respectively. Phase variation was detected on catalase Trypticase Soja plates, AMX and CRO MICs and bactericidal activity was determined for 10 pairs of O and T variants with different serotypes and susceptibility to penicillin. Seventy strains of SP were screened for phase variation. Nine out of 42 with chain length 0, + had O variants while 23 out of 28 strains with chain length ++ or +++ showed O variants. Proportion of O variants was predominant when chain length increased. Serotype 23F was prevalent. Bactericidal activity of O variants showed a four- to eightfold increase of MBC. O variants may be present in NP of children while T are predominant form for colonization. These virulent variants with lower level of autolysis showed less susceptibility to killing by antibiotics. They may persist in NP and explain the absence of eradication by active molecules. 
 
Antimicrobial resistance among clinical strains of
S. pneumoniae
isolated from patients with community-acquired respiratory tract infections (CARTI) in Russia
 
SoA8.12
 Kozlov RSa, Bogdanovitch TMa, Sivaya OVa, Agapova EDb, Ahmetova LIb, Furletovab, Gudkova LVb, Gugutsidgeb, Ilyina VNb, Marusinab, Multich IGb, Ortenberg EAb, Schetinin EVb, Shturmina SMb, Tseneva GYb. a
Institute of Antimicrobial Chemotherapy, Smolensk, Russian Federation, b
PeGASus Study Group, Russian Federation
 

Purpose: To determine the antimicrobial resistance of pneumococci causing CARTI in different Russian cities. Methods: A total of 142 non-duplicate strains isolated in 14 Russian cities in 2001 were studied. Antimicrobials tested included penicillin (PEN), amoxicillin (AMO), erythromycin (ERY), azithromycin (AZI), clarithromycin (CLA), midecamycin (MID), spiramycin (SPI), clindamycin (CLI), levofloxacin (LEV), vancomycin (VAN), rifampicin (RIF), tetracycline (TET) and co-trimoxazole (SXT). Susceptibility testing was performed by broth microdilution with interpretation of the results according to NCCLS guidelines (2001) were applicable. Results: Results are presented in the table. 

 *CA-SFM 1996.

Conclusions: Penicillins, LEV and VAN retained high activity against Streptococcus pneumonia tested. High resistance to macrolides, TET and SXT was also noted. 
A multi-centric surveillance of antimicrobial resistance in staphylococci and enterococci in Colombian hospitals
 
SoA8.13
 Arias CAa, Reyes Ja, Cortes La, Cruz Ca, Rico CLb, Zuniga Ma, Yepes Fa, Pena Aa. a
Bacterial Molecular Genetics Unit, Universidad El Bosque, Centro de Investigaciones, Bogota, D.C., Colombia, b
Department of Surgery, Surgical Microbiology Service, Fundacion Santa Fe de Bogota, Bogota, D.C., Colombia
 

Invasive isolates of staphylococci and enterococci were collected from 14 tertiary care centres. Identification was confirmed by both automated methods and multiplex PCR. MICs of various antibiotics were performed by standard methods. Detection of mecA and van genes was performed by PCR in resistant staphylococci and enterococci, respectively. Four hundred and eighty-two isolates were collected; Staphylococcus aureus and coagulase negative staphylococci (CNS) corresponded to 47.3 and 29.6% of them, respectively. 25.4% were identified as enterococci. Resistance to oxacillin in S. aureus and CNS was 46 and 76.2%, respectively. The mecA gene was detected in 96.2% of MRSA isolates. In S. aureus and CNS other antibiotic resistance profiles were as follows: chloramphenicol, 21 and 11.8%; gentamicin, 44.7 and 51%; ciprofloxacin, 42.1 and 28.7%; erythromycin, 44.7 and 60.8%; tetracyclin, 28.5 and 31.5%; TMS, 7 and 54.5%; rifampin 11.4 and 16.8%, respectively. All staphylococci were susceptible to vancomycin, teicoplanin and linezolid. No VISA isolates were found. In enterococci, resistance to glycopeptides was 10.8%: vanA (58.3%) and vanB (41.7%) were found. Resistance to ampicillin, ciprofloxacin, chloramphenicol, gentamicin, and rifampin was 12.6, 28.8, 7.2, 69.4, 46.8%, respectively. All enterococci were susceptible to linezolid. In summary, linezolid, glycopeptides, and chloramphenicol showed the best activity against all isolates. 
 
Antimicrobial resistance and consumption of antibiotics—the first results of National Resistance Monitoring Network (OPTY) in Poland SoA8.14
 Grzesiowski P, Karynski M, Hryniewicz W. Sera and Vaccines Central Research Lab, Immunology and Prevention of Infections, Warsaw, Poland
 

Purpose of the study: OPTY network was established as a ongoing national surveillance system to monitor antimicrobial resistance linked to antibiotic consumption in order to promote prudent use of antiinfective agents. The network is co-ordinated by National Reference Centre fore Antimicrobial Resistance (SVCRL). All laboratories have been using standardized methodology and participated in the National and International Quality Assessment Schemes (POLMICRO, UK NEQAS). Results: A total of 1200 isolates were collected from 20 hospitals with about 400,000 admissions during year 2000. The overall percentage of multi-resistant pathogens were 12% for MRSA, 19% for high level aminoglycoside-resistant Enterococci and 15% Enterobacteriaceae producing ESBLs. Utilisation of microbiology was relatively low with an average of eight tests/hospital bed per year. Antibiotic consumption measured as percentage of total cost for all pharmaceuticals utilised in hospitals varied between 12 and 36%, mean 25%. The consumption measured by daily defined doses reviled two major groups of antibiotics used, as cephalosporines and aminopenicillines with beta-lactamase inhibitors. Conclusions: The incidence of selected resistance mechanisms in participating hospitals was moderate. The consumption of antimicrobial agents in some centres was high and differed from hospitals of the same level of care. Microbiology was underutilised thus most of therapeutic regimens was of empirical character. 
 
Anaerobes: lessons from a french multicentric survey
 
SoA8.15
 Behra-Miellet J, Dubreuil LJ. Faculté de Pharmacie, Microbiology, Lille, France
 

Background: This study surveyed the antibiotic susceptibilities of 434 nonduplicate gram negative isolates collected from nine large university hospitals including B. fragilis group species (359), Prevotella spp. (40), Fusobacterium spp. (23). Methods: The NCCLS-approved M11-A4 was used. Drugs tested were: amoxicillin (AMX), AMX+clavulanic acid (AMC), ticarcillin (TC) TC+clavulanic acid (TCC), cefoxitin (FOX), cefotetan (CTT), imipenem (IMP), clindamycin (CM) and metronidazole (MOL). Results: Resistance rates within the B. fragilis group were: AMC 5.6%, TIC 33%, TCC 2%, FOX 13%, CTT 44%, CM 33%, IMP 1% and MOL <1%, respectively. Only one strain of B. fragilis was resistant to metronidazole (MIC=64 μg/ml); nimA gene was present. Resistance to imipenem or metronidazole was only found among the B. fragilis species, whereas B. fragilis was less resistant to the other drugs than the non-fragilis species. β-Lactamase production was detected for 26/40 Prevotella and 3/23 Fusobacterium. Conclusion: Dynamic changes of antimicrobial resistance are occuring within the B. fragilis group: FOX, CTT, CM continues to increase. Further antibiotic surveys are needed as a source of information to guide the empiric therapy of anaerobic infections. 
 
A map of bacterial resistance in a Hungarian region
 
SoA8.16
 Farkas Aa, Juhasz Ab, Orosi Pa, Miszti Cc, Balogh Md. a
Kenezy Teaching Hospital, Hygienie, Debrecen, Hungary, b
Kenezy Teaching Hospital, Laboratory, Debrecen, Hungary, c
University of Debrecen, Microbiology Lab, Debrecen, Hungary, d
Regional Hospital Berettyóújfalu, Laboratory, Debrecen, Hungary
 

Background: Regional trends of microbiological resistance pattern constitute basic data and qualifying criteria for effective infection control. Purpose: The aim of our study was to establish an internationally compatible regional database in a Hungarian county Hajdú-Bihar. Methods: Our model is the National Nosocomial Infections Society publications' format from the U.S. published in 2001. It contains data regarding various ICU types, ambulatory patients and hospitalised patients. The same format is used for antibiotic utilisation data and device related infections' rates as well. We collected cleaned data of years 2000–2001 from all the microbiological laboratories of our county. Results:
 

 
 Susceptibilities not significantly different from U.S. data were as follows: MR CNS, Streptococcus pneumoniae/penicillin and 3rd generation cephalosporin, Pseudomonas aeruginosa/piperacillin and Enterobacter spp. and Escherichia coli/ceftriaxon. Conclusions: This database proved to be a very useful tool for choosing primary wards of active surveillance including places for infectious disease physician's visit (ICU, rehabilitation unit). Additional analysis is needed at an individual institution's level for other heavily used (or useable) antibiotics and bacteria as well (aminoglycosides, beta-lactam–beta lactamase inhibitor combinations, 2nd generation cephalosporins, corynebacteria. 
 
AIDS-defining diseases (ADD) and HIV-related immunodeficiency in patients developing AIDS during the HAART era: what is changing?
 
SoA9.2
 Manfredi R, Calza L, Chiodo F. University of Bologna, Infectious Diseases, Bologna, Italy
 

To compare epidemiological, clinical, and immunological features of ADD before and after HAART introduction, between the 436 patients (p) diagnosed in 1985–1995, and the 103 p detected since 1997, in a case-control study. Though the mean number of newly diagnosed AIDS p had a sharp drop in the HAART era, from 65 p/year in 1991–1995 to 22 p/year since 1997 (P<0.001), the distribution of ADD and underlying immunodeficiency showed limited changes. When excluding a greater frequency of tuberculosis (TB) (P<0.001) and wasting syndrome (P<0.04), all other ADD did not show a different frequency before and after 1997. A tendency towards a higher mean CD4 count at AIDS disease was noticed: 78 vs 61 cells/μl (P<0.003), with a significant difference for Candida esophagitis, toxoplasmosis, Kaposi sarcoma and TB (P<0.002–<0.03). The limited variation of clinical and immunological presentation are attributable to the poor impact of HAART before AIDS recognition: 88.4% of p detected since 1997 did not receive HAART or had insufficient compliance to antiretrovirals, so that 58.2% of p were AIDS presenters. During the HAART era, an increase of mean age and sexual transmission was found (P<0.001). Notwithstanding the effects of HAART on the natural history of HIV disease, the consequences on ADD distribution and related immunodeficiency were negligible, since most p could not benefit from HAART before AIDS onset. A high clinical suspicion for ADD should be maintained when facing p with missed or undertreated HIV disease. 
 
Radata—communication internet platform management of resistance analysis guided haart switch for implementation in clinical practice of HIV-infected individuals
 
SoA9.3
 Paech V, Lorenzen T, Stoehr A, Plettenberg A. IFI, interdisciplinary Infectiology and Immunology, Hamburg, Germany
 

Purpose: HIV-resistance analyses are indicated to prepare switch of HAART in HIV-infected individuals with failure to ongoing HAART regimen. Specialists at several responsible sites often feel lack of complementary informations if interpretation of resistance analyses is done independent from each other. Clinical benefits from resistance analysis assays are sigfnificantly higher for those physicians, who can access external advice from HIV-experts for possible treatment options. The database concept ‘Radata’ (www.radata.de) was developed in Germany to generate expert advice for implementation in HAART switch. Results: Fifteen HIV-treatment centres, seven laboratories and 15 high ranked authorities in HIV-Medicine contribute to Radata database since it is started in January 2002 in Germany. HIV-infected subjects are eligible to participate at the project after presentation of failure to HAART (viral load >1000 c/ml). Expert advice is generated after all data are evaluated and based on recommendations of 2–4 external HIV-experts. Observation after therapy switch is scheduled for a period of 12 months. Conclusions: Radata is a novel database concept with features for evaluation of data and availability of complementary information to participating sites. The project is designed to provide its proficiency to patients and centres from Germany and foreign countries. Further information will be provided after the number enclosed subjects have enlarged. 
 
In vitro effects of HIV infection on ABC transporter expression and antiretroviral drug efficacy
 
SoA9.4
 Jorajuria S, Dereuddre-Bosquet N, Dormont D, Clayette P. CEA, DRM, Fontenay-aux-roses, France
 

Background: Intracellular concentrations of anti-HIV drugs are determinant for their efficacy. ABC transporters such as P-glycoprotein (P-gp) and multidrug resistance-associated proteins (MRP) are reported to limit protease inhibitor (IP) and nucleoside reverse transcriptase inhibitor (NRTI) access to their targets. Moreover, HIV may regulate the expression and activity of these host cell factors. Therefore, we evaluate in primary cultures of human monocyte-derived macrophages (MDM) and lymphocytes, effects: (1) of retroviral infection and HAART on the expression and activity of P-gp and MRP; and (2) of specific inhibitors of these host proteins on antiretroviral activities of NRTI, non-NRTI and IP. Results: On the one hand, we evidenced a transitory increase of P-gp mRNA expression in lymphocytes and MDM in response to in vitro HIV infection. This was correlated to an increased P-gp cell surface expression and activity, and an increased TNF-alpha production and mRNA. In contrast, no significant modulation of MRP was observed. On the other hand, PSC833 and probenecid potentiated in vitro the anti-HIV activity of AZT and indinavir. These effects were accentuated when PSC833 and probenecid were combined. Conclusion: These results showed that: (1) HIV infection by increasing ABC transporter expression could favorise the efflux of antiretroviral drugs and decrease their pharmacological effects; and (2) specific inhibitors of these transporters could reverse these deleterious effects. 
 
Effects of Interferon alpha plus ribavirine therapy on frequencies of HCV, HIV and CMV specific CD4-T-cell responses in peripheral blood of HIV/HCV coinfected patients after 6 months of treatment
 
SoA9.5
 Alatrakchi Na, Di Martino Vb, Thibault Vc, Benhamou Yb, Baude Ca, Bochet Md, Katlama Cd, Poynard Tb, Autran Ba. a
Hôpital Pitié-Salpêtrière, Laboratoire d'Immunologie Cellulaire, Paris, France, b
Hôpital Pitié-Salpêtrière, Service d'Hepato-Gastrologie, Paris, France, c
Hôpital Pitié-Salpêtrière, Laboratoire de Virologie, Paris, France, d
Hôpital Pitié-Salpêtrière, Service de Maladies Infectieuses, Paris, France
 

Objectives: To investigate the consequences of HIV-related immune defects on HCV-specific T-cell responses and the influence of IFN-alpha+ribavirine therapy on these responses. Methods: Two groups of patients with chronic HCV infection were studied: 26 HIV coinfected progressors with antiretroviral therapy and 13 HIV-negative controls. Twelve HCV/HIV and 9 HCV patients have already reached 6 months of IFN-alpha+ribavirine therapy. Virus-specific CD4-T-cells in peripheral blood were analyzed by IFN-gamma-ELISPOT-assays using HIV-p24, one CMV and three HCV (Core, NS3, NS4) antigens. Results: (1) at baseline, HCV-specific CD4-Th1-cells frequencies were significantly lower than HIV- and CMV-specific ones; (2) frequencies of CD4-Th1-cells against HCV as well as against CMV were similar in the two groups; (3) in HCV+/HIV+, HCV specific CD4-T-cell frequencies did not change between baseline and 6th month of anti-HCV treatment, decreased in three and increased in only one case. HIV- and CMV-specific frequencies were decreased in seven patients. Similar results were observed in HIV-negative group. Conclusion: (1) HCV-specific immune responses might be more prone to tissue compartmentalization than HIV-specific ones; (2) immune defects induced by HIV infection might not be responsible for the low level of HCV-specific responses observed in HIV-progressors; (3) IFN-alpha+ribavirine therapy influence on HCV- and HIV- specific CD4-T-cell frequencies after 6 months of treatment will be discussed. 
 
Frequencies of HIV-1-p24 specific Th1 cells (ELISPOT) are correlated with plasma HIV-1 viral load in a cohort of LT-NP and slow progressors
 
SoA9.6
 Martinez Va, Alatrakchi Na, Costagliola Db, Bonduelle Oa, Agut Hc, Autran Ba, ALT Study Groupa. a
Hopital Pitié-Salpêtrière, Laboratoire d'Immunologie Cellulaire, Paris, France, b
Faculté de Medecine Saint-Antoine, INSERM SC4, Paris, France, c
Hopital Pitié-Salpêtrière, Laboratoire de Virologie, Paris, France
 

Background: HIV-1-specific T helper-1 cell responses have been associated with long-term-non-progression (LT-NP) in HIV infection but the correlation between frequencies of HIV-1-p24-specific Th1 cells and viral load has not yet been studied. We prospectively quantified these frequencies by using an IFN-gamma ELISPOT assay in a cohort of LT-NP. Methods: A cohort of 62 LT-NP and slow progressors (infection >8 years and CD4 counts >600/mm3) was analysable. HIV-1-p24-specific T cells were analyzed using: proliferation, IFN-gamma ELISPOT assays and IFN-gamma production in cell supernatants. Results: Wide ranges were observed in the frequencies of HIV-1-p24-specific CD4 Th1 cells as assessed by ELISPOT (0-3770 SFC/106 PBMC) with a median of 70 SFC/106 PBMC. These frequencies were negatively correlated with viral load (r=−0.304, P=0.026) but not with CD4 counts and associated with a low level of T cell activation assessed by CD71 on CD4 cells (r=−0.266, P=0.035). Similar results were obtained with T cell proliferation and IFN-gamma production. Conclusion: Interestingly, the numbers of HIV-1-p24-specific Th1 cells correlate with plasma viral load, independently of CD4 counts indicating that: (1) the defect in HIV-1-specific CD4 Th1 cells does not reflect the global CD4 depletion; and (2) these responses are strongly correlated to the control of virus replication. 
 
Impact of drug–drug interactions on therapeutical management of active tuberculosis in HIV infected patients
 
SoA9.7
 Martinez Va, Truffot Cb, Caumes Ec, Katlama Cc, Jarlier Vb, Bricaire Fc, Jouan Md. a
Department of Infectious and Tropical Diseases, Pitié Salpêtrière Hospital, Institut Pasteur, Unité de Génétique Mycobactérienne, Paris, France, b
Department of Bacteriology, Pitié Salpêtrière Hospital, Paris, France, c
Department of Infectious and Tropical Diseases, Pitié Salpêtrière Hospital, Paris, France, d
Institut Pasteur, Unité de Génétique Mycobactérienne, Paris, France
 

Since 1996 and the use of HAART, management of HIV patients with active tuberculosis raised the question of drug–drug interactions and therapeutical management of both infections. Retrospective cohort study: Follow-up of 43 HIV patients with active tuberculosis diagnosed between 1996 and 2000. Studied data included evolution of tuberculosis and HIV, CD4 cell counts, plasma HIV viral loads, antituberculosis and antiretroviral regimens. Ninety-four percent of patients were treated by quadruple combination antituberculosis drug with rifabutin for five patients. Fourteen patients were treated by double antiretroviral therapy of nucleoside reverse transcriptase inhibitors (NRTIs) and 29 by triple or more drugs (NRTIs and/or nonnucleoside reverse transcriptase inhibitors NNRTIs and/or protease inhibitors PIs). The median follow-up was 24 months. There was no difference on CD4 cell counts and viral loads in the two groups and between the patients treated by NNRTIs and PIs at the diagnosis of tuberculosis, at the time of antituberculosis drug discontinuation and concerning cure rates of tuberculosis. On the other hand, the plasma HIV viral load was significantly better controlled in patients with NNRTIs than with PIs (P<0.005). In HIV patients with active tuberculosis receiving HAART, antiretroviral combination including NNRTIs allows a better control of viral replication than regimen including PIs without impact of the use of rifampin or rifabutin. 
 
Previous survey to the settlement of pharmacy visit among HIV-infected patients
 
SoA9.8
 Guerrault MNa, Langevin Sa, Merian-Brosse La, Leclerc Cb, Brossard Da, Welker Yb. a
Pharmacy CHI Poissy-Saint-Germain-En-Laye, France, b
Unité des Maladies Infectieuses et Tropicales (U.M.I.T.), CHI Poissy-Saint-Germain-En-Laye, France
 

Adherence is essential to the effectiveness of antiretroviral therapy. A pharmacy visit would improve the patient advisement. A survey was carried out over a period of 3 months in the U.M.I.T. A self-report was distributed to 150 patients. Ninety were evaluated. For 66%, information's given by the clinician were sufficient and for 76% the treatment advice cards were useful. However, 72% of them would like to attend a pharmacy visit. The topics they would prefer to be tackled were drug interactions (51%), side effects (49%) and effect of forgetting (44%). The treatment was well accepted and tolerated for, respectively 91 and 65% of the patients. The viral load and the CD4 count were well known by, respectively 52 and 46%. However, inaccurate pattern of treatment was frequent (>50%) and bad adherence was observed: treatment forgotten occasionally (60%), regularly (30%) or inadequate attitude when the treatment was forgotten (76%). Number of pills, dose frequency, length of the treatment would be risk factors of nonadherence. For the majority of patients, a pharmacy visit is necessary and beneficial. The first result shows a better understanding of the treatment, an improvement of the adherence and an enhancement of plasma concentration of antiretroviral drugs. 
 
In vivo activity of glycopeptides against
S. aureus
infection in a rabbit endocarditis model: is MIC predictive for in vivo efficacy?
 
SoA10.3
 Asseray N, Caillon J, Lemabecque V, Jacqueline C, Batard E, Potel G, Bugnon D. Laboratoire Antibiologie, Faculte de Medecine, Nantes, France
 

We have studied the in vivo efficacy of vancomycin (V) and teicoplanin (T) against five Staphylococcus aureus (SA) strains: two methicillin-susceptible (MSSA 1 and 2), two methicillin-resistant (MRSA 3 and 4) and one glycopeptide-intermediate (GISA 5) strain, in a rabbit endocarditis model. MICs of V and T (V/T) were 0.5/0.25, 1/0.5, 1/1, 0.5/0.5, and 4/8, for MSSA 1, MSSA 2, MRSA 3, MRSA 4, and GISA 5, respectively. The animals were randomly infected with one of these strains, then treated for 2 days by V or T. A continuous infusion of V, simulating a 30 mg/kg/24 h human dose was used. T was infused as a continuous infusion allowing simulating a 6 mg/kg human dose, following an initial bolus. These regimens achieved clinically relevant serum steady-state concentrations of glycopeptides (>20 mg/l). Results were as follows: expressed in log CFU/g of vegetations (mean±SD, followed in parenthesis by the number of rabbits used). 

 *P<0.05 vs controls.

Conclusion: In vivo activity of V and T in this model were different from one strain to another, whatever the in vitro susceptibility to glycopeptides could be. Apparent susceptibility measured by MIC could not predict the in vivo therapeutic effect of glycopeptides at the early stage of treatment in severe SA infections. 
 
Susceptibility to glycopeptides of
Staphylococcus aureus
in Strasbourg University Hospital
 
SoA10.4
 De Almeida Na, Hennebelle Ba, Heckendorn Ra, Klein Ca, Prevost Gb, Linger Lb, Monteil Hb, Bientz Ma, Jehl Fb, Meunier Oa. a
Hygiene Institute, University Hospital, Strasbourg, France, b
Bacteriology Institute, University Hospital, Strasbourg, France
 

Purpose: To determine the prevalence of the decreased glycopeptides susceptibility among 187 clinical isolates of Staphylococcus aureus collected from patients hospitalized in Strasbourg University Hospital between 15/01/2000 and 01/03/2000. The susceptibility to glycopeptides of 38 S. aureus isolates collected from hospital environment during approximately the same period was also investigated.

Methods: The susceptibility to glycopeptides was studied among the MRSA isolates, using:
–detection of the decreased susceptibility to glycopeptides using agar plates containing 6 mg/l teicoplanin,
–detection of hetero-VISA strains using agar plates containing 4 mg/l vancomycin,
–determination of the MICs of vancomycin and teicoplanin using the agar dilution and the E-test strips methods.

Results: Thirty-nine percent of S. aureus clinical isolates (74 out of 187 strains) are MRSA. No VISA or hetero-VISA strain was detected. Six percent MRSA isolates are teicoplanin intermediate S. aureus strains. In the environment, 13% S. aureus isolates are methicillin-resistant (five out of 38). The five strains are all susceptible to glycopeptides.

Conclusion: The results regarding vancomycin are reassuring. However, the high rate of MRSA and the presence of teicoplanin intermediate S. aureus isolates prove that prevention and control measures need to be improved. 
 
Comparative investigation of polymerase chain reaction and a conventional methods for detection of methicilin resistant
Staphylococcus
amont clinical isolates
 
SoA10.5
 Kantardjiev TVa, Vacheva-Dobrevski RSb, Panajotov SVa, Bachvarova AMa, Velinov TIa, Levterova VSa. a
National Center of Infectious and parasitic Diseases, Microbiology, Sofia, Bulgaria, b
Military Medical Academy, Clinical Microbiology, Sofia, Bulgaria
 

Purpose: Identification on methicillin resistant Staphylococci has a great clinical implication and significant impact of antibiotic therapy. The aim of this study is to compare the disc-diffusion test (DDT), oxacillin agar screen test (OAST) and PCR for detection of mec A gene. Fifty selective clinical isolates (41 Staphylococcus aureus and nine S. epidermidis) determined as methicillin resistant by DDT were enrolled in the study. DDT was performed with oxacillin disk (1 mkg/ml) on Mueller-Hinton agar (MHA) without NaCl (NCCLS, 2000). OAST was performed on MHA with 4% NaCl, oxacillin 6 mkg/ml, T 35 °C. These strains was genotypically characterized for the mec A gene presence by PCR method using the mec A 1-5′-AAA ATC CAT GGT AAA GGT TGG C-3′ and the mec A 2–5′-AGT TCT GCA GTA CCG GAT TTG C-3′ primers (GIBCO, BRL).

Results: In the group of 50 MRS isolates, detected by PCR, positive results were as follow: 23 S. aureus and six S. epidermidis. For six S. aureus isolates DDT and OAST were positive; PCR-negative. For two S. aureus and two S. epidermidis isolates PCR was positive; phenotypic methods-negative.

Conclusions: Accurate and rapid detection of MRS is a constant challenge for laboratories. The PCR assay (first time in our country) appears to be more reliable than routine susceptibility testing for the rapid diagnosis of MRSA infections at hospitals, particularly due to the heterogeneous resistance of many strains. 
 
Distribution and antibiotic susceptibilities of bacteria isolated from suspected urinary tract infections of inpatients in Hungary
 
SoA13.2
 Rozgonyi F, Csukás Z, Kamotsay K, Szabó D, Ostorházi E, Berek Z, Maródi C. Institute of Medical Microbiology, Semmelweis University, Budapest, Hungary
 

Between l January 1997 and 31 December 2000, a total of 12, 143 urine samples were cultured 40% as native urine (NU) and 60% as Uricult-Plus (UP) (Orion Diagnostica, Finland). Cultivations were negative in 39% of NU and 42% of UP specimens, while contamination was revealed in 20% of NU and 30% of UP. In the clinical bacteriologically evaluable positive 1726 NU and 1656 UP cultures, the distribution of the Gram-negatives was very similar with the predominance of Escherichia coli (43 and 41%) followed by Enterobacter spp. The distribution of Gram-positives differed significantly according to the types of specimens. NU resulted in 13% Group-D and 6% group-B Streptococcus while UP did 22 and 1.5%, respectively. Third generation cephalosporins and fluoroquinolons were equally very effective against E. coli strains, while ampicillin inhibited growth of 42% only. Carbapenems, cefepime and the fluoroquinolons were the most active against Enterobacter strains. Interestingly, trimethoprim+sulfarmetoxazole combination could inhibit more than 75% of Enterobacteriaceae strains. Piperacillin+tazobactam (89%), imipenem (83%), and ciprofloxacin (82%) could be the drog of choice against Pseudomonas aeruginosa. Enterococcus strains were highly sensitive to glycopeptides (100%), nitrofurantoin (99%), imipenem (95%) and amoxicillin+clavulanic acid (94%). 
 
Antimicrobial susceptibility levels of
Escherichia coli
isolates cultured from urine at a tertiary care teaching hospital. Temporal trend and comparison between community-acquired and nosocomial urinary tract infection
 
SoA13.3
 Nanetti A, Manfredi R, Valentini R, Calza L, Chiodo F. University of Bologna, Infectious Diseases, Bologna, Italy
 

In order to assess the local temporal trend of antibiotic sensitivity of the most common urinary tract bacterial pathogen, all urine-cultured Escherichia coli isolates were reviewed as to susceptibility profile, and specimen source (community- versus hospital-acquired infection). When evaluating sensitivity levels of 2070 community-acquired pathogens (1999–2001), a significant resistance rise was limited to cotrimoxazole (P<0.01) and nalidixic acid (P<0.02), while a tendency towards increased resistance regarded norfloxacin (P=0.05) (Fig. 1). When 1570 community-acquired E. coli isolates were compared with 2687 nosocomial strains (tested in the years 2000–2001), a greater susceptibility of community-acquired E. coli isolates was limited to cotrimoxazole versus all other compounds in the year 2000 (P<0.03), while it was extended to amoxicillin, cephalotin, nitrofurantoin and piperacillin in the year 2001 (P<0.0001) (Fig. 2). On the whole, E. coli showed an elevated sensitivity rate (>90% of tested strains) to nitrofurantoin, gentamicin, amikacin, and 2nd- and 3rd-generation cephalosporins, while only amoxicillin and piperacillin had a mean resistance rate >30%, regardless of the community or nosocomial origin. A permanent surveillance of sensitivity levels of the most common pathogens responsible for infectious diseases enables to identify local antimicrobial activity and its temporal variations, and plays a key role in starting empiric therapy, pending bacterial identification and in vitro assays. 

 Sensitivity to antimicrobial compounds strains isolated by urine culture of outpatients referring to our tertiary care hospital. 

 Sensitivity to antimicrobial compounds of E. coli isolated by urine culture in outpatients (OUT) and (IN) referring to our hospital (years 2000–2002). 
 
Treatment of urinary tract infections: a report of 100 cases
 
SoA13.4
 Amari AL, Tiouiri HT, Kilani BK, Goubontini AG, Zouiten FZ, Kanoun FK, Ben Chaabène TBC. Rabta Hospital, Infectious Diseases, Tunis, Tunisia
 

Objectives: To evaluate the therapeutic management of urinary tract infections (UTI) in adults.

Patients and methods: The study is carried out from July 1999 to December 2000. We included all patients that have signs of UTI. The predisposing factors of UTI are noted, as well as the susceptibility profile of the pathogens. Antibiotic treatment, the clinical and bacteriological course are reported.

Results: One hundred cases of UTI are observed. Thirty men and 70 women with a mean age of 48.5 years are included. Diabetes is a common predisposing factor for UTI reported in 37% followed by n prostatic hyperplasia (40%) andurolithiasis (7%). The most prevalent pathogens are Escherichia coli (75%), followed by K. pneumoniae (9%). Of the E. coli isolates, 76% are susceptible to the 1st CG, 100% to the 3rd CG and 45.5% to ampicilin. Moreover, this pathogen is susceptible to ciprofloxacin in 98.6% and to trimethroprim–sulphamethoxazole (TMP–SMZ) in 60%. Cefalotine is used in 40 cases, alone in 6 cases and with gentamicin in 34 cases. Cefotaxim is prescribed in 31 cases. The mean duration of treatment is 5.79 days. The recovery is reported in all cases. Recurrence of UTI in 25% but six patients lost sight 7 months with hindsight.

Conclusion: In UTI, the antimicrobial agents such as 1st CG combined with aminoglycosides are recommended as initial treatment as well as the 3rd cephalosporin generation at monotherapy. In addition, the fluoroquinolones and aminoglycosides are effective in UTI. 
 
Following symposia
 
Prevalence of resistance mutations to antirretrovirals and relation to virological failure
 
S3.4
 Garcia Fa, Suarez Sa, Alvarez Ma, Martinez NMa, Valera Bb, Pasquau Jb, Hernandez Quero Ja, Maroto MCa. a
Hospital San Cecilio, Microbiology, Granada, Spain, b
Hospital Virgen Nieves, Microbiology, Granada, Spain
 

Purpose: To investigate the prevalence of resistance mutations in the reverse transcriptase (RT) and protease (P) genes of HIV and to relate it with the type of virological failure (VF), we have studied 88 patients (11% naïve or pregnant women, 31% were first VF, 23% were second VF, 35% more than two VF. Resistance mutations were investigated using Trugene HIV-1 Genotyping Kit (Visible Genetics). Results: Global prevalence of resistance mutations for RT Inhibitors (RTI) has been >20% for M41L, D67N, K103N, M184V, L210W, T215YF, and for L10I, M36I, L63P, A71VT, L90M for P Inhibitors (PI). The prevalence of resistance mutations for the naïve patients studied was very low (A98G, V118I for RTI and L10I, M36I, M46I—all n=1—and L63P n=4 for PI). For patients on first VF only K103N, M184V, T215YF (RTI) were >20%, as well as L10I, D30N, L63P (PI); when patients on second VF were studied, then M41L, E44D, K103N, M184V, G190A, L210W, T215YF, K219QE (RTI) and M36I, L63P, A71T (PI) were >20% prevalence; finally, when patients with more than two VF were studied, the following resistance mutations were >20%: M41L, D67N, K70R, K103N, V118I, Y181C, M184V, G190A, L210W, T215YF (RTI), and L10I, M36I, M46IL, L63P, A71T, L90M (PI). Conclusions: The prevalence of primary resistance in the population studied is very low; the prevalence of mutations in the reverse transcriptase and protease genes increase in parallel to the type of virological failure. 
 
Genotypic resistance in HIV-1 RNA from patient plasma compared with rapid virus isolation and phenotypic resistance in patient PBMCs
 
S3.5
 Stuermer M, Groeschel B, Cinatl J, Doerr HW. Institute for Medical Virology, University Clinic Frankfurt, Frankfurt, Germany
 

Objective: To compare HIV-1 virus isolation in the presence of antiretroviral drugs with plasma HIV-1 genotyping. Materials and methods: HIV-1 genotyping was performed using the ViroSeqTM Vers. 2 from Applied Biosystems. Interpretation of genotype was done according to international standards. CD4-cells were purified from patient plasma and cultivated in microtiter plates coated with anti-CD3 and anti-CD28 antibodies in the presence of different concentrations of antiretroviral drugs. Virus production was measured using a p24 antigen assay. Phenotypic activity was expressed as 50% reduction of p24 concentrations. Results: Seventeen samples were analyzed. For 11 samples results were obtained from both methods, two samples could not be analysed by phenotyping and four samples not by genotyping. Only 3/11 samples showed total and 2/11 samples partial concordance, 6/11 samples showed discordance between the two assays. In discordant samples the genotype gave a definite interpretation. Conclusion: HIV-1 virus isolation and phenotyping from PBMCs may overcome the problem of currently used resistance assays, which analyse only the Reverse Transcriptase and the Protease gene of HIV-1. Possible mutations in other regions may influence viral fitness and therefore contribute to the growth of the virus population present. The lack of concordance between the two assays is related to the different blood compartments used. The clinical value of resistance tests using PBMCs is under investigation. 
 
Interleukin-6 co-operates with a new type I IFN, IFN-tau to inhibit early steps of HIV-I biological cycle
 
S3.6
 Rogez Ca, Clayette Pa, Martin Ma, Dereuddre-Bosquet Na, Martal Jb, Dormont Dc. a
CEA, DRM, Fontenay-aux-Roses, France, b
INRA, Physiologie Animale, Jouy-en-Josas, France, c
CEA, CRSSA, EPHE, DRM, Fontenay-aux-Roses, France
 

Background: Type I interferons (IFN) exhibit efficient antiviral activities notably against HIV, but severe side effects restrict their clinical uses. IFN-tau is an ovine or bovine non-cytotoxic type I IFN which displays higher inhibitory effects towards HIV replication than IFN-alpha, particularly in human monocyte-derived macrophages (MDM). The antiretroviral activity of IFN-tau seems to involve antiviral and immunomodulatory mechanisms: IL-6 synthesis is increased in dose-dependent manner in MDM treated with IFN-tau and a specific inhibition of IL-6 biological activity decreases its antiretroviral efficiency. Results: After a 1-h infection, a significant decrease of intracellular HIV RNA amount was found in MDM treated with IFN-tau. In parallel, no additive inhibition was observed with IFN-tau during the elongation of proviral DNA. These results suggest either an inhibition of HIV nucleocapsid uptake or an immediate HIV RNA degradation, and the expression of 2′,5′-OAS, MxA protein and PKR was then measured. IFN-tau induced the expression of these three host cell factors. The role of IL-6 on these different steps was evaluated and we showed that IL-6 co-operates with IFN-tau during the very early step of HIV biological cycle. Conclusion: Altogether, these results evidence that IFN-tau uses the same antiretroviral pathway as others type I IFN in MDM, and that IL-6 takes part to its inhibition of early steps of HIV biological cycle. 
 
Actinomycin-D as a modulator of resistances due to cell-wall active agents like Bacitracin (Bc) and lysozyme (Lz)
 
S4.7
 Chakrabarty ANa, Dastidar SGb. a
Calcutta University, Medical Microbiology, Calcutta, India, b
Jadavpur University, Pharmaceutical Technology, Calcutta, India
 

It was observed that development of Lzr in the Lzr mutants took placed at three different levels and was accompanied with unselected, distinctive and elevated levels of Bcr. Similarly, Bcr in Bcr-mutants were also detected at three different levels. Although the levels of Bcr (100/200 μg/ml) in the Bcr mutants could be raised only by persistent efforts, an increase in the levels of Lzr (as cross-resistance) in the same mutants could be easily achieved. A correlation of actinomycin-D resistance with Lzr and Bcr of the mutant bacteria and the effects of lipase treatment on the same showed a 4–20-fold rise in actinomycin-D resistance of the Lzr and Bcr mutants of Gram-positive bacteria compared with their correspondence wild-types. These findings suggest that Lzr and Bcr are controlled by several genes accounting for reduced cell-wall and cell-membrane permeability and indirectly, by phenotypic alteration of the lipid content of the cell-wall. Thus, the alteration of cell-walls and membranes and a phenotypic extra lipid layer can work in conjunction with the efflux pump mechanisms finally determining the levels of drug-resistance. 
 
Experimental development of drug resistance to non-antibiotics: a role of alteration of membrane fluidity and efflux systems
 
S4.8
 Dastidar SGa, Mazumdar Ka, Asok Kumar Ka, Chakrabarty ANb. a
Jadavpur University, Pharmaceutical Technology, Calcutta, India, b
Department of Medical Microbiology, Calcutta University, Calcutta, India
 

Drug resistance among clinical strains was studied by selecting mutants resistant to promazine (Pr) and methdilazine (Md). The results showed that successive step-up mutants of Pr and Md developed cross-resistance to several unrelated drugs, which in subsequent steps had broader resistance spectra with higher levels of resistance. Experiments on the membrane fluidity or permeability of bacterial cells using diphenyl hexatrine (DPH), a fluorescent probe on Md-mutants showed that three was marked reduction in the membrane fluidity and permeability. When several analogues of the basic phenothiazine structure, e.g. 2-chlor-methyl-N-methyl-pyrrolidine (CMP), methyl-1-methyl-2-pyrrolidone-4-carboxylate (MMPC), 3 hydroxymethyl-N-methyl-pyrrolidine (HMP) and Md with final substitution were tested for antibacterial function on different strains, highest activity was observed with respect to Md. With anaerobic bacteria the resistance(s) dependent on efflux pumps showed higher levels of resistance even to Md. We have found the non-antibiotic agents triflupromazine, trimeprazine and diclofenac sodium have high degree of activity against vibrios, staphylococci and pseudomonads. The explanation of such a phenomenon in terms of possible efflux pumps will be discussed. 
 
CSF, plasma and urine PCR in Lyme neuroborreliosis
 
S7.3
 Pícha Da, Moravcová La, Lásiková Ša, Marešová Va, Žïárský Eb. a
Charles University, 2nd Medical School, 1st Clinic for Infectious Diseases, Prague, Czech Republic, b
Department of Cellular and Molecular Biology, Charles University, 3rd Medical School, 1st Clinic for Infectious Diseases, Prague, Czech Republic
 

The main reason for high diagnostic value of PCR in neuroborreliosis (NB) is the direct way of spirochete detection. Two sets of primers in nested PCR were used: one for plasmide gene encoding OspC protein and second for chromosomal gene 16S rDNA. So far 25 patients with clinically manifested involvement in NB were enrolled into the prospective designed study (being continued). The main including criterion was positive prove of intrathecal specific antibody secretion (in 22 patients) and PCR positivity in CSF (in 3). All patients were repeatedly examined by neurologist and samples of CSF, plasma and urine were taken: (1) before treatment; (2) after treatment; (3) after 3 months. Before treatment were 12 patients PCR positive in CSF, six in plasma, and 10 in urine. Five were parallel positive in CSF and plasma and four in all three body fluids. Urine after treatment was positive in seven (28%) cases and completely negative after 3 months. The PCR has had relative high sensitivity (44 %), but does not rich the sensitivity of antibody index (88%). Supported by grant MZCR 6244; 111300003. 
 
Consumption of imipenem correlates with β-lactam resistance in
Pseudomonas aeruginosa
 
S12.5
 Lepper PMa, Högel Jb, Trautmann Ma, Grusa Ec. a
Department of Medical Microbiology and Hygiene, University of ULM, ULM, Germany, b
Department of Biostatistics, University of ULM, ULM, Germany, c
Hospital Memmingen, Central Pharmacy, Memmingen, Germany
 

Purpose: In the present study we investigated the monthly consume of three anti-pseudomonas-active antibiotics, namely imipenem, piperacillin/tazobactam (PT) and ceftazidime during a period of 3 years (1997–2000). The use of these antibiotics was correlated to the rate of resistance in Pseudomonas aeruginosa. Results: Inspection of the time series for use of imipenem, ceftazidime, and PT, and the corresponding time series for resistance (each available from July 1997 to July 2000) indicates a remarkable coincidence between use of imipenem and resistance against the three antibiotics mentioned. Pearsons's coefficient of correlation for the use of imipenem and the resistance against imipenem was 0.62 (P<0.001), between imipenem use and PT resistance was 0.57 (P<0.005), and between imipenem use and ceftazidim resistance 0.56 (P<0.005). We found positive regression coefficients quantifying an association with imipenem use in the same month (P<0.01) and with the use during the preceding month (P<0.05). The same was true when checking dependence of ceftadizime resistance (P<0.05) and PT resistance (P<0.01) on imipenem use observed during the same month. Neither the use of ceftadizime nor of PT could be identified as factors creating resistance to one of the three antibiotics under consideration within a reasonable period of time. Conclusion: There might be a strong pressure towards resistance created by carbapenems. This could limit the use of carbapenems for initial empiric therapy. 
 
Treat hard and fast: short course antibiotic treatment and its relation with patient compliance and effectiveness
 
S12.6
 Perez-Gorricho BPGa, Ripoll Mb, Pechere JCc. a
Niño Jesus Hospital, Infectious Diseases, Madrid, Spain, b
INSALUD, Outpatient Consult, Madrid, Spain, c
University of Geneve, Microbiology, Geneve, Switzerland
 

‘Treat hard and fast’: Short course antibiotic treatment and its relation with patient compliance and effectiveness. Finding the important implications for the way in which physicians manage patients with mild–moderate respiratory tract infections, and the relation of this management with the perception of antibiotic effectiveness, and the compliance with the antibiotic regimen has been the main purpose of the research. In a pan-European market research study of more than 3000 patients, designed to determine behaviour to the antibiotic management of mild-moderate respiratory tract infections, patient expectations of antibiotic therapy were identified, particularly those aspects that relate to efficacy and compliance. The study identifies three key drivers of patients perceived antibiotic efficacy: length of antibiotic course, time to onset of symptom relief and time to complete resolution of symptoms. The results demonstrate that once daily treatment for short periods is perceived by patients to be significantly more effective than longer antibiotic courses and thus better meets patient expectations of therapy. In this study, a macrolide, azithromycin, was selected as the drug therapy of shortest course, being the antibiotic with the shortest dosage schedule for common outpatient infections. The perception of efficacy with short course therapy also correlates with overall satisfaction with management by the physician and with patient compliance with antibiotic therapy. 
 
Consequences of the prophylaxis by amoxicillin on the colonization of the gastrointestinal tract of newborns
 
S12.7
 Jaureguy Fa, Carton Mb, Butel MJa, Panel Pc, Ghnassia JCd, Doucet-Populaire Fa. a
Université Paris5, Microbiologie, Paris, France, b
INSERM, U88, St. Maurice, France, c
CH Versailles, Gynecologie, Le Chesnay, France, d
CH Versailles, Microbiologie, Le Chesnay, France
 

Purpose of the study: Group B streptococci (GBS) remain a major cause of neonatal infections. Consensus guidelines have recommended an intrapartum antibioprophylaxis by amoxicillin, which has reduced the incidence of early-onset neonatal GBS infections. However, an increased incidence of beta-lactam-resistant Gram-negative neonatal sepsis has been reported. The aim of our study was to analyse the consequences of this antibioprophylaxis on the intestinal microbial colonization of newborns. A study of the fecal flora was carried out on 50 stools samples from 3 days-old newborns divided into groups: group A intrapartum treated mothers (n=25); and group B untreated mothers (n=25). Both groups were matched with regards to known factors affecting intestinal microbial colonization: gestational age, type of delivery and feeding.

Results: Colonization by enterobacteria and enterococci was not significantly different and occurrence of amoxicillin-resistant enterobacteria was similar (11/13 and 13/16 in groups A and B, respectively). However, the colonization by clostridia was modified: the number of newborns colonized was significantly less important in group A than in group B (group A: 3/25 and group B: 10/25 P<0.05).

Conclusion: In our study, intrapartum antibioprophylaxis did not affect intestinal colonization by aerobes but reduced significantly colonization by clostridia, potentially anaerobic pathogens. 
 
Impact of an antibiotic policy restricting the use of β-lactams and macrolides on the incidence of
Clostridium difficile
associated diarrhoea in general medical, renal and elderly patients
 
S12.8
 Boswell TCa, Pacey Sb, Broomfield Sc, Westmoreland Dc, Yates Cc. a
Nottingham City Hospital, Microbiology, Nottingham, UK, b
Nottingham City Hospital, Pharmacy, Nottingham, UK, c
Nottingham City Hospital, Infection Control, Nottingham, UK
 

The purpose of the study: To investigate the short-term impact of a new antibiotic policy for the treatment of urinary and respiratory infections on the incidence of Clostridium difficile associated diarrhoea (CDAD) in hospitalised medical, elderly care and renal patients. The results obtained: A policy restricting the use of β-lactams (except parenteral penicillin), and promoting alternative antibiotics including levofloxacin for pneumonia, and doxycycline for non-pneumonic respiratory infections, was launched in July 2000. As a result there was a significant and sustained reduction in use of aminopenicillins, cefuroxime and macrolides, with a corresponding increase in doxycycline and levofloxacin. The incidence of CDAD was determined during the 1st 12 months of the new policy and compared to the last 12 months of the old policy. The incidence of CDAD fell from 10.02 to 4.91 per 1000 patients, and from 1.2 to 0.59 per 1000 in-patient days (P<0.00001). In contrast, there was no change in the incidence of CDAD in other specialties (surgery, oncology etc.) that had not introduced the new policy. There was no change in the incidence of nosocomial bacteraemia with quinolone-resistant coliforms or MRSA, despite the increased use of levofloxacin. Conclusions: Hospital-wide reduction of β-lactam and macrolide use in medical patients can result in a significant and immediate reduction in CDAD. Longer follow-up will determine if this effect is sustained. 
 
Outcome of patients with
Streptococcus pneumoniae
pneumonia treated according to infectious disease society of america guidelines
 
S12.9
 Hershberger E, Zervos MJ. William Beaumont Hospital, Research Institute, Royal Oak, USA
 

We conducted a retrospective study to evaluate the outcome of hospitalized patients with documented Streptococcus pneumoniae pneumonia based on IDSA guidelines. From 1996 to 1999, patients with documented S. pneumoniae pneumonia were identified through microbiology reports. Medical records were reviewed for outcome based on IDSA guidelines. Two hundred and thirty-one patients were identified, 137 with diagnosis of CAP were evaluated. Outcome based on antimicrobial therapy, Pneumonia Severity Index (PSI), and pathogen susceptibility was evaluated. The treatment groups evaluated were: cephalosporin (C) (n=19), fluoroquinolone (FQ) (n=54), C+macrolide (M) (n=19), C+FQ (n=14), and macrolide (n=31). The percent cure rate for each group was 89, 91, 89, 93, and 90%, respectively. Sixty-five patients had penicillin non-susceptible S. pneumoniae (PNSSP), 24 intermediate (MIC=0.1–1 mcg/ml) and 41 resistant (MIC>2 mcg/ml). The overall cure rate in the PNSSP group was 46%, with success rate of 80% in FQ group, 38% in C+M, 36% in penicillin (PCN), 13% in M, and 50% in C. In patients with multi-drug resistant S. pneumoniae (n=47) (MDRSP), the cure rates were 83, 36, 14, 25, and 15% for patients receiving FQ, PCN, C+M, C+FQ, and M, respectively. Patients in the FQ group had significantly higher cure rate (P=0.0049). Patients with MDRSP had significantly better outcome with FQ compared to the other treatment regimens. 
 
Use of imipenem/cilastatin i.v. (tienam i.v.) for the treatment of low respiratory tract infections in intensive care units
 
S12.10
 Izzo La, Orsetti Rb, Boschetto Aa, Binda Ba, Della Casa Ua, Caramanico La, La Mazza Aa. a
Department of Surgery, Universitá degli Studi di Roma ‘La Sapienza’,‘P. Valdoni’, Rome, Italy, b
S. Camillo-Forlanini, Intensive Care Unit, Rome, Italy
 

Ventilator associated pneumonia (VAP) is considered the most frequent infection in the intensive care unit (ICU), occurring in 9–24% of patients intubated for longer than 48 h besides nosocomial pneumonia is a common complication in the critically ill surgical or trauma patient. Inadequate treatment can lead to the complications of acute respiratory distress syndrome (ARDS), empyema, and lung abscess. The most important aetiological agents both in VAP and in pneumonia which arise as complication in surgical or trauma patients are bacteria, whit a marked predominance of Staphylococcus aureus and Pseudomonas aeruginosa. The Authors present their experience (30 cases) on the employment of imipenem/cilastatin i.v. (tienam i. v.) as initial empirical monotherapy at the dose of 500 mg×3/day or 1 g×3/day for the treatment of the serious lower respiratory tract infection in an ICU. Tienam is a well tolerated broad spectrum antibacterial agent that is effective against the majority of gram-positive and gram negative aerobic and anaerobic bacteria including most Pseudomonas species. Except one patient deceased for causes related to his very poor general conditions and three cases in which has been necessary the addition of an aminoglycoside, in all the other patients the imipenem/cilastatin (tienam) monotherapy has shown satisfactory clinical and bacteriological responses. 
 
Clinical auditing of the impact of recommendations on antibiotic treatment
 
S12.11
 Kinoo Ja, David-Ouaknine Fa, Hacquard Ba, Echard Ya, Decazes JMb. a
Centre Hospitalier Lagny Marne la Vallée, Lagny sur Marne, France, b
Hospital Saint Louis, Paris, France
 

The aim of this study was to assess the impact of curative antibiotic recommendations on suitable prescriptions at Lagny-Marne la Vallée Hospital (general hospital, 714 beds). Two prospective exhaustive audits were made (all complete hospitalizations, excluding psychiatry, February–May 1997 and 2000) of the detailed curative antibiotic prescriptions, before and after distribution of internal recommendations. The same methodology, designed by a multidisciplinary team, was used for both periods. The same antibiotics were available at the pharmacy. The prescriptions were assessed by an infectious diseases specialist and a pharmacist using pre-established criteria: literature recommendations (1997 audit), internal recommendations (2000 audit). Six hundred and fifty-six prescriptions for 498 patients were collected and analysed in 1997, 738 for 497 patients in 2000. Exhaustivity of the recovered prescriptions was over 95%. Patient characteristics, infection sites and microbiological findings were similar for both groups. Suitable prescriptions were significantly increased (47–59%, P<0.001). Unsuitable prescriptions (economic reasons, too short or too long course, incorrect administration, or underdosage) were significantly reduced. Prescriptions for incorrect indications were unchanged and necessary combined treatment not being prescribed, increased. Local recommendations improved prescriptions, but efforts have to be done in order to go on the improvement of the practice behaviour. 
 
Cost-effectiveness analysis of antibiotic therapy in hospitalized patients with COPD Exacerbations (AE-COPD)
 
S12.12
 Beghi G, Aiolfi S, Maghini L, Patruno V, Aiolfi E. S Marta Hospital, Pulmonary Rehabilitation Unit, A.O., Rivolta d'Adda, Italy
 

Antibiotic costs represent a high burden of total drug costs for hospital administrations. A scientific approach considering also the economic aspects of each therapeutic decision may gain optimal treatment objectives at pondered costs.
In our study we retrospectively evaluated the clinical effectiveness and costs of antibiotic therapy in patients with AE-COPD. From 1997 to 2001, 1058 patients were treated as follows: 832 patients with oral therapy only: 30.9% with AMC 1 g b.i.d; 24.4% with CIP 500 mg b.i.d.; 17.4% with DOX 100 mg u.i.d.; 10.2% with LEV 750 mg u.i.d.; 8.5% with CLA 500 mg. b.i.d,; 7.8% miscellaneous. Ninety-four patients with switch therapy: 56.4% with AMC; 37.2% with CLA. Sixty-eight patients with e.v. therapy only: same drugs. Sixty-four patients with an association of two antibiotics. For each antibiotic used, clinical effectiveness, daily and total costs, and cost/effectiveness ratio were evaluated. Our results are summarized below. 

 
 Our retrospective study results support previous pharmaco-economic considerations according which in choosing an antibiotic regimen for AE-COPD we must take into consideration the expected clinical and microbiological results without forgetting to consider the economic burden of our decisions. 
 
Significant increase in fungaemia due to Non-Albicans Candida species
 
S20.4
 Shah PM. Klinikum der J.W. Goethe Universitaet, Schwerpunkt Infektiologie, Frankfurt am Main, Germany
 

Until 1996, predominant Candida species in blood cultures was Candida albicans. It accounted for 72.8% of all Candida species cultured from blood. Since then we have observed a gradual increase in number of non-albicans Candida species. From 1999, onwards non-albicans Candida species out-number C. albicans. This observation is especially important as non-albicans Candida species are generally non-susceptible to azole derivatives and empirical use of azoles in suspected Candidaemia should not be recommended. Amphotericin B is uniformally active against almost all Candida species. Echinocandin may be an alternative. See figure below. 

 
 
 
A search for newer antifungal chemotherapeutics
 
S20.5
 Chakrabarty ANa, Dastidar SGb, Saha Bb, Basu Lb. a
Calcutta University, Medical Microbiology, Calcutta, India, b
Jadavpur University, Pharmaceutical Technology, Calcutta, India
 

Fungal infections due to the mucor-rhizopus (M-Z) group present formidable problems due to lack of appropriate and effective drugs against them, as seen in increasing number of clinical situations; death due to mycoromycosis is nearly inevitable. We analysed the biological ‘weak-spots’ of the mucor-rhizopus group and attempted to devise suitable drugs using their weak-spots. We have noted that like many free-living fungi, the M-Z fungi are facultatively chemoautotrophic (can grow on simple sources of carbon and nitrogen and a solution of mineral salts), like the human pathogenic chemoautotrophic nocardioform bacteria. We devised a minimal medium based on that of Davis and Mingioli, supplemented with simple chemical compounds as sole sources of carbon and nitrogen. The key chemical here was diphenylamine with trypan blue (DPA–TB) and other similar sources of C and N. We found that while media free of these chemicals (controls) allowed good growth of different strains of M-Z fungi, a mixture of DPA–TB completely prevented their growth over a wide concentration range. Experiments with immunocompromised mice showed that these drugs at the concentrations used are well tolerated; mice experimentally infected with several clinical isolates of M-Z fungi and receiving these chemicals showed that these fungi could not grow in vivo. 
 
In vitro activity of newer fluoroquinolones against multi-drug resistant
Salmonella typhimurium
 
S33.4
 Delgado-Ronda Na, Trigo-Daporta Ma, Ibañez-Perez Rb, Garcia-Garcia MIc, Serrano-Heranz Rd, Munoz-Bellido JLa, Garcia-Rodriguez JAa. a
Hospital Universitario de Salamanca, Microbiología, Salamanca, Spain, b
Hospital N.S. Sonsoles, Microbiología, Avila, Spain, c
Hospital Virgen de la Concha, Microbiología, Zamora, Spain, d
Hospital NS Sonsoles, Medicina Interna, Avila, Spain
 

Purpose: Multidrug-resistant Salmonella typhimurium DT 104 has emerged as an important cause of food-poisoning outbreaks, characterized by resistance to ampicillin, tetracyclines, streptomycin, chloramphenicol and sulphonamides. Moreover, increasing fluoroquinolones resistance is being also reported. We have studied the in vitro activity of β-lactams and fluoroquinolones against multi-drug resistant S. typhimurium from human sources. Material and methods: Fifty multi-drug resistant S. typhimurium were tested against cefazolin, cefuroxime, cefotaxime, cefepime, ofloxacin, levofloxacin, and moxifloxacin, by the agar dilution method according NCCLS guidelines. Results and conclusions: All the strains were resistant to four or more of the following antibiotics: ampicillin, tetracyclines, chloramphenicol, streptomycin, sulphonamides and nalidixic acid. A high proportion of strains were intermediate or resistant to amoxicillin/clavulanate. We found no resistance to cephalosporins. Nevertheless, 26% were intermediate to first and/or second gen. cephalosporins. Cefotaxime and cefepime were the most active cephalosporins (MIC50: 0.1 mg/l). Though increasing fluoroquinolones resistance has been described among this kind of strains, no resistance to fluoroquinolones was found here. Levofloxacin was the most active fluoroquinolone (MIC90: 0.06 mg/l), followed by ofloxacin (MIC90: 0.1 mg/l) and moxifloxacin (MIC90: 0.2 mg/l). 
 
High rates of resistance to antibiotics by salmonellae from diarrhoeic children in Zliten-Libya
 
S33.5
 Ghenghesh KSa, Ben Ali Mb, Abuhelfaia Ab, Dufani MAa. a
Faculty of Medicine, Al-Fateh University, Medical Microbiology, Tripoli, Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, b
Faculty of Arts and Sciences, El-Ghomes University, Biology, El-Ghomes, Libyan Arab Jamahiriya
 

Salmonellae are major bacterial cause of diarrhoea in Libya particularly in children. Included in the present study 23 Salmonella species isolated from 169 children with diarrhoea in Zliten city-Libya. The children aged between a few days to 10 years. The organisms were tested for their susceptibility to antibacterial agents using the disc diffusion method. Of the isolates examined, 23 (100%) were resistant to ampicillin, 22 (95.7%) to amoxicillin–clavulanic acid combination, 20 (87%) to cefoxitin, 22 (95.7%) to chloramphenicol, 21 (91.3%) to doxycycline, 18 (78.3%) to gentamicin, 1 (4.3%) to nalidixic acid, 1 (4.3%) to trimethoprim–sulphamethoxazole and none (0.0%) were resistant to norfloxacin. A strong relationship was observed between the availability of antibiotics in the pharmacies of the city and resistance of the isolated salmonellae to these drugs. The misuse of the antibiotics by the community may be an important factor (among others) in the emergence of these high rates of resistance by the salmonellae examined. 
 
Comparative study of initial and acquired drug resistance in pulmonary tuberculosis in Iran
 
S38.4
 Mansoori D, Arami S, Mirabolhasani Z. NRITLD, infectious disease, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran
 

Purpose: Resistant to anti-tuberculosis agents particularly multiple drug resistant (MDR) is a major obstacle in treatment tuberculosis in the world. Between September 1996 and March 2000 for 273 smear and culture positive pulmonary tuberculosis patients (old=86, new=187) pretreatment susceptibility tests of isolated bacilli to INH, RIF, EMB and STM were performed by standard proportional method and the results were attributed to three groups: (I) newly diagnosed without any history of treatment; (II) patients with history of treatment for one course; (III) patients with history of treatment for two or more courses supposed to be MDR cases. The results were collected for each drug individually and different combinations of two, three and four medications.

Results: Resistance to one, two, three and four drugs was significantly increased in group III comparing to groups II and I, also in group II compared to group I. We observed a high rate of primary resistance to INH and STM in groups I and II and a high rate of MDR (INH and RIF resistance) in groups II and III.

Conclusion: The duration of bacilli exposure to antituberculosis agents in the past is a major factor in developing resistance. In contrast to WHO's guideline, due to high rate of primary resistance especially to STM in our area, we do not recommend addition of STM for treatment of patients whose initial four-drug regimens have been failed (group II). Keywords: Tuberculosis; Drug resistance 
 
Cellular immune response to exported protein of
Mycobacterium tuberculosis
in tuberculosis infected patients and in healthy donors in French Hospitals
 
S38.5
 Martinez Va, Sellier Pb, Truffot Cc, Bricaire Fd, Debre Pe, Jouan Mf, Carcelain Ga, Badell Ea, Mauger Ia, Autran Ba, Gicquel Ba. a
Hopital Pitié-Salpêtrière, Laboratoire d'Immunologie, Unité de Génétique des Mycobactéries, Paris, France, b
Hopital Lariboisiére, Médecine Interne A, Paris, France, c
Laboratoire de Bactériologie, Hopital Pitié-Salpêtrière, Paris, France, d
Département des Maladies Infectieuses, Hopital Pitié-Salpêtrière, Paris, France, e
Laboratoire d'Immunologie, Hopital Pitié-Salpêtrière, Paris, France, f
Institut Pasteur, Réseaux des InstitutsPasteur, Paris, France
 

The objectives were to study cellular immune responses to exported antigens of Mycobacterium tuberculosis in TB patients and in healthy donors, to understand host interactions with this bacteria, to develop new methods of diagnosis and define new vaccine candidates. Nineteen TB patients and seven healthy donors were enrolled in French Hospitals. Cellular immune responses were evaluated by lymphoproliferation and ex-vivo quantification of specific Th1 cells by ELISPOT-IFN-gamma assays. Four recombinant proteins of M. tuberculosis were tested: ESAT-6, 85B, Erp and TB B1.3 and compared with tuberculin. We confirmed that 85B (but not ESAT-6 in our study) gives higher responses in TB patients compared to donors according to the results in proliferation assay (P=0.04). In addition, frequencies of Th1 CD4 specific cells for ESAT-6 and tuberculin were statistical different between the two groups (P=0.04 and 0.028, respectively). 41.1% for 85B and 70.5% for ESAT-6 of the patients tested were responders in ELISPOT-assay versus 57.9% for both in proliferation assay. For the new antigens Erp and TB B1.3, no difference was observed between the two groups. In conclusion, 85B and ESAT-6 are recognised by a large number of our patients. They seem to be promising antigens for the development of new methods of diagnosis or for the development of new vaccines. Erp and TB B1.3 are not preferentially recognised by TB patients. Other exported antigens will be tested. 
 
Renal tuberculosis in district Brcko
 
S38.6
 Stanojcic Aa, Filipovic Jb, Radic Oc. a
Zvezdara Clinical Centre, Institute for Kidney Diseases, Belgrade, Yugoslavia, b
Echosonography Department, Outpatient Clinic, Brcko, Bosnia and Herzegovina, c
Hexalab Laboratory, PCR Centre, Belgrade, Yugoslavia
 

The incidence of tuberculosis (TB) is increasing worldwide. In recent some years, geographical differences in the incidence of TB in former Yugoslavia have been observed. An important rise in TB cases was registered in the bordering region of Bosnia. It is likely that poorer living conditions, influenced by war and emotional stress, may promote such rising incidence of TB.
Renal tuberculosis was diagnosed in 25 patients (female 21, male 4) from district Brcko in Bosnia, during the period of 2 years, 2000–2001. At the same time none patient had active pulmonary TB lesions, fibrous lesions were noticed in 18 patients, but we did not diagnose any signs of previous pulmonary TB in seven patients. Seven patients developed relapse of renal TB after 1–5 years of previous treatment. Guided by clinical parameters, precisely done renal echosonography enabled early suspicion and searching for renal TB, by radiological and other methods. Bacteriological diagnosis was performed by detection Mycobacterium tuberculosis on Loewenstein–Jensen medium in 18 patients. PCR as simple, fast and highly sensitive method enabled diagnosis in incipient stadium of disease, so antituberculous therapy could be instituted some months earlier.
Prompt diagnosis of renal tuberculosis (using PCR, besides standard methods) is necessary, otherwise delayed diagnosis may be dangerous. 
 
A study on resistance to first generation anti-tuberculosis drugs in
Mycobacterium kansasii
 
S38.7
 Mirsaeidi SM, Farnia P, Mohammadi F, Mansoori SD, Jabbari R, Taghizadeh R, Masjedi MR, Velayati AA. National Research Inistitute of Tuberculosis and Lung Diseases, Infectious Diseases and Immunology (NRITLD), Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran
 

Purpose: This research has been performed to determine antibiotic resistance of atypical mycobacteria especially Mycobacterium kansasi. Results: Twenty-three pigmented colonies which indicated atypical agents from NRITLD's mycobacterium culturebank were selected, they then underwent type identification and antibiogram for INH, RIF, ETB, STM. Nine samples were M. kansasi and 14 were other non-MTB, 4 was M. gordonei, 2 M. xenopi, 3 MAC, 1 M. bovis, 2 M. tererra, 1 M. asiatioum, 1 M. marinum and 1. Mean age in M. kansasi cases was 34+ 8.1 year and in non-kansasi cases 52+ 15.6 year and in whole society NTM was 44.9+16.4. Frequency of resistance in kansasi group were 4 to INH (44%), 4 to RIF (44%) 4 to ETB (44%), 5 to STM (55%) and prevalence of MDR was 4 (44%) and in non-kansasi group frequency of resistance were 13 (92%) to INH, to RIF 9 (64%), to ETM 9 (64%) and to STM was 10 (71%), to MDR was 9 (64%). Conclusion: A significant difference was seen between the age groups of patients who are affected with M. kansasi and non-kansasi (P<0.01), also in frequency of resistance to first generation anti-TB drugs. M. kansasi is detected as the most common atypical mycobacterium agent in pulmonary infections and attention to antibiogram is recommended before treatment. 
 
Combination of Amikacin–Rifampin in experimental chemotherapy of
Mycobacterium ulcerans
 
S38.8
 Marsollier La, Honoré Nb, Legras Pa, Manceau ALa, Mahaza Ca, Carbonnelle Ba, Cole Sc. a
CHU Angers, Laboratoire de Bactériologie, Angers, France, b
Laboratoire de Génétique bactérienne, Institut Pasteur, Paris, France, c
Institut Pasteur, Génétique Bactérienne, Paris, France
 

Buruli ulcer caused by Mycobacterium ulcerans, is the third most common mycobacterial after tuberculosis and leprosy in west Africa. Nowadays, the only effective treatment is surgery. It consists in a large excision of the lesions, often followed by a skin transplant. In this study, the effectiveness of rifampin, amikacin and their combination were estimated in the treatment of mice, which were infected experimentally by M. ulcerans. After 15 weeks of treatment with rifampin, amikacin or their combination, no more viable bacilli were found in infected tissues. The animals were kept for 3 other months. Among the mice treated with rifampin alone, two mice out of 30 relapsed. The minimal inhibitory concentration of these isolated strains went from 0.5 to 8 μg/ml. The DNA sequence, obtained from a 93-pb of the rpoβ gene from these strains, showed a missense mutations, which affect a Ser-415 replaced by a phenylalanine. This modification on the gene leads to an important inefficacy of treatment when rifampin was used alone. This study showed that rifampin and amikacin have a bactericidal action on M. ulcerans and that a combination of these antibiotics is necessary to avoid the selection of resistant mutants. 
 
Slide sessions
 
Cases for discussion
 
Histopathologic and electron microscopy studies of a severe isolated HIV enteropathy detected in an AIDS presenter. Favorable response to HAART introduction
 
OR1.1
 Manfredi R, Calza L, Chiodo F. University of Bologna, Infectious Diseases, Bologna, Italy
 

Advanced HIV infection was detected in a heterosexual female with a 1-year history of chronic diarrhoea and severe wasting, as expressed by a body weight of 39 kg, a CD4+ count of 64 cells/μl, and a plasma viraemia of 2.5 million copies/ml. A malabsorption syndrome was confirmed by d-xylose test, but repeated pathogen search tested negative at stool examination and light microscopy, scanning electron microscopy (EM), and transmission EM study of enteric mucosa. EM assays detected an ultrastructural modification of duodenal mucosa never reported to date: an extensive thinning of enterocytic microvilli, disappearance of glycocalix, and large vacuolization of the enterocyte cytoplasm. Two weeks after starting an indinavir-based HAART, diarrhoea disappeared and our patient significantly gained body weight: 6 kg after 4 months,15 kg after 8, and 18 kg after 1 year, paralleling a CD4+ increase to 299 cells/μl, and undetectable HIV viraemia. The subsequent 3-year follow-up confirmed absence of gut disturbances, a stable body weight, a CD4+ count of 350–480 cells/μl, and HIV viraemia persistently <50 copies/ml. Repeated endoscopy and related histopathologic and EM assays documented a notable improvement of mucosal damage, with complete cure reached after 2 years of HAART. A direct intestinal localization of HIV may be responsible for severe diarrhoea, malabsorption, and wasting, though the morphological features of HIV enteropathy are still unclear. HAART acts favourably also against isolated HIV-related enteropathy. 
 
Kaposi's sarcoma in a non-HIV immunocompetent adult: relapsing due to the development of a squamus cell carcinoma
 
OR1.2
 Sioula Ea, Magira EEa, Georgopoulou Ca, Rontogiani Db, Gounaris Ta. a
Evagelismos, Internal Medicine and Infectious Diseases, Athens, Greece, b
Evagelismos, Pathology, Athens, Greece
 

A 26-year-old heterosexual HIV negative girl was diagnosed with cutaneous Kaposi's sarcoma. The disease was started 2 years earlier with the appearance of lesions on the left feet and on the right knee. Absolute number of CD4 and CD8 were 1200 and 486 cells/dl, respectively with a decreased lymphocyte proliferation. Human herpesvirus type 8 had been detected in biopsy specimens and she placed on recombinant interferon alpha-2b. Follow up few months later the lesions decreased in size. Two years after the onset of the disease the patient readmitted because of a mass on the left paratracheal region along with mediastinitis. Her body temperature was increased. The patient underwent thoracic CT scan, which demonstrated mediastinal well defined soft tissue infiltration associated with mediastinitis and a well-defined mass in the left paratracheal region. The mass biopsy revealed squamous cell carcinoma. Several violaceus lesions were observed on the arms, hands and face. Severe bilateral lymphedema of the legs with a reddish papules nodules and tumors from 0.5 to 7 cm in diameter on the soles, toes and calves were present. This case illustrates the significant relapsing of the cutaneous Kaposi's sarcoma soon after the appearance of and the carcinoma and the mediastinitis. 
 
Disseminated
Aspergillus Terreus
infection treated with caspofungin
 
OR1.3
 Cooke FJa, Mumford Ab, Rahemtulla Ab, Rogers TRa. a
Department of Infectious Diseases and Microbiology, The Hammersmith Hospital and PHLS, London, UK, b
Department of Haematology, The Hammersmith Hospital, London, UK
 

A 57-year-old engineer, of Indian origin, was diagnosed with multiple myeloma in 1996. He received autologous peripheral blood stem cell transplants in May 1997 and August 2001. The second transplant was complicated by prolonged profound neutropenia (>100 days). During this period he developed a necrotic lesion on the palm of his right hand, which resembled ecthyma gangrenosum. However, repeated blood cultures yielded Alcaligenes xylosoxidans. The wound was extensively debrided and a small splinter was identified in the palmar fascia. Unexpectedly, intraoperative deep tissue samples demonstrated fungal hyphae on histology, and subsequently Aspergillus terreus was isolated from multiple specimens. A. terreus is often reported as resistant to amphotericin B, so intravenous itraconazole was commenced (200 mg bd). However, this isolate later proved sensitive to amphotericin B (MIC 0.5 mg/l). While receiving itraconazole the patient developed cavitation in his right lung, compatible with a septic embolus. He was then treated with intravenous caspofungin (50 mg od) for 3 weeks. His neutrophil count also gradually recovered. The palmar lesion improved clinically and thoracic imaging showed gradual resolution of his fungal lesions. This is the first reported use of the new echinocandin, caspofungin, in the management of disseminated A. terreus infection. 
 
Longterm-treatment with linezolid in a patient with mediastinitis caused by small variant MRSA
 
OR1.4
 Presterl ECa, Apfalter Pb, Rath Tc, Parschalk Ba, Graninger Wa. a
Department of Medicine I, Division of Infectious Diseases, University of Vienna, Vienna, Austria, b
Department of Clinical Microbiology, Hygiene Institute, University of Vienna, Vienna, Austria, c
Department of Surgery, Division of Plastic Surgery, University of Vienna, Vienna, Austria
 

A 58-year-old male patient with insulin-dependent diabetes underwent cardiac surgery for aortocoronary bypass 2 years ago. Two weeks after surgery he developed mediastinitis and sternal osteomyelitis caused by methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus (MRSA). Twice, revisions and plastic surgery for sternal osteomyelitis were performed. The patient received initially treatment with vancomycin. Then the patient received intravenous outpatient treatment with teicoplanin for 6 weeks followed by by treatment with fusidic acid and then trimethoprim/sulfametrol. The fistula was closed. Four months later he presented again with substernal pain and purulent discharge. The culture revealed the growth of staphylococci which were first mistaken for coagulase-negative staphylococci. After closer investigation these staphylococci were identified as small variant MRSA. Computer tomography (CT) revealed multiple mediastinal abscesses. The patient was treated with intravenous linezolid 600 mg bid for 10 days and then switched to oral linezolid 600 mg bid. The oral therapy was pursued for 16 weeks under close surveillance. The patient improved substantially, the purulent discharge disappeared. The mediastinal abscesses were not detected any longer by CT at the end of treatment. The treatment with linezolid was well tolerated. Platelets decreased initially but rose to normal values without treatment modification. 
 
Nosocomial pneumonia due to
Stenotrophomonas maltophilia
in a profound granulocytopenic patient hospitalized for community-acquired
Staphylococcus aureus
severe sepsis
 
OR1.5
 Radulescu Aa, Sasca Nb, Lupse Mc, Tatulescu Dc. a
University of Medicine and Pharmac, Epidemiology, Cluj-Napoca, Romania, b
The Teaching Hospital of Infectious Diseases, Laboratory, Cluj-Napoca, Romania, c
University of Medicine and Pharmacy, Infectious Diseases, Cluj-Napoca, Romania
 

Objective: To present the diverse opportunistic infections in immunocompromised patients and treatment difficulties.

Findings: A 35-year-old women was admitted to the Teaching Hospital of Infectious Diseases Cluj with a 2-day history of fever, myalgia, lumbar pain, hemorrhage syndrome. Severe sepsis was diagnosed and the conditions that evolved in it were paronychia in a patient with chronic leukemia having prolonged and profound granulocytopenia due to aggressive treatment with IFN. The condition at admission was critical due to trombocytopenia (<2000 platelets/μl) and hemorrhage syndrome. The evolution was favorable under antimicrobial treatment (imipenem), blood and platelet transfusion, intravenous immunoglobulins, granulocyte colony-stimulating factor, antifungal prophylaxis and supportive care. Blood and pus cultures revealed MSSA. In the 6th day of hospitalization she developed bronchopneumonia and respiratory failure. The sputum culture was positive for Stenotrophomonas maltophilia susceptible to ceftazidime, fluoroquinolones. Treatment was unsatisfactory until introducing ticarcilline–clavulanate and ciprofloxacine. She had uneventful recovery despite remaining granulocyto-trombocytopenic.

Conclusions: Treatment of infections with emerging agents in immunocompromised patients is difficult, guidance by results of susceptibility testing being misleading with a poor correlation between the tests and treatment outcome. 
 
Early disseminated listeriosis in a liver transplant recipient (LTR): a rare case due to an in vitro multiresistant strain
 
OR1.6
 Manfredi R, De Ruvo N, Vivarelli M, Bellusci R, Montalti R, La Barba G, Abtueli Aden A, Cucchetti A, Attard L, Calza L, Cavallari A. University of Bologna, Infectious Diseases, Bologna, Italy
 

A LTR receiving cyclosporin, azathioprine and steroids, developed an extraordinary episode of sepsis and pleural effusion due to a multiresistant Listeria monocytogenes (Lm) isolate. A Lm strain serov. 4 showing the same, extensive resistance pattern (all penicillins and 1st- and 2nd-generation cephalosporins), was isolated from multiple blood cultures and pleural fluid 2 weeks after surgery, while stool exam was negative. Our p spent her life in countryside and bred some animals, but denied consumption of uncontrolled food. Iv cotrimoxazole administration achieved a complete clinical and microbiological cure in 10 days. Underlying immunodeficiency may prompt unusual/severe Lm infection, but because of its usual community-acquired origin, Lm disease remains infrequent in hospitalized p. Only seven anecdotal reports of Lm infection were described in LTR, 1986–2000, all but 1 occurring months–years after surgery. An early respiratory and systemic infection caused by a community-acquired Lm strain which proved resistant to first-choice antibiotics, but had a favorable response to cotrimoxazole (used only once in a LTR with Lm sepsis), characterized our episode. An epidemiological survey retrieved the possible source of this usually community-acquired infection. Lm should be regarded as an emerging opportunistic pathogen in LTR, and specific risk factors should be seeked. When immunodeficiency is of concern, the unpredictable sensitivity of Lm should prompt in vitro assays to adjust antimicrobial therapy 
 
Problems for discussion
 
HBV–HCV and liver carcinogenesis: where does the viral influence end?
 
OR2.2
 Pappas GA. University Hospital, Internal Medicine, Ioannina, Greece
 

Hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) is a major clinical problem worldwide, usually evolving over a long-standing liver pathology, in the latter stages in the form of cirrhosis. HBV and HCV chronic infection is a common etiology of cirrhosis, and hence, HCC. A number of studies have attempted to clarify the role of these viruses into the progression towards HCC. Does their end in the stage of cirrhosis? Is progression towards HCC independent of the etiology of cirrhosis (since alcoholic cirrhosis also proceeds to HCC)? Do the trials with interferon alfa for patients with HBV or HCV cirrhosis exhibit a favorable result due to the antiviral properties of interferon, or is interferon exhibiting anti-oncogenic potential?, and is HCC cytokine and hormone sensitive (view ongoing trials with somatostatine analogues versus HCC)? (hence, if we treat alcoholic cirrhosis patients with interferon could we have a favorable response?). Which patients with HBV or HCV cirrhosis are eligible for interferon treatment?: interferon treatment is a potential hazard for those with thrombocytopenia. How ethical is it to conduct a randomised trial where one leg of cirrhotic patients is left without antiviral therapy? And on the basis of which classification system should the two legs of such a trial be separated? Moreover, do viral proteins with oncogenic potential exist (the controversy over the recently discovered HBV×protein is still, unresolved)? A major topic awaiting for a major debate. 
 
The behavior of
Campylobacter
spp. intestinal and systemic disease is significantly modified by both underlying HIV infection and antiretroviral treatment
 
OR2.3
 Manfredi R, Calza L, Chiodo F. University of Bologna, Infectious Diseases, Bologna, Italy
 

To assess the role of HIV-associated campylobacteriosis (C) according to HAART availability, 17 patients with positive culture were identified since 1991. Compared with the ∼1000 HIV-infected P followed in the last decade, no epidemiological differences were shown, save a greater sexual exposure to HIV (P<0.005). The introduction of HAART caused a drop of frequency of C (from 1.8 to 0.9 episodes per 1000 p-year; P<0.0001), and modified clinical features, with disappearance of dissemination and mortality, reported in 7 and 2 patients before 1996 (P<0.03). HIV-related immunodeficiency and disease stage were significantly related to C features before and after HAART availability: P<0.0001 for CD4 and neutrophil count, P<0.007 for AIDS diagnosis. Most cases (15) were community-acquired, but alimentary or environmental risk factors were never found. Ten patients received cotrimoxazole prophylaxis (nine before 1996; P<0.03), while no relationship occurred with steroid or antibiotic use, caused 14 cases out of 17. A 100% sensitivity was found to quinolones, followed by cephalosporins (82.3%), gentamicin (76.5%), macrolides (64.7%), and cotrimoxazole (47.1%). A 8–18-day antimicrobial therapy cured 16 P, but relapses caused by similar strains occurred in 6 patients within 2–8 weeks, all in the pre-HAART era (P<0.05). C still occurs in the HAART era, probably due to its varied mode of transmission. The frequency of C is greater in HIV-infected patients, but less frequent visceralization, recurrences, and mortality characterized the HAART era. 
 
Human Coronavirus-related outbreaks in a neonatal and pediatric intensive care
 
OR2.4
 Vallet Sa, Gagneur Ab, Legrand MCa, Sizun Jb, Talbot Pc, Picard Ba. a
CHU Morvan, Laboratoire de Microbiologie, Brest, France, b
CHU Morvan, Nicu, Brest, France, c
INRS, Human Health Research Center, Laval, Quebec, Canada
 

Objective: To determine the incidence and risk factors for nosocomial viral respiratory infections (NRVI) and involvement of Human Coronaviruses (HCoV) in a neonatal and pediatric intensive care unit. Methods: Prospective observational study. Nasal samples were obtained by cytological brush at admission and weekly thereafter for all hospitalized infants. Nasal samples were taken monthly from staff. Virological studies were performed, using immunofluorescence for Respiratory Syncitial Virus (RSV), Influenza viruses, paramyxoviruses, and adenoviruses; both immunofluorescence and RT-PCR were used for HCoV detection. Results: During 1998, 42 HCoV related NRVI were detected in 152 NN and six in 92 children. Three HCoV-related outbreaks were observed (February, August and December), associated with a high prevalence of infection in staff. During August outbreak, 18 HCoV-infected NRVI were detected over 23 hospitalized infants. Seventy-five of hospitalized preterm NN with gestational age under 32 weeks and 52.4% of staff members were infected. Risk factors for NRVI in NN were birth weight, gestational age, ventilation, oxygenation and hospitalization length. Ninety-two percent of infected preterm NN were symptomatic, mainly with bradycardia and respiratory worsening. Conclusions: These data provide additional evidence for a significant role of HCoV in NRVI occurring in hospitalized preterm NN. 
 
Strain typing and screening of 8 DNA targets to assess
Echinococcus
sp transmission in new and old geographic endemic foci
 
OR2.5
 Bart JMa, Piarroux Ra, Dia Lb, Benchikh-Elfegoun MCc, Vuitton DAa, Bardonnet Ka. a
SERF, Parasitology, BESANCON, France, b
National Centre of veterinary study, Parasitology, Nouakchott, Mauritania, c
University of Mentouri, Parasitology, Constantine, Algeria
 

Purpose: Cystic echinococcosis is due to Echinococcus granulosus. Parasite cycles depending on the main intermediate host species involved in different foci have been described promoting mixed infection in the same definitive host. Strain typing is a tool to identify the main intermediate host involved via the dogs in the human infection route and to focus the control measures. Many DNA targets have been used to compare samples and to access the parasite cycle in different countries. But no study has compared the value of each of these targets. Eight targets have been tested in Mauritania where echinococcosis is an emergent disease, and in Algeria where strain typing has never been done. Thirty-five cyst samples from human, ovine, camel and bovine have been tested with six nuclear and two mitochondrial targets. Results: The two mitochondrial targets and four out the six nuclear targets have allowed to discriminate the different foci. Two strains have been found infectious to human : the ‘sheep’ strain in Algeria and the ‘camel’ strain in Mauritania. Conclusion: Although overlapping geographically sometimes, this raises the question of the respective genetic evolution of the different strains and of their involving in human infection. 
 
Alveolar echinococcosis in France: an update
 
OR2.6
 Bardonnet K, Bresson-Hadni S, Bartholomot B, Gérard A, Watelet J, Beytout J, Saurin JC, Piarroux R, Vuitton DA, WHO Centre Collaborating for Prevention and Treatment of Human Echinococcosis, University of Franche-Comté, Besançon, France
 

Introduction: The highest prevalence rate for alveolar echinococcosis (AE) in Europe has been found in France. In 1997, a French observatory of human AE was done in order to get data that could be used to evaluate presentation, evolution and management of AE. Material-Methods: French cases were collected for the period 1982–2002. Registration of every case was performed with the subject's agreement. A questionnaire was filled in by referring to the patients' medical files or to practitioners or to patients themselves. Completeness of the collection of cases was ensured by multiplying the sources of information. Results: Two hundred and sixty nine French patients were registered. Sex ratio averaged 1. Mean age at diagnostic was 54.8 years. 12.5% of diagnosis was performed in ‘echinococcosis free’ French areas. Symptoms, but not always specific liver symptoms, were present at diagnosis in 76.4% of cases. The liver was the main location of lesions in 93.6% of cases. A wide spectrum of management of the patients was observed, accounting for regional differences. Conclusion: This French observatory of human EA will facilitate a better management of the disease at the national level. It shows new epidemiological trends, and especially an extension of the endemic area. 
 
Can coins and paper currency transmit
Bacillus anthracis
?
 
OR2.7
 Ghenghesh KS. Faculty of Medicine, Al-Fateh University, Medical Microbiology, Tripoli, Libyan Arab Jamahiriya
 

Anthrax is an often fatal bacterial infection caused by Bacillus anthracis. Recent events that began in September 2001 in US has gained the organism worldwide attention and heightened awareness of and concern about anthrax. Many cases of anthrax with a number of deaths have been reported as a result of contact with envelopes, sent through postal mail, containing B. anthracis endospores. A number of studies have shown that currency is colonized with bacterial organisms, that include enteropathogens (e.g. Shigella sp.), other enteric flora (e.g. Escherichia coli) and potential pathogens (e.g. Staphylcoccus sp., Pseudomonas sp. and Bacillus sp.). Furthermore, methicillin-resistant S. aureus (MRSA) isolates that produced enterotoxin (SEB) and toxic shock syndrome toxin-1 also been reported. All of these studies do agree on that currency may be considered as a method of spreading potentially pathogenic and pathogenic bacteria in the community. Therefore, currency could also be a vehicle for spreading other highly pathogenic organisms that include B. anthracis. In addition, the introduction of the ‘euro’ could also allow such bacteria greater freedom to travel across the euro zone. The threat of using currency, particularly paper notes, in spreading lethal organisms should be investigated and proper measures to prevent the use of such a method by terrorists should be implemented. 
 
Salvage of temporary femoral catheters for haemodialysis using antibiotics in ambulatory patients
 
OR2.8
 Gerasimovska V, Oncevski A, Dejanov P. Department of Nephrology, Clinical Centre, Skopje, The Former Yugoslav Republic, Macedonia
 

The stay of femoral catheters (FC) for haemodialysis is typically short-term for several days. We used FC as a temporary vascular access (VA) for a longer period of time in outpatients going on regular ambulatory haemodialysis, who had a problem with their permanent access. We analysed 43 patients who were discharged from hosptal with FC. Duration time of FC was between 13 and 183 days (average 44.2 days) with cummulative total of 1989 days. The incidence of bacteriaemia was 2.51 episodes/1000 catheter days. In six patients we had signs of infection, so according to our protocol we took blood cultures from peripheral vein, and from catheter (at same time) and started with antibiotic therapy (AB) systemically and locally (AB was ‘locked’ in catheter) with different duration of time. Dominant microorganism was Staphylococcus coagulasa negative, and much less Staphylococcus aureus, and Enterococcus.AB that were frequently used were: Cefotaxim, Vancomycin and Ciprofloxacin. At one of six patients we removed catheter at once without trying to save the catheter. Catheter tip was sent for microbiological analysis too. Criteria for catheter-related bacteriemia (CRB) was found in only one patient, and for possible CRB in five patients after we removed the catheters. In the absence of clinical signs of infection, AB treatment was not provided for positive tip culture alone or for positive blood culture of the catheter with negative blood culture from peripheral vein. 
 
Advances in meningitis education
 
OR2.9
 Holt DEa, Tait MIb, Cavanna ALb, Worgan-Brown Sa, Hart Ba. a
The Meningitis Trust, Stroud, UK, b
The Computer-aided Learning Unit, School of Health Science, University of Wales, Swansea, UK
 

Background: Meningitis remains an important cause of death worldwide despite improvements in diagnosis, treatment and prevention. Clinical and lay awareness of the disease relies on education, however educational delivery has changed and the introduction of material suitable for computer and internet application is now necessary. We have developed educational material on CDROM and on the internet applicable both at tertiary university and secondary school level.

Application: A computer-aided learning program on CDROM, covering all aspects of meningitis has been produced. It is suitable for undergraduate teaching of healthcare professionals from student nurse and doctors to pharmacists. In order to reach school children in a form acceptable to both pupils and teachers, we have developed a curriculum-linked website. These applications are simple to use and can be incorporated into existing courses of study, so that issues raised can be discussed with tutors and group peers.

Comment: The introduction of new methods of teaching and learning mean that compatible educational material must be produced. We believe that these applications, focusing on meningitis, are the first of their kind and that they offer tutors the opportunity to progress their teaching of the disease both in methodology and content. 
 
Effect of ceftriaxone along with probiotics administration on intestinal ecosystem and betalactamase activity
 
OR2.10
 Bertazzoni Minelli Ea, Benini Aa, Zoppi Gb. a
Department of Medicine and Public Health-Pharmacology Section, University of Verona, Verona, Italy, b
Department of Paediatrics, University of Verona, Verona, Italy
 

Oral bacteriotherapy during antibiotic treatment is a much debated topic. Aim: To study whether different probiotics can prevent imbalance of the intestinal ecosystem (dysbiosis) in children during therapy with ceftriaxone (Cx). Methods: Fifty-one children (mean age 5.1 years) with febrile respiratory tract infections were treated with Cx 50 mg/kg/day IV, alone (therapy 1) and along with the following preparations: Saccharomyces boulardii (2); Enterococcus spp. (3); lactulose (4); L. casei GG (5); L. rhamnosus, L. bifidus and L. acidophilus (6); B. bifidum and L. acidophilus (7); and a mixture of various lactobacilli and bifidobacteria at high concentrations (8). Faecal samples, collected before and after treatment, were analysed for microflora composition, Cx concentration, and beta-lactamase (BL) activity. Results: Cx causes intestinal dysbiosis. No C. difficile was found. Faecal BL increased after therapy in all treated groups. Cx alone increased BL activity in 60% (3/5) of children (no activity before treatment); a higher incidence (75–80%) was found in groups 2 and 5. After therapies 3, 4, 6, 7, and 8, BL activity was found in 1 or 2 more children. Cx was detected in 36% of faecal samples. Conclusions: The probiotics administration seems to protect against dysbiosis caused by Cx and to contain the increase in faecal BL activity. The effects differ according to the probiotic administered and are peculiar to certain bacterial species. These preliminary data need further studies. 
 
Antiviral therapy
 
Brivudin compared to famciclovir for improved therapy of herpes zoster: effects on acute disease and postherpetic neuralgia
 
OR3.1
 Wassilew SWa, Stubinski BMb, Koch Ib, Schumacher Kc, Capriati Ad. a
Klinikum Krefeld, Department of Dermatology, Krefeld, Germany, b
Berlin-Chemie/Menarini Group, Clinical Research, Berlin, Germany, c
Berlin-Chemie/Menarini Group, Clinical Research, Berlin, Germany, d
Menarini Group, Menarini Ricerche, Florence, Italy
 

Objective: Comparison of efficacy and safety of brivudin 1×125 mg and famciclovir 3×250 mg, both for 7 days, in the treatment of herpes zoster. Methods: Randomised, double-blind study on 2027 immunocompetent patients ≥50 years (brivudin: n=1019, famciclovir: n=1008). Primary endpoint was the prevalence of postherpetic neuralgia (PHN), defined as at least moderate zoster-associated pain 3 months after start of treatment. Results: Prevalence of PHN under brivudin (11.1%) and famciclovir (9.2%) did not differ significantly (OR (ITT): 1.23 [0.92–1.65]; P=0.17). Prevalence of zoster-associated pain, regardless of intensity, was 21.2% under brivudin and 19.3% under famciclovir. Median duration of PHN was 47.0 days with brivudin and 54.0 days with famciclovir (RR (ITT): 1.05 [0.76–1.45]; P=0.77). Median duration of vesicle formation was identical (32 h) under brivudin and famciclovir (RR(ITT): 1.01 [0.90–1.12]; P=0.91). Potentially treatment-related adverse events occurred in 11.8% of the brivudin recipients and in 10.1% of the famciclovir recipients (P=0.26). Conclusions: In zoster patients ≥50 years, brivudin 1×125 mg and famciclovir 3×250 mg showed equivalent effects on prevalence and duration of PHN. Brivudin is as effective as famciclovir in stopping viral replication in acute herpes zoster. Brivudin offers the advantage of a once daily dosage regimen while being as well tolerated as famciclovir. 
 
Activity of complexes of Pt(II) and Pd(II) with pyridine-2-carbaldehyde thiosemicarbazone (HFoTsc) against Hepres simplex virus infection
 
OR3.2
 Varadinova Ta, Kovala-Demertzi Db, Demertzis Mb. a
Faculty of Biology, Laboratory of Virology, Sofia University, St. Klement Ohridski, Sofia, Bulgaria, b
University of Ioannina, Inorganic and Analytical Chemistry, Ioannina, Bulgaria
 

Our previously published data have shown that [Pt(HFoTsc)2]Cl2 inhibited HSV 1, strain Victoria, infection in cultured cells (Acta Virol., 2001, 45, 87) with selectivity index (SI) 1.5 times higher than that of acyclovir 0 (ACV). In order to evaluate virus specific response and structure–activity relationships we continue our investigations with three Pt(II) and three Pd(II) complexes. The activity was evaluated against sensitive to ACV HSV 2 (strain Bja) and resistant strains R-100 (HSV 1) and PU (HSV 2) and compared to that obtained against strain Victoria (HSV 1) infection. SI was indicative for activity. The virus specific response was demonstrated by the fact that viruses sensitive to ACV were also sensitive to Pt(HFoTsc)2]Cl2, while ACV resistant viruses were sensitive to [PtCl(FoTsc)]. The structure–activity relationship was proved by the fact that the less active against HSV infection was [Pd(FoTsc)]. 
 
Influenza diagnosis, treatment, and the impact of new antivirals on current treatment behaviours during influenza outbreaks
 
OR3.3
 Schaetz La, Sessa Ab, a
Hoffman-La Roche F. Basel, Switzerland, b
Italian College of General Practitioners, Italy
 

Introduction: Annual influenza epidemics severely affect individuals, families, health care systems and society. The availability of new and specific antivirals provides an opportunity for better management of influenza. Methods: During the 1999/2000 and 2000/2001 influenza seasons, physicians (∼100/country) and public (∼1000/country) in the USA and Europe were interviewed to determine perceptions of influenza and behaviours for its treatment. Results: Patients recognise influenza illness as severe and identify it by symptoms of fever, muscle aches/pains and cough. Physicians use these symptoms to diagnose influenza clinically (93% fever, 78% muscle aches/pains, 47% cough); their main treatment objective being to reduce complications. Antibiotics for influenza treatment are broadly recommended/prescribed by about 30% of European physicians, whereas currently available antivirals are only recommended by 10%. The recommendation of antivirals by US physicians increased from 47% (season 99/00) to 62% (00/01) and markedly decreased antibiotic use (from 25 to 11%). Experience from the two influenza seasons shows that influenza antivirals are only used while the virus is circulating and that the volume of use is proportional to the size of the outbreaks. Conclusions: Experiences in the USA show that with prompt outbreak information antivirals can be used appropriately in times of influenza activity. 
 
Influenza treatment with oseltamivir: costs and benefits for the individual as well as for society
 
OR3.4
 Sander Ba, Gyldmark Mb, Morris Jc, Bergemann Ra. a
IMOR GmbH, Lörrach, Germany, b
F Hoffman-La Roche, Pharmaceutical Division, Health Economics and Strategic Pricing, Basel, Switzerland, c
Roche Products Ltd, Welwyn, UK
 

Objective: To evaluate the effects of treatment of influenza with antivirals (oseltamivir) on health outcomes and costs to patients and society.

Methods: Based on clinical trial data and data from the literature a simulation model has been developed. The underlying clinical pathway covers morbidity and mortality due to influenza and its specified complications. Health outcome data and costs were attached to events in the model. The model compares various scenarios, which are defined by treatment schemes within defined populations and other parameters. Application of the model is shown using UK unit cost data simulating an otherwise healthy adult population comparing oseltamivir with usual care.

Results: Early treatment results in reduced morbidity, which translates into faster recovery and return to normal activities (1.93 days). Lower morbidity and mortality make this a cost-effective intervention from a societal perspective. The analysis covers more than 10 different scenarios and the incremental cost effectiveness ratios will be discussed.

Conclusion: Antiviral treatment appears to be effective in terms of health outcome and cost for otherwise healthy adults from the perspectives of both the individual patient and society. However, this effect is very sensitive to time when treatment is started and the accuracy of the diagnosis of influenza. 
 
Oseltamivir is well tolerated by all patient groups
 
OR3.5
 Thakar Ba, Dutkowski Rb, Froelich Ec, Gilbride Ja, Ward Pa. a
Roche Global Development, Welwyn, UK, b
F Hoffman-La Roche, Nutley, USA, c
F Hoffman-La Roche, Basel, Switzerland
 

Introduction: Oral oseltamivir, the ethyl ester pro-drug of a potent inhibitor of influenza virus neuraminidase, is licensed for the treatment and prophylaxis of influenza in the USA. Patients and Methods: Safety data [adverse events, laboratory safety evaluations] derived from clinical trials involving >12 000 subjects (including ∼1000 children and ∼1200 high-risk adults) and 400 healthy volunteers in a large study investigating ECG parameters. Spontaneous event reports from MEDWATCH or yellow-card reports following use by ∼2 000 000 individuals worldwide. An observational case-control study of >10 000 subjects with influenza-like illness treated with oseltamivir. Results: Oseltamivir was well tolerated in clinical trials; drug-related side-effects were limited to transient GI effects occurring in ≤1:10 exposed individuals. These resolved spontaneously and caused drop out in <1% of treated subjects. No effects on ECG parameters were noted at doses ≥sixfold above the licensed regimen. Oseltamivir had no adverse effects on pulmonary function. No additional effects were identified among high-risk adults or children, or following prolonged dosing for prophylaxis. Occasional reports of liver dysfunction have been documented post-marketing but causal association has not been established. Conclusions: Oral oseltamivir is an effective and safe antiviral suitable for influenza management in all patient groups. 
 
Selection of active antiviral substances on Vaccinia virus uracil dna glycosylase
 
OR3.6
 Scaramozzino Na, Crance JMa, Drillien Rb, Dideberg Oc, Garin Da. a
CRSSA, Unite virologie, La Tronche, France, b
INSERM 99-08, Biologie, Strasbourg, France, c
IBS, Cristallographie Macromoleculaire, Grenoble, France
 

The decision to stop the vaccination against smallpox and the loss of specific immunity of a high proportion of the population made apocalyptic the perspective of a natural or provoked re-emergence of smallpox. Therefore, it is important to improve the current capacities to prevent or to treat the orthopoxvirus infections. Uracil DNA glycosylase (UDG) is one viral enzyme indispensable to the replication of poxviruses. UDG of the Copenhagen strain of Vaccinia virus (VV) was characterized with the aim of defining specific inhibitors susceptible to be used as a new class of active antiviral substances on the viruses of the Orthopoxvirus genus. The activity of this enzyme was analysed in real time, in an original method, on a PCR quantitative instrument by digestion of amplified DNA revealed by fluorescent intercaled molecules. This technique was used to screen and select several active antiviral substances on UDG. Moreover, the antiviral activity was estimated by the cytopathic effect of the VV on infected Vero cells. The cytotoxicity was determined by inhibition of Trypan Blue exclusion. The specificity of action of each tested compound was estimated by the selective index (50% cytotoxic dose/50% effective dose). Two antiviral compounds were selected for their inhibitory effect on UDG activity and on VV replication in Vero cell culture : (+)-5-iodo-2′-deoxyuridine and 4-chlorouracil. These compounds are candidates for the chemotherapy of poxvirus infections. 
 
Russian antiviral drugs for immunocompromised patients
 
OR3.7
 Nossik Da, Kaplina Eb, Nossik Nc, Ladigina Ab. a
The D.I.Ivanovsky Institute of Virology Russian Acad. Med. Sci., Laboratory of Immunodeficiency Viruses, Moscow, Russian Federation, b
Technomedservice Company, Research, Moscow, Russian Federation, c
The D.I.Ivanovsky Institute of Virology Russian Acad. Med. Sci., Laboratory of virus ontogenesis, Moscow, Russian Federation
 

Objective: To study the efficacy and tolerance of Russian antiviral drugs produced from DNA in a limited resources context. Results: The drug Derinat was produced from salmons' milt. Mm of DNA was 270–500 kDa, hyperchrome effect >37%, protein content <0.5%. The conjugation of the DNA with Fe3+ resulted in a new drug named Ferrovir which influences DNA and RNA synthesis during early stages of HIV-1 replication by blocking the virus's action on cells' metabolism and reduces cytomegalovirus titre in fibroblast cells for 1.5–2.0 Ig TCID50. A protective effect of ferrovir against fatal herpes encephalitis mice was found. The drugs are not toxic. IC50>4000 mg/ml. EC90 of ferrovir against HIV-1 was 800 mg/ml. In limited clinical trials patients received 75 mg of drugs twice daily (7–14 days). Administration was well tolerated and no side effects were observed. Derinat in 88.1% cases of herpesvirus infection (42 patients) improved the healing and shortened duration of illness. HIV-infected patients (34) treated with ferrovir showed sustained, elevated CD4+ counts and a significant reduction in HIV-1 viral load (median 1.8 Ig). The apparent remission was found in patients with concomitant HIV and Herpes Virus infection. Conclusions: Antivirals show good antiviral potency against RNA- and DNA-viruses; are well tolerated by patients and are useful in case of mixed infections; low price makes them accessible to populations with low financial resources. 
 
Ortho Total HCV core antigen assay can aid early prediction of response in patients treated with Interferon/Ribavirin
 
OR3.8
 Lunel Fa, Veillon Pb, Payan Cb. a
AHU Angers, Laboratoire de Bacterio-Virologie, Angers, France, b
CHU Angers, Laboratoire de Bacterio-Virologie, Angers, France
 

Aim: Evaluate the predictive value of Total HCV Core Antigen Assay and viral kinetics in patients with chronic HCV. Methods: One hundred and twenty two patients infected by genotype 1, 4, 5 or pretreatment viral load (bDNA 2.0, Chiron) >3 Meq/ml, with no previous treatment, received 6 MU interferon (IFN) during 12 months (M). Ribavirin was given with IFN after 3 months therapy, for 9 months in patients with detectable RNA. Viral load was expressed as Log (UI/ml) and HCV Ag as log (pg/ml×10 000). Results: Pretreatment Ag values were correlated with viral load (r2=0.779). We observed a rapid decrease of Ag (5.2 log pg/ml) and viral load (5.1 log UI/ml) after M1 in sustained responders (SR). In patients who relapsed (RR) after IFN alone, the fall was less important (2.6 log pg/ml, 3.6 log UI/ml) during M1. In SR and RR to combination therapy, the decrease of Ag and viral load at M1 was, respectively, (Ag: 1.2 and 1.4 log pg/ml; RNA: 2.4 and 1.5 log UI/ml). We did not observed significant variation of Ag and viral load in non-responders. The negative predictive value of HCV RNA and Ag after M1 of treatment were 100%, and positive predictive values were 81 and 82%. After 1 month of IFN alone, the HCV Ag decrease was highly predictive of SR, correlated with RNA negativation and early reduction of HCV RNA (>2 log). Conclusion: Early measurements of Total HCV Core Antigen are useful to predict long-term response to treatment. 
 
Lamivudine in the treatment of acute hepatitis B
 
OR3.9
 Vincenti A, Meini M, Luchi S, De Gennaro M, Ricciardi L, Moneta S, Scasso A. Infectious Diseases Department, Infectious Diseases, Lucca, Italy
 

Acute hepatitis B is a self-limiting infection, but in some cases its course may be particularly severe. We report a case of a 77-years-old woman affected by acute hepatitis B treated with lamivudine. On admission in the hospital the alanino-aminotransferase was1060 U/l, the aspartate-aminotransferase 1017 U/l, bilirubin 10,2 mg/dl, HBsAg, HBcIgM and HBeAg were positive, HBV DNA was 300.000 copies/ml. During the following days, the levels of AST and ALT gradually rose; on the 14th day prothrombine time was 39%, bilirubin 30 mg/dl and the patient developed signs of encephalopathy. Four plasmapheresis were practiced without benefit, so the patient was treated with lamivudine, 100 mg/day. After 24 days of therapy, lamivudine was discontinued because of the appearance of diffuse maculopapular rash. At this time the results of liver function tests were normal; after four months HBsAg and HBV DNA were no longer detectable. In our patient lamivudine prevented an acute hepatic failure. Our experience suggests a promising role of lamivudine in the treatment of acute hepatitis B, but how long such therapy have to be practiced and in which patients? Prospective, controlled, clinical studies using lamivudine in patients with acute-hepatitis B are necessary. 
 
The cost-effectiveness of amantadine versus symptomatic care in the treatment of influenza
 
OR3.10
 Morris Sa, Carman WFb, Barber Jc. a
City University, London, UK, b
West of Scotland Specialist Virology Centre, Glasgow, UK, c
Alliance Pharmaceuticals, Chippenham, UK
 

Aim: To assess the cost-effectiveness of amantadine versus best symptomatic care in the treatment of influenza in the UK.

Methods: We constructed an economic model populated with parameters from the published literature. The model structure is the same as that used in the economic evaluation of zanamivir published by the National Institute for Clinical Excellence in the UK. We conducted a cost-utility analysis (incremental cost per QALY gained) of amantadine versus best symptomatic care. The analyses are conducted for all adults (average-risk group) and the at-risk population (high-risk group), based on the prevalence of influenza over an average season and when the virus is circulating. The perspective is that of the NHS.

Results: In the average-risk group the incremental cost per QALY gained of amantadine relative to best symptomatic care is UK£30,488 during an average influenza season and UK£12,538 when the virus is circulating. For high-risk individuals the figures are UK£35,278 and UK£14,526, respectively. The results are sensitive to the hospitalisation rate.

Conclusions: If the threshold for cost-effectiveness is £20,000 per QALY gained amantadine represents value for money in the treatment of influenza in a variety of scenarios, including the baseline for both average-risk and high-risk groups when the virus is circulating. 
 
Posters
 
Sunday, 5 May 2002
 
Susceptibility of currently used antibiotics including newer fluoroquinolones in penicillin—resistant
Streptococcus pneumoniae
 
PS101
 Ertugrul Na, Gur Db, Musher DMc. a
SSK Ankara Education Hospital, Clinical Microbiology and Infectious Diseases, Ankara, Turkey, b
Hacettepe University Children's Hospital, Clinical Microbiology, Ankara, Turkey, c
Baylor College of Medicine, Veterans Affairs Medical Center, Infectious Diseases, Houston, Texas, USA
 

Background: Surveillance studies all over the world have revealed an extraordinary increase in the prevalence of penicillin resistant Streptococcus pneumoniae. The newer quinolones are believed to have broad activity against S. pneumoniae. Methods: A total of 87 penicillin resistant clinical strains isolated from patients at Hacettepe Children's Hospital, Ankara, Turkey between 1999 and 2001 were tested for their in vitro susceptibility to various antibiotics that are commonly used in the treatment of respiratory tract infections. The minimum inhibitory concentrations (MICs) of the penicillin, amoxicillin/clavulanic acid, doxycycline, azithromycin, clarithromycin, ceftriaxone, ciprofloxacin, levofloxacin, moxifloxacin and gemifloxacin were determined using the NCCLS recommended procedure for E-test. Results: The range of MICs, MIC50 and MIC90 values for all agents tested against the strains are shown in the Table. Gemifloxacin and moxifloxacin had the highest in-vitro activity among the quinolones tested. All strains tested were susceptible to <0.2 μg/ml gemifloxacin, <1 μg/ml moxifloxacin and 2 μg/ml levofloxacin. Conclusions: There is some degree of resistance to all the drugs except the newer quinolones which were active against all isolates studied. Table 1 MICs of the tested antibiotics against penicillin resistant isolates of S. pneumoniae. 

 
 
 
Comparative activity of quinolones against nosocomial
Staphylococcus aureus
: the results of multicentre study in Russia
 
PS102
 Kretchikov VA, Dekhnich AV, Stratchounski LS. Institute of Antimicrobial Chemotherapy, Smolensk, Russian Federation
 

Objectives: To compare in vitro activity of ciprofloxacin (CIP), levofloxacin (LEV) and moxifloxacin (MOX) against nosocomial strains of Staphylococcus aureus isolated in different regions of Russia.

Methods: A total of 879 S. aureus isolates obtained from patients hospitalised in 17 medical institutions in different regions of Russia: 4 in Central region (Moscow, Ryazan, Smolensk), 2 in North-Western region (St.-Petersburg), 3 in Southern region (Krasnodar, Stavropol), 2 in Volga region (N. Novgorod, Kazan), 3 in Ural region (Ekaterinburg, Ufa) and 3 in Siberia (Krasnoyarsk, Novosibirsk, Tomsk) were included. Antimicrobial susceptibility testing was performed by agar dilution method in accordance with the NCCLS recommendations (2001).

Results: Against all strains MOX was the most active agent with MIC90=0.25 mg/l compare to 4 mg/l for CIP and 1 mg/l for LEV. The MIC50, MIC90 and MICs ranges are shown in the table. Against ciprofloxacin-susceptible MRSA (N=199) the following MIC90 were found: 0.5 for CIP, 0.25 for LEV and 0.06 for MOX. Against non-susceptible to CIP MRSA strains (N=96) MIC90 were: 16 for LEV and 2 for MOX.

Conclusions: According to the above data MOX is more active than CIP and LEV against both MSSA and MRSA strains. However, MOX and LEV have a reduced activity against non-susceptible to CIP MRSA isolates. 

 
 
 
Fluoroquinolones resistance and topoisomerases mutations in
Stenotrophomonas maltophilia
 
PS103
 Trigo-Daporta Ma, Alonso-Manzanares MAb, Munoz Criado Sa, Munoz-Bellido JLa, Garcia-Rodriguez JAa. a
Department of Microbiologia, Hospital Universitario de Salamanca, Salamanca, Spain, b
Department of Microbiologia, Hospital Virgen de la Concha, Zamora, Spain
 

Purpose:
Stenotrophomonas maltophilia prevalence is growing, mainly in some hospital areas. S. maltophilia is frequently multi-drug resistant. Fluoroquinolone (FQ) resistance varies from one to another study, but in whole resistance is moderate to high. GyrA and parC QRDR partial codes have been recently described. We have studied correlations between FQ-resistance and mutations in these sequences in S. maltophilia clinical strains. Material and methods:
gyrA and parC QRDR regions from six FQ-resistant and two FQ-susceptible S. maltophilia clinical strains were amplified and sequenced. MICs of ciprofloxacin (CFX), gatifloxacin (GFX) and clinafloxacin (CNFX) were determined by the agar dilution method, according guidelines defined by NCCLS for P. aeruginosa. Results and conclusions: MICs ranges of CFX, GFX and CNFX for resistant strains were 8–32, 1–32 and 0.5–8 mg/l. Susceptible strains had MICs of CFX, GFX and CNFX of 1, 0.2 and 0.06–0.1 mg/l, respectively. Most susceptible and resistant strains had no significant mutations in the fragments sequenced. Only one resistant strain (MIC of CFX 16 mg/l) and one susceptible strain (MIC of CFX1 mg/l) had a significant gyrA mutation, the same in both strains (Ile112–Val). Thus, FQ resistance in S. maltophilia shall derive from changes in other areas in the topoisomerases or probably from other mechanisms of resistance, such as efflux pumps. 
 
Fluoroquinolone resistance in genetically characterized
Corynebacterium urealyticum
clinical strains
 
PS104
 Sanchez Hernandez Ja, Gutierrez Zufiaurre MNa, Mora Peris Bb, Yague Guirao Gb, Segovia Hernandez Mb, Munoz-Bellido JLa, Garcia-Rodriguez JAa. a
Department of Microbiologia, Hospital Universitario de Salamanca, Salamanca, Spain, b
Department of Microbiologia, Hospital Morales Meseguer, Murcia, Spain
 

Purpose:
Corynebacterium urealyticum is the cause of encrusted cystitis and other inespecific UTIs and systemic infections. It is frequently multi-drug resistant, with a high rate of resistance to fluoroquinolones (FQ). The mechanisms of resistance to FQs have not been described in C. urealyticum. We describe the C. urealyticum parC gene QRDR region and its relationship with quinolone resistance. Materials and methods: The activity of ciprofloxacin (CFX), levofloxacin (LFX), gatifloxacin (GFX), clinafloxacin (CNFX) and moxifloxacin (MFX) against 30 C. urealyticum clinical strains was determined following NCCLS guidelines for enterococci. We amplified and sequenced their parC QRDR by standard methods. Results and conclusions: Five strains (16.6%) were CFX-susceptible (MIC 0.1–0.5 mg/l), 5 had MICs 1–2 mg/l and 20 (66.7%) were high-level CFX-resistant (MIC 32–128 mg/l). CNFX was 64-fold more active than CFX. MFX and GFX had MICs90 of 4 and 8 mg/l. All the strains, including the type strain, showed a C to T change at the 2614 position referred to wild type S. aureus parC gene, leading to a Ser-80-Phe change, described as the main parC change in FQ-resistant S. aureus. This finding suggest that this mutant sequence, as compared with parC sequences from other Grampositives, might be the wild-type for this species, and might explain in part its high resistance rate, and its apparent lightness to develop high-level resistance. 
 
Ciprofloxacin-resistant
Streptococcus pneumoniae
isolated by Birmingham Public Health Laboratory between 1997 and 2001
 
PS105
 Harnett SJa, Gill MJb, Brenwald NPb, George RCc, Johnson APd. a
Birmingham Public Health Laboratory, Department of Medical Microbiology, Birmingham, UK, b
Division of Immunity and Infection, University of Birmingham, Birmingham, UK, c
Central Public Health Laboratory, Respiratory and Systemic Infection Laboratory, London, UK, d
Central Public Health Laboratory, Antibiotic Resistance Monitoring and Reference Laboratory, London, UK
 

Purpose: During routine surveillance, we identified 32 ciprofloxacin-resistant (MIC>8 mg/l) pneumococcal isolates and compared clinical details and resistance patterns. Results: They were isolated from sputa (29) and blood cultures (3) from adults, most with heart or lung disease. Hospital admissions were common; half had been inpatients in the previous 3 months. Nineteen patients received quinolones in the preceding 3 months, in part reflecting the local policy (introduced in 1997) of penicillin and ofloxacin for first line treatment of pneumonia. Thirteen patients had radiological signs of pneumonia and 10 were pyrexial with raised inflammatory markers. Agar dilution MICs for quinolones, including norfloxacin with and without reserpine, penicillin and erythromycin were performed. An increase in norfloxacin MICs was noted over the period 1997 (16–64 mg/l) to 2001 (256 mg/l). Fluoroquinolone efflux was suggested in three isolates. Resistance to moxifloxacin (MIC 8–16 mg/l) was noted from 1998 onwards. All isolates were serotype 9V and resistant to penicillin (MIC>0.5 mg/l). Thirty-one were resistant to erythromycin (MIC>1 mg/l). Conclusion: The 1997 policy of using quinolones may have contributed to the development of quinolone resistance and this cluster of isolates. The increasing levels of quinolone resistance observed raise concerns about the future use of newer quinolones for the treatment of respiratory infections. 
 
Susceptibility of 78 strains of
S. maltophilia
to quinolones: comparison of results at 18, 24 and 48 h. of incubation time with different methods, temperatures and atmospheres
 
PS106
 Sevillano D, Fuentes F, Valero E, Amores R, Garcia R, Prieto J, Department of Microbiology, Universidad Complutense, School of Medicine, Madrid, Spain
 

S. maltophilia has emerged in the last years as an important nosocomial pathogen, inherently resistant to most of the antimicrobial agents. New quinolones has been proposed as a treatment of choice because their enhanced activity, but several parameters (T
a, atmosphere, method) can affect the results of MICs.

Methods: We have performed MICs using two different methods (agar dilution and microdilution) and different conditions: 35 and 30 °C of temperature; atmosphere of O2 and CO2, and incubation times of 18, 24 and 48 h. A total of 78 strains were assayed with nine quinolones following standard NCCLS. Comparisons were made between results with 18–24 and 24–48 h using the χ
2-test (α=0.05).

Results: No differences were found between 18–24 and 24–48 h results with agar dilution, except with 3 ATBs in the case of MICs at 30 °C CO2. On the contrary, almost all the ATBs showed significant differences in the results with 24 and 48 h using microdilution method, at any condition of Tα or atmosphere.
Comparison of MICs (P values, significance level=95%) with incubation times of 24 and 48 h at different procedure conditions. 

 
 
Conclusions: The incubation time is a parameter that seems to affect significantly the results of MICs of quinolones when microdilution method is used, whereas only few differences can be encountered with the agar dilution method. 
 
Comparative activity of quinolones against the
Burkholderia cepacia
complex
 
PS107
 Mihaylova SAM, Georgieva-Sredkova MGS. Higher Medical Institute, Microbiology, Pleven, Bulgaria
 

Objective: To compare the in vitro activity of five quinolones against 135 Burkholderia cepacia complex isolates.

Materials and methods: A total of 135 B. cepacia complex isolates from 115 patients were tested. They were collected from a variety of clinical and environmental sources between 1996 and 2001. MICs of nalidixic acid (NAL), cinoxacin (CIN), norfloxacin (NOR), pefloxacin (PEF), and ciprofloxacin (CIP) were determined by the agar dilution method according to NCCLS guidelines.Results: MIC90s for CIP, PEF, NOR, NAL, and CIN were 1, 4, 8, 16, and 64 mg/l, respectively. MIC50s were equal to (for CIP, NOR, and NAL) or one dilution lower than the MIC90s (for PEF and CIN). Results are shown below: 

 *No available data for susceptile, intermediate, and resistant.

Conclusions: CIP is the most active agent against the B. cepacia complex followed by PEF. NAL and NOR have lower activity. CIN exhibits the lowest in vitro activity against this organism. 
 
Comparative antibacterial activity of five fluoroquinolones against Romanian
Streptococcus pneumoniae
strains involved in respiratory infections
 
PS108
 Pana Ma, Ghita Ma, Dorobat Ob, Papagheorghe Rc, Popescu Nc, Ungureanu Va, Andrei Md, Andries De, Blana Df, Iacob Sg. a
Cantacuzino Institute, National Reference Center for Streptococcus, Bucharest, Romania, b
Victor Babes Hospital, Clinical Laboratory, Bucharest, Romania, c
Coltea Hospital, Clinical Laboratory, Bucharest, Romania, d
Emergency Hospital, Clinical Laboratory, Bucharest, Romania, e
Cantacuzino Hospital, Clinical Laboratory, Bucharest, Romania, f
Maria Sklodowska-Curie, Clinical Laboratory, Bucharest, Romania, g
Matei Bals Institute, Infectious diseases, Bucharest, Romania
 

The purpose of the study was to analyse the antimicrobial activity of five fluoroquinolones (FQs)against pneumococci resistant to penicillin, erythromycin and trimethoprim/sulfamethoxazole. Methods: Two hundred and twenty-nine clinical samples of Streptococcus pneumoniae coming from blood (N=55), sputum (N=97), tracheal aspirate (N=54), and sinus (N=23) were recovered from adult hospitalized patients with community-acquired pneumonia, acute exacerbation of chronic bronchitis and acute sinusitis, from February 1999 to November 2000. The isolates were analysed for susceptibility (MICs) to penicillin (PC), erythromycin (EM) and trimethoprim/sulfamethoxazole (SXT) by agar standard dilution MIC testing and to five fluoroquinolones–ciprofloxacin (CIP), levofloxacin (LVX), ofloxacin (OFX), trovafloxacin (TVX) and grepafloxacin (GRX) by E-test according to the manufacturers specifications. Results: Breakpoints were used as proposed by NCCLS 1999. During the study period the pneumococci resistance was noted as follows: 65% to PC, 39% to EM and 73% to SXT. The rank order of activity of the five FQs against multi-drug resistant pneumococci was: CIP (MIC 90:2 mg/l), OFX (MIC 90:2 mg/l), LVX (MIC 90:1 mg/l), GRX (MIC 90:0.25 mg/l), TVX (MIC 90:0.25 mg/l). Conclusions: In Romania, fluoroquinolones represent alternative treatment to beta-lactams and macrolides for first-line empirical treatment for respiratory tract infections caused by pneumococci but, continued vigilance for emerging resistance to FQs is further indicated. 
 
Activity of six quinolones against clinical isolates of
Streptococcus pneumoniae
with reduced susceptibility to ciprofloxacin in Spain
 
PS109
 García-Rodríguez JAa, Cercenado Eb, Perea Ec, García-Rey Cd, Aguilar Ld, García-de-Lomas Je, and the Spanish Surveillance Group for Respiratory Pathogensf. a
Microbiology Department, Hospital Clínico Universitario, Salamanca, Spain, b
Microbiology Department, Hospital General Universitario Gregorio Marañón, Madrid, Spain, c
Microbiology Department, Hospital Virgen de la Macarena, Sevilla, Spain, d
GlaxoSmithKline, Medical Department, Tres Cantos, Madrid, Spain, e
Instituto Valenciano de Microbiología, Valencia, Spain, f
Spain
 

Introduction and Material/methods: Susceptibility testing (semiautomated broth microdilution method, Sensititre, Trek Diagnostics, USA, following NCCLS recommendations) was performed with six different quinolones to 817 Streptococcus pneumoniae isolates with a ciprofloxacin-CIP—MIC ≥2 mg/l collected in two consecutive SAUCE† surveillances in Spain (1996–97/1998–99). NCCLS resistance (R) breakpoints were used (≥8 for ofloxacin-OFL and levofloxacin-LEV; ≥2 for sparfloxacin-SPA; ≥4 for gatifloxacin-GAT—and moxifloxacin-MOX), but for gemifloxacin-GEM—where ≥1 was used. Results were as follows.
 
Conclusions: For CIP-R isolates GEM and MOX were the most active agents. GEM was the only agent not influenced by CIP MIC increase regarding prevalence of R, with 0% resistance for strains with CIP MIC ≥8 mg/l.
†SAUCE is an acronym standing for ‘Sensibilidad a los Antimicrobianos Utilizados en la Comunidad en España’ (Susceptibility to the Antimicrobials Commonly Used in the Community in Spain) and is the Spanish word for the willow tree. 
 
In vitro activity of gatifloxacin and seven other antibiotics against respiratory and urinary tract pathogens from the community. First results of the BASIC—study
 
PS110
 Grimm H, on behalf of a European Multicenter Study Group, Institute for Med. Microbiology, 88250 Weingarten, Germany
 

A total of 24 centers in Austria, Belgium, France, Germany, Italy, Portugal, Spain and Switzerland are involved in the BASIC study (Bacterial Annual Susceptibility Information Collection). The MICs of gatifloxacin (Gati), ciprofloxacin (Cipro), clarithromycin (Clari), benzylpenicillin G (Pen), amoxicillin (Amox), amoxicillin/clavulanic acid (Augm), cefuroxime (Cur) and cefixime (Cix) were determined using the microdilution method. Each center is requested to investigate 30 strains each of the following species: S. pneumoniae (Spn), S. pyogenes (Spy), S. aureus (Sau), E. faecalis (Efa), M. catarrhalis (Mca), H. influenzae (Hin), E. coli (Eco), K. pneumoniae (Kpn), P. mirabilis (Pmi) and P. aeruginosa (Pae).
So far approximately 1400 strains are enrolled. Some important MIC90%/percentage resistance were as follows:
 * NCCLS breakpoints not available; ** breakpoints out of MIC range tested. From the oral antibiotics tested gatifloxacin has the highest activity and broadest spectrum against all relevant respiratory and urinary tract pathogens. Gatifloxacin is a promising alternative for therapy of respiratory tract bacterial infections. 
 
In vitro activity of gatifloxacin against
Bordetella pertussis
in comparison with erythromycin, ciprofloxacin and levofloxacin
 
PS111
 Bourgeois N, Pangon B, Ghnassia JC, Doucet-Populaire F, de Versailles CH. Microbiologie, Le Chesnay, France
 

Purpose of the study: Bordetella pertussis infections are far more common in adults and adolescents than is generally estimated. However, they are often not recognised. Infected or colonised adults can act as a reservoir of infection, passing it to children. Fluoroquinolones are currently recommended for the treatment of respiratory tract infection in adult patients, which is usually empirical. Gatifloxacin is a novel 8-methoxyquinolone, with a potent activity against both Gram-negative and -positive bacteria. The in vitro activity of gatifloxacin was compared with those of erythromycin, the drug of choice for both treatment and prophylaxis of pertussis, ciprofloxacin and levofloxacin, against 52 clinical isolates strains of B. pertussis including 12 erythromycin resistant strains.

Results: We used the agar dilution method on Mueller–Hinton medium supplemented with 10% horse blood to determine the MIC of each antibiotic. Gatifloxacin (MIC90, 0.125mg/l) was as active as ciprofloxacin and levofloxacin (MIC90, 0.06mg/l) against both sensitive erythromycin (MIC90, 0.015 mg/l) and resistant erythromycin (MIC90, >512 mg/l) strains.

Conclusion: Gatifloxacin may be an effective drug in the treatment or prophylaxis of adults with suspected or confirmed pertussis. 
 
 
Ex vivo serum activity (killing rates) after gemifloxacin 320 mg versus trovafloxacin 200 mg single doses against ciprofloxacin-susceptible and -resistant
Streptococcus pneumoniae
 
PS112
 Calvo Aa, Giménez MJb, Alou La, Gómez-Lus MLa, Aguilar Lb, Prieto Ja. a
Microbiology Department, Universidad Complutense, Madrid, Spain, b
GlaxoSmithKline, Medical Department, Tres Cantos, Madrid, Spain
 

Serum bactericidal activity was measured ex vivo after single dose administration of gemifloxacin (GEM) 320 mg and trovafloxacin (TRO) 200 mg to 12 healthy volunteers in a randomized, cross-over phase I trial. Blood samples were collected 1 h (Cmax) after dosing and serum killing rates were determined against a serotype 3 penicillin (PEN)–ciprofloxacin (CIP) susceptible strain (S3) (MICs of 0.03, 1, 0.015 and 0.06 mg/l for PEN, CIP, GEM and TRO) and a serotype 9 PEN–CIP resistant strain (S9) (MICs of 2, 4, 0.03 and 0.25 mg/l for PEN, CIP, GEM and TRO). Tubes with 1.6 ml of serum sample and 0.4 ml broth (50% Todd–Hewitt+50% HBSS) were incubated over 3 h at 35 °C. Final inocula was 107 cfu/ml. Mean colony counts for samples and controls (K) are shown in the figure: 

 GEM exhibited higher colony counting decrease of the initial inocula, versus TRO, for both strains. After 3 h incubation, the initial inocula decrease obtained with TRO and the CIP susceptible strain was similar to that obtained with GEM and the resistant strain, showing a lower influence of CIP MIC increase in the ex vivo bactericidal activity of GEM versus TRO. 
 
Urine bactericidal activity after administration of gemifloxacin and trovafloxacin single doses in a phase I study
 
PS113
 García-Calvo Ga, Parra Aa, Giménez MJb, Ponte Ca, Aguilar Lb, Soriano Fa. a
Fundación Jiménez Díaz, Medical Microbiology, Madrid, Spain, b
GlaxoSmithKline, Medical, Madrid, Spain
 

Urine bactericidal activity after o.d. administration of gemifloxacin (GEM) 320 mg and trovafloxacin (TRO) 200 mg, was assessed in six adult males in a cross-over phase I trial. Urine killing rates (UKR) against Escherichia coli ATCC 25922 (MIC mg/l of 0.008 and 0.015 for GEM and TRO) and S. saprophyticus ATCC 1970 (MIC mg/l 0.015 and 0.06 for GEM and TRO) were performed with samples collected at 0, 2–4, 16–24 and 60–72 h. A 1.6 ml of Iso-Sensitest broth and 0.4 ml of bacterial logarithmic growth were added to 2 ml sample, giving a final inoculum of 107 cfu/ml. Colony counting was performed after 1, 2, 3 and 4 h incubation. Percentages of initial inocula reduction (IIR) were calculated. Mean urine concentrations measured by bioassay were (mg/l): 28.4, 14.7 and 0.5 for GEM, and 3.6, 3.0 and 0.1 for TRO. Against E. coli, an IIR of 99.9% was obtained after 2 h incubation with all samples except with TRO at 60–72 h. Against S. saprophyticus an IIR of 90% was obtained after 3 h incubation with all samples except with TRO at 60–72 h, where bacterial regrowth was found. The maintenance over 72 h of GEM urine antibacterial activity suggests its efficacy in the treatment of uncomplicated cystitis. 
 
Influence of the decreased susceptibility to ciprofloxacin on gemifloxacin versus levofloxacin efficacy in experimental pneumococcal pneumonia in guinea pigs
 
PS114
 Garcia-Olmos Ma, Parra Aa, Gimenez MJb, Garcia-Calvo Ga, Ponte Ca, Aguilar Lb, Soriano Fa. a
Fundacion Jimenez Diaz, Medical Microbiology, Madrid, Spain, b
GlaxoSmithKline, Medical, Madrid, Spain
 

The efficacy of ciprofloxacin (CIP), levofloxacin (LEV) and gemifloxacin (GEM) in the treatment of pneumococcal pneumonia was assessed in a guinea pig model using three strains (S) with MICs (mg/l) of 2, 2 and 0.03 (S1), 32, 4 and 0.25 (S2) and 64, 32 and 1 (S3) for CIP, LEV and GEM, respectively. Intraperitoneal treatments started 1 h after S. pneumoniae intratracheal inoculation, and continued t.i.d up to four doses. Ten animals were included in each group. Doses (mg/kg) used were 20, 16 and 6 for CIP, LEV and GEM, respectively, in order to mimic AUC0-24 h and Cmax obtained in humans after standard doses. Animals that survived 48 h after inoculation were sacrificed and colony counts were performed in lungs (Table: mean log10 cfu/g).
 *P≤0.05 versus placebo. All treatments against S1 and LEV and GEM against S2 produced ≥99.9% reductions in cfu/g versus placebo while GEM against S3 obtained a 99.69% reduction in spite of administering only four shots. Further studies with this model and strains with high CIP MIC are needed to evaluate GEM capability in overcoming CIP resistance in S. pneumoniae. 
 
Pharmacokinetic–pharmacodynamic relationships of levofloxacin 500 mg bid iv in patients with ventilator-associated pneumonia
 
PS115
 Pea Fa, Di Qual Ea, Cusenza Ab, Brollo La, Baldassarre Mb, Furlanut Ma. a
Institute of Clinical Pharmacology and Toxicology, DPMSC, University of Udine, Udine, Italy, b
1st Department of Anaesthesia, SM Misericordia Hospital, Udine, Italy
 

The purpose of the study Levofloxacin (LFX) is a fluoroquinolone whose activity against both Gram-negative bacilli and Gram-positive cocci enables its use in monotherapy for the treatment of nosocomial pneumonia. Our aim was to study the pharmacokinetic–pharmacodynamic appropriateness of LFX 500mg iv bid in the treatment of six inpatients with ventilator-associated pneumonia (VAP) (45±25 years; 4M–2F; 74±9 kg). Blood and urine samples were collected in steady-state conditions at appropriate intervals. LFX concentrations were analysed by HPLC. The aetiological agent was identified in all the cases and its in vitro sensitivity to LFX was always assessed. The results obtained mean values (±SD) of the major pharmacokinetic parameters were: Cmax, 8.78±2.05 μg/ml; Vdss, 1.25±0.36 l/kg; t1/2β, 4.69±0.87 h; Cl, 3.65±1.01 ml/min/kg; AUC0-τ, 32.47±12.80 μg/ml h. Cumulative urinary excretion was 82.89±10.23%, confirming that LFX clearance is mainly renal. Clinical cure and microbiological eradication were obtained in all the patients after a 7–13 day therapy. A suprainfection due to Acinetobacter anitratus insensitive to LFX occured in 1 case. The major pharmacodynamic parameters of fluoroquinolone efficacy were significantly higher than the proposed threshold (Cmax/MIC >10; AUC/MIC >125) in all the cases. The conclusion reached The findings suggest that LFX 500 mg bid iv may be considered effective in the treatment of VAP caused by sensitive bacteria. 
 
Comparative pharmacokinetics of levofloxacin in patients with lower respiratory tract infections (LRTI) being treated with sequential therapy
 
PS116
 Pea Fa, Brollo La, Lugatti Eb, Di Qual Ea, Dolcet Fb, Talmassons Gb, Furlanut Ma. a
Institute of Clinical Pharmacology and Toxicology, DPMSC, University of Udine, Udine, Italy, b
Division of Pneumology, SM Misericordia Hospital, Udine, Italy
 

The purpose of the study Levofloxacin (LFX) is a fluoroquinolone whose activity against both Gram-negative bacilli and Gram-positive cocci enables its use in monotherapy for the treatment of LRTI. Our aim was to study the pharmacokinetic–pharmacodynamic appropriateness of a standard switch LFX iv/os regimen (500 mg iv od for 5–7 days followed by 500 mg os od for 4–10 days) in the treatment of seven inpatients with LRTI (70±17 years; 6M–1F; 76±15 kg). Blood samples were collected in steady-state conditions at appropriate intervals. LFX plasma concentrations were analysed by HPLC. The aetiological agent was identified in 2/7 cases and its in vitro sensitivity to LFX was assessed. The results obtained Absolute oral bioavailability was 1.07±0.19, with a Cmax of 10.89±3.39 vs 8.36±3.90 μg/ml after iv and oral administration, respectively. No significant difference in the main pharmacokinetic parameters was observed between the two routes. The major pharmacodynamic parameters of fluoroquinolone efficacy were significantly higher than the proposed threshold (Cmax/MIC >10; AUC/MIC >125) in the two assessable cases. All the patients were clinically cured after a 9–15 day therapy. The conclusion reached The ad interim findings show that LFX 500 mg od may guarantee per os an exposure similar to that achievable after iv administration, suggesting that sequential therapy may be considered effective in the treatment of LRTI. 
 
Levofloxacine in the exacerbations of copd due to Pseudomonas ae
 
PS117
 Micheletto C, Tognella S, Pomari C, Dal Negro R, Ospedale Orlandi, Div.Pneumologia, Bussolengo, Italy
 

Development of antibiotic resistance in bacteria is a problem of great concern. Gram-negative bacteria, including multidrug-resistant (MDR) Pseudomonas aeruginosa (Ps), are responsible for a significant proportion of episodes of COPD exacerbations, particularly in elderly (1). Aim was to check the susceptibility to common antimicrobial treatments against Ps strains isolated from bronchial secretions in patients with severe exacerbations of COPD. Methods: Microbial investigations were conducted on 290 specimens: spontaneous purulent sputum (88.4%), and tracheobronchial aspirates (11.6%, collected with a protected specimen brush). Results: Fifty-seven Ps pathogen strains (106 CFU) were identified (19.6%) and tested over a 6-month period: Ps. aeruginosa 91.2%; Ps. Putida 3.5%; Ps. fluorescens 3.5%, and Burkholderia Cepacia 1.8%. The assessed susceptibility to most common antibiotics was: levofloxacine (90%), ciprofloxacine (84%), ipenem cil. (88%), ceftazidime (84%); amikacin (84%), and Piperacillin+tazobactam (74%). A much lower susceptibility was found for ticarcillin–clavulanic acid (58%), gentamicin (48%), and netilmicin (40%). Conclusion: (1) At present, Levofloxacine proves the most effective antimicrobic option for treating COPD exacerbations due to Ps infection; (2) a much more efficient policy of antibiotic prescribing should be promoted in order to prevent the selection of resistant strains in these cases. Ref. (1) Infect Med., 1999; 16: 54–60. 
 
‘In vitro’ activity of levofloxacin against nosocomial Gram-negative pathogens
 
PS118
 Santini L, Cianflone M, Lanzafame A, Mattina R, University of Milan, Institute of microbiology, Milan, Italy
 

Aim: to evaluate the ‘in vitro’ activity of levofloxacin in comparison with some β-lactams, meropenem, ciprofloxacin and netilmicin against 600 Gram-negative nosocomial rods, isolated during the year 2000, MICs, MBCs, and Killing curves, were determined by the broth microdilution method according to the NCCLS procedures. We also evaluated the MBC e Killing curves of levofloxacin and ciprofloxacin against 73 ESBL producing strains. Susceptibility results are showed in Fig. 1:
 These results confirm the excellent ‘in vitro’ activity of levofloxacin against nosocomial Gram-negative pathogens, including the ESBL producing strains (90% of Escherichia coli, E. cloacae and K. pneumoniae were inhibited at 0.5 mg/l). Levofloxacin was more rapid than ciprofloxacin to determine a bactericidal effect particularly against S. maltophilia. Moreover, considering the favourable PK/PD profile, levofloxacin can represent a valid therapeutic option for the treatment of severe Gram-negative nosocomial infections. 
 
Efficacy of levofloxacin and rifampicin for
Rhodococcus equi
treatment in HIV patient
 
PS119
 Moretti F, Quiros-Roldan E, Casari S, Chiodera A, Viale P, Carosi G. University of Brescia, Institute of Infectious and Tropical Diseases, Brescia, Italy
 

A 34-year-old man, IVDU, HIV positive was attended in aur hospital for fever and toracic pain. A X-chest radiography revealed a round lesion of 5 cm near the lingula with central hyper-diaphan area. Lymphocytes CD4+ count was 21 cells/mm3 and viral load 91.900 cp/ml. Hospital stay Rhodococcus
equi was found in cultures of peripheral blood, faecal and sputum specimens. Antibiotic treatment with oral rifampin (600 mg/QD) and with intravenous imipenem (500 mg tid) was started. Due to the persisting fever, immodificated radiography and negativity for P. carinii, Mycobacteria and bacteria in BAL coltures, imipenem was substituted by parenteral vancomycin (400 mg bid). After 10 days, because of persisting fever and increase of the diameter of the lung lesion (6 cm) vancomycin was sustituted by oral levofloxacyn (500 mg bid), continuing rifampin. After a 4 days course of levofloxacyn therapy the fever remitted. The patient was discharged with levofloxacyn (500 mg bid) and rifampin and, after 2 months of follow-up, a radiological control pointed-out a remarkable resolution in the lung lesion. We may suppose that levofloxacyn can be effective for the treatment of R. equi infection, even if more studies (particularly controlled studies) are necessary. 
 
Treatment with levoxacin in adult patients with enteric fever
 
PS120
 Liberti Aa, Izzo Ba, Loiacono Lb, Calabria Ga, Patarino Ta, Izzo Ea. a
II Department, Naples, D. Cotugno Hospital, Italy, b
III Department, Naples, D. Cotugno Hospital, Italy
 

The increasing prevalence of Salmonella typhi strains with reduced susceptibility of chloramphenicol had prompted the search for other antibiotics with the same efficacy.Quinolones are a class of antibiotic with an activity in vitro and in vivo against enteropathogenes. We inwestigated the use of Levoxacin in two regimens of treatment of typhoid and paratyphoid infection.

Patients and methods: Thirty-two adult patients were incluted in this study from September 1999 to April 2001; 26 patients had positive culture for S. typhi and six had positive cultures for S. paratyphi. All isolated were fully susceptible to Levoxacin. We compared treatment with Levoxacin for 7 days, 500 mgr b.i.d. (group 1, 16 patients), with treatment for 10 days, 500 mgr b.i.d. (group 2, 16 patients). Clinical cure was defined as defervescenze of fever by day 3 of treatment, with an absence of complications and no clinical relapse during the follow-up.

Results and conclusion: The clinical cure rate was 87% (14 patients) for group 1 and 94% (15 patients) for group 2; the difference in these rates was not statistically significant. The blood cultures of all patients were sterile by day 2 of treatment and remained so until the 6th month of follow-up, no subjects had clinical or microbiological relapse and all stool cultures remained negative, also.
The two regimens of treatment was good tollerated and no adverse event was registered; it was concluded that Levoxacin treatment for 10 days in enteric fever is not necessary the mulidrug-resistence of S. typhi led to the use of Quinolones as the first-line drug in the treatment of enteric fever. 
 
Pefloxacin in the treatment of patient with acute infectious diarrhoea
 
PS121
 Troselj-Vukiae TVBa, Strahinja Vb, Poljak Ia, Stojanoviae Dc, Nikoliae Nd. a
Department of Infectious Disease, University Hospital Center, Rijeka, Croatia, b
GlaxoSmithKline, Marketing, Rijeka, Croatia, c
Dept. Rijeka, Institute of Public Health, Rijeka, Croatia, d
Dept. Rijeka, Maritime Academy, Rijeka, Croatia
 

The purpose of the study was to investigate clinical and bacteriological efficiency in 5 and 7 days pefloxacin treatment and to compare it with symptomatic therapy.
The results obtained in 47 patients treated with pefloxacin the therapy was clinically effective already in the third day while in the control group this happend in the 7th day. Bacteriological eradication was noted in 18 patients (95%) of the first and 25 patients (93%) of second group in the 5th days of the treatment. They all had negative cultures 1 and 4 weeks after pefloxacin protocols were completed. Only 22 patients (63%) in control group had negative stool cultures in the 7th day of the treatment and all of them 4 weeks after it ended. There was no statistically significant difference in clinical (P=0.232) and bacteriological (P=0.972) efficiency between 5 and 7 days pefloxacin treatment protocols. Both protocols significantly differed in clinical (P<0.001) and bacteriological (P=0.017) eradication from the control group.
The conclusion reached is that the efficiency of pefloxacin (quinolones) in the treatment of acute infectiuos diarrhoea and justifies their use in the more severe forms of the disease. 
 
Antibacterial activity of moxifloxacin and four comparators in an in vitro model simulating lung and serum drug concentrations
 
PS122
 Dalhoff Aa, Ullmann Ub, Schubert Sb. a
Bayer AG, Wuppertal, Germany, b
University of Kiel, Institute of Med. Microbiology, Kiel, Germany
 

Background: The antibacterial activity of moxifloxacin (MXF) was compared to levofloxacin (LEV), amoxicillin (AMX), clarithromycin (CLA) and erythromycin (ERY) in an in vitro model.

Method: Pharmacokinetics in bronchial mucosa (BM) and serum (S) following single oral doses of 400 mg MXF or CLA and 500 mg LEV, AMX or ERY were simulated using a one compartment model. Bacteria tested Staphylococcus aureus (Nos. 133, 25895), Streptococcus pneumoniae (Nos. 4241, 672). Aliquots were taken (0–8 h) and plated on to Brain Heart Infusion agar for enumeration.
Results: S. pneumoniae 4241 was eliminated by all agents studied. Significant differences were apparent with S. pneumoniae 672 and the S. aureus strains:
 *nK=no. 99.9% kill.

Conclusions: Although quinolones and macrolides are concentrated in BM, higher focal concentrations of MXF only translated into increased bactericidal activity. MXF eliminated all four test strains most rapidly from the in vitro model. 
 
Efficacy and safety of oral moxifloxacin vs. intravenous ceftriaxone in the treatment of community—acquired pneumonia (CAP) in patients with HIV infection
 
PS123
 Mastroianni A. G.B. Morgagni General Hospital, Division of Infectious Diseases, Forlí, Italy
 

Objective: To compare the safety and efficacy of once-daily moxifloxacin with once-daily ceftriaxone in the treatment of CAP in HIV-infected patients (pts). Methods and Results: In a retrospective survey, oral moxifloxacin (400 mg daily×12–15 days) was compared to standard regimen of i.v. ceftriaxone (2 g daily×10–12 days) for treatment of CAP in HIV+ pts. Adults pts with clinical signs and symptoms of CAP and consistent chest X-ray findings were included. Pts had a median age of 39 years (range 29–529 and 70% were male). Demographic characteristics were similar in both treatment groups; 15 pts received mxifloxacin and 25 pts ceftriaxone. Clinical success rates were 94% for moxifloxacin and 96% for ceftriaxone. At a post-study evaluation approximately 8 weeks later, 2 moxifloxacin-treated pts and 3 ceftriaxone-treated pts had relapsed. The adverse events reported were comparable for both treatment groups. There were four-related adverse events (3 GI, 1 headache) for moxifloxacin-treated and 7 (4GI, 3 skin) for ceftriaxone-treated pts. Conclusion: The results of this study show that moxifloxacin as oral therapy is as effective and well tolerated as i.v. ceftriaxone in the treatment of HIV+ pts with CAP. Therapy with moxifloxacin was not associated with any significant clinical or laboratory abnormalities. These data suggest that once-daily oral administration of moxifloxacin is potentially convenient and cost-effective alternative therapy for CAP in pts with HIV infection. 
 
Moxifloxacin in the treatment of acute maxillary sinusitis after first-line therapy failure or acute sinusitis with high risk of complications
 
PS124
 Gehanno Pa, Berche Pb, Perrin Ab, Arvis Pc. a
ENT Department, Bichat Claude Bernard Hospital, Paris, France, b
Microbiology Department, Necker Enfants Malades Hospital, Paris, France, c
Bayer Pharma, Medical Affairs Department, Paris, France
 

The efficacy and safety of moxifloxacin (MXF) 400 mg once daily for 7 days was evaluated in the treatment of acute maxillary sinusitis after first-line therapy failure, or acute sinusitis with high risk of complications. In this prospective, multicenter study, a total of 216 patients with acute bacterial sinusitis confirmed by sinus X-ray were valid for efficacy analysis: one hundred and seventy five patients (81.0%) had an acute maxillary sinusitis which failed to respond to a previous antibiotic therapy given for a mean duration of 7.2 days, and 41 (19.0%) had an acute sinusitis with high risk of complications (frontal: 24, pan-sinusitis: 15 and sphenoid: 2). Ninety two patients (42.6%) were microbiologically valid. Clinical cure and continued clinical cure rates at 7–10 and 28–35 days post-therapy were 92.6 and 99.0%, respectively. Clinical cure rates at 7–10 days post-therapy were 94.9 and 82.9% in sinusitis after first-line therapy failure and in sinusitis with high risk of complications, respectively. Bacteriological eradication rate during therapy (Day 3–4) was 95.7%. At 7–10 days post-therapy. Bacteriological success rates were 97.1% in patients who failed to respond to a previous antibiotic and 95.4% of patients who had sinusitis with high risk of complications. 12.2% of patients experienced drug-related adverse events, abdominal pain (2.4%), nausea (2.4%) being the most frequently reported events. MXF was rapidly effective and a well-tolerated treatment for this kind of infection. 
 
Neisseria gonorrhoeae
with decreased susceptibility to penicillin and ciprofloxacin: novel mutation patterns in the
gyr
A and
par
C genes of ciprofloxacin resistant isolates and plasmid profile of penicillin resistant isolates of
N. gonorrhoeae
in India (Delhi)
 
PS125
 Chaudhry U, Saluja D. Dr. B. R. Ambedkar Center for Biomedical Research, University of Delhi, Delhi, India
 

Commercial sex workers (CSWs) serve as the most important reservoir of gonorrhoea. Periodic monitoring of the antimicrobial susceptibility profile of Neisseria gonorrhoeae in a high-risk population provides essential clues regarding the rapidly changing pattern of antimicrobial susceptibilities. In India, such a surveillance of the in vitro antimicrobial susceptibility of N. gonorrhoeae was established in 1997. Significant increasing trend of penicillin and ciprofloxacin resistance with high MIC of 2–16 and 1–32 μg/ml, respectively were found over the years (1997–2001). The molecular basis of ciprofloxacin resistance, i.e. mutations in the gyrA and the parC genes of 170 isolates, were analyzed. Four isolates (with an MIC of 32 μg/ml for ciprofloxacin) harbored triple mutations (Ser-91 to Phe, Asp-95 to Asn and Val-120 to Leu) in the gyrA gene. The third mutation of Val-120 to Leu, lies downstream of the quinolone resistance determining region of the gyrA and has not been described before in gonococcus. In addition, these isolates had a Phe-100 to Tyr substitution in the parC, a hitherto unknown mutation. The alterations in the parC gene were seen in these isolates only in the presence of changes in the gyrA gene and comprised amino acid changes at codons 91, 100, 104, 109, and 131. The presence of β-lactamase plasmid among the penicillin-resistant isolates was determined by their plasmid profiles and further confirmation was carried out by a PCR based protocol. Our findings suggest that emergence of penicillin and ciprofloxacin resistance in N. gonorrhoeae isolates from a major STD center in India, indicates the need for the increased awareness and prudent use of antimicrobials. 
 
In vitro activity of newer antibiotics against methicillin-resistant
Staphylococcus aureus
 
PS126
 Gutierrez Zufiaurre MN, Sanchez Hernandez J, Munoz-Bellido JL, Garcia-Rodriguez JA. Hospital Universitario de Salamanca, Microbiología, Salamanca, Spain
 

Purpose: MRSA are frequently co-resistant to a number of structurally unrelated antibiotics. More than 70% MRSA are resistant to gentamycin, ciprofloxacin, macrolides and clindamycin. Newer antibiotics active against multi-drug resistant Grampositives have been developed. We have tested the in vitro activity of newer antibiotics against genetically-characterized, high level ciprofloxacin resistant MRSA. Material and methods: Thirty-six ciprofloxacin-resistant, gyrA/grlA mutant MRSA clinical strains were tested against levofloxacin (LFX), ciprofloxacin (CFX), moxifloxacin (MFX), gatifloxacin (GFX), erythromycin (ER), telithromycin (TL), linezolid (LIN), synercid (SYN) and vancomycin (VA). MICs were determined by the agar dilution method, according NCCLS guidelines. Results and conclusions: All the strains were resistant to CFX, 55,5% were LFX-susceptible and 63.9% were GFX-susceptible. Nevertheless, MICs of LFX and GFX for all susceptible strains was in the highest extreme of the susceptibility range. MFX was the most active quinolone. Almost all the strains were high-level ER-resistant with constitutive MLSB phenotype. TL did not improve significantly its behaviour, although it was 10-fold as active as ER against the only ER-susceptible strain. VA, LIN and SYN had excellent activity against all the strains. They showed a very homogeneous behaviour against all the strains that were included in a range of 1–4 mg/l of LIN and VA and 0.5–1 mg/l. 
 
 
In vitro activity of newer antimicrobial agents against multi-drug resistant
Corynebacterium urealyticum
 
PS127
 Sanchez Hernandez J, Gutierrez Zufiaurre MN, Munoz-Bellido JL, Garcia-Rodriguez JA. Hospital Universitario de Salamanca, Microbiología, Salamanca, Spain
 

Purpose:
Corynebacterium urealyticum is the etiologic agent of encrusted cystitis and inespecific UTIs, and can be also involved in systemic infections. C. urealyticum is frequently multi-drug resistant, so only glycopeptide antibiotics and tetracyclines have high susceptibility rates, while fluoroquinolones resistance rates vary significantly. We have tested the in vitro activity of linezolid, telithromycin, synercid and newer fluoroquinolones against multi-drug resistant C. urealyticum clinical strains. Material and methods: Sixty-four C. urealyticum clinical strains were tested against levofloxacin (LFX), ciprofloxacin (CFX), moxifloxacin (MFX), erythromycin (ER), telithromycin (TL), linezolid (LIN), synercid (SYN) and vancomycin (VA). MICs were determined by the agar dilution method according guidelines defined by the NCCLS for enterococci. Results and conclusions: Results confirm the high resistance rate to older fluoroquinolones and macrolides, with >50% CFX resistance and 100% ER-resistance. LFX was more active (MIC90 32 mg/ml). MFX was the most active fluoroquinolones (MIC90 4 mg/ml). TL improve its behaviour in respect to ER (range 0.5–1 mg/ml). VA, LIN and SYN had excellent antimicrobial activity. No resistant strains were found. MIC90 were 1, 0.5 and 1 mg/ml, respectively. MICs were similar for all the strains independently of their resistance to other antibiotics 
 
 
Plasma concentrations, urinary excretion and bactericidal activity of linezolid (600 mg) versus ciprofloxacin (500 mg) in healthy volunteers after a single oral dose
 
PS128
 Wagenlehner FMEa, Wydra Sa, Onda Ha, Kinzig-Schippers Mb, Sörgel Fb, Naber KGa. a
Hospital St. Elisabeth, Urologic Clinic, Straubing, Germany, b
Institute for Biomedical and Pharmaceutical Research, (IBMP), Nürnberg-Heroldsberg, Germany
 

Purpose of the study: In a randomized cross-over study 12 volunteers received a single oral dose of 600 mg linezolid versus 500 mg ciprofloxacin to assess plasma concentrations (up to 24 h), urinary excretion (by HPLC), and urinary bactericidal titers (UBT) up to 120 h. The mean maximum plasma concentration of linezolid was 12.1 μg/ml and of ciprofloxacin 2.4 μg/ml. The cumulative renal excretion (mean) of parent drug was 40%/41% for linezolid/ciprofloxacin. UBTs were determined for a reference strain and five Gram-positive clinical uropathogens with the following MICs (μg/ml) for linezolid/ciprofloxacin: S. aureus ATCC 27278 (4/0.25), S. aureus (MSSA) (2/32), S. aureus (MRSA) (2/128), S. saprophyticus (MSSE) (2/0.5), E. faecalis (2/1), E. faecium (2/2). Results: Median UBTs measured within the first 6 h for linezolid were 1:96 for enterococcal strains and 1:128 to 1:256 for the four staphylococal strains. Median UBTs for ciprofloxacin were 1:64 for the two enterococcal strains, 1:384 to 1:512 for the two ciprofloxacin susceptible, 1:1.5 for the two resistant staphylococcal strains. Areas under the UBT–time-curve showed statistically significant differences only for the two ciprofloxacin resistant staphylococcal strains in favour of linezolid. Conclusion: Linezolid exhibited the same bactericidal activity against ciprofloxacin resistant as susceptible strains. Linezolid should be tested for treatment of complicated UTI due to Gram-positive uropathogens in a clinical trial. 
 
 
The pharmacokinetic profiles of linezolid and teicoplanin in the critically ill
 
PS129
 Whitehouse Ta, Cepeda JAa, Tobin Cb, Zhang Jb, MacGowan Ab, Wilson APRc, Singer Ma. a
Bloomsbury Institute of Intensive Care Medicine, London, UK, b
Department of Microbiology, Southmead Hospital, Bristol, UK, c
Department of Microbiology, University College London Hospitals, London, UK
 

Purpose: We performed pharmacokinetics within a double-blind, randomised trial comparing linezolid and teicoplanin in intensive care patients with known or suspected Gram-positive infection. They received either 600 mg linezolid intravenously 12-hourly, or 400 mg teicoplanin 12-hourly for the first three doses and once daily thereafter (or every 3rd day if renally impaired). Blood samples were collected to create serum pharmacokinetic profiles. Linezolid was quantitated by HPLC and teicoplanin by fluorescence polarization immunoassay. Results: Twenty two patients were studied in the linezolid group (M–F 13:9, mean age 54 years [range 19–90 years]). Median treatment duration was 8.5 days (range 4–18). Eighteen patients were treated with teicoplanin (M–F 13:5, mean age 57 years [range 17–86]) for median 9 days (range 4–17). Steady state peak concentrations (mean±SD) for linezolid and teicoplanin were 12.8±5.0 and 10.5±4.7 mg/l, respectively. Trough concentrations at day 4 were 4.7±4.3 mg/l for linezolid and 7.9±2.5 mg/l for teicoplanin. Recommended breakpoints of Staphylococcus aureus are 4 mg/l for linezolid and 8 mg/l for teicoplanin. Accumulation occurred in one 90-year-old linezolid-treated patient with impaired renal function. Conclusion: Current recommended dosing regimens for linezolid and teicoplanin are generally appropriate in the critically ill, though a more detailed analysis is required. 
 
 
Laboratory evaluation of streptogramins and oxazolidinones against methicillin-resistant
Staphylococcus aureus
clinical isolates
 
PS130
 Stamos G, Lebessi E, Ioannidou S, Paleologou N, Kallergi K, Foustoukou M, ‘P. and A. Kyriakou’ Children's Hospital, Microbiology, Athens, Greece
 

The purpose of the study was to investigate the susceptibility of methicillin resistant Staphylococcus aureus (MRSA) isolates from a 500-bed Paediatric Hospital to Quinupristin/Dalfopristin (Q/D, streptogramin combination) and Linezolid (LZD, oxazolidinone). Material: We performed a retrospective analysis of 85 MRSA strains, isolated from patients hospitalized in miscellaneous medical departments [Neonatal Unit (35), Surgical Wards (15), Orthopaedic Wards (9), Oncology Unit (7), other wards (8) and outpatient clinic (11)], during a 3-year period (1998–2000). The sources of isolation were pus (23), throat (22), nasal (8), bronchial (5), skin (6), stool (6) ear (4) and other (11) specimens. All isolates were sensitive to glycopeptides, while 22.4% were resistant to gentamicin and 7.1% to erythromycin. Methods: The sensitivity testing was performed by a disk diffusion method (BBL sensitivity disks, Becton Dickinson), according to NCCLS guidelines. The breakpoint zone diameters for LZD and Q/D were ≥21 and ≥19 mm for susceptibility and ≤17 and ≤15 mm for resistance, respectively. Results: All isolates were proved to be susceptible to both antibiotics. The mean inhibition zones were 29.1 mm for LZD and 26 mm for Q/D. Conclusions: LZD and Q/D are very promising antimicrobial agents, showing excellent activity against MRSA clinical isolates. The prudent therapeutic use is strongly recommended to avoid the emergence of resistance. 
 
 
In vitro activity of streptogramins and oxazolidinones against
Streptococcus pneumoniae
clinical isolates
 
PS131
 Stamos G, Lebessi E, Paleologou N, Psatha M, Sanida P, Zaphiropoulou A, Foustoukou M, ‘P. and A. Kyriakou’ Children's Hospital, Microbiology, Athens, Greece
 

The purpose of this study was to evaluate the in vitro activity of Linezolid (LZD), a member of oxazolidinones and the streptogramin combination Quinupristin/Dalfopristin (Q/D) against clinical isolates of Streptococcus pneumoniae from a tertiary care Paediatric Hospital. Material: A total of 53 pneumococcal isolates exhibiting reduced susceptibility to common antibiotics were included in the study. The strains were isolated from middle ear fluid (34), eye (4), nasal (5) blood (6) and other (4) cultures during the last 4 years. The percentages of the isolates that were resistant to penicillin, erythromycin, cotrimoxazole and clindamycin were 67.9, 67.9, 67.9 and 26.4%, respectively. Methods: The susceptibility testing was performed by a standard disk diffusion method (BBL sensitivity disks, Becton Dickinson). In case of marginal results or intermediate sensitivity to Quinupristin/Dalfopristin, the MIC was determined using the E-test method (AB Biodisk). Results: All isolates were found to be sensitive to LZD. Q/D was very active as well, except for two isolates that exhibited intermediate susceptibility, showing cross-resistance to macrolides and clindamycin, as well. Conclusions: The new antimicrobial agents show excellent activity against resistant to common antimicrobials pneumococcal isolates, but the clinical use is not suggested, unless no other therapeutic solutions are available. 
 
 
In vitro
susceptibility of Gram-positive cocci to linezolid and teicoplanin: use of linezolid for Gram-positive infections in ICU
 
PS132
 Cepeda JAa, Hayman SJb, Wilson APRb, Kibbler Cc. a
University College London Hospitals, Clinical Microbiology, London, UK, b
University College Hospital, Clinical Microbiology, London, UK, c
Royal Free Hospital, Medical Microbiology, London, UK
 

Linezolid is a new oxazolidinone with excellent activity against Gram-positive organisms including glycopeptide-resistant strains of staphylococci and enterococci. In ICU linezolid has been used for the treatment of severe Gram-positive infections in a control trial. The susceptibility pattern of all Gram-positive isolates from ICU patients has been studied. Methods: A total of 2427 specimens from ICU patients were processed, 767 were from patients enrolled in the antibiotic trial. All methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus (MRSA), coagulase-negative staphylococci (CoNS), Enterococcus sp and methicillin-sensitive Staphylococcus aureus (MSSA) were tested. The break point for linezolid was 4 mg/l and for teicoplanin 8 mg/l. Isolates were tested for susceptibility by E-test. Results: Linezolid (1063 isolates) MIC 50/90 (mg/l) were as follows: MRSA (N=541) 0.6/2, CoNS (N=143) 0.9/1.4, Enterococcus sp (N=39) 0.7/0.8, MSSA (N=340) 0.8/1. Teicoplanin (782 isolates) MIC 50/90(mg/l) MRSA (N=415) 1.9/3.5, CoNS (N=100) 4/7.4, Enterococcus sp (N=24) 0.9/1.4, MSSA (N=243) 2.2/2.6. All Gram-positive isolates were inhibited by concentrations of linezolid below the breakpoint including eight strains of staphylococci resistant to teicoplanin. Conclusions: Linezolid was highly active against Gram-positive isolates. Resistance to teicoplanin was similar to other reported series. There was no emergence of resistance to linezolid. 
 
 
Methicillin-resistant
Staphylococcus aureus
clearance during treatment with Linezolid
 
PS133
 Cepeda JAa, Whitehouse Tb, Singer Mb, Bellingan Gb, Kibbler Cc, Shaw S d, Wilson APRa. a
University College London Hospitals, Clinical Microbiology, London, UK, b
University College London Hospitals, Intensive Care, London, UK, c
Royal Free Hospital, Medical Microbiology, London, UK, d
Royal Free Hospital, Intensive Care, London, UK
 

MRSA colonization is often a limiting factor for discharge from ICU. Clearance of MRSA is seldom achieved with conventional glycopeptide treatment. The oxazolidinone, linezolid, has excellent soft tissue and respiratory tract penetration and might be expected to eradicate carriage in some patients. We recently performed a double-blind randomized trial in 204 ICU patients with known/suspected Gram positive infection. 100 received intravenous linezolid, 600 mg b.d., and 104 patients received teicoplanin 400 mg o.d. MRSA clearance was assessed at End of Treatment (EOT), at 7- and 21-days follow-up. Results: In the linezolid and teicoplanin groups, 45 and 43 were known to be colonized with MRSA at study entry, respectively, while 39 and 40 were not. Detection of clearance of MRSA colonization at EOT was 51% for linezolid vs 19% for teicoplanin group (χ
b
P<0.005), at 7 days it was 35% vs 14% (χ
b
P<0.1), and at 21 days 19% vs 33% (ns). Conclusion: Short-term MRSA clearance can be achieved in significantly more patients treated with linezolid however this was not maintained at 21 days, either because of incomplete initial eradication or recolonization. Further analysis will follow when molecular typing of the isolates is completed. 
 
Penetration of linezolid into bone, fat and muscle during hip arthroplasty
 
PS134
 Lovering AM, Bannister GC, Zhang J, MacGowan AP, Southmead Hospital, BCARE, Bristol, UK
 

There are limited data describing the concentrations and penetration of linezolid (LZD) into tissues, such as bone, that can be used to guide therapy for non-vascular infections. Here we report the concentrations and penetration of LZD for bone, fat and muscle in comparison with cefamandole (CMD). Twelve patients received 600 mg LZD as a 20 min infusion and 1000 mg CMD as a bolus injection immediately before hip arthroplasty. Bone, fat, muscle and blood samples were collected at timed intervals after the infusion and assayed by a validated HPLC method. For bone, peak levels of both agents occurred 10 min after administration with mean levels of LZD 9.1 mg/kg versus CMD 17.5 mg/kg, decreasing to LZD 5.7 mg/kg versus CMD 9.7 mg/kg at 30 min. Correction for blood concentrations gave penetration of LZD 51% versus CMD 25% at 10 min and LZD 46% versus CMD 23% at 30 min. For fat and muscle, peak levels occurred 20 min after infusion. Mean levels were LZD 5.2 mg/kg versus CMD 10.9 mg/kg (fat) and LZD 13.4 mg/kg versus CMD 10.9 mg/kg (muscle). Correction for blood concentrations gave penetration of LZD 37% versus CMD 19% (fat) and LZD 95% versus CMD 31% (muscle). We conclude that linezolid exhibits rapid penetration into bone and associated soft tissues achieving levels in excess of the MIC for sensitive organisms; with a similar distribution and penetration profile to agents currently used for treatment of infections in these tissues. 
 
Design, synthesis and in vitro evaluation of XRP2868, a new oral streptogramin
 
PS135
 Bacqué Ea, Barrière JCa, Berthaud Nb, Desmazeau Pb, Dutruc-Rosset Gb, Dutka-Malen Sb, Ronan Bb. a
Aventis Pharma, Chemistry, Paris, France, b
Aventis Pharma, Disease Group, Paris, France
 

XRP2868 is a new oral streptogramin composed of 2 semi-synthetic synergistic components in a 30/70 (w/w) association: RPR202868 (5δ-(1-morpholino)methyl-5δ,5γ-dehydro pristinamycin IE) from PIA and RPR132552 [(16R)-16-deoxy-16-fluoro pristinamycin IIB] from PIIB by original synthetic routes. The association has antibacterial activity against staphylococci including methicillin—MLSB-resistant strains (MIC90 range: 0.12—1 μg/ml), streptococci (MIC90: 0.25 μg/ml), pneumococci including multidrug resistant strains (MIC90: 0.50 μg/ml), enterococci including vancomycin-resistant strains (MIC90: 4 μg/ml), M. catarrhalis and Neisseria spp. (MIC90: 0.12 μg/ml), H. influenzæ (MIC90: 1 μg/ml), Legionella spp. (MIC90: 0.06 μg/ml) and anaerobes (MIC range: 0.06–4 μg/ml). XRP2868 is generally bactericidal at the concentration of 2–4×the MIC against S. aureus, S. pneumoniae, H. influenzae and demonstrates consequent PAE (2.1–>5.7 h at 2–4×MIC, following an exposure of 0.25–2 h). Mutants of S. aureus to XRP2868 were isolated at low frequencies (3.6×10−9–9.7×10−10) at 2× and 4×MIC while no mutant could be isolated at 8×MIC. These results suggest that XRP2868 (30/70 w/w) is a promising compound for the treatment of community-acquired infections. 
 
Ex vivo evaluation of RPR202868/RPR132552 (XRP2868), a new oral streptogramin
 
PS136
 Berthaud N, Diallo N. Aventis Pharma SA, Infectious Disease Group, Paris, France
 

The intra cellular activity of XRP2868, was assessed in J774 murine macrophages containing ingested Staphylococcus aureus (three strains) or L. pneumophila (one strain). At the concentration of 8× the MIC, growth of S. aureus was strongly inhibited after a 3-h period of incubation (Δ log10 cfu/ml vs T0 controls range: −2.16–−1.24, according to the strain tested). At the concentration of 8× the MIC, growth of intracellular L. pneumophila was inhibited after a 48–72-h period of incubation (Δ log10 cfu/ml vs T controls about −1.30 and −1.48 at 48 and 72 h, respectively). RPR202868 and RPR132552 alone had also inhibiting effect on bacterial growth (Δ log10 cfu/ml vs T0 controls after 72 h of incubation about −1.54 and −0.87, respectively). The bactericidal activity of XRP2868 was also assessed against slowly growing S. aureus, under experimental conditions mimicking those observed in patients with an infected indwelling device (first step of infection: adherence to inert support; declared infection: biofilm model). Under the experimental conditions, XRP2868 demonstrated a rapid and potent bactericidal effect against S. aureus adherent to an inert support or included in biofilm. This effect was observed at each of the three concentrations tested (5, 10, 50 and 8, 100 and 200× MIC, respectively). 
 
In vivo evaluation of XRP2868 (RPR202868/RPR132552), a new oral streptogramin
 
PS137
 Berthaud N, Huet Y, Aventis Pharma SA, Infectious Disease Group, Paris, France
 

The oral efficacy of XRP2868, was assessed in Staphylococcus and pneumococcal murine infections. Mice were challenged ip (×10, and ×100 times LD50). Abscesses were established by intramuscular injection of about 107 bacteria into the right thigh of mice. Pneumonia was established by intranasal injection of about 107 bacteria. Mice were treated twice a day for 1 (Staphylococcus aureus septicaemia and abscesses), 2 (S. pneunomoniae septicaemia) or 3 days (S. pneumoniae pneumonia). Six to 15 days post infection, for septicaemia and abscesses the results were expressed as ED50, whereas for pneumonia they were expressed as the dose yielding an average survival time (AST) significantly longer than that of the untreated infected controls. XRP2868 was efficacious in the treatment of experimental infections in mice caused by MLSB-sensitive and -constitutively resistant S. aureus (ED50 range: 20–44 and 24–60 mg/kg/administration in septicaemia and abscess models, respectively). It was also efficacious in the treatment of infections caused by S. pneumoniae whatever the serotype and the resistance profile of the strains tested (ED50 range: 28–55 mg/kg/administration in septicaemia, AST: 50 mg/kg/administration). These results suggest that XRP2868 might be effective for the treatment of staphylococcal and pneumococcal community-acquired infections. 
 
XRP2868 (RPR202868/RPR132552), a new oral streptogramin: bactericidal activity and pharmacokinetics in a model of
Streptococcus pneumoniae
mouse pneumonia
 
PS138
 Berthaud N, Huet Y, Diallo N. Aventis Pharma SA, Infectious Disease Group, Paris, France
 

The bactericidal activity against Streptococcus pneumoniae of XRP2868, a new oral streptogramin composed of two semi-synthetic synergistic components in a 30/70 (w/w) association (RPR202868, pristinamycin I derivative and RPR132552, pristinamycin II derivative), was assessed in lungs of mice with pneumonia. Mice were inoculated intranasally with about 107 cfu of strain 6254-01 (MLSB-resistant). Eighteen hours later (T0), animals received XRP2868 (120 mg/kg p.o). The administration was repeated 6, 24, 30, 48 and 54 h afterwards. To study the influence of varying the ratio of PI to PII component administered on activity and PK parameters, ratios of RPR202868 to RPR132552 ranging from 0/100 to 100/0 were also administered under the same conditions. After an oral unitary administration at 120 mg/kg, XRP2868, as well as ratios of RPR202868 to RPR132552 ranging from 50/50 to 90/10, demonstrated strong and quick bactericidal activity in lungs. Lung levels of RPR202868 and RPR132552 were generally equal or two times higher than blood levels. Resulting RPR202868/RPR132552 ratios in blood and lung, although not in accordance with the initial ratio administered, were synergistic for 3–4 h in blood and for 1–3 h in lungs explaining the activity observed. 
 
In vitro activity of telithromycin against respiratory tract pathogens isolated in France during 2000–2001
 
PS139
 Drugeon HBa, Moniot-Ville Nb, Bensalah Ac. a
Hopital Laennec, Laboratoire de Microbiologie, Nantes, France, b
Laboratoire Aventis, Medical, Paris, France, c
Quintiles, Medical, Levallois Perret, France
 

One thousand six hundred and ninety-four of adult respiratory tract infection (RTI) isolates were collected from November 2000 to April 2001 in 30 French centers. MICs of telithromycin (TEL), erythromycin (E), penicillin (P), amoxicillin (AMX), amoxiclav (AMC), cefuroxime (CXM) and levofloxacin (LVX) were determined by agar dilution method. MICs 50/90 (mg/l) were the following: Streptococcus pneumoniae (SP): Overall SP strains (n=675): TEL 0.015/0.06; E 0.5/64; AMX 0.06/2; CXM 0.25/4; LVX 1/2. P susceptible strains (n=331): TEL 0.0075/0.015; E 0.03/16; AMX 0.015/0.03; CXM 0.03/0.12; LVX 1/1. P intermediate strains (n=191): TEL 0.015/0.12; E 32/64; AMX 0.5/1; CXM 2/4; LVX 1/2. P resistant strains (n=153): TEL 0.015/0.5; E 64/64; AMX 2/4; CXM 4/16; LVX 1/2. E susceptible strains (n=353): TEL 0.0075/0.015; E 0.03/0.12; AMX 0.03/0.5; CXM 0.03/2; LVX 1/2. E resistant strains (n=322): TEL 0.015/0.25; E 64/64; AMX 0.5/2; CXM 2/8; LVX 1/2. Four percent of the strains were of high level of resistance (MICs ≥4 mg/l) to AMX. Haemophilus influenzae (n=751): TEL 1/2; E 8/16; AMC 0.5/2; CXM 1/4; LVX 0.03/0.03. Moraxella catarrhalis (n=268): TEL 0.06/0.12; E 0.12/0.25; AMC 0.03/0.12; CXM 0.5/1; LVX 0.06/0.06. Conclusion: Based on in vitro data, telithromycin is a good candidate for the treatment of RTI. 
 
In vitro evaluation of abt-773, telithromycin and azithromycin against
Streptococcus pneumoniae
,
Moraxella catarrhalis
,
Haemophilis influenzae
and methicillin-resistant
Staphylococcus aureus
 
PS140
 Steele-Moore L, Berg D, Barnes I, Couch K, Klein J, Holloway W. Christiana Care, Infectious Disease, Wilmington, US
 

Macrolide resistant Streptococcus pneumoniae (SP) is a worldwide concern predominantly because these isolates tend to be multiply drug resistant. New agents with increased activity against these pathogens are clinically important. The ketolide class of antimicrobial agents demonstrate excellent in vitro activity against SP, even those that are macrolide resistant. The in vitro activities of the ketolides ABT-773 (A) and telithromycin (T) were compared to azithromycin (AZ) against clinical isolates of SP, Moraxella catarrhalis (M.cat), Haemophilis influenzae (H.flu) and MRSA. Organisms tested: 51 strains of SP (including 14 AZ resistant), 25 H.flu, 25 MRSA and 10 M.cat. Microdilution MIC tests were performed following NCCLS recommendations using freshly prepared plates containing Haemophilis Test Medium for H.flu, cation adjusted Mueller-Hinton Broth (CAMHB) with laked horse blood for SP and CAMHB for M.cat and MRSA. The new ketolides, A and T had superior activity against SP including the AZ resistant strains (MIC90s: A=0.12 mcg/ml, T=0.25, AZ=4). All compounds had excellent activity against M.cat while none demonstrated activity against MRSA. H.flu activity was comparable among A, T and AZ. These new ketolides are not currently approved by the FDA; however T has been approved in Europe. 
 
Medical and economic impact of telithromycin in the outpatient treatment of community-acquired pneumonia (cap) in Argentina
 
PS141
 López H, Vidal GI, Salomón JM, Scaglione M, Zitto TR. Centro de Infectología, Infectious Diseases, Buenos Aires, Argentina
 

Objective: We evaluated the impact of the initial treatment failure rate, hospitalisation and costs in outpatient treatment of adult CAP in Argentina comparing amoxicillin, clarithromycin and telithromycin. Method: A probabilistic model was implemented in outpatient treatment of CAP. We estimated an initial treatment with amoxicillin, clarithromycin or telithromycin. We assumed expected clinical cure at 90.1, 88.5 and 94.6%, respectively. For those patients with failure treatment we evaluated a second-line of antibiotics (amoxicillin followed by clarithromycin and clarithromycin followed by new fluorquinolone) or hospitalisation. Patients with telithromycin and failure treatment must be hospitalised without a second line of outpatient treatment. Costs of CAP included drug's costs by 10 days, medical visits, chest radiographies, analysis and hospitalisation. Results: We estimated treatments in 100 patients and first-line drug failure in 10, 11 and 5 patients with amoxicillin, clarithromycin and telithromycin, respectively. Costs in outpatient treatment were: hospitalisation $12,224 and $13,489.4; second-line drug $1039 and $1045; second-line hospitalised $1320.4 and $1232 with amoxicillin and clarithromycin, respectively and hospitalisation with telithromycin $6137. Conclusions: Telithromycin showed lower clinical failure, hospitalisation and costs in CAP. Some studies suggest shortening CAP telithromycin treatment to 7 days helping adherence to treatment and decreasing costs even more. 
 
The new macrolides—a good alternative of tetracycline in the treatment of Mediterranean Spotted Fever
 
PS142
 Popivanova NIPa, Petrov AIPa, Boykinova OBBa, Kazakova ZKKa, Baltadjiev AGBb. a
Medical University, Infectious Disease, Plovdiv, Bulgaria, b
Department of Anatomy, Medical University, Plovdiv, Bulgaria
 

Mediterranean Spotted Fever (MSF) caused by Rickettsia conorii appears an endemic disease for some regions in Bulgaria. Frequently the disease has a severe course with multiple organ lesions. The early and adequate treatment is of extreme importance for the outcome of the disease. Searching an alternative antibiotic treatment of this disease we considered macrolides for their good cell and tissue penetration and dose-dependent bacteriostatic and bactericide effect. We treated 27 MSF patients with doxycycline 2×100 mg/day, 25 patients with clarithromycin 2×250 mg/day, as well as 25 patients with midecamycin 2×400 mg/day and midecamycin acetate 30 mg/kg/day. As a surrogate marker for treatment evaluation the effect on the febrile syndrome was used. Our findings showed that by the 5th day of treatment the fever normalized in 89.47, 88.24 and 76.47% of the patients treated with doxycycline, clarithromycin and midecamycin, respectively. For the same period the patient fever decreased below 38 °C in 100, 100 and 94.12%, respectively. The intoxication symptoms were influenced within the same period equally in all treated patients. Conclusions: We suggest that the new macrolides appear a good alternative of tetracycline on patients with MSF. 
 
Erythromycin resistance of Gram /+/ cocci in Bulgaria. Benefits of the new macrolides in the treatment of respiratory infections PS143
 Popivanova NIa, Yovtchev IPb, Dobreva MDc, Argirova TAc. a
Medical University, Infectious Disease, Plovdiv, Bulgaria, b
Medical University, Ear-Nose-Throat Disease, Plovdiv, Bulgaria, c
Medical University, Microbiology, Plovdiv, Bulgaria
 

In the recent 2 years we tested Erythromycin sensitivity of 474 species of Gram /+/ cocci isolated from throat and nose secretions, ear and eye effusions, sputa, cerebrospinal fluid and blood cultures, vaginal and urethral secretions, urine and fecal samples from patients with inflammatory diseases of the listed organs and systems. Staphylococcus aureus, Staphylococcus coagulase /−/, Streptococcus â-haemolyticus, Enterococcus were isolated. Of these microorganisms S. aureus was the most abundant. Our resistograms revealed sensitivity of the Gram /+/ cocci in 76.97 and 68.60% for 2000 and 2001, respectively, and resistance of 23.03 and 31.40%, respectively. In the tests with Midecamycin and Midecamycin acetat the same microorganisms showed sensitivity of 85.38% and resistance of 14.62%. The clinical findings showed excellent effect of the new macrolides including Clarithromycin and azalides—Azithromycin. We conclude the resistance of Gram /+/ cocci and especially of S. aureus to Erythromycin increases very quickly and has reached dramatical extent. By now, the new 14, 15, and 16-membered ring macrolides and azalides show high antibacterial activity and good clinical effect. 
 
Quinupristin/dalfopristin: how insensitive… PS144
 Pappas GA, Liberopoulos E, Tsiara S, Elisaf M, Tsianos E. University Hospital, Internal Medicine, Ioannina, Greece
 

Quinupristin/dalfopristin (Q/D) is a novel injectable streptogramin antibiotic which initiation in therapeutics was hailed as an important step towards treatment of vancomycin-resistant Enterococcus faecium (VREF) species. Initial reports concluded in an excellent response of VREF to Q/D. Reports of Q/D-resistant strains of E. faecium have emerged, both in USA and Europe. We report two cases of E. faecium bacteremia in which the responsible isolate was not sensitive to Q/D. The first patient was a woman with acute leukemia and septicemia. E. faecium was cultured from blood samples: the species was resistant to almost all antibiotics, exhibiting sensitivity only to tetracycline (!), while its sensitivity to Q/D was indermediate. The second patient was a man with endocarditis, in whom blood cultures isolated E. faecium sensitive to a number of antibiotics, including ciprofloxacin and vancomycin; still the sensitivity to Q/D was indermediate. Q/D has not been officially introduced to the antibiotic arsenal of Greek medicine. Moreover, the drug has never been used in our hospital, not even experimentally. Other E. faecium species isolated in our hospital have been sensitive to Q/D. How much hope can be put on a drug that seems to be partly useless before its initiation? Increasing reports of V/Q-resistant strains of E. faecium from all over Europe raises fears that the V/D story might well end before it begins. 
 
Time-dependent stimulation of MDBK cell surveillance by vegetable tannins
 
PS145
 Varadinova Ta, Diakov Ta, Karagiozova Da, Genova Pa, Pardon Pb, Baudry Cb, Quideau Sb. a
Sofia University, Virology, Sofia, Bulgaria, b
et Institut du Pin, Centre de Recherche en Chimie Moleculaire, Universite Bordeaux 1, Bordeaux, France
 

Vegetable tannins posses a wide range of biological activities. The aim of the present study was to evaluate the cytotoxicity of five purified vegetable tannins against MDBK cells. The maximal non-toxic concentrations (MNC) and the concentrations required to inhibit cell growth by 50% (CC50) were evaluated after 24, 48 and 72 h periods of action. MNC values after 48 h indicated that compounds stimulated cell surveillance when applied in concentrations lower than 0.01 μM. CC50 values indicated: (i) a decrease in cytotoxicity after 48 h as CC50 were up to 70 times lower than those observed after the 24 h period, and (ii) a re-increase in cytotoxicity when the period of action was prolonged up to 72 h as CC50 were 2500 times lower than those observed after the 48 h period. These data thus appear to reveal the capability of the investigated natural polyphenolic products to stimulate cell surveillance in a time-dependent manner. 
Antibacterial effect survey of enoxolone on periodontopathogenic and capnophilic bacteria isolated from specimens of patients with periodontitis
 
PS146
 Salari MHa, Kadkhoda Zb, Sohrabi Na. a
Tehran University of Medical Sciences, Pathobiology, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, b
Tehran University of Medical Sciences, Dentistry, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran
 

Objectives: Most of the microorganisms associated with periodontitis are capnophilic and anaerobic bacteria. Purpose of this study was to detection of antibacterial effect of enoxolone on periodontopathogenic and capnophilic bacteria. Methods: In this study 136 periodontopathogenic and capnophilic bacteria were isolated from 400 specimens of patients with periodontitis by culture method. An anti-bacterial activity of enoxolone against these microorganisms was investigated by minimum inhibitory concentration (MIC) and minimum bactericidal concentration (MBC) methods. Results: Based on our findings the MIC, MBC and Lethal does 50 (LD50) of Enoxolone for Actinobacillus actinomycetemcomitans, Eikenella corrodens and Capnocytophaga were ‘8, 16, 64’, ‘16, 16, 32’, and ‘8, 16, 32’ μg/ml, respectively. Conclusion: Our results show enoxolone has antibacterial effect on A. actinomycetemcomitans, E. corrodens and Capnocytophaga spp. 
 
Synthesis of new derivates of 5-aminothiazole and antibacterial activity
 
PS147
 Sakalova STN. Medical University, Microbiology, Grodno, Belarus
 

We have synthesized diamides of dicarboxylic acids, with components such as 5-nitrothiazole benzolsulphamides and triazol. All the above compounds exhibited bacteriostatic activity towards some microorganisms. For further studies of bacteriostatic activity of amides and diamides of dicarboxylic acids, as well as for determination of ‘structure–activity’ relationship, we have synthesized a range of monoamides. Antibacterial activity of the synthesized compounds was studied in vitro by agar dilution methods. For this purpose, approximately 50 various Gram-positive and -negative microorganisms including clinical strains of Staphylococcus aureus, Bacillus subtilis, Serratia marcescens, Escherichia coli, Proteus morganii, Micrococcus lisodeicticus, Staphylococcus epidermidis, Shigella sonnei, Salmonella typhimurium, Yersinia enterocolitica. Minimum inhibitory concentration was expressed in μg/ml. Nitazole was used as a comparison substance. Analysis that new derivatives of 5-nitrotiasole have high antibacterial activity relative towards certain microorganisms included strains obtained from infection department's patients. Results will be shown. 
 
Microbial susceptibility to the essential oil of
Ziziphora clinopodiodes
Lam.
 
PS148
 Rasooli I. Shahed University, Biology, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran
 

Purpose of the study: Antimicrobial activities of essential oils vary from oil to oil and from one micro organism to another. The antimicrobial and chemical properties of essential oil from Ziziphora clinopodiodes Lam. has not been studied and hence the present study was planned to evaluate those properties against a series of micro organisms viz, Escherichia coli, Staphylococcus aureus, Pseudomonas aeroginosa, Klebsiella pneumonia, Bacillus subtilis, Bacillus licheniformis, Streptococcus faecalis, Candida albicans and Saccharomyces cerevisiae. Results:
Z. clinopodiodes Lam. essential oil was found to have remarkable antimicrobial property against all the microorganisms but P. aeroginosa. The oil exhibited its best antimicrobial activity within a maximum of 45 min. Seventeen components were identified by Gas Chromatography and Mass Spectrometry (GC and GC/MS) analysis of the oil, out of which Pulegone (24.5%), Neomenthol (12.8%), Cyclohexene,5-methyl-3-(1-methenyl)trans (12.2%), 2,4-cycloheptadien-1-one,3,6,6-trimethyl (9.2%), Piperitone (4.2%), and Limonene+1,8-cineole (4.1%) constitute major parts of the oil. Conclusion: Monoterpenes seem to have antimicrobial role. It seems necessary to explore antimicrobial properties of new harmless antimicrobial agents from natural sources as substitutes for common chemical drugs. 
 
Methanol extract of
Carpobrotus edulis
enhances killing of methicillin resistant
Staphylococcus aureus
phagocytosed by THP-1 human monocyte derived macrophages and promotes the release of modulators of cellular immunity PS149
 Ordway D. Instituto de Higiene e Medicina Tropical/UNL, Unit of Mycobacteriology, Lisbon, Portugal
 

Although alkaloids from the family Mesembryanthemaceae have anti-cancer activity, species of this family have received little attention. Because these alkaloids also exhibit properties normally associated with compounds that have activity at the level of the plasma membrane, we have studied a crude methanol extract of Carpabrotus edulis, a common plant found along the Portuguese coast, for properties normally associated with plasma membrane active compounds. The results of this preliminary study show that the extract is non-toxic at concentrations that prime THP-1 human monocyte-derived macrophages to kill ingested methicillin resistant Staphylococcus aureus and promote the release of lymphokines associated with cellular immune functions. The extract also induces the proliferation of THP-1 cells within 1 day of exposure and 2 days earlier than that induced by phytohemagglutinin. Similar results were obtained with monocyte-derived macrophages isolated from human peripheral blood. The active component or components of the plant extract may be exploited as intracellular active anti-bacterials as well as modulators of cellular immunity. 
 
Enhancing of Erythromycin production by
Saccharopolyspora erythraea
NUR001 with common and uncommon oils
 
PS150
 Hamedi J, Malekzadeh F. Department of Biology, Faculty of Science, University of Tehran, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran
 

Enhancing effect of various oils on the erythromycin production by Saccharopolyspora erythraea NUR001 were evaluated in a complex medium consisting soybean flour and dextrin as the main substrates. The biomass, erythromycin, dextrin and oil concentrations, and pH value were measured on a daily basis. Also, the kinds and frequencies of fatty acids of the oils used were determined. Saturated fatty acids in the shark oil were higher than that of vegetable oils used. Erythromycin concentration in the melon (Cucumis melo var. inderus cultivar mashhad) seed oil containing medium was 4.56 times higher than that of the control medium (without oil) and 1.18 times higher than that of rapeseed oil containing medium. Erythromycin concentration in the other oil containing media, including rapeseed, soybean, shark (Carcharhinus dussumieri), and safflower oils was 3.88, 3.03, 2.59, 2.44 time higher than that of control medium, respectively. The melon seed oil had the least enhancing effect on the biomass production, and thus decreasing the cost of the biomass separation. 
 
Can varicella be eliminated by universal childhood vaccination ?—Epidemiological and economic data from Germany
 
PS151
 Wutzler Pa, Banz Kb, Neiss Ac, Goertz Ad, Bisanz Hd. a
Institute for Antiviral Chemotherapy, University of Jena, Jena, Germany, b
Outcomes International, Basle, Switzerland, c
Institute of Medical Statistics and Epidemiology, Technical University, Munich, Germany, d
GlaxoSmithKline, Pharma, Munich, Germany
 

Purpose: Universal varicella vaccination in childhood is expected to reduce substantially the number of uncomplicated cases of chickenpox and to decrease the number of complicated cases requiring hospitalization. To generate fundamental data for decisions of the health authorities epidemiological and health-economic data were collected in two large studies. Using an age-structured decision analytic model the benefits, costs and cost-effectiveness of a varicella immunization program over a period of 30 years were assessed. Results: It could be shown, that the vast majority of varicella cases occur in children aged less than 8 years. In 16.3% of the cases a severe course was assessed. Overall incidence of complications was estimated to be 5.7%. A routine varicella vaccination program targeting healthy children could prevent 82.6% of varicella cases and over 4700 major complications per year provided the coverage rate would be 85%. Under these conditions the elimination of varicella is predicted to be achievable within 15–20 years. A combined measles, mumps, rubella and varicella vaccine is expected to provide the required coverage. Conclusions: Routine childhood varicella vaccination appears to be a highly efficient strategy to significantly reduce the sizeable burden of varicella and leads to significant savings from both societal and payer's perspective. 
 
Immunisation against influenza of children with allergic diseases
 
PS152
 Bulgakova VA, Balabolkin II, Sentsova TB. Scientific Center of Child Health, Russian Academy of Medical Sciences, Scientific Research Institute of Pediatrics, Moscow, Russian Federation
 

Objective: To estimate efficacy of vaccine Influvac at children with allergic diseases. Methods: Twenty children aged 3–18 years with allergic diseases received vaccine Influvac (Solvay Pharma). For the control group of children, with allergic pathology did not receive this vaccine because of an intolerance of chicken protein (10 children). Results: All vaccinated children for the observable season of 6 months did not get influenza. General and aboriginal reactions to a vaccine did not occur. In control group for the observable season two children were ill with influenza and four children with acute respiratory virus infection (60%). Among vaccinated children there was an increase in titre to a protective level (1:40 and above) to all to three strains of influenza 30 days after injection. Vaccine Influvac can be recommended for an immunisation against influenza of children with an allergic pathology because of efficacy and absence of side effects. 
 
Pharmacoeconomic impact in immunizing adults against influenza
 
PS153
 López H, Zitto TR, Vidal GI, Cánepa MC, Salomón JM, Scaglione M. Centro de Infectología, Infectious Diseases, Buenos Aires, Argentina
 

Objectives: Our study examines the possible economic impact of the influenza on health working adults in Argentina, and the intervention cost saving with immunization. Methods: This is a theoretical study based on a mathematical model. Population data was published in 2001s national statistics. The global incidence of influenza infection was estimated at 5%. We have estimated the direct cost on influenza infection (outpatient visits, drugs and hospitalization) and indirect cost (work absenteeism and productivity loss) and projected net saving for the 20–64 year-old vaccinated group. The vaccine effectiveness was estimated at 70 and 90%. The price of vaccine was $8 each. Results: The total population in Argentina was 36.027.041 in 2001, while 19.337.487 of the people were 20–64 year-old (53.67%). Considering an incidence of 5%, 996.874 people had influenza infection during the year. The direct cost was of $23.962.647 and the indirect cost was of $250.453.421. The saving cost avoiding influenza was of $192.091.178 and $246.974.371 and the net saving amount (avoided cases—vaccine cost) was of $8.385.051 and $63.268.245 for 70 and 90% of effectiveness, respectively. Conclusion: Influenza vaccination is effective in diminishing cases of flu and reducing working-day loss. Its a safe and cost-effective vaccine. 
 
Impact of vaccination against flu in a health institution
 
PS154
 López H, Zitto TR, Cánepa MC. Centro de Infectología, Infectious Diseases, Buenos Aires, Argentina
 

Flu infection is a major cause of illness and one of the most common cause of work absenteeism, increasing institution costs, healthcare provider visits, use of drugs, and decreasing work productivity. Vaccine against flu has an effectiveness between 70 and 90%, in health adults. Objective: Evaluate the impact of flu-like respiratory tract infections in a health institution staff during 1 year, comparing vaccinated with not-vaccinated groups. Methods: We evaluated all causes of absenteeism along 1 year (2001), based on the written note made by the professional who has evaluated ill people, selecting flu-like respiratory infection causes. We evaluated age, working days loss related to illness, and cost on vaccinated and not-vaccinated groups. Results: One hundred and sixty eight of the total staff (479 people) were vaccinated, 21 of them had flu-like infection, resulting in 40 working days lost. For not-vaccinated group, 33 people had flu and 56 lost days. Lost cost for vaccinated group was of $1267, and for not-vaccinated group, $1874. Conclusion: We observed a decrease in working days loss and money waste related to flu-like infections on the vaccinated group. Because of safety and effectiveness of vaccine against flu, the implementation of vaccination will be cost-effective for all institution staff. 
 
Using recombinant α2β interferon in complex therapy of bronchial asthma at children
 
PS155
 Zaitseva OVa, Malinovskaya VVb. a
Russian State Medical University, Paediatric, Moscow, Russian Federation, b
Epidemiology and Microbiology Scientific Institute named by N.F. Gamaley, Interferon, Moscow, Russian Federation
 

We studied functioning of the interferon system in 108 children with atopic bronchial asthma (BA) at the age of 2–14 years. The control group included 10 healthy children. We investigated the interferon status (method of Grigoryan S.) and serum concentrations of IFN-gamma (IFNγ) (ELISA). There was a decrease in the IFN-producing ability of leukocytes to the synthesis of IFNα at 50% and IFNγ at 84% of children with BA. Serum level of IFN of children with BA during all period of illness is compared to the children without predisposition to atopy (94.9±10.3 and 192.3±7.8 pg/ml accordingly) was significantly decreased. Production of IFNα increased after using viferon (recombinant α2β IFN and antioxidants). Decreased ability of gamma-interferonogenesis in the most children was not affected by the action of immunomodulators. There was shown interferon system's dysfunction in the development of atopy and increasing predisposition to respiratory infections and to persistent of atypical infections in children with BA. 
 
One case with Congo-Crimean haemorrhagic fever
 
PS156
 Harxhi A, Pilaca A, Pano K. University Hospital Center of Tirana, Infectious Diseases, Tirana, Albania
 

Congo-Crimean haemorrhagic fever is viral disease with a high rate of mortality that is caused by a Nairovirus, Bunyaviride species. This is a zoonotic disease, which affects sporadically humans and is geographically distributed even in Eastern Europe and Balkan. During the months of May and June 2001, in northeast of Albania were reported eight cases of haemorrhagic fever. Serologic tests performed in the laboratory of reference in Thesaloniki, Greece confirmed the diagnosis of Congo-Crimean haemorrhagic fever. In the mean time, WHO reported the outbreak in southwest Kosovo of 69 cases suspected for haemorrhagic fever from which 18 were confirmed laboratory as Congo-Crimean haemorrhagic fever. We are describing here the clinical history of one of eight cases with CCHF in Albania. From the epidemiological point of view this case was considered peculiar, as it was the only one hospitaly acquired, and due to the gravity of the haemorrhagic syndrome was admitted at the intensive care unit at infectious diseases service, University Hospital Center of Tirana. 
 
Prevalence of active chronic hepatitis B among the HBsAg-carriers in Smolensk, Russia
 
PS157
 Rafalski VV, Sudilovskaya NN, Karakina ES. Smolensk Sate Medical Academy, Institute of Antimicrobial Chemotherapy, Smolensk, Russian Federation
 

Purpose: To estimate the frequency of active chronic hepatitis B among the HBsAg-carriers in Smolensk. Results: In the study were included 150 patients ≥18 years of age with documented HBsAg-carrier ≥6 months (average age—39.4 years, male—58%, female—42%). HBV DNA in serum was tested by qualitative and quantitative PCR (commercial test-system Ampli-Sens HBV). HBeAg, HBeAb, HBsAg were detected by ELISA (Hoffmann La Roche). HBV DNA by qualitative PCR was detected in 41% patients, by qualitative PCR was detected in 13% patients in the concentration ≥105 copies/ml, in 4.3% ≥106 copies/ml, in 4.3% ≥107 copies/ml, in 2.1% ≥108 copies/ml (Fig. 1). 

 HBV DNA level distribution among the HBsAG carriers. Elevated (1.5 the upper limit of normal) ALT level was determined in 3.8% of the HBV DNA negative and 25.4% of the HBV DNA positive patients. HBeAg was detected in 10.2% of the HBV DNA positive patients and had not been determined in the HBV DNA negative patient. Eleven percent of patient had the combination of the biochemical, serological and virology criteria, which are typical for active chronic hepatitis B (HBsAg-carrier >6 months, HBV DNA ≥10×5 copies/ml, elevated ALT). Conclusion: In Smolensk 41% of the HBsAg-carriers have viral replication confirmed by qualitative PCR. Eleven percent of them have active chronic hepatitis B. 
 
Inducible nitric oxide synthase expression in chronic viral hepatitis and its relation with histological severity of disease
 
PS158
 Kandemir Oa, Polat Ab, Kaya Aa. a
Medicine of Faculty, Mersin University, Clinical microbiology and infectious disease, Mersin, Turkey, b
Medicine of Faculty, Mersin University, Pathology, Mersin, Turkey
 

The exact potential of nitric oxide in the pathogenesis of chronic viral hepatitis is not known. The elevated nitric oxide production is assumed to be responsible for the pathological changes in many inflammatory conditions, mainly via peroxynitrite, a potential oxidant that is produced by the reduction of superoxyde anion with nitric oxide. The intensity and the distribution of the immunohistochemical staining of intrahepatic inducible nitric oxide synthase were studied in the biopsy specimens obtained from 63 patients with viral hepatitis and 13 patients with elevated transaminase levels from other etiology. Hepatic inducible nitric oxide synthase staining was significantly more intense in the viral hepatitis group (P=0.000). Inducible nitric oxide synthase staining levels correlated well with the severity of the viral hepatitis using the Knodell's liver histological activity index (r=0.393, P=0.002). Among the viral hepatitis group, the pathological distribution of the inducible nitric oxide synthase staining favored the periportal regions whereas less staining was observed in the bile duct and parenchyma regions. As nitric oxide mediated nitration of hepatocellular proteins is found to be elevated in the inflamed hepatic tissues and it well correlated with the severity of the disease, we suggest that inducible nitric oxide synthase can possibly have a critical role in the pathogenesis of chronic viral hepatitis. 
 
Treatment with ursofalk of patients ill with chronic hepatitis of viral and other aetiologies
 
PS159
 Katchanko E, Kozatchenko M, Klutchareva A. The President's Hospital, Minsk, Belarus
 

There were 36 patients under observation who were divided into two groups, the first of 18 patients (eight chronic virus hepatitis; three chronic virus hepatitis+steatosis; four steatohepatitis; three chronic cryptogenic hepatitis; there were 14 men and four women aged from 35 to 74. The second group consisted of 18 patients, eight with chronic virus hepatitis; four with steatohepatitis; six with chronic cryptogenic hepatitis. There were 15 men and three women aged from 40 to 80. Diagnosis was confirmed with the help of clinical data, biochemical tests, serological markers, PSR-diagnostics and ultrasound examination and computer tomography of the abdomen. In the first group of patients the treatment with ursofalk was administered at the dosage of 10 mg/kg of body mass from 1 month to 3 years with improvement in general condition of the patients: heaviness, pain under the right rib, nausea and skin itch have disappeared. In all the cases, improvement in the biochemical blood analysis took place during treatment. The average index of ALT activity was before—105.88 U/l, after—62.06 U/l and AST—156.44 and 95.05 U/l; ALP—196.39 and 171.87 U/l; GGT—163.2 and 82.86 U/l; CHOL—5.38 and 4.8 mmol/l; TG—2.15 and 1.75 mmol/l. In the second group of patients the treatment was carried out with various hepatoprotectors during the courses from 1 to 6 months. Before the average index of ALT activity was 181.3 U/l, after—165.5 U/l; AST—126.9 and 129.0 U/l; ALP—229.8 and 213.5 U/l; GGT—204.2 and 238.0 U/l; CHOL—5.85 and 5.67 mmol/l; TG—1.72 and 1.8 mmol/l. Treatment of patients suffering from hepatitis of viral and other aetiologies with ursofalk produces a positive effect on both clinical symptomatic and biochemical indices. Remission was more stable during a long period of taking the preparation. The hepatoprotective effect of ursofalk during the 3 years was sustained for the whole of the period of the treatment. After stopping, an acute attack of cytolytic syndrome was observed. With other hepatoprotectors we did not get any improvement in clinical scene of the disease or in biochemical indices. 
 
Herpes-virus hepatitis
 
PS160
 Shavlov NM, Kletsky SK. Minsk, Belarus
 

HSV-1 and -11 have possibility to damage different organs and systems. Sometimes they cause damage of the liver, which resemble viral hepatitis. The etiology of such hepatitis may be confirmed only by results of liver biopsy.
We have diagnosed 12 cases of herpetic hepatitis: eight children and four adults. Clinical course was different. In five cases the acute beginning took place: high temperature, the jaundice at the 2–3 day (the level of bilirubin was 200–350 mkmol, especially direct), cholestasis, the pain in upper right part of abdomen. The ascites was found in three patients with acute hepatitis during 1st week from the beginning of disease. In seven cases the beginning was gradual. The temperature was subfebrile, prolonged; malaise and moderate pain in upper part of abdomen were constant complaint. The jaundice was moderate; bilirubin increased until 120 mkmol. The level of ALT was moderately increased (5–7 times). The blood analysis showed moderate leukocytosis with neutrophilia, and increased SRE.
The serological markers of hepatitis A, B, C, D were negative in all cases. HSV-1 and -2 were found in the blood. The diagnosis was defined by the results of hystochemical investigations, when the viruses were found in liver bioptat, and confirmed with the results of specific treatment. Specific damage of liver cells was found: protein dystrophy and specific inclusions in cell nucleus.
In all cases the treatment with acyclovir were given. The results we have observed during 1st week: the temperature became normal, the jaundice decreased and bilirubin was normal during 5–10 days.
In one case the recidive took place 2 weeks later after treatment. The second course of acyclovir with Intron A gave good results. 
 
Hepatitis G virus infection in individuals at high risk of transmission of viral hepatitis
 
PS161
 Nesic Za, Delic Db, Prostran Ma, Vuckovic Sa, Stojanovic Ra. a
Department of Pharmacology, School of Medicine, University of Belgrade, Belgrade, Yugoslavia, b
Clinical Center of Serbia, Institute for Infection and Tropical Disease, Belgrade, Yugoslavia
 

The large number of unsolved cases of acute and chronic hepatitis has most probably the viral etiology. In mid 1990s, two independent groups of authors reported a new human hepatotropic virus, with flavivirus like genomes, hepatitis G virus (HGV). The aim of this pilot study was to determine the prevalence of hepatitis G viral infection among patients at high risk of exposure to blood and blood products, as well as to evaluate if the risk of HGV infection was higher among them than in the general population. Immunoenzyme test on microtitration plate for detection antibodies against HGV E2 antigen in plasma or sera (R&D Systems, Minneapolis, USA) was used for evidencing anti-HGV IgG antibodies in sera. Anti-HGV antibodies were detected in the control group (blood donors) in 8.3% (2/24) patients. Prevalence of anti-HGV antibodies among i.v. drug users was evidenced in 42.8% (9//21), in hemophiliacs 41.2% (7/17), in patients acquiring multiple blood transfusion 42.8% (3/7), in hemodialyzed patients 33.3% (4/12) and in patients with transplanted organs 57.14% (4/7). Our results suggest that patients exposed to blood or blood products have a higher risk of HGV infection than general population. 
 
Evaluation of Ortho Total HCV Core antigen assay in assessment and follow-up of patients treated for chronic HCV
 
PS162
 Lunel F, Veillon P, Payan C. CHU Angers, Laboratoire de Bactério-Virologie, Angers, France
 

An assay to quantitate ‘Total’ HVC Core antigen (HCV Ag) in serum or plasma, may reflect viral load, has been developed by Ortho-Clinical Diagnostics. Methods: We evaluated HCV Ag with two quantitative assays for HCV RNA: bDNA 3.0 (Bayer) and Monitor 2.0 (Roche). We studied 191 samples from untreated patients and 237 from 144 patients with chronic HCV treated with IFN or IFN/Ribavirin. Results: Correlation of Ag and quantitative assays was high (r=0.85 for bDNA 3.0 and 0.83 for Monitor 2.0). No difference between the levels of RNA and Ag among HCV genotypes (r=0.82–0.96) was found. Ag values, before treatment, were significantly lower in sustained responders (SR) than in other groups (5.4 log versus 6 log, P<0.001). In patients treated with IFN or combination therapy, we found very good correlation between decrease and negativation of Ag and viral load: 2 log IU/ml decline after M1 of interferon was significantly correlated with the negativation of HCV Ag and SR. Thirty-eight/41 of SR had a RNA load decrease >2 log IU/ml and 39/41 had a negativation of HCV Ag after M1. Conclusion: Total HCV Core Ag appears to be a new tool for monitoring patients with HCV infection. 
 
Hepatitis C virus RNA and HCV Core antigen kinetics predict the efficiency of interferon-alfa and ribavirin therapy in naive patients infected by HCV genotype 2 or 3
 
PS163
 Lunel Fa, Veillon Pa, Payan Ca, Loustaud-Ratti Vb, Rifflet Hc, Fouchard-Hubert Id, Causse Xe, Abergel Af. a
CHU Angers, Laboratoire de Bactério-Virologie, Angers, France, b
CHU Dupuytren, Service de Médecine Interne A, Limoges, France, c
CHG Ajaccio, Service de Médecine B, Ajaccio, France, d
CHU Angers, Service de Médecine A, Angers, France, e
CHU la Source, Service d'Hépatogastroentérologie, Orleans, France, f
Hopital Hotel-Dieu, Service d'Hépatogastroentérologie, Clermont-Ferrand, France
 

Fifty-five patients infected by genotype 2 or 3 were treated with a primary dose of 3 (if hepatitis C virus (HCV) RNA <3 Meq/ml) or 6 million units of interferon alfa-2b (IFN) thrice weekly for 12 months. Ribavirin was added at month 3 (M), until M12 if HCV RNA was found positive after M2 of IFN. The viral kinetic was assessed during the follow up by serial measurements of HCV RNA (bDNA 3.0 and Monitor 2.0) and using a new assay from Ortho-Clinical Diagnostics which is able to quantify total HCV core antigen. Sustained virologic response was observed in 65% of the patients (36/55). After 1 month of IFN treatment, sustained responders had a fall of HCV RNA and HCV Core antigen higher than non-responders (4.33±1.84 log UI/ml versus 0.15±0.31 log UI/ml, P<0.001, for HCV RNA) and (1.68±0.89 log (pg/ml×10 000) versus 0.17±0.18 log (pg/ml×10 000) P<0.001, for HCV Core antigen). After 1 month of IFN, the Positive and Negative Predictive Values of sustained response were, respectively, 100 and 17.4% for HCV RNA negativation and 97.5 and 37.5% for HCV antigenemia negativation. These results suggest that both kinetics of viral load and antigenemia are highly predictive of sustained response. 
 
Prevalence of hepatitis B, hepatitis C and genotypic analysis on economic immigrants in Greece
 
PS164
 Theodorou M, Petinelli I, Pontikaki D, Mela C, Blana A, Papanastasiou A, Toliopoulos A, Stavrakaki M, Sagkana E. Microbiology Department, Western Attika General Hospital, Greece, Egaleo, Greece
 

Greece has accepted a big number of economic immigrants lately. We investigate the prevalence of hepatitis B/C as well as the epidemiological features that might influence the public health. 1.235 economic immigrants from: Albania 630, Eastern Europe 411 and from Asiatic-African countries 194, visited our hospital to be checked in order to get a health certificate to obtain the green card. They where tested for hepatitis B/C. The serological markers were determined by immunoenzymatic method. All HbsAg(+) and anti-HCV were further tested for HBV DNA and HCV RNA by competitive RT PCR. HCV RNA(+) were genotyped by strip hybridization immunoassay.
In 630 Albanians 17.5% were HbsAg(+), 14.6% HBV DNA(+), 1.1% anti-HCV(+) and 0.8% HCV RNA(+). In 411 East Europeans 5.1% were HbsAg(+), 4.4% HBV DNA(+), 2.43% anti-HCV(+) and 1.9% HCV RNA. In 194 Asians-Africans, 2.6% were HbsAg(+) and 2% HBV DNA(+). In 101 Pakistanis, 26.7% were anti-HCV(+) and 22.0% HCV RNA(+). Of the rest of Asians-Africans, 11.82% were anti-HCV(+) and 9.3% HCV RNA(+). Albanians: higher prevalence of HBV infection (14.6%). Greek blood donors: 1% Pakistanis: HCV infection is 22% (predominance of 3a type), General Greek population: 2%. Public health services in Greece and Europe must take appropriate measures. 
 
Hepatitis-B vaccine and murine schistosomiasis
 
PS165
 El Zawawy LAa, Mohamed ONb, Ali SMa, Eissa MEa, Allam SRa. a
Faculty of Medicine, Parasitology, Alexandria, Egypt, b
High Institute of Public Health, Microbiology, Alexandria, Egypt
 

The purpose of the study was to investigate the influence of schistosomal suppression on the antibody response to hepatitis-B vaccine (HBV) and to study if the vaccine has any protective effect on experimental () infection. The results obtained revealed that infection reduced the serum antibody level against HBV. Parasitological and histopathological findings showed significant protection against infection. The conclusion reached was; in order to reduce the incidence of virus-B infection especially in schistosomiasis endemic areas, public health officials should evaluate a policy for regulation of HBV booster vaccination to enhance the population immunity against hepatitis-B infection. 
 
Family adherence to anti-retroviral therapy for African immigrant children in London PS166
 Cooper E, Fisher T, Shingadia D. Newham General Hospital, Family Clinic, London, UK
 

Sustained anti-retroviral combination chemotherapy requires excellent adherence to the regimen so as to suppress viral replication sufficiently to delay the emergence of resistance. If chemotherapy were taken to scale, e.g. in Africa, erratic adherence might soon lead to multi-resistant circulating virus. We reviewed our experience in a well established London family clinic with a team including community nurses. We reviewed the records of the 23 African immigrant children, aged 2–14, treated with anti-retrovirals exclusively at our centre throughout 2001. Whereas 14 had undetectable HIV RNA within the year, only four had undetectable RNA throughout the year. Four failed therapy through proven resistance mutations, but nine were considered through circumstantial evidence to have rising viral loads primarily because of poor adherence. Three were known to have stopped taking drugs for extended periods. The three boys over 11 years were unreliable in adherence, but the one girl in this age-group was fully adherent. Our preliminary assessment is that for the children in our families, despite a team approach and home visits, non-adherence to HAART may be twice as common as selection of a dominant viral mutant as a primary cause of failure to sustain viral suppression. 
 
Prevalence of lipodystrophy in a cohort of black africans patients
 
PS167
 Quiros-Roldan E, Moretti F, Castelli F, El-Hamad I, Carosi G. Institute of Infectious and Tropical Diseases, University of Brescia, Brescia, Italy
 

The prevalence of HIV related lipodystrophy-syndrome depending on the definition and severity of lipodystrophy ranges from 5 to 80%. We have retrospectively reviewed the medical records of 58 African patients followed. The characteristics are shown in table.
 The 3.4% of Africans had triglycerides >200 mg/ml and 1.7% had cholesterol >250 mg/ml, none had both metabolic alterations. Glycemia >120 mg/ml was observed in 8.6% patients. It is interesting highlight that in any the Africans morphological changes were noted and all of them showed weight stable. Although the low prevalence of metabolic alterations may be attributed to the different ethnic alimentary behavior if self-body perception by African is not as accurate as by caucasian on the estimation of the body changes have to be investigated. 
 
Maternal anti-HAV prevalence and vaccination age
 
PS168
 Alabaz Da, Alhan Ea, Yaman Ab, Evliyaoglu Na, Kocabas Ea, Aksaray Na. a
Division of Pediatric Infectious Diseases, Cukurova University, Adana, Turkey, b
Department of Microbiology, Cukurova University, Adana, Turkey
 

Hepatitis A virus (HAV) infection is usually asymptomatic in children. However, it may occasionally cause a severe disease with high morbidity and mortality, and loss of school or business days. In a previous study, we have shown that every one of two to three school children from upper social classes living in Adana carries high risk of HAV infection. It is well known that maternally transmitted anti-HAV antibodies interfere with HAV vaccination. In an effort to determine the optimal age for HAV vaccination, 122 babies (52% girls and 48.5% boys) born in our hospital were prospectively followed up at least 24 months for the presence of maternal antibodies to hepatitis A (anti-HAV IgG).
Anti-HAV IgG titers were measured from the blood specimens obtained at birth from the mothers and from the offsprings at months, 0, 3, 6, 9, 12, 15, 18, 21 and 24.
The prevalence of positive anti-HAV at birth (95%) was similar to those of HAV seroprevalance studies carried out in adults in our area.
The disappearance of antibodies occurred between the 1st and 21st month of life. The prevalence of anti-HAV IgG among children aged 0, 9, 12, 15, 18 and 21 months were 95, 60, 32, 9, 4 and 0%, respectively.
In light of these findings, we suggest that hepatitis A vaccination be given after 21 months of age. Earlier vaccination may be ineffective due to interference with maternally transmitted anti-HAV antibodies. 
 
Epidemiology of ontestinal ameobiasis in an Iranian hospital
 
PS169
 Ghaderi B, Alaghebandan R, Rastegar lari A. Department of Microbiology, Iran University, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran
 

Diarrhoea is a major public health problem in developing countries. Amoebiasis is one of the most common causes of diarrhoea in Iran as an endemic area for amoebiasis. Little, however, is known about the extent of the condition in our society. The aim of this study is to determine socio-demographic and clinical characteristics of patients with intestinal amoebiasis. During July and August 2001, we collected 90 patients with diarrhoea among 5000 patients who visited at a referral hospital in Shahriar area (in countryside of Tehran), Iran. Thirty out of 90 patients (33%) had intestinal amoebiasis and were followed up prospectively until the resolution of the illness. Nineteen of 30 (63.3%) patients were male and the remaining of 36.7% was female. The patients were aged 1–76 with mean of 28.4 years. Most of the patients (70%) were below 30 years of age and the peak of occurrence was between the age of 17 and 26 years. Watery diarrhoea with abdominal cramps was the main clinical feature. Seventy percent of patients were resident in urban area and the remaining (30%) in rural area. Average family income was low and all patients were in low socioeconomic level. Water supplying system for all patients was pipeline water. Low socioeconomic level associated with poor personal hygiene was the most important factor for highly prevalence of this problem in our society. Also it seems that food plays important role in transmission of protozoa then water. 
 
The new strategy for allele identification of the genes coding for pertactin and pertussis toxin subunit S1 in
Bordetella pertussis
 
PS170
 Fiett Ja, Letowska Ib, Hryniewicz Wc. a
Sera and Vaccines Central Research Laboratory, Molecular Microbiology, Warsaw, Poland, b
Sera and Vaccines Central Research Laboratory, Immunology and Infection Prophylactics, Warsaw, Poland, c
Sera and Vaccines Central Research Laboratory, Clinical Microbiology and Epidemiology, Warsaw, Poland
 

Bordetella pertussis strains demonstrate a significant polymorphism in toxin S1 subunit and pertactin, which are major protective antigens of the organism. Monitoring the changes in prevalence of particular alleles of genes coding for these proteins in local B. pertussis populations is an essential issue in cases of the observed decrease of vaccination effectiveness. We have developed a new method for allele identification of these genes, which eliminates the necessity of DNA sequencing. The approach is based on the identification of the number of repeats or the presence of specific nucleotides in the polymorphic regions or residues, respectively, of the genes and utilises products of their full or partial PCR amplification. The nucleotide heterogeneity in each polymorphic site is analysed either by the differential digestion of the amplicons or by the ARMS (amplification-refractory mutation system) methodology. Numbers of repeats in particular regions of the genes are revealed by the size analysis of the adequate PCR products or their restriction fragments. In all cases the presence, size or pattern of DNA molecules obtained is visualised by the agarose gel electrophoresis. The preliminary analysis of the recent and archival B. pertussis strains identified in Poland was performed using the described approach. The presented strategy provides a much easier, faster and more cost-effective than DNA sequencing mean to study the polymorphism of the major B. pertussis antigens. 
 
Vaccination coverage and history of vaccine preventable infectious diseases among students in second year of medicine and pharmacy of tours university
 
PS171
 Borderon JCa, Hamed Ab, Ragot Sb. a
Centre Hospitalier Universitaire, Tours, France, b
Médecine Préventive Universitaire, Tours, France
 

The purpose of this study was to determine the level of infectious risk in students who will be exposed to patients. Information was obtained by a questionnaire for each student, and by checking medical records for immunization coverage and vaccine preventable infectious diseases. Answers could be specified for 138 students, of whom 97 females (F) and 41 males (M). The number of non-immunized students was against diphtheria: two, tetanus: three, pertussis: four, poliomyelitis: two, hepatitis B: six, and hepatitis A: 127, respectively. Among the 52 students non-vaccinated against measles, 14 (nine F and five M) had no history of that disease. Among 56 (31 F and 25 M) non-vaccinated against rubella, 17 (10 F and seven M) had no history of that disease, uncertain in seven others (six F and one M). The date of vaccination was often late regarding recommendations. Fifteen students had no history of varicella. One student had not received BCG vaccination. Fifty-eight students had received two, and 14 three BCG vaccines. Post-BCG tuberculin skin testing was missing after 28 first BCG, 14 second and 3 third BCG. The date of the first tuberculin test was often one or several years after BCG vaccination. Adverse effects of vaccination were rarely reported: two cases of fever (DT polio, measles); three cases of local reaction (DT polio, DTP polio). One case of contraindication for influenza vaccine: egg allergy. The survey shows failure in immunization coverage actually recommended in health care students. 
 
Rabies—the morbidity in Lasi county between 1971 and 2000
 
PS172
 Luca V, Corcarci C, Mihalache D, Dorobat C, Miftode E, Luca C. Infectious Diseases Department, University of Medicine and Pharmacy-Gr.T.Popa, Lasi, Romania
 

Objectives: To present the morbidity of rabies and evaluate the efficiency of our prophylaxis scheme in Lasi county.

Material and method: We made a retrospective study of the rabies cases in the patients admitted in our unit in a 13th-year period. We have analysed all the clinical, epidemiological and biological aspects. Results: In a 30-year period, 22 cases of rabies were admitted in the Clinical Infectious Diseases Hospital Lasi. The highest incidence was for 1986–1990—eight cases (36%); the highest yearly cases were three cases in 1974 and 1986. Most of the patients were male (59%), came from suburban areas (21 patients). Eight cases occurred in May–June, wild animals were involved in half the cases (fox, wolf). For 18 patients, no prophylaxis was performed and an incomplete course in four cases. The period of time to the appearance of the first symptom was 18–120 days. The prophylaxis scheme led to a good protection. Conclusions: In Lasi county, rabies is a problem with a prevalence of 0.73%/year. 
 
Trends in antimicrobial drug use in the community—Riyadh 2000
 
PS173
 Al-Hajjar Sa, Al-Jumaah Sa, Trazi Wb, Tufenkeji Ha, Frayha HHa, Al-Swail Sc, DeVol Ed, Al Shahri Sc, Al-Kurnas Ad. a
King Faisal Specialist Hospital and Research Centre, Pediatrics, Riyadh, Saudi Arabia, b
Maternity and Children's Hospital, Pediatrics, Jeddah, Saudi Arabia, c
School Board, Education, Riyadh, Saudi Arabia, d
King Faisal Specialist Hospital and Research Centre, Research Centre, Riyadh, Saudi Arabia
 

Trends in the use of antimicrobials in Riyadh in 2000 were analyzed. Data was obtained from a survey of 652 randomly selected families of school children aged 6–8 years in a 3-month period in 2000. One hundred and ninety-nine (33.8%) students were on antibiotics in the month preceding the study; 108 (56%) received antibiotics for the diagnosis of pharyngitis; 177 (90%) students antibiotics were prescribed by a physician; and in 161 (83%) the duration of antibiotics was less than 1 week.
This study shows a major problem in antibiotics prescription in our community and also the need to establish effective antibiotics policy in general practice to limit the potential emergence of drug resistance bacteria in the community. 
 
Decision making in the selection of antibiotics for urinary tract infections and prophylaxis
 
PS174
 Mir Sa, Cura Aa, Erdogan Ha, Guler Sa, Sengul GNa, Koyu Aa, Ozinel MAb. a
Department of Pediatrics, Ege University Medical Faculty, Izmir, Turkey, b
Department of Microbiology, Ege University Medical Faculty, Izmir, Turkey
 

Antibiotic susceptibility spectrum of childhood urinary tract infection agents are geographical variation. The current antibiotic regimens and the selection of antibiotics for prophylaxis should be re-evaluated periodically. The objective of our study was to determine the local resistance rates to antibiotics and to give a direction for the selection of antibiotics in UTI treatment. We evaluated 4124 urinary culture assays retrospectively, sent from Pediatrics and Pediatric Surgery inpatient and outpatient clinics of our hospital during the last 6 months, and investigated the isolated pathogens and the resistance rates to antibiotics. In addition, the data obtained were compared with of 5 years ago. Table shows the flora of Aegean region. There is no significant difference between the results we obtained and of 1996. However, the frequency rate of the most common UTI pathogen, that is Escherichia coli, decreased from 62 to 41.5%.
 With respect to the resistance rates to antibiotics of UTI pathogens, the resistance rates of E. coli for carbapenems, aminoglycosides and third generation cephalosporins were 1, 10 and 10%, respectively as before, but the rates for ampicillin increased from 67 to 75% and for TMP-SMX it increased from 49 to 61%. We concluded that the resistance profiles to antibiotics should be reviewed every 5 years at least and thus the selection of proper antibiotics would lessen the morbidity as well as the medical expenses. 
 
Economic aspects of infectious disease control in Georgia
 
PS175
 Chanturidze TK, Tsiklauri R. Ministry of Labor, Health and Social Affairs, Public Health, Tbilisi, Georgia
 

Purpose: Since 1991 infectious diseases (ID) are increasing in Georgia. This study is aimed to reveal economic barriers of effective ID control by assessing financial contribution to ID from Public and Private sources, household's total spending on health and their capacity to pay.
Sources:
1National Household Expenditure and Revenue survey.
2WHO Fair Financial Contribution Methodology.
3Meta-Analysis.

Results: 51.8% of population leaves under the poverty level; 70% out of total household expenditure (average 270 GeL; US$ 130) 30% is spent on food—non-subsistence income covers expenditures on goods and services including health; 15% of population refuses health services because of inability to pay; Public Spending on Health comprises 33% of total health expenditures; Public Spending on ID control is below 1 GeL per capita; Almost all private spending goes to ID treatment and equals to 28.6 GeL per patient.

Conclusions: Insufficient public spending on ID control transfers the burden to the population with extremely low capacity to cover health expenses. Refusal to utilize health services, and incomplete treatment and increases the threat of ID spread and drug resistance. Government should increase the allocations to ID from public sources for effective ID control in Georgia. 
 
Self-purchasing of antibiotics by Russian townspeople
 
PS176
 Stratchounski LSa, Andreeva IVa, Galkin DVa, Ratchina SAa, Petrotchenkova NAa, Demin AAb, Kuzin VBc, Kusnetsova STd, Likhatcheva RYe, Nedogoda SVf, Ortenberg EAg, Belikov ASh. a
Department of Clinical Pharmacology, Smolensk State Medical Academy, Smolensk, Russian Federation, b
Novosibirsk State Medical Academy, Novosibirsk, Russian Federation, c
Nizjni Novgorod State Medical Academy, Nizjni Novgorod, Russian Federation, d
Ural State Medical Academy, Ekaterinburg, Russian Federation, e
Outpatient Clinic 17, Moscow, Russian Federation, f
Volgograd State Medical Academy, Volgograd, Russian Federation, g
Tyumen State Medical Academy, Tyumen, Russian Federation, h
Regional Children Hospital, Kaliningrad, Russian Federation
 

Antimicrobial resistance is a global public health service problem. One of the main reasons for resistance is unjustified use of antibiotics. Objective: To investigate self-purchasing of antibiotics amongst non-medical population in Russia.

Methods: The study was carried out in eight Russian cities by physicians who visited families and elucidated background justifications for the use of antibiotics. In each city, 100 families were evaluated (a total of 800 families). All data was filled in a specially developed questionnaire.

Results: Two hundred and forty (30%) families purchase antibiotics on their own. The most often respondents indicated following antibiotics for self-medication: co-trimoxazole (17.5%), chloramphenicol (13.3%), ampicillin (12.9%), ciprofloxacin (9.2%), tetracycline (6.7%), erythromycin (6.2%). Respondents purchased antibiotics under the following conditions (in percentage of total quantity of called indications for use): cough—13.3%, acute infections of upper respiratory tract—12.7%, intestine disorders—10%, pneumonia—8%, bronchitis—8%, acute tonsillitis—7.4%, fever—7.1%, sore throat—6.5%.

Conclusion: The population admit to purchase antibiotics on over-the counter (OTC) basis. Such uncontrolled use of antibiotics has unfavourable consequences for general population due to increasing antibiotic resistance and the increase in the prevalence of infectious diseases. 
 
Antimicrobial consumption trends in children's university hospital
 
PS177
 Ratchina Sa, Averchenkova Lb, Jarkova La. a
Smolensk State Medical Academy, Institute of Antimicrobial Chemotherapy, Smolensk, Russian Federation, b
Department of Clinical Pharmacology, Children University Hospital, Smolensk, Russian Federation
 

Local surveillance of antimicrobial (AM) consumption is essential to promote the rational use of this group of drugs. The purpose of this study was to analyze the trends of AM use in the Children University Hospital in 1998 and 2000.
Data on AM usage were obtained from the hospital drugstore requests in the 250-beds multi-ward Children University Hospital. Consumption was expressed as the number of DDD per 100 bed-days (b–d).
The total AM consumption figures were similar in 1998 and 2000 (7.7 and 8.2 DDDs/100 b–d, respectively) with notable differences in AM prescribing patterns. Penicillin consumption increased from 1.8 to 3.8 DDDs/100 b–d mostly due to amoxicillin. The overall aminoglycoside usage remained comparable (0.95 vs. 0.82 DDDs/100 b–d) though amikacin has considerably replaced gentamicin. There was a sevenfold increase of ciprofloxacin (0.03 vs. 0.2 DDDs/100 b–d) along with the evident decrease of tetracycline and co-trimoxazole consumption found (1.5 vs. 0.9 DDDs/100 b–d and 0.8 vs. 0.1 DDDs/100 b–d, respectively).
The tendency to prescribe more effective in respect of the local resistance data and/or more safe AM was detected in 2000 comparing with 1998 that can be explained by the introduction of the local guidelines for infectious diseases management in 1999. 
 
Clarithromycin in the treatment of chronic prostatitis caused by
Chlamydia trachomatis
—a pilot study
 
PS178
 Skerk Va, Krhen Ib, Schonwald Sa, Marekovic Ic, Markovinovic La, Roglic Sa, Zeljko Zd, Kruzic Ve. a
Department for Urinary Tract Infections, University Hospital for Infectious Diseases, Zagreb, Croatia, b
Clinical Hospital Centre Rebro, Clinic for Urology, Zagreb, Croatia, c
Clinic for Pulmonary Diseases Jordanovac, Zagreb, Croatia, d
Department for Urology, Clinical Hospital Merkur, Zagreb, Croatia, e
Croatian Institute of Public Health, Zagreb, Croatia
 

The aim of this pilot study was to determine the efficacy and tolerability of clarithromycin in the treatment of chronic prostatitis caused by Chlamydia trachomatis (CT). Fifty-two patients older than 18 years of age with diagnosed chronic Chlamydial prostatitis were enrolled. The presence of CT in expressed prostatic secretion or urine specimen voided immediately after prostatic massage was confirmed by isolation on McCoy cells and Lugol staining. The majority of patients suffered from suprapubic pain and pain in the groin. Twelve patients had no clinical symptoms. According to rectal palpation, prostate gland was normal in 35 patients, tender and soft in 12 and firm in five patients. Clarithromycin was administered orally 500 mg twice daily for 14 days. Simultaneously the patients' partners received 500 mg orally twice daily for 7 days. Clinical efficacy and tolerability of administered clarithromycin were evaluated 1–7 days and 4–6 weeks after the end of treatment. Bactericidal efficacy of administered drug was evaluated 4–6 weeks after the end of treatment. The eradication of CT was achieved in 30 out of 40 patients, while 28 patients were clinically cured. Two patients had nausea and elevated serum transaminases. In asymptomatic patients, the eradication of CT was achieved in 10 of 12 patients who reported no side effects. This pilot study has shown an excellent efficacy and tolerability of clarithromycin in the treatment of patients with chronic Chlamydial prostatitis. 
 
Association of selected virulence factors with alpha-haemolytic
Escherichia coli
strains isolated from various clinical material
 
PS179
 Bogyiova Ea, Siegfried La, Kmetova Ma, Biros Eb. a
Faculty of Medicine, Institute of Medical Microbiology, University of P.J. Safarik, Kosice, Slovakia, b
Academy of Sciences of the Czech Republic, Laboratory of Genetic Ecotoxicology, Institute of Experimental Medicine, Prague, Czech Republic
 

Women with diagnosis of urinary tract infections (UTI) often demonstrate vaginal colonisation with alpha-haemolytic Escherichia coli strains. In the present study we decided to evaluate a distribution of virulence genes encoding for cytotoxic necrotizing factor type 1 (cnf1), P-fimbriae, S/F1C-fimbriae aerobactin (aer), and afa genes in alpha-haemolytic E. coli strains isolated from gynaecological material in our region and to compare the detected sequences in clinical isolates of other diagnostic groups. Of 127 alpha-haemolytic E. coli strains, 41 were isolated from urine, 44 from gynaecological specimen, and 42 were faecal strains. E. coli strains were tested for the production of haemolytic phenotype on blood agar plates. The amplification of virulence factors was performed by PCR according to previously described protocols (Le Bouguenec et al., 1992; Blanco et al., 1996; and Yamamoto et al., 1995). We found that all gynaecological alpha-haemolytic strains were positive for cnf1, (P<0.001 compared to 78% of urine strains, and P<0.0001 compared to 61% of faecal strains). Similarly, sfa/foc specific DNA sequences were found in 100% of gynaecological isolates (P=0.01 compared to 85% of urine strains and P=0.005 compared to 83% of faecal strains). From this point of view, the female genital tract seems to be a potential reservoir of these uropathogenic E. coli strains. 
 
Azithromycin in the treatment of pelvic inflammatory disease caused by
Chlamydia trachomatis
 
PS180
 Schonwald Sa, Skerk Va, Puntaric Aa, Vickovic Na, Desnica Ba, Krhen Ib, Marekovic Ic, Vince Ad. a
Department for Urinary Tract Infections, University Hospital for Infectious Diseases, Zagreb, Croatia, b
Clinical Hospital Centre Rebro, Clinic for Urology, Zagreb, Croatia, c
Clinic for Pulmonary Diseases Jordanovac, Zagreb, Croatia, d
University Hospital for Infectious Diseases, PCR Laboratory, Zagreb, Croatia
 

The aim of this study was to examine the efficacy and tolerability of parenteral administration of azithromycin in the treatment of pelvic inflammatory disease (PID) caused by Chlamydia trachomatis. In the period from November 1, 2000 to October 31, 2001, azithromycin was administered in 35 hospitalized patients with chlamydial PID. The diagnosis was made prior to hospitalization. Microbiological analysis of urine, blood and swab specimens collected from endocervix, vagina and urethra confirmed C. trachomatis to be the single suspected causative pathogen of PID. The presence of C. trachomatis in swab specimens from endocervix was examined by DNK/RNK hybridization. Azithromycin was administered 5–7 days after samples for microbiological analysis were collected in dose of 1×500 mg iv for 5 days. Clinical efficacy and tolerability of therapy were assessed 1–7 days after the end of therapy and clinical and microbiological analysis 3–4 weeks after completion of therapy. The eradication of C. trachomatis and normalization of gynecological findings were achieved in 33 and disappearance of subjective symptoms in 30 patients. No side effects and deviations from normal values in hematologic and biochemical blood parameters were recorded. This study showed high bactericidal efficacy, rapid clinical effect and good tolerability of once-daily administration of 500 mg azithromycin for 5 days in the treatment of patients with PID caused by C. trachomatis. 
 
A novel method for diagnosing vaginitis: AFFIRM VPIII
 
PS181
 Altindis Ma, Cevrioglu Sb, Aktepe OCa, Cetinkayaa. a
Kocatepe University School of Medicine, Microbiology, Afyon, Turkey, b
Kocatepe University School of Medicine, Obstetrics and Gynecology, Afyon, Turkey
 

Diagnosis of the causative organism of the vaginitis is usually based on clinical criteria. A standardized, laboratory based and rapid diagnostic test for the identification of these organisms is desirable. To determine the laboratory method that best predicted the causative organism, we calculated the sensitivity, specificity and predictive value of positive and negative test for clinical criteria, an oligonucleotide probe test (AFFIRM VPIII-BD USA) and compared them with the combination of positive vaginal culture and Gram-stained vaginal smear. We evaluated 40 consecutive women aged 21–48 years, attending for vaginal discharge. Vaginal swab specimens were used for culture of Gardnerella vaginalis, Trichomonas vaginalis and Candida sp, preparation of a vaginal smear for Gram-stain interpretation and wet mount evaluation and AFFIRM test. AFFIRM detected G. vaginalis in 10 (25%), Candida sp in three (7.5%) women and no trichomoniasis case found by any methods. The sensitivity and negative predictive values of AFFIRM test and clinical signs were same (100%) in identifying of bacterial vaginosis. However, AFFIRM test was more specific (94 vs 72%) and also has higher positive predictive value (80 vs 53%) than clinical signs. We did not evaluate the results for patients with candidiasis because of less number.
According to these results AFFIRM-microbial identification tests are objective and specific for the rapid diagnosis of the bacterial vaginosis. 
 
Comparison of efficacy of single dose of tinidazole with standard dose of metronidazole in
Giardia lamblia
infection (Preliminary report)
 
PS182
 Fallah Ma, Moshtaghi AAb. a
University of Medical Sciences, Parasitology, Hamadan, Islamic Republic of Iran, b
University of Medical Sciences, Pediatrics, Hamadan, Islamic Republic of Iran
 

Objectives:
Giardia lamblia is the most common intestinal protozoa in developing countries. Treatment of the infection with metronidazole, the drug of choice, requires a long course of therapy and produced some side effects. The object of this study is to determine efficacy and side effects of tinidazole in G. lamblia infection. This is a preliminary report of an ongoing trial.

Methods: A randomized controlled clinical trial was carried out and 47 subjects with G. lamblia infection were treated with tinidazole or metronidazole. Tinidazole 50 mg/kg single dose and metronidazole 25 mg/kg three times a day for 7 days were given orally to 24 and 23 children, respectively. Parasitological cure was documented when there were consecutive negative stool examinations at 1–2 weeks after therapy.

Results: Twenty-one of 23 individuals treated with tinidazole and 20 of 24 children treated with metronidazole had parasitological cure. Cure rates between two groups were not significant statistically. No major side effects were observed except one case in metronidazole group who had mild headache and abdominal pain for 2 days.

Conclusions: We concluded, tinidazole at the dose has efficacy equal of metronidazole in the treatment of G. lamblia infection. Because of single dose prescription, short course of therapy and good compliance of patients, this preparation is preferred to metronidazole in giardial infection. 
 
Prophylactic effect of β-carotein against
S. mansoni
 
PS183
 Ebeid FA, Seif El-Din SH. Theodor Bilharz Research Institute, Pharmacology, Cairo, Egypt
 

β-Carotein was given in different doses starting from 2.5 to 10 mg/kg body weight (b.w.) for different groups of albino mice 4 days before infection with S. mansoni. Infection of animals was done by body immersion using 80 Egyptian strain of S. mansoni cercariae/mouse. Forty-nine days after infection the animals were sacrificed and hepatic and mesenteric worms were extracted and determined. Ova count in liver and intestinal tissue and the total number of worms/animals were also determined in experimental groups comparing with infected control animals. The results indicated marked decrease in number of worms and ova count in both liver and intestine comparing with control ones. This reduction increased significantly with increasing dose. It was concluded that β-carotein could be used as a prophylactic agent against S. mansoni infection. 
 
Optimal choice of antimicrobial therapy for
Pseudomonas aeruginosa
urinary tract infections in outpatients
 
PS184
 Barisic Z, Babic-Erceg A, Borzic E, Zoranic V, Carev M, Kaliterna V. Department of Microbiology, Public Health Institute, Split, Croatia
 

The aim of this study is to determine frequency of Pseudomonas aeruginosa urinary tract infection (UTI) in outpatient's population in South Croatia and to suggest optimal antimicrobial treatment for these patients. During 3 months long observation period, from total number of 13 158 examined urine specimens, significant bacteriuria was found in 2341 specimens. P. aeruginosa was the sixth most common isolate, it was isolated from 94 specimens (4.02%). These 94 specimens were taken from 57 different patients. Susceptibility testing was performed by disk diffusion method, and the following results were obtained: resistance to cefibuten occurred in 94.74% patients, to norfoxacin in 49.12%, to ciprofloxacin in 47.37%, to gentamicin in 42.11%, to netilmicin in 35.09%, to amikacin in 24.56%, to ceftazidime in 3.51% and to imipenem in 1.75% patients. P. aeruginosa strains showed better susceptibility to tested parenteral antibiotics than to antibiotics for oral use which complicated treatment in outpatients. The best susceptibility was shown to imipenem, but this drug is inappropriate for use in outpatients setting, so the best choice for treatment P. aeruginosa UTI in our outpatients is treatment with ceftazidime, and the second choices are aminoglycoside drugs amikacin and netilmicin. 
 
Biofilm in patients with complicated urinary tract infection
 
PS185
 Silan La, Breza Jb, Krcmery V Jr.c. a
Department of Internal Medicine, Derer s University Hospital, Bratislava, Slovakia, b
Department of Urology, Comenius University School, Bratislava, Slovakia, c
Department of Pharmacology, St. Elisabeth Cancer Institute, Bratislava, Slovakia
 

We studied the clinical efficacy of oral treatment with ciprofloxacin/CPF/ alone and combined with clarithromycin in patients with complicated urinary tract infection/CUTI/ with or without an indwelling catherer. Patients were randomly allocated to 600 mg CPF/CPF group/ or to 600 mg CPF plus 600 mg CAM/combination group/ for 14 days. Evaluation was done on day 14 according to the criteria advocated by the Japanese Urinary Tract Infection Committee. In patients with a urinary catherer, the combination achieved a higher complete bacterial elimination rate /50%/ and clinical efficacy rate /84%/ than CPF alone /30 and 61.5%, respectively/. While no significant difference was found in the bacterial elimination rate between the two groups, the clinical effect of the combination /40%/ was superior to that of CPF alone /23%/ in patients with an indwelling catherer. The better clinical efficacy of the combination may partly be attributed to the antibiofilm effect of CAM in the clinical setting. The results also indicated that difficulties still remain in the treatment of CUTI in patients with an indwelling catherer. In conclusion, clinical study suggested that CAM might have an inhibitory action on biofilm formation in the clinical setting. Combination of CAM with other appropriate antimicrobial agents may have a favorable effect on the treatment of CUTI. 
 
Vesicoureteral reflux and urinary tract infections—the management of primary vesico-eureteral reflux in children
 
PS186
 Silan La, Reznicek Jb, Breza Jb, Zvara Vb, Krcmery V Jr.c. a
Department of Internal Medicine, Derer s University Hospital, Bratislava, Slovakia, b
Department of Urology, Derer s University Hospital, Comenius University School of Medicine, Bratislava, Slovakia, c
Department of Pharmacology, St. Elisabeth Cancer Institute, Bratislava, Slovakia
 

The children studied presented with primary vesicoureteral reflux at Derer s Universitz Hospital in Bratislava between 1974 and 1994. Seven hundred and sixty patients, 179 boys and 581 girls, suffering from primary vesicoureteral reflux in age from 6 months to 18 years were tested and systematically analyzed outcomes data for seven treatment alternatives. Key outcomes identified were probability of reflux resolution, likelihood of developing pyelonephritis and scarring, and possibility of complications of medical and surgical treatment. Available outcomes data on the various treatment alternatives were summarized and the relative probabilities of possible outcomes were compared for each alternative.

Conclusions:

1Increased of urinary tract infection, vesicoureteral reflux nephropathy includes early diagnosis, appropriate evaluation, effective ATB therapy, and surgery indicated.
2The main determinants of renal damage are bstruction, age, sex, predisposition on renal scarring, reflux grade and laterality, therapeutic delay, individual susceptibility, bacterial virulence and immunogenetic status.
3The one and only absolute indication for surgical management is failure of medical therapy to prevent chronic recurrent pyelonephritis, renal injury or other reflux complications and eliminations of the reflux condition will minimize their likelihood.
4Genetically conditioned immunopathogenic mechanisms are involved in the pathogenesis of the chronic recurrent pyelonephritis in patient suffering from VUR.
5For most children we recommended continuous antibiotic prophylaxis as initial treatment-medical therapy is based on the principle that reflux often resolves with time, and antibiotics maintain urine sterility and prevent infections while the patients awaits spontaneous resolution.
6VUR predispose an individual to renal infection, the immunological and inflammatory reaction caused by a pyelonephritic infection may result in renal injury or scarring.

 
 
Urinary tract infections in the elderly
 
PS187
 Silan La, Breza Jb. a
Department of Internal Medicine, Derer s University Hospital, Bratislava, Slovakia, b
Department of Urology, Comenius University School of Medicine, Bratislava, Slovakia
 

Elderly patients with UTI are believed less likely to be cured by antimicrobial therapy than younger patients. The reasons for this poorer outcome have not yet been clarified. We have investigated the efficacy of antimicrobial therapy in elderly patients with complicated UTI. Five hundred patients, 260 men and 240 women, who had complicated UTI/268 symptomatic and 240 symptomatic and were 21–80 years of age, were treated with one of three different drugs, one was a never quinolone and two were oral cephems. Multivariate logistic regression analysis of treatment outcome revealed that the clinical response was significantly related to general underlying diseases and diseases of the urinary tract, but not to age, symptomatic or asymptomatic UTI, or infection site such as the kidney or bladder. We concluded that the clinical effectiveness of an antimicrobial agent was not directly related to age, and that urological examination for underlying disease and control of them is quite important for effective treatment and control of complicated UTIs, especially in elderly patients. 
 
The study on the frequency and antimicrobial resistance of
Escherichia
(
E
)
coli
in urine isolates of patients admitted to Maribor Teaching Hospital in 1998 and 2000
 
PS188
 Rebersek Gorisek Ja, Baklan Za, Unuk Sa, Novak Db. a
Department for Infectious Diseases, Teaching Hospital Maribor, Maribor, Slovenia, b
Department for Microbiology, Regional Institute of Public Health Maribor, Maribor, Slovenia
 

Purpose: The aim of the study was to determine the frequency and antimicrobial resistance of Escherichia coli isolated from urine samples of patients admitted to Maribor Teaching Hospital in 1998 and 2000. The frequency and the antimicrobial resistance were compared between years 1998 and 2000.

Methods: In the prospective study going on between 1998 and 2000, all urine isolates from patients at Maribor Teaching Hospital were collected and analysed. Urine cultures were done using the modified Sanford method. The susceptibility testing was performed by disk diffusion method according to NCCLS.

Results: In the year 1998, 2563 urine isolates and in the year 2000, 2325 urine isolates were analysed. E. coli represented 39.1% of urine isolates in 1998 and 39.4% of urine isolates in 2000.

E. coli resistance rates (%) to amoxycillin was 39.5 in the year 1998 and 38.4 in the year 2000; to amoxycillin/clavulate was 15.4 and 10.5; to cefalotin was 7.8 and 5.7; to cefaclor 2.8 and 2.18; to trimethoprim sulfamethoxazole was 15.0 and 18.4; to ciprofloxacin was 4.9 and 6.9; to gentamicin was 2.3 and 2.2.

Conclusion: Compared to 1998, the frequency of E. coli isolated from urine samples is similar to that in the year 2000. The resistance to amoxycillin, cefaclor and gentamicin is stable. The resistance to trimethoprim sulfamethoxazole and ciprofloxacin is increased and the resistance to amoxycillin/clavulate and cefalotin is decreased. 
 
Prevalence of the resistance to metronidazole, furazolidone and nitrofurantoin in
Helicobacter pylori
clinical strains
 
PS189
 de la Obra Sanz Pa, Roman JLa, Lomas Ea, Villar Hb, Lopez-Brea Ma. a
Hospital de la Princesa, Microbiology, Madrid, Spain, b
Hospital de San Agustin, Microbiology, Aviles, Spain
 

The objective of this study was to determine the prevalence of metronidazole, furazolidone and nitrofurantoin resistance in Helicobacter pylori clinical isolates. Methods: A total of 286 strains of H. pylori were included in this study. All these were tested against metronidazole, and 164 against furazolidone and nitrofurantoin by an agar dilution method. Resistance was defined as: metronidazole, MIC >8 mg/l; and MIC >4 mg/l for furazolidone and nitrofurantoin. Results: Sixty-eight strains were resistant to metronidazole (23.8%). The MIC50 and MIC90 values were 1 and 32 mg/l, respectively. Three of 164 strains (1.8%) were furazolidone resistant (MIC=4 mg/l), two of these strains were metronidazole resistant (MIC=16 mg/l) and they had MIC of 2 mg/l for nitrofurantoin. The MIC50 and the MIC90 were 0.125 and 0.5 mg/l, respectively for furazolidone. Only one of the 164 strains (0.6%) was nitrofurantoin resistant (MIC 4 mg/l), this strain was metronidazole resistant (MIC 128 mg/l) and had a MIC=1 mg/l for furazolidone. The MIC50 and the MIC90 were 0.5 and 1 mg/l, respectively for nitrofurantoin. Conclusion: The low frequency of furazolidone and nitrofurantoin resistance, compared to metronidazole suggests that the furazolidone and the nitrofurantoin may be good alternatives to metronidazole for treatment of H. pylori infections. 
 
Antimicrobial resistance of
Campylobacter
isolated from human origins
 
PS190
 Zhukhovitsky VG, Drabkina IV. Department of Bacteriology, Botkin Hospital, Moscow, Russian Federation
 

The purpose of the study was to determine the antimicrobial resistance of 50 thermophilic enteropathogenic Campylobacter spp. (TEC) isolated from human under acute diarrhoea in 2001 in Moscow. Among 50 TEC strains 45 C. jejuni and five C. coli were identified. The antibiotic tested by disk diffusion test on Mueller-Hinton agar with sheep blood were ampicillin (A), amoxycillin/clavulanate (AC), imipenem (I), meropenem (M), erythromycin (E), clarithromycin (Cl), tetracycline (T), doxycycline (D), gentamicin (G), azithromycin (Az), chloramphenicol (Ch), lincomycin (L), ciprofloxacin (C), nalidixic acid (NA). The resistant rate of the TEC isolates was highest for NA (42%) followed by A (38%), T (36%), D (20%), N (20%) and Cl (16%). A moderate resistance rate was obtained for A (8%), Ch (6%), Az (6%), AC (2%). None of the isolates demonstrated resistance to I, M and G and four of 50 isolates (8%) were sensitive for all the antibiotics tested. MIC90 to NA was estimated as 64 mg/l. Among 21 NA resistant TEC strains 20 (40%) were identified as C. jejuni and one (2%) as C. coli. Among C. jejuni and C. coli NA resistant rate was 44 and 20%, respectively. One NA resistant C. coli and nine NA resistant C. jejuni were resistant to ciprofloxacin. 
 
Resistance of
Salmonella
isolates from poultry meat to various antibiotics
 
PS191
 Ring C, Atanassova V. Department of Food Hygiene and Microbiology, School of Veterinary Medicine, Hannover, Germany
 

Aim of the study: Poultry meat is known to be often contaminated with Salmonella and other foodborne pathogens and thus has to be considered as a possible source for human infections. The aim of the study was to monitor the resistance of Salmonella isolates from poultry meat of different European countries to various antibiotics. Material and methods: From September 2001 to December 2001 a total of 422 samples of frozen poultry meat from France, Germany, Italy, Spain, The Netherlands and Portugal were examined for the prevalence of Salmonella using classical cultural detection as well as RFLP-PCR. All isolates were tested for their sensitivity towards ampicilline, kanamycine, ciprofloxacine, tetracycline, trimethoprim, sulfamethoxazole, nalidixic acid and erythromycine using standard procedures. Results: From 18.01% of all examined samples Salmonella spp. were isolated. Of these isolates 32.9% were characterized as Salmonella, 42.1% as S. hadar and 17.1% as S. typhimurium. Nearly 100% of all isolates were resistant to erythromycin. Resistance towards four or more isolates was observed in several cases. Discussion: The consumption of poultry meat, if insufficiently prepared, has still to be considered as a major source for human infection with Salmonella spp. The question arises whether the resistance of the isolates to various antibiotics is of clinical importance in the treatment of the patients. 
 
Epidemiological aspects of
Salmonella
carriers and
Salmonella
resistance to the antibiotics
 
PS192
 Tiodorovic B, Miljkovic-Selimovic B, Todosijevic-Paunovic D. Institute of Public Health, Faculty of Medicine, Epidemiology, Nis, Serbia, Yugoslavia
 

Objective: To provide insight into the epidemiologic situation of Salmonellosis for the Nis area (the largest area in Serbia, with inhabitants—648,000). Methods: The material was processed at the Institute for Public Health (Epidemiology and Microbiology divisions). Isolation of microorganisms was performed on apparatus for rapid identification (Vitek-Biomerieux) and by applying ELISA tests and classical microbiological methods. Results: In the period 1992–2000, 2857 Salmonella laboratory confirmed cases were reported. The greatest number of diseased in the 0–4 years group. The most frequent isolated salmonellae were: S. enteritidis (83.7%) and S. typhimurium (11.2%), S. hadar, S. agona, S. virchow, S. infantis, S. derby, S. enteritidis showed the greatest sensitivity to antibiotics with the infrequent resistance to ampicillin and trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole. S. typhimurium showed the greater resistance to the wide spectrum of antibiotics and some isolates were resistant to all antibiotics tested. The less common types of Salmonella were sensitive to all antibiotics except trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole and ampicillin. Conclusion: Specific resistance to some antibiotics was related to serotypes. 
 
Typhoid fever—retrospective study of 52 cases in Lebanon PS193
 Tohme A, Abboud J, Ghayad E. Hôtel-Dieu Hospital, Internal Medicine, Beirut, Lebanon
 

Objectives: To present epidemiological and clinical features of typhoid fever in Lebanon. Methods: Fifty-two patients were seen at Hotel-Dieu Hospital of Beirut between 1995 and 1999. Diagnostic criteria were positive blood culture for S. typhi or paratyphi and/or a somatic O agglutinin titer ≥1/160 as determined by the Widal test with symptoms suggestive of typhoid fever. We also present an epidemiological study of 3864 cases registered by the Ministry of Health during the same period. Results: Among the 3864 cases, 40% of the patients' ages were between 15 and 40 years and 33% were less than 14 years. The overall male to female ratio was 0.98 and 24% of cases were seen on January, February and 11% on August. Among the 52 patients, young adults were the most affected. Average duration of symptoms before the diagnosis was 10±8 days. The main presenting symptoms were: fever (96%), diarrhoea (37%), abdominal pain (31%) and headache (29%). Complications were noted in 33% of cases and digestive complications were the most prevalent. Leucopenia was not a helpful diagnostic marker. S. typhi was the most frequent (84%) serotype identified. Resistance to ampicilline was 13%, to cotrimoxazole and chloramphenicol 10% for each. The mortality rate was 2%. Conclusion: Typhoid fever is still an endemic disease in our country and the occurrence of resistant strains of S. typhi will favor ceftriaxone or fluoroquinolones in the treatment. 
 
Psoas abscess (about 25 cases)
 
PS194
 Maaloul Ia, Hammami Ba, Zambaa Fa, Elleuch Ra, Hammami Ab, Ben Jemaa Ma. a
CHU Hedi Chaker, Service des Maladies infectieuses, Sfax, Tunisia, b
CHU Habib Bourguiba, Laboratoire de Microbiologie, Sfax, Tunisia
 

Although its not very frequent, the psoas abscess is not an exceptional entity. In order to specify its clinical, biological, radiological and evolutionary features, a retrospective study has been led in our service, on a period of 14 years (January 1988–December 2001).
On the whole, 25 cases have been listed. They were 16 men and 9 women. The age average was 40 years (extreme 14–74 years). The study did not find any underlying diseases, except diabetes mellitus for three patients. The clinical symptoms were dominated by fever with abdomino-lumbar aches (20 cases), and psoitis (eight cases). Biology showed an inflammatory syndrome in all cases and a hyperleucocytosis in 17 cases.
The diagnosis of psoas abscess, evoked on clinical data, has been confirmed by the imagery data: Ultra-Songraphy (16 cases), CT scanning (six cases), Magnetic Resonance Imaging (three cases).
The tubercular etiology has been confirmed in six cases, among which two were associated to Escherichia coli (one case) and to Brucella melitensis (one case). The other etiologic agents were dominated by Staphylococcus aureus (eight cases), B. melitensis (two cases), E. coli (one case), Bacteroides fragilis (one case), Streptococcus anginosus (one case), Fusobacterium nucleaticum (one case) and Candida glabrata (one case).
All patients received an anti-infectious treatment adapted to the micro organism in question. A drainage of the abscess has been realized for 15 patients (percutaneous: nine cases, surgical: six cases). The evolution was favourable for 23 patients. However, two patients had a relapse after stopping the treatment.

Conclusion: The diagnosis of the psoas abscess, difficult on the clinical data, is based on the imagery techniques (US, CT, RMI). The percutaneous drainage guided by the imagery is recommended (in an etiological and therapeutic aim). Associated to an adapted antibiotherapy, it allows to defer a surgical drainage. 
 
Abdominal changes in patients with human brucellosis
 
PS195
 Zezoski MBZ, Nikolova O, Gavriloski PMG. Medical Center, Infectious Diseases, Prilep, The Former Yugoslav Republic, Macedonia
 

Purpose: To make a list of the most frequent abdominal changes in patients with human brucellosis.

Materials and methods: There were 769 new patients with human brucellosis, between 01 1991 and 12 2001. Diagnosis was made using standard clinical, biochemical and serological investigations (BAB, Wright, COOMB'S, RVK, 2-mercaptoethanol, ELISA IgM and IgG), and specially ultrasound examination of the abdomen and retro peritoneum.

Results: Weight loss is the most frequent change, presented in 665 (86.5%) patients. Follow atypical abdominal pain in 89 (5.3%), vomiting in 59 (7.7%), diarrhea in 44 (5.3%), enlarged liver in 594 (77.2%), enlarged spleen in 573 (74.5%) and hepatic lesion with increased AST and ALT in 174 (22.6%).

Conclusion: Although frequent, abdominal changes seldom could be missed in patients with human brucellosis. We recommend routine ultrasound examination with standard biochemical test for liver function, due to avoid unnecessary complications. 
 
Importance of C-reactive protein in
 
PS196
 Kandemir Oa, Sahin Gb, Tasova Yc, Sahin Ea, Kaya Aa. a
Faculty of Medicine, Clinical Microbiology and Infectious Disease, Mersin University, Mersin, Turkey, b
Faculty of Medicine, PMR, Mersin University, Mersin, Turkey, c
Faculty of Medicine, Clinical Microbiology and Infectious Disease, Cukurova University, Adana, Turkey
 

Osteoarticular complications are common in Brucellosis. The most common site of involvement is the sacroiliac joint. The osteoarticular complications such as, sacroiliitis and spondylitis are diagnosed with radiologically. In the present study, we aimed to determine the severity (grade) of sacroiliitis by using some laboratory parameters such as ESR, CRP and tube agg test. Seventy-two (34 male, 38 female) patients with Brucellosis were included in the study. Osteoarticular involvement was present in 44 patients. The most common osteoarticular finding was sacroiliitis in the patients (86%). Twenty (20) healthy subjects were formed the control group. There was statistically significant difference between patients and controls regarding ESR, CRP, and tube agg test (P=0.000, 0.0017, 0.000, respectively). In addition, sacroiliitis has an effect on ESR and CRP. There was a positive correlation between the grade of sacroiliitis and the value of CRP (P=0.006, r=0.414). In conclusion, it has been suggested that, CRP may be used as an auxiliary or a secondary parameter in grading sacroiliac joint involvement in Brucellosis. 
 
Epididymoorchitis and spondylitis due to
Brucella melitensis
 
PS197
 Magira EEa, Papandreoy Sa, Gounaris Ta, Spirelis MAa, Tasopoulos Ga, Anagnostopoulou Mb, Paniara Ob, Gounari Pa, Sioulal Ea. a
Evagelismos, Internal Medicine, Athens, Greece, b
Evagelismos, Microbiology, Athens, Greece
 

A 65-year-old Greek farmer was admitted to the hospital because of painful scrotal swelling, hepatosplenomegaly, lumbar pain and low-grade fever accompanied by profuse sweating. His life style included occupational animal exposure ingestion of raw milk and dairy products. The laboratory data were within the normal ranges. Focal hypoechoic right testicular lesions, swelling of the concurrent epididimis along with an increase in the vascularity of the right testis were seen on an Echo examination. These findings were consisting in unilateral epididimo-orchitis. A CT scan of the lumbar spine area showed a decrease of the signal intensity localized in the anterior aspect of L5 vertebral body at the diskovertebral junction involving the subchondrial parts of the L5 and S1 vertebrae Standard tube agglutination test was positive for antibodies to Brucella melitensis (titer >1/1280). Cultures of blood specimens were positive for B. melitensis. The patient had been given to a combination of antibiotics with doxycycline, streptomycin and rifampin. A remarkable improvement of his clinical condition was showed 2 weeks later. This case illustrates the following point: in areas in which brucellosis is endemic when scrotal abnormalities are seen the possibility of genitourinary tract complications of Brucella should be considered. 
 
Complications and focal forms of Brucellosis PS198
 Pappas GAa, Akritidis NKb, Mastora Mb, Tsianos Ea. a
University Hospital, Internal Medicine, Ioannina, Greece, b‘G. Hatzikosta’ Hospital, Internal Medicine, Ioannina, Greece
 

Aims and scope: To determine the incidence and forms of complications associated with Brucella infection.

Patients and methods: We studied the 100 most recent patients, in all larger series approaching 1000, diagnosed as suffering from Brucellosis, and assessed the presence of signs and symptoms of arthritis and spondylitis, or other forms of bone involvement. The diagnosis of Brucellosis was based on serology or isolation of Brucella species from blood cultures or cultures from other media.

Results: Osteoarticular complications were noted in 23 patients, 13 presenting with arthritis, and 10 presenting with spondylitis. Eight patients presented with genitourinary complications, either orcheoepididymitis (four patients), or hematuria resolving with treatment (four patients). Meningitis was present in two patients. Gastrointestinal complications (vomit and diarrhea) were present in three patients, while one patient presented with ascites. Respiratory tract complications, in the form of pneumonia (four patients) or bronchitis (three patients) were noted in seven patients, while one patient with pneumonia exhibited pleural fluid. Skin rashes, of macular type, were present in three patients. No patient presented with complications from the heart. Hematologic complications were frequent, in the form of severe (one patient) or moderate (two patients) pancytopenia, isolated thrombocytopenia (three patients), or lymphocytosis (eight patients). 
 
Osteoarticular complications of Brucellosis PS199
 Akritidis NKa, Pappas GAb, Mastora Ma. a‘G. Hatzikosta’ Hospital, Internal Medicine, Ioannina, Greece, b
University Hospital, Internal Medicine, Ioannina, Greece
 

Aims and scope: To determine the incidence and modes of bone and joint involvement in the course of Brucellosis.

Patients and methods: We studied the 100 most recent patients, in all larger series approaching 1000, diagnosed with Brucellosis, and assessed the presence of arthritis and spondylitis. The diagnosis of brucellosis was based on serology or isolation of Brucella species from blood cultures.

Results: Twenty-three patients exhibited a form of osteoarticular involvement. Arthritis was present in 13 patients, most often involving the knees, but also the hips, elbows, even smaller joints as intephalangeal joints of the hand. Synovial fluid, when aspirated, was often characterised by an intense mononuclear infiltrate. Spondylitis was present in 10 patients, most often involving the lumbar spine, but also the thoracic spine. The characteristic erosion on the upper anterior crest of the vertebral body was visible in plain X-rays in three patients, while MRI and bone scan were helpful in other cases.

Discussion: Osteoarticular involvement in the course of brucellosis is the most common focal presentation of the disease. Acute brucellosis is often accompanied by bone and joint ache, especially of the lumbar spine, still frank involvement in the form of arthritis and spondylitis is not rare. Arthritis usually presents in the acute form of the disease, while spondylitis tends to be characteristic of a chronic form of the disease, often necessitating prolonged use of antibiotics. 
 
Some characteristics of osteoarticular involvement in human brucellosis
 
PS200
 Bosilkovski M, Krteva L, Caparoska S, Grozdanovski K, Sajn B. Clinic for Infectious Diseases and Febrile Conditions, Medical Faculty, Skopje, The Former Yugoslav Republic, Macedonia
 

One hundred and twenty-six patients with brucellosis were studied prospectively. Seventy-eight (61%) of them had osteoarticular involvement. Peripheral arthritis in 46 (59%) patients was the most frequent, followed by spondilitis in 27 (35%), sacroiliitis in 15 (19%), rarely bursitis, tendinitis and osteomyelitis. The overall male to female ratio was 2:1. Their average age was 39 (SD 20) years. Direct contact with animals was the reason for acquisition of the illness in 59% of patients, in 29% alimentary or aerogenous route was incriminated, and in 12% the route of aqisition was unknown. The average duration of the symptoms from the onset to establishing the diagnosis was 68 (SD 78) days. The main presenting symptoms were joint pain (100%), sweating (77%), fatigue (58%) and fever (57%). Hepatomegaly was present in 58%. In 49% of patients, involvement of some other system was evident. Comparison with patients, who did not have osteoarticular illness, showed that patients with osteoarticular involvement had significantly more often joint pain, fatigue, weight loss and more prolonged duration of symptoms before the diagnosis was established. 
 
Doxycycline and chloroquine as combination therapy for chronic Q fever endocarditis PS201
 Calza L, Attard L, Manfredi R, Chiodo F. Division of Infectious Diseases, University of Bologna, S. Orsola Hospital, Bologna, Italy
 

Introduction: Endocarditis is the main clinical manifestation of chronic Q fever, occurring in about 60–70% of all reported cases, and it is diagnosed almost exclusively in patients with either cardiovascular abnormalities or an immunocompromised condition. Case report: A 62-year-old Caucasian male patient with biological prosthetic aortic valve was first hospitalized because of an interstitial pneumonia. Six months later, our patient was re-admitted owing to intermittent fever, chills and weight loss. Echocardiographic study showed a small vegetation of 12 mm in diameter on left cusp of aortic valve. Serology for Coxiella burnetii revealed a complement-fixing IgG antibody titer to phase I antigen of more than 1:2048, consistent with chronic Q fever endocarditis. Antimicrobial therapy with i.v. doxycycline and oral chloroquine was started, leading to a clinical and echocardiographical recovery. Therapy was continued by oral doxycycline and chloroquine, and the patient remained asymptomatic during a 2-year follow up. Conclusion: The optimal treatment of Q fever endocarditis has not been well established: the most effective antimicrobials are fluoroquinolones and rifampin, but chloramphenicol, doxycycline and trimethoprim are also useful. The role of chloroquine in combination with doxycycline seems to be promising, because chloroquine may increase the lysosomal pH, enhancing the doxycycline bactericidal activity. 
 
Pneumonia in the course of Q fever
 
PS202
 Akritidis NKa, Pappas GAb, Mastora Ma, Liappis Ea, Tsianos Eb. a‘G. Hatzikosta’ Hospital, Internal Medicine, Ioannina, Greece, b
University Hospital, Internal Medicine, Ioannina, Greece
 

Aims and scopes: To review the incidence and the forms of lower respiratory tract infection in patients suffering from Q fever, and their clinical and radiological characteristics.

Patients and methods: Twenty-seven patients diagnosed as suffering from Q fever, were assessed for the presence of lower respiratory tract infection. The diagnosis was confirmed serologically.

Results: Thirteen patients expressed lower respiratory tract pathology, as confirmed by clinical examination and chest X-ray. In 11 of these patients the main cause of admission was respiratory tract symptoms, ranging from dry cough to hemoptysis. Chest X-ray was pathological in 13 patients: 10 patients had lobar pneumonia, two of them multiple nodular opacities, and one of them bronchopneumonia. Hepatitis was a common finding. All patients were treated with tetracycline.

Discussion: Although Coxiella burnetii infection is acquired via the respiratory tract, it is paradoxical that symptoms attributed to the lung are not invariably positive. Q fever pneumonia is an atypical pneumonia that usually follows a benign course. Diangostic suspicion is usually raised by the epidemiologic pattern and the accompanying mild hepatitis. Pleural effusion is not a common finding. The usual radiologic appearance of Q fever pneumonia is that of a lobar or segmental pneumonia. One important aspect of Q fever pneumonia is its common presentation in the form of multiple nodular opacities often necessitating the exclusion of malignancy. 
 
Tularaemia: analysis of 26 cases during the period 1975–2001 in Rimouski, Quebec, Canada
 
PS203
 Jutras P, Bernatchez H, Dolce P, Tourangeau F, Lamoureux J. Centre Hospitalier Regional de Rimouski, Microbiologie, Rimouski, Canada
 

A retrospective review was done with the hospital archives and the microbiology department files. During the period 1975–2001 there were 26 cases (22 M, 4 F). Of those cases, 22 had a laboratory confirmation: serology (16), culture (4), and serology+culture (2). There were 0–4 cases per year, mainly in October (73%). A history of exposition to hare was present in 24/25 (96%) and to marmot in 1/25 (4%). Skinning (18/25 72%), animal contact (5/25 20%), bite (1/25) and wound during bait preparation with frozen meat for hunting (1/25) were noted. The initial clinical presentation was ulceroglandular (77%), glandular (19%) and pneumonic (4%). The involved nodes distribution was axillary (12/24), cubital/axillary (10/24) and cubital (2/24). Median incubation period was 3 days (range 1–6); time to consultation 3 days (range 0–7), and time for effective treatment 7 days (range 0–23). An initial diagnosis of tularemia was made presumptively in 42%. Effective antibiotic regimen used was aminoglycosides in 73% (19/26), and tetracyclines in 27% (7/26). Note that intravenous netilmicin was used in 6 cases. Complication rate was 35% (9/26) with one death (4%), and was associated with delay in effective treatment (>8 days of illness) (P<0.05). Conclusion: In our area tularemia occured mainly in male population, during autumn, with a short incubation period and history of hare contact. Delay before appropriate treatment increased the complication rate. 
 
Neurological manifestations in murine typhus: a study of 84 cases
 
PS204
 Bompolaki I, Doukakis S, Triantafillidou D, Polimili G, Kastanakis M, Nikiforakis K, Vittorakis E, Kastanakis S. First Medical Department, ‘Saint George’ General Hospital, Chania, Greece
 

A severe frontal and/or retroorbital headache represents the most common neurologic manifestation of murine typhus. Other neurologic manifestations as confusion, stupor, nuchal rigidity and in severe cases delirium, extreme agitation or coma appear less commonly. Eighty-four patients with compatible clinical status of murine typhus and high serological titers of antibodies against Rickettsia typhi, were studied from our team. Seventy-four patients (88%) presented headache and nine patients (11%) presented confusion. One patient (1.1%) presented nuchal rigidity in combination with severe headache and confusion giving us the suspicion of meningitis. In this case a lumbar puncture was performed emergently and the cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) was examined. The findings of CSF were proteins: 9 mg/dl, WBC: 16/ml and glucose: 73 mg/dl and its culture was negative. All patients were treated with a specific anti-rickettsial treatment. The outcome of murine typhus was favorable for all 84 patients (100%). No one patient presented neurologic sequelae. 
 
Conjunctivitis in murine typhus: a study of 83 cases
 
PS205
 Doukakis S, Bambili K, Triantafillidou D, Vittorakis E, Bompolaki I, Kastanakis M, Evaggelopoulos A, Kastanakis S. First Medical Department, ‘Saint George’ General Hospital, Chania, Greece
 

Conjunctivitis usually accompany rickettsial diseases such as Rocky Mountain spotted fever, epidemic typhus and murine typhus. Eighty-three patients with compatible clinical status of murine typhus and high serological titers of antibodies against Rickettsia typhi, were studied from our team, during a period of time between January 1993 and the first semester of 1998. The clinical examination of these patients revealed the presence of conjunctivitis in 21/83 patients (25.6%). In the same time these patients referred retroocular pain and mild photophobia. This study showed that in murine typhus the injection of conjunctivae is rather common. Almost a quarter of the patients presented conjunctivitis despite the fact, that this ocular manifestation is less severe than in other typhus and spotted fevers. 
 
Blood picture in murine typhus: a study of 83 cases
 
PS206
 Doukakis S, Bambili K, Polimili G, Girousis N, Kastanakis M, Vittorakis E, Bompolaki I, Tomazinakis I, Kastanakis S. First Medical Department, ‘Saint George’ General Hospital, Chania, Greece
 

Eighty-three patients with compatible clinical status of murine typhus and high serological titers of antibodies against Rickettsia typhi, were studied from our team, during a period of time between January 1993 and the first semester of 1998. Three blood samples were obtained from each patient for the study of their hematological abnormalities. The first sample was obtained on admission, the second sample 2 weeks after the first, the third sample, 1 month after the second. On admission 26/83 patients (31%) presented anemia, 6/83 patients (7%) presented leukopenia and 42/83 patients (51%) presented thrombocytopenia. The mean value of hematocrit, white blood cells and platelets was 12.4 g/dl, 6.1×103 and 147×103/ml, respectively. Two weeks later anemia was presented in 45/83 patients (54%), 3/83 patients (4%) presented leukopenia, 3/83 patients (4%) presented leucocytosis and 15/83 patients (18%) presented thrombocytopenia. The mean value of hematocrit, white blood cells and platelets was 11.3 g/dl, 7.0×103 and 248×103/ml, respectively. One month later 11/42 patients (26%) had anemia and 2/42 patients (5%) presented thrombocytopenia. The mean value of hematocrit, white blood cells and platelets was 12.4 g/dl, 6.4×103 and 242×103/ml, respectively. Our study showed that early thrombocytopenia and anemia are frequent in murine typhus and that white blood cells count is usually normal. 
 
Renal function in murine typhus: a study of 83 cases
 
PS207
 Doukakis S, Polimili G, Triantafillidou D, Kastanakis M, Vittorakis E, Palla K, Kastanakis S. First Medical Department, ‘Saint George’ General Hospital, Chania, Greece
 

The clinical course of murine typhus is usually uncomplicated and the mortality rate is low (<1%). Advanced age and prolonged interval before administration of a specific anti-rickettsial treatment are correlated with severity of the disease. Renal function in murine typhus is usually unaltered except in elderly patients with prolonged hypotension. Eighty-three patients with compatible clinical status of murine typhus and high serological titres of antibodies against Rickettsia typhi, were studied from our team, during a period of time between January 1993 and the first semester of 1998. Three blood samples were obtained from each patient for the study of their renal function. The first sample was obtained on admission, the second sample approximately 2 weeks after the first, the third sample, taken from the half of the patients, was obtained one month after the second. On admission 4/83 patients (5.0%) presented acute renal failure. The outcome of murine typhus was favourable for all 83 patients (100%). The four patients who presented acute renal failure reversed after the administration of anti-rickettsial treatment and careful administration of fluids. In murine typhus the induction of hypovolaemia insufficiently corrected by normal homeostatic mechanisms may lead to pre-renal azotaemia. In these cases the immediate onset of an anti-rickettsial treatment and the correction of hypovolaemia are essential for the rapid clinical improvement of the patient. 
 
Experimental ocular toxoplasmosis: clinical, histopathological, immunological and therapeutic studies
 
PS208
 El Zawawy LAEa, Hammoda NAa, Allam SRa, Ali SMa, Galal ASb. a
Faculty of Medicine, Parasitology, Alexandria, Egypt, b
Faculty of Medicine, Ophthalmology, Alexandria, Egypt
 

The purpose of the study was to investigate clinical, histopathological, immunological and therapeutic features of an experimental model of ocular toxoplasmosis in sensitized and non sensitized rabbits and to assess the influence of treatment by interleukin2 (IL-2) on ocular lesions. The results obtained was that ‘Toxoplasma’ retnochoroiditis developed in both groups of rabbits with more pronounced effect in non sensitized animals. Administration of IL-2 improved ocular lesions in both groups with more evident effect in sensitized rabbits. Immunological findings were consistent with clinical and histopathological observations. The conclusion reached was that; ocular lesions were manifested in non sensitized rabbits more than in sensitized ones. IL-2 revealed a significant impact on improving the host defense against infection in eye. Immunotherapy with IL-2 would open the way for a new range of treatment based on immunomodulation. 
 
Express-diagnostic of
Streptococcus
antigen for the adequate antibiotic therapy in patients with pharyngitis
 
PS209
 Pertseva TO, Konopkina LI, Kireeva TV. DSMA, Internal Medicine , Dniepropetrovsk, Ukraine
 

The purpose of the study: Evaluation of effectivness of Streptococcus express-diagnostic for the adequate antibiotic therapy in patients with pharyngitis.

Results: We deal with clinical and microbiological comparison in 53 patients with pharyngitis. Using of Streptococcus antigen express diagnostic in swabs from the backside of pharynx allowed to get positive results in the seven cases (13.2%). Following cultural study has confirmed these results. Positive test was more probable in patients with pronounced fever (more than 38 °C), headache, weakness and in cases associated with chronic tonsillitis. Isolated Streptococcus pyogenes was susceptible to ampicillin, claritromicin, erytromicin, azytromicin, , clindamicin, ceftriaxon, levafloxacin, oxacillin, cefuroxim, roxytromicin.

Conclusion: Using of the express diagnostic of Streptococcus antigen allows to restrict groundless prescription of antibiotic therapy in patients with other types pharyngitis (i.e. viral, candidal etc.). 
 
Necrotising soft tissue infections as a complication of chickenpox: three case reports
 
PS210
 Alabaz Da, Turgut Ma, Kocabas Ea, Tumgor Ga, Yaman Ab, Alhan Ea. a
Division of Pediatric Infectious Diseases, Cukurova University, Adana, Turkey, b
Department of Microbiology, Cukurova University, Adana, Turkey
 

Chickenpox is a common viral infection that usually follows a benign, self limited course in healthy children. The most common complication in children with varicella is superimposed cutaneous infections with pyogenic bacteria (Streptococcus pyogenes and Staphylococcus aureus). Varicella gangrenosum, a necrotising soft tissue infection complicating the vesicular eruption of chickenpox, is rare. Here we present three cases with necrotising soft tissue infections following chicken pox.
These children were admitted because of common crusted lesions and necrotising soft tissue infection over the neck, the back, and the inguinal area. They all had the contact history and ensuing vesiculopapular rush. These infections were caused by group A streptococci in two cases, and S. aureus in one case. After instituting of appropriate antibiotic therapy, each patient underwent a surgical exploration with fasciotomies and debridement.
Widespread use of varicella vaccine may decrease invasive infections in children, adolescents, and adults, thus decreasing the burden the disease with its complications impose up on the family and the society. 
 
Cefprozil in the treatment of
Streptococcal tonsillopharyngitis
in 58 children and adolescents
 
PS211
 Krupova Ya, Peskova Jb, Krizan Sc, Moro Md, Harnicarova Ae, Streharova Ae, Krcmery Vf. a
St. Elisabeth Cancer Institute, Trnava University, Clinical Pharmacology, Bratislava, Slovakia, b
Trnava Hospital, General Practitioner, Trnava, Slovakia, c
Department of Pediatrics, Trnava Hospital, Trnava, Slovakia, d
Trnava Hospital, General Practitioner, Cifer, Slovakia, e
Department of Infectious Diseases, Trnava University, Trnava, Slovakia, f
Department of Clinical Pharmacology, Trnava University, Trnava, Slovakia
 

Cefprozil is a second generation cephalosporin. The aim of this open, multicentre, non-comparative study was to investigate the efficacy and safety of cefprozil in the treatment of Streptococcal tonsillopharyngitis. Fifty-eight patients were clinically assessed for signs and symptoms of streptococcal infection. Laboratory confirmation was sought using three tests; culture, rapid Strepto Test and estimation of antistreptolysin (ASO). One or more tests were done in 47 of the 58 patients. Treatment was for 5 days, 25 mg/kg per day in children, 500 mg per day in adolescents. Patients were again clinically assessed on the 5th–6th day. The results showed clinical success in 56 patients (96.5%) and in 46 of the 47 who had laboratory tests (97.8%). Two patients had treatment withdrawn because of nausea and abdominal pain (3.5%). Of the 47 patients with laboratory tests at least one test was ositive. The most helpful was the Strepto Test giving the quickest positive result in 92% of those tested (38/41). Culture was positive in 58% of those tested (24/41). The ASO test was of limited value. In conclusion, cefprozil showed high clinical efficacy and safety in the treatment of S. tonsillopharyngitis. 
 
Invasive Group B streptococcal infection in a healthy adult
 
PS212
 Tsiara S, Militadou G, Milionis C, Elisaf M.  
Internal Medicine Department, University of Ioannina, Ioannina, Greece
 

Streptococcus group B Agalactiae (GBS) is a rare pathogen for healthy male adults. We present an old man in whom (GBS) was isolated in blood cultures. Case report: A 79-year-old man was admitted to the hospital in order to investigate osteolytic lesions in the lumbar spine. Two weeks before, he experienced severe low back pain radiating to the right leg and fever arising to 39.50 °C with chills and rigors. A GBS was isolated from blood cultures and treatment with penicillin was initiated. A spine CT scan revealed osteolysis in the T12 and S1 vertebrae and the patient transferred to us. He was a previously healthy man. He received only antihypertensive therapy. On admission he was afebrile with arthralgias and myalgias. On clinical examination there was tenderness on the right pleurospondylic angle radiating to the right leg. Laboratory data on admission: Hb: 11.2 g/dl, WBC: 7.4×109/l, ESR: 77 mm/h. Biochemical values, serum protein electrophoresis, rectal examination and a prostatic specific antigen (PSA) were normal. A bone marrow aspiration and biopsy were negative. A transoesophageal ultrasound revealed vegetation on the right cusp of the aortic valve, with low grade regurgitation. An MRI of the lumbar spine revealed infectious myositis with concomitant osteomyelitis involving the L4, L5 vertebrae without any evidence of osteolytic lesions. A thorough investigation did not revealed any underlying immunosuppressive disease. Treatment with vancomycin and gentamycin IV was initiated and the patient discharged from the hospital in excellent health after 6 weeks. Discussion: GBS infections usually occur in neonates and pregnant, or in adults with underlying disease as diabetes mellitus or immunosuppression. The most common site of infection is soft tissue. We present this case because GBS infections are rare in the elderly in the absence of underlying disease. Common sites of involvement are soft tissues, while bone, joints, and heart valves account to 1–2% of the involved organs. Although our patient had more than one site of involvement he responded well to medical treatment without surgical debriment or heart valve replacement. 
 
Successful treatment of craniocervical necrotizing fasciitis (CCNF) with antimicrobial therapy combined with rHuGM-CSF
 
PS213
 Mastroianni Aa, Marani Mb, Paganelli Mb. a
Division of Infectious Diseases, G.B. Morgagni General Hospital, Forlì, Italy, b
Division of Otorhinolaryngology, G.B. Morgagni General Hospital, Forlì, Italy
 

Objective: To evaluate the safety and efficacy of rHuGM-CSF in combination with broad-spectrum antibiotics for the treatment of CCNF. Methods and results: A retrospective review of all patients (pts) with CCNF treated with antibiotics+rHuGM-CSF at our hospital from January 1997 to December 2001 was performed. Five patients were identified with the diagnosis of CCNF. Ages ranged from 33 to 71 years; there were three women and two men. Dental infection was the most common source of CCNF in 90%. One patient had acute tonsillitis leading to CCNF. All cases studied experienced infection of the neck with spread into the submandibular, submental, sublingual, retropharyngeal, and parapharyngeal spaces. All infections were polymicrobial. Diabetes mellitus was a co-morbidity in one case. All pts were treated with dual antibiotic coverage (vancomycin+meropenem), rHuGM-CSF (10 mcg/kg/daily given s.c.) and aggressive wound care. rHuGM-CSF was given for 7–10 days. In spite of the severity of the infection all pts recovered and do not experienced local or systemic complications. Discussion: CCNF is a severe bacterial infection of the cervical fascia resulting in extensive fascial necrosis with widespread undermining of the surrounding tissues. Prompt antibiotic therapy combined with rHuGM-CSF resulted in a 100% overall survival in our experience. To our knowledge, this is the first report describing the successful treatment of CCNF with use of broad-spectrum antibiotics combined with rHuGM-CSF. 
 
An infection from
Neisseria meningitidis
due to strain b. Case report
 
PS214
 Balomenaki Ea, Dedousi Oa, Tsialla Aa, Athanasopoulos Da, Tsafaraki Ab, Kastanakis Sc. a
Pediatric Department, ‘Saint George’ General Hospital, Chania, Greece, b
Microbiology Labarotory, ‘Saint George’ General Hospital, Chania, Greece, c
First Medical Department, ‘Saint George’ General Hospital, Chania, Greece
 

The following case adds to the clinical manifestations and course of meningococcal disease. A previously healthy 3-year-old girl presented acutely with high fever purpuric rash including conjuctival haemorrhages and hypotension. The child had also neck stiffness. A presumptive diagnosis of meningococcal septicaemia was made and treatment with penicilline, chloramphenicole, fluids and inotropes was initiated. Laboratory investigations showed WBC: 4300/ml, Hb: 12.2 g/dl, Hct: 39.5%, ESR: 1 mm in the first hour, PT: 26 s, APTT: 90 s. Neisseria meningitidis Group B was isolated from the blood cultures. CSF obtained after antibiotics were started did not grow N. meningitidis. The patient had an adverse outcome. She died after 12 h of hospitalization. This patient developed a fulminating meningococcal septicaemia. Shock is a clinical diagnosis arising from the failure of compensatory mechanisms that maintain perfusion of vital organs at the expense of non vital. Septic shock results from loss of circulating plasma volume due to increased vascular permeability and maldistribution of intravascular volume. In young children there is a prevalence of serogroup B meningococcal disease which can be explained by the immaturity of the immune system and by the fact the group B capsule synthesis is known to inhibit alternative complement pathway activation. This case emphasizes the need for further protection against N. meningitidis group B. 
 
Community-acquired meningitis at a general hospital of Athens, Greece
 
PS215
 Chalkiadaki Da, Dermitzaki Sa, Athanasiou Va, Mamalouga Ma, Markopoulou Aa, Divari Ab, Papadimitriou Ab, Lazanas MKa. a
3rd Internal Medicine Department, Red Cross Hospital, Athens, Greece, b
Neurology Department, Red Cross Hospital, Athens, Greece
 

Objectives: To describe the features of the cases with acute meningitis in adults who were admitted at a general hospital of Athens, Greece. Methods: We studied the cases of patients >15 years of age whom community acquired-meningitis was diagnosed at Red Cross Hospital of Athens, Greece, during 2000–2001. Results: Forty-eight patients were included in this study. The etiological agents were: viral (n=26, 54.2%, mean (‘x ) age=28 years), Streptococcus pneumoniae (n=8, 16.6%,‘x age=53), Neisseria meningitidis (n=7, 14.6%, ‘x age=28), S. viridans (n=6, 12%, ‘x age=34), P. multocida (n=1, age 75). The peak incidence of bacterial meningitis was in winter (pneumococcal 73%, meningococcal 86%, s. viridans 83%) .The cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) findings in viral meningitis were ‘x white cells=340/mm3, ‘x PMN=27%, ‘x glucose CSF/ serum 0.55, ‘x protein 39 mg/dl and in bacterial meningitis were ‘x white cells=5800/mm3, ‘x PMN=80%, ‘x glucose CSF/ serum=0.2, ‘x protein=350 mg/dl, Gram stain was positive in 55%, culture was positive in 45%. All pneumococcal and meningococcal strains were susceptible to penicillin. The case fatality rates for pneumococcal and meningococcal meningitis were 25 and 14.3%, respectively. Conclusions: The cases of bacterial meningitis were according to typical epidemiological features of age and season. The case fatality rate of pneumococcal meningitis appear to be high regardless of susceptibility to penicillin. None had received pneumococcal vaccine prior to becoming ill. 
 
Diagnosis and therapy of meningococcal meningitis—trend and particularities of a ‘Romanian model’
 
PS216
 Lintmaer I, Moroti R, Popescu A, Popescu C. Institute of Infectious Diseases Matei Bals , Unit 5 , Bucharest, Romania
 

Background: Newer diagnosis methods and antimicrobials are expected to change the management of menigococcal meningitis (MM) and to improve its prognosis. Objectives: To determine the changes in the diagnosis methods and therapy of MM patients in a Infectious Diseases Hospital. To compare MM management in Bucharest with literature data. Methods: Retrospective rewiew of MM in adult patients hospitalized over a 6-year period. Our results were compared with other studies made in the 90s, taken from MEDLINE. Results: There were 97 episodes of MM during the study period (52 episodes in 1995–1997 and 45 episodes in 1998–2000). We noticed a defined diagnosis increase and increased blood culture specificity. The antimicrobial monotherapy was maintained but penicilin was replaced by ceftriaxone. HHC was replaced by dexamethasone in pathogenic therapy. We noticed a shorter length of treatment and a reduced lethality. The most important differences between our results and other studies are: monotherapy regimens are less frequent and therapy lengths are longer; however, prognosis is similar. Conclusions: The MM management has been modified in the last 3–4 years: prognosis is improved, but the changes do not bring clear cost/effective benefits. 
 
Tunisia: infective endocarditis of 108 cases
 
PS217
 Tiouiri TH, Kilani B, Amari L, Zouiten F, Kanoun KF, Ghbontini A, Ben Chaabene T. Rabta Hospital, Infectious Diseases, Tunis, Tunisia
 

Objectives: In order to study epidemiological, clinical and thera-peutical characteristics of the infective endocarditis (IE). Methods: We reviewed all the cases of IE fulfilling the Duke criteria. Data were collected during a 19-year period (1980–1998) in the unit of infectious diseases. Results: One hundred and eight cases were identified. The mean age was 37.5 years. Sex ratio was 0.8. Eighty-five IE (78.6%) occured in patients with native valve, and 23 IE (21.4%) with prosthetic valve. Fever was the most common sign, 12% had a congestive heart failure, 26.9% had cutaneous signs. The most common primary focus of IE was orthodontic. Blood cultures were positive in 63% of cases. In one case, serological test identified Rickettsia conori. Streptococci and staphylococci were isolated in 27.8 and 25.9%, respectively. Echocardiography detected abnormalities in 63.4% of cases. Rheumatic heart disease was the most predisposing condition. Empirical therapy was based on combination of b lactam with aminoglycoside. Recovery was obtained for 60 patients. Cardiac surgery was performed in 26 cases. Overall mortality rate was 19.4%. Conclusion: IE affects young persons. Prevention needs eradication of acute rheumatic arthritis. 
 
A major outbreak of Legionnaires' disease in Spain: diagnostics aspects
 
PS218
 Guerrero Ca, Toldos CMa, Yagüe Gb, Ramírez Ca, Rodríguez Ta, Segovia Ma. a
Hospital Morales Meseguer, Servicio de Microbiología, Murcia, Spain, b
Departamento de Microbiología, Facultad de Medicina, Universidad de Murcia, Murcia, Spain
 

Objective: To evaluate the value of different methods (serological tests, culture of respiratory secretions, blood cultures and urinary antigen testing) for the diagnosis of Legionella pneumophila pneumonia during an outbreak in Spain.

Results: We have studied 542 patients from a recent outbreak of legionellosis in Murcia (Spain). The diagnosis was achieved in 305 patients. Urinary antigens were positive in 187 patients. In the 355 patients with urinary antigen negative the serological response was demonstrated by indirect immunofluorescence (IFA) in 118 patients. All Blood cultures processed were negative. Sputum samples were obtained from 154 patients, of these L. pneumophila was isolated only in six patients. In all of them direct immunofluorescence test (DFA) was positive.

Conclusions: Although the serological diagnosis was the most sensitive method the urinary antigen testing was of great value in the rapid diagnosis of the legionella's outbreak in Murcia. The isolation of L. pneumophila by culture showed a poor sensitivity probably because of the low severity of the illness. 
 
Chloramphenicol as a first choice antibiotic in treatment of purulent meningitis
 
PS219
 Dzupova Oa, Helcl Mb, Prihodova Jb, Benes Ja, Rohacova Hb. a
3rd Faculty of Medicine, University Hospital Bulovka, Clinic of Infectious Diseases, Prague, Czech Republic, b
Clinic of Infectious Diseases, University Hospital Bulovka, Prague, Czech Republic
 

Purpose: To evaluate chloramphenicol for an initial empiric antibiotic treatment of purulent meningitis in adults. Study group: One hundred and twenty patients hospitalized for the diagnosis purulent meningitis in the department in years 1997–2000, 67 males and 53 females, age range 15–81 years, mean age 52.6 years. Children up to 15 years were not included. Method: A retrospective analysis of the study group focused on antibiotic treatment both initial and changes during treatment. Results: Chloramphenicol was used as an initial antibiotic in 59 (49%), 3rd generation cephalosporin in 30 (25%), penicillin in 21 (17%), ampicillin in five (4%) and other antibiotic in five (4%), respectively. During treatment chloramphenicol was switched for 3rd gen cephalosporin in seven of 23 patients with Streptococcus pneumoniae meningitis and in five of 28 patients with meningitis of unknown etiology. The reason for the change was non-improving CSF formula in three, persisting CSF culture positivity in two and persisting coma in seven patients. Conclusion: Because of repeated necessity to switch chloramphenicol for 3rd gen cephalosporin during treatment of purulent meningitis of pneumococcal and unknown etiology the initial treatment strategy was changed in 2001. Third gen cephalosporin is now used as a first choice antibiotic, what is in consent with international recommendation of treatment. To evaluate and compare groups treated initially with chloramphenicol and with 3rd gen cephalosporin will need several more years. 
 
Low prevalence of multi-drug resistant
Mycobacterium tuberculosis
in Jerez de la Frontera-Cadiz (SPAIN)
 
PS220
 Alados JC, Aller AI, De Miguel C, De Francisco JL, Calbo L. Hospital del SAS-JEREZ , Microbiologia, Jerez de la Frontera, CADIZ, Spain
 

Introduction and aim: Previous reports indicate that multi-drug resistance Mycobacterium tuberculosis (MTB) is an worldwide problem. The aim of this study was to review the resistance of MTB to the first-line antimycobacterial agents in our area. Material and methods: Over a period of 4 years (1998–2001), 151 strains of MTB isolated from non-treated patients with tuberculosis (38 strain in 1998, 48 in 1999, 37 in 2000 and 28 in 2001) were studied. These isolates were tested for in vitro drugs susceptibility to Isoniacid-I, Rifampicin-R, Streptomycin-S and Ethambutol-E using the Bact/Alert method (Organon Teknica) as described by the manufacturer. Results: Our results showed that 10.6% (16/151) strains were resistant to one or more drugs. Single drug resistances were detected on nine strains to I (6.3%), one to R (0.66%), two to S (1.3%), one to E (0.66%). Three MTB strains were resistant to more than one drug but only one was multi-drug resistant (I+R).The incidence of I-resistant strains over the period fell from 13% in 1998 to 3.6% in 2001. Conclusions: (1) Multi-drug resistance is not an important problem in our area. (2) Isoniacid resistance was declined to an admissible level. 
 
Resistance of
Mycobacterium tuberculosis
to anti-tuberculous drugs in Greece
 
PS221
 Ziotopoulos Pa, Charalambopoulou Ab, Fakiri Hb, Handrinos Ba, Kanellopoulou Mb, Papafrangas Eb. a
Department of Chest Medicine, Sismanoglio General Hospital, Athens, Greece, b
Laboratory of Microbiology, Sismanoglio General Hospital, Athens, Greece
 

Purpose: To study the problem of resistant tuberculosis in Greece. Materials and Methods: One hundred and seven cases of non-HIV TBC infections hospitalized since 1997 in our service. Sputum and other biological materials were cultured. We studied the sensitivity to pyrazinamide (PZ), streptomycin (SM), isoniazide (INH), rifambicin (RIF) and ethambutol (EMB) using the radiometric method BACTEC. Results: (a) Overall resistance PZ: 11.21% (12 patients), SM: 17.75% (19 patients), INH: 17.75% (19 patients), RIF: 12.15% (13 patients), EMB: 8.41% (nine patients). (b) Resistance to one drug: 6.54% (seven patients) PZ: 0.0%, SM: 2.8% (three patients), INH: 2.8% (three patients), RIF: 0.9% (one patient), EMB: 0.0%. (c) Resistance to two drugs: 4.67% (five patients) SM-INH: 2.8% (three patients), PZ-SM: 0.93% (one patient), INH-RIF: 0.93% (one patient). (d) Multi-resistance—to three drugs: 4.67% (five patients) SM-INH-RIF: 1.87% (two patients), PZ-SM-INH: 0.93% (one patient), PZ-INH-EMB: 0.93% (one patient), PZ-SM-EMB: 0.93% (one patient)—to four drugs: 0.93% (one patient) PZ-SM-INH-EMB—to all (five) drugs: 5.61% (six patients) PZ-SM-INH-RIF-EMB. Conclusion: The observed high resistance, probably due to the large number of immigrants during the last years, imposes continuous surveillance. 
 
The decline of high drug resistance rate of pulmonary
Mycobacterium tuberculosis
isolates from a Southern Taiwan medical centre, 1996–2000
 
PS222
 Lu PLa, Chen TPa, Tsai JJa, Lee YWb, Hwang KPc, Peng CFd. a
Department of Internal Medicine, Kaohsiung Medical University Hospital, Kaohsiung, Taiwan, b
Kaohsiung Medical University Hospital, Infection Control Committee, Kaohsiung, Taiwan, c
Department of pediatrics, Kaohsiung Medical University Hospital, Kaohsiung, Taiwan, d
School of Technology for Medical Sciences, Kaohsiung Medical University, Kaohsiung, Taiwan
 

To investigate the anti-tuberculosis drug resistance pattern of pulmonary tuberculosis isolates in southern Taiwan, an area with higher tuberculosis incidence and mortality than other regions of the island, we performed a hospital-based surveillance at a southern Taiwan medical center from 1996 to 2000. The combined drug resistance rates to at least one of five first-line agents was 84.8%, and to both isoniazid and rifampin (multi-drug resistance, MDR) was 11.4%, indicating high resistance rates compared with those reported in the WHO/IUATLD global project and in northern Taiwan. The resistance rates to two second-line drugs, cycloserine, and kanamycin, were 75.7 and 23.7%, respectively. A significant decreasing trend in resistance rates to all drugs except streptomycin was observed during the 5-year period. Though combined drug resistance rate may not be the most accurate tool as it includes previously treated cases which inflates the resistance rate, the observation of trends in the susceptibility of pulmonary tuberculosis in accompany with the increasing percentages of tuberculosis patients receiving complete treatment course and the decreasing percentages of cases lost of follow-up in Kaohsiung after the institution of new governmental regulations for case management in 1997 suggest the usefulness of intervention programs. 
 
Lipid profile in patients with multidrug resistant pulmonary tuberculosis
 
PS223
 Ulubas Ba, Cimen Fb, Eryýlmaz Tc, Buðdaycý Rd, Alpar Me. a
Faculty of Medicine, Mersin University, Chest Disease, Mersin, Turkey, b
Atatürk Chest Disease and Surgery Center, Chest Disease, Ankara, Turkey, c
Atatürk Chest Disease and Surgery Center, Chemistry, Ankara, Turkey, d
Faculty of Medicine, Mersin Üniversity, Health Care, Mersin, Turkey, e
Atatürk Chest Disease and Surgery Center, Chest, Ankara, Turkey
 

As shown experimentally, tuberculosis (TB) infection may contribute to development of atherosclerosis. Also antituberculosis drugs may effect atherosclerosis. The aim of our study was to evaluate serum level of total cholesterol (TCH), triglycerides (TG), low density lipoprotein (LDL), very low density lipoprotein (VLDL), high density lipoprotein (HDL), Apoprotein A (APO A), Apoprotein B (APO B) and lipoprotein A (lp(a) in multidrug resistant tuberculosis (MDR-TB) patients. The study group consisted of 20 MDR-TB and age–sex match 20 healthy controls. The mean age of the MDR-TB patients was 37.95±11.50 and control's 53.75±11.81 years and smoking habits was 17.70±11.96 package/year (p/y) and 19.1±17.335. From measuring parameters, TCH concentration was found in patients/controls, 144.70±36.48/185.3±42.83 mg/dl, HDL concentration 44.40±16.47/36.65±5.33 mg/dl, LDL 78.55±26.4/122.2±40.14 mg/dl, VLDL concentration 19.75±22.80/31.7±16.06 mg/dl, TG concentration 19.75±22.80/31.7±16.06 mg/dl, APO A concentration 102.15±32.33/128.15±23.66 mg/dl, APO B concentration 102.15±32.33/128.15±23.66 mg/dl, Lp(a) concentration 27.90±26.28/17.59±15.23 mg/dl, respectively. In MDR-TB patients TCH, TG, LDL, VLDL, APO B concentrations were statistical significant lower than controls (P<0.000, 0.000, 0.000, 0.000, 0.000). Conclusion: In our study group, MDR-TB patients do not have a risk of atherosclerosis. 
 
A case of tuberculosis presenting with an abscess extending from supra-sternal region to anterior mediastinum
 
PS224
 Ersoz Ga, Kandemir Oa, Egilmez Rb, Kaya Aa. a
Faculty of Medicine, Mersin University, Clinical Microbiology and Infectious Diseases, Icel, Turkey, b
Faculty of Medicine, Pathology, Mersin University, Icel, Turkey
 

Extrapulmonary tuberculosis may sometimes present with confusing clinical manifestations. A 77-year-old female patient was admitted with a history of recurrent supra-sternal abscess for 1 year. MRI confirmed the presence of sternal osteomyelitis and an anterior mediastinal mass. The diagnosis of tuberculosis was proved by histologic examination and acid-fast stain. The patient was treated with first-line agents, which isoniazid, rifampin, pyrazinamide, and ethambutol. 
 
Tobacco smoking as a factor of the decrease of chemotherapy effectiveness and of the development of the drug resistance in patients with pulmonary tuberculosis
 
PS225
 Shprykov ASa, Zhadnov VZa, Shprykova ONb. a
Medical Academy, Department of Tuberculosis and Lung diseases, Nyzhny Novgorod, Russian Federation, b
Medical Clinic for Infectious #2, Laboratory of Bacteriology, Nyzhny Novgorod, Russian Federation
 

Studies of the effect of smoking on the results of chemotherapy of 798 patients with tuberculosis of lungs. Intensive tobacco smoking slowed down clearance of positive sputum and of lung tissue destruction (in smokers 92.1% and 70.1 vs. 98.0% and 90.6% in non-smokers, P<0.01). Drug-resistant MTB strains have been found to be isolated more often in smokers—43.4 vs. 19.4% in non-smokers, P<0.01. Resistance to streptomycin and isoniazid prevailed, reaching in heavy smokers 50.0 and 30.5%, respectively. Resistance to rifampicin increased 1.5 times. The concentration of rifampicin in the blood serum of heavy smokers decreased in 1.8 times. Clinical data are in complete correlation with the findings of our experiments: 67% of experimental cultures developed resistance to streptomycin, isoniazid and less to rifampicin in the study of drug sensitivity under the effect of tobacco smoke condensate. Thus, our findings show the development of drug resistance in MTB under the effect of components of tobacco smoke and also showed less effectiveness in therapy. 
 
Thoracic actinomycosis: still a problem
 
PS226
 Kilani KB, Ammari LA, Tiouiri HT , Ben Chaabène TBC. Rabta hospital, Infectious Diseases, Tunis, Tunisia
 

Actinomycosis is a chronic disease characterized by abcess formation, tissue fibrosis and draining sinuses. It is caused by anaerobic bacteria belonging to the genus actinomyces. Thoracic actinomycosis may involve the lungs, pleura, mediastinum or chest wall. The authors present a case of pulmonary actinomycosis complicating a cervico-facial site. A 32-year-old man with a history of cervicofacial actinomycosis treated by penicillin G 2 years ago was admitted because of right-sided chest pain for 2 months before presentation, cough and fever. Physical examination shows a painless indurated mass in the neck with multiple fistula of the sternum. Chest radiograph and CT scan revealed a mass in the upper lobe of the right lung with an infiltrate of the upper lobe of the left one. Magnetic resonance imaging confirms the previous lesions, with extending process to the sternum and right collar bone. Bronchoscopy was performed while patient was on antimicrobial therapy. Culture of bronchoalveolar lavage fluid was negative. Transbronchial biopsy was not conclusive. Fungal serologies were negative for aspergillosis, histoplasmosis, blastomycosis. Bacterial examination of purulent drainage from sternal wound shows inclusion bodies identified as actinomyces. He was treated then with penicillin IV for 2 months, than switched to doxycycline. After 8 months of treatment, he is asymptomatic with radiological improvement. 
 
Resistance of
Achromobacter xylosoxidans
isolated from CF patients
 
PS227
 Kanellopoulou Ma, Skarmoutsou Na, Iglezos Ib, Mylona Ea, Martsoukou Ma, Apostolopoulou Fb, Papafrangas Ea. a
Laboratory of Clinical Microbiology, Sismanoglio General District Hospital of Attica, Athens, Greece, b
2nd Department of Pneumology, Sismanoglio General District Hospital of Attica, Athens, Greece
 

Introduction:
Achromobacter xylosoxidans is a rare human pathogen. It is an important cause of bacteremia in patients with cardiac diseases, malignancies and immunosuppression. It has been recently recognized as an emerging microorganism in Cystic Fibrosis (CF), whose its pathogenic role is unknown.

Aim: To investigate the sensitivity to eleven different antibiotics of 27 A. xylosoxidans strains isolated from adults with CF, during 2001.

Methods: The susceptibility was tested by Kirby Bauer and microdilution methods (Wider I, Fransisco Soria Melguizo, S.A.), according to NCCLS recomendations.

Results: The resistance to antibiotics was as follows : Gentamicin, Tobramycin, Aztreonam 100%, Amikacin 96%, Ceftazidime 85%, Ticarcillin 66%, Carbapenems, Cotrimoxazole 59%, Colistin 51% and Piperacillin 22%.

Conclusions: (1) A. xylosoxidans isolated from CF patients appeared resistant to the most usually tested antibacterial agents. (2) Colistin which is used as aerolized antibiotic for CF patients seems to be effective in the half of the isolated strains. (3) Piperacillin was the most active antibiotic against A. xylosoxidans. 
 
Comparative in vitro activities of alafosfalin in combination with various antibiotics against
Burkholderia cepacia
and
Pseudomonas aeruginosa
strains from patients with cystic fibrosis
 
PS228
 Morris KA, Perry JD, Jain S, Gould FK. Microbiology Department, Freeman Hospital, Newcastle upon Tyne, UK
 

Alafosfalin, l-alanyl-l-1-aminoethylphosphonic acid, is an antibacterial peptide mimetic which inhibits peptidoglycan biosynthesis. We report the in-vitro activity of this compound in combination with ceftazidime, cefsulodin, fosfomycin, piperacillin/tazobactam, aztreonam, ciprofloxacin and timentin. Drug combinations were evaluated against 20 Burkholderia cepacia strains, and 20 Pseudomonas aeruginosa strains isolated from patients with cystic fibrosis. For this purpose a chequerboard technique was adopted using doubling dilutions of each antibiotic incorporated into a highly defined agar medium free of antagonists. The minimum inhibitory concentrations (MICs) and fractional inhibitory concentrations (FICs) of all the antibiotic combinations were determined which revealed the antibiotic interaction occurring. Alafosfalin in combination with ceftazidime, meropenem, piperacillin/tazobactam and timentin demonstrated the highest percentages of synergy in both B. cepacia and P. aeruginosa. Synergy was shown to occur in 15, 15, 10 and 10% of B. cepacia strains respectively, and in 10, 5, 5 and 5% of P. aeruginosa strains. These four combinations were re-tested with all 40 isolates and the results were shown to be reproducible. Alafosfalin shows potential as a treatment for cystic fibrosis patients colonised with P. aeruginosa and/or B. cepacia, when applied in combination with these agents. 
 
Community-acquired pneumonia—does its aetiology matter?
 
PS229
 Lintmaer I, Popescu A, Popescu C. Institute of Infectious Diseases Matei Bals, Unit 5, Bucharest, Romania
 

The aetiology of a pneumonia is not one of the criteria used to determine pneumonia's severity. However, it is accepted that identified based–based therapy is less expensive (and possibly more effective). Objectives: Our study aims were to: (1) to evaluate the role of aetiology identification in pneumonia; (2) to evaluate the first-line therapy in pneumonia. Methods: We conducted a retrospective study in an Infectious Diseases Hospital on 1126 patients with pneumonia. We excluded all the cases with nosocomial pneumonia. Primary end-point was the 28-day clinical failure (deaths, ICU admission), secondary end-points were the average time of fever and length of stay and the antimicrobial regimen changes. Results: Causative agent identification rate was 24.6%. The evolution was different for patients with identified aetiology compared with other patients in terms of: 28-day failures, length-of-stay and changes of the antimicrobial regimen. The 61 patients with inadequate first-line therapy had a more severe course of illness with a greater rate of 28-day clinical failure, longer fever and length-of-stay. Conclusions: Pneumonia's treatment was better for the patients with identified causative agent. That is why we should include aetiology among the pneumonia severity criteria, especially at an ‘after 3-day therapy’ re-evaluation. 
 
Pneumococcal acute otitis media in Greek paediatric population: increasing evidence for antimicrobial resistance
 
PS230
 Paraskakis Ia, Mastora Sa, Bozavoutoglou Ea, Papadatou Ma, Chrissakis Ab, Pangalis Ab, Papavasileiou Hc, Panagea Tc, Legakis NJd. a
P&A Kyriakou, Children's Hospital, Microbiology, Athens, Greece, b
Aghia Sophia Children's Hospital, Microbiology, Athens, Greece, c
Penteli Children's Hospital, Microbiology, Athens, Greece, d
Athens University, Microbiology, Athens, Greece
 

Purpose: To determine the incidence of Streptococcus pneumoniae (S.pn.). In acute otitis media (AOM) in 229 children attending as outpatients in Pediatric Departments of three Children's Hospitals located in the area of Athens during a 15-month period (September 2000–November 2001). Also, the drug-resistance and serogrouping of S.pn. isolates were evaluated. Results: Pneumomococcal AOM was detected in 94 children (41.0%) and S.pn. was the only pathogen in 80.9%. The resistance rates of the organism to antibiotics were as follows: penicillin 48.9% (MIC<1 μg/ml; intermediately resistant 31.9%, MIC 1.5 μg/ml 8.5%, and MIC>2 μg/ml; highly resistant 8.5%), erythromycin 55.3%, clindamycin 11.7%, cotrimoxazole 41.5% and chloramphenicol 6.4%. All isolates were uniformly susceptible to rifambicin and vancomycin. The large majority of pneumococcal isolates (80.8%) had the M-phenotype and the remaining strains (19.2%) the constitutive MLS phenotype. A various of serogroups were detected; the serogroup 19 was the most predominant one (50.0%), followed by serogroups 14 (14.9%), 23 (10.6%) and 6 (6.4%). The non-typable S.pn. strains compromised the 8.5% of the strains. Conclusions: High prevalence of resistance to penicillin, macrolides and cotrimoxazole in pneumococcal AOM of childhood was recognized. A strategy for preventing AOM caused by drug-resistant pneumococci is mandatory to start. 
 
Antibiotic resistance of
Streptococcus pneumoniae
isolated from adults in a General District Hospital (1998–2001)
 
PS231
 Kanellopoulou M, Martsoukou M, Skarmoutsou N, Charalabopoulou A, Bournazou V, Kanderakis G, Papafrangas E. Laboratory of Clinical Microbiology, Sismanoglio General District Hospital of Attica, Athens, Greece
 

Aim: To investigate the ‘in vitro’ activity of antibiotics against Streptococcus pneumoniae strains isolated from adults sputum–bronchial secretions during a 4-year period (1998–2001).

Material and methods: A total number of 82 strains were examined. The sensitivity test was performed by Kirby Bauer, microdilution method (Pasco, Difco) according to NCCLS guidelines and by E-test.

Results: A percentage of 5.5 % of S. pneumoniae strains revealed high level resistance to Penicillin (MIC≥2 μg/ml), while the 28% showed intermediate resistance (MIC 0.12–1 μg/ml). The resistance to Erythromycin and Cotrimoxazole was 8.3 % (MIC≥1 μg/ml) and 5.5 % (MIC≥4/76 μg/ml), respectively. All strains were sensitive to Cefotaxime (MIC 0.05 μg/ml), Vancomycin (MIC≤0.5 μg/ml), Meropenem (MIC≤0.25 μg/ml) and Levofloxacin (MIC≤2 μg/ml).

Conclusions: (1) The prevalence of high resistance S. pneumoniae to Penicillin seems to be low in examined strains (5.5%). (2) Intermediate resistance to Penicillin of S. pneumoniae isolates was high as expected (28%). (3) Most of the strains were sensitive to Erythromycin (91.7%) and Cotrimozaxole (94.5%). (4) S. pneumoniae isolates were completely (100%) sensitive to Levofloxacin, Vancomycin and Meropenem. 
 
Five years survey of Antibiotic Therapy in Acute Exacerbations of COPD (AE-COPD)
 
PS232
 Beghi G, Aiolfi S, Maghini L, Patruno V, Aiolfi E. S Marta Hospital, Pulmonary Rehabilitation Unit, A.O., Rivolta d'Adda, Italy
 

Aim of this study was a retrospective (1997–2001) evaluation of the more effective and practical antibiotic treatment in 1058 AE-COPD patients (pts) admitted to our Unit. Methods before introducing any antimocrobial drug, sputum specimens were collected for microbiological purposes, while blood analysis, to monitor adverse systemic effects, were performed at the beginning and the end of treatment. Antibiotic treatment ranged from 8 to 15 days according to four regimens: Regimen A (832 pts)=oral therapy only: 30.9% with AMC 1 g b.i.d.; 24.4% with CIP 500 mg b.i.d.; 17.4% with DOX 100 mg u.i.d.; 10.2% with LEV 750 mg u.i.d.; 8.5% with CLA 500 mg b.i.d.; 7.8% miscellaneous. Regimen B (94 pts)=sequential therapy (e.v. for 3 days→oral): 56.4% with AMC 1 g b.i.d.; 37.2% with CLA 500 mg b.i.d. Regimen C (68 pts)=e.v. therapy only: same drugs. Regimen D (64 pts)=an association of two antibiotics. Results of 1058 evaluated pts, only 199 (19.6%) required a second regimen of treatment because of failure of the previous one: 19.7% of Regimen A; 12.7% of Regimen B; 23.5% of Regimen C, and 14% of Regimen D. Mild adverse effects were detected only in four pts. Our results confirm that oral antibiotic treatment is practical, safe, and effective, and can be considered as the first line regimen also in hospitalized patients with AE-COPD. 
 
Oral cefixime therapy reduces bacterial load and inflammatory indices in patients with infection-induced exacerbations of severe chronic obstructive pulmonary disease
 
PS233
 Becher Ga, Gillissen Aa, Rothe Mb. a
St. George Medical Center, Robert-Koch-Hospital, Leipzig, Germany, b
FILT, Lung and Chest Diagnostics Ltd., Berlin, Germany
 

Patients with severe form of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) are prone by frequent exacerbations. Bacterial infections are judged to cause at least half of exacerbations. Haemophilus influenzae and Streptococcus pneumoniae are the most frequent isolates, Gram-negative bacilli account for the severe cases, aggravating the inflammatory process in the airways eventually leading to respiratory insufficiency. The aim of this ongoing placebo controlled, parallel group, mono center study trial is to evaluate beneficial effect of cefixim to reduce bacterial load and pulmonary inflammation in patients (n=30) with acute bacterial exacerbation of severe COPD. Thus, 30 patients received in randomized fashion either Cefixim (400 mg/day) or placebo (5 days). On days 1, 2, 5 and 8 breath condensate is collected using ‘EcoScreen’ (Jaeger Germany) for LTB4-, IL-8-, Nitrite- and PH-analysis. In parallel sputum gathered for detection of bacterial strains, and for LTB4-, and IL-8 quantification purposes. These data are compared to clinical outcome parameters such as lung function tests, radiographic findings, serum inflammatory markers and length of hospital stay. The preliminary data obtained confirm successful antibiotic therapy with oral Cefixim in bacterial related acute exacerbations of COPD is a useful approach to reduce bacterial load, and concomitantly lower inflammatory indices of the central and peripheral airways leading to clinical improvement of the patients. 
 
Streptococcus pneumoniae
serotypes and in vitro activity of ceftidoren and 10 other antimicrobials in Southern European countries (ARISE Project)
 
PS234
 Soriano Garcia Fa, Fenoll Ab, Fernandez-Roblas Ra, Coronel Pc, Gimeno Mc, Rodenas Ec, Garcia Ma, Granizo JJd. a
Fundacion Jimenez Diaz, Microbiology, Madrid, Spain, b
Instituto de Salud Carlos III, Centro Nacional Microbiologia, Majadahonda, Spain, c
Tedec Meiji Farma, Scientific, Alcala de Henares, Spain, d
Fundacion Jimenez Diaz, Epidemiology, Madrid, Spain
 

Purpose: To describe the susceptibility of Streptococcus pneumoniae against cefditoren and 10 other antimicrobials by serotype a multicenter study in South Europe was carried out.
A total of 877 strains were collected between September 2000 and March 2001 from adult patients (more than 16 y.o.) with respiratory tract infection (respiratory tract samples and blood cultures). All the isolates were sent to a central Laboratory (Fundación Jiménez Díaz, Madrid, Spain) where susceptibility test was performed by broth microdilution (Sensititre) following NCCLS recommendations. Serotype was determined by Quellung reaction and Dot Assay in Carlos III Institute in 806 strains.

Results: A total of 25 strains (3.1%) were not typable. The most prevalent serotypes were 23 (15.4%), 6 (11.4%), 19 (10.8%), 3 (9.6%), 14 (8.9%) and 9 (8.1%). Two hundred and sixty-four strains were grouped in 27 different serotypes.
The proportion of susceptible strains by serotype to penicillin, erythromycin and levofloxacin were: serotype 3 (90.9, 93.5, 100%); 6 (50.0, 34.8, 96.7%); 9 (36.9, 86.2, 93.8%); 14 (38.9, 48.6, 94.4%); 19 (60.9, 44.8, 97.7%); 23 (58.9, 49.2, 99.2%).
The MIC 90 to cefditoren was ≤0.03 (serotype 3); 0.5 (serotype 6, 9 and 19) and 1 mg/l (serotype 14 and 23).

Conclusions: The most prevalent serotype was 23. The susceptibility was higher in serotype 3 than in serotypes 14 and 23. 
 
Community acquired pneumonia—a study among closed military community of young people
 
PS235
 Martynova AV, Turkutyukov VB, Vostrikova AA, Andryukov BG. Vladivostok State Medical University, Epidemiology, Vladivostok, Russian Federation
 

Purpose: The etiology of pneumonia is still partly unknown. We should like to clear up an etiological role of respiratory pathogens in community-acquired pneumonia among youth. And we had chosen for it a model of a closed community both investigation of etiology of disease and for further investigation of mechanisms of transmission drug-resistant mechanisms. Methods: We studied 300 adults in age of 17–25 from closed military collectives who presented to two public hospitals (one urban and one rural) with acute radiologically confirmed pneumonia during winter 2000–2001. We did blood and lung-aspirate cultures, mycobacterial cultures, serotype-specific pneumococcal antigen detection, and serology for viral and atypical agents. Results:
Streptococcus pneumoniae is recognized as an important cause of community-acquired pneumonia, it probably accounts for 65% of cases of community-acquired pneumonia among youth. Chlamydia pneumoniae and Mycoplasma pneumoniae responsible for approximately 20% of cases. Haemophilus influenzae caused 7.5% sever cases of disease, 3% of all cases were due to Moraxella catharralis. Conclusion: Pneumococcial infection accounted for 65% of the cases diagnosed. S. pneumoniae was the most common bacterial infective agent, with a low incidence of both M. pneumoniae and S. pneumoniae. Other causative pathogens occurred only within groups of individuals with deficiency of immunological status. 
 
Nasopharyngeal colonization by
Streptococcus pneumoniae
(SP) in children with acute bacterial infections
 
PS236
 Berezin ENa, Cardenuto MDa, Nobuko Eb, Guerra MLc, Brandileone MCd. a
Santa Casa, Pediatrics, S. Paulo, Brazil, b
Santa Casa, Microbiology, S. Paulo, Brazil, c
Adolfo Lutz, Microbiology, S. Paulo, Brazil, d
Adolfo Lutz, Bacteriology, S. Paulo, Brazil
 

To determine antimicrobial susceptibility of SP isolated from the upper respiratory tract, we collected NP swab specimens from 80 children, between 3 months and 5 years old. Those children attended the outpatient clinic in S. Paulo City, with diagnosis of bacterial infection requiring antibiotic therapy between March 15, 2000 to May 20, 2001. Penicillin susceptibility of isolates was determined by screening with oxacillin 1 mcg disk and performing the minimal inhibitory concentration by the E-test. We performed also susceptibility test for amoxicillin and cefaclor. Results: SP was recovered from NP of 42 children (52.5%). The carriage of SP was more prevalent in children attending day care centers, children with young siblings at home, and children with tobacco users at home. The prevalence of penicillin non-susceptible strains was 40.4% all of them with intermediate resistance. All the strains were susceptible to amoxicillin and 19.2% were resistant to cefaclor. Serotypes 14.6B, 19F, 9N, 4, 6A and 5 were the most common. These findings suggest that nasopharyngeal isolates of Streptococcus pneumoniae from children with upper respiratory infections can be used to conduct surveillance for antimicrobial resistance in a defined geographic area. We were able to conclude also that penicillin intermediate resistent strains can be susceptible to amoxicillin. 
 
Streptococcus pneumoniae:
2 years of epidemiological surveillance in Monterrey, Mexico
 
PS237
 Hinojosa RMa, Saenz Aa, Collazo Ma, Echaniz Gb. a
Universidad Autonoma de Nuevo Leon, Infectologia, Monterrey, Mexico, b
Instituto Nacional de Salud Publica, Epidemiologia, Cuernavaca, Mexico
 

The emergence of penicillin- and multidrug-resistant pneumococcal strains has become a global concern, necessitating the identification of the epidemiological spread of such strains. Material: Ninety Streptococcus pneumoniae clinical isolates were collected from March 1997 through March 1999. Typing was done by the capsular reaction with pooled, type, or group antisera. Susceptibility testing to 11 antimicrobials was done by the E-Test and the disk diffusion method. Results: Only 46 (51%) S. pneumoniae strains were classified by serotyping; the most frequent types were 6A/B, 23F, 9V, 19F and 4. The Oxacillin screening test detected 37.2% penicillin-resistant S. pneumoniae strains isolated from children and 44.6% from adults. The susceptibility percentage of S. pneumoniae to Ceftriaxone was 93% in both children and adults. S. pneumoniae isolates from children exhibit a susceptibility of 88% to Azithromycin, while in adults 91% of the isolates were susceptible. For the rest of the antimicrobial agents, the susceptibility ranged from 69 to 89%. S. pneumoniae had a lower susceptibility to ceftazidime and ciprofloxacin. Conclusions: Ceftriaxone and Azithromycin had a good in-vitro activity against S. pneumoniae strains. But the percentage of penicillin-resistant S. pneumoniae detected in this study is alarming, therefore we conclude that a continuous surveillance system is necessary in Mexico. 
 
Prognostically unfavourable factors in patients with ambulant pneumonia
 
PS238
 Vertkine AL, Prokhorovitch EA, Alexanyan LA. Department of Clinical Pharmacology and Internal Medicine, Moscow State Medico-Stomatological University, Moscow, Russian Federation
 

A retrospective analyses of 221 cases of ambulant pneumonia with fatal outcome was made. Among the patients who died from ambulant pneumonia the prevailing age was over 60 (63.8%) and the prevailing sex was male (68.8%). 95.9% had pneumonia accompanied with some pathology: chronic lung disease (43.9%), alcoholism (26.2%), diabetes mellitus (10.4%). 62.5% of the patients had a big volume of lungs lesion—55.7% of the patients suffered from bilobular pneumonia and 6.8%—from trilobate pneumonia. In 57.0% of the cases pneumonia was complicated with abscess formation and/or exudative pleurisy. We studied the antibiotics therapy used for the patients treatment. The change of antibiotics was made only in 53 cases (24.0%) whereas in the other cases no change of preparations was made though the signs of the therapy non-effectiveness were obvious. Thus, the rational antibiotics therapy with the timely change of non-effective antibacterial drug is significantly important. While choosing the antibiotics, the patient's age, the accompanying diseases, the volume of the lungs lesion and complications which define pneumonia seriousness are to be taken into consideration. 
 
Survey on the perception, attitudes and knowledge of general practitioners concerning lower respiratory tract infections in adults
 
PS239
 Perronne Ca, Rouveix Bb, Guillemot Dc, Zuck Pd, Reitz Ce, Tsatsaris Ae. a
Hôpital Raymond Poincaré, Service de Maladies Infectieuses, Garches, France, b
Hôpital Cochin, Paris, France, c
Institut Pasteur, Paris, France, d
Hôpital de Metz, Metz, France, e
Laboratoires Abbott, Rungis, France
 

Objectives: To describe the management of lower respiratory tract infections (LRTI) in healthy adults, by general practitioners (GP). Methods: A questionnaire was sent to a representative national sample of 4092 GPs. This questionnaire assessed their perception and management of LRTI, the indication for antibiotics (AB) in a case of LRTI in a healthy adult with no focal signs and no signs of severity, knowledge of the micro-organisms responsible for acute bronchitis and knowledge of the AFSSAPS (French Agency for the Safety of Health Products) recommendations. Results: Three thousand seven hundred and thirty-eight GPs, who reported seeing an average of 131 patients per week, including 10.3±9.6 patients with LRTI, returned the questionnaire. The main results are presented in the following table.
 
 *several possible replies. 
Conclusions: For the majority of GPs, the main objective of the visit is to determine the indication for antibiotics. According to GPs, ALP and whooping cough are rare, while atypical pneumonia is frequent. GPs also declare that the diagnosis of ALP is often easy right from the first visit, in contrast with that of atypical pneumonia. Complementary investigations are not often requested. GPs consider that they often delay prescription of antibiotics (41%) and declare that they tend to prescribe a macrolide as first-line treatment. Finally, GPs have a poor knowledge concerning the micro-organisms responsible for acute bronchitis and the majority of GPs declare to be familiar with AFSSAPS recommendations. 
 
Epidemiological survey on the general practice management of lower respiratory tract infections in healthy adults
 
PS240
 Perronne Ca, Rouveix Bb, Guillemot Dc, Zuck Pd, Reitz Ce, Tsatsaris Ae. a
Hôpital Raymond Poincaré, Service de Maladies Infectieuses, Garches, France, b
Hôpital Cochin, Paris, France, c
Institut Pasteur, Paris, France, d
Hôpital de Metz, Metz, France, e
Laboratoires Abbott, Rungis, France
 

Objectives: To study the management of one case of lower respiratory tract infection (LRTI) in adults by general practitioners (GPs). Methods: Prospective study conducted on a representative national sample of 4092 GPs. Each GP had to include the first healthy adult patient seen during the 3-week data collection period, either on a home visit or in the office for recent cough and acute fever >37.8 °C. Clinical data, the diagnostic perception and the therapeutic approach to the patient were collected by means of a standardised questionnaire, distributed by Abbott laboratories. Results: Three thousand seven hundred and thirty-eight general practitioners included 3738 patients.
 
Conclusions: During LRTI in adults, GPs observe few focal signs, confirming the marked predominance of bronchitis compared to pneumonia. In view of the frequency of the signs, the diagnosis of pneumonia appears to be overestimated. One-third of clinical situations were diagnosed as ‘bacterial superinfection of acute bronchitis’, despite it is not a recognised diagnostic entity. Antibiotic prescription was immediate in 87% of cases and delayed in 10% of cases. This last point shows that clinical practice differs from the GP's perception of their described prescribing practice shown in a simultaneous survey (56% of GPs declared that they prescribed antibiotics immediately, while 41% delayed this prescription). 
 
Characteristics of severe community acquired pneumonia in a Greek intensive care unit
 
PS241
 Daganou M, Ktena M, Pavlou M, Kandili K, Nikolopoulos J, Kythreotis P, Rasidakis A. Kaa Department of Respiratory Failure and ICU, Sotiria General and Chest Disease Hospital, Athens, Greece
 

Purpose: To determine the characteristics of severe CAP in a Greek ICU. Results: Thirty-three patients (20 men, mean age 49 b 19 years, mean APACHE II score 15.3 &bdqup;b 7.3) during the years 1998–2001 were prospectively studied. Thirteen patients (39%) had no identifiable risk factor for severe CAP. An etiologic factor was revealed in 15 patients (45%). In 14 of them this was achieved with noninvasive methods. PSB cultures were taken from eight patients and were positive in only 1. The offending organisms included: Streptococcus pneumoniae in six cases, GNB as the sole pathogen in six cases, Haemophilus influenzae (with S. pneumoniae or Klebsialla pneumoniae) in two cases, S. aureusin two and Legionella pneumophila in one patient. Initial antibiotic regimen a combination of marcodile +3rd gen cephalosporin±aminoglycoside was successful in 12 patients who all survived and had to be changed empirically or according to culture results in 17 patients who had a mortality of 65%. The overall mortality rate was 42%. The identification of the causative factor did not seem to have any impact on survival. Conclusion: Severe CAP in our ICU was most often caused by S. pneumoniae and GBN. The high mortality of this entity seems to be influenced by the immediate use of the appropriate antibiotic combination and not by the identification of the causative organism. This underscores the need for knowledge of topical microbiology which helps in designing an effective empirical initial antibiotic regimen. 
 
Patterns and predictors of antibiotic usage during hospital pneumonia management in a region of Belarus
 
PS242
 Mily MNa, Golubev SAb, Lugovoy VYa, Voronov GGb. a
Vitebsk Emergency Hospital, Pharmacotherapy unit, Vitebsk, Belarus, b
Basic and Clinical Pharmacology Department, Vitebsk State Medical University, Vitebsk, Belarus
 

Purpose: The study aims were to assess the spectrum and predictors of the antibiotic use during pneumonia management in a regional emergency hospital in Belarus. Patients, treatment and physicians characteristics of 195 cases (2000–2001) were collected and possible associations were examined with using defined daily doses methodology (DDD) and American Thoracic Society (ATS) guidelines. Results: The mean treatment duration was 13.9±7.4 days, the total antibiotic DDD/100 bed-days was 130.4. The DDD/100 bed-days of the most used antibiotics were: penicillins 54.0; aminoglycosides 29.5; macrolides 21.9; cephalosporins 9.8; tetracyclines 8.2. In MANOVA certain ATS categories were associated with DDD/day, but not with frequency of definite antibiotic use. DDD/day was higher in case of multilobar infiltrates (1.62±0.55 vs. 1.3±0.44; P<0.01) and severe pneumonia signs (1.74±0.68 vs. 1.27±0.39; P<0.01). Higher DDD/patient associated with age over 65 (22.9±14.2 vs. 18.4±11.1; P<0.05) and male gender (20.9±13.1 vs. 16.6±9.0; P<0.05), with only gender significance in MANOVA. In ANOVA physicians personality significantly influenced on DDD/patient. Conclusion: Our study indicated the low rate of macrolides and cephalosporins using, and the high one of aminoglycosides. Antibiotic prescriptions were associated with disease severity and physician personality rather then with empirical choice rules recommended. 
 
Acute exacerbation of COPD: most frequent infecting agents and their suspectability to the different types of penicillins. Analysis of medical documentation
 
PS243
 Pertseva TO, Bogatska KE, Gashynova KY. DSMA, Internal Medicine , Dniepropetrovsk, Ukraine
 

Number of COPD cases has been increased in Ukraine. Treatment of acute exacerbation (AE) of COPD is not always successful because of inadequate antibiotic therapy. The aim of study was to reveal most frequent infecting agents and their susceptibility to the different types of penicillins in patients with AE of COPD. Medical documentation of 48 patients with AE of COPD (type I) was studied. Data of sputum analysis and susceptibility of isolated agents to penicillin, ampicillin, oxacillin and amoxicillin/clavulone acid were evaluated. There were patients with Haemophilus influencae/parainfluencae (43.8%), Klebsiella pneumoniae (25%), Staphylococcus aureus (12.5%), Pseudomonas fluorescens, Pseudomonas putida, Serratia marcescens, Serratia liquefaciens (6.8% each), Streptococcus agalactiae, Acinetobacter baumanii (4.1% each) in samples of sputum. In 31.3% cases there was mixt infection. 6.8% had no any bacterial agents. Only 10% of agents were susceptible to penicillin, 35%—to ampicillin, 15%—to oxacillin. However, 70% of microorganisms were susceptible to amoxicillin combined with clavulone acid. This study has shown that most frequent infecting agents caused AE of COPD were Gram-negative microorganisms and S. aureus. According to antibiogram the prescription of amoxicillin/clavulone acid is most expedient in this case. 
 
Efficacy and safety of azithromycin (sunamed) in treatment of acute exacerbation of chronic obstructive bronchitis
 
PS244
 Pertseva TO, Bogatska KE, Konopkina LI, Kireeva TV, Gashynova KY. DSMA, Internal Medicine Department, Dniepropetrovsk, Ukraine
 

We examined 32 patients (22 men, mean age 52.3±4.7 years) with acute exacerbation of COB (type I). The most frequently isolated agents were Haemophilus influenzae and parainfluenzae—eight patients, Gram-negative rods in 8, Staphylococcus aureus in two and mixed in six and one patient had no bacterial agents isolated in their sputum. High susceptibility to azithromycin was found in all cases of Gram-positive agents and in H. influenzae and parainfluenzae. Other Gram-negative agents were resistant to this drug in vitro. However, treatment with 500 mg/day during 3 days was clinically effective in 93.7% of cases. Only 25.0% of patients had a further acute exacerbation of COB. There were peculiarities of the infecting agents causing acute exacerbation of COB in this study: Klebsiella pneumoniae and S. aureus were found more frequently than in other studies. High efficacy of surnamed in the treatment of acute exacerbation of COB was established in 68.7%. 25.0% had partial positive clinical effect after this therapy. There were no patients with adverse events. 
 
Efficacy and tolerance of amoxicillin 30 mg/kg bid versus amoxicillin 15 mg/kg tid in the treatment of acute otitis media (AOM) in children ≤2 years
 
PS245
 Borek Ma, Guggenbichler JPb. a
Biochemie GmbH, International Medical Department, Kundl, Austria, b
Department of Pediatrics, University of Erlangen, Erlangen, Germany
 

Five hundred and sixteen patients (mean age 4±2.6 years) with clinical and otoscopic diagnosis of AOM were included in a randomized, double blind, multicentre study, and were treated 10 days either with AMOX 30 mg/kg bid or AMOX 15 mg/kg tid. Assessments were made during therapy (day 3–5), after End of Therapy (EOT, day 12–14) and Follow Up (FU, day 38–46). The primary efficacy endpoint was the clinical response at EOT defined as success (cure/improvement) or failure.
 Both regimens were well tolerated; one or more drug-related adverse events (AEs) were reported in 17.2% (11/64) of bid patients and in 21.7% (13/60) of tid patients. The most frequently reported drug-related AEs in each group were gastrointestinal symptoms (bid 11.5% vs. tid 13.5%), which were mainly of mild or moderate severity. Both regimens were clinically equivalent. The higher cure rates in the bid group suggest a possible higher benefit from bid therapy in children ≤2 years. 
 
Influence of child care on Nasopharyngeal (NP) carriage of
Streptococcus pneumoniae
(SP) and
Hemophilus infuenzae
(HI) and antibiotic use
 
PS246
 Dunais B, Carsenti H, Pradier C, Fontas E, Martin C, Develey B, Dellamonica P. Infectious Diseases Department, Nice University Hospital, Nice, France
 

Children attending family day-care (FDC) should be less exposed to upper respiratory tract infections than those in group day-care (GDC) and therefore to antibiotic treatment; fewer should thus carry resistant bacteria. To test this hypothesis, NP carriage of SP and HI with reduced susceptibility to penicillin (PDSP and HI BL+, respectively) was investigated among children in FDC (maximum three children) and in GDC (25–100 children) in the Alpes Maritimes (France) between November 1999 and March 2000. A two stage cluster sample of children attending GDC or FDC was selected. NP samples were cultured for SP and HI. Penicillin susceptibility was tested by disk diffusion and E-test, and β-lactamase production by API-NH® tests (BioMerieux, Lyon). Two hundred and thirty-five children in FDC and 298 in GDC aged 6–36 months were sampled. Age and sex distribution were similar in both groups. SP was isolated in 80 children in FDC (34%), and in 163 (54.7%) children in GDC (P<10–6 ). Proportions of PDSP were 52.5 and 55.8%, respectively (P=0.6). HI was present in 37.6% of children in GDC vs. 23.8% in FDC (P<0.001). Proportions of HI BL+ were 40.2% vs. 46.4%, respectively (P=0.4). Antibiotic exposure during the previous 3 months concerned 46.2% of children in GDC vs. 48.7% in FDC (P=0.6). There was no correlation between antibiotic use and carriage of PDSP or HI B+ strains. SP and HI carriage rates are significantly lower among children in FDC than in GDC. Advising alternative types of day-care for children attending GDC should reduce exposure and thus limit the spread of resistant bacteria. However, the proportion of PDSP and HI BL+ is similar in both groups and comparable patterns of antibiotic use are observed. Continued efforts must concentrate on parental education and enforcement of recommendations for management of pediatric upper respiratory tract infections. 
 
Invasive
Haemophilus influenzae
isolates in Tunis: antibiotic susceptibility, serotype and biotype
 
PS247
 Smaoui Ha, Thabet La, Kaabachi Ob, Kechrid Aa. a
Hopital d'Enfants de Tunis, Lab de Bacteriologie, Tunis, Tunisia, b
Hopital d'Enfants de Tunis, Service d'Orthopedie, Tunis, Tunisia
 

During a period between January 1999 and August 2001, 43 invasive Haemophilus influenzae (Hi) isolates had been collected at the Children's Hospital of Tunis. We used Haemophilus Test Medium to test antibiotic susceptibility. The MIC of beta-lactams was measured by E-test. Beta-lactamase production was determined by using the cefinase test and biotyping by ApiNH. Presence of capsular antigen was determined by using Hi typing anti sera. Hi strains were isolated from meningitidis (35), bacteremia (5) and arthritis (3). All strains were serotype b and 62.2% of them belonged to biotypes I and II. Amoxicillin resistance with beta-lactamase producing mechanism occured in 34.8%. MIC90 of beta-lactamase producing strains was 32 vs 0.5 mg/l in non-producing one. There is no betalactamase-negative amoxicillin resistant among these invasive isolates. Antibiotic resistance concerned chloramphenicol: 9.3%, trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole: 11.6%, tetracycline: 4.6% and kanamycin: 11.6%. Invasive Hi infections in tunisian children's were always associated with type b strains. Introduction of a Hib vaccine programme in Tunisia is recommended. 
 
Analysis of the clinical course and effects of treatment of neuroborreliosis in children
 
PS248
 Wozniakowska-Gesicka Teresa T, Andrzejewski A, Wisniewksa-Ligier Malgorzata M, Al-Batool Khalid K. Polish Mother's Memorial Institute, III Department of Pediatrics, Lodz, Poland
 

The aim of this study was to analyse the clinical picture and treatment of neurological manifestations of neuroborreliosis in children. The study included 22 children (2–16 years) with neuroborreliosis diagnosed on the basis of the clinical and serologic criteria. Symptoms of facial palsy occurred in six children symptoms of III–VI cranial nerves palsy in three children, meningitis in four and paresthesias in three. Symptoms of V or VIII nerve palsy, mental disturbances, radiculoneuritis or cerebellitis were found in singular cases. All children received ceftriaxone intravenously 3–4 weeks. Total recovery was obtained in 18 children following the first course of therapy. Recovery following the second course of therapy (amoxicillin) occurred in one child with mental disorders and one with VI nerve palsy. Improvement was achieved after the second course in the patient with radiculitis, however, muscular atrophy persisted. Irreversible, unilateral deafness was found in a child with VIII nerve palsy in spite of three courses of therapy applied. Infection with Borrelia burgdorferi in children causes a wide spectrum of neurological manifestations. Facial palsy was the most common sign in our study. Applying ceftriaxone in the treatment of neuroborreliosis is characterised by a good effectiveness. 
 
Double infection by
C. pneumoniae
and
M. pneumoniae
as a cause of cystic changes in the lungs
 
PS249
 Streharova A, Moravcikova D. Department of Infectious Diseases, University of Trnava, TRNAVA, Slovakia
 

Chlamydia pneumoniae and Mycoplasma pneumoniae are human respiratory pathogens manifested in early childhood. Immunological disbalance could trigger autoaggressive diseases. The authors describe the case of a15-year-old girl with development of multiorgan failure and septic state, which followed multiple cystic changes in the lungs. The girl did not have a diagnosis of cystic fibrosis. The authors consider that cystic changes are a consequence of double infection by C. and M. pneumoniae.
 
 
‘Baby-friendly’ hospital initiative and decreasing of neonatal infections
 
PS250
 Dzarlieva M, Momeva L, Temelkovska G, Balevska P, Pejkovska M. Medical centre, Neonatology, Bitola, The Former Yugoslav Republic, Macedonia
 

UNICEF Skopje has supported a nationwide Safe Motherhood Needs Assessment in representative samples of hospitals. Eighteen of 28 maternity wards and facilities renovated and certified as ‘baby-friendly’. All mature newborns with successful adaptation to extra uterine life and satisfactory vital parameters are 24 h during the day with their mothers at rooming-in system. Aim: With rooming-in system we reached decreasing of incidence of neonatal infections. Material and methods: History records of newborns from our department. For the period of 9 months, 907 neonates have been borne. With suspection of infection there—49 babies (5.4%). Newborns borne through meconium stained liquid—40 (4.4%). Results: Microbiological findings: from blood culture—Staphylococcus coagulaza negative from swabs—Staphylococcus aureus, Escherichia coli, Staphylococcus epidermidis.
Conclusion: In 1999, from all babies who had risk factors for infection in 56 newborns (5%) we had positive findings and in year 2000 (before rooming-in sistem), in 44 (3.9%). After that period (with rooming-in) 15 newborns (1.5%). With rooming-in system we reached decreasing in incidence of neonatal infections by breaking the chain of infection—only mothers take care of their babies with help of the staff. Newborns are in their micro environment, the same they will have at their home. With this practice we have also reduction of nosocomial infections. 
 
A study on antibiotic susceptibility and resistance factor transmissibility among antibiotic resistant salmonellae isolated from children affected to diarrhea
 
PS251
 Sharifzadeh A. Azad University of Shahrekord, Microbiology, Shahrekord, Islamic Republic of Iran
 

In spite of happened drug resistance, antibacterial therapy still is the best route of treatment of Salmonellosis in man and animals. In order to detection of dominants serotypes of salmonellae in children and detection of antibiotic susceptibility and R-factor transmissibility among those isolated salmonellae. This study was conducted on 400 diarrheic stool samples were collected from children affected by diarrhea in Ayatollah Kashany hospital of Shahrekord, during Spring of 1999 to Autumn of 2000. After isolation and identification of salmonellae, seven serotypes were detected. One of those was S. typhi and another six serotypes were S. paratyphi B. In order to detection of antibiotic different antibiotic disks were used in disk diffusion method. Best results were taken from Ceftizoxim, Cephtriaxon, Cephazolin and Chloramphenichol. The R-factor were transferred from isolated salmonellae to Escherichia coli K12 in all of cases of resistance to Penicillin and Ampicillin. 
 
Macrolides in infancy—comparative characteristic of their clinical efficacy
 
PS252
 Samsygina GA, Ochlopkova KA. Russian State Medical University, Children Diseases, Moscow, Russian Federation
 

Serologic studies performed in 1999–2000 showed that Mycoplasma pneumoniae, Chlamydia pneumoniae and C. trachomatis were causes of bronchitis and pneumonia at least in 37.9% of cases in children under 4 years old with acute low respiratory tract infection. A comparative study of clarithromycin, spiramycin, midecamycin and azithromycin clinical efficacy was performed during the therapy of 98 children 2 months–4 years old. Groups of patients were comparable in age, gender and clinical characteristics of disease. Rate of excellent and good results was 82.1% in group treated by clarithromycin, 94.5% in group treated by spiramycin, 61.4% in group treated by midecamycin and 96.0% in group treated by azithromycin. The rate of side effects in most groups was similar—about 4%. But the group treated by midecamycin showed allergic reactions (15.4%), diarrhoea (15.4%), and rate of liver enlargement in 7.6% of cases. 
 
Colonization by
Streptococcus pneumoniae
and group
A Beta haemolytic streptococci
in school-children in Riyadh, Saudi Arabia
 
PS253
 Al-Hajjar Sa, Al-Jumaah Sa, Trazi Wb, Tufenkeji Ha, Frayha HHa, DeVol Ec, Al-Kurnas Ac, Al-Swail Sd, Al-Shahri Sd. a
King Faisal Specialist Hospital and Research Centre, Pediatrics, Riyadh, Saudi Arabia, b
Maternity and Children's Hospital, Pediatrics, Riyadh, Saudi Arabia, c
King Faisal Specialist Hospital and Research Centre, Research Centre, Riyadh, Saudi Arabia, d
School Board, Education, Riyadh, Saudi Arabia
 

Pharyngeal colonization by Streptococcus pneumoniae and group A BHS were evaluated in 652 randomly selected school children aged 6–8 years in Riyadh, Saudi Arabia. Fifty-six children (8.6%) had positive culture for either organisms of the 56 isolates from school children, 17 (30%) were S. pneumoniae, of them 14 (82%) were penicillin-sensitive, three (18%) were penicillin-resistant, and two (11.7%) were resistant to two antimicrobials. Forty isolates of BHS (71%) were group A BHS. All isolates were penicillin and erythromycin sensitive. The carrier rate among school children for penicillin-resistance S. pneumoniae and resistance to two antimicrobials were (4.6%) and (3%), respectively. The carrier rate of group A BHS was (6.1%). Riyadh has a low rate of antibiotic-resistant S. pneumoniae and a similar rate of group A BHS carriers among school children as that seen in temperate areas. 
 
No A
Streptococcus
β -hemolytic isolated from Pharyngeal isolates in acute Pharyngitis: about 21 strains collected in the Tunisisan center
 
PS254
 Boukadida Ja, Boukadida Nb, Hannechi Na, Said Hb, Erraii Sa, Elmhabrech Ha. a
CHU F. HACHED, Laboratoire de Microbiologie, Sousse, Tunisia, b
C S Base, Sousse, Tunisia
 

The acute pharyngitis is a very frequent pathology in which Group A Streptococcus is the most incriminated bacteria. However, other non A β-haemolytic Streptococcus (SBNA) could be responsible. The aim of this work is to determine the part of each non A β hemolytic streptococci (SBNA) in acute pharyngitis and the related antibiotics susceptibility pattern. The study was realized in Sousse-Tunisia (north Africa) during 5 months from May 2001. The origin materials of isolates are throat swab (Transystem Venturi, Copan, Bovezzo). The mean age of patients is 23 years with extremes 3–72 years. The samples are cultured on blood agar plates in a delay of 3 h maximum. Identification was done to samples that have over than 20 β-hemolytic colonies, groupage with pastorex STREP. Sanofi Pasteur France, Susceptibility pattern according to NCCLS norms, MIC is determined by E-test. The control strain is S. pneumoniae ATCC 49619. Twenty-one clinical isolates of SBNA are distinguished from 80 clinical isolates of β-hemolytic streptococci recovered from 143 patients with acute pharyngitis without symptoms of viruses' infections (tearing, corysa, sneeze). All β-hemolytic Streptococcus represents 55.94% of all collected samples. SBNA were 26.25% of the isolates. SBNA were 11 strains Group G streptococci, seven strains Group C streptococci and three strains Group F streptococci. Susceptibility pattern of each SBNA to antimicrobial agents is as follow: Group G streptococci: Peni G=100%, Amoxicillin =100%, Pristinamycin 100%, Clindamycin and Erythromycin=45.46%, Tetracyclin=9.1%, Telithromycin 63.63% and Levofloxacin=45.45%. Group C streptococci: Peni G=100%, Amoxicillin =100%, Pristinamycin 100%, Clindamycin=57.15%, Erythromycin=42.86%, Tetracyclin=71.42%, Telithromycin=85.72%, Levofloxacin=100%. Group F streptococci-Peni G=100%, Amoxicillin=100%, Clindamycin=66.66%, Erythro=33.34%, Tetracyclin=66.66%, Telithromycin=100%, Levofloxacin=66.66%. All SBNA have MIC to Penicillin G under 0.1 mg/l. According to available data, Penicillin G and Amoxicillin still the reference treatment of acute bacterial pharyngitis in spite of the new antibiotics introduction. 
 
Comparison of cefaclor and amoxicillin in the treatment of pediatric
Streptococcal tonsillopharyngitis
in S. Paulo (Brasil)
 
PS255
 Berezin ENa, Quevedo SGb, Nicolla Lb, Viegas Dc, Eizenberg Bd, Pedrosa Fb, Santos AGa. a
Santa Casa, Pediatrics, S. Paulo, Brazil, b
Elly Lilly, Scientific, S. Paulo, Brazil, c
FAC. ABC, Pediatrics, Santo Andre, Brazil, d
University Hospital, Pediatrics, S. Paulo, Brazil
 

A multicenter, open label, prospective, randomized trial in which patients 2–16 years of age with proven GABHS pharyngitis were randomized to receive either 10-day course of the broad spectrum oral cephalosporin, cefaclor or a 10-day course of amoxicillin. Patients were included if they have signs and symptoms of Streptococcal tonsillopharyngitis and a rapid streptococcal rapid test positive . Patients were evaluated at days 3–5, 13–16 and 24–35 posttherapy. Pharyngeal cultures were conducted at baseline and at follow-up visit (13–16 days). We considered for bacteriologic eradication analysis only patients with positive culture to GABHS. There were 148 patients with a rapid streptococcal rapid test. Clinical success were achieved in around 95% of the patients. For evaluate eradication of the initial pathogen we considered 42 patients of the amoxil arm and 40 patients of the cefaclor arm. Thirty-four of 42 patients of the amoxil arm (80.9%) and 36 of 40 (90%) patients of the cefaclor arm were considered bacteriological cured at the second culture performed at day 13–16. Ten days of a penicillin or amoxicillin therapy may not be the best therapeutic choice for all pediatric patients. In developing countries where rheumatic fever is still an important problem to evaluate the bacterial eradication achieved with the different antibiotics may be important. 
 
Prophylactic affect of
Saccharomyces boulardii
for antibiotic-associated diarrhea in a paediatric age group
 
PS256
 Erdeve O, Tiras U, Camurdan MO, Tanyer G, Dallar Y. Ankara Education and Research Hospital, Pediatrics, Ankara, Turkey
 

The process resulting in antibiotic associated diarrhea is the alteration of enteric flora due to bacteria. Saccharomyces boulardii is a yeast, isolated from cover of a kind of hazelnut and its usage became widespread recently. There is no enough study about S. boulardii activity at pediatric ages. We aimed to define S. boulardii activity on azithromycin and sulbactam-ampiciline, and associated diarrhea at pediatric age group. The 18.9% of cases only with antibiotic usage developed diarrhea, whereas rate was 5.7% for probiotic using group (P<0.05). All of the Clostridium difficile toxin A defined cases were from sulbactam-ampiciline using group. The rate of diarrhea for sulbactam-ampiciline using group was 25.6%, while it was 5.9% for group used S. boulardii as probiotic beside sulbactam-ampiciline (P<0.05). It was observed that probiotic usage decreases diarrhea rate four times (P<0.05). When age groups considered, the rate of sulbactam-ampiciline associated diarrhea increased at 1–5 ages and S. boulardii effect on preventing diarrhea was significant at 1–12 ages (P<0.05). Antibiotic associated diarrhea is a common clinical problem at pediatric age group. S. boulardii is a hope giving probiotic especially for sulbactam-ampiciline associated diarrhea. 
 
Infections in neonates of mothers with a past history of abortion
 
PS257
 Grey Ea
 Bilikova Ea, Hafed BMa, Kovacicova Ga, Chovancova Db, Huttova Mb, Krcmery Va. a
School of Health, Trnava University, Trnava, Slovakia, b
Postgraduate Academy of Medicine, Neonatal Clinic, Bratislava, Slovakia
 

The purpose of the study: The aim of the study was to find out, whether artificial abortion of a mother has impact on neonatal infection of her future baby.

The results obtained: Therefore, we compared 39 neonates with infection, who were born to mothers with past history of abortion (1–7 artificial abortions within 10 years), with the babies of mothers, who have not experienced abortion before. Control group consisted of 207 neonates hospitalized at the same clinic, at the same time period. According to the analysis of risk factors for neonatal infections, it was found, that prematurity (28–32 weeks of gestation) (30.77 vs. 14.01%, P 0.019) and low birth weight-1500–2500 g (58.97 vs. 39.13%, P 0.03) were significantly more frequently observed in babies of mothers with past history of abortion. Drug abuse (heroin) (12.82 vs. 1.45%, P 0.003) and nicotine use (15.38 vs. 2.42%, P 0.0027), were more significantly related to neonatal infections in babies of mothers with past history of abortion. Etiological analysis showed that only Candida albicans (5.13 vs. 0%, P 0.024) was significantly related to neonatal infections in mothers with past history of abortion.

The conclusion reached: In conclusion, artificial abortion has not only direct impact to the health of the mother, but also on her next pregnancy. 
 
Bacteraemia and patient mortality in a peadiatric intensive care unit
 
PS258
 Armenian SH, Singh J, Arrieta AC. Children's Hospital of Orange County, Infectious Disease, Orange, USA
 

Purpose: This study will identify the factors that significantly contribute to mortality in patients with bloodstream infections (BSI) at a pediatric intensive care unit (PICU). Results: Medical records of 63 patients who were admitted to the PICU and had a documented BSI were reviewed. There were 74 separate episodes of BSI's, with nine patients having multiple BSI's during their hospital stay. A case-control model was used. Cases were BSI's with eventual mortality (N=27; 36.5%) and controls were those who survived BSI (N=47; 63.5%). Patients who died were older (5.7 vs. 2.4 years; P<0.01), more likely to have a nosocomial BSI (42.9 vs. 16.7%; P<0.05), longer hospitalization prior to BSI (30.5 vs. 9.8 days; P<0.05), and have a polymicrobial BSI (66.7 vs. 30.6%; P<0.05). Infection related mortality (IRM)-defined as death within 7 days of BSI—was significantly higher in those receiving inadequate antibiotic treatment at the time of diagnosis of BSI (54.5 vs. 12.7%; P<0.01), as well as in those with gram negative bacteremia and/or fungemia (35 vs. 13%; P<0.05). Logistic regression was used to adjust for potential confounding variables. Conclusions: We found that being older, multiple organisms, and a longer hospitalization prior to the BSI were significantly associated with overall patient mortality. IRM was significantly higher for those with inadequate initial antibiotic coverage and in those with gram negative bacteremia and/or fungemia. 
 
Teicoplanin treatment for serious Gram-positive infections in children
 
PS259
 Somer Aa, Gür Da, Diri Sa, Yalcýn Ia, Salman Na, Ongen Bb, Gürler Nb. a
Department of Pediatric Infectious Diseases, Istanbul University Istanbul Medical Faculty, Istanbul, Turkey, b
Department of Microbiology and Clinical Microbiology, Istanbul University Istanbul Medical Faculty, Istanbul, Turkey
 

Teicoplanin is a glycopeptide antibiotic active against a broad range of Gram-positive pathogens including methicillin-resistant staphylococci and offers the advantages of once daily administration, choice of administration route, lack of requirement for routine therapeutic drug monitoring and lower propensity to cause nephrotoxiticy and anaphylactoid-like reactions. In this study the efficacy and safety of teicoplanin were evaluated retrospectively in children with serious bacterial infection.
Sixty-three children (18 girls, 45 boys) aged between 1 month and 15 years were treated with teicoplanin (three loading dosages of 10 mg/kg at 12 h intervals, followed by a maintenance dosage of 10 mg/kg/day). The infections treated were pleural empyema (n=25), joint and bone infections (n=22), septicemia (n=9), skin and soft tissue infections (n=4), and lung abscess (n=3). The pathogens isolated were Staphylococcus aureus (n=30, 16 of which were methicillin resistant), coagulase-negative staphylococci (n=4), S. pneumoniae (n=4), and Group A hemolytic streptococci (n=2). The duration of therapy ranged from 14 to 81 days (median 28 days). Clinical success (cure plus improvement) was achieved in 96.8% of cases. No side effects attributable to teicoplanin therapy were encountered.
Teicoplanin appears to be an effective and well-tolerated treatment for serious Gram-positive infections in children. 
 
The treatment of febrile neutropenia (FN) in children with Acute Lymphoblastic Leukaemia (ALL) and Acute Myeloblastic Leukaemia (AML)
 
PS260
 Ivanova LF, Dmitrieva NV, Bagirova NS, Durnov LA. N.N Blokhin Cancer Research Center of Russia, Moscow, Russian Federation
 

The risk of infection is present in all children with acute leukemia. Two hundred and sixty episodes of febrile neutropenia were analyzed in 149 children (aged 1.5–16 years) with AML—43 cases and ALL—106 cases over 10 years during cytostatic therapy (protocols: mBFM—87 AML and mBFM—90 ALL). A degree of FN occurred in 90% of cases in AML, in 53%—in ALL. The sites of infection were: blood+central venous catheter (32%) and respiratory tract (49%). Pathogens isolated from blood were: Gram-positive—CNS—70%, Streptococcus spp.—18.7%, Gram-negative—Enterobacteria—41%, Pseudomonas aeruginosa—23%, Candida spp.—23.5%, Aspergillus spp.—5.9%, other—5.9%. For the treatment of FN we used empirical antibiotics regimens. Clinical response was noticed: in 1st line of therapy—cephalosporins 3–4 generation used—45%, carbapenems used—60% as 2nd–3rd lines—vancomycin—70%, amphotericin B—80%. Thirty-two percent of children with AML and 5.2% children with ALL died because of sepsis. Conclusion: Carbapenems are more active in the 1st line of antibiotics therapy both for patients with AML and ALL. Vancomycin is useful in the 2nd line for patients with ALL. Amphotericin B and vancomycin are useful in combination in the 2nd line for patients with AML. 
 
Our drug of choice in cases of complicated neonatal sepsis
 
PS261
 Pavlenishvili IVP. Medical Academy, Pediatrics, Tbilisi, Georgia
 

Our drug of choice in cases of complicated neonatal sepsis I. Pavlenishvili, G, Iobashvili Tbilisi, Medical Academy Georgian Society of pediatrics Chemotherapy (GSPC) with collaborations of Drug and Therapeutic Committee (DTC) of Childers hospital ‘Republic’ finished the observation study about nosocomial infections of Neonatal ICU in above mentioned hospital. Study begins from November 2000. During this period we observe 45 cases of neonatal sepsis, most of them were due gram-negative bacteria. Thirty-four cases of neonatal sepsis were cause different stains of Escherichia coli, Proteus spp. and Acinetobacter. We notice that during last 2 years the role of Acinetobacter in etiology of neonatal sepsis and nosocomial complications of neonatal sepsis in our hospital is gradually increased. As our observation reveals most optimal in the case of complicated neonatal sepsis was (according criteria of DTS) use of Ceftasidime. Almost in all cases we used Ceftasidime with success. We have only one case of mortality. 
 
Macrolide resistance in pediatric pharyngeal isolates of
Streptococcus pyogenes
 
PS262
 Bogdanovitch Ta, Jalava Jb, Kaplan Ec, Johnson Dc, Jarkova La, Egorova Oa, Stratchounski La. a
Smolensk State Medical Academy, Institute of Antimicrobial Chemotherapy, Smolensk, Russian Federation, b
Antimicrobial Research Laboratory, National Public Health Institute, Turku, Finland, c
Department of Pediatrics, University of Minnesota Medical School, Minneapolis, USA
 

Since the macrolide resistance (MR) in Streptococcus pyogenes has been increasing in Europe, we studied the incidence and genetic basis of MR in S. pyogenes in Russia.

S. pyogenes isolated at baseline and during follow-up visits from children with acute pharyngitis receiving penicillin or midecamycin (16-membered macrolide) were studied. MR was evaluated by agar dilution (NCCLS), resistance mechanisms—by PCR.
A total of 149 S. pyogenes were obtained at the baseline, 21 (14%) of which were erythromycin-resistant: 19 strains (90%) were erm(A)-positive, one—mef(A)-positive, and one was negative for all primers used. All erm(A)-strains were inducibly resistant to clindamycin and represented seven PFGE profiles with one profile found in 11/19 strains. In three midecamycin treated patients MR was selected during the therapy (one strain had erm(A), one—mef(A), one—unknown resistance determinant). mef(A)-strain obtained during follow-up visit had different PFGE pattern with mef(A) strain isolated at baseline, while both the baseline and follow-up strains with unknown mechanism of resistance had unique PFGE pattern.
These data showed moderate incidence of erythromycin-resistant S. pyogenes in Smolensk. Ribosomal methylation (erm(A)) was the most common mechanism and though the polyclonal nature of MR was established, most erm(A)-strains belonged to only a few clones. 
 
Bacillus cereus
infections in traumatology-orthopaedy department: retrospective study and re-evaluation of healthcare practices PS263
 A Dubouixa, B Chaminadeb, M Archambaudc, E Bonnetd, S Daudec, G Chabanonc, N Martyc. a
Chu Rangueil, Bacteriologie-Hygiene, Toulouse, France; b
Chu Rangueil, Traumatology, Toulouse, France, c
Chu Rangueil, Bacteriology, Toulouse, France, d
Chu Purpan, Smit, Toulouse, France
 

Bacillus cereus was cultured for 30 patients from traumatology department who had developed postoperative wound infections between August 1997 and March 2000. All patients presented inferior members open fractures, frequently contaminated with telluric material and requiring external fixators. Genomic study of clinical isolates by pulsed field gel electrophoresis and Random analysis polymorphic DNA, allowed us to eliminate an outbreak. Furthermore, the reduced delay in which patients developed the infection (6 days+/- 2) led us to re-evaluate the procotols used in our institution. Indeed, all patients had received amoxycillin + clavulanate IV 2g for antibioprophylaxis during anesthetical induction then relayed per os for 48 hours. Because of the production of a potent beta-lactamase by the bacteria, this association could not be efficient. Furthermore, accordingly to the AFNOR EN 1040 norm, we have tested clinical isolates’ sensitivity to the principal antiseptics used for antisepsis and disinfection (iodophors, chloride derivated and biguanidines) and observed a major resistance of all strains tested. Even if these postoperative wound infections are considered as nosocomial because of the delay in appearance, we actually think that Bacillus cereus were initially present in telluric material. This fact led us to propose a systematic screening for Bacillus at admission for this type of wound and to administrate quinolones such as ciprofloxacin for prophylaxis. 
 
Internal thiols and reactive oxygen species in the candidacidal activity exerted by a N-terminal peptide of human lactoferrin PS 264
 Lupetti Aa, Paulusma-Annema Aa, Welling MMb, Dogterom-Ballering Ha, Senesi Sc, Campa Mc, Dissel JT vana, Nibbering PHa. a
Leiden University Medical Center, Department of Infectious Diseases, Leiden, The Netherlands, b
Leiden University Medical Center, Department of Radiology, Division of Nuclear Medicine, Leiden, The Netherlands, c
Università degli Studi di Pisa, Dipartimento di Patologia Sperimentale, Biotecnologie Mediche, Infettivologia ed Epidemiologia, Pisa, Italy
 

The purpose of the study. The emergence of Candida albicans strains resistant to current antifungals points to the need for new antifungal agents, e. g. antimicrobial peptides. The results obtained
. We report that hLF(1-11), a synthetic N-terminal peptide of human lactoferrin, displays excellent killing effect against fluconazole-resistant C. albicans and that sub-optimal concentrations of this peptide combined with fluconazole act synergistically. Previous investigations revealed that hLF(1-11) required an energized mitochondrion, ATP release by Candida, and ligation of ATP receptors for its killing effect. We now report that reactive oxygen species (ROS) are involved in the killing effect of hLF(1-11). Since internal thiols protect cells from oxidative damage, our observation that hLF(1-11) caused a 20% reduction of internal thiols in Candida is of interest. As expected, N-acetyl-L-cysteine (NAC), which is a precursor of glutathione and a ROS scavenger, inhibited the killing effect of hLF(1-11). Diamide, which oxidizes internal thiols, was candidacidal and hLF(1-11) and diamide acted synergistically in killing C. albicans and ROS production. Moreover, the hLF(1-11)-induced activation of mitochondria was inhibited by NAC, indicating that internal thiols/ROS affect mitochondrial activity. The conclusion reached
. The candidacidal activity of hLF(1-11) involves ROS production and reduction of internal thiols. 
 
 
Sharp rising trend in ciprofloxacin resistance in the haematology unit of a tertiary care hospital. a remedial approach to the problem PS 265
 Guleri, AS. Western Infirmary, Department of Clinical Microbiology, Glasgow G11 6NT, United Kingdom
 

Introduction: Ciprofloxacin is given as prophylaxis to reduce the occurrence of gram-negative bacteraemia in neutropenic patients and bone marrow transplant [autograft] recipients at hematology ward of Gartnaval General Hospital, Glasgow. Objective: An audit was conducted to explore the observation of increasing resistance to Ciprofloxacin in enterobacteriacea isolated from specimens from such patients in the hematology unit. Results: Enterobacteriacea isolates in specimens from such patients processed over the years 1997 to 2001 were examined. Number of specimens per year was—109, 152, 132, 160 and 170 respectively and the annual percent ciprofloxacin resistant enterobacteriacea from these was 2%, 9%, 12%, 14% and 21%. Conclusion: Conclusion drawn from the audit was that rapid rise in Ciprofloxacin resistance may possibly be attributed to the use of this fluoroquinolone as a single agent in dose of 250/500 mg [cut off patient weight 40 Kg] twice a day in neutropenic patients till neutrophils exceed 500/c.mm. Subsequent to the audit, prophylaxis protocol was modified to use of oral Colistin 3-mega units/twice a day in combination with ciprofloxacin 250/500 mg twice a day. A prospective audit is proposed to test the benefits of this combination. 
 
Rhinocerebral zygomycosis: diagnostic dilemma for emergency physician: can the associated morbidity and mortality in this rare but deadly disease be reduced? PS 266
 Samavedam S, Guleri AS. Western Infirmary, Clinical Microbiology, Glasgow G11 6NT, United Kingdom
 

Rhinocerebral zygomycosis [RCZ] is a rare, invasive, rapidly progressive opportunistic infection caused by ubiquitous fungi of the order mucorales. It usually occurs in diabetics or immunocompromised patients. The emergency physician will typically see patients with RCZ in its earliest stages masquerading as a variety of other less serious diseases. The key markers like necrotic patch on hard palate, nasal septum or turbinate, marked facial pain, and cellulites with marked eye and neurological signs may present late in disease. We report a case of RCZ caused by Rhizopus arrhizus [oryzae] in an 84 year old woman with poorly controlled diabetes. She presented with a right-sided facial droop of short origin and being generally unwell. CT scan was non-conclusive and delayed presentation of key markers of RCZ permitted disease to rapidly progress. Despite an intensive antifungal therapy with AmBisome and Insulin sliding scale, patient rapidly succumbed within 4 days. Fine needle aspiration cytology is less invasive, easier and equally effective alternative to pre op biopsy. The key to successful reduction in morbidity and mortality associated with this rapidly fatal disease is - Increasing awareness of the disease, an early diagnosis, correction of underlying metabolic derangement, prompt intensive antifungal therapy with amphotericin B and radical surgical debridement of the necrotic tissue. An ‘optimal dosage’ of AmBisome requires discussion. 
 
Clinical audit in the haematology ward of a tertiary care hospital: study of degree of correlation between bacteraemia and oro-pharyngeal screens in immunocompromised patients over five years and role of antibiotic prophylaxis PS 267
 Guleri AS, Butcher I. Western Infirmary, Clinical Microbiology, Glasgow G11 6NT, United Kingdom
 

Introduction: A clinical audit was carried out over 5-years [1997-2001] in the immunocompromised patients including neutropenic patients and bone marrow [autograft] transplant recipients in hematology ward of Gartnaval General Hospital, Glasgow, a tertiary care center. Objective: It was aimed to establish the degree of correlation between bacterial isolates in oro-pharyngeal screen during bacteraemia episodes and role of antibiotic prophylaxis. Methods: 2191 specimens from 255 patients with bacteraemia episodes were screened. Results: 29.4% [75/255] incidence of positive correlation, and 38.4% [98/255] of negative correlation was observed. There was 32.1% [82/255] incidence of coagulase negative staphylococcus [CNS] bacteraemia Conclusion: CNS bacteraemia is most commonly associated with intravenous catheter infection, which was predominantly seen. Oro-pharyngeal colonization does account for a significant [29.4%] incidence of bacteraemia in the compromised host including neutropenic and bone marrow transplant [autograft] recipients. Hence, prophylaxis with antibiotic is essential. A break up of the percentage of bacterial isolates to be presented. 
 
Stopping antiretroviral therapy after intensification, GM-CSF and initiation of therapeutic vaccination (Remune) in chronic HIV disease: results at 104 weeks PS 268
 Toma Ea, Loignon Ma, Zarowny Db, Bernard NFc, Labrecque La, Tremblay Ca, Cyr La, Cordeau MPd, Sindhu Te, Menezes Je, Beaulieuf R. a
Hôtel-Dieu du CHUM, Microbiology, Montreal, Canada, b
Canadian HIV Trials Network, Scientific/Industrial Liaison, Vancouver, Canada, c
McGill University, Research Centre, Montreal, Canada,
d
Hôtel-Dieu du CHUM, Radiology, Montreal, Canada,
e
St-Justine hospital, Research Centre, Montreal, Canada,
f
Hôtel-Dieu du CHUM, Hematology, Montreal, Canada
 

Purpose: To assess whether antiretroviral therapy (ART) intensification, GM-CSF use and Remune initiation before stopping ART lead to viremia containment, and long periods off ART. Methods: Ten adults with chronic HIV disease, HIV-1 RNA levels (VL) <1.7 log copies/ml and median CD4+ -T cell count of 385/ml were enrolled. After ART intensification with ddI (6 months) + hydroxyurea [HU](5 mo.) + GM-CSF (3 mo.) and a Remune dose, ART was stopped but Remune continued. ART was resumed if rebound VL did not decrease to <4.7 log in 3 months or if CD4+ counts decreased to <200. Results: VL rebounded in all patients after stopping ART, and 7 developed an acute retroviral syndrome (ARS). CD4+-T cells decreased, and CD8+38+ increased (5-fold). After a median stoppage of 16 weeks, ART was resumed in 9 patients and VL decreased to <1.7 log, CD4+ counts were regained, IL-2 and IL-15 levels rose. At the 2nd interruption, 9/9 patients had a rebound, and 3/9 had a 2nd ARS, but peak VL and loss of CD4+ were lower (P=0.003). After 21.3 weeks off ART, 8 patients resumed therapy. The breadth and magnitude of HIV-specific activity increased and thymus size grew. The patients were off ART for a median of 49.5 out of 80 weeks. Two of them are off ART for 80 and 44 weeks respectively ( VL<4 log).

Conclusions: This approach led to a high ARS incidence, long periods off ART, increases in HIV-specific responses, IL-2 and IL-15 levels, and thymus size. 
 
Urinary tract infection in a hospitalized population
 
PS269
 Klonou E, Gatsoulis N, Pasxali A, Panagiotaki E. Bacteriology Lab of Corfu General Hospital, Greece
 

Urinary tract infection in hospitalized population is a significant problem. This is a study of catherized patients urinary infection in Corfu Hospital.In 2000–2001, 3500 urine cultures were sent to our bacteriology laboratory. 650 of them were collected from the catheters. Clinical data of age and type of disease were analysed.
The samples were cultured on Mc Conkey agar-Urotube and Vitek cards. The organisms identified with Vitek automatic system. The sensitivity was tested with Vitek and Kirby-bauer method.
Results: No growth of organisms in 46.5%. Positive cultures 35%. 62.2% of the bacteria were Gram(−) rods (45.6% E. Coli, Pseudomonas spp. 0%), 16% were Gram(+) cocci (Enterococcus spp.) and 22% was Candida spp. the resistance of E. Coli was: 37% to Ampicillin, 17% to Co-Trimoxazol and 2% to quinolons. E. faecalis was resistant 10% to Vancomycin.

Conclusions: (1) The percentage of positive cultures and the organisms’ resistance are acceptable. (2) Pseudomonas spp. is absent. (3) There is a high percentage of Candida spp. (4) There are Vancomycin resistant Enterococci in our Hospital. 
 
Monday, 6 May 2002
 
Acetaminophen does not interfere in the therapeutic efficacy of amoxycillin/clavulanic acid or erythromycin in the treatment of acute otitis media caused by
Streptococcus pneumoniae
 
PM101
 Ponte Ca, Parra Aa, Cenjor Cb, García-Olmos Ma, Giménez MJc, Aguilar Lc, Soriano Fa. a
Fundación Jiménez Díaz, Medical Microbiology, Madrid, Spain, b
Fundación Jiménez Díaz, Otorrinolaryngology, Madrid, Spain, c
GlaxoSmithKline, Medical, Tres Cantos, Madrid, Spain
 

The possible interference of acetaminophen in the amoxicillin/clavulanic acid (A/C) or erythromycin (ERY) efficacy in the treatment of acute otitis media (AOM), and its possible role in the evolution to otitis media with effusion (OME), were determined in a gerbil model. A 23F Streptococcus pneumoniae strain exhibiting a MIC of A/C and ERY of 1/0.5 and 0.12 mg/l, respectively, was used. Both antibiotics were tested at 2.5 and 10 mg/kg. Acetaminophen at 50 mg/kg was administered 30 min before each antibiotic dose. Antibiotic concentrations in serum and middle ear exudate were determined. Both antibiotics significantly reduced the number of culture-positive ears and colony counts, with serum concentrations over the MIC of the microorganism for ≥15% of the dosing interval. Antibiotic concentrations in middle ear exudate were almost identical in animals receiving and not receiving acetaminophen. Clinical and microbiological efficacy was correlated with antibiotic concentrations in middle ear exudate ≥1.7 times the MIC of the microorganism, for both antibiotics. Both antibiotics demonstrated efficacy in the treatment of pneumococcal AOM, with the same rate of OME. Acetaminophen, concomitantly administered, did not interfere the efficacy of the two antibiotics tested and did not prevent the evolution of AOM to OME. 
 
Concomitant administration of acetaminophen and high doses of amoxycillin/clavulanate and erythromycin in the treatment of otitis media with effusion caused by
Haemophilus influenzae
in a gerbil model
 
PM102
 Parra Aa, Ponte Ca, Cenjor Cb, García-Olmos Ma, Giménez MJc, Aguilar Lc, Soriano Fa. a
Fundación Jiménez Díaz, Medical Microbiology, Madrid, Spain, b
Fundación Jiménez Díaz, Otorrinolaryngology, Madrid, Spain, c
GlaxoSmithKline, Medical Department, Madrid, Spain
 

A gerbil model of otitis media with effusion (OME) induced by Haemophilus influenzae (amoxicillin/clavulanate-A/C- and erythromycin-ERY-MICs of 1/0.5 and 4 mg/l, respectively) was used to evaluate the efficacy of A/C (10/2 and 15/3 mg/kg) and ERY (20 and 50 mg/kg). Antibiotics were administered subcutaneously 2 h post-middle ear inoculation, and continued t.i.d for 24 h, with or without acetaminophen (AP), at 50 mg/kg, administered 30 min before each antibiotic dose. Antibiotic concentrations in serum and middle ear (ME) were measured by bioassay. ME samples for colony counting were collected on day 2. A/C reduced (P≤0.05) positive ME samples and colony counts versus untreated controls or ERY: ME positive cultures of 90% for controls, 0% for A/C 15, 7% for A/C 10, 17% for A/C 10+AP, 90% for ERY 20, 57% for ERY 50 and 87% for ERY 50+AP. This was due to A/C (but not ERY) concentrations in ME exceeding 1.8 times the MIC despite the higher percentage of antibiotic penetration of ERY versus A/C (43 versus 8/14%). Animals receiving AP showed less polymorphonuclear cells and more bacteria in ME than those receiving only antibiotics, suggesting that the anti-inflamatory drug diminish the phagocytes and therefore, the efficiency in bacterial clearance. 
 
Amoxycillin treatment for acute otitis media caused by penicillin-resistant
Streptococcus pneumoniae
. A pharmacodynamic analysis
 
PM103
 Parra Aa, Ponte Ca, Cenjor Cb, García-Calvo Ga, Giménez MJc, Aguilar Lc, Soriano Fa. a
Fundación Jiménez Díaz, Medical Microbiology, Madrid, Spain, b
Fundación Jiménez Díaz, Otorrinolaryngology, Madrid, Spain, c
GlaxoSmithKline, Medical, Madrid, Spain
 

Purpose: To determine the amoxycillin minimal dose obtaining therapeutic and microbiological efficacy in an experimental otitis media model caused by a penicillin-resistant pneumococcus.

Methods: A serotype 23F Streptococcus pneumoniae strain exhibiting a MIC of amoxycillin of 1 mg/l was used in an experimental model performed in gerbils (Meriones unguiculatus) following previously described procedures. Amoxycillin was tested at the following doses: 0.2, 0.4, 0.8, 1.25, 2.5 and 5 mg/kg. Amoxycillin concentrations in serum and middle ear exudate were determined after drug administration.

Results: Doses of ≥2.5 mg/kg significantly reduced the number of culture-positive ears, colony counts and otorrhoea (P≤0.05) as compared with untreated controls or animals treated with doses lower than 1.25 mg/kg. Doses of ≥2.5 mg/kg achieved antibiotic concentrations in the middle ear 1.4–2.4 times higher than the MIC of the infecting strain and serum concentrations over the MIC for 14–19% of the dosing interval.

Conclusions: Amoxycillin at doses achieving serum concentrations similar to those obtained in children after standard doses, obtained therapeutic and microbiological efficacy regardless the susceptibility of the infecting strain. Better correlation was found between antibiotic efficacy and antibiotic concentrations in middle ear exudate than between efficacy and serum concentrations, which were suboptimal from the pharmacodynamic perspective. 
 
Increasing prevalence of amoxycillin–clavulanate-resistance among E. coli strains in a Hungarian university hospital
 
PM104
 Veréb I, Vígh A, Urbán E, Hajdú E, Nagy E. Department of Clinical Microbiology, University of Szeged, Szeged, Hungary
 

Background: Amoxicillin–clavulanate resistance (ACR) is an emerging problem in Escherichia coli as reported from different parts of Europe. The aims of the present study were to evaluate statistically the prevalence of ACR among E. coli isolates and to investigate the genetic background of the resistance. Methods: All E. coli strains isolated between 2000 1 1 and 2001 9 1 were screened for ACR by Kirby–Bauer disc diffusion method. The resistance to other beta-lactam–beta-lactamase inhibitor combinations and to different beta-lactam antibiotics were also tested. Selected strains underwent determination of beta-lactamase activity. Confirmatory tests for suspected extended spectrum beta-lactamase were performed. PCR testing for TEM and SHV genes were carried out on plasmids isolated from selected strains. Results: In 2000 out of 1109 E. coli strains 102 (9.2%) were found to be resistant to amoxicillin clavulanate (AMC). Most of the resistant strains (95%) were obtained from the genitourinary tract and no ACR isolate was found in blood cultures. In 2001 out of 2167 isolates 239 (11%) proved to be ACR and 2.5% were isolated from blood cultures and 66.9% from the genitourinary tract. Thirty-five selected strains were further analysed. Thirty-two were also resistant to (SAM) and six were further resistant to TZP. Quantitative beta-lactamase determination showed increased activity in strains which were partially susceptible to AMC. The presence of ESBL could be proved only in three ACR isolates. 
 
Comparative analysis of ceftibuten (CEF) versus cefixime (CFIX) in the treatment of uncomplicated urinary tract infection (UTI)
 
PM105
 Tassaly JL. G.P., Praxis, Tat, Hungary
 

This open parallel-group study compared the efficacy and tolerability of CEF with CFIX 400 mg once daily in the treatment of community acquired uncomplicated UTI. Seventy-eight female patients were randomized to receive either oral CEF or CFIX for 5 or 10 days. The efficacy of treatment was evaluated by clinical response (by symptoms of UTI dysuria frequency urgency suprapubian pain and by clinical signs) by bacteriologic response and health status measures at baseline and posttherapy. Results: The clinical cure (complete resolution of symptoms and signs) rate for patients receiving CEF was 95.12% of the 41 evaluable patients and 89.18% of the 37 patients receiving CFIX. Bacteriologic response (based on the results of urine cultures obtained posttherapy) the pathogen was eradicated in 82.3% for CEF 73.3% for CFIX. No drug related side effects have been reported in CEF and side effects were experienced by 5.40% of the patients receiving CFIX. Improvement in health status comparing visual scale scores baseline and poststudy to have detected a higher change in average score from 17 to 94 in CEF, from 20 to 82 in CFIX. Wilcoxon improvement value was significant on the 3rd day of therapy in case of CEF and on the 5th day of therapy in CFIX group. In conclusion, the results of this study indicate that CEF course is more effective than CFIX in producing a favourable clinical outcome and achieving higher bacteriologic eradication rate, furthermore CEF was better tolerated. 
 
Pharmacokinetics of cefepime in bile and gall bladder tissue
 
PM106
 Kastanakis Ma, Petrikkos Gb, Grammatikou Mb, Katsilampros Nb, Kastanakis Sc, Oikonomou Kc, Bastounis Ha. a
1st Surgical Department, Athens University, Laiko General Hospital, Athens, Greece, b
1st Department of Propedeutic Medicine, Athens University, Laiko General Hospital, Athens, Greece, c
Saint George Hospital Hania Crete, Greece
 

Cefepime is a fourth generation cephalosporine that has a broader spectrum of antibacterial activity than the third generation cepfalosporines and is more active in vitro against Gram-positive aerobic bacteria. The purpose of this study was to measure cefepime concentrations in plasma, bile fluid and gall bladder tissue in patients undergoing cholecystectomy. Thirty patients 12 male, 18 female, mean age: 48 years had data acceptable for analysis and were included in this study. All patients received iv 2 g of cefepime. Several hours after administration and at different time intervals, during surgery, samples were obtained from plasma, bile fluid and gall bladder tissue concomitantly. Antibiotic levels were measured by an agar diffusion method. The mean delta time was 284±255 min. The values for plasma, bile fluid and gall bladder tissue, were 33.6±28.5, 6.6±4.3 and 16.1±12.9 μg/ml, respectively. The plasma/bile fluid ratio was 2.6±2.4. There was a significant correlation between plasma and gall bladder tissue concentration (r=0.771, P=<0.0001). A correlation between bile fluid and plasma cefepime concentration was not observed.
The minimum inhibitory concentration (MIC) data from previous in vitro studies indicate that the cefepime concentration observed in plasma bile and tissue samples of this study would be adequate against typical biliary tract pathogens. Furthermore, these cefepime concentrations correlated well with the favorable clinical outcome reported in previous clinical studies in biliary tract infections. There was also good correlation between delta time and plasma and tissue concentrations and if the dose were given closer to the time of surgery, cefepime concentration would be higher reducing the possibility of an infection. 
 
In vitro activity of Cefepime against
E. coli
and
Klebsiella
strains
 
PM107
 Aktepe OC, Altindis M. Microbiology, Kocape University School of Medicine, Microbiology, Afyon, Turkey
 

Cefepime (FEP) is a fourth generation cephalosporin, recently introduced clinical usage in a wide range spectrum. The in vitro activity of this compound was investigated by E-test and standart disc-diffusion methods in a group of clinical isolates. A total of 44 strains, 24 Escherichia coli and 20 Klebsiella, were included in this study. Standart disc-diffusion test was done according to NCCLS recommendations. E-test was performed according to the manufacturer's instructions (AB Biodisk, Sweden). Bacterial suspensions adjusted to 0.5 MacFarland standart were spread on to Mueller–Hinton agar (BBL, USA) and then E-test strips were applied. Following overnight incubation at 35 °C, the MICs were interpreted on the gradient scales of test strips. Obtained results of FEP E-test susceptibility are 91% for E. coli, 80% for Klebsiella. These results show, FEP has a good activity on E. coli strains compared to Klebsiella isolates. The MIC90 value of Klebsiella group is quite high, however, 80% susceptibility rate indicates FEP would be still a choice for antibiotherapy, particularly among multiresistant strains. 
 
A novel therapy in prevention of antibiotic-induced changes in faecal microflora
 
PM108
 Harmoinen JAa, Vaali Kb, Lindevall Kc, Heino Pc, Westermarck Ea. a
Dep. Clin. Vet. Sciences, Faculty of Veterinary Medicine, Helsinki, Finland, b
Institute of Biomedicine/Pharmacology, University of Helsinki, Helsinki, Finland, c
Remedium Clinical Research, Ipsat Therapies Espoo, Finland
 

Objectives: The use of antibiotics may lead to decreased colonization resistance and increased formation of resistant bacteria. Present concept was developed to overcome these untoward effects.

Methods: β-Lactamase of Bacillus licheniformis was overproduced in Bacillus subtilis. This targeted recombinant β-lactamase enzyme (TRBL) was released in the small bowel from a controlled-release formulation. Beagles (n=6) were treated BID with either 20 mg/kg ampicillin (i.v.)+placebo (p.o.), 20 mg/kg ampicillin (i.v.)+TRBL (p.o.) or only placebo (i.v.+p.o.). Stool was collected at days 4 and 10. Samples were cultured for total and main groups of aerobic and anaerobic bacteria and yeast. Temperature gradient gel electrophoresis (TGGE) was used to separate the ribosomal RNA genes.

Results: Ampicillin+placebo group had clearly decreased counts of both aerobic and anaerobic bacteria during the treatment, whereas those receiving TRBL had only minor overall changes and some occasional changes by single species. Intravenous ampicillin decreased the fecal similarity percentage to 60%. The similarity percentage during treatment with ampicillin+TRBL did not differ from that of placebo (86 vs. 81%).

Conclusions: According to our results the TRBL can maintain the large intestinal microflora almost unchanged. These results indicate that TRBL is a promising novel approach for overcoming the ecological adverse effects on gut flora caused by β-lactam antibiotic agents. 
 
Pharmacokinetic interactions of aztreonam and amikacin
 
PM109
 Adamis Ga, Papaioannou MGb, Giamarellos-Bourboulis EJb, Gargalianos Pa, Kosmidis Jc, Giamarellou Hb. a
1st Department of Internal Medicine, Athens General Hospital ‘G.Gennimatas’, Athens, Greece, b
4th Department of Internal Medicine, Athens Medical School, Athens, Greece, c
Department of Internal Medicine, The Euroclinic of Athens, Athens, Greece
 

Since broad-spectrum â-lactams combined with amikacin are often applied for nosocomial infections, their pharmacokinetic interactions might be interesting. One gram of aztreonam and 0.5 g of amikacin were administered intravenously single and in combination in six healthy volunteers. Blood samples were collected at regular time intervals and concentrations of antimicrobials were determined by a microbiological assay applying a strain developing resistance to single agent after serial passages. Mean concentrations of amikacin in serum when administered alone and in combination with aztreonam were 26.2 and 20.3, 11.8 and 12.3, 8.4 and 12.2, 6.3 and 9.7, 1.8 and 4.3 and 0 and 1.3 μg/ml immediately after and 0.5, 1, 2, 4 and 8 h after infusion of antimicrobials. Respective concentrations of aztreonam were 63.5 and 25.3, 27.5 and 21.6, 24.2 and 10.5, 19.5 and 13.6, 5.8 and 4.4 and 1.8 and 4.0 μg/ml. AUCs for amikacin when administered alone and in combination with aztreonam were 35.5±10.9 and 50.5±7.8 mg h/l, respectively. Respective AUC for aztreonam were 99.7±35.2 and 76.4±31.5 mg h/l. It is concluded that the co-administration of aztreonam and amikacin results in earlier clearance of aztreonam and in higher levels of amikacin compared to the administration of each single antimicrobial. 
 
Molecular modelling of β-lactams reveals the structural basis for their inhibition of penicillin-binding proteins, susceptibility to β-lactamases and oral bioavailability
 
PM110
 Grail BM,
 Gupta S, Payne JW. School of Biological Sciences, University of Wales, Bangor, UK
 

β-Lactam antibiotics are peptide mimetics that act as suicide substrates for transpeptidase enzymes that cross link bacterial cell-wall peptides. For the first time, the structural and electronic features needed for their recognition by transpeptidase have been fully described, using innovative molecular modelling techniques to compare the conformational forms adopted by cell-wall peptides and β-lactams. Comparison of features in the backbone and C-terminal regions of conformers of active β-lactam antibiotics and model cell-wall peptides, has allowed definition of the molecular recognition template required for substrate recognition by transpeptidase. These shared structural features allow both to act as substrates and to acylate the active-site serine. However, a significant difference in a critical backbone torsion between the two substrates, provides an explanation for the inability of the enzyme–antibiotic complex to undergo the deacylation step that causes inhibition of transpeptidase. On the other hand, β-lactamases appear to have evolved molecular mechanisms that facilitate the deacylation reaction through compensating for the altered structural orientations in β-lactams caused by the different backbone torsion. Finally, analysis of the conformer repertoires of β-lactams for structural features required for substrate uptake by peptide transporters, provides insights into how their structures can be tailored for optimal oral absorption. 
 
Antimicrobial susceptibility of
Proteus mirabilis
clinical isolates producing extended spectrum beta-lactamases (ESBLs)
 
PM111
 de Miguel S, De Julián R, Camino N, Martínez VM, Baquero M. Hospital Carlos III, Microbiology, Madrid, Spain
 

Objectives: The aim of the present study was to determine in vitro susceptibility to antimicrobials of Proteus mirabilis isolated from urinary tract infections. Methods: We studied the susceptibility profile of ESBL positive P. mirabilis strains in three adopted children from India with age range from 20 months to 2 years. ESBL was identified using the synergic effect of clavulanate with betalactams (ceftazidime and cefotaxime). MIC values of each isolate were obtained by automated microdilution MicroScam method. Results: The results are shown in the next table:
 
Conclusions: Isolates were characterised by resistance to third and fourth generation cephalosporins, ampicillin and piperacillin; resistance to aminoglycosides (except a strain that was susceptibility to amikacin); and resistance to cotrimoxazole. Therapeutic failure and lack of erradication of ESBL positive P. mirabilis happen easily as consequence of high resistance in this bacterium. 
 
Amoxycillin sub-therapeutic doses combined with specific serotherapy in the treatment of a stereotype 6B penicillin-resistant
Streptococcus pneumoniae
sepsis: a mouse model
 
PM112
 Yuste Ja, Giménez MJb, Fenoll Aa, Aguilar Lb, Casal Ja. a
Instituto de Salud Carlos III, Centro Nacional de Microbiología, Majadahonda, Madrid, Spain, b
GlaxoSmithKline, Medical Department, Tres Cantos, Madrid, Spain
 

The in vivo efficacy of amoxicillin (AMX) sub-therapeutic doses (3.12 mg/kg, t.i.d for 48 h, achieving serum levels over the MIC of only 3% of the dosing interval) and concomitant specific serotherapy (single intraperitoneal dose of 1/4 diluted hyperimmune serum (HS) obtained from mice immunized with the heat-inactivated strain) was assessed in a pneumococcal sepsis BALB/c mouse model. Mice (five mice/treatment group) were intraperitoneally infected with 1.5×108 cfu/ml of a serotype 6B penicillin-resistant strain (MIC of 2 and 4 mg/l for penicillin and AMX, respectively). Treatments started 1 h after bacterial inoculation. Study groups were: control (K; receiving non-immune serum (NHS)), AMX+NHS, HS, and AMX+HS. Survival rates (%) over time were:
 Significant differences (P≤0.01; log rank test) were found between the administration of AMX+HS and other treatments, with a median survival rate of more than 336 h versus 36 h for the other groups. Treatment with concomitant specific antibodies highly increased the efficacy (measured as survival rate over time) of in vivo sub-inhibitory concentrations of AMX. 
 
Imipenem consumption and gram-negative pathogen resistance to imipenem at Sestre Milosrdnice University Hospital, Croatia
 
PM113
 Jajic-Benèic Ia, Benèic Ib. a
Department for Microbiology, Parasitology and Hospital Infections, Sestre Milosrdnice University Hospital, Zagreb, Croatia, b
Department for Traumatology, Clinic for Traumatology, Zagreb, Croatia
 

Purpose of the study: The study was performed to determine the consumption of imipenem and resistance of gram-negative pathogens (Pseudomonas aeruginosa, Acinetobacter sp., Klebsiella sp., Escherichia coli, Proteus mirabilis, Serratia marcescens, Enterobacter sp.) to imipenem. Gram-negative pathogens were isolated at the Sestre Milosrdnice University Hospital from Zagreb, Croatia, in 1999 and 2000. The imipenem sensitivity testing was performed by disk diffusion and E-test methods. The consumption of imipenem was expressed in DDD/100 hospital days in the same periods. Results obtained: Imipenem resistance of Acinetobacter sp. decreased significantly in the year 2000 (P=0.0052), especially in the first 6 months (P=0.021) when the lowest consumption of imipenem was recorded. Imipenem resistance of other gram-negative pathogens did not decrease significantly. Conclusion reached: Comsumption of imipenem might lead to changes in resistance to imipenem among Acinetobacter strains. 
 
Survey of extended-spectrum beta-lactamases production in clinical isolates of
Acinetobacter baumannii
 
PM114
 Vacheva-Dobrevski RS, Savov EZ. Military Medical Academy, Clinical Microbiology, Sofia, Bulgaria
 

Purpose:
Acinetobacter baumanii is becoming increasingly frequent nosocomial pathogen at our hospital, and beta-lactam resistant strains are on the increase, especially among icu isolates. To study the susceptibility of A. baumanii clinical isolates to beta-lactams and to determine the ESBL-producing strains during 2001, year. A total 438 Gram-negative nonfermenters (GNNF) isolates was investigated by semiautomated Mini API System (Bio Merieux, France). Eighty-four A. baumanii non-repeated isolates was studied for ESBL-producing by Double-disk synergy test (DDT) and ATB-BLSE test (Bio Merieux, France). MICs for beta-lactams were determined by E-test (AB Biodisk, Sweden).

Results:
A. baumanii (n=84) showed a multidrug resistance. The isolates were resistant to cefotaxime (79%), cefoxitin (96%), ceftazidime (49%), amoxicillin/clavulanate (76%), piperacillin (72%), aztreonam (84%), imipenem (12%). The 32 (38%) of investigated A. baumanii expressed ESBL activity and originated more frequently from ICU (78%). ESBLs producing strains were isolated from endotracheal aspirate (52%), surgery wounds (29%), blood culture (5.7%).

Conclusions: In general resistance levels were higher in clinical isolates A. baumanii to beta-lactams. The DDT seems to be a practical method for ESBL-screening; ATB-BLSE method is more sensitive. Our study display to be the first report of ESBL-producing A. baumanii strains from our country. Carbapenems seems to be the most active agents against A. baumanii. 
 
Characterization of an extended-spectrum beta-lactamase from
Salmonella infantis
 
PM115
 Réjiba S, Chouchani C, Souissi F, Ben-Mahrez K, Belhadj O. Laboratoire de Biochimie et Technobiology, Faculté des Sciences de Tunis, Université Tunis EL Manar, Tunis, Tunisia
 

Salmonella infantis, strain 111, was isolated from a newborn baby at Wassila Bourguiba Maternity in Tunis. It exhibited high resistance to penicillins, extended-spectrum cephalosporines (cefotaxime, ceftriaxone, ceftazidime, cefpirome) and aztreonam but remained susceptible to cefoxitine and imipenem. Involvement and characterization of enzymatic mechanism in β-lactam resistance were investigated in strain 111. Isoelectricfocusing revealed that this strain produced a β-lactamase of pI 6. This enzyme had a broad-substrate profile, hydrolyzing amoxicillin, ampicillin, ticarcillin, cephaloridine, cefuroxime, cefotaxime, ceftriaxone, cefpirome and ceftazidime. The highest specific activity was observed with ampicillin. Cefotaxime was hydrolyzed the most efficiently of the extended-spectum cephalosporines. The pI 6 extended-spectrum β-lactamase (ESBL) was inhibited by clavulanic acid and sulbactam. No inhibition of the ESBL was observed with 1 mM EDTA. Thus, no metal ion is involved in hydrolysis for this β-lactamase. Resistance due to the production of the pI 6 ESBL was transferred with DNA plasmid into Escherichia coli. On the basis of substrate and inhibition profiles and isoelectric point, the pI 6 ESBL was not previously described in S. infantis in Tunisia. The presence of such a resistance on a plasmid raises concer for rapid dissemination among bacteria and loss of effectiveness of β-lactams. 
 
Liver biopsy among co-infected HCV and HIV patients
 
PM116
 Poizot-Martin Ia, Enel Pb, Benhaïm Sc, Vion-Dury Fc, Dinh Tc, Drogoul MPc, Gastaut JAc. a
Assistance Publique Hôpitaux de Marseille, CISIH Sud, Pr JA Gastaut, Marseille, France, b
Assistance Publique Hôpitaux de Marseille, Cellule Santé Publique DMI2, Marseille, France, c
Assistance publique Hôpitaux de Marseille, CISIH Sud, Marseille, France
 

Objective: To assess liver biopsy (LB) practices in a cohort of 255 co-infected HCV and HIV patients followed up in an HIV specialized medical unit. Method: Transversal study with questionnaire among patients in pre-therapeutic's evaluation with PCR+ and without LB at 6 months. Results: Among the 255 patients, 28 (11%) are lost of follow up, 159 (62.3%) have had LB, 68 (26.2%) have no LB. The characteristics of these 68 patients are: median age=38.5±6 years; sex ratio=2.14, CDC-stage A=33.3% B=47.0% C=19.7%, undetectable viral load=33.3%, median CD4=326±204, anti-retroviral therapy=95.5%, HCV-genotype 1=46.7%; 3a=31.7%; 4=21.7%. Causes of non-made LB are: (1) refusal from patients because of biopsy's fear=35.3%; (2) contraindications because of HIV infection=33.8% (clinical events=16.2% which contraindicate anti-HCV treatment, grade III thrombocytopenia=8.8% which contraindicate biopsy, non-adherence to previous HIV follow up=8.8%); (3) other=30.9% (alcoholism=13.2%, psychiatric/depressive disorders=11.8%, decompensated cirrhosis=5.9%). Drug use or methadone/buprenorphine treatment are not considered as contraindication. Conclusion: One-third of patients are afraid of LB. Alcoholism and psychiatric/depressive disorders are the principal contraindications to anti-HCV treatment. It seems important to improve information of patients about LB and to focus on alcohol and psychiatric/depressive disorders management in such population. 
 
Human T-Lymphotropic Virus type I (HTLV-I) co-infection accelerates the development of hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) in patients with chronic hepatitis C virus (HCV) viraemia
 
PM117
 Kashiwagi KKa, Furusyo NFa, Nakashima HNa, Kashiwagi SKb, Hayashi JHa. a
Department of Environmental Medicine and Infectious Disease, Kyushu University, Fukuoka, Japan, b
National Kyushu Medical Center, Fukuoka, Japan
 

The purpose of the study: The aim of this prospective study was to explore the effect of HTLV-I co-infection on the development of HCC among patients with chronic HCV viremia. A total of 764 consecutive patients with chronic HCV viremia were studied and followed-up over a mean period of 5.1 years: 172 (22.5%) were infected with HTLV-I infection and 592 (77.5%) were not. The results obtained the annual HCC development rate was 3.4% in patients co-infected with HCV and HTLV-I and 1.4% in patients infected with HCV alone. HCC was significantly higher in 33 (19.2%) of the 172 patients co-infected patients than in 39 (6.6%) of the 592 patients infected with HCV alone (P<0.001, Logrank test). In patients under the age of 55 years, HCC development was significantly higher in seven (17.1%) of 19 patients co-infected with HCV and HTLV-I than in eight (2.9%) of 220 patients with HCV alone (P<0.05, Logrank test), whereas there was no significant difference in HCC development between patients over age 55 with or without HTLV-I infection (26 (2.0%) of 131 and 31 (9.9%) of 312, respectively). The conclusion reached HTLV-I infection accelerates the development of HCC in chronic HCV patients, especially among patients under the age of 55 years. 
 
Hepatitis B virus (HBV) genotypes B and C have different clinical outcomes in Japanese patients with chronic HBV infection
 
PM118
 Furusyo Na, Nakashima Hb, Kashiwagi Kb, Kashiwagi Sc, Hayashi Jd. a
Department of General Medicine, Kyushu University Hospital, Fukuoka, Japan, b
Department of Environmental Medicine and Infectious Disease, Kyushu University, Fukuoka, Japan, c
Internal Medicine, National Kyushu Medical Center Hospital, Fukuoka, Japan, d
Department of General Medicine, Kyushu University Hospital, Fukuoka, Japan
 

To analyze HBV genotype-related clinical differences among patients with chronic HBV infection, all 158 patients were serially tested for serum alanine aminotransferase (ALT) and hepatitis B e antigen (HBeAg) and followed up for a mean 10.8 (6.4) year period. Genotypes B and C were found in 58 (36.7%) and 100 (63.3%) of the patients, respectively. HBeAg positivity and ALT abnormality rates at the start of the observation period were significantly higher in genotype C patients (66.0 and 84.0%) than in genotype B patients (34.5 and 22.4%). The annual rate of spontaneous HBeAg disappearance in genotype B patients was much higher than in genotype C patients (8.38 versus 2.34%, respectively). Patients with genotype C who were continuously HBeAg negative from entry had significantly higher ALT abnormality (58.8%) than those with genotype B (19.2%). Interestingly, patients with genotype C who became HBeAg negative by interferon treatment had high ALT abnormality (58.8%). All patients with ALT abnormality were serum HBV DNA positive. These findings indicate that HBV genotype C patients are more severe liver deterioration because of the delay of HBeAg disappearance and continued HBV replication after HBeAg disappearance. 
 
Antiviral and anti-stress activities of ‘gamma’-l-Glutamylhistamine and its derivates
 
PM119
 Nossik NNa, Nebolsin VEb, Zheltukhina GAc, Yevstigneeva RPc. a
The D.I. Ivanovsky Institute of Virology, Viral Reproduction, Moscow, Russian Federation, b
Pparminterprisis Co., Chemistry, Mocow, Russian Federation, c
Moscow State Academy of Fine Chemical Technology, Piptide Chemistry, Moscow, Russian Federation
 

Objective: To study the effects of ‘gamma’-l-Glutamylhistamine (Glu-HA) derivates on non-specific immunity (‘alfa’-IFN, ‘gamma’-IFN and NK cell activity) and antiviral activity on the experimental influenza and herpes virus infections in mice. The Glu-YA and its derivate Glu-II were synthesized by peptide chemistry techniques. The Glu-HA and Glu-II was administered i.p. 0.05 and 0.5 mg/kg before and after influenza virus (type A/Aichi) and showed a protective effect even at the high infective dose (100LD50)—the rate of protection=42–51/60% in the positive/control group. They were not very effective in the protection of herpes simplex virus encephalitis in mice. The model of the physico-emotional stress in mice was used to investigate the IFN system and NK cell activity. The production of IFNs and NK cell activity of splenocytes decreased in 2 h after the stress and back to normal level in 7–10 days. It was shown that Glu-HA and Glu-II can protect or substantially prevent the decrease in NK cell activity and IFNs synthesis in post-stress period (so normally did not induce the IFNs' synthesis). Conclusions: The Glu-HA and Glu-II showed antiviral effect against influenza virus infection in mice. The immunomodulating activity and ability to normalize the IFN synthesis and NK cell activity depressed the post-stress period and probably play an essential role in the antiviral activity. 
 
No dose adjustment of an anti-influenza prodrug oseltamivir is required in patients with hepatic impairment
 
PM120
 Oo Ca, Snell PRb, Liu Ba, Martin Db, Simkins Tb, Small Ib, Ward Pb. a
Hoffmann-La Roche Inc., Global Development, Nutley, USA, b
Roche Products Ltd., Global Development, Welwyn Garden City, UK
 

Background: Oseltamivir (OSE; Ro 64-0796, Tamiflu®) is an oral ethyl ester prodrug of its active metabolite oseltamivir carboxylate (OC: Ro 64-0802), a potent and selective neuraminidase inhibitor of the influenza virus. The purpose of the study is to evaluate the need for OSE dosage adjustment in hepatic impaired patients (HI). Method: Healthy volunteers (HV) versus HI (Child-Pugh Score 7–9) [matched on the basis of age (±10 years), gender and weight (±20%)] were compared. Each subject received 75 mg OSE. Results: Based on Cmax (ng/ml) and AUCinf (ng h/ml) analysed using nominal times, LS mean ratios and 90% CI between HI and HV were similar. OSE* values in HI were marginally elevated but not sufficiently to require dose adjustment.
 
Conclusions: No OSE dose adjustment is required in HI patients. 
 
Development of perspective antiviral compounds by means of 4D-QSAR
 
PM121
 Lozytska RNa, Kuz'min VEb, Lozitsky VPc, Artemenko AGb, Fedchuk ASc, Vanden Eynde JJd . a
Physico-Chemical Institute, Catalysis, Odessa, Ukraine, b
Physico-Chemical Institute, Theoretical Chemistry, Odessa, Ukraine, c
Anti-Plague Institute, Chemotherapy, Odessa, Ukraine, d
Organic Chemistry, University of Mons-Hainaut, Mons, Belgium
 

The aim of this study is to investigate the influence of molecular structure of macrocyclic pyridinophanes and their analogs on anti-influenza and antiherpetic activity of these compounds. We used 4D-QSAR approaches on the basis of simple representation of molecular structure. Such representation for biologically active substances allows the description of the spatial structure of compounds with the complete stereochemical information. It determines spatial structures either promoting or interfering of the concrete biological activity. It is easy to realize the molecular design of compounds with the given level of activity with the help of the combinations of simplexes. Statistic characteristics for QSAR of Partial Least-Squares models are satisfactory (R=0.92–0.97; CVR=0.76–0.86). The molecular fragments that increase the antiviral activity were defined and will be demonstrated. This information was used for design and directed synthesis of several novel antiviral agents with predicted high anti-influenza or antiherpetic activities. Predicted activities were confirmed experimentally. 4D-QSAR approaches are useful for development of antiviral compounds. This work was partially supported by INTAS foundation (grant INTAS 97-31528). 
 
The anti-influenza action of proteolysis inhibitor E-aminocaproic acid (E-ACA)
 
PM122
 Lozitsky VP. Ukrainian Mechnikov Research Anti-Plague Institute, Chemotherapy, Odessa, Ukraine
 

The purpose of this study was to research the anti-influenza activity of proteolytic inhibitor E-ACA. It prevents the enhancement of proteolysis during the interaction of virions with cell membranes and decreases penetration of virions into cells. E-ACA brings down proteolytic cleavage of HA-precursor to HA-1 and HA-polypeptides and reduces the infectious virus harvest. It shows the prophylactic and therapeutic action during the experimental influenza reducing the enhancement of alkaline proteases activity in lungs after infection. E-ACA promotes the intensification of specific antibodies production and cell immunity, prevents vessels' permeability and hemorrhagic phenomena, decreases the destruction of bronchi's epithelium. It reduces the duration of intoxication, catarrhal instances and hyperthermia in sick children. E-ACA improves the indexes of immunity, non-specific resistance and decreases the rate of bacterial complications. Application of E-ACA for treatment influenza and other ARVI in children is recommended in Ukraine on the base of results of our researches. The higher effects demonstrated as a result of combine usage of E-ACA with specific Ig, or Deitiforin, or Unithyol, or Ribavirin. In our opinion, the study of effectiveness of E-ACA combine application with inhibitors of influenza NA is the perspective direction of anti-influenza researches development. 
 
We should we treat immediately all varicella patients with acyclovir if the patient is older than 20 years
 
PM123
 Gvozdenovic Ea, Dulovic Ob, Grebenarovic Jc. a
Institute for Infectious and Tropical Diseases, Respiratory Transmitted Diseases, Belgrade, Yugoslavia, b
Institute for Infectious and Tropical Diseases, Respiratory Transmitted Disaeses, Belgrade, Yugoslavia, c
Institute for Radiology, Clinical Center of Serbia Belgrade, Yugoslavia
 

During past 2 years in Institute for Infectious and Tropical Diseases in Belgrade, 89 immunocompetent varicella patients were treated and cured. Among them 32 were older than 20 years (35.95%). X-rays were performed in all patients. Diagnosis of pneumonia was made in 32 patients (35.95%), but in 26 (81.25%) patients older than 20 years. Varicella is a benign, self-limited disease, if it strikes early, i.e. pre-school, school children and teenagers. At that time there is no need for specific therapy. But in neonates, immunocompetent adults and in all immunocompromised patients it can be difficult and life-threatening disease. In immunocompetent adult population pneumonia is a very serious, sometimes fatal complication. Knowing the pathophysiology of primary varicella–zoster infection, specific therapy with acyclovir should be started immediately after making the diagnosis in patients older than 20 years, without waiting for X-ray proof of pneumonia. 
 
Brivudin compared to acyclovir for the treatment of herpes zoster: effects on acute disease and posttherapeutic pain
 
PM124
 Wassilew SWa, Wutzler Pb, Stubinski BMc, Koch Ic, Staedtler Gc, Capriati Ad. a
Klinikum Krefeld, Department of Dermatology, Krefeld, Germany, b
Institute of Antiviral Chemotherapy, University of Jena, Jena, Germany, c
Berlin-Chemie/Menarini Group, Clinical Research, Berlin, Germany, d
Menarini Group, Menarini Ricerche, Florence, Italy
 

Objective: Comparison of efficacy and safety of brivudin 1×125 mg and acyclovir 5×800 mg, both for 7 days, in the treatment of herpes zoster. Methods: Randomised, double-blind study on 1227 immunocompetent patients ≥18 years (brivudin: n=613, acyclovir: n=614). A subgroup of patients ≥50 years (brivudin: n=309, acyclovir: n=299) was examined for the occurrence of posttherapeutic pain in a poststudy survey. Posttherapeutic pain was defined as any zoster-associated pain, regardless of intensity, after the end of acute zoster. Results: Brivudin was superior to acyclovir in reducing time to last occurrence of new vesicles (RR(ITT): 1.13 [1.01–1.27], P=0.01). The advantage of brivudin was more pronounced in patients ≥50 years (RR(ITT): 1.16, [1.01–1.34], P=0.02). Incidence of posttherapeutic pain was significantly lower with brivudin (32.7%) than with acyclovir (43.5%, P=0.006). Duration of pain was comparable in both treatment groups (RR: 1.11, [0.93–1.32], P=0.27). Potentially treatment-related adverse events occurred in 7.7% of the brivudin recipients and in 10% of the acyclovir recipients. Conclusions: Brivudin 125 mg once daily for 7 days is superior to standard acyclovir in stopping viral replication in acute herpes zoster. In patients ≥50 years, brivudin is more effective than acyclovir in reducing the risk of developing posttherapeutic pain. Brivudin is as well tolerated as acyclovir. 
 
Comparative effect of extracts from marine organisms against replication of HSV-1 and HSV-2
 
PM125
 Vassileva RKa, Taskova Db, Kamenarska Zc, Popov Sd, Bankova Ve, Shishkov Sb. a
Bulgarian Academy of Sciences, Institute of Microbiology, Virology, Sofia, Bulgaria, b
Fac. Biology, Laboratory of Virology, University of Sofia, Sofia, Bulgaria, c
Institute of Organic Chemistry, Bulgarian Academy of Sciences, Organic Chemistry, Sofia, Bulgaria, d
Institute of Organic Chemistry, Bulgarian Academy of Sciences, Organic Chemistry, Sofia, Bulgaria, e
Institute of Organic Chemistry, Bulgarian Academy of Sciences, Organic Chemistry, Sofia, Bulgaria
 

The application of modern methods in the chemotherapy of herpes infections and the need of expanding their range necessitate the search of new antiviral agents. In this aspect, we examined 21 extracts from organisms, obtained from the Black Sea—16 extracts from algae and five extracts from bacteria. The water extract of Polysiphonia denudata shows highest antiviral activity against both viral models and the 50% effective dose (ED50) for HSV-1 (strain Da) is 48.2, and for HSV-2 (strain Bja) is 44.5. The rest of the algae extracts demonstrate slight effect against one or both of the viral types. ED50 for HSV-1 of the butanol extract of MOU2Bu (bacterial extract) is 59.1. The value of ED50 for HSV-2 is similar—84.9. Virus-specific effectivity was demonstrated against the replication of both of the viruses—HSV-1 and HSV-2, using butanol extract MOU3Bu; ED50 for HSV-2 is 85.9, and for HSV-1 is 336.3. The other three of the bacterial extracts show slight inhibitory effect against the replication of HSV-1 and HSV-2. 
 
Antiviral activity of metal complexes of acyclovir
 
PM126
 Varadinova Ta, Genova Pa, Garcia-Raso Ab, Terron Ab, Fiol Jb, Badenas Fb. a
Laboratory of Virology, Sofia University, Sofia, Bulgaria, b
Chemistry, Universitat de les Balears, Palma de Mallorca, Spain
 

We have published that Cu(II) complexes of acyclovir (ACV) are active against HSV infection (MBD, 1996). Here we present data on the activity of ACV complexes of Ni(II), Cd(II), Co(II) and Ag(I) against resistant to ACV HSV 1 strain R-100 in comparison with the effect against ACV sensitive strain Victoria. Selectivity indexes (SI) compared to that of ACV were indicative for activity. The following data were obtained: (i) 1 was 10 times less selective inhibitor of strain R-100 than of strain Victoria; (ii) under the action of [Cd(ACV)Cl2], [Ni(ACV)2(H2O)4]Cl2·2ACV and [Ni(ACV)(NO3)]3·5H2O was up to 90% higher than that in the control; (ii) 2 was 28 times less selective inhibitor than ACV; (iv) SI of 3 was two times higher for strain R-100 and five times lower for strain Victoria then that of ACV. These data show that the selectivity of ACV against resistant HSV 1 strains can increase when ACV is bond to a proper metal ion.
 
 
 
Derivatives of carboalkoxysulfanilic acids as antiviral agents
 
PM127
 Tetz VV, Artemenko NK, Furayeva VA. Microbiology, Virology and Immunology, St. Petersburg State Pavlov Medical University, St. Petersburg, Russian Federation
 

Antiviral activity against different types of Herpes simplex viruses, including variant resistant to acyclovir and acute toxicity was determined. Methods: An antiviral activity against Herpes Simplex virus of the type I (HSV-I/Leningrad/248/88) and variant HSV-1 (VVT/4/00R) resistant to acyclovir was determined using commonly accepted method. Viruses were grown on a continuous culture. Maximal toxic dose was determined by the administration of compounds orally (300 mg/kg) or intraabdominally (100 mg/kg) to white mice that had mass 18–20 g. Condition of the animals was controlled during 72 h. Mice pneumonia model was used for the testing activity in vivo. Results: Derivatives tested have activity against HSV-1 and HSV-1 resistant to acyclovir. Maximum protection of the cells up to 80% was reached at concentration of compounds 100–10 mg/kg. Tested compounds have low toxicity and animals did not die after intraabdominal and after per oral administration of the substances. Using these compounds led to essential relief of diseases in animals. The number and square of virus specific areas of inflammation in lung was decreased to compare with control untreated group. Tested compounds protected animals similar to acyclovir that was used as control. Conclusion: Derivatives of carboalkoxysulfanilic acids are active against HSV in vitro and in vivo and act on the acyclovir resistant variant viruses. 
 
Denotivir: in vitro, animal model and clinical evidence of its efficacy in Herpes simplex virus infections
 
PM128
 Markiewicz Ra, Szepietowski JCb. a
Jelfa S.A., Medical Department, Jelenia Gora, Poland, b
Department of Dermatology, University of Medicine, Wroclaw, Poland
 

Background: Denotivir is a 5-benzoamino-4′-chloro-3-methyl-4-isothiazolecarboxanilide anti-inflammatory agent with antiviral and immunomodulatory activities. It possesses also mild antibacterial and antifungal action. The purpose of the study: The aim of this presentation is to give an overview of recent studies demonstrating denotivir efficacy in herpetic infections. The results obtained: In vitro studies revealed that denotivir in the doses below its cytotoxicity (about 25 uM) significantly inhibited (by 90–99%). Herpes simplex virus (HSV)-1 and HSV-2 replication in fibroblast and kidney cell cultures. Moreover, it was showed that denotivir in the dose of 37 mg/ml markedly inactivated HSV-2 after 30 min incubation in 37 °C. In giunea pigs research, 2% denotivir in 90% DMSO appeared to be superior to 90% DMSO alone and untreated groups in the therapy of animal skin infected by HSV-2. There was no huge difference in eythema and oedema scorings between studied groups, however in the group treated with denotivir, in contrast to others, no vesicles developed. Several clinical studies showed usefulness of denotivir in controlling herpetic infections in dermatology, ophthalmology and otolaryngology. In the majority of studies within few hours after the drug application itch and pain relief was noted and within 1–2 days the vesicular lesions were dried up. The conclusion reached: In conclusion, denotivir is an effective antiherpetic agent. 
 
Comparison of therapeutic effects of salicylic and fig tree latex on bovine papilloma
 
PM129
 Hemmatzadeh F, Fatemi A. Faculty of Veterinary Medicine, Microbiology, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran
 

This study was conducted on 12 cows affected with teat papillomatosis. In the first step, each cow was located on one of three groups. The first group contained four cows from 1 to 4 years that were treated with fig tree (Ficus carica) latex. The second group contained four cows from 1.5 to 4 years that were treated with a 10% solution of salicylic acid, and the third group contained four cows as control. In group one and two following treatment with fig tree latex and salicylic acid, superficial necrosis begun from day 5 and all of the warts disappeared by day 30. In the control group, after day 20, there were no changes in number of lesions, but some of them were larger than first observation. On day 25, one of the marked warts disappeared and on day 35 another wart was disappeared but six were present until day 45. Comparison of effects of salicylic acid and fig latex showed similar effects in treatment of udder papillomatosis in cow. 
 
Laboratory markers of skeletal muscle toxicity in HIV-infected patients: a cross-sectional case-control survey of frequency, potential correlation with antiretroviral therapy, clinical significance, and outcome
 
PM130
 Manfredi R, Motta R, Patrono D, Calza L, Chiodo F, Boni P. Infectious Diseases, University of Bologna, Bologna, Italy
 

To assess skeletal muscle toxicity among ∼1000 HIV-infected outpatients (p), the 129 p who had ≥1 altered CPK assay (>195 U/l) between May and November 2001, were compared with 387 p randomly selected among those who had ≥2 laboratory exams in this 6-month interval, in a 1:3 case-control study. Among the 129 p with altered CPK levels only six were females, and 110 received antiretrovirals. The overall frequency of altered CPK among all p who underwent ≥2 laboratory workouts in 6 months was 14.4%. CPK alteration was transient in 98 p, with values ranging from 196 to 3463 (mean 256.2±62.3) U/l, but was recognized ≥2 times in 2–6 months in 31 p (24%), 24 of them showing concomitant high aldolase levels (3.1–10.8 U/L). A myopathy or a rhabdomyolisis were recognized in four p only; a myositis was confirmed in one p by histopathology. In a multivariate logistic regression analysis, when excluding the unexpected prevalence of the male gender (P<0.0001), no significant difference emerged between p and controls as to age, risk for HIV infection, iv drug use, duration of HIV infection, prior anti-HIV therapy and its length, selected drug combinations, administered nucleoside analogues,HIV disease stage, mean CD4+ count and HIV viremia, signs and duration of lipodystrophy, increased glucose, triglyceride and cholesterol levels, and other therapies. Muscle abnormalities, though frequently asymptomatic, are underestimated HIV disease complications, and the role of metabolic (i.e. mitochondrial) alterations, deserves investigation. 
 
Poor efficacy of non-nucleoside reverse transcriptase inhibitor (NNRTI)-based salvage HAART in HIV-infected patients heavily pre-treated with all other classes of antiretroviral compounds
 
PM131
 Manfredi R, Calza L, Chiodo F. Infectious Diseases, University of Bologna, Bologna, Italy
 

Poorly comparable literature series show conflicting results of NNRTI-based rescue HAART: 20–70% rate of virologic success. To assess the response to a 4–5-drug rescue HAART including a NNRTI, 72 patients (p) treated with nucleoside analogues (NA) and protease inhibitors (PI) for >18 and >15 months, respectively but naïve to NNRTI, with a viremia >10 000 copies/ml, were prospectively followed during 1–2 years, provided that they ensured a >90% adherence. Efavirenz was used in 41 p, nevirapine in 29, and delavirdine in two. Most p (88.9%) had an early laboratory improvement, but mean peak viral load decrease was 0.4 Log, and a significant reduction vs baseline (P<0.02) lasted 3 months only. A mean 17% increase of zenith CD4 count was obtained (P<0.001), but only 18.1% of p remained >200 cells/μl 1 year after switch to NNRTI. In a multivariate analysis, the concurrent introduction of novel PI(s) (32 p) and/or different NA(s) (19 p) acted favorably until the 9th month of follow-up (P<0.04), while genotypic mutations conferring NNRTI cross-resistance, usually associated with a broad resistance profile, predicted failure in all p (P<0.001), and the response did not vary according to duration and type of prior therapy, and selected NNRTI. A deep salvage NNRTI-based HAART has a poor and transient virologic outcome also in NNRTI-naïve p, while a more evident and sustained immunologic response is expected. P who can introduce novel PI/NA and have no mutations impairing NNRTI activity are entitled to a better outcome. 
 
Fatal lactic acidosis without elevation of liver-enzymes during the treatment with stavudine, didanosine and efavirenz: a case report
 
PM132
 Winzer R, Langmann P, Väth T, Zilly M, Klinker H. Medizinische Poliklinik der Universität Würzburg, Schwerpunkt Hepatologie/Infektiologie, D-97080 Würzburg, Germany
 

Nucleoside reverse transcriptase inhibitors (NRTIs) cause various side effects, many of which are thought to be due to their effects on mitochondria.
A 36-year-old HIV positive (HIV RNA: 6000 copies/ml, CD4 cell count: 359/μl), obese (body-mass-index: 40.9), therapy-naïve female patient, who after 7 months of well tolerated and effective antiretroviral therapy (stavudine, didanosine, efavirenz), had slight gastro-intestinal discomfort and suddenly developed a lactic acidosis (arterial-pH 7.03 [7.36–7.44], anion-gap 45.8 mmol/l [7–16], serum-lactate 24.8 mmol/l [0.7–2.1]), without clinical and laboratory signs of liver-involvement (bilirubin 0.4 mg/dl [0.1–1], aspartate-aminotransferase 26.0 U/l [<15], alanine-aminotransferase 13.0 U/l [<17], g-glutamyl-transpeptidase 32.0 U/l [<18], alkaline phosphatase 110 U/l [55–170]). She died 4 days later despite intensive care (continuous venovenous haemodiafiltration, sodium-bicarbonate infusion, high doses of vitamins, respiration). The pathologic examination showed an enlarged liver (2370 g) with yellowish appearance and pasty consistency, which microscopically appeared as a massive macro- and microvesicular fatty degeneration, and only slight signs of terminal pancreatitis.
This reported case gives evidence that a massive lactate acidosis may develop without previously disarranged laboratory parameters for liver or pancreatic function. A fatal outcome may evolve without further accompanying-illnesses. 
 
Efficacy and tolerability of atorvastatin in the treatment of hypercholesterolemia in HIV-infected patients receiving HAART
 
PM133Calza L, Manfredi R, Chiodo F. Division of Infectious Diseases, University of Bologna, Bologna, Italy

Introduction: Significant increases in plasma triglyceride and cholesterol levels have been reported in patients treated with HAART, and prolonged metabolic imbalances could significantly act on the long-term prognosis and outcome of HIV-infected persons. Patients and methods: Fourteen HIV-infected patients on PI-based HAART since at least 12 months and presenting hypercholesterolemia (>290 mg/dl) of at least 6-month duration and unresponsive to a hypolipidemic diet and physical exercise, have been treated with a single daily dose of atorvastatin (20 mg) for 18 months. Results: One patient was ecluded from evaluation due to early drop-out. Ongoing antiretroviral treatment included ritonavir in four cases, indinavir in four, nelfinavir in three, and saquinavir hard-gel in two. At the close of 18-month follow-up of atorvastatin therapy, a decrease of total cholesterol level of 21.9% versus respective baseline value was observed; eight out of 13 patients reached normal values for cholesterol. Mild gastroenteric symptoms were found in only one of the 13 treated patients, while no skeletal muscle and liver toxicity has been observed. Discussion: In our study, pharmacological treatment with atorvastatin proved certainly effective in the management of diet-resistant hypercholesterolemia, and was associated with a favourable tolerability and adherence profile. 
 
The effectiveness of antiretroviral drug therapy for HIV-1 is associated with HIV-1 proviral DNA level and viral selection
 
PM134Chong Ya, Murata Ma, Nabeshima Sb, Ikematsu Hb, Kashiwagi Sb, Hayashi Jb, Ariyama Ia. a
Department of Environmental Medicine and Infectious Disease, Faculty of Medical Sciences, Kyushu University, Fukuoka, Japan, b
Department of General Medicine, Kyushu University Hospital, Fukuoka, Japan

The effect of combination antiretroviral therapy regimens on HIV-1 proviral DNA level in peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMCs) was examined in 12 HIV-1-positive patients, using endpoint dilution PCR and serially cloning and sequencing of the gag region of HIV-1. The major clone was defined as the most numerous of 10 analyzed clones, and observation periods ranged from 8 to 32 months (mean, 19.8±10.2 months). In five patients (one with primary-stage HIV-1 infection) receiving three antiretroviral drugs, HIV-1 RNA levels reduced to undetectable (i.e. <100 copies/ml). HIV-1 proviral DNA levels and the number of major clones reduced in four of these patients. HIV-1 RNA levels reduced, but remained detectable, in five other patients. In the two remaining patients (both receiving two rather than three antiretroviral drugs) HIV-1 RNA levels increased. These results suggested that the population of the major clones may be affected when HIV-1 RNA levels reduce following combination regimens of antiretroviral therapy. 
 
Saquinavir hard gel (Shg) as a part of a spontaneous 12–18-month de-intensification anti-HIV regimen following successful highly active antiretroviral therapy (HAART)
 
PM135
 Manfredi R, Calza L, Chiodo F. Infectious Diseases, University of Bologna, Bologna, Italy
 

The induction-maintenance concept was poorly studied in HIV+ patients (p), and Shg was never assessed after prolonged response to potent protease inhibitors (PI)-based HAART. Shg-naïve p who refused indinavir, ritonavir, or nelfinavir-based HAART after achieving long-term viral suppression, and resorted to Shg+2 nucleoside analogues (NA), were followed prospectively. In 60.7% of the 61 p assessed for 12–18 months, ≥1 NA was changed. Prior HAART was interrupted after 8.4±2.9 months, due to adverse events (46 p), or p's request (15 p), while a viremia <50 copies/ml was present since 4.7±1.5 months. A viremia of 50–1000 HIV-RNA copies/ml was maintained in 49 p (80.3%), while a higher viral load occurred in 12 p after 5.9±0.6 months, and was related to a pre-HAART viremia >100 000/ml, a more frequent >100% recovery of CD4 count, mutations of codons 48–90, and failure to change NA (P<0.05–0.001). A CD4 drop >20%/150 cells/μL was found after 7.1±0.5 months in only eight p, who also had virologic failure: immunologic deterioration was earlier and deeper when NA were not changed (P<0.05). All the 37 p who introduced Shg+novel NA after a successful >6-month induction with a potent PI-based HAART had a stable 12–18-month outcome. A suboptimal HAART including the less effective but better tolerated Shg may be effective for >1 year, especially when novel NA are introduced, and specific mutations are absent. Despite a lower potency, drugs with a good safety and compliance profile may be recovered for simplified regimens. 
 
Quantification of HIV-1 RNA in Cerebrospinal Fluid after the start of dual or triple antiretroviral therapy
 
PM136
 Abrescia Na, Busto Aa, D'Abbraccio Ma, Figoni Ma, Viglietti Ra, Di Nicuolo Gb, De Marco Ma, Butrico Ea, Piccirillo Ma. a
4th Infectious Diseases Department, D. Cotugno Hospital, Naples, Italy, b
D. Cotugno Hospital, Virology Section, Naples, Italy
 

Objective: To evaluate efficacy of antiretroviral therapy (ART) with two or three drugs in the nervous ‘reservoir’.

Patients: Thirteen acute neurological and ART naive AIDS patients underwent a paired and simultaneous sample from plasma and cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) for a quantitative detection of HIV-1 RNA (Amplicor Roche) before ART. All patients underwent a CT and/or MR of the brain to perform a diagnosis. All of them had an HIV related neurological acute inflammatory disease. After diagnosis all patients received ART: 7/13 received two NRTI and 6/13 received HAART including two NRTI and one protease inhibitor. All patients underwent a paired and simultaneous follow-up from plasma and CSF during the 2nd month of treatment.

Results: In all patients baseline levels of HIV-RNA were higher (P<0.05) in the plasma (log 10 5.37+0.93) than in the CSF (log 10 4.33+1.379). The 7/13 patients who received dual therapy had undetectable levels (cut-off 200 copies/ml) of viral RNA at the follow-up in CSF, but not in plasma: three of these seven patients had a detectable plasma HIV-1 RNA. All 6/13 patients with HAART had undetectable HIV-1 RNA both in plasma and in CSF at the follow up.

Conclusions: Dual NRTI therapy is rapidly effective in CSF (because of an high penetration of drugs through a more permeable blood–brain barrier and lower HIV RNA baseline levels) but not in plasma. HAART is rapidly and equally effective both in CSF and plasma. 
 
Fulminant hepatic failure after the start of a highly active antiretroviral therapy efavirenz-based regimen in a naive AIDS woman without hepatitis viruses co-infection
 
PM137
 Abrescia N, D'Abbraccio M, Figoni M, Busto A, De Marco M, Butrico E, Viglietti R, Maddaloni A. 4th Division of Infectious Diseases Department, D. Cotugno Hospital, Naples, Italy
 

There are no reports of fulminant and fatal hepatic failure after the start of Highly Active Antiretroviral Therapy (HAART) in an HIV subject without chronic viral hepatitis. Case report: A 30-year-old naive AIDS woman with clinical symptoms due by a PCP was observed. Baseline ALT was increased (0.5 m.n.v.) because of a mild hepatosteatosis and a silent cholelithiasis. Serology for HBV, HDV and HCV was negative; IgG anti-HAV, anti-EBV, anti-CMV and anti-HSV were present. HIV-1 RNA was 5.7 log 10, CD4+ count was 26/μl. During the PCP treatment with co-trimoxazole ALT values increased (>5 m.n.v.); nevertheless, she completed the treatment. Liver enzymes returned to the pre-treatment values over several days. Then she started HAART with stavudine, lamivudine and efavirenz. After 10 days the patient showed an efavirenz-related skin rush that resolved within 5 days, without treatment discontinuation. Fourteen days after the start of HAART jaundice appeared. Laboratory revealed severe ALT increase (>8 m.n.v.) and hyperbilirubinemia (17 mg/dl) and she died because of an acute liver failure syndrome within few days. An HAART efavirenz-based regimen can result highly hepatotoxic when given in presence of a hepatosteatosis, of a recent hepatotoxicity caused by a non-antiretroviral treatment and of a previous idiosyncratic reaction to efavirenz. 
 
Our experience with Bulgarian herbal extracts for improving the general condition of HIV-positive patients
 
PM138
 Mekouchinov K. Military Medica Academy, Laboratory of Virology, Sofia, Bulgaria
 

Purpose: To investigate the positive effect of Bulgarian herbs on the general condition of HIV-positives.

Methods: We used a combination of 19 Bulgarian herbal extracts and treated six patients, divided in two groups: three with symptomatic and three with asymptomatic HIV-infection. The all three patients with asymptomatic HIV-infection were treated only with herbal extracts, another three patients with symptomatic HIV-infection were treated with combination of herbal extracts and anti-retroviral therapy. The general status of patients has been evaluated by both subjective and objective surveillance. The immunologic monitoring has been performed by absolute count of CD4+ lymphocytes.

Results: All patients have shown an obvious improvement in their general condition: high spirit and working capacity, good appetite and sleep, a restoration of body weight. The number of CD4+ lymphocytes has been lightly increased or constant.

Conclusion: The combination of Bulgarian herbal extracts has shown significant positive effect on the general condition and improve the quality of life. 
 
Antifungal activity of in vitro and in vivo combinations of voriconazole with 5-fluorocytosine and amphotericin B against
Candida
and
Cryptococcus
spp
 
PM139
 Hitchcock CA, Andrews RJ, Lewis BGH, Pye GW, Oliver GP, Troke PF. Pfizer Global Research and Development, Department of Discovery Biology, Sandwich, UK
 

Purpose: The present study was designed to determine whether the activity of voriconazole (VOR), a novel triazole, was reduced against candidal and cryptococcal infections by the addition of standard antifungal agents, amphotericin B (AMB) and 5-fluorocytosine (5-FC). VOR was tested in combination with standard antifungal agents both in vitro, using a checkerboard MIC determination test, and in vivo in immune normal guinea pig models of fungal infections.

Results: The results indicate that the efficacy of VOR against Candida albicans and C. neoformans was not antagonised by AMB or 5-FC in vitro. Furthermore, in guinea pig models of systemic candidiasis and intracranial cryptococcosis, no antagonism was observed between the lower doses of VOR and either AMB or 5-FC on the basis of reductions in tissue fungal loads. At the highest doses of VOR, both AMB and 5-FC showed some antagonism, but the combinations were still effective in significantly reducing fungal tissue loads compared with vehicle-treated control animals.

Conclusion: These results suggest that VOR may be used in combination with standard antifungal agents, and future studies to elucidate the clinical potential of VOR combination therapies in the management of Candida and Cryptococcus infections are warranted. 
 
Itraconazole in the treatment of pityriasis versicolor
 
PM140
 Tiodorovic J, Jovanovic D, Binic I, Nikolic LJ. Faculty of Medicine, Clinic of Dermatovenerology, Nis, Serbia, Yugoslavia
 

A comparison of two short-term dose schedules with itraconazole was carried out in 50 patients with pityriasis versicolor. The patients were divided in two groups. Each group consisted of 25 patients who completed the therapy and controls. The clinical diagnosis was confirmed mycologically, by direct microscopic examination. The first group received 400 mg of itraconazole daily for 3 days. The second group received 200 mg daily for 5 days. The patients were controlled clinically and mycologically 15 and 30 days after the initiation of treatment. Erythema, scaling and pruritus was evaluated clinically. Clinically and mycologically cured patients accepted as cured. The cure rate were 76% in the first group and 72% in the second group at day 30. The effects of these two groups are similar. None of the patients reported side-effects. 
 
Fungal urinary infections: emerging species, antifungal susceptibility trends and antibody response
 
PM141
 Badawi HEa, Kamel AIb, Fam NSa, El-Sayed MEa, Elian SAEc. a
Theodor Bilharz Medical Research Institute (TBMRI), Microbiology, Giza, Egypt, b
Theodor Bilharz Medical Research Institute (TBMRI), Urosurgery, Giza, Egypt, c
Faculty of Medicine, Medical Microbiology and Immunology, Cairo University, Cairo, Egypt

Objectives: To assess the role of Candida species in 120 patients with urinary tract infections (UTIs) with or without schistosomiasis and/or cancer bladder, to compare chromogenic; CHROMagar (CMA), BIGGY agar; morphologic (corn meal, rice agar-Tween 80) media and biochemical candifast test for identification of Candida species. Susceptibility to antifungal agents using E-test and candifast and the performance of ELISA test for detection of anticandida antibodies (IgM and IgG) in serum were evaluated. Results:
C. albicans was the most frequent (43.4%) species responsible for fungal UTIs. However, non-albicans species, C. glabrata (23.3%), C. tropicalis (20%) and C. krusei (13.3%) were also isolated. Rice agar-Tween 80 was found to be cheap, available and sufficient to make a final identification (100%). CMA could not identify C. glabrata. BIGGY agar could not adequately differentiate Candida species. Candifast biochemical identification showed low sensitivity of 83.3%. E-test on Sabouraud dextrose agar (SDA) is simple method for MICs determination and could detect S-DD strains in case of azoles. Conclusion: The emergence of non-albicans species such as C. glabrata, C. tropicalis and C. krusei have contributed to complicated UTIs. This necessitates accurate isolation and identification of Candida to the species level. Morphology on rice agar-Tween 80 and antifungal susceptibility using E-test on SDA is a simle rapid scheme for routine identification of clinically important yeasts. 
 
The diagnosis of Allergic Fungal Rhinosinusitis—a case study
 
PM142
 De Carvalho VBa, Gove EWa, Meewes Pb, McDonough Mc. a
Drs Niehaus Ungerer Pathologists, Microbiology, Pretoria, South Africa, b
Drs Niehaus Ungerer Pathologists, Serology, Pretoria, South Africa, c
Eugene Marais Hospital, Ear, Nose and Throat Specialist, Pretoria, South Africa
 

Purpose: Classification of Allergic Fungal Rhinosinusitis (AFR) is based on the immunologic relationship of the host to the fungus. AFR must be differentiated from other fungal rhinosinusitis infections, which include acute invasive, chronic invasive, fungal balls and saprophytic colonization. Although many cases of fungal rhinosinusitis is caused by species of Aspergillis, dermatiaceous moulds have become an emerging pathogen in immunocompetent individuals. Results: Our case study involved a 36 year male suffering from facial pain, headache, postnasal drip and loss of smell. He was HIV negative and a nonsmoker. The following laboratory tests were performed: IgE-2331.40 (0.00–25.00) IU/ml IgA-2.16 (0.70–4.00) g/l IgM-0.61 (0.40–2.30) g/l Allergen specific IgE for Alternaria—20.00 (0.00–0.5) kU/l FBC-Normal except eosinophils slightly raised 0.60 (0.00–0.50)×109/l. CT scans indicated fungus proliferation, bone erosion and extension of disease into adjacent anatomic area. Sinus tissue following debridement was sent for microscopy and culture. Hyphae was microscopically observed and cultures yielded two dermatiaceous fungi, Bipolaris spp and Alternaria spp. Conclusion: It is important to differentiate these two species from Curvularia, Helminthosporum, Drechelria and Exserohilum. Knowledge of these dermatiaceous fungi is important in directing appropriate antifungal therapy and selecting the correct antigens for postsurgical immunotherapy after initial debridement and irrigation. 
Antifungal activity of in vitro and in vivo combinations of voriconazole with 5-fluorocytosine and amphotericin B against
Aspergillus fumigatus
 
PM143
 Hitchcock CA, Andrews RJ, Lewis BGH, Pye GW, Oliver GP, Troke PF. Pfizer Global Research and Development, Department of Discovery Biology, Sandwich, UK
 

Purpose: A key requisite for a new antifungal drug is to demonstrate that it is devoid of significant antagonism in combination with other agents. Combinations of the new triazole, voriconazole (VOR), and standard antifungal agents (5-fluorocytosine or amphotericin B; 5-FC or AMB) were tested against Aspergillus fumigatus in vitro and in guinea pig models of infections to confirm that antifungal activity was not antagonised by using combination therapies. VOR was studied in combination with AMB or 5-FC in vitro, using a checkerboard MIC determination test, and in vivo, using immune normal and immunocompromised guinea pig models of systemic aspergillosis.

Results: The results indicate that the potency of VOR was not antagonised by AMB or 5-FC in vivo; indeed, at lower concentrations of VOR, significant improvements in reducing fungal burden in both in vivo models were achieved by the addition of AMB. In vitro, no antagonism was found between VOR and AMB, although 5-FC had a significant antagonistic effect on VOR activity.

Conclusion: These results from in vitro and in vivo models of aspergillosis suggest that VOR may be used in combination with standard antifungal agents and, therefore, justify further examinations of VOR combination therapies in a clinical setting. 
 
In vitro activity of caspofungin compared to that of amphotericin B, fluconazole, and itraconazole against
Candida
species
 
PM144
 Arikan S, Sancak B, Hascelik G. Department of Microbiology and Clinical Microbiology, Hacettepe University Medical School, Ankara, Turkey
 

Purpose: To evaluate the in vitro activity of caspofungin against various Candida spp. and particularly against isolates with decreased amphotericin B, fluconazole, and itraconazole susceptibilities.

Methods: Susceptibility tests were done by NCCLS M27A microdilution guidelines for 239 clinical Candida strains. The MICs (μg/ml) were read at 24 and 48 h.

Results: Caspofungin MICs at 24 h are shown in the table. MICs at 48 h were similar to 24 h readings. Expectedly, no evidence of cross-resistance was detected between caspofungin and other drugs tested. Caspofungin was similarly active against fluconazole- or itraconazole-susceptible and resistant isolates.

Conclusions: (1) Caspofungin is active in vitro against all Candida spp. tested. (2) Caspofungin MICs are slightly higher for C. parapsilosis compared to other species. (3) Its activity against fluconazole- and itraconazole-resistant isolates is noteworthy. (4) Validation of these data require clinical investigations.
 
 
 
Susceptibility of clinical strains of
Candida parapsilosis
to triazoles
 
PM145
 Swoboda-Kopec Ea, Wroblewska MMb, Sulik-Tyszka Ba, Cupak Ab, Luczak Mb. a
Central Clinical Hospital, Microbiology Laboratory, Warsaw, Poland, b
Department of Medical Microbiology, Medical University in Warsaw, Warsaw, Poland
 

The purpose of the study: Analysis of the patterns of susceptibility to triazole antifungal agents of the clinical isolates of Candida parapsilosis, cultured from patients hospitalised in the years 1998–2000 in different wards of the Central Clinical Hospital (1200 beds) of the Medical University in Warsaw, Poland. The strains were cultured from urine samples, blood, ear swabs and wound swabs.

Results: In total 63 isolates of C. parapsilosis were cultured (28—from internal medicine wards, 27—from surgical wards and eight from the intensive care unit patients). Isolates from wound swabs comprised 14 strains (22.22%), ear swabs—13 strains (20.64%), urine—13 strains (20.64%), blood—10 strains (15.86%) and other specimens—13 strains (20.64%). Susceptibility to fluconazole was detected in 56 strains (88.88%), while resistance—in seven strains (11.12%). Testing of susceptibility to itraconazole revealed 47 (74.61%) strains susceptible and 16 (25.39%)—resistant to this agent.

Conclusions: (1) We report a high frequency of C. parapsilosis isolations from blood culture specimens (15.87%). (2) The isolated strains showed a higher frequency of susceptibility to fluconazole than to itraconazole. 
 
Patterns of susceptibility to triazoles of
Candida tropicalis
strains from clinical specimens
 
PM146
 Swoboda-Kopec Ea, Wroblewska MMb, Stelmach Ea, Sulik-Tyszka Ba, Luczak Mb
.
a
Microbiology Laboratory, Central Clinical Hospital in Warsaw, Warsaw, Poland, b
Department of Medical Microbiology, Medical University in Warsaw, Warsaw, Poland
 

The purpose of the study: Estimation of susceptibility to triazoles of the clinical isolates of Candida tropicalis, cultured from sputum, urine, throat swabs, wound swabs, drain swabs, stool, peritoneum and other specimens from patients hospitalised in the different wards of the Central Clinical Hospital (1200 beds) of the Medical University in Warsaw, Poland in the period 1998–2000.

Results: Out of 52 strains of C. tropicalis, 31 were cultured from internal medicine wards, 17 from surgical wards and four from the intensive care unit patients. There were 11 (21.15%) strains isolated from sputum, six (11.53%) from urine, four (7.69%) both from drain swabs as well as throat swabs, three (5.76%) from stool specimens and 24 (46.18%) from other samples. Twenty-three strains (44.23%) showed susceptibility to fluconazole, while resistance—29 strains (55.77%). These values for itraconazole were 14 strains (26.92%) susceptible and 38 strains (73.08%) resistant to this antifungal drug.

Conclusions: (1) C. tropicalis was most often isolated from sputum and urine samples, while no isolations from blood culture specimens were recorded. (2) The cultured strains were characterised by a very high frequency of resistance to itraconazole (73.08%). 
 
Investigation of antifungal resistance and extracellular virulence factors of oropharyngeal
Candida norvegensis
isolates from bone marrow transplanted (BMT) patients
 
PM147
 Hermann Pa, Forgács Kb, Majoros Lc, Gyetvai Ád, Rozgonyi Fe. a
Department of Prosthodontics, Semmelweis University, Budapest, Hungary, b
Department of Microbiology and Biotechnology, University of Debrecen, Debrecen, Hungary, c
Institute of Medical Microbiology, University of Debrecen, Debrecen, Hungary, d
Department of Prosthodontics, University of Debrecen, Debrecen, Hungary, e
Institute of Medical Microbiology, Semmelweis University, Budapest, Hungary
 

Oropharyngeal microbiological samples of 80 BMT patients were evaluated. Weekly cultures (days −7, 0 and +7) revealed presence of fungi in 27 patients (33.7%): in four (5%) patients before BMT only, in 12 (15%) after BMT only, and in 11 (13.8%) both before and after BMT. In one patient Candida norvegensis was isolated from the throat, buccal and palatal surfaces. Three C. albicans, two C. krusei, and three C. norvegensis from four patients were chosen to comper their antifungal sensitivities and extracellular virulence factors. Using Fungitest method we determined the sensitivities of these isolates to flucytosine, amphotericin B, miconazole, ketoconazole and fluconazole. The fluconazole sensitivities were also determined by the E-test. On the basis of the Fungitest data the three C. norvegensis isolates were sensitive to flucytosine, amphotericin B, and also to ketoconazole. In case of fluconazole and miconazole they proved to be susceptible dependent upon dose. The MIC fluconazole values determined by the E-test for the three C. norvegensis isolates were 96, ≥256 and ≥256 μg/ml, respectively. The oropharyngeal isolates of C. norvegensis produced high amounts of extracellular aspartic protease and phospholipase similarly to C. albicans strains. These enzymes may contribute to the pathogenesis of this new emerging Candida species. 
 
In vitro activities of antifungal and antiseptic agents against
Rhodotorula
sp
 
PM148
 Preney L, Théraud M, Guiguen C, Gangneux JP. Laboratory Parasitologie-Mycologie, CHU de Rennes, France
 

Purpose of the study:
Rhodotorula species are common saprophyte yeasts widespread in nature. Since the last 10 years, they have been implicated in several severe infections, especially in immunocompromised patients, and various antifungal therapies were used. However, only limited data are available on the susceptibility of Rhodotorula sp. to antifungal and antiseptic agents. Material and methods: In this work, we evaluated the in vitro activities of eight antifungal agents against 30 strains of Rhodotorula (21 strains of R. rubra and nine strains of R. glutinis using ATB Fungus system (bioMerieux) and Etest strips (AB-Biodisk). Beside, the effect of eight antiseptic agents was assessed on a suspension of R. rubra. The quantification of yeasts after exposure to antiseptic agents was performed by subculturings using a microtitration method in 96-well plates. Results and discussion: All strains tested were susceptible to amphotericin B, 5FC, and nystatin. Twenty-nine out of 30 strains were susceptible to ketoconazole, 21 out of 30 were intermediate to econazole. All strains were resistant to fluconazole (CMI>64 mg/ml) and itraconazole (CMI>1 mg/ml), and 29 out of 30 were resistant to miconazole, suggesting that antifungal therapy must be adapted when Rhodotorula yeasts are implicated in invasive infection. Beside, 5 min exposure to sodium hypochlorite 12°, chlorhexidine 0.5% or Ecodiol (isopropyl alcohol+alkylamin) showed fungicidal activities. 
 
Susceptibility testing of
Aspergillus fumigatus
and emerging
Aspergillus
pathogens by a modification of the NCCLS M38-P method
 
PM149
 Logotheti Ma, Kapsanaki-Gotsi Eb, Velegraki Aa, Zagoura Db. a
Department of Microbiology, Mycology Reference Laboratory, Medical School, University of Athens, Athens, Greece, b
Biology Department, Section Ecology and Systematics, University of Athens, Athens, Greece
 

Aspergillosis in high risk groups of patients is still associated with high mortality rate (30–90%). Aspergillus fumigatus is the primary pathogen, while other opportunistic Aspergillus species are emerging.
Amphotericin B (AB), itraconazole (IT), voriconazole (VO) and terbinafine (TE) minimum inhibitory concentrations (MIC) were determined by modifying the NCCLS M38-P microdilution method. Stock drug solutions were prepared in RPMI 1640, dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO), and polyethylene glycol (PEG 400). Inocula, of the A. fumigatus group (7), A. flavus group (6), [A. parasiticus, A. versicolor, A. microcysticus, A. oryzae], A. niger group (9), [A. tubigensis, A. heteromorphus, A. pulverulentus, A. foetidus, A. awamori, A. carbonarius], the A. terreus group (2) and the M38-P quality control strains were prepared according to, and by modifying, the NCCLS guidelines. Plates were incubated at 30 and 35 °C and read at 24 and 48 h.
PEG 400 effectively dissolved IT and VO, while either DMSO or PEG dissolved TE. Low 30 and 35 °C–48 h AB, IT, VO and TE MICs (0.062–0.5 mg/l) were recorded. A. terreus (1) and A. parasiticus (2) were resistant to AB.
Certain clinical isolates demonstrate clinical and in vitro resistance. Standardization of susceptibility testing would offer reliable assistance in selecting and monitoring antifungal therapy. 
 
Investigation of identification and antifungal susceptibility from clinical specimens
 
PM150
 Otag F, Aslan, G, Ozturk C. Microbiology Department, Faculty of Medicine, Mersin University, Mersin, Turkey
 

Rates of opportunistic fungal infections have risen markedly. Because some of these species have potential resistance to antifungal agents, rapid presumptive species level identification is crucial in allowing for directed antifungal therapy. In this study, 55 isolated yeasts from the clinical specimens were identified by ATB ID 32 C (BioMerieux, France). The number of identified yeasts were, respectively; 33 (60%) Candida albicans, six (10%) C. glabrata, five (9.1%) C. tropicalis, three (5.4%) C. parapsilosis, two (3.6%) C. krusei, two (3.6%) C. kefyr, one (1.8%) C. guillermondii, one (1.8%) C. dubliniensis. Twenty-one of 55 strains were investigated for antifungal sensitivities by ATB Fungus kit (BioMerieux, France). The results are as follows: 100% sensitivity was detected to myconasol, 94% to flusitozin, nystatin and econasol, 95% to amphtericin B and ketokonazol. It is important to achieve empirik treatment of the opportunistic Candida infections and the following of resistance to antifungals. 
 
PCR as a diagnostic tool of syphilis in unclear cases
 
PM151
 Shakhmatov DA, Strelchenco, OV. Novosibirsk State Medical Academy, Dermatovenerology, Novosibirsk, Russian Federation
 

At the present stage in Russia with a background of a high case rate of syphilis, it becomes necessary to exclude biological false positive serological tests. Because the serodiagnosis of syphilis has significant limitations, the direct detection of T. pallidum in suspect blood may serve as an alternate diagnostic strategy. Polymerase chain reaction (PCR) has been the most widely used amplification method. The study of 56 patients receiving examination related and treatment for syphilis in STD clinic and persons directed from other hospitals where routine serologic examination revealed doubtful results. PCR reaction was carried out with nested primer pairs based on the DNA sequence of the 47–1 and 47–2 kDa gene of T. pallidum. PCR was utilized with whole blood. A complex of serological tests: FTA-abs and TIT was used as the &rdqup; gold standard”. As a result the sensitivity of PCR was 91.2% and specificity was 90.9%. Selective comparison of PCR results with VDRL, the FTA-abs and treponemal immobilisation test (TIT) has shown concurrence 96.8%. In conclusion, the preliminary results of PCR in whole blood in syphilis detection revealed its high sensitivity and specificity; possibility to obtain rapid results in unclear cases. 
 
Chlamydia pneumoniae
: molecular basis of pathogenesis
 
PM152
 Caronzolo D, Lucini V, Pannacci M, Fraschini F, Scaglione F. University of Milan of Pharmacology, Milan, Italy
 

Chlamydia pneumoniae (Cp) is an atypical pathogen whit intracellular location, whose eradication is very difficult. In the past years it has been objects of many studies that lead to the demonstration of a relationship between its presence and the development of widespread multifactorial pathologies such as atherosclerosis and asthma. The lack of its eradication can become an important clinical and social problem. The study objective is the comprehension of pathogen–host interaction mechanism, to characterize therapeutics protocols that cold lead to complete eradication of Cp from organism. The research had been principally made on the studying the molecular mechanisms that are at the root of pathogen permanence inside host cell. Using proliferation and apoptosis tests we underlined a different behaviour of infected cells towards control cells. In presence of P1 (20 mg/ml), i.e. a peptide that can inhibit the proliferation and induce apoptosis in vitro inhibiting NF-kB, uninfected cells proliferation decreased of 35% in comparison whit the controls, while the one of infected decreased only of about 15%. Moreover, using various apoptosis-inducers, the infected cells showing apoptosis were about 10% while the uninfected were about 40%. The caspace III activity increased significantly in uninfected cells. In conclusion, Cp could delay its elimination from the host inhibiting the apoptosis via NF-kB activation. 
 
Broad-range polymerase chain reaction (PCR) fungal identification in diagnosis of fungal superinfection of bacterial endocarditis
 
PM153
 Hryniewiecki Ta, Gzyl Ab, Rawczynska-Englert Ia, a
Department of Acquired Valvular Heart Disease, National Institute of Cardiology, Warsaw, Poland, b
Department of Sera and Vaccines, National Institute of Hygiene, Warsaw, Poland
 

Infective endocarditis (IE) frequently causes problems in diagnosis, especially where blood cultures are negative and with fungal etiology (also as a fungal superinfection in bacterial IE). The purpose of the study: The purpose of the study was to evaluate the usefulness of broad-range fungal PCR in diagnosis of fungal superinfection of bacterial IE. Twenty-five blood samples were taken for analysis from patients with infective endocarditis. IE was diagnosed according to Duke criteria including positive blood cultures. Suspicion of fungal superinfection was established on serological investigation in five patients, confirmed by blood culture in two patients. Control group consisted of 15 patients without infection. DNA was isolated using the commercially available S.N.A.P. kit. Amplification products were analyzed by gel electrophoresis stained with ethidium bromide. The results obtained: fungal DNA was found in two patients with fungal superinfection of bacterial IE confirmed by culture. In the remaining patients with IE and controls no fungal DNA was found. The conclusion reached: Broad-range fungal PCR is a fast and inexpensive tool for the detection of fungal DNA, but it is more prone to contamination than species-specific PCR. The method may be valuable in the identification of fungal superinfection of bacterial IE or diagnosis of fungal IE. 
 
Use of ELISA with TT virus (TTV) to detect anti-TTV antibodies in human sera
 
PM154
 Rivanera D, Lilli D, Lozzi MA, Piunno M, Mancini C. Microbiology, Science and Public Health, Rome, Italy
 

Aim: The aim of this study was to evaluate the EIA method for detection of antibody to TTV virus (TTV) and to investigate the anti-TT virus prevalence in patients with hepatitis B (HBV) virus, hepatitis C (HCV) virus, in group of ‘high risk'subjects to hepatitis and in healthy subjects. The Elisa methods (Nuclear laser Vienna Lab) using TTV S and NS antigens: ORF1 (770 aa) and ORF2 (202 aa) was applied to detect anti-TTV; the serological screening was performed from 250 samples to Italian subjects. Results: The positive rates of anti-TTV antibodies were 11.29% in 62 patients with hepatitis B–C and 14.06% in 119 ‘high risk’ hepatitis patients. The anti-TTV was also found in 7.56% in 69 healthy people. Conclusions: The anti-TTV were detected in all groups studied, however, its positive rate was similar in patients with hepatitis B–C and in ‘high risk’ hepatitis respect to heathly people. Our results shown that TT virus is frequent in Italy both in patients infected by others transmitted viruses and in general population. The positivity found in healthy adults included in our studies suggests that the virus might be transmitted non-parenterally. The study of pattern of antibody to TTV may be an infectious marker of TTV similar to that of anti-HCV. 
 
A stress test on a miniaturized identification system designed for Neisseria and Haemophilus
 
PM155
 Rich Ma, Bannatyne RMa,  Memish ZAb. a
King Fahad National Guard Hospital, Division of Microbiology, Riyadh, Saudi Arabia, b
King Fahad National Guard Hospital, Infection Prevention and Control, Riyadh, Saudi Arabia
 

We report an incident that occurred in our laboratory when the BBL Crystal Identification System for Neisseria and Haemophilus was used to identify a Haemophilus-like-organism. The numerical profile generated was not in the system database. Conventional biochemical tests subsequently revealed an identification of Brucella melitensis, a common isolate in our area. As a result of this revelation we subjected this system to a mini ‘stress-test' with a collection of 20 isolates of B. melitensis. Two numerical profiles were obtained, 1740616606 and 1740616607, neither of which are listed in the system database. Brucella species have been misidentified as Moraxella species, Moraxella phenylpyruvica, and as Haemophilus influenzae biotype IV in various identification systems. Two cases of laboratory-acquired brucellosis have been attributed to misidentification. To its credit the BBL Crystal Identification System for Neisseria and Haemophilus neither generates a profile number with a misidentified organism nor assigns a confidence level. Instead it properly directs the user to resort to conventional methods to secure an identification. If further studies on additional Brucella isolates and strains from different geographical sources confirm the unique biochemical profiles identified here, it may be worthwhile to incorporate these into the database where they would be of considerable assistance in areas where brucellosis is widespread. 
 
Cloning and characterization of
AFLMP1
in
Aspergillus flavus
 
PM156
 Chong TK, Woo PCY, Leung ASP, Yuen KY. The University of Hong Kong, Microbiology, Hong Kong, Hong Kong
 

Purpose of the study: To clone and characterize an antigenic protein for serodiagnosis of infection caused by Aspergillus flavus which is the commonest Aspergillus species causing aspergilloma (AO) and invasive aspergillosis (IA) in Asia.

Result obtained: We cloned the AFLMP1 gene, which encodes the first antigenic cell wall protein in A. flavus. AFLMP1 codes for a protein, Aflmp1p, of 273 amino acid residues, with sequence features that are present in Mp1p and AFMp1p, the antigenic cell wall mannoprotein in Penicillium marneffei and Aspergillus fumigatus that we described previously. It contains a serine- and threonine-rich region for O glycosylation, a signal peptide, and a putative glycosylphosphatidylinositol attachment signal sequence. Specific anti-Aflmp1p antibody was generated with recombinant Aflmp1p protein purified from Escherichia coli to allow further characterization of Aflmp1p. Indirect immunofluorescent staining indicated that Aflmp1p is present in the cell walls of the hyphae and conidia of A. flavus. Furthermore, it was observed that patients with AO and IA due to A. flavus develop a specific antibody response against Aflmp1p.

Conclusion reached: This suggested that the recombinant protein and its antibody may be useful for serodiagnosis in patients with AO or IA, and the protein may represent a good cell surface target for host humoral immunitiy. 
 
Integrons in clinical isolates of Enterobacteriaceae
 
PM157
 Grape M, Farra Aa, Sörberg Mb, Sundström, Lc, Kronvall Ga. a
Karolinska Institute, Clinical Microbiology-MTC, Stockholm, Sweden, b
Department of Medicine, Karolinska Institute, Inf. Dis., Stockholm, Sweden, c
Department of Medical Biochemistry and Microbiology, Uppsala University, Uppsala, Sweden
 

Purpose: To investigate the basis for increasing resistance to trimethoprim and sulphamethoxazole. Methods: PCR screening for integrons of 105 clinical urinary tract isolates was performed. Isolates were tested for resistance to 12 antibiotics. Integrons in 14 isolates were sequenced. Results: Integrons of class 1 were found in 43 isolates and class 2 integrons were found in 10. Eight isolates in the study were resistant to five antibiotics or more and not shown to carry any integron. Nineteen of 69 isolates resistant to trimethoprim did not carry integrons. Only one of these isolates was shown to carry sul1 and is thus probably also carrying an integron. None of the 19 isolates were shown to carry dfr8, one of five trimethoprim resistance genes known to exist outside integrons. Three isolates were resistant to sulphonamides but were not shown to carry neither sul1 nor sul2. Only dfr and aad gene cassettes were found in the sequenced integrons. Conclusions: Resistance to trimethoprim in 19 of 69 trimethoprim resistant isolates is mediated by genes not detectable, as in the case with three sulphonamide resistant isolates. Sequenced integrons that contain dfr genes do not carry any gene cassettes mediating resistance to modern antibiotics. 
 
Unusual diagnosis tool for an unusual presentation of alveolar echinococcosis: report of two cases of local progression after an animal bite
 
PM158
 Bardonnet K, Bart JM, Loiseau J, Gérard A, Estavoyer JM, Heyd B, Badet JM, Dubiez A, Piarroux R, Bresson-Hadni S. WHO Collaborating Centre for Prevention and Treatment of Human Echinococcosis, University of Franche-Comté, Besançon, France
 

Introduction: The classical human contamination route for alveolar echinococcosis (AE) is ingestion of eggs. Two exceptional human cases are reported with extensive local evolution of AE after a bite.

Case no. 1: Between 1954 and 1972, a patient underwent surgery seven times for a muscle growing tumour which developed after a bite. The diagnosis of muscle AE was assessed on histopathological examination. In 1980, serological tests were in accordance with Echinococcus sp infection.

Case no. 2: In 1985, a man presented ‘cat-scratch fever’ with a right supraclavicular tumefaction following a cat bite. Between 1986 and 2000, five recurrences occurred. Different surgical explorations indicated multiple abscesses of the cervical muscles. In 2000, serological tests were in favour of Echinococcus sp infection and the pathologist described a parasitic wall suggesting hydatidosis, but specific PCR from histological samples prompted the diagnosis of AE.

Conclusion: In these exceptional observations, the liver which is the most usual location of AE was lesion-free. The chronic inflammatory AE lesions have developed in the local lymphatic chain area of the bite site. To perform diagnosis in these very unusual forms of AE, it is necessary to add unusual tests such as specific PCR to classical tests. 
 
Mutations and horizontal gene transfer contribute to sulphonamide resistance in
S. pyogenes
 
PM159
 Jönsson M, Swedberg G. Medical Immunology and Microbiology, Uppsala University, Uppsala, Sweden
 

The enzyme DHPS (dihydropteroate synthase) participates in the folate synthesis pathway, and is well recognized as the target for sulphonamides. The enzyme preceding DHPS in this pathway, PPPK (dihydropterin pyrophosphokinase), is another interesting candidate drug target. The metabolic role of PPPK is to provide one of the substrates for DHPS. Earlier studies have suggested that PPPK and DHPS enzymes need to have physical contact with each other for full enzyme activity. Substances that interfere with such interactions could lead to impaired growth and thus be used as inhibitory drugs. Studies of potential interactions between the enzymes have been initiated. So far, indication of a weak interaction has been detected in gelfiltration experiments and the two-hybrid system. To confirm these results, we are currently developing a method to study substrate channeling. We have also cloned and sequenced the operons coding for the enzymes in the folate biosynthesis from different clinical isolates of Streptococcus pyogenes. Comparisons revealed some isolates with a mosaic structure in the operon, suggesting that horizontal transfer of genetic material has occurred. 
 
Screening of class I integrons in antibiotic resistant
Salmonella
serotypes isolated from poultry products
 
PM160
 Antunes Pa, Réu Cb, Sousa JCb, Pestana Nb, Peixe Lb. a
Laboratory of Microbiology, Faculty of Nutrition and Food Sciences, Faculty of Pharmacy, University of Oporto, Oporto, Portugal, b
Laboratory of Microbiology, Faculty of Pharmacy, University of Oporto, Oporto, Portugal
 

Antibiotic resistance in foodborne Salmonella is an emerging public health concern. Integrons are now recognized as the main genetic vehicles of antibiotic resistance in Gram-negative bacteria, including in Salmonella. The purpose of the present study was to investigate the presence of class I integrons in resistant isolates of several serotypes of Salmonella isolated from poultry products and to determine their association with multidrug-resistance phenotypes. A total of 20 isolates of Salmonella belonging to seven different serotypes were tested. The most frequent multiresistant phenotype, found alone or together with other resistances, was to streptomycin and tetracycline. All but seven were resistant to three or more antimicrobial agents, including quinolones and amoxicillin. PCR analysis with the 5′CS and 3′CS primers detected the presence of class I integrons of 1.5 kb in one isolate, with the multiresistant phenotype: amoxicillin, chloramphenicol, streptomycin, trimethoprim-sulphametoxazol and tetracycline. Our findings suggest that the uncontrolled use of the antimicrobial agents in food animals may have contributed to the development of the pattern of resistance observed in Salmonella isolates. Also the presence of integrons in low prevalent human Salmonella serotypes but associated with food animals underscores the public health problem of antibiotic resistance acquisition and spread. 
 
Prevalence and antimicrobial resistance of
Campylobacter jejuni
and
C. coli
isolated from broilers and pigs in France
 
PM161
 Avrain La, Humbert Fb, Sanders Pc, Kempf Ia. a
AFSSA, UMB, Ploufragan, France, b
AFSSA, HQPAP, Ploufragan, France, c
AFSSA, LERMVD, Fougères, France
 

In 1999, 620 caeca from standard, export or free-range broilers and in 2000, 600 fecal samples from pigs, were collected in French slaughterhouses. Prevalence of Campylobacter jejuni and C. coli strains was 56.6% in standard, 51.3% in export and 80% in free-range broilers. In standard and export productions, the most often isolated species was C. jejuni, whereas C. coli was predominant in free-range production. 53.8% samples collected from pigs contained C. coli. The sensitivity of strains to ampicillin, nalidixic acid, enrofloxacin (broilers) or ciprofloxacin (pigs), tetracycline, erythromycin and gentamicin was tested by an agar dilution method. In broilers, the percentages of resistant strains were, respectively 22, 25, 17, 57, 0.3 and 0% for C. jejuni and 29, 43, 40, 70, 31 and 0% for C. coli. In pigs the percentages of resistant C. coli were, respectively 12, 21, 12, 83, 65 and 0%. In broiler production, significant differences between distributions of species or percentages of resistant strains were observed according to type of production or administrated antimicrobials. 
 
The folate biosynthesis operon of
S. pyogenes
: mosaic gene patterns and protein interactions
 
PM162
 Jönsson M, Swedberg G. Department of Medical Biochemistry and Microbiology, Uppsala Universitet, Uppsala, Sweden
 

The enzyme DHPS (dihydropteroate synthase) participates in the folate synthesis pathway, and is well recognized as the target for sulphonamides. The enzyme preceding DHPS in this pathway, PPPK (dihydropterin pyrophosphokinase), is another interesting candidate drug target. The metabolic role of PPPK is to provide one of the substrates for DHPS. Earlier studies have suggested that PPPK and DHPS enzymes need to have physical contact with each other for full enzyme activity. Studies of potential interactions between the enzymes have been initiated. So far, indication of a weak interaction has been detected in gelfiltration experiments and the two-hybrid system. To confirm these results, we are currently developing a method to study substrate channeling, as interfering with such interactions could lead to impaired growth and thus be used as inhibitory drugs. We have also cloned and sequenced the operons coding for the enzymes in the folate biosynthesis from different clinical isolates of Streptococcus pyogenes. Comparisons revealed some isolates with a mosaic structure in the operon, suggesting that horizontal transfer of genetic material has occurred. 
 
Multi-resistance gene cluster on a plasmid in a clinical isolate of
E. faecium
 
PM163
 Werner G, Hildebrandt B, Klare I, Witte W. Department of Nosocomial Infections, Robert Koch Institute, Wernigerode Branch, Germany
 

Purpose: Strain UW786 was isolated from an urine sample of a patient with a permanent catheter. The purpose of our study was to identify and localize the resistance determinants in this isolate. Results: Isolate UW786 was resistant to the following antibiotics: penicillin, ampicillin, gentamicin (high-level), streptomycin (high-level), erythromycin, clindamycin, vancomycin, teicoplanin, ciprofloxacin, moxifloxacin, nourseothricin, rifampicin, and fusidic acid (low-level, MIC=4 mg/l); but showed susceptibilities to oxytetracycline, phosphomycin, chloramphenicol, trimethoprim/sulfamethoxazol, linezolid, and quinupristin/dalfopristin. Hybridization, PCR and sequencing experiments localized a cluster consisting of several resistance genes in a composite element on a plasmid. The cluster included genes and transposons Tn1546 (vanA)–Tn917 (ermB)–Tn1505 (aadE–sat4–aphA-3). The plasmid itself was not transferable in filter-matings into a fusidic acid high-level resistant Enterococcus faecium recipient while selecting either for erythromycin or vancomycin resistances. However, after transposing a Tn916-related determinant into UW786, determinants became mobilizable with the help of the conjugative transposon. Transconjugants were, besides others, high-level resistant to fusidic acid, but susceptible to penicillin and ampicillin. PFGE of transconjugants demonstrated a pattern almost identical to the recipient but clearly different from the donor. Conclusion: Resistance genes in E. faecium could be arranged in a cluster and are mobile via mobilizable/transferable plasmids. 
 
Dual infection with hepatitis G virus (HGV) and hepatitis C virus (HCV) in relation to different HCV genotypes
 
PM164
 Lilli D, Rivanera D, Barbacini IG, Lozzi MA, Mancini C. Department of Science and Public Health, University La Sapienza, Microbiology, Rome, Italy
 

Aim: Hepatitis G virus (HGV), a new RNA virus that is parenterally trasmitted has frequentley been found in patients with chronic hepatitis C infection but its role in chronic liver desease is unknown. The aim of this study was to determine the prevalence of HGV infection in patients infected with HCV.
Ninety-eight patients infected with HCV were evaluated for the presence of HGV RNA. The HCV genotypes distribution was 30 genotype 1b, 10 genotype 1a, 54 genotype 3a and four genotype 4c/4d. HCV RNA and HGV RNA were detected by RT-nested PCR. Results: Infection with hepatitis G virus was detected in 21 (21.4%) patients and 77 (78.6%) were HGV RNA negative.
None of our patients with genotypes 1a and 4c/4d results HGV RNA positive. Prevalence of HGV infection was 10% in patients infected with HCV genotype 1b and 33.3% with genotype 3a.

Conclusions: Infection with HGV occurred frequently (21.4%) in this sample of patients with chronic hepatitis C. We observed a height prevalence of HCV/HGV coinfection in patients infected with HCV genotype 3a.
This association with HCV genotype 3a was indipendent of the source of infection, infact some of our patients have not history of intravenous drug use. 
 
Characterization of extended-spectrum beta-lactamase (ESBL)-mediated resistance in
Salmonella
spp. from Durban, South Africa
 
PM165
 Moodley Pa, Essack Sb, Gajee  Ka, Sturm Wa. a
Department of Medical Microbiology, Nelson R. Mandela School of Medicine, School of Infection, University of Natal, Durban, South Africa, b
School of Pharmacy and Pharmacology, University of Durban Westville, Durban, South Africa
 

Background: Gastroenteritis is a common condition among the paediatric population presenting to King Edward VIII Hospital in Durban, South Africa. From July 2001, we noticed that the susceptibility of the Salmonella spp. isolated from stool samples among these children were resistant to multiple antibiotics.

Aim: To characterize the phenotype of the resistance mechanisms involved.

Methods: Minimum inhibitory concentrations (MICs) of ampicillin, azithromycin, ciprofloxacin, cefepime, cefuroxime, cefotaxime, ceftazidime, ceftriaxone, cefoxitin, chloramphenicol, cotrimoxazole and gentamicin were determined by means of the agar dilution method. Isolates were subjected to the E-test for extended-spectrum beta-lactamase (ESBL) production. Isoelectric focusing was performed as a preliminary step in enzyme characterization.

Results and conclusion: Thirty isolates of multiresistant Salmonella spp. were obtained. Antibiogram typing revealed six different resistance phenotypes. All isolates depicted ceftazidime/ceftazidime–clavulanate ratio of >8 and were considered putative ESBL-producers. Isolates expressed 1–3 beta-lactamases each with pI values ranging between 5 and 8.2 indicative of TEM-, SHV- and/or CTX-M-related ESBLs. Nine isolates expressed two beta-lactamases each and two isolates expressed three beta-lactamases each. There was evidence of the simultaneous expression of both TEM- and SHV-derived ESBLs as well as the simultaneous expression of multiple TEM- or SHV-derived ESBLs in single isolates, a phenomenon reported in ESBL-positive Klebsiella pneumoniae isolated at the same hospital. 
 
Neutrophils exhibit reduced chemiluminescence response to serum opsonized
Klebsiella pneumoniae
producing extended spectrum β-lactamases (ESBL)
 
PM166
 Sahly Ha, Benedi Jb, Forestier Cc, Hansen DS4, Ofek I5, Podschun Ra, Sirot Dc, Tomás JM6, Ullmann Ua. a
Department of Medical Microbiology and Virology, University of Kiel, Kiel, Germany, b
Departmento de Biologia, Area de Microbiologia, Universidad de las Islas Baleares, Palma de Mallorca, Spain, c
Laboratoire de Bactériologie, Faculté de Médecine-Pharmacie, Université D'Auvergne, Clermont-Ferrand, France, d
Department of Gastrointestinal Infections, Statens Seruminstitut, Copenhagen, Denmark, e
Department of Human Microbiology, Sackler School of Medicine, Tel Aviv University, Tel Aviv, Israel, f
Departmento de Microbiologia, Facultad de Biologia, Universidas de Barcelona, Barcelona, Spain
 

Objective: To investigate the ability of ESBL and non-ESBL-producing Klebsiella pneumoniae isolates treated with human serum to induce a chemiluminescence response in neutrophils. Methods: Oxidative burst induced by the interaction of ESBL (n=81) and non-ESBL-producing (n=152) Klebsiella pneumoniae isolates with neutrophils from healthy individuals was monitored by measuring the chemiluminescence response (CL). Pooled sera from healthy individuals served as source of complement for pretreatment of the bacteria. CL responses triggered by serum treated zymosan served as positive control. The serum opsonized Klebsiella strains were arbitrarily graded as high (H) and low (L) inducers of CL when the CL response induced by the bacteria was CL <60 and >60%, respectively, of that induced by opsonized zymosan. Results: Out of 152 non-ESBL-producing Klebsiella isolates, 61.8% induced high CL response in neutrophils whereas only 42% of 81 ESBL-producing Klebsiella isolates did so (P<0.02). Conclusions: Strains harboring the ESBL plasmid were more virulent than non-ESBL-producing strains by virtue of their higher tendency to escape serum-dependent recognition by neutrophils. 
 
Osiris—an automated system for susceptibility testing in agar diffusion technique
 
PM167
 Chegrani F, Kolbert M, Shah PM. Universitätsklinik Frankfurt, Zentrum der Inneren Medizin Med III Schwerpunkt Infektiologie, Frankfurt am Main, Germany
 

Objective: OSIRIS measured zone sizes were compared to manually measured inhibition zones using round 90 (RP) and 120 mm Mueller Hinton square Agarplates (SQP). Variations of ±3 mm in zone size measurements were defined as tolerable. ‘Very major errors’ (VME) were defined as classification of a resistant organism as sensitive by OSIRIS. Thirty thousand two hundred and ninety-eight single measurements testing 42 antibiotics on 352 staphylococci and 113 Enterobacteriaceae were done according to the DIN 58940 recommendations.

Results: Vancomycin, Rifampicin, Gentamicin gave the best results on RP with a concordance of 96, 88 and 86%. Vancomycin, Rifampicin, Teicoplanin performed best with 97, 94, 93% on SQP testing Staphylococci. Worst results on RP gave Cefuroxim (43.8%) and Fosfomycin (55.1%), on SQP Fosfomycin (36.4%), Ofloxacin (88.1%). For Enterobacteriaceae Amikacin (100%), Gentamicin (100%), Ciprofloxacin (100%) performed best on RP; worst Nalidixinacid (32.5%), Piperacillin (82.5%). Concordance on SQP Amikacin (100%), Cefotaxim (100%), Gentamicin (100%), Nitrofurantoin (72.5%), Cotrimoxazol (90%). Very major errors were seen in <1% of all test performed.

Interpretation: Osiris is a rapid and reliable system for susceptibility testing with round and square agarplates and has an excellent expert system. 
 
Comparision of Dio-Bacit, asitracin-SXT and latex agglutination in group A beta-hemolytic
Streptococcus
definition
 
PM168
 Altindis Ma, Aktepe OCa, Kocagoz Tb. a
Kocatepe University School Of Medicine, Microbiology, Afyon, Turkey, b
Diomed Inc. TR, Istanbul, Turkey
 

Dio-Bacit, in a two section plate, that contains 5% sheep blood agar on one side and sheep blood agar with bacitracin (2 μg/ml) was compared for its efficiency in identification of Group A Beta hemolytic Streptococcus (GABS) with other two different growth plates, one containing 5% sheep blood agar with bacitracin (B) and the other containing B-SXT. We used latex-agglutination for this comparision. Throat specimens obtained from 490 cases were inoculated to Dio-Bacit plates, first to one side with 5% sheep blood agar and to the other side with B. After an overnight inoculation at 37 °C, colonies with beta hemolysis an 5% sheep blood agar but no growth with B, were inoculated to 5% sheep blood agar again and antibiogram identification discs containing 0.04 U B and 1.25 and 23.75 mg SXT (Oxoid, UK) were placed onto the plate and incubated overnight at 37 °C. After that, colonies with beta hemolysis were defined as B-sensitive while colonies resistant to SXT were defined to be GABS. All colonies are serologically classified by latex-agglutination (Oxoid, UK). Seventy-one (14.5%) inoculations revealed growth of GABS at Dio-Bacit plates. After inoculating these colonies to 5% sheep blood agar, 72 of them were found to be sensitive to B, while 67 were found to be sensitive to B but resistant to SXT and 58 of them were defined as GABS by Latex test. When compared with latex-agglutination test, we found Dio-Bacit method's sensitivity and spesificity to be 92 and 96.9%, respectively. 
 
Comparison of Mueller Hinton (MHA) and Iso Sensitest Agar (ISA) using aura
 
PM169
 Kolbert M, Chegrani F, Shah PM. Universitätsklinikum Frankfurt, Zentrum der Inneren Medizin Med III Schwerpunkt Infektiologie, Frankfurt am Main, Germany
 

Objective: Variation in different batches of MHA can influence susceptibility testing markedly, whereas variation in composition of ISA is minimal. Inhibition zone size (IZS) was determined on MHA and ISA.

Method: Agar diffusion technique as recommended by DIN 58940 was used to determine IZS (read using AURA and manually) for 178 Staphylococci and 22 Enterobacteriaceae. Variations in automated measured zone sizes of ±3 mm to the manual readings were considered to be within acceptable range.

Results: Six thousand and fifty-two zone sizes were determined for Staphylococci and 748 for Enterobacteriaceae. MHA displayed tendency to smaller zone sizes in automated readings than ISA, as well in Staphylococci and Enterobacteriaceae. On the other side automated readings presented on ISA more precise results than MHA. Overall less major discrepancies (<3 mm) were found on ISA. IZS were generally smaller on MHA.
The tables below show differences in manually and automated measured zone sizes on different media and species.
 
 
 
Evaluation of the
E
-test and agar dilution method for testing antibiotic susceptibility of
Helicobacter pylori
strains to metronidazole and clarithromycin
 
PM170
 Skvarc Ma, Gubina Ma, Tepes Bb. a
Institute for Microbiology and Immunology, Medical Faculty of Ljubljana, Ljubljana, Slovenia, b
Zdravstvo Rogaska, Rogaska Slatina, Slovenia
 

Purpose: To assess the in vitro susceptibility of Helicobacter pylori to antimicrobial agents with agar dilution method (AD) and E-test.

Results: Forty-one H. pylori strains isolated from patients with peptic ulcer disease were tested by AD. The E-test (AB Biodisk, Sweden) results and strains were gathered from the previous study. The strains were frozen to −80 °C and then used again for our study. Resistances to metronidazole and clarithromycin were defined as MIC values ≥8 and ≥2 μg/ml. The results are presented in the table.
 We discovered seven more cases of resistance in the case of metronidazole. We did not have such experience with clarithromycin.

Conclusion: Our results show that E-test is comparable to AD for clarithromycin, but for metronidazole our findings confirm NCCLS recommendantion. Classical AD is time consuming for every day use in the laboratory. The use of screening agar plate with 8 μg/ml of metronidazole to detect possible resistance could be the solution. 
 
Comparison of two methods for detection of ESBL-producers
 
PM171
 Rokosz Aa, Sawicka-Grzelak Aa, Meszaros Jb, Luczak Ma. a
Department of Medical Microbiology, The University Medical School, Warsaw, Poland, b
Department of Bacteriology, State Institute of Hygiene, Warsaw, Poland
 

Purpose: To identify ESBL-positive strains and to compare two methods applied for the detection of extended-spectrum beta-lactamases (ESBLs).

Methods: Two hundred and sixty strains of Gram-negative rods were cultured from clinical specimens from hospitalized patients. Identification of strains was performed in the automatic ATB system (bioMerieux, France). These strains were identified as ESBL-positive on the basis of the double-disc synergy test (DDST according to Jarlier et al., 1988) results. All strains were also determined using a novel method of ESBL detection (DD, diagnostic disc) according to Appleton (1999). Two discs were applied in this test: CPD (cefpodoxime) and CD 01 (cefpodoxime/clavulanic acid) (Oxoid, England).

Results: Consistent results of two methods (DDST and DD) were obtained in the case of 166 from among 260 of examined strains (60.4%). Consistent results concerned 161 out of 222 strains of enteric rods (72.5%) and only five from among 38 other strains (mostly non-fermenting rods).

Conclusions: The novel method of ESBL-producers detection (DD) is more objective and easier for interpretation than the double-disc synergy test (DDST). Diagnostic disc test should be used as the basic one or to confirm the results of DDST in difficult cases. 
 
Assessment of
E
-test for determining penicillin resistance in pneumococci
 
PM172
 Sener B, Yeniþehirli G, Ercis S, Hasçelik G. Department of Clinical Microbiology, Hacettepe University Medical Faculty, Ankara, Turkey
 

There is a greater need for susceptibility testing methods that distinguish between susceptible and resistant pneumococci. An alternative method could be the E-test, which is compared with the reference agar dilution method in this study.
Penicillin susceptibility of a total of 149 pneumococci was determined by E-test and agar dilution methods. Streptococcus pneumoniae ATCC 49619 and Enterococcus faecalis ATCC 29212 were used as controls.
The results were given in the table. Penicillin MIC50 values were 0.125 μg/ml for both of the methods, while MIC90 was 1 μg/ml for agar dilution and 0.75 μg/ml for E-test.
 
aBy agar dilution.
Overall aggrement between agar dilution penicillin MIC and E-test was 0.89 (P<0.05). Three penicillin intermediate isolates were interpreted as susceptible by the E-test. The E-test MIC's agreed within 1 log2 dilution of the reference method for 134 (92.41%) of the isolates. 
 
Effect of anoxic conditions on the minimum inhibitory concentration of metronidazole in
Helicobacter pylori
 
PM173
 de la Obra Sanz P, Lomas E, Roman JL, Alarcon T, Lopez-Brea M. Hospital de la Princesa, Microbiology, Madrid, Spain
 

The objective of this study was to determine the effect of incubation under anoxic conditions on the metronidazole resistance of Helicobacter pylori. Methods: A total of 35 clinical isolates were used in this study. MICs were determined by an agar dilution method using Mueller-Hinton agar plus 7% lysed horse blood. Three plates series contained twofold dilutions of metronidazole from 256 to 0.008 mg/l were prepared. The first one was incubated under microaerophilic conditions (Oxoid) for 3 days; second and third series were incubated anaerobically (anaerobic system, Oxoid) for 8 and 18 h, respectively, and were then transferred to the microaerophilic enviroment up to complete 3 days of incubation. Results: With microaerophilic incubation, 12 of 35 strains were resistant (MIC50 and MIC90 were 1 and 32, respectively). With 8 h anaerobic preincubation, four of 35 strains were resistant (MIC50 and MIC90 were 0.5 and 4, respectively). With 18 h anaerobic preincubation, 1 of 35 strains was resistant (MIC50 and MIC90 were 0.25 and 1, respectively). Conclusions: Anaerobic preincubations causes an increase in sensitivity to metronidazole, the extent of which was dependent on the length of the anaerobic period. 
 
Microbiological aspects of mixed purulent–septic infections
 
PM174
 Shprykova ONa, Shkaryn VVb, Tez VVc, Andremont Ad, Kovalyshena OVe. a
Clinic of Infections #2 Medical Academy, Laboratory of Bacteriology, Nyzhny Novgorod, Russian Federation, b
Department of Epidemiology, Medical Academy, Nyzhny Novgorod, Russian Federation, c
Department of Microbiology, 2 State Medical University Named by I.P. Pavlov, Virusology and Immunology, St.-Petersburg, Russian Federation, d
Bacteriological Laboratory, Hospital of Bichat-Claude Bernard, Paris, France, e
Department of Epidemiology, State Medical Academy, Nyzhny Novgorod, Russian Federation
 

The purpose of the research was the investigation of microbiological features of tissue infections in surgical and otolaryngological patients. The prospective microbiological investigations had been conducted in 690 patients and 918 bacterial strains were isolated, 568 (61.9%) of them were in mixed culture. The commonest associations were formed by Staphylococcus epidermidis or Staphylococcus aureus with the following microorganisms: Pseudomonas aeruginosa, Enterococcus faecalis, Enterobacter spp., Micrococcus spp., Corynebacterium spp., Klebsiella spp. Mixed cultures were isolated in high numbers more often than pure cultures: 59.8±0.5 and 37.6±0.6%, respectively (P<0.01). In the surgical department the percentage of multiantibiotic resistant stains from mixed cultures was 68.1±0.1% and in otolaryngological department—76.9±0.3%, while in monocultures the respective was found, respectively in 31.9±0.18 and 23.08±0.05% (P<0.01). Microbial associations play a significant role as causative agents of purulent–septic infections in surgical and otolaryngological patients. Components of associations are often multiantibiotic resistant strains and occur in high concentrations. 
 
Antimicrobial susceptibility patterns of
Moraxella catarrhalis
 
PM175
 Kanellopoulou M, Skarmoutsou N, Martsoukou M, Charalabopoulou A, Mylona E, Koukis P, Papafrangas E. Sismanoglio General District Hospital of Attica, Laboratory of Clinical Microbiology, Athens, Greece
 

Aim: To determine the susceptibility of 156 Moraxella catarrhalis strains isolated from adults sputum–bronchial secretions during a period of 3 years (1998–2000) to 11 antimicrobial agents.

Methods: The susceptibility to antibiotics was performed by microdilution method according to NCCLS guidelines. The production of β-lactamase was tested by nitrocefin sticks (Oxoid).

Results: The MICs50/MICs90 (μg/ml) appeared, respectively: ampicillin 1/4, amoxicillin/clavulanic 0.06/0.12, cefaclor 1/1, ceftriazone 0.06/0.5, erythromycin 0.12/0.25, azithromycin ≤0.03/0.06, clarithromycin 0.12/0.12, ciprofloxacin 0.03/0.06, imipenem ≤0.015/0.06, tetracycline ≤0.25/≤0.25, trimethoprim/sulfamethoxazole 0.25/0.25. β-Lactamase was detected in 98.5% of the strains.

Conclusions: (1) M. catarrhalis isolates were uniformly susceptible to all tested antimicrobials except ampicillin. (2) The production of β-lactamase was responsible for ampicillin resistance (98.5%). (3) M. catarrhalis strains had almost the same behavior ‘in vitro’ to the tested microlides (erythromycin, azithromycin, clarythromycin). 
 
Fungal strains isolated from diarrhoeic faecal samples submitted for detection of
Clostridium difficile
and its toxins
 
PM176
 Rokosz A, Sawicka-Grzelak A, Luczak M. Department of Medical Microbiology, The University Medical School, Warsaw, Poland
 

Purpose: To isolate, identify and determine the drug-susceptibility of fungal strains cultured from fecal samples routinely submitted for detection of Clostridium difficile and its toxins in cases of antibiotic-associated diarrhea (AAD).

Methods: One hundred fecal samples from hospitalized patients were examined (May–October 2001). C. difficile toxins A/B were detected directly in stools with C. DIFFICILE TOX A/B II test (TechLab®, USA). Fecal specimens were inoculated on CCCA and Candida ID (bioMerieux, France) media. C. difficile and fungi were identified with standard microbiological procedures. Susceptibility of fungal strains to anti-fungal agents was determined (ATB FUNGUS, bioMerieux, France).

Results:
C. difficile toxins were detected in 38 and C. difficile strains were isolated from 23 of examined specimens. Sixty-two fungal strains of 8 genera were cultured from 50 stool samples (24 C. albicans isolates). Massive fungal growths were observed on primary plates in all cases. Fifty-five fungal strains were susceptible to nystatin, 53- to 5-fluorocytosine, 52- to amphotericin B, 45- to ketoconazole, 43- to miconazole and 39- to econazole.

Conclusions: In some cases of antibiotic-associated diarrhea fungal strains are responsible for symptoms of this disease. Certain persons having AAD should be treated with anti-fungal agents. 
 
Streptococcus pneumoniea
resistant to penicillin and erythromycin in Southern European Countries (ARISE Project)
 
PM177
 Soriano Fa, Fernandez-Roblas Ra, Granizo JJb, Coronel Pc, Gimeno Mc, Rodenas Ec, Gracia Ma. a
Fundacion Jimenez Diaz, Microbiology, Madrid, Spain, b
Fundacion Jimenez Diaz, Epidemiology, Madrid, Spain, c
Tedec Meiji Farma, Scientific, Alcala de Henares, Spain
 

Purpose: To describe the resistance to penicillin and erythromycin among 877 Streptococcus pneumoniae strains isolated from adult patients with respiratory tract infections in four Southern European countries (Portugal, Spain, Italy and Greece) a multicenter study was carried out between September 2000 to March 2001.

Results: A total of 291 isolates (33.2%) were penicillin non-susceptible (intermediate and resistant) and 308 (35.1%) were erythromycin non-susceptible. Non-susceptibility to both antibiotics was found in 183 (20.9%).

Conclusions: If penicillin administration eliminates all penicillin susceptible strains, the prevalence of penicillin non-susceptible strains will increase as well as the erythromycin non-susceptible ones. This means that the proportion of erythromycin non-susceptible strains should increase from 35.1 to 62.9%.
At the same time, if erythromycin eliminate all susceptible strains to this antibiotic, the prevalence of penicillin non-susceptible strains would increase from the initial 33.2 to 59.4%. These data can explain the co-selection results observed in different surveillance studies. 
 
Antimicrobial susceptibility and capsular types/groups of
Streptococcus pneumoniae
isolates causing pneumococcal diseases in Bulgaria
 
PM178
 Setchanova La, Gergova Ra, Ioneva Mb, Sredkova Vc. a
Department of Microbiology, Medical University, Sofia, Bulgaria, b
Department of Microbiology, II City Hospital-Sofia, Sofia, Bulgaria, c
Department of Microbiology, Faculty of Medicine, Pleven, Bulgaria
 

A prospective study of pneumococcal infections was performed in cooperation with five clinical microbiology laboratories in Bulgaria.
MICs values to 12 antimicrobials and serotype/serogroup distribution were determined for 242 strains of Streptococcus pneumoniae. Pneumococci were isolated from patients with systemic or respiratory infections. The incidence of penicillin G-intermediate and penicillin G-resistant isolate was 27.3 and 10.3%, respectively. The rates of resistance to other antimicrobials were: cefotaxime/ceftriaxone—6.2%; erythromycin—21.5%; clindamycin—7.8%; tetracycline—24%; chloramphenicol—26.4%; trimethoprim/sulfamothoxazole—38%; ciprofloxacin—10.7%; rifampin—3.7%. The S. pneumoniae isolates belonged to 19 capsular types/groups.
The most common serotypes/serogroups in Bulgaria are 1, 3, 5, 6, 9, 14, 19 and 23. 
 
Serotype distribution and antimicrobial resistance of
Streptococcus pneumoniae
 
PM179
 Sener B, Yeniþehirli G, Köseoðlu Ö, Hasçelik G, Günalp A. Department of Clinical Microbiology, Hacettepe University Medical Faculty, Ankara, Turkey
 

We aimed to determine the pneumococcal antibiotic resistance rates and the serotypes of those resistant isolates in our hospital.
The MIC values of 212 isolates (year 1996–2001) were determined by agar dilution method. Serotyping was performed by using 12 pooled antisera of the Pneumo-test.
The results were as follows (n=212).
 
aWere tested in 195 strains.
Cefaclor MIC50 was 0.5, MIC90 was 4 μg/ml. The rates of resistance in penicillin intermediate and resistant strains (n=103) were cefotaxime 26.7%, erythromycine 26.7%, chloramphenicol 13.3%, tetracycline 26.7%, rifampicin 3.9%, ciprofloxacine 1.9%. Among these resistant isolates the most frequent serotypes were 19, 23, 9, 6, 14.
The prevalence of the penicillin resistant pneumococci, particularly the intermediate ones, is high in Turkey. These penicillin resistant strains also show multiple resistance to other antimicrobials. 
 
Antimicrobial susceptibility of clinical isolates of
Pseudomonas aeruginosa
. Evolution of resistance in 4 years
 
PM180
 Cesteros R, Guerrero C, Miranda A, Menasalvas A, Blázquez R, Segovia M. Hospital Morales Meseguer, Servicio de Microbiología Clínica y Unidad de Enfermedades Infecciosas, Murcia, Spain
 

Objectives: To asses the antimicrobial susceptibility of clinical isolates of Pseudomonas aeruginosa obtained from 1997 to 2000 and to monitor trends in antimicrobial resistance.

Methods: MICs were determined by microdilution testing according to NCCLS. The antibiotics tested were: ceftazidime (CAZ), aztreonam (ATM), imipenem (IMP), gentamicin (CN), tobramycin (TB), amikacin (AK) and ciprofloxacin (CIP).

Results: A total of 1293 isolates were included. Urine was the most common site of isolation for outpatients isolates (61.2%) while for hospitalized patients respiratory samples were the most frequent (40.2%). Susceptibility to antibiotics was: 90% CAZ, 87.5% ATM, 93% IMP, 76.8% CN, 95.5% TB, 96.7% AK and 81.9% CIP. Comparison of susceptibility data through 1997–2000 showed that the increase in the resistance rate was significative for CAZ (4.6 vs 12.9%), ATM (9.9 vs 18%), CN (18 vs 26%), TB (1.85 vs 6.9%), AK (1.6 vs 5.7%) and CIP (15.17 vs 21%). Significant differences were found under the following circumstances: isolates from intensive care units and from inpatients were significatively more resistant to CAZ, ATM and IMP. Isolates from respiratory samples were more resistant to CAZ and ATM and isolates from urine samples were more resistant to CIP.

Conclusions: Although the antimicrobial susceptibility level has been decreasing P. aeruginosa isolates still show good susceptibility percentages for all antibiotics tested. 
 
Antimicrobial susceptibility testing of clinical isolates of
Bordetella pertussis
: report on 27 isolates from Rouen, France
 
PM181
 Lemee La, Nouvellon Ma, Caron Fb, Lemeland JFa. a
CHU Rouen, Bacteriologie, Rouen, France, b
CHU Rouen, Maladies Infectieuses et Tropicales, Rouen, France
 

Reports of an increased clinical incidence of pertussis and the development of resistance by Bordetella pertussis to erythromycin prompted the collection and antimicrobial susceptibility testing of recent clinical isolates from patients, who were hospitalized in Rouen between 1991 and 1999. MICs of nine antimicrobial agents (erythromycin, josamycin, spiramycin, roxithromycin, ketolide HMR 3647, cotrimoxazole, ciprofloxacin, rifampicin and amoxicillin) were measured by agar dilution method on Mueller-Hinton agar containing 5% horse blood. MBCs of erythromycin and rifampicin were also determined against four isolates of B. pertussis. All isolates were fully susceptible to the nine antimicrobial agents tested. MICs 90 (mcg/ml) were 0.03 for erythromycin, ketolide HMR 3647 and ciprofloxacin, 0.06 for josamycin, 0.25 for spiramycin, roxithromycin and rifampicin, 0.5/2.5 for cotrimoxazole, and 1 for amoxicillin. MBCs (mcg/ml) were 0.125–0.5 for eyrthromycin and 0.5–1 for rifampicin. In conclusion, our isolates of B. pertussis remain extremely susceptible to all antimicrobial agents tested, especially macrolides. No resistance was detected. Finally, if erythromycin remains the molecule of choice, other macrolides (C14 and C16) also confirm their good in-vitro activity. In addition, the good in-vitro potency of rifampicin, together with its great diffusion within the respiratory tract, suggests that rifampicin has potential clinical efficacy in pertussis too. 
 
Fluoroquinolones resistance phenotypes in 252
Streptococcus pneumoniae
strains
 
PM182
 Roussel Delvallez Ma, Morel Ea, Cattoen Cb, Hendricxs Sc, Verhaeghe Ad, Wallet Fa, Delpierre Fa, Varon Ee, Courcol RJa. a
Laboratoire de Bactériologie, Hôpital Calmette, Lille, France, b
Laboratoire de Bactériologie, Hôpital de Valenciennes, Valenciennes, France, c
Laboratoire de Bactériologie, Hôpital de Douai, Douai, France, d
Laboratoire de Bactériologie, Hôpital de Dunkerque, Dunkerque, France, e
Centre National de Référence des Pneumocoques, HEGP, Paris, France
 

The emergence of Streptococcus pneumoniae (Sp) with diminished susceptibility to penicillin G (PSDP) suggests the use of other antibiotics such as newer fluoroquinolones (FQ). The resistance phenotypes of 252 consecutive pneumococcal strains isolated from patients of four hospitals (Observatoire Régional des Pneumocoques du Nord-Pas de Calais) were studied: 39 strains were susceptible to penicillin G and 213 were PSDP. Reference strains provided from the Centre National de Réfeacute;rence des Pneumocoques were added to the study. The activity of pefloxacin, ciprofloxacin, norfloxacin, sparfloxacin, levofloxacin and moxifloxacin was studied. Reserpine was used to detect the efflux phenotype. Methods used were performed according to the recommendations of the Comité de l'Antibiogramme de la Société Française de Microbiologie. For each strain, the resistance phenotype to FQ was deduced by comparison of MICs or diameters obtained with those obtained with the reference strains of known phenotypes. FQ resistance phenotypes were not correlated to β-lactam agent susceptibilities. Wild type phenotype was observed among 76.9 and 77.5% of the susceptible and PSDP strains, respectively. A ‘wild efflux’ mechanism, deduced by addition of reserpine to norfloxacin, represented the predominant phenotype. It was detected among Sp susceptible to penicillin G (23.1%) as well as among PSDP (17.4%). 
 
Phenotypes of resistance to macrolides of
Streptococcus pneumoniae (SP) isolated from nasopharyngeal aspirates of children attending day-care centres (DCC) in three French departments
 
PM183
 Roussel Delvallez Ma, Carsenti-Etesse Hb, Dunais Bb, Pradier CHb, Dellamonica Pb, Dupont MJc, Estavoyer JMc, Pecking Md. a
Hospital Calmette, Laboratoire de bactériologie, CHR, Lille, France, b
Hospital l'Archet, CHU de Nice, Nice, France, c
Laboratoire de Bactériolgie, CHU, Besancon, France, d
Prouits Roche, Neuilly/Seine, France
 

The aim of this study was to determine macrolide resistance phenotypes of SP isolated in three French departments (Alpes Maritimes, Doubs, Nord) from nasopharyngeal aspirates of children aged 3 months to 3 years attending a DCC. A random sample of children attending randomly selected DCCs was obtained during three periods (Spring, Autumn and Winter 1999) in each department (10 494 children attending DCCs and 2565 children sampled). Analysis of macrolide susceptibility of SP strains was performed using the CA-SFM method. Out of 1262 strains, 64.7% had decreased susceptibility to penicillin (SPDP) and 77.5% were resistant to erythromycin. The triple disk diffusion method (erythromycin (E), clindamycin (Cl) and spiramycin) was used to determine resistance phenotypes.
 Macrolide resistance is a well known phenomenon in France and is confirmed by our study. These results show that the constitutive phenotype is predominant as in other parts of Europe and the frequency of efflux mechanism is lower than that observed in the USA and Canada. 
 
Developing antibiotic resistance surveillance of
Helicobacter pylori
in England and Wales
 
PM184
 Elviss NC, Owen RJ. Central Public Health Laboratory, Laboratory of Enteric Pathogens, London, UK
 

Purpose:
Helicobacter pylori antibiotic resistance is a key contributing factor in ∼10% of infected patients failing drug treatment. Our aim was to survey rates of primary in-vitro resistance at different locations, and links to disease severity. Antral gastric biopsies/cultures were received from PHLs in Chelmsford, mid-Essex (1115 isolates 1995–2001); London (103 isolates 1999–2000); and Bangor, north Wales (165 isolates1999–2001). Susceptibilities to metronidazole (Mtz), clarithromycin (Cla), tetracycline (Tet) and amoxicillin (Amx) were tested by disc diffusion and also by E-test for Cla and Mtz. Results: Overall resistance rates (1383 isolates) were 38% for Mtz and 8% for Cla. All were susceptible to Amx and Tet. Dual resistance rate was 5%. Breakdown by location showed some marked differences. Mtz resistance was highest in London (63%) compared to 37% in Chelmsford and 20% in Bangor. By contrast Cla rates were 11% for London, and about 5% for Bangor and Chelmsford. In London, the majority of Mtz resistant isolates were from non-UK borne individuals (75% non-UK vs 25% UK). Comparison of duodenal ulcer-associated isolates with those from non-ulcer patients indicated similar rates of Mtz resistance (28%). Conclusion: Resistance rates may vary significantly between locations depending on the local population with non-UK birth being a key risk factor for primary resistance with a Mtz resistant strain. Local resistance rates should be taken into account in test and treat strategies. 
 
Effects of a major
Escherichia coli
efflux pump alterations on intrinsic and plasmid-borne antibiotic resistance
 
PM185
 Potrykus J, Benetkiewicz M, Wegrzyn G. Department of Molecular Biology, University of Gdansk, Gdansk, Poland
 

Purpose of the study: Because of their ability to extrude a wide range of compounds, multidrug efflux pumps have recently become an important issue in combating bacterial infections. AcrAB-TolC is the major efflux system of Escherichia coli. We investigated the effect of AcrA on plasmid-borne and intrinsic chloramphenicol, tetracycline and ampicillin resistance. Results and conclusions: Recently, we reported a chloramphenicol sensitivity of E. coli mutant expressing cat, the chloramphenicol resistance gene. The strain was shown to bear a nonsense mutation in the acrA gene. Our studies indicate that this mutation is, at least in part, responsible for the observed chloramphenicol sensitivity phenotype. The mutation seems also to influence the strain's susceptibility to ampicillin and tetA(C)-mediated (plasmid-borne) tetracycline resistance. Although the TetA(C) protein retained its biological function, there was a considerable growth impairment of the mutant strain when cultured in tetracycline containing medium. Deletion of the acrAB locus prevented any growth in the presence of tetracycline. Upon the addition of ampicillin, the mutant underwent lysis more rapidly than the control strain. Such was also observed in acrAB deletion derivatives of other E. coli strains. We are trying to elucidate the role of the acrA gene product in the phenomena described above. 
 
Existence of efflux pumps in wild type isolates of drug-resistance bacteria
 
PM186
 
 Raja Ray RR. Medical Microbiology and Parasitology, Calcutta University, Kolkata, India
 

Efflux pumps possessed by the bacterial cells of different kinds of bacteria had presented as a newer mode of drug resistance in many organisms. The capacity of bacterial cells to cause outward flow of noxious agents was known, however, for a considerable time with respect to tetracycline. Recently, interest in the efflux pump system has brought to light some previously ill-understood mechanisms of drug resistance, involving noxious agents, toxins or poisons. We have found high level of resistance in pseudomonads towards cetrimide and other germicides for which no definite chromosomal/plasmid-mediated genes/mechanisms could be identified. Likewise, occurrence of non-antibiotic sensitive vibrios, staphylococci and pseudomonads in the background of their high level of resistance to most of the common antibiotics suggest a mechanism of interference with the efflux pump, which accounts for such sensitivity in such cases. Involvement of multiple resistance of marine isolates of V. parahaemolyticus to numerous clinically used antibiotics to which they have never been exposed also suggests a possible role of efflux pumps in determining such resistance—that these can simultaneously develop against multiple marine toxins/poisons and other noxious agents. 
 
Interaction between oxacillin and glycopeptides in a teicoplanin-resistant mutant of
Staphylococcus epidermidis
with reduced susceptibility to vancomycin
 
PM187
 Greco AA, Ben Hassen A. Laboratory service of National Bone-Marrow Transplant Center, Tunis, Tunisia
 

We selected a laboratory-generated mutant of Staphylococcus epidermidis capable of growing in the presence of 256 mg/l of teicoplanin (353b TM256), from a methicillin-resistant (MIC>256 mg/l), teicoplanin-sensitive (MIC 4 mg/l) and vancomycin-sensitive (MIC 2 mg/l) clinical isolate of S. epidermidis (353b SO). In a previous work, we studied the different phenotypic characteristics acquired by the teicoplanin-resistant mutant 353b TM256 (20th Interdisciplinary Meeting on Anti-Infectious Chemotherapy, December 2000, poster sessions, 82/P1). In this work, we examined the interaction between oxacillin and glycopeptides against this teicoplanin-resistant mutant of S. epidermidis with reduced susceptibility to vancomycin. To study the combined antibiotic activity of oxacillin and glycopeptides, we used different methods: a modified disk diffusion test, the E-test, time-kill assays and population analysis profiles. The synergistic activity of glycopeptides in combination with oxacillin against the teicoplanin-resistant mutant 353b TM256 was demonstrated with a bactericidal effect. No synergy was seen against the parental strain 353b SO. Moreover, the synergy between glycopeptides and oxacillin occurred with suppression of the subpopulation with the highest level of glycopeptides resistance. We concluded that combination of glycopeptides and oxacillin may be a possible alternative in the treatment of infections caused by methicillin-resistant, teicoplanin-resistant S. epidermidis. 
 
Compositional changes in microcosm biofilms induced by application of minocycline: a preliminary study
 
PM188
 O'Neill J, Spratt D, Wilson M. Eastman Dental Institute, University College London, Microbiology, London, UK
 

The aim of the study was to observe the effect of application of minocycline upon microcosm dental plaques. The plaques were cultivated in a Constant Departmenth Film Fermentor (CDFF), which produces biofilms under conditions mimicking those present in vivo. The composition of the biofilms was determined by viable counting on selective and non-selective media. The proportion of antibiotic resistant genera within the biofilm was determined by viable counts utilising media containing minocycline (16 μg/ml).
Before commencing antibiotic pulsing, the biofilms had a total viable anaerobic count of 1.26×1010 CFU per biofilm, with negligible (6 CFU/biofilm) minocycline-resistant bacteria. However, 24 h after introduction of the antibiotic, the total count had been reduced to 1.02×109 CFU/biofilm whilst the number of minocycline-resistant bacteria had risen to 1.23×106 CFU/biofilm. At the final sampling time point (192 h) the total viable anaerobic count was 5.82×108 CFU/biofilm whilst the number of minocycline-resistant bacteria was 1.12×107 CFU/biofilm.
Hence, there is a very low basal level of inherent resistance to minocycline within microcosm dental plaques, but this increases considerably once the biofilms are exposed to minocycline. 
 
Mechanism of resistance to aminoglycosides (AMG)
E. coli
isolated from children with community-acquired urinary tract infections (CAUTIs)
 
PM189
 Shevelev Aa, Reshedko Ga, Edelstein Ia, Kozlova La, Korovina Nb, Zorkin Sb, Katosova Lb, Papajan Ac, Marusina Nd, Ahmetova Le, Vajalkova Af, Agapova Eg, Fokina Bh. a
Smolensk, Russian Federation, b
Moscow, Russian Federation, c
Saint-Petersburg, Russian Federation, d
Kazan, Russian Federation, e
Ekaterinburg, Russian Federation, f
Orenburg, Russian Federation, g
Irkutsk, Russian Federation, h
Nizhni Novgorod, Russian Federation
 

Background: Urinary tract infections are one of the most frequently infections in children. Escherichia coli is one of the leading bacterial pathogens causing CAUTIs.

Methods: During the 2000–01 years nine centers took part in the study. The MICs of antimicrobials were determined by the agar dilution method as described in the NCCLS guidelines.

Results: A total of 710 consecutive urine isolates from 692 children aged 1 month to 18 years with CAUTI were collected. The most frequently isolated species from children with CAUTI was E. coli (52.3%), followed by Klebsiella spp. (8.0%) and Proteus spp. (7.6%). Results of the in vitro susceptibility testing of E. coli to AMG are shown in table below. Resistance of the strains was conditioned on production of AMG-modifying enzymes. There has been found following phenotypes among resistance strains: gentamicin–tobramycin–netilmicin (77.8%—AAC(3)-V and 13.9%—AAC(3)-IV enzymes) and gentamicin–tobramycin (8.3%, due to ANT(2″) enzyme).
 
Conclusion: Amikacin is most active AMG against E. coli. Resistance to gentamicin and netilmicin was mainly determined by production of AAC(3)-V enzyme. 
 
Effect of β-lactamase inhibitors (β-L-I) on the evolution of resistance (R) to β-lactams (β-L) in Gram-Negative bacilli in Venezuelan Hospitals, 1988–19
 
PM190
 Martin Ga, Carmona Ob, Guzman Mc. a
Department of Pharmacology, School of Medicine, Universidad Central de Venezuela, Caracas, Venezuela, b
Department of Microbiology, School of Medicine, Universidad Central de Venezuela, Caracas, Venezuela, c
School of Medicine, Universidad Central de Venezuela, Caracas, Venezuela
 

The β-lactams antimicrobials still are the most frequently used. Among the bacteria responsible of high resistance to β-lactams are gramnegative rods; its most frequent mechanism is the production of β-lactamase. The use of β-L-I has reversed partially this mechanism of resistance. We expect changes in the frequencies of R using β-L″CI after more than 10 years. Since 1988, The Venezuelan Group of Bacterial Resistance, with 29 health institution in the country; analyse and publish data on bacterial resistance of isolates from patients with bacterial infection coming from hospitals. It was used diffusion disk, according NCCLS. The software program WHONET (WORLD HEALTH ORGANIZATION NET) was used. We follow the trends of R of gram-negative rods to β-L alone and with β-L-I during the decade 1988–1998. Statistical analyses were made by evaluating the differences among percentages of resistance between the two series (P≤0.05). Results and discussion: The difference in R between β-L and β-L/β-L-I are: (1) piperacillin, piperacillin/tazobactam: between 10 and 30% of R for most isolated, except for Escherichia coli (45%) and Serratia spp. (60%); (2) ampicilin, ampicilin/sulbactam: between 10 and 30%; (3) cefoperazone, cefoperazone/sulbactam: between 5 and 25%. How is expected gramnegative rods resistance to β-lactams with a β-L-I is lower than the β-lactam alone; furthermore the difference between both series, grows higher with time. These results are relevant and they were not expected, since β-L-I have been shown to be β-lactamase inductors. 
 
Trends in the Resistance (R) to β-lactams and others antimicrobials in
P. aeruginosa
in Venezuelan medical centres. Nosocomial (Nos) and communitarian resistance
 
PM191
 Martin Ga, Carmona Ob, Guzman Mc. a
Department of Pharmacology, School of Medicine, Universidad Central de Venezuela, Caracas, Venezuela, b
Department of Microbiology, School of Medicine, Universidad Central de Venezuela, Caracas, Venezuela, c
School of Medicine, Universidad Central de Venezuela, Caracas, Venezuela
 

In order to approach the infection produced by resistant bacteria, it is convenient to consider the hospital and the community as two separate ecosystems. The hospital ecosystem has special relevance in the infection and R of gramnegative aerobic bacilli. Today, they are the main responsible of Nos infection, with special reference to Pseudomonas aeruginosa. Infection by resistant bacteria is a world wide problem, specially related to Nos. Since 1988, The Venezuelan Group of Bacterial Resistance, with 29 health institution in the country; identify, analyse and publish data on bacterial R to antimicrobials: β-lactams, quinolones and aminoglicosides of isolates from patients with bacterial infection coming from hospitals and the community. It was used diffusion disk, according NCCLS. The software program WHONET (WORLD HEALTH ORGANIZATION NET) was used. Statistical significance (P≤0.05) was determined by application of the χ
2 technique. We show significant differences in the R of P. aeruginosa Nos and communitarian (highest differences: piperacilina 40/7%, tobra 40/4%). We also established significant differences between the R arising in public hospitals and private hospitals (highest differences: ceftazidime 50/5%, amika 25/5%). We show the tendency in decreasing of frequency of R since 1998; this is more evident in private hospitals (β-lactam and aminoglicosides). New antimicrobials and new mechanism of action, and in the future the new technology will solve today's problem. However, the most important tools we have today are prevention and antimicrobials, and we must make them suitable. 
 
Susceptibility to antibiotics of
Enterobacter cloacae
and
Citrobater freundii
from drinking water
 
PM192
 Quintera SM, Sousa JC, Peixe L. Department of Microbiology, Faculty of Pharmacy, University of Oporto, Oporto, Portugal
 

The increased use of antimicrobials in farming, together with the practice of raw sewage discharge into receiving waters, has resulted in a significant increase in the number of antibiotic resistant bacteria present in aquatic environment. Our objective was to determine the antimicrobial susceptibility, with focus on b-lactam resistance, among Enterobacteriaceae strains isolated from raw drinking water samples. Several isolates (n=107) of Enterobacter cloacae and Citrobacter freundii obtained from drinking waters were screened for antibiotic susceptibility patterns, using the agar diffusion technique, according to NCCLS's procedures. Only 55% of E. cloacae strains, as well as 37% of C. freundii strains show resistance to amoxicillin and amoxicillin/clavulanic acid. A reduced incidence of resistance to several others antibiotics was also observed. The obtained results suggest that strains isolated from raw drinking water have greater susceptibility to antimicrobial agents than pathogenic strains from hospital or out-patients infections. The ‘natural’ antimicrobial resistance phenotypes, usually described for C. freundii and E. cloacae, only seem to apply to strains isolated from human infections. Notwithstanding the high susceptibility of the tested isolates to b-lactams, the role of environmental bacteria as a reservoir of resistance genes justify its periodical monitoring as a valid index for resistance spreading. 
 
A snapshot of the soil. Using bacterial communities for tracing the evolution of metal-resistance
 
PM193
 Quintera SMa, Sousa JCa, Peixe La, Monteiro NMb. a
Department of Microbiology, Faculty of Pharmacy, University of Oporto, Oporto, Portugal, b
Department of Zoology and Anthropology, Faculty of Sciences, University of Oporto, Oporto, Portugal
 

It is well known that pathogenic bacteria, specially those resistant to antimicrobial agents and heavy metals poses public health risks of great concern, and its detection, namely in soils is generally related to pollution. In this study, the heavy metal resistance patterns of the microflora isolated from polluted (dump area) and unpolluted soil environments were examined. The plate growth covering percentage in the soil samples was determined using Mueller-Hinton plates supplemented with different heavy metal (Al3+, Cd2+, Cu2+, Pb2+, Hg2+ and Zn2+) concentrations. Parallelly, using ICP-AES, it was possible to ascertain the real heavy metal concentration for each soil sample.
We found that the percentage of plate growth covering from the used samples was closely linked to the level of chemical pollution measured for each location. Moreover, using ANOVA, we found significant differences between locations. The dump site showed the highest tolerance to all the tested metals (Newman–Keuls test). This pattern of results was consistent when using the data from the ICP-AES. Furthermore, it was possible to observe that Pseudomonas spp., with a relatively high MIC for the studied metals, might become a relevant model for both public health issues and eco-toxicological studies. 
 
Biochemical characteristics of environmental isolates of
Listeria monocytogenes
 
PM194
 Moshtaghi Ha, Garg SRb, Mandokhot UVb. a
Shahrekord University, Food Hygiene, Shahrekord, Islamic Republic of Iran, b
Haryana Agricultural University, Food Hygiene, Hisar, India
 

Purpose: The investigations were carried out to study the biochemical reactions of Listeria monocytogenes isolated from different sources in the environment.

Results: A total of 12 isolates of L. monocytogenes were obtained from 230 samples of agricultural soil, faecal matter of animals and sewage. All the isolates were Gram-positive, small rods, catalase positive, oxidase negative, motile with tumbling motility in hanging drop at 22–25 °C, aerobic, facultative anaerobic, fermentative and produced acid from glucose. All the isolates of L. monocytogenes were beta haemolytic and positive for CAMP reaction with Staphylococcus aureus. All the isolates were negative for phenyl alanine deaminase, ornithine decarboxylase, lysine decarboxylase, malonate utilization and beta galactosidase tests. These were also negative for acid production from arabinose, d-xylose, mannitol, soluble starch and sucrose but acid was produced in rhamnose, salicin, and trehalose. Hydrogen sulfide production was recorded in tripticase soy broth with lead acetate paper strips but negative with triple sugar iron agar. All the isolates were found to hydrolyse aesculin. Out of 12 isolates of L. monocytogenes only two produced acid from lactose. In serotyping all the isolates were serotype 4b.

Conclusion: We can conclude that L. monocytogenes serotype 4b at least in fermentation of lactose shows different reactions. 
 
Incidence of multi-resistant enterococci in enteric flora of healthy human volunteers from Portugal
 
PM195
 Novais Ca, Sousa JCa, Peixe LVa, Coque MTb. a
Laboratory of Microbiology, Pharmacy School, Oporto University, Oporto, Portugal, b
Laboratory of Microbiology, Ramón y Cajal Hospital, Oporto, Spain
 

Objective: To evaluate the occurrence of antibiotic resistant enterococci isolated from faeces of healthy human volunteers from Portugal (January–June 2001). Methods: The samples were pre-enriched in BHI broth with and without vancomycin (6 mg/l) and then plated onto M-Enterococcus agar with and without antibiotics: vancomycin (6 mg/l), gentamicin (125 mg/l), kanamycin (500 mg/l), and streptomycin (1000 mg/l). Representative colonies of each morphology were isolated and identified as Enterococcus sp as previous described. PCR was used to identify E. faecium and E. faecalis and to characterise vancomycin resistant genotype. API20Strep was also used in the identification. Susceptibility testing to 11 antibiotics was performed by an agar dilution method (NCCLS). Results: Three hundred and fifty-three enterococci were isolated from 92 of a total of 99 faecal samples (93%, n=92/99). The majority of enterococci were identified as E. faecium, E. faecalis and Enterococcus sp. Resistance to almost all antibiotics studied was observed: vancomycin—3.0%; teicoplanin—3.0; ampicillin—21.2%; tetracyclin—81.8; erythromycin—86.9%; ciprofloxacin—78.8%; chloramphenicol—54.5%; gentamicin—17.2%; streptomycin—78.8%; kanamycin—77.7%; linezolid—0%. The vancomycin resistant enterococci presented a vanA genotype. Conclusion: Resistance to several common antibiotics used in therapy was observed among enterococci isolated from healthy human from community. Many of these isolates presented multi-resistance. Of concern is the presence of vanA genotype among these populations that may constitute a reservoir of vancomycin resistant genes. 
 
Antimicrobial resistance in tetracycline-resistant oral bacteria
 
PM196
 Pike Ra, Lucas Vb, Roberts Gc, Stapleton Pd, Richards Hd, Rowbury Rd, Mullany Pa, Wilson Ma. a
Department of Microbiology, Eastman Dental Institute for Oral Health Care Sciences, University College London, London, UK, b
Department of Oral Medicine, Eastman Dental Institute for Oral Health Care Sciences, University College London, London, UK, c
Department of Paediatrics, Eastman Dental Institute for Oral Health Care Sciences, University College London, London, UK, d
Department of Biology, University College London, London, UK
 

Mercury release from dental amalgam may select for mercury-resistant oral bacteria. Mercury resistance is often associated with multiple antibiotic resistances. The aims of this study were to determine whether tetracycline-resistant oral bacteria from children with and without amalgam fillings were also resistant to: (a) mercury; and (b) multiple antibiotics.
Tetracycline-resistant organisms were isolated on Iso-Sensitest/blood agar containing tetracycline (8 μg/ml). The MIC of HgCl2 and several antibiotics were determined using agar dilution (BSAC).
One hundred and three organisms were isolated from patients without amalgam. Ninety-one were Streptococcus species, seven Neisseria species, three Veillonella dispar and two Rothia species. Fifty-seven percent exhibited resistance to at least one antibiotic, 12% were mercury-resistant, 42% were penicillin-resistant, 11% were ampicillin-resistant and 23% erythromycin-resistant.
Fifty-two organisms were isolated from patients with amalgam. Forty-five were Streptococcus species, five Neisseria species, one V. dispar and one Staphylococcus aureus. Sixty-three percent exhibited resistance to at least one antibiotic, 23% were mercury-resistant, 38% penicillin-resistant, 11% were ampicillin-resistant and 31% showed erythromycin-resistance.
Statistically, the results showed that in tetracycline-resistant organisms, the presence of dental amalgam did not affect the level of resistance to mercury or to the antibiotics tested. 
 
Prevalence of antibiotic-resistant oral bacteria in children not receiving antibiotic therapy
 
PM197
 Conway-Wallace HLa, Mullany Pa, Bedi Rb, Wilson Ma. a
Eastman Dental Institute, University College London, Microbiology, London, UK, b
Eastman Dental Institute, University College London, Transcultural Oral Health, London, UK
 

The purpose of this study: To determine the prevalence of antibiotic-resistant oral bacteria in children who had not received antibiotics during the 3 months prior to sampling. Plaque samples were obtained from 16 children aged 4–6 years and plated onto media containing: penicillin, ampicillin, tetracycline, erythromycin and vancomycin. Resistant isolates were enumerated, sub-cultured and frozen for subsequent identification. The process was repeated 6 and 12 months later.

The results obtained: Bacteria resistant to each of the antibiotics were present in all of the children at each sampling time (except in the case of ampicillin and penicillin at 0 months). The proportion of antibiotic-resistant bacteria in the oral microflora ranged from ≥13.7 (erythromycin) to ≤0.5% (ampicillin). The proportions of bacteria resistant to a particular antibiotic remained reasonably constant over the 12-month sampling period. In only two cases (penicillin and ampicillin) was there a statistically significant change in the proportions of resistant bacteria at different time periods.

The conclusion reached: The results of the study have revealed that bacteria resistant to a wide range of antibiotics may be isolated from children who have not been administered these agents during the 3 months prior to sampling. Furthermore, in many cases the proportion of bacteria resistant to a particular antibiotic remains constant over a 12-month period. 
 
Antimicrobial use in the intensive care unit: results of a pharmacoepidemiological study in Italy
 
PM198
 Periti P. E.I.F.T. srl, Via XX Settembre 104, Firenze, Italy
 

A retrospective survey of antimicrobial chemotherapy use in 560 Intensive Care Units in Italy was carried out in 1999 using a computerized questionnaire under the auspices of the Journal of Chemotherapy. Of the ICUs contacted, 43.4% replied, being mainly general or post-surgical and pediatric units having a mean of 10 beds, nine doctors and 20 nurses. The antimicrobial agents used in these wards were almost always polychemotherapy with prevalent use of beta-lactams, aminoglycosides and glycopeptides or as empirical treatment during the first 72 h after hospital admission. The continual use of medium-high dose combinational antimicrobial chemotherapy was justified by microbiological testing, which revealed that more than one-third of bacterial pathogens were resistant. Approximately, 60% of Gram-positive bacteria were methicillin-resistant, whereas about 13% of Gram-negative strains were resistant to at least one of the tested antibiotics. Forty percent of the responding ICUs furnished microbiological testing data, of which three quarters indicated the incidence of chemoresistance of the isolated strains. Fungal infections were less frequent than bacterial, the most commonly isolated agent being Candida spp. In conclusion, the sample of ICUs examined showed adequate and reasonable use of antimicrobial agents, with heavy reliance on medium-high dose combination therapy due to the elevated incidence of resistant isolates found. 
 
Plasma concentrations (P), urinary excretion (U) und bactericidal activity of gatifloxacin (GAT) 400 mg versus ciprofloxacin (CIP) 500 mg in 12 healthy volunteers after a single oral dose
 
PM199
 Boy Da, Kinzig-Schippers Mb, Sörgel Fb, Naber KGa. a
Hospital St. Elisabeth, Urologic Clinic, Straubing, Germany, b
Institute for Biomedical and Pharmaceutical Research, IBMP, Nürnberg-Heroldsberg, Germany
 

Twelve volunteers received a single oral dose of 400 mg GAT versus 500 mg CIP to assess P up to 36 h, U (by HPLC), and urinary bactericidal titers (UBT) in eight intervals up to 120 h. The mean Pmax of GAT/CIP was 3.35/2.12 μg. The Ucum (mean) for GAT/CIP was 81.0/43.2%. The UBTs, i.e. the highest twofold dilution of urine still bactericidal, were determined for nine uropathogens and one reference strain—MICs (μg/ml) (agar dilution) for GAT/CIP: Escherichia coli ATCC 25922; E. coli (0.25/0.25); Klebsiella pneumoniae (0.06/0.06); Proteus mirabilis (0.25/0.06); Pseudomonas aeruginosa (4/1); Enterococcus faecalis (0.5/2 and 8/64); Staphylococcus aureus (0.125/0.5 and 0.06/0.5); Staphylococcus saprophyticus (0.125/0.25). The median UBTs measured within the first 6 h for gatifloxacin were between 1:16 and 1:1024 for the five Gram-negative strains (incl. P. aeruginosa) and between 1:8 and 1:1024 for the five Gram-positive strains. The median UBTs for ciprofloxacin were between 1:64 and 1:1024 for the Gram-negative strains (incl. P. aeruginosa) and between 1:1.5 and 1:768 for the five Gram-positive strains. For the UBTs up to 12 h, GAT was significantly superior to ciprofloxacin in all Gram-positive strains, not different in the two E. coli strains, and inferior in the Klebsiella, Proteus and Pseudomonas strains. For the UBTs at 12–24 h, GAT was generally superior to CIP, but showed no difference in the Proteus and Pseudomonas strains. GAT showed overall comparable urinary bactericidal activity as CIP and should be tested for the treatment of complicated UTI. 
 
Comparison of quinine therapeutic drug monitoring to 96 patients admitted in Intensive Care Unit or Infectious Medical Department in Bichat Hospital during 2001
 
PM200
 Camus Ma, Goulay Sa, Montesino Lb, Mentre Fc, Massias La, Farinotti Ra. a
Bichat Hospital AP-HP, Clinical Pharmacokinetics, Paris, France, b
Bichat Hospital AP-HP, Intensive Infectious Care Unit, Paris, France, c
Bichat Hospital AP-HP, Biostatistics and Epidemiology, Paris, France
 

Malaria is one of the most prevalent endemic infectious disease affecting humans. In Bichat hospital 111 cases of malaria acute illness were reported during 2001. Among them, 96 patients were hospitalised and intravenously treated by quinine. This retrospective study consisted of comparing the therapeutic drug monitoring (TDM) of quinine distinguishing, respectively 36 and 60 patients cured in Infectious Medical Department (IMD) and Intensive Care Unit (ICU) where a standardised quinine regimen was established (62 and 47% malaria attacks, respectively). In ICU, the treatment consisted of an infused loading dose 16 mg/kg/4 h of quinine diluted in 5% glucose followed by 24 mg/kg/day. Plasma quinine maximal concentrations were assessed after selective liquid–liquid extraction and spectrofluorometry detection. Statistical analysis was performed using t-test. Results showed that patients had comparable weight (71.4±19.7 and 70.8±17.9 kg) but quinine doses and plasma concentrations were significantly different in ICU and IMD, respectively (20.2±6.5 versus 22.7±3.7 mg/kg/day, P<0.001 and 11.4±3.3 versus 10.3±3.2 mg/l, P<0.01). In ICU and IMD, respectively: 57 and 49% were in the therapeutic range (10–15 mg/l) with 29 and 43% below the requested therapeutic concentration (10 mg/l) and 13 and 8% above the limit of toxicity (15 mg/l) conveying the importance of TDM in intravenous quinine treatment to avoid infra-therapeutic or toxic concentrations. 
 
Simultaneous central nervous system distribution using microdialysis and pharmacokinetic–pharmacodynamic modelling of the electroencephalogram effect of norfloxacin in rats
 
PM201
 Chenel M, Marchand S, Dupuis A, Bouquet S, Couet W. University of Pharmacy, Pharmacology, Poitiers, France
 

Purpose: To investigate the epileptogenic activity of norfloxacin by a pharmacokinetic–pharmacodynamic (PK–PD) modelling approach and to assess the contribution of distributional processes across the blood–brain barrier (BBB) to the delayed effect.

Methods: Rats (n=10) received an IV bolus dose of norfloxacin (150 mg/kg). Convulsant effect was quantified by electroencephalogram (EEG) recording during 9 h post-dose. Arterial blood samples were collected for drug assays in plasma. Unbound norfloxacin concentrations were monitored in brain extracellular fluid (ECF) using microdialysis with in vivo calibration of the probes by retrodialysis with ciprofloxacin.

Results: The EEG effect reached its maximum between 70 and 190 min post-dose. A PK/PD effect compartment model was successfully fitted to these data. The relationship between effect and concentration at the effect site was best described by a spline function. Norfloxacin concentrations in brain ECF were relatively low compared to plasma levels (ECF/plasma areas under curve (AUC) ratio equal to 9.7±2.8%), but central distribution was rapid. Therefore, the effect versus brain ECF concentrations curves still exhibited a marked hysterisis.

Conclusion: The delay observed between plasma concentrations and norfloxacin convulsant effect cannot be explained by a slow distribution of norfloxacin across the BBB. 
 
CSF kinetics of Vancomycin (Van) and Fusidic acid (Fu)
 
PM202
 Pagoulatou Aa, Kanellakopoulou Kb, Vafiadou Ma, Kostakopoulos THc, Kastriotis Ib, Giamarellou Hc. a
Department of Anesthesia, Sismanoglio General Hospital, Greece, b
4th Department of Internal Medicine, Athens Medical School, Athens, Greece, c
Department of Urology, Athens Medical School, Athens, Greece
 

CSF kinetics of Van and Fu were studied in 57 patients who underwent short urological surgery under spinal anesthesia. Patients were excluded if they were already receiving an antibiotic or were suffering from renal and hepatic dysfunction. Van was administered at 1 g over 1 h infusion. Serum and CSF samples were collected post-dose and the mean serum levels were as follows: 30 min–1 h: 21.1 μg/ml (five patients), 1–2 h: 10.1 μg/ml (five patients), 2–4 h: 8.5 μg/ml (six patients), 4–6 h: 6.7 μg/ml (six patients) and 6–8 h: 5.15 μg/ml (seven patients). Fu was administered at 500 mg dose over 1 h infusion. Serum and CSF samples were taken post-dose and the mean serum concentrations were found as follows: 0–30 min: 43.08 μg/ml (six patients), 30 min–1 h: 41.7 μg/ml (six patients), 1–2 h: 33.8 μg/ml (five patients), 2–4 h: 27.8 μg/ml (six patients), 4–6 h: 25.6 MG/ml (five patients). In CSF, both Van and Fu were undetectable. It is concluded that in the absence of meningeal inflammation Van and Fu do not penetrate (with the applied microbiological assay) the CSF barrier. 
 
Comparison of the pharmacology of intravenous and orally given moxifloxacin in an in-vitro model
 
PM203
 Wiegand I, Pfeil E, Wiedemann B. University of Bonn, Pharmaceutical Microbiology, Bonn, Germany
 

Purpose: The intravenous form (IV) of 400 mg Moxifloxacin (MOX), one of the newer fluoroquinolones, has been recently approved by the FDA. During the IV treatment higher peak serum concentrations are achieved in comparison to the oral administration (PO) of the same dose. The antibacterial activity of fluoroquinolones is concentration dependent. We therefore simulated human pharmacokinetics of single PO and IV dosages of 400 mg MOX in an in-vitro model using six different gram-negative and -positive pathogens to elucidate the different effect of these two dosing schedules.

Results: The comparison of the pharmacological parameter AUC/MIC shows an increase (Table 1) that could predict an enhanced antibacterial effect. However, the analysis of the killing curves with the following parameters, ka.max (maximal killing activity) and AAC (area above the killing curve between 0 and 24 h), reveals no major difference between the PO and IV dosage.
 
Conclusion: The serum concentration after oral administration is already sufficiently high to show the optimal bactericidal effect of MOX that can only be slightly increased by higher peak concentrations and higher AUC/MIC ratios. Thus the concentration dependence is not linear but ends already at concentrations achievable by oral dosing and documents that AUC/MIC calculations cannot easily be translated into dosing schedules. 
 
Effect of Quinolones against slowly growing
E. coli
 
PM204
 Dalhoff A, Brummer P, Hakimpur-Zern S, Matutat S, Ullmann U. Institute of Med. Microbiology, University of Kiel, Kiel, Germany
 

Background: Bacteria growing in vivo multiply much more slowly than in vitro. Whether the bactericidal activity of quinolones may be affected by an increase in generation time (g) was studied in batch cultures.

Methods: By limiting the nutrient supply, generation times were lengthened from approximately 0.45 to 1.5 h up to 3.9 h. Alternatively, the quinolones were added to the bacterial cultures during the lag-, exponential- and stationary phase. Recent clinical isolates of Escherichia coli were exposed to multiples of the MICs of ciprofloxacin or norfloxacin. The ‘killing rates’ were calculated in analogy to the growth rate.

Results: The bactericidal activity of the quinolones tested against E. coli was minimally influenced by the reduced generation time. Ciprofloxacin concentrations of ≥2×MIC eliminated the test strains within ≤2 h from the test system if added during the lag or exponential growth phase; four times higher concentrations were needed to reduce CFUs by 99% within 2 h, if added during the stationary phase. Norfloxacin was significantly less active.

Conclusion: In contrast to norfloxacin, the bactericidal activity of ciprofloxacin is minimally affected by the generation time or growth phase of the bacteria. 
 
Pharmacology of intravenous moxifloxacin in an in-vitro model
 
PM205
 Wiegand I, Pfeil E, Wiedemann B. University of Bonn, Pharmaceutical Microbiology, Bonn, Germany
 

Purpose: Moxifloxacin (MOX) is one of the newer fluoroquinolones, now available for parenteral application. The pharmacology of an intravenous once-daily dose (OD) of 400 mg MOX was determined with five gram-negative and -positive pathogens (Streptococcus pyogenes, Streptococcus pneumoniae, Moraxella catarrhalis, Escherichia coli, and Klebsiella pneumoniae). A twice-daily dose (BID) of 400 mg MOX was simulated with the gram-positive species in order to increase the bactericidal effect.

Results: To determine the efficacy, killing curves were analyzed, and following parameters were calculated: ka.max: maximal killing activity [log cfu]; ka.1 h: reduction of viable cells after 1 h [log cfu]; AAC: area above the killing curve between 0 and 24 h [log cfu h] (Table1).
 
Conclusion: An intravenous once-daily dose of MOX is active against all tested pathogens. The gram-negative species are rapidly killed (ka.1 h similar to ka.max). There is no pronounced initial effect on the two gram-positive species but a general slow reduction in the viable cell count (ka.max is reached after 24 h). The efficacy of MOX (measured as AAC and ka.max) on S. pyogenes and S. pneumoniae is to some extent increased after the second dose. However, the analysis of the killing curves reveals no major difference between OD and BID. Even the OD nearly gives the maximal bacterical activity of MOX against gram-positive pathogens. 
 
Dose proportionality and pharmacodynamic (PD) breakpoint of amoxicillin
 
PM206
 Horkovics-Kovats Sa, Kinzig-Schippers Mb, Nemec Bc, Borek Md. a
Biochemie GmbH, Biopharmaceutics Deparment, Kundl, Austria, b
IBMP, Nürnberg-Heroldsberg, Germany, c
CEPHA s.r.o., Pilsen, Czech Republic, d
International Medical Department, Biochemie GmbH, Kundl, Austria
 

Objectives: To evaluate the dose proportionality of amoxicillin and to compare the respective PK/PD parameters of two dosage regimens.

Methods: The dose proportionality of amoxicillin was evaluated using linear regression of mean AUC0-inf and Cmax data of 13 different bioequivalence studies (N=477 volunteers) performed with formulations containing various amounts of amoxicillin alone or in the combination with clavulanic acid. The volunteers received a single oral dose in the range of 250–1000 mg. Amoxicillin plasma concentrations were determined by HPLC/UV or LC/MS/MS methods. Time above MIC (TMIC) expressed in% of dosing interval was calculated with three target MIC values (0.5, 1.0 and 2.0 mg/l) for 500 mg 8-hourly and 1 g 12-hourly dosage regimens.

Results: The absorption of amoxicillin (AUC0-inf) showed a linear dependence with a correlation coefficient of 0.975. The correlation coefficient of the linear regression for the Cmax dependence on the actual dose was 0.909. The respective TMIC for both dosage regimens were very similar, with largely overlapping confidence intervals, supporting a PD breakpoint of 2 mg/l for the 1 g 12-hourly regimen (TMIC ≥2 mg/l: 42.8%, 95% CI 38.6, 46.9%).

Conclusion: This analysis shows the dose proportionality of amoxicillin over the dosage range of 250–1000 mg and supports the pharmacodynamic rationale for a 1 g bid dosage regimen. 
 
Piperacillin/tazobactam concentration profile after high dose administration pattern in nosocomial pneumonias due to mecanical ventilation
 
PM207
 Pedeboscq Sa, Gruson Db, Bassoua Va, Hilbert Gb, Pometan JPa. a
St. André Hospital, Pharmacy, Bordeaux, France, b
Pellegrin Hospital, Reanimation, Bordeaux, France
 

The piperacillin (P)/tazobactam (T) antibacterial spectrum covers the largest part of bacteria responsible for pneumonias due to mechanical ventilation. But, due to important bacterial inoculum and pharmacokinetic parameter modifications in intensive care patients, high doses of beta-lactamines seem to be necessary to obtain antibiotic concentrations above suspected bacteria's MIC (Minimal Inhibitory Concentration). This led us to compare, in patients with pneumonia due to mechanical ventilation, two intermittent administration patterns: 4 g three times a day (usual pattern) versus 4 g four times a day (high dose pattern). This study is carried out in collaboration with intensive care unit, bacteriological department and pharmacy where antibiotic concentrations are determined. Twenty-three takings of blood are executed within a 48 h period, in addition to two bronchial secretion samples. Concerning P seric concentrations, the high dose pattern seems to be more adapted because of relatively high residual concentrations (>20 μg/ml). Three hours after each injection, T seric concentrations are lower than the 4 μg/ml activity threshold. First and second day residual bronchial concentrations of P seem to be sufficient although T concentrations are below activity threshold. These results are to be correlated with the MIC determined by the bacteriological department, and only this correlation will make us able to conclude the better efficacy of the high dose pattern in intensive care patients. 
 
Anti-inflammatory drugs interference in absorption and tissue penetration of amoxycillin
 
PM208
 Del Fiol FSa, Menon SZb, Caramez THb, Celotto TFb, Lopes RASb. a
University of Sorocaba, Pharmacology, Sorocaba, Brazil, b
School of Pharmacy, University of Sorocaba, Sorocaba, Brazil
 

Antibiotics and anti-inflammatories are frequently associated in clinical practice. There is some concern about the quantity of antibiotic that reaches the infection sites, which may be reduced in the presence of an anti-inflammatory drug. The purpose of the present study was to analyse how steroids (dexamethasone (DEXA)) and AINES (celecoxib (CELE)) influence on the penetration of amoxicillin to inflamed tissues. Thirty female rats (Rattus norvegicus) were used with surgically implanted PVC sponges on their backs to form granulomatous tissue. One week later the animals were divided into three groups. One group received only AMOX (40 mg/kg), another received AMOX (40 mg/kg) plus CELE (6.0 mg/kg) and the last received AMOX (40 mg/kg) plus DEXA (0.3 mg/kg). One hour later the animals were sacrificed and the concentration of amoxicillin in the serum and tissue investigated.
There was no difference among the groups in the quantity absorbed (AMOX=18.87±2.05 μg/ml; AMOX+CELE=18.20±1.89 μg/ml and AMOX+DEXA=18.13±2.28 μg/ml). There was a reduction in the tissue concentration of amoxicillin (P<0.01 Tukey-Kramer) for the group that received the drug with dexamethasone. For the other groups, there was no difference in the tissue concentration of amoxicillin.
The results indicated that in inflamed tissue, a significant reduction of antibiotic penetration was induced by sinultaneous dexamethasone therapy. 
 
Prediction of the optimal amoxicillin dose regimen based on coupling of pharmacokinetic data and bactericidal activity
 
PM209
 Galmiche H, Tod M, Drugeron H, Rouveix B. Service de Pharmacologie Clinique Hopital, Cochin, Paris, Service de Pharmacie, Hopital Avicène, Bobibny, Service de Microbiologie, Hopital Laennec, Nantes, France
 

Background: Given its short half-life, amoxicillin (AMX) should be administered at least three times a day to patients with acute exacerbations of chronic bronchitis, in order to achieve serum concentrations well above the MIC of the responsible pathogen. However, several authors have recommended twice-daily administration of a higher dose for a shorter period. We assessed the relationship between AMX sputum concentrations and antibacterial activity following two treatment schedules in healthy volunteers.

Subjects and methods: Twelve healthy volunteers were randomized to receive AMX for 4 days at a dose of either 1 g bd or 500 mg bd. Serum and sputum were collected every day, 3 h after the morning administration, and again 2 days after the last dose. AMX concentrations were determined by HPLC with fluorometric detection. Sputum killing activity was determined against Haemophilus influenzae, Streptococcus pneumoniae and Moraxella catarrhalis.

Results: Mean serum concentrations measured 3 h after the morning administration were 1.5 (500 mg bd) and 1.95 mg/l (1 g bd), and were above the MICs of the three microrganisms. In contrast, sputum concentrations were always below 0.5 mg/l. In terms of sputum killing activity, 1 g bd was more effective than 500 mg bd against S. pneumoniae and M. catarrhalis, whereas no sputum samples were active on H. influenzae.

Conclusion: The optimal amoxicillin treatment schedule cannot be established on the basis of serum pharmacokinetics only. 
 
Cysteine based mucolytics inactive amoxicillin
 
PM210
 Galmiche H, Louchahi K, Tod M, Drugeon H, Giroud JP, Rouveix B. Service de Pharmacologie Clinique, Hopital Cochin, Paris, CREPIT 93, Hopital Avicenne, Bobigny, Service de Microbiologie, Hopital Laennec, Nantes, France
 

Background: Cysteine-based mucolytics are commonly used in combination with antibiotics to treat patients with acute exacerbations of chronic bronchitis (AECB). They are also used to allow in vitro MIC determination in sputum specimens. We conducted an in vitro and ex-vivo compatibility study designed to detect a possible interaction between mucolytics and antibiotics. Methods: Serial samples of bronchial secretions were collected from AECB patients and from healthy volunteers who received 1 g of amoxicillin twice a day for 4 days. Two mucolytics were used to fluidify sputum specimens: 2,3-dihydroxy-1,4-dithiolbutan (Digest-EUR®) and acetylcysteine (10% solution). Amoxicillin was assayed using a chromatographic system with fluorometric detection. Each sample was also tested in a microbiological assay. Results: Amoxicillin could not be detected in the presence of the mucolytic agents. Conclusions: This mucolytic–amoxicillin interaction may be explained by amoxicillin fixation to fluidified mucoproteins, and should be taken into account when assessing antibiotic efficacy in vivo. 
 
Influence of milk in macrolides absorption and distribution
 
PM211
 Del Fiol FSa, Ferro Cb, Albuquerques ETb. a
University of Sorocaba, Pharmacology, Sorocaba, Brazil, b
Uniso, School of Pharmacology, Sorocaba, Brazil
 

Physicians frequently recommend that macrolides should be administered with milk to decrease the discomfort they cause. Thus the objective of this study was to verify the interference of milk in the absorption and distribution of erythromycin (ERYT); clarithromycin (CLAR); roxithromycin (ROXI) and azithromycin (AZIT). Forty female rats (Rattus norvegicus) were used with surgically implanted PVC sponges on their backs for granulomatous tissue formation. One week later the animals were divided into groups that received the drugs ERYT, CLAR, ROXI and AZIT with and without milk (3.5 ml/kg [Ca++]=1.1 mg/ml). The animals were sacrificed and the serum and tissue concentration of the drugs was investigated.
There was no reduction (P<0.05 Tukey-Kramer) in the serum and tissue concentration in the presence of milk for AZIT and CLAR. There was a 27% reduction for ROXI in the serum concentration in the presence of milk (11.84 ±1.35 and 8.63±1.34 μg/ml), but no alteration in the tissue concentration. There was a 33% reduction for ERYT (P<0.05), in the serum concentration in the presence of milk (10.20±1.06 and 6.83±0.88 μg/ml) and a 40% reduction in the tissue concentration.
The milk decreased the effectiveness of treatments with erythromycin and roxithromycin and the bioavailabilities of this macrolides were affected by co-administration with milk. 
 
Milk influence in tetracycline absorption and distribution
 
PM212
 Del Fiol FSa, Souza GPb, Duzzi MRb. a
University of Sorocaba, Pharmacology, Sorocaba, Brazil, b
Uniso, School of Pharmacology, Sorocaba, Brazil
 

The degree to which tetracyclines are absorbed differs greatly. This absorption is impaired by the concurrent ingestion of divalent and trivalent cations. Thus the objective of this study was to investigate the interference of milk in the absorption and distribution of tetracycline (TETR), oxytetracycline (OXYT), minocycline (MINO) and doxycycline (DOXY). Forty female rats (Rattus norvegicus) were used with surgically implanted PVC sponges on their back for granulomatous tissue formation. One week later the animals were divided into groups that received the drugs: TETR; OXYT; MINO; and DOXY with and without milk (3.5 ml/kg [Ca++]=1.1 mg/ml). The animals were sacrificed and the drug concentrations in the serum and tissue were determined.
There was no reduction (P<0.05 Tukey-Kramer) in the serum and tissue concentrations in the presence of milk for MINO. There was a 25% reduction (P<0.05) for DOXY in the serum concentration in the presence of milk (11.24±0.61 and 8.40±0.41 μg/ml) and 32% in the tissue concentration. For OXYT, there was a reduction of 34% (P<0.05) in the serum concentration in the presence of milk (14.57±1.51 and 9.54±1.51 μg/ml) and 16% in the tissue concentration. The TETR results show a 35.4% reduction (P<0.05) in the serum concentration in the presence of milk (13.46±3.39 and 8.69±3.03 μg/ml) and 40% in the tissue concentration.
Milk decreased tetracycline bioavailability and effectiveness. 
 
Isotopic studies with oxine labelled platelet. Platelet kinetics in thrombocytopenic malaria patients
 
PM213
 Presterl Ea, Zedtwitz-Liebenstein Ka, Karanikas Gb, Winkler Sa, Eidherr Hb, Kletter Kb. a
Department of Internal Medicine I, Division of Infectious Diseases, Vienna, Austria, b
Department of Nuclear Medicine, University of Vienna, Vienna, Austria
 

Introduction: Thrombocytopenia is a common feature in human malaria (1). Excessive splenic platelet pooling has been suggested to play a role in uncomplicated cases of malaria, but a moderately shortened platelet life span during the period with decreasing parasitaemia seems the most plausible cause of the frequently observed thrombocytopenia (2, 3). Consumption coagulopathy, eventually manifested as disseminated intravascular coagulation, has been described in malaria (4). In uncomplicated malaria, however disseminated intravascular coagulation is rarely found (3).

Results: In malaria patients the sequestration was not different to normal. Platelet half-life was reduced in patients with P. falciparum malaria to 10–17 h (normal ∼8 days). In one patient with P. vivax malaria Platelet half live was 59.5 h.

Conclusion: No significant differences in the sequestration of platelets when compared to healthy individuals could be detected by 111In-labelled platelet scintigraphy. Especially, no enhanced splenic sequestration, as previously expected, was the cause of the thrombocytopenia. Therefore, other mechanisms than sequestration are responsible for the dramatically reduced life span of the platelets during acute malaria. 
 References 1. Perrin LH, Lindsay JM, Miescher PA. The hematology of malaria in man. Semin-Hematol 1982;19:70–82.2. Skudowitz RB, katz J, Lurie A, Levin J, Metz J, Mechanisms of thrombocypenia in malignant tertian malaria. Br med J 1973;515–517.3. Horstmann RD, Dietrich M, Bienzle U, Rasche H. Malaria induced thrombocytopenia. Blut 1981;42:157–164.4. Borochovitz D, Crosley AL, Metz J. Disseminated intravascular coagulation with fatal haemorrhage in cerebral malaria. Br med J 1970;710.5. International Committee for Standardization in Hematology Panel on Diagnostic Applications of Radionuclides (ICSH). J Nucl Med 1988;29:564–566.6. Thakur ML, Welch MJ, Joist JH, Coleman RI. Indium-111-labeled platelets: studies on preparation and evaluation of in vitro and in vivo functions. Thrombo Res 1976;9:345–357.7. Lamy T, Moisan A, Dauriac C, Ghandour C, Morice P, Le Prise PY. Splenectomy in idiopathic thrombocytopenic purpura: ist correlation with the sequestration of autologous Indium-111-labeled platelets. J Nucl Med 1993;33:182–186. 
 
Characteristics of DNA condition from male generative cells under doxycycline and macrolides using
 
PM214
 Zaharanka AG, Rozhdestvensky DA. Vitebsk State Medical University, Vitebsk, Belarus
 

Aim: The studying of chromatingeterogenic test (CT) results in sperm of subjects taking doxycycline (D) and some macrolides (Erythromycine (E), Jozamycine (J), and Azytromycine (A)) in moderate therapeutic doses.

Methods: Forty healthy volunteers (20–23 years) were studied. Daily dose of D was 0.2; E was administered in dose 0.25 four times per day 10 days; J—0.5 before meals twice daily 10 days; A—0.25 before meals once daily 5 days. CT for evaluation of DNA condition in human spermatozoids was performed before treatment (twice), on the 5th and 10th days of treatment, as well as after 1 and 2 months after treatment course completing.

Results: CT data analysis revealed that the mean amount of defective spermato-zoids before treatment was 18.5+3.5%. By the 5th day of D treatment the index of de-natured DNA was 63.4+6.5% (P<0.001), by the 10th day—80.4+7.2% (P<0.001). One and 2 months after the D treatment course the amount of generative cells with denatured DNA was 54.5+4.6 and 42.5+3.8%, respectively (P<0.001 in both case). Under E treatment the amount of defective spermatozoids changed as 38.2+4.2 (5th day), 42.4+2.7 (10th day), 35.6+2.5 (after 1 month), and 30.5+4.2% (after 2 months) (P<0.05 in any case). Under A using the CT results at the same control points were 39.5+4.7, 46.5+3.2, 40.2+3.5, 25.6+3.2% (P<0.05 in any case); and under J treatment—18.2+2.5, 20.3+2.5, 17.2+3.2, 15.2+4.2%, respectively (P>0.05 in any case).

Conclusions: The data obtained permit to conclude that D demonstrates the high level of toxicity to male generative cells. This effect preserves during 2 months after the course of D treatment. 
 
An outbreak of multi-resistant
Acinetobacter baumanii
(MR-Ab) in an intensive care unit (ICU)
 
PM215
 Doyle MMa, Moriarity Jb, Ryan Tb, Devitt Ec, Keane CTa. a
Department of Clinical Microbilogy, St. James' Hospital, Dublin, Ireland, b
Department of Anaesthesia and Intensive Care, St. James' Hospital, Dublin, Ireland, c
St. James' Hospital, Infection Control, Dublin, Ireland
 

Objective: To study the effect of aggressive isolation and decontamination measures to control an outbreak of multi-resistant Acinetobacter baumanii (MR-Ab) in an ICU.

The outbreak: The index case was transferred from a Mediterranean hospital, directly into an open-plan 10-bedded ICU, with severe injuries to his head and thorax. He died shortly after admission. Sputum, Bronchoalveolar lavage fluid, blood cultures and a chest drain swab grew MR-Ab, resistant to ampicillin, co-amoxiclav, aztreonam, amikacin, ceftazidime, cefotaxime, cefuroxime, ciprofloxacin, gentamicin, meropenem, piptazobactam, tobramycin and sensitive only to colistin.
Within 10 days, MR-Ab was isolated from two further ICU patients. All isolates demonstrated identical antimicrobial susceptibility profiles. The ICU was closed to admissions and thoroughly cleaned. All patients were isolated and their contacts screened. The ICU was reopened, however, MR-Ab was isolated from a fourth patient. This patient was isolated, the ICU closed, for a second time, thoroughly cleaned, and all contacts isolated until discharge. All subsequent patients screened were negative for MR-Ab

Conclusion: This illustrates the importance of aggressive isolation measures and thorough supervised cleaning in control of an outbreak, and the need to screen patients for resistant bacteria before admission to the intensive care unit in a General hospital. 
 
Extended spectrum beta-lactamase-positive bacteria isolated in neonatal intensive care unit
 
PM216
 Sandorcinova Za, Siegfried La, Kmetova Ma, Viragova Sb. a
Institute of Medical Microbiology, Faculty of Medicine, University of P.J. Safarik, Kosice, Slovakia, b
Hospital, Kosice-Saca, Neonatal Intensive Care Unit, Kosice, Slovakia
 

Extended-spectrum beta-lactamases hydrolyse all penicilins, cephalosporins, including third-generation cephalosporins and aztreonam. ESBL are predominantly produced by Klebsiella spp. but may be presented in other Enterobacteriaceae, too. The aim of present study was to investigate the occurrence of ESBL-producing bacteria isolated from patients hospitalized at the neonatal Intensive Care Units (ICU). Fifty Escherichia coli and 35 Klebsiella spp. were isolated from rectum of patients hospitalized at the neonatal ICU. The MICs of antimicrobial agents were determined by the standard agar plate dilution method according to the NCCLS guidelines. For screening of ESBL production we investigated strains showing reduced susceptibility (MIC equal and/or more than 2 ml/l) to at least one of third generation cephalosporins. ESBL production was detected by double disk synergy test (DDST), E-test for ESBL, and PCR employing specific primers for the presence of blaSHV and blaTEM genes. By using DDST and E-test, among E. coli isolates, an expression of ESBL was detected in the three by the former method, while among Klebsiella spp. isolates, a production of ESBL was found in the two by the latter method. In ESBL-positive E. coli strains the presence of blaTEM genes fragments was detected while in ESBL-positive Klebsiella spp. genes encoding for SHV-type beta-lactamases were found. 
 
Isolation of staphylococci from wound swabs and their susceptibility to antibiotics
 
PM217
 Markov MIJ, Shopovski E, Despotovski V, Angelevski A, Nikolovski B. Military Hospital, Microbiology, Skopje, The Former Yugoslav Republic, Macedonia
 

Purpose: To determine percent of staphylococci from wound swabs and to establish their susceptibility to antibiotics.

Material and method: The wound swabs have been evaluated with standards microbiological techniques. Bacteria have been identified with strips from the ‘ATB EXPRESSION’ system. The susceptibility testing has been performed with strips with dilution technique, read by the same system.

Results: During the last 5 years (01 01 1997–25 02 2002), a total of 1978 wound swabs have been evaluated in the Military Hospital in Skopje. Positive bacterial finding have been determined in 1345 (68%) swabs with 1575 isolated bacterial species, from which 587 (37.3) were staphylococci: Staphylococcus aureus 460 (29.2%) isolations (173 methycillin resistant S. aureus); S. epidermidis 79 (5.0%); S. haemolyticus 21 (1.3%); S. hominis 11 (0.7%); S. chromogenes and S. lugdunensis nine (0.6%); S. intermedius, S. lentus, S. sciuri and S. warneri all with seven (0.4%) isolations. The susceptibility of S. aureus was to: penicillin 2%, ampicillin 15%, amoksicillin/clavulonic acid 67%, ceftazidime 66%, gentamicin 29%, tetracycline's 28%, erythromycin 61%, lincomycin 44%, ciprofloksacin 95%, cotrimoxazole 82%, vancomycin 100%, fusidic acid 96%, cefixime 57%, and Azitromicin 78%.

Conclusion: In our study most frequently isolated bacteria from the wound swabs were staphylococci, especially S. aureus. Susceptibility, except for the penicillin (2%), was high to other antibiotics. 
 
Antimicrobial susceptibility of MRSA at Maribor Teaching Hospital—a comparison of the years 1999 and 2000
 
PM218
 Kotnik Kevorkijan Ba, Lorenèiè Robnik Sb, Golle Ab. a
Teaching Hospital Maribor, Infectious Diseases, Maribor, Slovenia, b
Laboratory of Microbiology, Institute of Public Health, Maribor, Slovenia
 

The study went on from January 1999 to December 2000. At Maribor Teaching Hospital, 2288 Staphylococcus aureus isolates were collected. In 1999, 114 (10%) and in 2000, 73 (6.4%) were MRSA. MRSA were recovered from routine clinical material and from surveillance swabs (nose, throat, skin). For isolation, conventional culture media were used and for surveillance swabs MRSA-screening plate (manitol salt agar with 6% oxacillin) and Trypticase soy broth with 6.5% NaCl were added. S. aureus was identified by catalase, DNA-se and tube-coagulase test. Antibiotic susceptibility was determined by the disk-diffusion method according to NCCI guidelines. All 187 MRSA isolates were tested for sensitivity to the following antimicrobials: gentamicin, netilmicin, ciprofloxacin, erythromycin, chloramphenicol, tetracycline, cotrimoxazol, vancomycin and clindamycin. It was found that all MRSA isolates were sensitive to vancomycin and partially or totally resistant to the rest. There were no important differences between the years 1999 and 2000. Our MRSA isolates were completely (100%) susceptible to vancomycin, but resistant to the other antimicrobials in use to some extent. Although the monitoring of MRSA susceptibility to antimicrobials once a year did not show any important change in antimicrobial resistance, the periodical monitoring of MRSA susceptibility to antimicrobials and revaluation of current treatment regimens of MRSA infections is necessary. 
 
Staphylococcus aureus
strains with reduced susceptibility to vancomycin among clinical isolates in University hospital in Warsaw
 
PM219
 Mlynarczyk A, Mlynarczyk G, Luczak M. Department of Medical Microbiology, Medical University of Warsaw, Warsaw, Poland
 

The appearance of VISA (vancomycin intermediate Staphylococcus aureus) or h-VISA (hetero-VISA) strains could explain occasionally occurring failures of therapy of MRSA infections with vancomycin. The VISA and especially h-VISA are very difficult to be found in the routine laboratory. In our investigations we examined 1011 of S. aureus strains isolated and stored in our laboratory for several last years (1997–2001). Most strains were isolated in 2000, and some in 2001. For all staphylococcal strains MRSA as well as MSSA the MICs of vancomycin were performed by the standard dilution method. Among strains isolated in the last year three strains were recognized as VISA (MIC values were 8 mg/l). The frequency of VISA was 0.3%. In the aim of founding the h-VISA strains the population analysis was used. For this analysis all strains growing on the concentration 4 mg/l of vancomycin from the inoculum 106 were chosen. It was 54 strains, but only 32 of them were recognized as h-VISA. The frequency of h-VISA among investigated strains was about 3%. Most but not all of the h-VISA and all VISA strains were methicillin resistant. 
 
In vitro activity of vancomycin, teicoplanin and oxacillin against staphylococci isolated from patients of surgical intensive care unit
 
PM220
 Kucukates E, Karayel N, Kansiz E. Institute of Cardiology, University of Istanbul, Istanbul, Turkey
 

Objectives: Oxacillin-resistant staphylococci have emerged as a major infection control problem in our hospital. The aim of this study was to evaluate the in vitro activity of vancomycin, teicoplanin and oxacillin against staphylococci.

Material and methods: This study was performed between January 2000 and December 2001, at University of Istanbul, Institute of Cardiology. The antimicrobial susceptibilities of 179 staphylococci isolates for vancomycin, teicoplanin and oxacillin have been investigated by E-test according to NCCLS guidelines.

Results: Fifty-five (30.73%) of 179 clinical isolates were Staphylococcus aureus. One hundred and twenty-four (69.27%) of 179 clinical isolates were coagulase negative staphylococci (CNS). None of 179 staphylococci isolates were resistant to vancomycin. But three of CNS isolates were intermediate and six of CNS isolates were resistant to teicoplanin. Twenty-eight (50.9%) of 55 S. aureus were resistant to oxacillin. Ninety (72.60%) of 124 CNS isolates were also resistant to methicillin.

Conclusions: Nosocomial staphylococcal infections, especially in intensive care units increase day by day. Staphylococcal infections are a major problem in many hospitals. According to our experiences the rate of oxacillin resistant staphylococci isolates in our hospital has also increased. 
 
Activity of linezolid against nosocomial strains of
Staphylococcus aureus
in Russia: results of multicentre study
 
PM221
 Dekhnich AV, Stratchounski LS, Edelstain IA, Narezkina AD. Institute of Antimicrobial Chemotherapy, Smolensk, Russian Federation
 

Purpose: To determine the susceptibility of nosocomial strains of Staphylococcus aureus to linezolid in different regions of Russia.

Results: A total of 879 clinical strains of S. aureus isolated in 2000–2001 from patients hospitalized in 17 medical institutions in different parts of Russia—four in Central region (Moscow, Ryazan, Smolensk), two in North-Western region (St.-Petersburg), three in Southern region (Krasnodar, Stavropol), two in Volga region (N. Novgorod, Kazan), three in Ural region (Ekaterinburg, Ufa), three in Siberia (Krasnoyarsk, Novosibirsk, Tomsk), were included in the study. Antimicrobial susceptibility testing was performed by agar dilution method in accordance with the NCCLS recommendations. All tested strains including 295 MRSA strains (33.6% of all strains) were found to be susceptible to linezolid with the MIC ranged from 0.5 to 4 mg/l. Both MIC50 and MIC90 were 2 mg/l.

Conclusions: Linezolid had excellent in vitro activity that was not affected by resistance to other classes of antimicrobials, so it has a potential as an option for the treatment of nosocomial infections caused by S. aureus including MRSA. 
 
Susceptibility to antiseptics of MRSA isolated in Japan during 1998–1999
 
PM222
 Sasatsu Ma, Noguchi Na, Ito Tb, Hiramatsu Kb. a
Tokyo University of Pharmacy and Life Science, Microbiology, Tokyo, Japan, b
Juntendo University, Bacteriology, Tokyo, Japan
 

Methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus (MRSA) is a clinically significant pathogen because MRSA is resistant to many kinds of antibiotics and causes nosocomial infections around the world. The antiseptics are used for prevention of infections by MRSA. Antiseptic-resistant MRSA strains have been isolated from clinical specimens. Antiseptic resistance genes confer resistance to many kinds of drugs structurally and the resistance mechanism is the energy-dependent drug efflux system. In addition, the fluoroquinolone (FQ)-resistance gene, norA, confers also resistance to many kinds of antiseptics. We studied the relation of the susceptibility to antiseptics and FQs of MRSA strains isolated in Japan. A total of 420 strains of MRSA were isolated from 14 hospitals in Japan from 1998 to 1999. Acriflavin (AF), acrinol, benzethonium chloride, benzalkonium chloride and chlorhexidine digluconate were used as the antiseptics. Norfloxacin and sparfloxacin were also used in this experiment. The MIC was determined by agar double-dilution method as recommended by the NCCLS. About 65% of MRSA showed resistance to AF (MIC: >64 ug/ml). No strain was resistant to a specific antiseptic. FQ-susceptible strains were susceptible to all antiseptics. This study showed that antiseptic-resistant MRSA are widely spread at hospitals in Japan. 
 
Synergistic action of methicillin and vancomycin against methicillin resistant
Staphylococcus aureus
strains
 
PM223
 Mlynarczyk G, Mlynarczyk A, Luczak M. Department of Medical Microbiology, Medical University, Warsaw, Poland
 

The drug of choice in treatment of serious infections caused by MRSA was still vancomycin, however sometimes failures were observed, especially in monotherapy. Some conflicting are present in literature about an effect of combined action of vancomycin and beta-lactams. In the present work, the common effect of vancomycin and methicillin against chosen Staphylococcus aureus strains was examined. The investigated strains were characterized as VISA, h-VISA and clones obtained from h-VISA in population analysis. Two methods were performed: E-tests with methicillin and vancomycin placed on the media supplemented with the second antibiotic and the chessboard micro-analysis with increasing concentrations of both antibiotics. The FIC indexes were calculated for different combinations of concentrations. On the basis of the FIC indexes it was shown that the simultaneous action of vancomycin and methicillin was synergistic in all examined strains VISA and h-VISA, but only in appropriate concentrations. In different combinations the observed effect was addition or indifference. Antagonism was never observed. The synergistic effect was not observed in the case of standard S. aureus strain sensitive to methicillin. Supplementation of media with 4% of NaCl substantially decreased the observed effect. 
 
Incidence of antibiotic resistance in
Staphylococcus aureus
strains in Hungary with special reference to MRSA
 
PM224
 Ghidán Á, Maródi C, Csukás Z, Kamotsay K, Szabó D, Ostorházi E, Rozgonyi F. Institute of Medical Microbiology, Semmelweis University, Budapest, Hungary
 

Between January 1997 and December 2000, a total of 3109 Staphylococcus aureus strains isolated from patients admitted to the clinics of the Semmelweis University were examined for antibiotic sensitivity with the disc diffusion test. Resistance to individual antimicrobials were as follows: penicillin 84%, oxacillin 25%, erythromycin 31%, ciprofloxacin 15%, amikacin 12%, netilmicin 8%, tobramycin 10%, gentamicin 20%, clindamycin 22%, mupirocin 4%, tetracyclines 34%, chloramphenicol 9%, teicoplanin 2% and vancomycin 0%. All MRSA were β-lactamase producer. They showed co-resistance to erythromycin (53%), ciproflxacin (36%), amikacin (29%), netilmicin (23%) and mupirocin (10%). Multiple resistant MRSA strains to mupirocin+tetracyclines+chloramphenicol amounted to 0.9%. Triple resistance to oxacillin+ciprofloxacin+netilmicin was 14%. The detection of mecA gene by PCR in randomly chosen MRSA qualified with 1 μg oxacillin disc resulted in only 15% mecA positivity indicating that the traditional disc diffusion test overestimates the frequency of MRSA strains particularly in such an environment where the usage of penicillins and cephalosporins is so liberal as in Hungary. Consequently, the selective pressure for β-lactam-resistance and β-lactamase induction exists everywhere. This conclusion is coherent with the relatively low frequency of multiple resistant MRSA strains and urge the need of a routinely available genetic method to apply for MRSA detection. 
 
Final results from the antibiotic resistance surveillance at the St. Elizabeth Cancer Institute in Bratislava after 2 years (1999–2000)
 
PM225
 Babela Ra, Krcmery Vb, Kovacicova Ga, Lovaszova Ma, Svetlansky Ia, Gogova Ma. a
School of Public Health, University of Trnava, Trnava, Slovakia, b
Department of Clinical Pharmacology, St. Elizabeth Cancer Institute, Bratislava, Slovakia
 

Objectives: The main objectives of this study were to monitor antibiotic resistance, identify new/emerging resistance mechanisms at an early stage, prevent their dissemination, early detection and prevent the outbreaks. Methods: Our laboratory used antibiotic disc sensitivity testing methodology (NCCLS 1993). Zone sizes were measured objectively using a BIOMIC automated radius zone reader. Results: Throughout 2 years (January 1999 till December 2000) we have surveyed 3190 organisms collected from Outpatient Departments (1145, 35.8%), Radio-Oncology Department (992, 31.1%), Medical Department (765, 23.9%), OBG Department (217, 6.8%), Surgical-Oncology Non ICU Department (207, 6.5%), ICU Department (175, 5.5%). From 1543 (100%) strains of Enterobacteriaceae 68 (4.4%) were resistant to 4th generation fluoroquinolone and 44 (2.9%) strains were ESBL positive. From 416 (100%) strains of Staphylococcus aureus were only five (1.2%) strains resistant to methicilin (MRSA). We collected 370 (100%) strains of enterococci, whereabout only two (0.5%) were resistant to glycopeptides (VRE). From 235 (100%) strains of Pesudomonas aeruginosa, 97 (41.2%) were resistant to aminoglycosides. Conclusions: National restrictive antibiotic policy hand in hand with local hospital antibiotic policy and regular rotation of antibiotics used in prevention and treatment on all departments is leading in our case in positive situation in antibiotic resistance in comparing with other Slovakian and European centers. 
 
Antimicrobial resistance of nosocomial strains of
Staphylococcus aureus
 
PM226
 Dekhnich AV, Stratchounski LS, Edelstain IA, Narezkina AD. Institute of Antimicrobial Chemotherapy, Smolensk, Russian Federation
 

Purpose: To determine the antimicrobial resistance of Staphylococcus aureus causing nosocomial infections in Smolensk Regional Hospital.

Results: A total of 140 S. aureus strains isolated during 2000–2001 were studied. Antimicrobials tested included oxacillin (OXA), erythromycin (ERY), clindamycin (CLI), gentamicin (GEN), vancomycin (VAN), linezolid (LNZ), tetracycline (TET), chloramphenicol (CHL), rifampicin (RIF), fusidic acid (FUS), trimethoprim/sulfamethoxazole (TS), ciprofloxacin (CIP), mupirocin (MUP), quinupristin/dalfopristin (QD). Susceptibility testing and its interpretation were performed by agar dilution according to NCCLS guidelines where applicable.
Results are presented in the table.
 
Conclusions: The most active antimicrobials were vancomycin, linezolid, quinupristin/dalfopristin, fusidic acid, mupirocin, followed by co-trimoxazole, rifampicin. Beta-lactams, macrolides, lincosamydes, tetracyclines and chloramphenicol should not be used for the treatment of nosocomial S. aureus infections. 
 
Nosocomial infections due to
Staphylococcus aureus
in neonates
 
PM227
 Mrazova Ma, Bilikova Ea, Krcmery Va, Huttova Mb, Kacmarikova Mc, Babela Rc, Grey Ec. a
Department of Clinical Pharmacology, St. Elisabeth Cancer Institute, Bratislava, Slovakia, b
Postgraduate Medical School, Clinic of Neonates, Bratislava, Slovakia, c
University of Trnava, School of Public Health, Trnava, Slovakia
 

We investigated all staphylococcal infections within 2 years among 246 neonates hospitalized for infection in the neonatal ICU in a tertiary neonatal referral center. Univariate analysis, to assess risk factors for neonates infected with Staphylococcus aureus (121) vs. without S. aureus (125) was performed. From the total number of 246 cases, in 121 cases S. aureus was isolated from various samples; in 16 cases from blood cultures, in 36 cases from urine, in 18 cases from eye swabs and in 29 cases from gastric content (no significant differences in comparison with control group). Colonization with S. aureus, was a predictor of infection: nasal swabs, throat swabs, ear swabs, skin swabs and umbilical swabs were significantly more commonly observed in neonates infected with S. aureus, than with other infections. Etiological analysis showed that co-pathogens Escherichia coli and viridans streptococci were significantly more frequently associated with neonatal infection caused by S. aureus, in comparison to other organisms. According to localization of infection site, conjunctivitis and thrush stomatitis was the commonest S. aureus neonatal infections. Outcome was similar to other infections and without any significant differences between both groups. Mortality was similar to other infections, probably because: initial therapy in our centre contains an antistaphylococcaly active agent (cefuroxime or cefotaxime plus aminoglycosides). 
 
Nosocomial infections caused by
Enterococcus
spp.
 
PM228
 Morozova OT, Semina NA. Laboratory of Hospital Infections, Central Research Institute of Epidemiology, Moscow, Russian Federation
 

Purpose is to study the role of Enterococcus spp. in the aetiology of nosocomial infections among the patients of the childrens clinical hospital and susceptibility of these strains to antibiotics.

Methods: The strains of enterococci were isolated from 66 patients with hospital infections in 2000–2001.

Results: The aetiological structure of Enterococcus-infections showed the predominance of skin and soft tissue infections (39.4%), urinary tract infections (33.3%), bloodstream infection (10.6%), pneumoniae (4.5%), infection of central nervous system, gastrointestinal tract, eye, surgical wound infections were of rare incidence (3–1.5%). Various nosological forms of infections were caused more often by E. faecalis than E. faecium (72.7, 27.3%). The antibiotic resistance to ampicillin and other beta-lactams occured in 100% of E. faecium isolates, but all strains of E. faecalis were susceptible to these drugs. High-level gentamicin resistance demonstrated E. faecalis isolates—29.0%, E. faecium—100%; and high-level streptomycin resistance showed E. faecalis—67.7%, E. faecium—88.8%. All the E. faecalis were active against fluoroquinolones, but E. faecium were resistant in 22.0%. There were no vancomycin resistant enterococci.

Conclusion:
E. faecalis predominated in the aetiological structure of nosocomial infections due to Enterococcus spp. Antibiotic resistance patterns for two species of enterococci were different, all the strans were susceptible to vancomycin. 
 
Evaluation of antimicrobial resistance of
Enterococcus
spp. experience of 6 years (1996–2001)
 
PM229
 Lopez-Barba J, Jesus de la Calle I, Solino-Ocaña I, Rodríguez-Iglesias M, Perez-Ramos S. Microbiology Laboratory, Puerto Real University Hospital, Cádiz, Spain
 

Objective: Determination of quantitative changes in antimicrobial resistance of Enterococcus isolated from clinically significant not urinary samples of patients remitted to the Laboratory of Microbiology during a 6 years period (1996–2001). Material: The period of the study was COMPRISED between 1996 and 2001. The samples has been processed for the isolation of Enterococcus following conventional methods. Were isolated 3424 enterococci strains. The identification and susceptibility to antibiotics have been performed in automated system MicroScan(c) Dade-Behring(c) through panels Combo CGP. The data were processed by the statistical system Statgraphics Plus 4.1. Results: Of the 3424 Enterococcus, have been identified 3298 E. faecalis and 126 E. faecium. The resistance is shown in Table 1. Conclusions: The resistance to Va and Tei of E. faecalis remains through last 4 years (2–3%). The high resistance to erythromycin and tetracilin (>70%) and the resistance (30–31%) to quinolones, antibiotics all of them used in community-acquired infections justify the susceptibility testing to the clinical strains isolated of this group of microorganism. In E. faecium the antimicrobial resistances was high and increasingly to imipenem, meropenem, erythromycin and quinolones. 
 
 
Characteristics of strains
E. faecium
colonizing the neutropenic patients
 
PM230
 Abbassi MS, Achour W, Gréco A, Ben Hassen A. Laboratory of Bone Marrow Transplant Center, Tunis, Tunisia
 

Digestive colonization by Enterococcus faecium in the neutropenic patients under gut decontamination is important. Seventeen multiresistant strains of E. faecium isolated from stools of seven neutropenic patients were the target of an epidemiological analysis through the determination of the MICs of amoxicillin, gentamicin, vancomycin, the transferability gentamicin resistance to the recipient strain E. faecalis JH2-2 by filter-mating assay, analysis of plasmid profiles of E. faecium-strain and of transconjugants and the amplification by PCR of the gene aac(6′)-aph(2′) coding for the bifunctional enzyme by using primer M13771 who gives a fragment of 174 kb. Among the seventeen strains, eleven had the same antibiotype A1, 12 had a gentamicin MIC>4096 mg/l. The MIC90 of the amoxicillin was of 128 mg/l. All the strains were sensitive to vancomycin. Ten strains harbored a plasmid of 70 kb transfered at a frequency of 6.10–5, also found in gentamicin-resistant transconjugants. However, strains belong to nine distinguished plasmids profiles. All high-level gentamicin resistant-strains had a positive PCR amplification of the aac (6′)-aph (2″) gene. The features of the studied strains establish their endogen origin, specific for every patient, sharing only high-level resistance to gentamicin. Gut decontamination treatment with gentamicin enhance either the spread and the preservation of easy-transferable plasmid carrying genetic transposable element. 
 
 
Frequency and antibiotic resistance of bacteria isolated from patients suffering infectious complications following the implantation of prosthetic devices
 
PM231
 Kristóf K, Rozgonyi F. Institute of Medical Microbiology, Semmelweis University, Budapest, Hungary
 

For patients with indwelling joint prosthesis, early recognition and prompt therapy for infection in any location may be critical to reduce the risk of seeding the joint implant heamatogenously. A year period (2001) a total of 2440 swabs of aspiration from patients with infectious complications following the implantation of prosthetic devices were cultured. Cultivation and identification of the strains were performed by conventional methods and by VITEK system (bioMĕrieux) and susceptibility testing by disc diffusion. Potentional pathogens were recovered in 324 cases (13.27%). Gram positive cocci, in particular Staphylococcus spp. proved to be the most commonly isolated bacteria. Coagulase-negative Staphylococcus (CNS) was isolated more frequently (48%), followed by S. aureus (28%), Enterococcus faecalis and E. faecium (11%), Gram-negatives (3%), anaerob isolates (7.5%). Resistance to individual antimicrobials of S. aureus and CNS were as follows: methicillin 8 and 47%, clindamycin 4.5 and 21.7%, fluoroquinolones 0 and 18%. Mupirocin resistant strains of S. aureus were not found, while 7.7% were among the CNS strains. Our results could be essential for the rational selection of treatment at our orthopedic wards. 
 
 
Emergence of vancomycin-resistant
Enterococcus faecium
isolated from blood cultures of haematological patients hospitalised in a Central Clinical Hospital of the Medical University in Warsaw in 2001
 
PM232
 Marchel Ha, Tkaczuk Aa, Luczak Mb, Wroblewska Mb. a
Department of Medical Microbiology, Central Clinical Hospital of the Medical University in Warsaw, Warsaw, Poland, b
Department of Medical Microbiology, Medical University in Warsaw, Warsaw, Poland
 

Purpose of the study: In the year 2001 the first strains of vancomycin-resistant enterococci (VRE) have been reported at a university-affiliated hospital in Warsaw (1200 beds). The aim of the study was to investigate the frequency of enterococcal isolates in haematological patients in 1999–2001, estimation of the percentage of VRE in 2001 and characterisation of VRE strains.

Results: In the analysed period the percentage of isolated Enterococcus sp. strains among all non-repetitive clinical isolates in 1999, 2000 and 2001 was 3.9, 3.1 and 51%, respectively. Cultured strains were identified as E. faecalis,
E. faecium,
E. gallinarum and E. avium. The most prevalent was E. faecium strains, isolated with a frequency of 75, 62 and 75%, respectively. Vancomycin-resistant strains were all identified as E. faecium and in 2001 they comprised 17% of all isolates of this species.

Conclusions: (1) The frequency of isolation of Enterococcus sp. in blood cultures of haematological patients remained relatively stable in 1999–2001. (2) The predominant enterococcal species isolated from these patients was E. faecium. (3) In 2001 we recorded for the first time an emergence of vancomycin-resistant E. faecium, which comprised 17% of all isolates of this species. 
 
 
Epidemiology of
Pseudomonas aeruginosa
strains isolated in immunocompromised patients
 
PM233
 Kalai S, Ben Hassen A, Achour W, Greco A. Laboratory of Microbiology, National Bone Marrow Transplantation Center, Tunis, Tunisia
 

From April 1998 to June 2000, 47 non-repeated strains of Pseudomonas aeruginosa were isolated from 42 immunocompromised patients. Thirty-six percent of strains were isolated from abscess, 27% from blood culture and 11% from urine. Susceptibility to antibiotic was studied by the routine disk diffusion method (CA-SFM). MICs were determined using agar dilution to 11 antibiotics (5b-lactams, four aminosides and two fluoroquinolones). Serotyping of the different trains was performed using antisera to the International Antigenic Typing Systems Serotypes. The study showed 80% of resistance to ticarcillin, 60% to piperacillin, 55% to ceftazidime, 71% to cefepime, 13% to imipenem, 51% to amikacin and 55% to ciprofloxacin. Fifty-three percent of P. aeruginosa strains were multiresistant (25 strains) and were isolated in 12 patients. Wild phenotype to b-lactams was observed in 30% of strains. The most frequent b-lactams resistance phenotypes were: cephalosporinase over production (34%) and penicillinase (11%). Imipenem, ceftazidime and piperacillin-tazobactam were the most active b-lactams (MIC 50 of 4.16 and 32 mg/l, respectively). Amikacin was the most active aminoside (MIC 50 of 128 mg/l). Thirty-seven percent of P. aeruginosa strains have the serotype O11, 24% the serotype O6 and only 5% were non-serotypable. All multi resistant strains have the serotype O11. These results showed high rates of antibiotic resistance and predominance of O11 serotype in multiresistant strains compared to the O12 serotype in Europe. 
 
 
Infectious complications sustained by
Stenotrophomonas
(
Xanthomonas
)
maltophilia
in HIV-infected patients: a ten-year surveillance study
 
PM234
 Calza L, Manfredi R, Chiodo F. Division of Infectious Diseases, University of Bologna, Bologna, Italy
 

Introduction:
Stenotrophomonas maltophilia is an ubiquitous, aerobic, gram-negative bacillus closely related to the Pseudomonas species, and usually considered an opportunistic, nosocomial pathogen. At present, very limited informations are available about S. maltophilia infections in the setting of HIV disease. Patients and methods: A retrospective survey of clinical and microbiological records of 1374 HIV-infected patients referring to out tertiary care centre between 1991 and 2000 was performed, in order to identify all episodes of S. maltophilia infections, and analyze its epidemiological, clinical, and microbiological variables. Results: Sixty-one episodes of S. maltophilia infection were observed in 59 patients: sepsis/bacteraemia in 48 cases (78.7%), lower airways infection in five, urinary tract infection in four, pharyngitis in two, lymphadenitis and liver abscess in one case each. Forty-seven out of 61 episodes of S. maltophilia infections (77%) occurred as nosocomial disease, generally in association with advanced immunodeficiency, neutropenia, instrumentation, and prior antimicrobial therapy. Bacterial isolates showed an elevated resistance profile against many beta-lactam compounds, aztreonam, imipenem, and aminoglycosides. Conclusion:
S. maltophilia represents an emerging opportunistic pathogen in HIV-infected patients, responsible for a broad range of clinical manifestations, and often resistant to multiple beta-lactam and aminoglycoside compounds. 
 
Extended spectrum beta-lactamases producing germs in intensive care units
 
PM235
 Licker MS, Moldovan R, Negru CO, Berceanu Vaduva D, Dan L, Branea D, Craciunescu M, Hogea E, Munteanu D, Popa M. University of Medicine and Pharmacy ‘Victor Babes’, Microbiology, Timisoara, Romania
 

The purpose of the study: We collected 226 bacteriological samples from adult and neonate patients who were admitted in intensive care units (ICU). The aim was to observe the colonization status with microbes that may have a nosocomial potential and to establish circulating phenotypes in ICUs. The results obtained from a total of 226 samples 61 strains of gram negative bacteria (Enterobacteriaceae family) were isolated. Fourteen strains showed extended spectrum beta-lactamases (ESBL) phenotype (eight strains of Klebsiella pneumoniae, three of Escherichia coli, two of Klebsiella ornithynolitica, one of Klebsiella oxytoca). We used both disc diffusion test (extended antibiotic susceptibility test and synergy test to visualize ‘champagne stopper’ pattern) and mini API® system. The conclusion reached: We put in evidence a massive colonization with germs that may have a nosocomial potential especially microbes that produce ESBL (22.9% from all enterobacteriaceae isolated) which implies a rational policy in prescribing antibiotics in hospitals from western part of Romania. 
 
Carbapenem activity against nosocomial Gram-negative rods
 
PM236
 Sawicka-Grzelak Aa, Rokosz Aa, Meszaros Jb, Luczak Ma. a
Department of Medical Microbiology, University Medical School, Warsaw, Poland, b
Department of General and Transplantation Surgery, University Medical School, Warsaw, Poland
 

Purpose: To determine a susceptibility of nosocomial Gram-negative rods to carbapenems. Methods: Two hundred strains of Gram-negative rods were cultured from clinical specimens from hospitalized patients (July–November 2001). Identification of strains was performed in the automatic ATB system (bioMerieux, France). Susceptibility of strains to carbapenems: imipenem and meropenem was determined with disc diffusion method according to NCCLS recommendations. ESBL-producing strains were detected with double-disc synergy test (DDST according to Jarlier et al., 1988) or a novel method of ESBL detection (DD, diagnostic disc) according to Appleton (1999). Two discs were applied in this test: with cefpodoxime (CPD) and with cefpodoxime/clavulanic acid (CD 01) (Oxoid, England). Results: One hundred and ten strains of enteric rods and 90 strains of non-fermenting rods were cultured. Twenty eight (14%) ESBL-positive strains were detected. Carbapenems were active against 96% of enteric rods. The percentage of non-fermenting rods susceptible to imipenem was 70 and to meropenem—60. Conclusions: Carbapenems: imipenem and meropenem demonstrated high activity against clinical strains of enteric rods. However, the antibiotics were less active against nosocomial strains of non-fermenting rods. 
 
Inhaled antibiotics against multiresistant bacteria in bronchial secretions of ICU patients: a preliminary report
 
PM237
 Horianopoulou Ma, Kanellopoulou Mb, Paraskevopoulos Ia, Valakis Ka, Kyriakidis Aa, Lambropoulos Sa. a
Intensive Care Unit, Sismanoglio General Hospital, Athens, Greece, b
Department of Microbiology, Sismanoglio General Hospital, Athens, Greece
 

Purpose: The aim of this study was to assess the effectiveness of aerosolized ampicillin/sulbactam, ceftazidime and colistin, in ICU patients with multiresistant Acinetobacter baumannii or Pseudomonas aeruginosa colonization of the respiratory tract.

Methods: Fifty-three intubated, mechanically ventilated patients participated in the study. Multiresistant A. baumannii, sensitive only to ampicillin/sulbactam, or P. aeruginosa, sensitive to ceftazidime or colistin, were isolated from the bronchial secretions (105–108 CFU/ml). All 53 patients were subsequently treated with intravenous ampicillin/sulbactam, ceftazidime or colistin, whereas 27 of them were also given the same antibiotic in aerosolized form.

Results: A decrease in the number of colonies by 103–106 CFU/ml was observed, following 2–4 days of combined treatment with both intravenous and inhaled antibiotic. None of the 27 patients developed VAP. In the 26 patients who only received the antibiotic intravenously, the decrease ranged from zero to 104 CFU/ml, after 7 days of treatment. Two of 26 patients developed VAP.

Conclusions: Our results suggest that the administration of aerosolized antibiotics represents an effective means of preventing ventilator-associated pneumonia caused by A. baumanni and P. aeruginosa. 
 
Activity of antibiotics against
Pseudomonas aeruginosa
strains isolated from tracheal aspiration
 
PM238
 Andrei Ma, Petrescu AMb, Pana Mb, Valcu Mc, Alboiu Ac, Ghita Mb, Ghita Dd. a
Emergency Hospital, Clinical Microbiology Laboratory, Bucharest, Romania, b
Cantacuzino Institute, Clinical Microbiology, Bucharest, Romania, c
Emergency Hospital, Plastic Surgery, Bucharest, Romania, d
Rotest, Microbiology, Bucharest, Romania
 

Introduction:
Pseudomonas aeruginosa is an important nosocomial pathogen. Resistance to certain beta-lactam antimicrobial agents among P. aeruginosa is increasing. Despite the development of new antibiotics multiresistant strains of P. aeruginosa represent an important therapeutic problem. The aim of this study was to investigate the activity of imipenem, amikacin, piperacillin, ciprofloxacin, ceftazidime, against clinical isolates of P. aeruginosa. Methods: A total of 54 isolates by tracheal aspiration from hospitalized patients, admitted to intensive care units were identified as P. aeruginosa using an algorithm that included: Gram stain, pigment, oxidaze (+0,) and Gram negative identifications Microscan Walkaway-96 (Dade Behring) were used according to the manufactures instructions. Minium inhibitory concentrations were determined using Walkaway, interpretation based on NCCLSM 100-S9, January '99. Results: The respiratory tract was the single site of isolation for this study. The best activity was showed by imipenem 25%, followed by amikacin 22%, piperacillin, pip/tazobactam, ciprofloxacin had the same sensitivity 11%. Conclusion: A high level resistance to antibiotics was observed to P. aeruginosa isolated from tracheal aspiration. Carbapenems seem to be the most active against P. aeruginosa in this study. 
 
Comparative activity of colistin by agar dilution and disk diffusion against 35 isolates of
Acinetobacter baumannii
 
PM239
 Escudero E, Perez L, Alarcon T, de las Cuevas C, Lopez-Brea M. Hospital Universitario de la Princesa, Microbiology, Madrid, Spain
 

Objective: To compare the susceptibility to colistin results by disk diffusion (DD) and agar dilution (AD), using 35 Acinetobacter baumannii strains collected from significant clinical samples of infected and colonised patients admitted to the Hospital Universitario de la Princesa from June to November 2001.

Materials and methods: Clinical samples were collected from patients admitted to this hospital. Only one isolate per patient was included. Antimicrobial susceptibility testing was performed as recommended by the NCCLS. All bacterial isolates were tested by DD and AD to provide a comparison of both test results. Very major error was considered when the strains were resistant (R) by AD and susceptible (S) by DD and major error when S by AD and R by DD. Categories of S and R were stablised using the breakpoints suggested by Mensura (2000). Colistin R strains was typed by REP-PCR.

Results: Among the 35 strains included in this study 30 (85.7%) were S to colistin and five (14.2%) were colstin R by AD, of this five colistin R strains four (11.4%) were S to colistin by DD and one was R by both methods. All R isolates were similar by REP-PCR.

Conclusions: Most of the AD colistin resistant strains were S when tested by DD indicating that this method is not useful to determine the resistance to colistin. REP-PCR patterns show that the spread of a colistin R clone seems to be involved. 
 
Treatment of bone and joint infections (BJI) due to gram negative bacteria (GNB) by a cefepime (CFP)–fluoroquinolones (FQ) combination
 
PM240
 Legout L, Senneville E, Yazdanpanah Y, Savage C, Rosele B, Migaud H, Mouton Y. Orthopedic Department of Surgery, Hospital Roger Salengro, Lille, France
 

Objective: To assess the efficacy and safety of CFP combined with ofloxacin (OFL) or ciprofloxacin (CIP) in the treatment of hypercase GNB, BJI. Methods: GNB were isolated from per-operative biopsies (pob) and/or from articular punction (ap). Patients (pts) received CFP, 2 g bid+OFL, 200 mg tid or CIP, 400 mg bid intravenously for 28 days, followed by a prolonged oral FQ monotherapy. Cure was defined as: resolution of all clinical signs of infection, normalization of the biological inflammatory profile at the end of treatment (EOT) and absence of infection at the same site during the post-treatment follow-up period (PTFU). Results: All of the 20 studied patients [mean age=48 years] had hospital acquired BJI. Seventeen/20 had an infected orthopedic device (prosthetic joints=6, other orthopedic prosthetic devices=11). Culture of 17 pob and 5 ap yielded to Pseudomonas sp. (11), Enterobacter cloacae (6), others (4). Vancomycin was added for six pts co-infected by GNB-MRSA. Nineteen/20 pts underwent a surgical intervention (debridement=11, removal-replacement=7, amputation=1). After PTFU period of 17 months (range 3–29), the overall success rate was 12/17 (88.2%) without serious adverse events. Conclusion: CFP–FQ combination was safe and efficient in the treatment of hypercase GNB, BJI. 
 
Treatment of posttraumatic MRSA osteomyelitis of the femur with long-term cotrimoxazole—a case report
 
PM241
 Dzupova Oa, Dzupa Vb, Stulik Jb, Zicha Jc. a
3rd Faculty of Medicine, Clinic of Infectious Diseases, University Hospital Bulovka, Prague, Czech Republic, b
3rd Faculty of Medicine, University Hospital Kralovske Vinohrady, Orthopaedic Clinic, Prague, Czech Republic, c
Immunology Department, St. Elisabeth Hospital, Prague, Czech Republic
 

The authors report a case of posttraumatic osteomyelitis of the femur caused by methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus (MRSA), following the shot injury. Relapses of the infection occured in 3 months interval and were treated by revision, debridement, lavage and vancomycin. Because of laboratory signs of renal insufficiency vancomycin became contraindicated for treatment of the third relapse of infection and the different approach was employed: classic open treatment of bone infection sec. Orr was combined with a long-term administration of high-dose cotrimoxazole. The patient was given cotrimoxazole 9600 mg daily divided in four doses (120 mg/kg/24 h) for 2 months, then for gastrointestinal complaints with lowered dose of 5760 g daily for next 6 months. The wound completely healed. During 18 months after the final surgery there was no relaps of infection, but the atrophic pseudoarthrosis of the femur resulted. The patient can walk with a rigid orthesis and two crutches. The whole treatment of the injury and complications lasted 22 months, demanded for 11 surgical procedures and total cost was 1.25 millions CZK (35,700 EUR). 
 
Comparison of different methods for detection of extended spectrum beta lactamases (ESBLs) and their genetic relatedness among enterobacteriaceae clinical isolates in a research medical institute
 
PM242
 Omar Ma, Badawi HEb, Helmi Ha, Mokhtar Sb. a
Theodor Bilharz Research Institute (TBRI), Microbiology, Giza, Egypt, b
Theodor Bilharz Research Institute (TBRI), Microbiology, Infection Control Unit, Giza, Egypt
 

Objectives: To determine the frequency of ESBLs and their genetic relatedness among Enterobacteriaceae clinical isolates recovered at the Microbiology Laboratory of TBRI. The abilities of different methods to detect these resistant strains were compared. Methods: One hundred out of 178 isolates that were screened positive for ESBLs were tested with double disk synergy test (DDST), three dimensional test (TDT), E-test-ESBL and Vitek-ESBL test. Pulsed field gel electrophoresis (PFGE) analysis was applied to 13 ESBLs; five Klebsiella pneumoniae and eight Escherichia coli. Results: Revealed the prevalence of ESBLs in 25.8% of clinical isolates. The sensitivities of the DDST, TDT, E-test and Vitek were 100, 73, 86.9 and 47.8%, respectively. In the DDST, aztreonam was the most sensitive indicator (93.4%). PFGE demonstrated that 80% of K. pneumoniae were derived from a single clone whereas 62.5% of E. coli isolates were derived from two different clones. Non-clonal origin was demonstrated in 20% of K. pneumoniae and 37.5% of E. coli. Conclusion: There is an increased prevalence of ESBLs. The DDST is the most sensitive, practical and cost effective diagnostic method reliable for routine use in our laboratory. Both clonal spread and plasmid dissemination contributed to the concurrent nosocomial outbreaks caused by ESBL-producing K. pneumoniae and E. coli. Judicious use of antibiotics and implementation of infection control measures are necessary to limit the prevalence of such outbreaks. 
 
Severe nosocomial infections due to
Stenotrophomonas maltophilia
 
PM243
 Radulescu Aa, Sasca Nb, Lupse Mc, Carstina Dc. a
University of Medicine and Pharmacy, Epidemiology, Cluj-Napoca, Romania, b
The Teaching Hospital of Infectious Diseases, Laboratory, Cluj-Napoca, Romania, c
University of Medicine and Pharmacy ‘Iuliu Hatieganu’, Infectious Diseases, Cluj-Napoca, Romania
 

Objective: To present a variety of severe nosocomial infections due to Stenotrophomonas maltophilia in patients hospitalized in tertiary medical units from Cluj.

Results: During the last year nine strains of S. maltophilia obtained from patients with severe infections and hospitalized in different wards were isolated. All but one were considered nosocomial infections: four cases of pneumonia, one urinary tract infection, three cases of surgical wound infections and one case of endocarditis under surgical treatment. The cases of pneumonia were either primary occurring in a granulocytopenic patient with leukemia or secondary in patients that underwent surgical treatment. In the case of endocarditis the ethiology was established after surgery from the damaged valve in a negative hemoculture patient with a poor outcome under medical treatment. In all cases of surgical wound infection bacteremia occurred diagnosed on clinical basis in the presence of severe sepsis or hematogenous dissemination in the lung. The urinary tract infection occurred in a patient after urinary surgery and having a catheter in place. The immediate evolution was favorable in all cases but treatment was difficult due to the highly resistant strains and to underling diseases.

Conclusions:
S. maltophilia should be considered in nosocomial severe infections and prophylaxis by interrupting environmental transmission has to be promoted. 
 
Susceptibility of nosocomial ESBL-positive uropathogens to antimicrobial agents
 
PM244
 Sawicka-Grzelak A, Rokosz A, Luczak M. Department of Medical Microbiology, University Medical School, Warsaw, Poland
 

Purpose: To identify and determine the drug-susceptibility of ESBL-positive strains isolated from urine samples. Methods: Seven hundred and twelve strains of Gram-negative rods were cultured from 4000 urine samples from hospitalized patients during 5 months (July–November 2001). Identification and susceptibility were performed in the automatic ATB system (bioMerieux, France) using ID 32 E, ID 32 GN and ATB UR 5 strips. ESBL-activity was detected with double-disc synergy test (DDST according to Jarlier et al., 1988) or using a novel method of ESBL detection (DD, diagnostic disc) according to Appleton (1999). Two discs were applied in this test: with cefpodoxime (CPD) and with cefpodoxime/clavulanic acid (CD 01) (Oxoid, England). Results: Five hundred and ninety-five strains (83.6%) belonging to Enterobacteriaceae family, 115 strains (16.1%) of non-fermenting rods and two strains (0.3%) of other Gram-negative rods were isolated. Eighty-two ESBL-producing strains (11.5% of all strains) were detected. Fifty-nine ESBL-positive strains were susceptible to nitrofurantoin, 58- to norfloxacin and ciprofloxacin and 54- to fosfomycin. Conclusions: ESBL-positive strains were detected most frequently among enteric rods (80 strains). Nitrofurantoin and quinolones were the most active in vitro antibacterial agents against examined ESBL-positive uropathogens. 
 
Aminoglycoside resistance mechanisms in nosocomial Gram-negative bacteria in Smolensk Regional Hospital (Russia)
 
PM245
 Reshedko GK. Smolensk State Medical Academy, Institute of Antimicrobial Chemotherapy, Smolensk, Russian Federation

Purpose: To determine aminoglycoside resistance mechanisms in nosocomial gram-negative bacteria isolated in Smolensk Regional Hospital in 1995–2000. Results: The mechanisms of resistance were evaluated phenotypically using 12 different aminoglycosides. A total of 257 aminoglycoside resistant gram-negative strains were studied. One hundred fifty-eight strains were collected in 1995–1996, 52 in 1998 and 47 in 2000. The resistant profiles were determined: Enterobacteriaceae—152; Pseudomonas aeruginosa—62; Acinetobacter spp.—43. The most frequently phenotypes were GT (gentamicin, tobramycin)—48% and GTNet (gentamicin, tobramycin, netilmicin)—35%. The GT phenotype due to production ANT(2″)-I enzyme, the GTNet–AAC(3)-V (87 strains), AAC(3)-IV—one strain and AAC(2″)-I—one strain. The resistance to amikacin in 7% strains was due to production AAC(6′)-I (3%) and APH(3′)-VI (4%). The most of examined strains were simultaneously resistant to kanamycin and neomycin caused by production of APH(3′)-I (69%). Only seven strains were resistant to all aminoglycosides due to impermeability of outer membrane. No substantial differences were observed between years. Conclusions: The main mechanism of aminoglycoside resistance is fermentative modification. The high rate to gentamicin and tobramycin was due to production of ANT(2″)-I and AAC(3)-V. Amikacin and isepamicin were the most active aminoglycosides against gram-negative nosocomial isolates. 
 
Risk factors (RF) of infectious complications (IC) after extensive operations in oncogynaecologic (OG) patients
 
PM246
 Dmitireva NVa, Petoukhova Ia, Nummaev Bb, Sokolova Ea. a
Laboratory of Microbiology, Cancer Research Center of Russia, Moscow, Russian Federation, b
Department of Oncogynecology, Cancer Research Centre, Moscow, Russian Federation
 

The aim of the study was to determine RF of IC in OG pts. Total 241 OG pts after extensive hysterectomy (201 pts), extensive vulvoectomy (22 pts) and extensive/combined operations for ovarian cancer (18 pts) were analysed. IC developed in 74 pts. One hundred and sixty-seven pts had no IC. Twenty-eight of 50 RF analysed were independent RF of IC. Most important included: age >50 years (P=0.0002), grade 2–3 obesity (P=0.0002), diabetes mellitus (P=0.0002), diagnosis of cervical cancer (P=0.0001), history of pre-cancer of vulva (P=0.0001) and its duration >10 years (P=0.0094), hypoalbuminemia (P=0.001), hypoproteinemia (P=0.007), anemia (P=0.0154), radiodermatitis (P=0.004), previous chemotherapy (P=0.017, if more than five courses of chemotherapy—P=0.003), leukopenia after chemotherapy (P=0.014), previous antibiotic therapy (P=0.0004), duration of operation >3 h (P=0.0001), duration of postoperative draining (P=0.0001), blood loss >900 ml (P=0.003), intraoperative antibiotic prophylaxis (P=0.0004). RF for UTI only were following: pyeloectasia by ultrasound investigation (P=0.0001), leucocyturia before operation (P=0.017), bacteriuria before operation (P=0.016) and duration of urinary catheter using >10 days (P=0.0001). 
 
Postpartum endometritis due to group A
Streptococcus
: a case-control study
 
PM247
 Blanchon Ta, Blanchard Hb, Lamarche-Vadel Aa, Ciais Mb, Rivet Mb, Lafaix Pillet MCc, Salmon-Ceron Dd, Vidal-Trecan Ga. a
Cochin Port Royal Hospital, Service de Sante Publique, Paris, France, b
Cochin Port Royal Hospital, Unite Operationnelle d'Hygiene, Paris, France, c
Cochin Port Royal Hospital, Service de Gynecologie-Obstetrique Site St Vincent-de-Paul, Paris, France, d
Cochin Port Royal Hospital, CCLIN, Paris, France
 

Aims: To determinate risk markers of an outbreak of postpartum endometritis due to group A Streptococcus. Design: A case-control study using data collected with a structured form. Setting: The cases of postpartum endometritis were diagnosed in the department of Obstetric of the Paris hospital network during 5 days (December 1999–January 2000). The group of controls consisted of women delivered in the same department during the same period. Participants: Cases (n=3) and controls (n=59). Findings: Cases had smoked more often during pregnancy (67 vs. 16%; P=0.089) and received more often immunosuppressive treatment than controls (33 vs. 0%; P=0.060). Instrumental delivery has been needed more often for cases than controls (67 vs. 13%; P=0.062). Cases had been hospitalized after delivery in a ward z of the department more often than controls (100 vs. 23%; P=0.017). They had been examined after delivery more often by a midwife x (100 vs. 18%; P=0.009) and a nurse y has provided care to cases and not to controls (33 vs. 0%; P=0.051). Conclusion: Smoking, receiving immunosuppressive treatment during pregnancy, and instrumental delivery were significantly associated with postpartum endometritis (P<10%). A midwife and a nurse might be involved in the transmission of the infection. 
 
Antibiotic prophylaxis (AP) in extensive operations in oncogynaecologic (OG) patients
 
PM248
 Petoukhova Ia, Sokolova Ea, Dmitrieva Na, Nummaev Bb. a
Laboratory Microbiology, Cancer Research Center of Russia, Moscow, Russian Federation, b
Department of Oncogynecology, Cancer Research Centre, Moscow, Russian Federation
 

The aim of the study was to assess efficacy of perioperative AP. Total 241 pts were included. Two hundred and one pts with cervical cancer (CC) undergone extensive hysterectomy, 22 pts with cancer of vulva (CV)-extensive vulvoectomy, 18 pts with ovarian cancer (OC) – extensive/combined operations. Fifty-one pts (group 1) received AP with amoxicillin/clavulanate (AM/CL) 1.8 g IV 30 min prior to operation, then 1.2 g IV thrice per day for 3–5 days. Fifty pts (group 2) received cefotaxime (CTX) 2 g IV 30 min prior to operation, then 1 g four times per day for 3–5 days+metronidazole (MTZ) 500 mg two times per day for the same period. One hundred and forty pts were retrospective control (they received II–III generation cephalosporins or linkosamides only after operation). The rate of SWI in pts with CC, CV and OC was 13.5, 73, 29%, respectively; DWI—16.2, 0 and 21%, respectively; UTI—72, 80, 42.8%, respectively. The AP with AM/CL was more effective compared to CTX+MTZ (SWI—6 vs 18%, respectively, P<0.05, DWI—9.8 vs 14%, respectively, P<0.05). The rate of postoperative UTI was equivalent in two groups (62 vs 74%, P=N.S.). Thus, AP with AM/CL is preferrable option in extensive operations in OG pts. 
 
Prophylaxis of post-operative hospital pneumonia in elderly surgical patients in the general resuscitation department
 
PM249
 Vertkin AL, Shtchepochkin VV, Kolobov SV, Krivtsova EV, Namazova LS, Martynov AI. Department of Clinical Pharmacology and Internal Medicine, Moscow State Medico-Stomatological University, Moscow, Russian Federation
 

Fifty-eight patients were randomized into two groups. Group 1, a treatment consisting of 31 patients and Group 2, consisting of 27 patients as a control. The patients were at the age of 67±1.2 and had had different surgical interventions with general anaesthesia from 1 to 3 h and accompanying COPD (89%). Artificial pulmonary ventilation was used in 45 cases. In the early post-surgery period the patients of Group 1 were administered inhalation therapy, including ipratopium of bromide in the combination with fenoterol (atrovent, berodual) and ambrocsol (lazolvan) through a nebulizer. The inhalation therapy was not administered to the patients of Group 2. Under the influence of the inhalation therapy pulmonary ventilation and respiratory metabolism was restored faster in all the resuscitation patients (in Group 1—by the end of the first 24 h, in Group 2—on the 3rd–4th day). The percent rate of PEF1 was 76.7+4.1 and 56.4+4.5, respectively. Artificial pulmonary ventilation ended in 9.2 and 7.3 h, respectively. The time of the patients' stay in the resuscitation department was 3.2 days in Group 1 and 4.6 days in Group 2. By the end of the 1st week pneumonia developed in one patient from Group 1 and in eight patients in Group 2. Aerosol therapy application accelerates medication delivery to the respiratory tracts, increases the local activity and effects good prophylaxis for surgical hospital pneumonia. 
 
Variation in ethiology of early and late onset ventilator associated pneumonia
 
PM250
 Nikolopoulos J, Daganou M, Michailidou M, Karabela E, Kavada K, Retsou S, Antoniadou A, Rasidakis A. Department of Respiratory Failure and ICU, Sotiria General and Chest Disease Hospital, Athens, Greece
 

Purpose: To compare the distribution of causative microorganisms, their susceptibility to antibiotics and outcome of ‘early’ and ‘late’ VAP in a Greek ICU. Methods and results: Retrospective study of mechanical ventilated (MV) patients (pts) with early and late VAPs during a 6-month period. Diagnosis of VAP was made by clinical, radiographic criteria and quantitative cultures of bronchial secretions. VAP was diagnosed in 17 pts (26%) out of 67 consecutive admissions in ICU. All pts before the development of VAP received antibiotics. Three episodes of VAP (17.6%) were developed before the 7th day of MV (early VAP) and were caused: (1) by multi-resistant Acinetobacter; and (2) by antibiotic-susceptible Pseudomonas aeroginosa. In this group one pt died from septic shock related to VAP and two pts survived. Fourteen pts (82.4%) developed VAP after the 7th day of MV (late VAP). Five cases were caused by multi-resistant P. aeroginosa, two cases by MRSA, two cases by multi-resistant Acinetobacter, two cases by susceptible to antibiotics Klebsiella pneumoniae, and three were polymicrobial and caused by multi-resistant microorganisms (MRSA and GNB). Four pts died (28.6%) from septic shock related to VAP, five pts (36%) died because of another cause and five pts (36%) survived. Conclusions: Early and late onset episodes of VAP were caused by ‘potentially drug-resistant bacteria’. P. aeroginosa as a cause of early VAP was susceptible. Mortality attributed to early and late VAP was similar. 
 
Antibiotic prophylaxis in oncological and major reconstructive orthopaedic surgery
 
PM251
 De Biase P, Ciampalini L, Astone A, Capanna R. Azienda Ospedaliera Careggi, Oncological and reconstructive Centre, AOC, Florence, Italy
 

During last year patients scheduled for oncological surgery or major reconstructive procedures were randomised to either vancomycin or teicoplanin prophylaxis. Prophylaxis was performed with either vancomycin 1 g i.v. twice daily or teicoplanin once daily 400 i.v. Two hundred patients were included. Four patients did not agree the study protocol and were excluded. We treated 98 patients with teicoplanin and 98 patients with vancomycin. Out of the 196 patients 117 were operated for oncological disease, while the remaining 79 underwent major orthopaedic procedures. We experienced 10 cases of red man syndrome, and five cases of moderate hypotension. Five patients had postoperative complications: two deep venous thrombosis, one pulmonary embolism, two postoperative haematoma. In five patients we observed a wound dehiscence; two of these patients showed clinical sign of SSI and microbiological examinations were positive for MRSA. One patient recovered from infection with medical therapy, while the other patient showed a local tumour recurrence and was amputated at the thigh. At last surgery infection was still present clinical and at microbiological examination. In conclusion we had an infection rate of 1.02% which is comparable to the infection rate of a ‘clean’ surgery in patients with normal risk of infection. Teicoplanin showed lower toxicity, has a longer half-life and has a simpler way of infusion and it is our current choice in high risk surgery. 
 
Injuries with contaminated sharp articles in health care workers in General Hospital Celje, Slovenia
 
PM252
 Lesnicar G, Sibanc B. Department of Infectious diseases, Medical Center Celje, Celje, Slovenia
 

In a prospective study carried out from January 1997 till June 2001, we registered 133 subcutaneous injuries with sharp objects, mostly in nurses and cleaning service workers. In 19% of cases the incident occurred outside the hospital, in persons who were not medical workers. In 69 cases the injury causing object was a needle that had been used in known patients, 14 of which were hepatitis B positive. Fifty-five (48.2%) of the injured health workers had been previously vaccinated against hepatitis B; the protective antibodies to hepatitis B in the blood were found in 35/114 (30.7%) health workers only, while the tests for antibodies to hepatitis C and HIV were negative in all cases. Following the incident, the majority of the injured persons, i.e. 102, were vaccinated against hepatitis B, while 46 persons (34.6%) also received passive prophylaxis with human immunoglobulin against hepatitis B. None of the injured persons have developed the disease or showed evidence of sero-conversion. In the year 2000 the general as well as specific preventive measures practised in our hospital became more rigorous. Thus, approximately 80% of our health workers at risk have already been vaccinated against hepatitis B. 
 
Multidrug-resistant bacteria infected patients isolation precautions in outpatient and investigation departments in a Paris university hospital: knowledge of medical and paramedical health workers
 
PM253Couzigou Ca, Blanchard Hb, Diakite Bc, Ciais Mb, Rivet Mb, Salmon-Céron Dc, Vidal-Trécan Gd. a
Université René Descartes, CHU Cochin Port-Royal, Service de Santé Publique, Paris, France, b
Université René Descartes, CHU Cochin Port-Royal, Unité Opérationnelle d'Hygiène, Comité de Lutte contre les Infections Nosocomiales, Paris, France, c
Université René Descartes, CHU Cochin Port-Royal, Comité de Lutte contre les Infections Nosocomiales, Paris, France, d
Université René Descartes, CHU Cochin Port-Royal, Service de Santé Publique, Comité de Lutte contre les Infections Nosocomiales, Paris, France
 

To improve measures preventing dissemination of multidrug-resistant bacteria (MRB), a cross-sectional survey (2000) was conducted to analyse healthcare workers' (HCWs) isolation precaution knowledge for MRB infection at 21 investigation and outpatient departments excluding four declaring not to be involved in care to MRB patients (emergency, obstetrics, nuclear medicine, and bacteriology).
Two hundred and eight HCWs answered (67% of the paramedical staff, 28% of the physicians). Thirty-three percent of them reported they do not know frequently or always the patient MRB status. They (82%) wish MRB status to be mentioned on the test form or on the advice request letter.
MRB patient visit or test was appropriately timed in 62% answers. Gowns (61%) or masks (58%) use were not systematically reported. Other HCWs (74%) reported better isolation precaution knowledge than physicians (58%) and nurses (81%) than investigation assistants (58%). Physicians declared lower compliance with use of gowns, gloves or draw-sheets than other HCWs. They had also lower education in isolation precautions and were less interested in education programs.
This study suggests the necessity to improve MBR infection information. Physicians and investigation assistants seem to be insufficiently aware of hospital infection control. Therefore, education strategies targeted at physicians and investigation assistants working at outpatient and investigation departments should be developed. 
 
Outbreak of
Clostridium difficile-associated diarrhoea in Infectious Disease Department: risk factors and hygiene measures assessment
 
PM254
 Henoun Loukili N, Martin M, Remy V, Hansmann Y, Christmann D. Hôpitaux Universitaires de Strasbourg, Maladies Infectieuses et Tropicales, Strasbourg, France
 

The incidence of Clostridium difficile associated diarrhoea (CDAD) increased in our department from January to June 2001. Objective: To confirm the out break of CDAD, to identify the risk factors and assess the effectiveness of the measures implemented for controlling this outbreak. Methods: CDC definitions were used to identify the cases. The scope of the outbreak was defined. CDAD incidences during the outbreak period and during the same period in 2000 were compared. Risk factors (reduced mobility, antibiotic treatments …) were studied for patients whom length of hospital stay (LHS) was more than 6 days. Contact precautions and environmental cleaning with ClONa implemented were assessed. Results: Seventeen episodes of CDAD were identified. Sex ratio: 1.41, mean age=58.5, mean LHS=36 days, mean delay for CDAD occurring=21 days. One hundred and fifty-two patients involved in the study of risk factors. Relative Risk (R.R.) evaluated were: β-lactams (R.R.=7.62, IC95%: 1.03–56.56), reduced mobility (R.R.=7.61, IC95%: 1.76–32.85). Incidence of CDAD was less than two cases per 1000 days of hospitalisation after June 2001. Conclusion: We confirmed the outbreak of CDAD in our department β-lactams and reduced mobility were identified as risk factors for CDAD. Measures implemented to control the outbreak were effectiveness. 
 
Positive heart transport fluid cultures associated with severe infections in heart transplant recipients
 
PM255
 Meyers BR, Gurland I. Mount Sinai Hospital, Infectious Disease, New York, USA
 

At the Mount Sinai Hospital in New York City 256 heart transplants were performed between 1986 and June 2000. Cultures were routinely performed on all heart transplant transport fluids. Culture data was available for 204 of these patients. In total 24/204 (11.8%) were positive for bacteria, fungi or both. The organisms isolated included coagulase negative staphylococci (13), Pseudomonas aeruginosa (2), Staphylococcus aureus (1), Acinetobacter baumanii (1), Serratia mercescens (1), Enterobacter cloacae (1), Escherichia coli (1), Proteus mirabilus (1), Enterococcus faecalis (1), Viridans Streptococci (1), and fungi (Aspergillus fumigatus (1), Penicillium species (1), and Rhodotorula rubra (1). Two heart transplant recipients had two organisms isolated from the transport fluid. Isolation of resistant gram-negative bacilli in the transport fluid was associated with significant infection in 3/5 patients (60%) with the same organism. The observed infections were pneumonia secondary to E. cloacae, sternal wound infection secondary to P. aeruginosa, and bacteremia secondary to P. aeruginosa. It appears prudent to provide prophylaxis against resistant gram negative bacilli to prevent infections. 
 
Rate and mortality in nosocomial bloodstream infections
 
PM256
 Zacharof AK, Flevaris C, Petrogianopoulos C, Karachalios G, Vroulis J, Chartzoulakis G, Drakogiorgos G, Loizidou A, Svoukas G. 2nd Department of Internal Medicine, Hellenic Red Cross Hospital, Athens, Greece
 

Objective: We studied the trends of nosocomial bloodstream infection and calculated the population-attributable risk for death among hospitalized patients. Methods: We perform a 15-year retrospective study for all patients (N=79 160), admitted to our department between 1986 and 2000. Results: Between 1986 and 2000, a total of 1577 patients developed 1763 episodes of nosocomial bloodstream infection. The crude infection rates increased linearly from 7.2 to 25.4 per 1000 discharges (1.11–1.93 episodes per 1000 patient-days) during the 15-year study period. Increases in the infection rates were due to gram-positive cocci, yeasts and essentially explained by infections caused by coagulase-negative staphylococci, Staphylococcus aureus, enterococci, and Candida species, respectively. Although the crude mortality in patients with nosocomial bloodstream infections decreased from 45% in 1986 to 28% in 2000, the in-hospital population-attributable mortality among infected patients increased from 5.5 deaths per 1000 discharges in 1986 to 8.2 per 1000 discharges in 2000. The etiologic fraction or the proportion of deaths in patients with bloodstream infection to all deaths occurring in the hospital increased from 15.4% in 1986 to 26.4% in 2000. Conclusions: The incidence and the population-attributable risk for death among patients experiencing nosocomial bloodstream infections increased progressively during the last 15 years in our department. 
 
Ventilator-associated pneumonia before and after intensive care unit temporary closure
 
PM257
 Nikolopoulos J, Karabela E, Michailidou M, Kavada K, Antoniadou A, Daganou M, Rasidakis A. KAA Department of Respiratory Failure and ICU, Sotiria General and Chest Disease Hospital, Athens, Greece
 

Purpose: To evaluate the influence of ICU's temporary closure on the characters of VAP. Results: We compared the incidence, causative organisms and mortality of VAP in two different time periods. Period 1 June to December 1999. Period 2 June to December 2000. Between those two periods the ICU remained closed for 4 months because of reconstruction works.

Period 1: Sixty-seven consecutive patients (pts) were studied with bronchial secretions cultures at least 2 days after Mechanical Ventilation (MV) initiation. The VAP was diagnosed by clinical, radiological and microbiological criteria in 17 pts (26%). Causative organisms included: Pseudomonas aeruginosa 8, Acinetobacter 5, Staphylococcus aureus 4, Klebsiella pneum. 3, Enterobacter 1. In three cases VAP was proved polymicrobial. Fourteen (14) episodes of VAP (82%) were developed after 7 days MV (late VAP) and were attributed to multiresistant microorganisms. Mortality of VAP was 29%.

Period 2: Among 66 consecutive pts, VAP was diagnosed in 21 (32%). Causative organisms included: Acinetobacter 10, P. aeruginosa 8, S. aureus 4, K. pneumoniae 3, Escherichia coli 1. Five (5) cases were polymicrobial and 14 cases were ‘late VAP’ (67%). Causative microorganisms had similar patterns of sensitivity to antibiotics (compared to period one). Mortality of VAP was 38%.

Conclusion: Temporary ICU closure had no significant influence on the incidence, distribution of causative organisms, their sensitivities to antibiotics and mortality of the VAP. 
 
A mortality prediction model in acute pyelonephritis
 
PM258
 Efstathiou SPa, Pefanis AVa, Tsioulos DIa, Tsiakou AGa, Zacharos IDa, Kanavaki Sb, Mountokalakis TDa. a
Third University Department of Medicine, Sotiria General Hospital, Athens, Greece, b
Microbiology Laboratory, Sotiria General Hospital, Athens, Greece
 

Purpose: The aim of this study was to derive a scoring system for the prediction of outcome in adult patients with acute pyelonephritis (AP) severe enough to need hospitalization. Therefore, the charts of 225 patients (102 men, median age 67 years) were reviewed.

Results: Logistic regression analysis identified in both sexes four independent correlates of in-hospital mortality, the coefficients of which divided by 0.5 and rounded to the nearest interval, resulted in the following integer-based scoring system: Points (men)=6* (shock)+4* (bedridden status)+4* (age >65 years)+3* (previous antibiotic treatment) and Points (women)=6* (shock)+4* (bedridden status)+4* (age >65 years)+3* (immunosuppression). The vast majority of patients (89 and 87% of males and females, respectively) could be classified in the subgroups with lower scores (six points or less) which had a very limited risk of death (0–2.5 and 0–2.3% for men and women, respectively), whereas for patients in the highest score subgroup (11 points or more), the risk was 100% for men and 91% for women.

Conclusion: Risk stratification of patients with AP is possible from simple clinical variables available on admission. 
 
Procalcitonin (PCT) and C-reactive protein (CRP) for differentiation of systemic inflammatory response syndrome (SIRS), sepsis and severe sepsis
 
PM259
 Lupse Ma, Ursu Lb, Slavcovici Aa, Carstina Da. a
Clinical Department, Teaching Hospital of Infectious Diseases, Cluj-Napoca, Romania, b
Laboratory Department, Teaching Hospital of Infectious Diseases, Cluj-Napoca, Romania
 

Objectives: To evaluate the value of PCT in the differentiation of patients with SIRS, sepsis, severe sepsis and bacteremia in comparison to CRP. Design: Prospective study including patients who meet criteria for SIRS, sepsis or severe sepsis (Consensus Conference of the ACCP/SCCM) admitted over 18-month period. Patients and method: A total of 67 patients were included: eight with SIRS, 35 with sepsis and 24 with severe sepsis. Sixteen from 59 patients had bacteremia. PCT and CRP were evaluated in the first 24 h after admission: PCT by BRAHMS PCT-Q test and CRP by turbidimetric assay. The sensitivity, specificity, predictive value of different cutoff points for CRP and PCT were determined. Results: With a cut off point of 0.5 ng/ml for PCT and 0.6 mg/dl for CRP sensitivity and specificity for sepsis were 73%, respectively 75% (PPV 95.6, NPV 27.3) and 96%, respectively 17% (PPV 87.2, NPV 75). A cutoff point of 2 ng/ml for PCT accurately predict severe sepsis (sensitivity 80%, specificity 100%, PPV 100). A PCT level of at least 10 ng/ml was a good predictor for bacteremia (sensitivity 86%, specificity 90%, PPV 73.7 and NPV 95). Conclusion: PCT is a good discriminating marker to characterize the level of inflammation caused by infection and can predict bacteremia. 
 
Assessment of Procalcitonin (PCT) in the diagnosis of bacterial infections in patients with Febrile Neutropenia
 
PM260
 Giamarellou Ha, Aoun Ab, Klastersky Jb, Anagnostopoulos Nc, Galani Lc, Grecka Pc, Panaretou Ec, Papageorgiou Ec, Repoussis Pc, Syrseloudis Dc, Voukoutis Ec, Devigili Ed, Menichetti Fd, Krcmery Ve, Drgona Le, Bouza Ef. a
4th Department of Internal Medicine, Athens Medical School, Athens, Greece, b
Procalcitonin Study Group on Febrile Neutropenia, Belgium, c
Procalcitonin Study Group on Febrile Neutropenia, Greece, d
Procalcitonin Study Group on Febrile Neutropenia, Italy, e
Procalcitonin Study Group on Febrile Neutropenia, Slovakia, f
Procalcitonin Study Group on Febrile Neutropenia, Spain
 

PCT has been considered as a useful diagnostic marker in neutropenic patients with bacteremia and/or severe sepsis (Giamarellos-Bourboulis EJ et al. Clin Infect Dis 2001;32:1718). In an attempt to define its value in the diagnosis of localized infections in neutropenic hosts, daily determinations of PCT and of C-reactive protein (CRP) were performed before and after the onset of fever in 50 subjects 27 male and 22 female aged 48.6±18.7 years with various haematologic malignancies (AML 26, NHL 17, MDS 5, ALL 2) developing neutropenia (<500 PMNs/mm3) after chemotherapy. Thirty-three patients were presented with fever of unknown origin (FUO) and 17 with localized bacterial infections (LBI; pneumonia 7, acute pyelonephritis 4, soft tissue infections 3, acute pharyngitis 3). PCT was determined by an immunoluminometric assay and CRP by nephelometry. It is concluded that febrile neutropenia followed by a localized bacterial infections is accompanied by significantly higher levels of PCT than in case of FUO (47.9±3.64 vs 0.51±0.16 ng/ml). Similar differences are not observed with CRP, which lacks the appropriate specificity. 
 
Assessment of Procalcitonine (PCT) and antigens in the diagnosis and follow-up of systemic fungal infections in neutropenic patients
 
PM261
 Christofilopoulos S, Suller MTE, Giakkoupi P, Psallas M, Petrikkos G. 1st Department of Propedeutic Medicine, Infectious Diseases and Antimicrobial Chemotherapy Research Laboratory ‘G.K. Daikos’, Laiko General Hospital, Greece
 

Neutropenic patients are at high risk of developing systemic and often fatal fungal infections especially candidiasis and aspergillosis. Signs of infection are often absent or appear late and cultures have low sensitivity.
Our study included 35 patients who were categorized as having proven (9), probable (11), or possible (5) systemic fungosis according to EORTC criteria; 10 showed no sign of infection, and were used as controls. Blood samples were received on the 1st, 3rd, and 5th day from the onset of signs of a fungal infection, and then twice a week. PCT levels were determined by an immunochemioluminent assay, and Candida and aspergillus antigen levels by ELISA.
In only five patients PCT indicated early signs of infection, albeit at barely detectable limits. Six patients, however, showed significantly increasing titres preceding time of death. Positive antigens titres were observed only in 10 patients who had proven or probable systemic fungosis. Only half of the control group had negative antigen titres; a high rate of false negatives was also observed. Both PCT and antigens titres increased in parallel in 4/6 patients with unfavorable outcome.
PCT and antigens titres cannot reliably indicate early diagnosis of systemic fungal infections although may be used as a prognostic tool of severity. 
 
 
Lactulose, a factor that decreases endotoxaemia, in obstructive jaundice?
 
PM262
 Koutelidakis IMa, Papaziogas Va, Makris Ia, Giamarellos-Bourboulis EJb, Giamarellou Hb, Papaziogas Ta. a
Thessaloniki Med School, 2nd Surgical Clinic, Thessaloniki, Greece, b
4th Department Internal Medicine, Athens Medical School, Athens, Greece
 

Bacterial translocation is a process implicated in the pathogenesis of spontaneous peritonitis. In order to evaluate the impact of lactulose administration on systemic endotoxaemia, obstructive jaundice was induced in 11 rabbits by common bile duct ligation. Animals were divided into two groups, group A of five rabbits not receiving lactulose and group B of six rabbits, which received 1.5 ml/kg of lactulose orally by an oral catheter. Blood was collected daily, before and after operation for a total duration of four days. Samples were applied for culture and for determination of endotoxins (LPS) by the LAL QCL-1000 assay. Concentrations of LPS (mean±SD) of group A were 1.15±0.74, 2.24±0.74, 1.60±0.81 and 2.34±0.70 EU/ml on the 1st, 2nd, 3rd and 4th day, respectively. Respective concentrations of LPS (mean±SD) of group B were 0.84±0.28, 0.65±0.12, 0.81±0.20 and 0.60±0.42. All blood cultures were sterile in both groups. Differences between concentrations of LPS of the two groups were statistically significant on the 2nd and the 4th day (P<0.05). It is concluded that the administration of lactulose may decrease systemic endotoxaemia in the field of obstructive jaundice. 
 
 
Nosocomial infections: a prevalence study in the island of Crete
 
PM263Doukakis Sa, Tzimis Lb, Perogambrakis Ga, Kalloniatou Ma, Christodoulakis Na, Evaggelopoulos Aa, Koutsoumba Da, Kastanakis Sa. a
First Medical Department, ‘Saint George’ General Hospital, Chania, Greece, b
Pharmacy Department, ‘Saint George’ General Hospital, Chania, Greece
 

Prevalence surveillance is a rapid and inexpensive mode to estimate the problem of hospital-acquired infections (HAIs). To study the problem of nosocomial infections in our hospital, a prevalence study was made from our team in 1999. The study included 265 patients (the total number of hospitalized patients at the time of the study). From these patients 129 were males (49.0%) and 136 females (51.0%). One hundred and ninety-one patients (72.0%) belonged in the groups of age between 50 and 89 years. Fifty-seven patients had a urine catheter (22.3%). One hundred and fifty-five/265 patients (58%) received antibiotics and from these 99 patients received one antibiotic and the remaining 56 patients two or more. A nosocomial infection was found in 13 patients and consequently the prevalence of HAIs was 5.0%. Among these, urinary tract infections were six (46.1%), lower respiratory tract infections were three (23.0%), surgical site infections were three (23.0%), and bloodstream infections was one (7.7%). The incidence of multiresistant bacteria was primarily Enterococcus spp and secondary, Pseudomonas aeruginosa, Enterobacter spp, Klebsiella pneumoniae, Escherirchia coli, Staphylococcus aureus, Enterobacter cloacae. Unfortunately prophylactic chemotherapy of long duration was found despite the suggestions of the infection control committee. Regarding age the highest incidence of HAIs occurred in the third age group. 
 
 
Bloodstream infections (BSI) in patients with haematological malignancies (HM)
 
PM264
 Bagirova NS, Dmitrieva N. Laboratory of Microbiology, Cancer Research Center of Russia, Moscow, Russian Federation
 

Objectives: To determine the pathogens and susceptibility to antimicrobials.

Methods: Blood samples were collected from 430 adult PTS (1997–2001). The bacteraemic episodes were classified according to the definitions of the CDC. Laboratory detection of bacteraemia and fungaemia was performed according to Cumitech 1B (Blood Cultures III, 1997). Susceptibility testing was performed by disk diffusion method (NCCLS).

Results: The total number of blood samples—1371, 249-positive (18.2% episodes of significant bacteraemias). BSI was confirmed microbiologically in 137 of 430 febrile PTS (31.9%). The most frequent pathogens were Gram(+) cocci (62.7%) (P<0.0001), gram(−) bacilli—22.7%, fungi—11.4%. Coagulase-negative staphylococci (CNS) represented 38.9%, Staphylococcus aureus 12.4%, Streptococcus spp. 4.9%, Enterococcus spp. 5.9%, Enterobacteriaceae 15.1%, Pseudomonas aeruginosa 3.2%, other non-fermenting—5.9%, yeast 8.1%, mould 3.2%, anaerobes 2.7%. One hundred percent CNS were resistant to penicillin, 68.4% to oxacillin, 36.6% to clindamycin, 39.5% to cefazolin, 80.3% to ceftazidime, 48.7% to ciprofloxacin, 51.3% to gentamicin, and no isolate was resistant to vancomycin.

Conclusion: The predominant pathogens in all types of HM were Gram(+) cocci (mainly CNS). All Gram(+) microorganisms were sensitive to vancomycin. 
 
 
Isolation of bacterial agents and study of their antibiotic susceptibility in hospitalized patients
 
PM265
 Katashinsky Oa, Opriatova Tb, Tchuev Pc. a
State Clinical Hospital, Anaesteziology, Odessa, Ukraine, b
State Clinical Hospital, Bacteriology, Odessa, Ukraine, c
Medical University, Anaesteziology, Odessa, Ukraine
 

This investigation was carried out in Odessa State Clinical Hospital during 2000–2001. Of the patients with post-operation complications, 60% of 518 Gram-negative cultures were sensitive to ceftazidime and 72% to amikacin. Sixty-nine percent of 143 Gram-positive cultures were resistant to penicillin G, but they were sensitive to vancomycin and nitrofurantoin in 100 and 92% of cases, respectively. Sixty percent of 366 isolates of Pseudomonas aeruginosa were sensitive to ceftazidime and 71% to amikacin. Rates of resistance to carbenicillin and gentamicin were 60 and 66%, respectively. One hundred and forty-three isolates of Escherichia coli were studied and 65% of them were resistant to ampicillin 67% to cephalothin and 70% to tetracycline. Of the isolates tested against ciprofloxacin, all were sensitive. One hundred and eight isolates of Staphylococcus aureus were studied and they were resistant only to penicillin G (69%). Staphylococcus aureus was sensitive to erythromycin (65%), tetracycline (65%), oxacillin (83%) and vancomycin (100%). All 34 isolates Enterococcus faecalis were sensitive to nitrofurantoin and 70% to ciprofloxacin. The majority of S. aureus and E. faecalis isolates were susceptible to most other antibiotics, but the majority of E. coli isolates were resistant to the studied antibiotics expect ciprofloxacin. 
 
 
Campylobacter foetus
bacteraemia in an immunocompromised patient: a case report
 
PM266
 Monno Ra, Ierardi Eb, Rendina Mb, Ceci Ga, Luzzi Ic, De Vito Da, Rizzo Ga, Francavilla Ab. a
Department of Internal Medicine and Public Health, University of Bari, Bari, Italy, b
Department of Emergency and Organ Transplantation, University of Bari, Bari, Italy, c
Istituto Superiore di Sanità, Rome, Italy
 

A 33-year-old woman was admitted for recurrent fever. The patient underwent a liver transplantation and splenectomy in 1985. She had followed immunosuppressive therapy until 1995 when tacrolimus was added for chronic rejection. In 1999 non-Hodgkin lymphoma was diagnosed and chemotherapy was started. Six months later because of the presence of two metastatic encephalic foci affecting the optic chiasm, a new chemotherapy course was started with the regression of lesions. In January 2000 she was treated with steroid recycle and cyclosporine–azathioprine–prednisone reintroduction. Fever occurred after 2 months and Cytomegalovirus (CMV) infection was diagnosed. Treatment with Ganciclovir was started with clinical remission. In November 2000 CMV infection recurred and blood cultures were positive for a bacterium that was identified as Campylobacter fetus. The patient was successfully treated with intravenous ciprofloxacin. Bacteremia frequently occurs in cancer patients. Bacteremia due to C. fetus are rare, occurring mainly in immunocompromised patients. C. fetus expresses a proteinaceous surface layer that confers serum resistance. In our patients steroid and immunosuppression may have contributed to the development of lymphoma. All of these factors and chemotherapy have contributed to CMV infection and all have made the patient susceptible to bacteremia with this infrequently found bacterium. The clinical microbiologist should be aware of this infection in immunocompromised host. 
 
 
Cefepime (CEP) versus ceftazidime (C) plus aminoglycosides (A) in the treatment of patients with fever and granulocytopenia
 
PM267
 Minenko SV, Dmitrieva NV, Sokolova EN, Ptushkin VV. Bone Marrow Transplantation Department, N.N. Blokhin Cancer Research Center, Moscow, Russian Federation
 

C+A is the standard regimen as empirical therapy for febrile neutropenia (FN). Activity of C against g+ bacteria and g− bacteria, producing chromosomally-mediated b-lactamases (e.g. AmpC) is suboptimal. CEP is active against a broad range of g+ and g−, including AmpC producing bacteria. The purpose of the study was to compare the efficacy of two regimens in the treatment of FN. Methods: Patients with FN received either CEP (2 g/8 h) or C (2 g/8 h) plus Amikacin (15 mg/kg/day) or Netilmicin (5 mg/kg/day). Data were collected prospectively. Results: A total of 35 pts with 41 episodes (35/41) of FN were included. Fifteen/19 in CEP group and 20/22 in C+A group. The median duration of neutropenia grade 4, distribution of age, sex and underlying disease were comparable in both arms. MDI was in 37 and 24%, CDI in 21 and 18% FUO in 57 and 63% in FEP and C+A groups correspondingly. Response to the initial empirical regimen according to IHS criteria was in 58% of CEP and 27.3% of C+A groups (P=0.05). Modification of therapy with a change of CEP or C to carbapenem took place in 31 and 40% of CEP and C+A groups (P=0.5). No patient in either treatment group died due to the presenting infection. Tolerability of CEP was good and no laboratory abnormalities took place. Transient elevation of serum creatinin level was observed in two patients C+A group. Conclusions: CEP monotherapy is as effective as C+A combination in the treatment of patients with fever and granulocytopenia 
 
 
Intraabdominal infections treated with cefoperazone/sulbactam
 
PM268
 Krcmery Va, Kovacicova Ga, Lesay Mb. a
Department of Pharmacology, St. Elisabeth Cancer Institute, Trnava University, Bratislava, Slovakia, b
Department of Surgery, St. Elisabeth Cancer Institute, Bratislava, Slovakia
 

Purpose of the study: Retrospectively, we analysed 60 patients with intraabdominal infection for aetiology, risk factors, and outcome from 11 hospitals in Slovak Republic within 1 year (March 00–March 01). Results: In this group significantly more frequent were older patients (>65 years) with cancer (65 vs. 16%, P<0.0007). Acinetobacter spp. (50 vs. 7%, P<0.0001) and Enterobacteriaceae (83 vs. 39%, P<0.04) were predictive for monoinfection. Pre-treated patients with other antibiotics had inferior prognosis and more risk factors: permanent urinary catheter (95 vs. 67%, P<0.05), ventilation or intubation (91 vs. 17%, P<0.0001) and polymicrobial infection (86 vs. 33%, P<0.0002). The risk factors with poor prognosis were Enterobacteriaceae (30 vs. 14%, P<0.04), diabetes mellitus as underlying disease (18 vs. 54%, P<0.2) and uraemia (4 vs. 40%, P<0.002). Surprisingly, negative prognostic factor was also non-effective previous antibiotic therapy. Failed patients died significantly more frequently patients due to underlying disease. Cefoperazone/sulbactam was shown to be useful, effective and well tolerated also in one group of patients with 75% efficacy of treatment, and it belongs to a group of antibiotics suitable for treatment of nosocomial infections. 
 
The resistance of bacteria isolated from blood cultures
 
PM269
 
 Andrei Ma, Grintescu Ib, Bambache Lb, Pana Mc, Ghiulea Mb, Valcu Md, Ghita Mc, Truta Ee. a
Clinical Microbiology Laboratory, Emergency Hospital, Bucharest, Romania, b
Emergency Hospital, ICU, Bucharest, Romania, c
Cantacuzino Institute, Microbiology, Bucharest, Romania, d
Emergency Hospital, Surgery, Bucharest, Romania, e
Emergency Hospital, Pharmacy, Bucharest, Romania
 

Introduction: We analysed the microbiology results of all blood cultures from hospitalized patients from ICU. Material and methods: Five hundred and eighty blood cultures obtained from hospitalized patients between June-November, 2001. Positive cultures were found in 74 cases (12.7%). Isolation of microorganisms and sensitivity to antimicrobial agents were performed by Microscan Walkaway-96, Dade Behring. Gram-positive bacteria were isolated in 54% of blood cultures. Coagulase-negative Staphylococcus (CNS) was the most common Gram-positive pathogen 27%, followed by Staphylococcus aureus 16.2%, Enterococcus spp. 10.8%. Resistance to oxacillin was observed in 83.3% of S. aureus (MRSA) and in 100% of CNS (MRS). All isolates were sensitive to vancomycin. Among Gram-negative bacteria Klebsiella spp. was isolated in 21.6% of cases, Acinetobacter baumanii in 13.5%, Enterobacter spp. in 8.1%, Providencia spp. in 2.7%. Of the Klebsiella spp. isolates 25% were resistant to amikacin, 85% to cephalosporins, 87% to piperacillin/tazobactam. All were sensitive to imipenem. Of the A. baumanii isolates 100% were resistant to amikacin, aztreonam, cefoperazone, cefotaxime, ceftriaxone, piperacillin; 60% to ampicillin-sulbactam, 80% to ceftazidime, and 40% sensitivity to imipenem. The resistance rate of Providencia was 100% for all antibiotics. Conclusion: A high level of resistance to antibiotics was observed in bacteria isolated from blood cultures in our hospital. 
 
Antimicrobial activity of selected pharmacopoeial antiseptics analysed according to European Standards
 
PM270
 Tyski Sa, Bocian Ea, Wolyniak Ab. a
Drug Institute, Antibiotics and Microbiology, Warsaw, Poland, b
Warsaw University, Biology, Warsaw, Poland
 

Purpose: There are some substances described in Pharmacopoeias, which might be used as antiseptics for skin disinfection. European Committee for Standardisation approved several European Standards (EN), describing test methods establishing, whether an antiseptic has or does not have a bactericidal or fungicidal activity under the laboratory conditions defined by EN. The aim of the study was to investigate, if some chemical compounds in concentrations recommended by Polish Pharmacopoeia for skin disinfection, comply European Standards requirements. Methods: Basic bactericidal (EN 1040) and fungicidal (EN 1275) activity were investigated as well as bactericidal activity of products for hygienic and surgical handrub and hand wash used in human medicine (prEN 12054). All methods and used neutralizers were validated. Standard strains: Staphylococcus aureus, Pseudomonas aeruginosa, Escherichia coli, E. hirae, Candida albicans and A. niger were used, when EN standards were evaluated. Results: Ethanol, izopropanol and n-propanol caused viable microbial count reduction required by ENs in pharmacopoeial concentrations. Benzalkonium chloride 0.1%, benzoic acid 0.1%, chloramine 1%, resorcinol 3%, hydrogen peroxide 3%, showed to be effective antiseptics. Boric acid 6%—in double pharmacopoeial concentration, showed biocidal activity. Chlorhexidine digluconate 0.1 and 0.2% was effective against bacteria and fungi, respectively. Potassium permanganate 0.1% was fungicidal while 1.6% bactericidal.