1821mtnaMolecular Therapy. Nucleic AcidsMol Ther Nucleic AcidsAmerican Society of Gene & Cell TherapyPMC1190379911903799119037994008364910.1016/j.omtn.2025.102482Rescue of the disease-associated phenotype in CRISPR-corrected hiPSCs as a therapeutic approach for inherited retinal dystrophies
SilesLaura PomaresEsther 1Departament de Genètica, Institut de Microcirurgia Ocular, IMO Grupo Miranza, 08035 Barcelona, Spain∗Corresponding author: Esther Pomares, Departament de Genètica, Institut de Microcirurgia Ocular, IMO Grupo Miranza, 08035 Barcelona, Spain. esther.pomares@imo.es
11220253611024821024821332025© 2025 The Author(s)This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/).

## Abstract
Inherited retinal dystrophies (IRDs), such as retinitis pigmentosa and Stargardt disease, are a group of rare diseases caused by mutations in more than 300 genes that currently have no treatment in most cases. They commonly trigger blindness and other ocular affectations due to retinal cell degeneration. Gene editing has emerged as a promising and powerful strategy for the development of IRD therapies, allowing the permanent correction of pathogenic variants. Using clustered regularly interspaced short palindromic repeats (CRISPR)-Cas9 and transcription activator-like effector nucleases (TALEN) gene-editing tools, we precisely corrected seven hiPS cell lines derived from IRD patients carrying mutations in ABCA4, BEST1, PDE6A, PDE6C, RHO, or USH2A. Homozygous mutations and point insertions/deletions resulted in the highest homology-directed repair efficiencies, with at least half of the clones repaired properly without off-target effects. Strikingly, correction of a heterozygous pathogenic variant was achieved using the wild-type allele of the patient as the template for DNA repair. These results suggest the unexpected potential application of CRISPR as a donor template-free strategy for single-nucleotide modifications. Additionally, the corrected clones exhibited a reversion of the disease-associated phenotype in retinal cellular models. These data strengthen the study and application of gene editing-based approaches for IRD treatment.
Keywords: MT: RNA/DNA Editing, inherited retinal dystrophies, gene editing, sister chromatid, CRISPR, TALEN, retinitis pigmentosa, Best disease, gene therapy, cell therapy

## Graphical abstract
 
Pomares and Siles demonstrate precise HDR-mediated correction of pathogenic variants causing different inherited retinal dystrophies using single-stranded oligodeoxynucleotides or the endogenous sister chromatid as a repair template. Corrected iPSCs rescue the disease-associated phenotype in retinal cell models. These findings contribute to the development of gene-editing therapies for inherited retinal dystrophies.

statusreleaseddisplay-pdfyesis-olfnois-manuscriptnois-preprintnois-journal-matternois-scannednois-retractednoReceived 2024 Apr 30; Accepted 2025 Feb 6; Collection date 2025 Mar 11.

## Introduction
Inherited retinal dystrophies (IRDs) are a group of heterogeneous eye diseases that cause vision loss due to impaired function or degeneration of photoreceptors or retinal pigment epithelium (RPE) cells. They are rare disorders, affecting 1 in 4,000 individuals with 5.5 million patients worldwide. , IRDs follow autosomal dominant or recessive, or X-linked inheritance patterns caused by mutations in approximately 300 genes. , , , Despite the development of novel therapeutic strategies, still no treatment strategy currently exists to cure or stop disease progression in the vast majority of IRDs, except for specific genes and mutations. , 
Clinical manifestations in IRD are diverse depending on the gene and cell type affected, and can be syndromic, generating a broad phenotypic diversity. , The most common one is retinitis pigmentosa, which is characterized by the degeneration of photoreceptors triggering several visual complications and blindness. It is considered one of the most genetically heterogeneous disorders in humans with reported mutations in more than 100 genes. , Conversely, Stargardt disease is caused by pathogenic variants only in the ABCA4 gene, and is responsible for 12% of IRD-related blindness. Patients with achromatopsia also suffer from photoreceptor degeneration, but in this case individuals are deprived of color vision. Other forms include Best disease, Leber congenital amaurosis (LCA), or Usher syndrome. 
The management of IRD is complex and relies on genetic diagnosis and counseling, together with ophthalmologic follow-up, to improve visual quality and reduce patient symptomatology. Many clinical trials are ongoing. However, owing to the broad spectrum of IRD-related genes and mutations, therapeutic approximations are diverse and complex. Moreover, the different clinical stages of disease progression could help determine the most suitable treatment. In particular, gene therapy is the most explored approximation for therapeutic use, for example Luxturna gene therapy for patients with autosomal recessive RPE65 mutations in LCA. , Gene augmentation represents one of the most desired treatment modalities for gene therapy, such as in CNGA3 and CNGB3 trials in patients with achromatopsia. , Nevertheless, this is not appropriate for gain-of-function mutations or in cases of toxicity of the protein products. Additionally, the limited cargo capacity of adeno-associated viruses used in gene therapy could be challenging for large genes such as ABCA4. , 
Other emerging approximation alternatives to viral-based technologies are being studied, showing promising results, such as optogenetics, antisense oligonucleotides, or nanoparticles. , Moreover, cell therapy is a key strategy for the replacement of damaged tissue. Noteworthy, stem cell-based therapy from allogeneic or autologous donors has demonstrated encouraging results in RPE cell transplants. 
Gene editing has emerged as an important tool for the modification of the DNA, with a special interest in translational medicine for its ability to permanently correct pathogenic variants avoiding re-administration. , , , Nonetheless, some important issues with respect to precision, efficiency, safety, loading, and in vivo delivery still exist. , However, efforts are being made to tackle all these concerns for its application in personalized medicine. , , , Recently, the EDIT-101 clinical trial has been approved for the removal of an aberrant splice donor in CEP290 (c.2991 + 1655A>G) through subretinal delivery of the clustered regularly interspaced short palindromic repeats (CRISPR)-Cas9 system using an AAV5 vector in LCA patients. , Also other genetic disorders, including cancer, , , Duchenne muscular dystrophy or viral infections, , , are taking advantage of genome editing as a therapeutic strategy.
Zinc finger nucleases and transcription activator-like effector nucleases (TALENs) were the first-generation nucleases used for gene editing; however, they appeared to be complex and expensive. Decisively, the advent of CRISPR-associated nuclease Cas9 technology marked an important improvement in gene-editing tools due to its precision, ease, and potential. , Currently, the most used technology is, by far, CRISPR, despite TALENs are also appreciated because of their high specificity. , In both technologies, the genomic regions of interest are targeted by either primer sequences in TALENs or by a single guide RNA (sgRNA) in CRISPR-Cas9, which needs to be just beside the protospacer-adjacent motif (PAM)—the tri-nucleotide “NGG” in case of Cas9 from Streptococcus pyogenes. 
Both TALEN and CRISPR-Cas9 rely on cellular repair mechanisms to restore DNA double-strand breaks (DSBs) generated by FokI or Cas9 nucleases, respectively. , , , This repair is predominantly performed by two major error-prone systems: the non-homologous end-joining (NHEJ) and microhomology-mediated end-joining (MMEJ) pathways. NHEJ joins the broken DNA ends, while MMEJ uses short homologous sequences near the DSB for its repair. Moreover, DNA repair machinery has also a mechanism to precisely repair DSB, named homology-directed repair (HDR), which needs a homologous DNA template. , , , 
Specifically, the HDR mechanism can follow homologous recombination (HR) or single-strand template repair (SSTR). , , , , , The HR mechanism uses a sister chromatid or a homologous chromosome as the template, , , while SSTR needs a homologous single-stranded DNA for gene correction, such as a single-stranded oligodeoxynucleotide (ssODN). , , , , Although HDR would be the preferred mechanism for proper gene-editing assays, NHEJ is the most active pathway in mammalian and non-dividing cells, which commonly repair DNA by introducing small insertions and deletions. , , , , , , Additionally, it has been extensively reported that NHEJ is the favored mechanism to repair DNA lesions after Cas9-induced DSBs. , , Thereby, drugs to enhance the HDR pathway instead of NHEJ are largely used in gene correction assays. , , 
In this study, we report the efficient and precise correction of point mutations in seven induced pluripotent stem cell (hiPSCs) lines derived from patients with IRD. The percentage of properly edited clones ranges from 3% to more than 70% of the screened clones, depending on the gene, pathogenic variant, and technology used. Specifically, homozygous and small insertions/deletions exhibited the highest HDR efficiencies. Moreover, the distance between the DSB and the pathogenic variant and sgRNA specificity decisively influenced gene-editing outcomes. Surprisingly, in some gene-editing assays of hiPS cell lines from heterozygous carriers, the pathogenic variant was corrected using the wild-type allele of the patient as the template for repair. Finally, the repaired clones exhibited reversion of the IRD-associated phenotype in retinal cell models compared with mutant hiPSCs, indicating a potential rescue of the diseased condition.
Most IRDs are caused by point mutations, like the ones studied in this article. Hence, the precise correction of pathogenic variants in patient-derived iPSCs using gene-editing technologies is a promising therapeutic approach for retinal dystrophies. The results presented here support and broaden the application of gene editing as a future prospect for IRD treatment.

## Results

## Design and validation of the optimal sgRNA and TALEN guides for targeting IRD-related pathogenic variants
IRDs are mainly caused by single point mutations or small insertions/deletions that can be corrected by gene editing using an ssODN as a repair template. For that purpose, we aimed to correct seven iPS cell lines derived from patients with different retinal disorders. Specifically, patients with Stargardt disease, Best disease, achromatopsia, or retinitis pigmentosa. All hiPS cell lines carried previously described heterozygous or compound-heterozygous point mutations in ABCA4, BEST1, PDE6A, RHO, or USH2A genes, except in the patient with achromatopsia who harbored a homozygous missense change in PDE6C (listed in ). For compound-heterozygous carriers, we selected only one pathogenic variant for correction because of its recessive behavior (asterisks in ).
 We focused on CRISPR and TALEN technologies because of their efficacy and precision, as well as their low ratio of off-target effects, respectively. We designed several sgRNAs for CRISPR-Cas9 and one TALEN mRNA pair for each selected pathogenic variant in the seven hiPS cell lines (schematized in A and 1B; ). Moreover, we designed an ssODN specific for each mutation and technology considering some important parameters to enhance HDR-mediated repair, such as the length of the left and right homologous arms, the location of the DSB that should be centered, and the incorporation of phosphorothioate modifications at the ends of the template. , Importantly, the ssODN also harbored a synonymous nucleotide substitution in the PAM sequence to avoid Cas9 re-cutting in the case of successful knockin in CRISPR experiments , (nucleotides in blue in ).
 DNA cleavage analyses showed a higher efficacy of sgRNAs than TALENs except when targeting the mutation in USH2A, in which cleavage was similar for both technologies ( A and 1B; ). The Cas9-mediated DSB cleavage efficiency ranged from 0% to approximately 55% ( A). However, we obtained considerable cleavage by TALENs only with guides targeting BEST1, PDE6C, and USH2A mutations ( B). Notably, sgRNAs with a GC content between 46% and 60% display the highest cleavage efficiencies, suggesting a correlation with their ability to induce DSB, but not with TALEN mRNA pairs ( A). Noteworthy, we did not study sgRNAs with GC content higher than 60%.
Consequently, sgRNAs or TALEN mRNAs that were unable to induce DSB or exhibited low DNA cleavage were discarded for the gene-editing assays. Finally, we selected one sgRNA harboring the pathogenic variant to increase allele specificity, with the lowest distance between the DSB and the mutation for each mutation in the seven hiPS cell lines (green guides in ).

## Efficient HDR correction of pathogenic variants in hiPSCs from IRD patients without off-target effects
Single-nucleotide gene editing relies on the precise correction of single or small nucleotide changes by HDR mechanisms. , , , To that end, we electroporated either sgRNA/Cas9 or TALEN mRNA pairs, together with the corresponding ssODNs (summarized in ) in patient-derived iPSCs. Following electroporation, the cells were cultured with L755507 activator, M3814 inhibitor, and Y-27635 ROCK inhibitor to improve HDR repair and cell survival. Finally, single colonies were cultured and Sanger sequenced to assess gene-editing outcomes ( C).
Sequencing analysis revealed substantial differences in gene-editing efficiency based on the type of technology, mutation, zygosity, and genomic region, resulting in different percentages of properly corrected clones without on-target abnormalities in each assay ( D; ). After CRISPR-Cas9-mediated gene editing, we successfully corrected the pathogenic variant in all iPS cell lines, except for FRIMOi002-A (USH2A c.2209C>T), which was repaired using TALENs ( D). Notably, both sgUSH2A_2 and talUSH2A_1 induced DNA DSB with moderate efficiency (<10%) ( ). However, we could not obtain repaired clones of FRIMOi006-A (BEST1 c.229C>T) or FRIMOi007-A (PDE6C c.1670G>A) using TALENs ( D). Noteworthy, hiPSCs after TALEN electroporation exhibited poorer overall cell survival compared with CRISPR-Cas9-treated cells.
 Remarkably, the highest HDR efficiencies with the absence or lowest ratios of on-target effects were found in gene-editing assays targeting the di-nucleotide insertion, the single-nucleotide deletion, and the homozygous mutation (ABCA4 c.3211_3212insGT, PDE6A c.1268delT, and PDE6C c.1670G>A, respectively) ( E and 1F). In the majority of cases, the percentages of on-target aberrations were <25%, and <40% in all assays ( F). Notably, we did not obtain on-target anomalies when correcting for either of the ABCA4 mutations (c.4253 + 4C>T and c.3211_3212insGT) ( ). Moreover, the best knockin results were found in assays with sgRNAs that had the shortest distances between the DSB and the targeted mutation ( B).
Corrected clones generated using CRISPR or TALEN showed hiPSC-like cellular morphology and proliferation rates similar to those of the parental clones ( G). In addition, we found no significant differences in the expression of stemness-related genes between clones ( C and reported previously , ). Likewise, they shared the same ability to differentiate into the three embryonic germ layers and into retinal 3D models, named organoids, demonstrating the preservation of pluripotency after gene editing ( H, D, and S1E).
Gene editing can cause undesired genomic alterations because of error-prone repair or binding of the guides to off-target regions. , , For off-target assessment, we analyzed all predicted regions with two mismatches in sequence homology, and most of the predicted homologous loci presenting three mismatches corresponding to exonic or intronic regions. In more than 250 off-target sequences analyzed by Sanger sequencing, undesired genomic alterations were not detected in the 68 repaired clones screened ( I; ), suggesting that two or more mismatches in sequence homology prevented the binding of the sgRNA to off-target regions. Additionally, we performed whole genome sequencing (WGS) analysis of one corrected and one parental FRIMOi004-A clone and found no genomic abnormalities derived from the CRISPR-Cas9 gene editing, as previously reported ( I). 
 Altogether, these results indicate the precise HDR correction of IRD-related point mutations using CRISPR-Cas9 and TALEN technologies for several types of mutations and different genes. The highest knockin results were achieved when targeting homozygous or small ins/dels by CRISPR-Cas9, between 50% and 70% of properly corrected clones without on- and off-target defects, and were also associated with the sgRNAs exhibiting the shortest distances between the DSB and the mutation. Although TALEN-mediated gene editing was less efficient, we achieved successful pathogenic variant repair in FRIMOi002-A (c.2209C>T USH2A) but not by CRISPR-Cas9.

## Precise HDR correction of pathogenic variants by using the endogenous sister chromatid
Using CRISPR gene-editing assays for the repair of heterozygous mutations, we obtained a few clones that exhibited pathogenic variant correction but did not harbor the PAM mutation. Remarkably, we also observed edited clones carrying the pathogenic variant in homozygosis instead of heterozygosis or corrected ( A). This observation indicates DNA cleavage of the wild-type allele and DSB resolution by incorporating the mutation, which could not occur if ssODNs were used as the template for repair. HDR mechanisms can use exogenous (ssODN in the SSTR pathway) or endogenous homologous sequences, such as the sister chromatid (HR pathway) ( A). , , 
 This prompted us to study whether we had obtained the undesired cut and HDR repair of the wild-type allele in some gene-editing assays. Specifically, cutting of the wild-type allele would result in: (1) clones carrying the pathogenic variant and PAM mutation in heterozygosis (SSTR repair), or (2) clones with the pathogenic variant in homozygosis (HR repair), as shown in B. Significantly, we observed these two genotypes only when using sgRNAs harboring one mismatch in sequence homology with the wild-type allele, but not when using sgRNAs with two or nine mismatches ( B, see sgABCA4_7 and sgPDE6A_3). Additionally, the results related to the correction of the pathogenic variant in the mutant allele showed the best HDR efficiencies when sgRNAs with at least two mismatches in sequence homology against the wild-type allele were used ( C). Altogether, these results suggest that better knockin efficiencies are associated with lower recognition of the wild-type allele, although it should be considered that the assays were performed in different hiPS cell lines and with different ssODNs, which could affect gene-editing efficiency.
Because heterozygous pathogenic variants are common in IRD, precise and efficient gene editing should ideally target only the mutant allele to minimize undesired DNA modifications in the wild-type allele. To further analyze these findings, we focused on the gene editing of BEST1 c.229C>T in FRIMOi006-A, which displayed similar ratios of SSTR- and HR-mediated repair ( D). We designed another sgRNA named sgBEST1_5, which harbors the same nucleotide change corresponding to the pathogenic variant but moved one position (nucleotides in blue in E). This resulted in one mismatch against the wild-type allele and two mismatches against the mutant allele (dark blue asterisks in E). Conversely, the previously designed guide, sgBEST1_4, showed perfect homology with the mutant allele and one mismatch with the wild-type allele (light blue asterisks in E). As expected, sgBEST1_4 induced higher levels of DNA cleavage in FRIMOi006-A than sgBEST1_5, which worked better in wild-type hiPSCs because of sequence homology ( B and S2C).
We then compared the HDR efficiency for correction of the pathogenic variant in FRIMOi006-A using both sgRNAs. We obtained only one clone with the pathogenic variant corrected using sgBEST1_5, in contrast to more than 45% of successfully knocked-in clones obtained using sgBEST1_4 ( F). Significantly, we observed that sgBEST1_5 guide acted almost exclusively on the wild-type allele ( G), whereas the sgBEST1_4 guide mostly recognized the mutant allele ( F). Remarkably, the gene-editing assay performed with sgBEST1_4 did not generate clones with the pathogenic variant in homozygosis, whereas the assay performed with sgBEST1_5 resulted in 23.81% of clones with this genomic event ( H and D).
Notably, both BEST1 gene-editing assays were performed in the same hiPS cell line and using the same ssODN, indicating that the specificity of the sgRNA for the mutant allele could decisively determine HDR gene-editing outcomes. In line with the previous results shown in B, these data also suggest that the number of mismatches is crucial to avoid the wild-type allele DSB and HR repair that could generate clones carrying the pathogenic variant in homozygosis.

## Pathogenic variant correction by using the wild-type allele as repair template in ssODN-free CRISPR-Cas9 gene-editing assay
The results showing DNA repair using the homologous sister chromatid prompted us to wonder if sgRNA-induced DSB without using an ssODN could be sufficient for correcting heterozygous pathogenic variants. Before further evaluating these findings, we first aimed to confirm the generation of homozygous pathogenic variants and ensure that we did not misidentify a potential heterozygous gross deletion as a result of NHEJ. Therefore, we analyzed the HR- and SSTR-corrected clones using karyotyping and long-read sequencing.
Karyotyping revealed no differences between the parental and corrected clones ( A). Notably, parental FRIMOi006-A hiPSCs harbored a balanced translocation (t(4; 22) (p14; q12)), as previously reported, which was also conserved in gene-edited clones. Long-read sequencing resulted in 48 and 38 structural variants in SSTR- and HR-repaired clones, respectively ( and ). From these, approximately the 90% were in common with structural variants also detected in parental cells, and only 5% in the HR-edited clone were not found in the parental clone ( A). Furthermore, none of the structural variants were located in BEST1 ( and ).
 Taking advantage of the long-read sequencing results, we analyzed whether these detected structural variants could have arisen after gene editing as off-target effects. Each locus was amplified, run on a gel, and sequenced using Sanger sequencing (chromosomal positions are indicated in ). To analyze the inversion, we designed two forward primers, one of which was located in the potentially inverted fragment, and one reverse primer ( ). PCR products of corrected clones revealed no bands corresponding to the predicted deletion and insertion and showed the same band pattern as the parental ones, including the inversion ( B–S3D). Additionally, we studied one deletion in chromosome 2 that was detected in the three samples and in wild-type hiPSCs, which was not found, indicating a false-positive result ( D). Importantly, these analyses revealed the absence of large on- or off-target effects due to CRISPR-Cas9 gene editing.
Subsequently, we performed the same gene-editing assay without ssODNs in the patients ABCA4_A, BEST1, PDE6A, and RHO (FRIMOi003-A, FRIMOi006-A, FRIMOi001-A, and FRIMOi005-A, respectively) ( B). Consequently, cell clones exhibiting gene editing of the pathogenic variant (either corrected or homozygous, depending on the cut allele) would indicate effective DSB repair using the endogenous sister chromatid.
We successfully corrected the c.229C>T BEST1 pathogenic variant in more than 20% of the clones analyzed in the FRIMOi006-A cells ( C and E). This percentage of clones was similar to that achieved in the assay involving transfection with ssODNs (HR-mediated repair) ( C; ). The corrected clones were also examined for other rare variants harbored by the patient, to ensure cell purity ( F). In contrast, iPSCs from patients ABCA4_A, PDE6A, and RHO failed to correct the mutations without ssODNs in the screened clones ( C). Nevertheless, in iPSCs from patient ABCA4_A we obtained a small number of clones with the pathogenic variant in homozygosis, indicating a wild-type allele cut and HR repair ( C). Notably, these three hiPS cell lines displayed lower ratios of the HR pathway than the BEST1 hiPSCs ( D). In addition, sgBEST1_4 had a shorter distance between the DSB and the pathogenic variant than the sgABCA4_3, sgPDE6A_3, and sgRHO_4 guides, which could also influence HR-mediated repair ( E), although we should still consider that this comparison is between assays performed in different cell lines.
Next, we analyzed whether the absence of ssODNs could activate the NHEJ pathway. Although some clones displayed on-target genomic abnormalities ( E), the on-target aberration percentages were similar to those generated when providing ssODNs in the clones screened ( F).
Altogether, the results derived from these studies showed that gene-editing outcomes are highly influenced by the specificity of sgRNA and could be conditioned by the HDR pathway used for DSB repair. This study also demonstrated unexpected gene editing of the heterozygous BEST1 c.229C>T mutation using CRISPR-Cas9 technology without ssODN. Furthermore, heterozygous mutations could benefit from the wild-type allele as a template for correction of the pathogenic variant upon sgRNA/Cas9-induced DSB.

## HDR-corrected clones exhibit reversion of the mutant-associated phenotype in retinal cellular models
IRD-related mutations can trigger complex phenotypes depending on the affected gene and mutation. , To assess the phenotypic changes after HDR repair, we differentiated several hiPS cell lines into retinal cellular models. Notably, pathogenic variant correction and pluripotency conservation were routinely checked during hiPS culture and after differentiation ( A and S4B).
Bestrophin-1, encoded by BEST1, is an integral membrane protein that functions as a calcium-activated anion channel, and is expressed only in RPE cells. , Thus, we differentiated BEST1 FRIMOi006-A parental and knocked-in clones into this retinal cell type. Both genotypes exhibited normal RPE differentiation and morphology as revealed by ZO-1 staining, the expression of early differentiation markers (PAX6 and MITF), and the RPE marker RPE65 ( A and C). We also evaluated the mRNA levels of BEST1 and found similar expression in wild-type, parental, and corrected RPE cells ( B), demonstrating that this pathogenic variant does not significantly affect bestrophin-1 expression, as previously reported. 
 Calcium-activated chloride channel activity was measured by quantifying iodide distribution in RPE cells expressing a fluorescent sensor ( D). Once the chloride channels are opened, iodide ions enter the cell—quenching fluorescence of the transfected RPE cells, revealing channel activation. We observed that the corrected FRIMOi006-A clones displayed reduced opening of the chloride channel over time compared with the parental clones and showed similar levels to those found in wild-type RPE ( C), even in the presence of an ionophore ( D). The fluorescence signal was lower in BEST1 mutant cells at almost all time points analyzed compared with isogenic knockin clones ( C and 4D). In contrast, no differences were observed when the RPE cells were cultured without a stimulus buffer ( E). These results demonstrate restoration of the previously reported BEST1 c.229C>T (p.Pro77Ser) phenotype, showing a reduction in chloride channel opening in CRISPR-Cas9-corrected cells and restoration of epithelial permeability. 
Next, we investigated whether epithelial function was compromised in BEST1 mutant RPE. RPE cells are essential for photoreceptor function by phagocytosing photoreceptor outer segments (POSs). , Notably, FRIMOi006-A parental cells displayed increased POS uptake compared with the corrected clones, indicating enhanced phagocytic activity of BEST1 mutant cells ( E and F). Nevertheless, this increase in phagocytosis can hamper POS processing and accumulation in RPE cells causing abnormal function, which has been associated with visual affectations. We also monitored trans-epithelial electrical resistance (TER) in RPE monolayers. Surprisingly, BEST1 c.229C>T-repaired clones displayed increased TER compared with mutant cells ( F). This result suggests a role for the epithelial barrier function with bestrophin-1.
Collectively, these functional data reveal a potential rescue of the retinal phenotype associated with IRD-related mutations after gene editing. The disease-associated phenotype in Best disease was reversed by restoring the epithelial monolayer function and permeability.

## Discussion
Pathogenic variants associated with IRDs have been identified in more than 300 genes, and lead to diverse outcomes and cellular effects. This underscores the need for various therapeutic approaches to address these issues effectively. Most IRDs are caused by point mutations, such as those corrected by gene editing in this study, making technologies promising tools for future personalized medicine. In addition, genome editing has improved significantly in recent years with the advent of prime and base editors, and the enhancement of Cas enzymes and other engineered proteins, has considerably enhanced their potential. , , 
The data obtained in this study show the precise correction of IRD-related pathogenic variants using CRISPR-Cas9 and TALEN technologies. Gene-editing results showed that targeting homozygous mutations, point insertions, or deletions yielded the best HDR efficiencies, coinciding with the absence or lowest ratios of on-target defects ( E and 1F). In our study, CRISPR-Cas9 was found to be significantly more powerful than TALENs, demonstrating higher sgRNA-induced DSB and HDR efficiency in hiPSCs. In the majority of assays, we successfully corrected more than 45% of the screened clones. However, although less effective, TALENs could be useful and suitable in cases where CRISPR-Cas9 is not, due to genomic loci concerns. Similarly, engineered Cas enzymes—like, Cas12a, Cas13, and Cas14—have been shown promoting CRISPR-Cas applications. , , , 
The efficiency of inducing DNA cleavage by sgRNA is a key factor in the design of CRISPR assays. , , Nevertheless, the optimization of other aspects could also significantly improve gene-editing outcomes. For instance, the number of mismatches in sequence homology determines allele discrimination by sgRNA, which results in an advantage in point mutations affecting two or more nucleotides because the wild-type allele is virtually unrecognized. The results reported here show that sgRNA specificity is of utmost importance for preventing undesired genomic events in the wild-type allele. In addition, the distance between the DSB and the pathogenic variant is decisive for proper gene editing, as previously reported. , 
DNA lesions are preferably resolved by the NHEJ pathway in somatic mammalian cells. , Therefore, in gene-editing assays, the HDR mechanism is commonly favored through the use of HDR activators and NHEJ inhibitors. Recent studies correlate the importance of the chromatin status in the regulation of the DSB repair mechanism used and also in the sgRNA-mediated ability to cleave DNA. , Surprisingly, in the assays for correcting heterozygous pathogenic variants we observed a significant amount of corrected clones that had not incorporated the Cas9-blocking mutation—present in the ssODN—and a small percentage of edited clones carrying the pathogenic variant in homozygosis. These results suggest DNA repair methods other than ssODN-mediated correction. Recombinases like RAD51/RAD52 have been reported to be key mediators of Cas9-induced DSB with a dependence on the type of repair template. , For instance, RAD52 promotes single-stranded DNA increasing SSTR pathway. Notably, preliminary data in this study showed a potential association in RAD52 expression levels and SSTR-mediated repair (data not shown).
Noteworthy, the DNA DSB could be resolved using the ssODN but failing to incorporate the Cas9-blocking mutation because of template unbinding or instability. Additionally, a large DNA deletion in the wild-type allele may explain the fictitious detection of the pathogenic variants in homozygosis. However, karyotyping analysis and long-read sequencing revealed the absence of structural variants or gross deletions, which could lead to misidentification of clones. Moreover, these genomic events are often associated with the plasmidic delivery of sgRNA/Cas9 rather than with ribonucleoprotein (RNP) complexes. , , Noteworthy, despite being potentially deleterious, these undesired homozygous clones can still be edited in subsequent rounds of gene editing.
Notably, DSB repair using endogenous homologous DNA was further supported by performing a CRISPR-Cas9 assay by transfecting only sgRNA and Cas9 but not ssODN. This assay successfully corrected the heterozygous pathogenic variant of BEST1. However, this was not achieved in ABCA4_A, PDE6A, and RHO hiPSCs, suggesting that successful DSB repair by the HR pathway could be intimately ligated to the gene, mutation, and hiPS cell line per se. Accordingly, the HR and SSTR pathways are regulated by several proteins that can be influenced by these factors. , 
Remarkably, several studies have reported successful template-free repair of DSB through the NHEJ/MMEJ pathways, which are sufficient to recover protein function. , , Nevertheless, this approximation is not suitable for the precise correction of single-nucleotide pathogenic variants. Similarly, the MMEJ pathway has been reported to be useful for correcting small indel variants via stochastic repair. 
Altogether, these findings suggest the possibility of using CRISPR-Cas9 gene editing without transfecting a synthetic oligonucleotide for the precise correction of pathogenic variants. Consequently, the transfection cargo is reduced, and the potential on- and off-target effects associated with the ssODN. , Noteworthy, this approximation lacks the modification in the PAM sequence, which could result in an increase in NHEJ events due to DNA re-cut.
Gene editing as a therapeutic strategy needs to ultimately reverse the disease condition of the patient to stop the mutant phenotype. Importantly, we observed rescue of anionic intracellular transport in BEST1 c.229C>T corrected clones, which was reported to be increased in mutant BEST1 RPE cells compared with wild-type cells ( C and 4D). We also found increased permeability of the BEST1 mutant RPE monolayer compared with that in repaired cells in TER measurements ( F). The electrical resistance of the epithelial layer is directly associated with monolayer permeability. Thus, the higher ion flux across mutant RPE cells and their increased phagocytic activity suggest a reduced tightness of the epithelial barrier in bestrophin-1-mutant cells, which could lead to RPE dysfunction.
In summary, we report the efficient correction of different iPS cell lines derived from patients with several IRDs (Stargardt disease, Best disease, achromatopsia, and retinitis pigmentosa). We achieved a highly efficient CRISPR-Cas9-mediated correction of a homozygous mutation in PDE6C and of small ins/del in ABCA4 and PDE6A, respectively. Additionally, we report the successful TALEN-mediated correction of the FRIMOi002-A USH2A mutant cell line. Furthermore, gene-editing results suggest the potential use of CRISPR-Cas9 without the use of ssODNs as exogenous repair templates and DSB resolution using endogenous DNA, which could be suitable for personalized medicine. Finally, the HDR-repaired clones exhibited the restoration of several mutant-associated conditions.
Considerable efforts are being made to find therapeutic approximations to cure the majority of IRDs, especially in gene therapy, antisense oligonucleotides, optogenetics, and stem cell-based therapies. , , , Gene therapy is one of the most explored modalities for treating these retinal disorders. Nevertheless, in some cases, it could be challenging because of several issues such as transgene size, inflammation, dosage, and use of appropriate vectors. , , Although gene editing also shares some of the concerns that need to be addressed by gene replacement, this editing therapy allows permanent correction of the patient’s own DNA, stopping disease progression.
Notably, patient-derived hiPSCs in combination with gene editing represent a significant stem cell-based strategy for IRD management, considering that knocked-in clones display the rescue of the potential disease-associated phenotype triggered by the pathogenic variant. Moreover, recent studies have shown encouraging short-term results on the safety and survival of transplanted hiPSC-derived RPE cells in animal and human models. , , 
One of the remaining steps should be to enhance gene-editing studies in retinal tissues, taking into consideration several key factors such as delivery, safety, and transfection methodologies. The eye is a relatively accessible organ, which confers an advantage for therapy development. Research on gene and cell therapy is critical for the regenerative and personalized medicine. Altogether these data contribute to improving the study and development of potential therapeutic approaches to stop disease progression and encourage the advancement of gene-editing strategies for the future cure of IRD.

## Materials and methods

## Human iPSC culture and lineage differentiation
Human iPS cell lines FRIMOi001-A, 002-A, 003-A, 004-A, 005-A, 006-A, and 007-A, described in , were obtained as previously described. , , , , , For some experiments, wild-type hiPSCs were used from a patient without any ophthalmologic disease and no genetic variants related to retinal dystrophies. hiPSC colonies were maintained in StemFlex medium (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA) and cultured on Matrigel-coated dishes (Merck, Bedford, MA, USA). To obtain hiPS single-cell suspensions, hiPS colonies were detached using TrypLE (Thermo Fisher Scientific), centrifuged, and counted before Neon-mediated transfection (Thermo Fisher Scientific). For hiPSC lineage specification, gene-edited clones were subjected to ectodermal, mesodermal, and endodermal differentiation using the Human Pluripotent Stem Cell Functional Identification Kit (R&D Systems, Minneapolis, MN, USA), according to the manufacturer’s instructions. The study was conducted in accordance with the Declaration of Helsinki and was approved by the Ethics Committee of the Institut de Microcirurgia Ocular (Protocol code: 170505_117. Date of approval: June 2, 2017).

## sgRNAs, TALENs, and ssODNs design
sgRNAs and TALENs were designed using the Invitrogen TrueDesign Genome Editor (Thermo Fisher Scientific) and are listed in ssODNs were designed of 70–86 nucleotides total length and synthesized using PAGE purification method. The pathogenic variant was located at the center of the template, with the left and right arms at 30–35 nucleotides perfectly homologous to the target sequence. Phosphorothioate nucleotide modifications were added to the ends of ssODNs to increase their stability. The ssODN for the CRISPR assays also harbored a Cas9-blocking mutation to modify the PAM sequence, which was analyzed using ALAMUT software (version 1.4, Sophia Genetics), PhyloP, and the UCSC Genome Browser for the conservation of the reading frame, amino acid change, and SNP prevalence.

## Genomic cleavage detection assay
The efficiency of DNA cleavage induced by sgRNAs and TALENs was determined using GeneArt Genomic Cleavage Detection kit (Thermo Fisher Scientific) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. Briefly, hiPSCs were transfected with sgRNA or TALEN and 4 days later, PCR amplification of the desired locus was performed. A single band was confirmed by agarose gel electrophoresis. Next, the PCR product was subjected to several rounds of denaturation and re-annealing to generate mismatches that were detected and cleaved by the Detection Enzyme. The resulting bands were visualized by agarose gel electrophoresis using iBrightCL1000 (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Quantification of band intensity for correlation with Cas9 activity was performed using iBright Analysis Software (Thermo Fisher Scientific).

## Gene-editing assay
For gene editing, 1 × 105 hiPSCs were electroporated (Neon, Thermo Fisher Scientific) with two pulses of 20 ms at 1,200 V for transfection with 10 pmol sgRNA, 15 pmol ssODN, and 10 pmol High Fidelity (HiFi) SpCas9 protein (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Simultaneously, hiPSCs without sgRNA and ssODN were transfected as parental controls. Immediately after electroporation, hiPSCs were seeded onto Matrigel-coated dishes and cultured in StemFlex medium supplemented with 10 μM ROCK inhibitor (Merck, Bedford, MA, USA), 10 μM of the HDR activator L755507 (Merck), and 0.5 μM of NHEJ inhibitor M3814 (Selleckchem, Houston, TX, USA) for 24 h. Then, cell culture medium was replaced with fresh StemFlex medium, and cells were cultured until formation of single colonies. When colonies grew but were still small enough to ensure the formation of individual clones, they were picked and cultured individually in 96-multiwell plates. After approximately 1 week, the clones were expanded, and a fraction of the cells from each clone was collected for genotyping analysis by Sanger sequencing (Macrogen, Madrid, Spain). The parental and properly edited clones were expanded and sequenced to confirm their genotypes. Notably, the edited clones in each assay were analyzed for other rare variants or patient-specific SNPs to ensure cell line purity.

## PCR amplification, Sanger sequencing, and karyotyping
PCR amplification of the desired genomic region was performed and run on a gel to ensure a single DNA band and a negative control. The PCR products were purified using 96-well Acroprep Advance plates (Pall Corporation, Ann Arbor, MI, USA) with a vacuum manifold (Pall Corporation). The products were Sanger sequenced using forward and reverse primers (Macrogen). All primer sequences used in this study are listed in and . Sanger sequencing results were downloaded from the manufacturer’s platform and the data were aligned and analyzed. Gene-edited clones were also analyzed for the presence of other uncommon variants to confirm hiPS cell line purity. Parental and edited clones were subjected to karyotyping (Reference Laboratory, Spain).

## Off-target prediction and analysis
Off-target prediction was performed using the online tool Cas-OFFinder. Up to three mismatches were allowed for the algorithm to perform the prediction. All exonic and intronic regions in close proximity to the exons were covered by Sanger sequencing. In addition, potential splicing effects in deep intronic off-targets were predicted using the ALAMUT software (Sophia Genetics). Intergenic regions were not analyzed in this study. PCR amplification and Sanger sequencing of selected off-targets ( ) were performed on the parental and corrected clones.

## Nanopore sequencing
Long-read sequencing was performed using Oxford Nanopore sequencing (LongSeq Applications, Spain). Briefly, DNA was extracted from cells using Gentra Puregene Cell Kit (Qiagen, Netherlands) and analyzed for purity and quality. Data were aligned via the Minimap2-specific algorithm for Oxford Nanopore Genomic Reads and QualiMap. Structural variant calling was performed with Sniffles and annotated with SnpEff and SnpSift, according to the LongSeq report. Structural variants with at least 30 reads were used for data interpretation.

## hiPSCs differentiation into retinal cellular models
hiPSCs were differentiated into retinal organoids, RPEs, and photoreceptor-like cells as described by de Bruijn et al., Gonzalez-Cordero et al., , Regent et al., and Barnea-Cramer et al., respectively. Briefly, for organoids differentiation, hiPSCs were cultured in proneural induction media, and optic vesicles were excised and cultured in low-binding 96-multiwell plates in several retinal differentiation mediums until maturation. RPEs were obtained either by the same retinal organoids protocol or by culturing hiPSCs in RPE differentiation media subsequently supplemented with 10 mM Nicotinamide (Sigma), 100 ng/mL Activin A (Stem Cell Technologies), or 3 μM CHIR99021 (Sigma). RPE cell pigmentation was evaluated using ImageJ software (NIH, Bethesda, MD, USA).

## Immunofluorescence staining
For immunofluorescence analysis of RPE differentiation markers, iPSC clones were seeded and differentiated at the desired time points onto Matrigel-coated ibidi slides (ibidi GmbH, Gräfeling, Germany). ibidi slides were fixed in 4% paraformaldehyde (Thermo Fisher Scientific) for 15 min at room temperature. Next, the cells were permeabilized with 0.25% Triton X-100 in phosphate-buffered saline (PBS) and incubated for 1 h in blocking solution (5% fetal bovine serum, 4% bovine serum albumin, and 0.5% Tween in PBS) at room temperature. Fixed parental and edited clones were incubated overnight at 4°C with ZO-1 (ZO1-1A12, Thermo Fisher Scientific), RPE65 (401.8B11.3D9, Thermo Fisher Scientific) or Alexa Fluor Plus 555 phalloidin (A30106, Thermo Fisher Scientific). The cells were visualized using an anti-mouse Alexa Fluor 488 (A32723, Thermo Fisher Scientific) secondary antibody and counterstained with 4′,6-diamidino-2-phenylindole (DAPI) (62248, Thermo Fisher Scientific). Immunofluorescence imaging was performed using Zeiss Axiovert and Axiocam 503 mono (Carl Zeiss Inc., Jena, Germany), and images were processed using ImageJ software (NIH). Representative images are shown.

## RNA extraction and quantitative real-time PCR
To assess the gene expression of pluripotency and RPE differentiation markers, RNA was extracted using TRIzol reagent (Thermo Fisher Scientific) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. cDNA was obtained using Transcriptor First Strand cDNA Synthesis Kit (Roche Diagnostics, Basel, Switzerland) and analyzed by real-time PCR using QuantStudio and specific TaqMan probes (Thermo Fisher Scientific).

## TER measurement
For electrical resistance assessment, 1 × 105 RPE cells were seeded onto Matrigel-coated Transwell filters (0.4-μm pore size, 0.47-cm2 area, Thermo Fisher Scientific), and cultured in RPE media. Medium was also added to the lower compartment. TER was recorded during monolayer maturation and in Transwell filters without cells for background subtraction once per week for more than 1 month using a voltohmmeter (Millicell ERS 3.0 digital, Merck). TER measurements were obtained by multiplying the net TER values by the culture area.

## POS isolation, labeling, and phagocytosis by RPE
POSs were isolated from porcine eyes according to the protocol described by Parinot et al. Once purified, POSs were observed under a microscope to assess their morphology. One portion was labeled with fluorescein isothiocyanate (FITC), and then were aliquoted and frozen for storage. RPE cultures of parental and edited FRIMOi006-A clones were seeded in 96-multiwell plates, and mature RPE cells were incubated with 1 × 106 FITC-labeled POSs for 8 h. The POS-containing medium was removed, and the RPE cells were washed five times with PBS. Wells without cells were used as controls to ensure POS removal, and cells without POS were used for background subtraction. FITC fluorescence was determined using Varioskan LUX (Thermo Fisher Scientific).

## Anion channel activity determination
The influx across chloride channels was quantified using the Premo Halide Sensor kit (Thermo Fisher Scientific) following the manufacturer’s instructions. Briefly, RPE cells were seeded in 96-multiwell plates and transduced with a YFP-labeled sensor for halide ions. Anion channel activity was stimulated with a buffer containing NaI supplemented or not with A23187 (10 μg/mL). The fluorescence signal was quenched when the chloride channel was activated. Fluorescence was detected every 30 s using Varioskan LUX (Thermo Fisher Scientific) and background well values were subtracted from the experimental wells.

## Statistical analysis
Statistical analyses were performed using the Prism 9.3.1 (GraphPad Software, La Jolla, CA, USA). Statistical significance was assessed using the non-parametric Mann-Whitney U test and set at values of p ≤ 0.001 (∗∗∗), p ≤ 0.01 (∗∗), p ≤ 0.05 (∗) levels, or non-significant (ns) for p > 0.05. Bar graphs represent mean ± SD, unless specified. In each experiment at least two clones of each genotype were used for analysis. Both SSTR- and HR-corrected clones were used for functional data production in .

## Data availability
The authors declare that all relevant data supporting the findings of this study are available within the article and its . Raw data and additional not shown results are available from the corresponding author (E.P.) upon reasonable request.

## Acknowledgments
We are grateful to Sheila Ruiz-Nogales for her technical support and helpful comments on the manuscript. We are also indebted to the patients for their contributions to the study. Informed consent was obtained from the subjects involved in the study. This work was supported by grant number Fi-201401 (Fundació de Recerca de l'Institut de Microcirurgia Ocular, Fundación IMO). The authors also thank Bernard Faure for his contribution.

## Author contributions
L.S. performed the experimental work and analysis in the study; L.S. and E.P. contributed to project conceptualization and methodology; E.P. conceived and supervised the study; L.S. wrote the manuscript; and E.P. supervised the manuscript.

## Declaration of interests
The authors declare no conflict of interest.

## Footnotes
Supplemental information can be found online at https://doi.org/10.1016/j.omtn.2025.102482.

## Supplemental information

## Document S1. Figures S1–S4 and Tables S1–S7

## Document S2. Article plus supplemental information

## References
 

## Associated Data

## Supplementary Materials

## Document S1. Figures S1–S4 and Tables S1–S7

## Document S2. Article plus supplemental information

## Data Availability Statement
The authors declare that all relevant data supporting the findings of this study are available within the article and its . Raw data and additional not shown results are available from the corresponding author (E.P.) upon reasonable request.