3532isciiScienceiScienceElsevierPMC1187515311875153118751534003486210.1016/j.isci.2025.111943DNA-PK inhibition sustains the antitumor innate immune response in small cell lung cancer
De RosaCaterina MorgilloFloriana AmatoLuisa IommelliFrancesca De RosaViviana TirinoVirginia PapaccioFederica TuccilloConcetta Di GuidaGaetano D’AngiolellaDomenico Michele Di LielloAlessandra ZappavignaSilvia CaragliaMichele GambardellaAntonio NardoneValerio RamkumarKavya WangQi WangJing De VitaFerdinando CiardielloDavide MartinelliErika TroianiTeresa NapolitanoStefania MartiniGiulia ServettoAlberto ByersLauren Averett CiardielloFortunato Della CorteCarminia Maria 1Department of Precision Medicine, University of Campania Luigi Vanvitelli, 80131 Naples, Italy2Institute of Biostructures and Bioimaging, National Research Council, 80145 Naples, Italy3Department of Experimental Medicine, University of Campania Luigi Vanvitelli, 81100 Caserta, Italy4Department of Medicine, Surgery and Dentistry, “Scuola Medica Salernitana”, University of Salerno, 84084 Baronissi, Italy5Radiology and Radiotherapy, Department of Precision Medicine, University of Campania ‘Luigi Vanvitelli’, 80138 Naples, Italy6Department of Thoracic Head and Neck Medical Oncology, University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center, Houston TX 77030, USA7Department of Bioinformatics and Computational Biology, University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center, Houston TX 77030, USA8Division of Gastrointestinal Medical Oncology and Neuroendocrine Tumors, European Institute of Oncology (IEO), IRCCS, 20141 Milan, Italy9Laboratory of Precision and Molecular Oncology, Biogem Scarl, Institute of Genetic Research, 83031 Ariano Irpino, Italy10Department of Clinical Medicine and Surgery, University of Naples Federico II, Naples 80131, Italy∗Corresponding author carminiamaria.dellacorte@unicampania.it
11These authors contributed equally
12Lead contact
122025283111943111943332025© 2025 The AuthorsThis is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/).

## Summary
Small cell lung cancer (SCLC) is a highly aggressive form of lung cancer with limited treatment options. Patients often respond well to initial chemo-immunotherapy but relapse quickly, necessitating new strategies to enhance immune responsiveness. Recent research explores combining DNA-damaging therapies with immunotherapy to activate the STING pathway and improve the antitumor immune response. The addition of DNA Damage Repair (DDR) inhibitors, such as DNA-PKcs inhibitors, after chemotherapy has shown promise in activating innate immune sensors and enhancing CD8+ T cell and NK cell pathways in SCLC models. This approach could potentially reshape the tumor microenvironment and sustain an antitumor immune response, offering a maintenance strategy for SCLC treatment.
Subject areas: Molecular biology, Cell biology, Cancer

## Graphical abstract
 

## Highlights
•Adding DNA-PKi sequentially after cisplatin boosts the anti-tumor immune response in SCLC
•DNA-PKi enhances innate immunity via the non-canonical STING-MAVS pathway activation
•DNA-PKi and immunotherapy promotes lymphocyte infiltration in tumor spheroids
•Combining DNA-PKi with anti-PD-L1 is a promising maintenance strategy for SCLC patients

Molecular biology; Cell biology; Cancer

statusreleaseddisplay-pdfyesis-olfnois-manuscriptnois-preprintnois-journal-matternois-scannednois-retractednoReceived 2024 Aug 20; Revised 2024 Nov 20; Accepted 2025 Jan 29; Collection date 2025 Mar 21.

## Introduction
Small cell lung cancer (SCLC) is a challenging malignancy owing to its aggressive biology, characterized by high intrinsic replication stress and DNA damage, and treated for decades only with chemotherapy in the absence of targetable mutations. Currently, four cycles of platinum-based chemotherapy plus an anti-PD-L1 drug, followed by maintenance of the anti-PD-L1 drug until progression, represent the standard of care for patients with extensive-stage (ES) SCLC. , , However, in the absence of clinically validated predictive biomarkers for response to immunotherapy in SCLC, this is still a one-size-fits-all approach, and most patients relapse within a few months after the end of the induction therapy. 
According to the recent biological classification of SCLC based on transcriptomic by Gay CM., SCLC can be divided into four molecular subgroups, three defined by the transcription factors ASCL1 (SCLC-A), NEUROD (SCLC-N), POU2F3 (SCLC-P), and a fourth inflamed subtype (SCLC-I), with specific therapeutic vulnerabilities. SCLC-A cells are sensitive to Bcl2 inhibitors, Myc-high SCLC-N cells are sensitive to AURK inhibitors, SCLC-P cells are sensitive to PARP inhibitors, and SCLC-I cells are sensitive to chemo-immunotherapy and their combinations. More specifically, the SCLC-I subgroup showed high expression of genes related to human lymphocyte antigens (HLAs), immune checkpoints (including CD274, PDCD1, CD38, IDO1, TIGIT, VISTA, ICOS, and LAG3), and stimulator of interferon genes (STING)-induced T cell attracting chemokines, such as CCL5 and CXCL10. 
Our group and others have shown that the addition of DNA-damaging therapies (chemotherapy, radiotherapy, or DNA damage repair inhibitors, DDRis) to immunotherapy enhances the antitumor immune response via activation of the canonical STING pathway, which is the major innate immune pathway, , , favoring the recruitment of tumor-infiltrating CD8+ T cells through the secretion of proinflammatory chemokines such as CCL5 and CXCL10. , However, other roles for STING in regulating these processes remain to be elucidated.
We hypothesized that STING activation may be accompanied by a broader inflammatory response, which occurs physiologically in viral infections. Among the innate immune pathways that may be triggered by cytosolic dsDNA and RNA sensors activation induced by anticancer therapies, we investigated the role of IFN-inducible protein 16 (IFI16) and mitochondrial antiviral signaling protein (MAVS) in the activation of the innate immune response. Specifically, in response to RNA-viral infections, oligomeric MAVS is expressed on the outer mitochondrial membrane and induces the activation of the NK-κB and IFN-I signaling pathways. 
In this respect, inhibitors of the DDR pathways PARP, Chk1, and Wee-1 are effective in combination with immunotherapy in SCLC via STING. , , , Among the other DDR proteins, DNA-dependent protein kinase (DNA-PK) is a targetable enzyme involved in non-homologous end-joining (NHEJ) , , and antiviral responses. Most recently, DNA-PK has been identified as a sensor of both a cGAS/STING-dependent and an STING-independent viral DNA sensing pathway. , We hypothesized that DNA-PK inhibition may modulate multiple innate immune pathways involved in the antitumor immune response in SCLC, similar to its physiological role in antiviral reactions. In the present study, we investigated the effect of targeting DNA-PK in three different SCLC models: cell lines, patient-derived immune cells, 2D/3D cocultures of cancer and immune cells and ex vivo SCLC tumor derived from malignant pleural effusion (MPE) of cisplatin-resistant SCLC patient. We showed that DNA-PKi is able to sustain an antitumor immune response by reinforcing the activation of the STING pathway with a non-canonical mechanism, based on interaction with MAVS at the mitochondrial level. These results support DNA-PK as a good target in SCLC, especially in the maintenance of the chemo-immunotherapy response.

## Results

## Cisplatin increases DDR machinery and multiple DNA/RNA sensors co-activation in SCLC tumors and in SCLC patients-derived PBMCs
Our group previously demonstrated that the expression of STING-related chemokines correlates with features of immune responsiveness in lung cancers and in lung cancer patients-derived peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMCs). , Therefore, we used two models of SCLC (cell lines and patients-derived PBMCs) to assess whether chemotherapy-induced DNA damage may impact DNA/RNA sensors activation. Patients detailed demographic and clinical data are shown in .
 We performed RNA-seq from SCLC cell lines before and after in vitro treatment with cisplatin (0.5 μM for 72 h). GSEA revealed that cisplatin treatment induced an enrichment of several DDR-related pathways including DNA repair and E2F targets compared to the control (CTR), thus indicating an upregulation of downstream effectors of the response to DNA damage-induced cellular replication stress. Interestingly, we found an enrichment of innate immune response-related pathways, classified as influenza infection and SARS COV2 translation machinery in the cisplatin-treated SCLC cell lines ( A; ). DNA sensors are activated in response to both intrinsic and extrinsic DNA damage. Thus, we hypothesized that DDR proteins can mediate innate immune response activation in SCLC cells. We tested the effect of cisplatin treatment (0.5 μM) for 72 h on a panel of SCLC cell lines, such as H82, H446, H661 ( B), H2141, H524, and H209 ( A). Western blot analysis revealed an increase in p-H2A.X (widely known as marker of DNA damage) after cisplatin treatment in these cells. Furthermore, we found that cisplatin induced the concomitant activation of DDR proteins, as shown by the upregulation of the levels of the phosphorylated and total forms of DNA-PK, p-Chk1 (downstream of ATR) and p-Chk2 (downstream of ATM). Importantly, the upregulation of DDR proteins occurred along with an increase in the expression of STING, as well as the cytosolic RNA sensor MAVS, in all the examined cell lines. Moreover, we detected marked chemotherapy-mediated IFI16 upregulation only in two (H82 and H524) of the six SCLC cell lines analyzed. These results indicate that innate immune pathways (mainly STING and MAVS) can be triggered by chemotherapy-induced DNA damage in SCLC models.
 To study the effect of the chemotherapy-induced DNA damage on the immune milieu (lymphocytes, NK cells, and macrophages), we used peripheral blood immune cells to test the effect of cisplatin treatment in activating DNA/RNA sensors. We collected blood samples from naive SCLC patients and on the third day of therapy with cisplatin (post-cisplatin patients). First, we investigated the differential gene expression (DEGs) by RNA-seq in SCLC patients-derived PBMCs before and after cisplatin treatment. GSEA analysis showed that cisplatin-treated PBMCs collected from SCLC patients were significantly enriched in antitumor innate immune-related pathways, such as the type I interferons’ pathways (IFN-α and IFN-β) and IFN-γ ( C; ). Interestingly, these gene sets are related to the activation of the DNA/RNA sensors downstream pathways, such as cGAS/STING, MAVS, DDX41, and IFI16. , , Moreover, cisplatin treatment reduced the expression of PD-1 signaling signature in SCLC patients-derived PBMCs, thus indicating that DNA damage-dependent immune cells activation is further enhanced by the antitumor activity of PD-1 gene set downregulation. Then, we investigated the expression of DNA/RNA sensors (STING and MAVS) in PBMCs from naive and post-cisplatin SCLC patients ( D and B). Notably, we found a relevant upregulation of STING and MAVS in PBMCs collected from SCLC patients’ post-cisplatin, thus indicating that in PBMCs as well as in SCLC cells, chemo-immunotherapy triggers DNA damage-related innate immune sensors activation. Therefore, we suggest that the maintenance of intrinsic DNA damage levels in both cancer and immune cells may be a possible mechanism for increasing immune responsiveness of SCLC tumors by activating innate immune pathways.
We afterward explored the expression of additional markers of activated innate immune pathways in tumors tissues from a TGCA database. In particular, we examined the correlation between the gene expression of STING downstream-related chemokine (CCL5), a marker of STING pathway activation, and that of other innate immune activators, such as DNA/RNA sensors, in SCLC samples (n = 81) from the cohort of George et al. We found that SCLC tumor tissues with higher STING chemokine levels also exhibited increased expression of genes involved in the activation of IFITH1 and DDX60 (Spearman Rho>0.6, p < 0. 001), members of MAVS pathway and IFI16 (Spearman Rho≥0.6, p < 0.001), a DNA sensor upstream of STING ( E), demonstrating that different innate immune pathways are simultaneously activated in cancer cells. Taken together, these results suggested that the activation of STING occurs concomitantly with other DNA/RNA sensors expression, in particular MAVS and IFI16.

## DNAPK inhibition activates MAVS in PBMC-derived lymphocytes from SCLC patients under treatment with chemo-immunotherapy
In this context, we investigated the effect of different DDR inhibitors on the induction of DNA/RNA innate immune sensors in SCLC patient-derived PBMCs. First, we performed an MTS assay using increasing concentrations of DDR inhibitors (DNA-PKi, ATMi, ATRi, and PARPi) ( A), to determine the concentrations required to reach 50% of the maximum possible response to treatment (IC50), a sublethal dose, to study the activity of live immune cells. Then, we treated PBMCs collected from SCLC patients with the appropriate IC50 of each DDR inhibitor for 72 h. RT-PCR analysis of STING, MAVS, and IFI16 mRNA expression revealed that DNA-PKi upregulated both STING and MAVS more than the other DDR inhibitors (p < 0.0005): ATMi had little impact on MAVS upregulation (both p < 0.05), whereas PARPi strongly increased IFI16 levels (p < 0.0005) ( A). We also validated the RT-PCR findings by western blot analysis ( B and B).
 To deeper investigate the role of chemo-immunotherapy-induced DNA damage in the DNA-PKi-mediated induction of STING/MAVS expression in SCLC immune cells, we serially collected blood samples from treatment-naïve patients with a diagnosis of SCLC (n = 10) and after at least two cycles of chemo-immunotherapy treatment (n = 10). We investigated changes in STING, MAVS, cGAS and IFI16 mRNA expression in lymphocytes. Briefly, PBMCs were cultured in RPMI supplemented with autologous human serum. After 1 h, monocytes adhered to the plate, while lymphocytes remained in suspension and were separated by collecting the supernatant ( C). After 24 h, the in vitro-expanded T-lymphocytes were treated with 2 μM DNA-PKi and/or ENPP1i for 72 h. We used ENPP1i as a positive control for canonical activation of the STING pathway, being ENPP1 (ecto-nucleotide pyrophosphatase/phosphodiesterase-1) a membrane-bound nucleotide hydrolase identified as the major enzyme that hydrolyzes 2′3′-cGAMP. ENPP1 blockade results in activation of the STING-dependent response. 
RT-PCR analysis showed that DNA-PKi increased mRNA levels of STING, MAVS and IFI16 in both naive (p < 0.0005) and under treatment (p < 0.0005) SCLC patient-derived lymphocytes. Interestingly, no significant changes in the cGAS expression were detected in immune cells derived from naive patients ( C) or from under treatment SCLC patients ( D), indicating that DNA-PKi-mediated STING upregulation in immune cells is not strictly dependent on cGAS and may be due to other nucleic acid sensors, suggesting the activation of the non-canonical STING pathway. Indeed, ENPP1i alone was highly effective in upregulating STING and cGAS expression in naive SCLC patient derived PBMCs. Furthermore, the effect of the combination of DNA-PKi and ENPP1i was most evident at both gene and protein levels in lymphocytes of naive SCLC patients compared to patients under treatment. This specific chemo-immunotherapy-dependent response may provide a rationale for using DNA-PKi in the clinical setting of SCLC patients after specific chemo-immunotherapy administration to maintain high STING levels and prolong the immune-mediated antitumor response. Conversely, the combination of DNA-PKi and ENPP1i may find clinical application in treatment-naïve SCLC patients to sustain antitumor immune system activity.
To better understand the immunomodulatory effects of specific chemo-immunotherapy in SCLC patients-derived PBMCs and to clarify the effect of DNA-PKi on the concomitant activation of nucleic acid sensing and innate immune responses, we performed western blot analysis for STING, MAVS and IFI16 ( E) of CD3/CD28-activated T lymphocytes collected from naive and under treatment SCLC patients. DNA-PKi preferentially upregulated STING, MAVS, and IFI16, to a greater extent when we collected PBMCs from patients under treatment compared to naive patients. These findings confirmed our hypothesis that immune cells with extensive DNA damage exhibit increased levels of STING and MAVS owing to the synergistic immunomodulatory effect of specific chemotherapy followed by DNA-PKi. In addition, MAVS active fibrillary form (upper band) increased in naive patients upon the combination of DNA-PKi and ENPP1i, while, noteworthy, DNA-PKi alone was the most effective in activating the fibrillary form of MAVS in under treatment SCLC patients. In this regard, 75 kDa MAVS forms large prion-like fibril complexes on the mitochondrial membrane, where it exists in its active form in terms of IFN-I signaling pathway activation. , 
We then investigated the transcriptional changes induced by DNA-PKi via RNA-seq in under treatment SCLC patient-derived PBMCs. The viral infection, lung innate lymphoid cells and cytotoxic T cell datasets were significantly enriched along with impairment of mitochondrial functions in PBMCs from SCLC patients after treatment with DNA-PKi ( F and D; ). These results align with in vitro findings and indicate a broad positive pro-immune effect mediated by DNA-PKi after specific chemo-immunotherapy in SCLC patients PBMCs.
In view of the RNA-seq results and given the emerging role of DDR-mediated metabolic changes in immune cells, we explored the effect of DNA-PKi on the metabolism of PBMCs derived from post-chemo-immunotherapy SCLC patients by performing a Seahorse glycolytic rate assay ( E). We found that DNA-PKi alone or in combination with ENPP1i resulted in a shift to oxidative metabolism, with increased OCR and respiratory reserve. In addition, both DNA-PKi- and ENPP1i-treated immune cells had greater ECARs and glycolytic capacities than CTR cells. This indicates that the increase in oxidative phosphorylation occurred along with increased glycolytic capacity in DNA-PKi-treated immune cells, whereas ENPP1i treatment alone preferentially affected glycolysis rate rather than mitochondrial respiration. Significantly, as indicated by the basal mitoOCR/glycoPER ratio, DNA-PKi treatment alone or in combination with ENPP1i, but not ENPP1i treatment alone, increased acidification rate. These findings indicate that inhibition of DNA-PK in combination with cGAS/STING canonical pathway activation affects both mitochondrial respiration and glycolysis compared to control cells modulating the metabolic fitness of immune cells, which may be beneficial for the maintenance of immune cells activity.

## STING-MAVS mitochondrial interaction upon DNA-PK inhibition
Based on these findings, we further aimed to clarify the molecular mechanisms underlying the simultaneous activation of MAVS and STING signaling induced by DNA-PKi in under treatment SCLC patients-derived PBMCs. We analyzed the subcellular localization and physical interaction of STING and MAVS using immunofluorescence (IF) and co-immunoprecipitation (coIP). IF analysis revealed an increase in the mean fluorescence intensity (MFI) of STING and MAVS along with a significant increase of their co-localization in DNA-PKi-treated PBMC-derived immune cells ( A). STINGMFI significantly increased after treatment with DNA-PKi alone (MFI 19.85, p < 0.0005), ENPP1i (MFI 17.09, p < 0.005) and in combination with ENPP1i (MFI 15.43, p < 0.005) compared to the control (MFI 6.30), whereas MAVSMFI significantly increased after treatment with DNA-PKi alone (MFI 14.52, p < 0.0005) and in combination with ENPP1i (MFI 12.79, p < 0.05) compared to the control (MFI 3.67) and to ENPP1i (MFI 4.88). In A and S3B we confirmed the mitochondrial subcellular localization of MAVS. Therefore, the increase of STING-MAVS co-localization upon DNA-PKi treatment, but not in ENPP1i, clearly indicated that DNA-PK inhibition triggers STING upregulation and its translocation to the mitochondrial compartment to interact with MAVS. We hypothesized that the mitochondrial localization of STING may be related to its non-canonical activation mediated by DNA-PKi.
 Therefore, in order to assess whether mitochondrial STING may serve as a co-adaptor for MAVS signaling, we performed an IP assay in PBMCs derived from naive and post-cisplatin SCLC patients and then treated them with DNA-PKi and/or ENPP1i ( C). We found that MAVS and STING physically interacted in DNA-PKi PBMC-derived lymphocytes from both naive and under treatment SCLC patients. It is interesting to note that the interaction between STING and the active fibrillar form of MAVS (75 kDa band) occurs only in PBMC collected post-cisplatin and after DNA-PK inhibition. In contrast, ENPP1i did not induce STING translocation to the mitochondria nor the formation of a complex with MAVS. To assess whether the mitochondrial STING-MAVS interaction results in activation of the phospho-kinases promoting innate immune response, we performed confocal IF in post-cisplatin SCLC patient derived PBMCs to assess the subcellular of p-IRF3. As shown in C and S3D, DNA-PKi induced a significant increase in p-IRF3 MFI (p < 0.05) and significantly promoted p-IRF3 translocation to the nuclear compartment (p < 0.005), thus confirming the functional interaction between STING and MAVS. Overall, these data suggest that DNA-PKi induces STING translocation to the mitochondria in post-cisplatin SCLC patients derived PBMCs, where it co-adapts with activated MAVS fibrils to strengthen the innate immune antitumor response. Additionally, DNA-PKi after chemo-immunotherapy-induced DNA stress further enhances and amplifies this mechanism by selectively activating MAVS fibrils formation. To strengthen the key contribution of MAVS in triggering STING activation upon DNA-PK inhibition, we performed silencing of MAVS in SCLC patients PBMCs collected post-cisplatin. We found that the efficacy of DNA-PKi and ENPP1i in activating STING downstream pathway was reduced in absence of MAVS even if the expression of total STING was not impaired ( E). In F, we performed silencing of cGAS and STING in SCLC patient derived PBMCs to further confirm the non-canonical STING activation upon DNA-PKi treatment. We found that sicGAS specifically inhibited both p-IRF3 and STING in ENPP1i treated PBMCs, whereas DNA-PKi upregulated p-IRF3 and STING despite the silencing of cGAS. Furthermore, suppression of STING led to a reduction in the activation of this pathway in both DNA-PKi and ENPP1i-treated samples. Overall, these results confirm that DNA-PKi selectively induce MAVS activation and interaction with mitochondrial STING to activate and maintain the STING downstream pathway in immune cells independently from cGAS.
Based on these data, we studied the synergistic effect of the sequence of cisplatin followed by DNA-PKi in inducing an antitumor immune response in SCLC patients-derived PBMCs. Transcriptomic data showed that sequential treatment (cisplatin → DNA-PKi) significantly enriched viral infection-related signatures in patient-derived PBMCs ( G). We then compared the DEGs of sequential treatment compared to cisplatin alone. Interestingly, we found that sequential treatment prompts an enrichment in the IFN-induced antiviral response pathways as well as cytotoxic immune cell pathways (CD8+ T cell pathway and NK cell-mediated cytotoxicity) in comparison to cisplatin in PBMCs ( D and H; ), highlighting the efficacy of the sequential combination of cisplatin and DNA-PKi in sustaining an antitumor immune response. Overall, these results indicated that the non-canonical STING interaction with active MAVS fibrils induced by DNA-PKi after cisplatin efficiently activate anti-tumor immune response in SCLC patients PBMCs ( E).

## DNA-PK inhibition effect on the interaction between MAVS and STING in PBMC-derived immune cells and SCLC cells
Next, we investigated the effect of DNA-PK inhibition in SCLC cells, alone or in coculture with PBMCs derived from SCLC patient’s post-cisplatin. We first performed short-term treatments (6 h and 24 h) to verify the efficacy of DNA-PKi and ENPP1i in activating phosphorylation of kinases in the STING downstream pathway in SCLC cells by western blot ( A) and IF ( B and S4C). At 6 h, the two drugs show similar effects on activation of STING, MAVS, and downstream p-IRF3, while at 24 h ENPP1i is more effective in maintaining STING pathway downstream activation (with increased p-TBK1 and p-IRF3).
Instead, as shown in A and 4B, when we conducted long-term treatments (72 h), we demonstrated the ability of DNA-PKi to maintain a prolonged immune response, as potentially needed in a clinical setting of maintenance therapy. Specifically, we showed that DNA-PKi treatment after 72 h in SCLC cell cultures upregulate MAVS lower band without activating the fibrils formation (upper band) ( A). In addition, it is not sufficient to impact STING expression. This finding was also confirmed by IP assay, which showed no MAVS/STING complex formation. Instead, DNA-PKi treatment after 72 h significantly increased p-IRF3 MFI compared to CTR and to ENPP1i ( B). However, p-IRF3 localized mainly in the mitochondrial compartment after treatment with DNA-PKi for 72 h. Based on these results, we hypothesized that DNA-PKi treatment alone was not sufficient to activate the non-canonical STING-MAVS activation in in vitro tumor cell lines. Therefore, we performed transcriptomic analysis to deeply understand these mechanisms in the context of SCLC cells. Gene set enrichment analysis (GSEA) showed a significant enrichment of the DNA repair and viral infection gene sets in SCLC cell lines treated with DNA-PKi, somewhat reproducing the cisplatin treatment effect ( D). Moreover, transcriptomic data showed that sequential treatment (cisplatin → DNA-PKi) vs. CTR significantly enriched IFN pathways and viral infection-induced IFN responses in SCLC cell lines. We also found a significant enrichment of apoptosis gene sets and a downregulation of metastasis and stem cells gene sets, thus suggesting an antitumor efficacy of the sequential treatment ( E). While, when we compared SCLC cell lines treated with the sequence vs. cisplatin alone, we found that sequential treatment induces higher upregulation of antitumor immune related pathways, specifically the T cell receptor and B cell receptor pathways, IFN-related pathways as well as the reduction of stem cells features, and the gene sets associated with lung cancer poor survival ( B and F; ). These data indicated that DNA-PKi efficacy was most evident after a pre-existing chemotherapy damaged DNA in SCLC cells.
 To assess whether facing immune cells could impact MAVS/STING activation in cancer cells, we established a 2D coculture of H661 ( C) and DMS79 ( G) SCLC cells with PBMCs derived from SCLC patient’s post-cisplatin treatment. We found that physical contact between tumor cells and lymphoid cells strongly activates the non-canonical MAVS/STING pathway and induces physical complex assembly in tumor cells. Furthermore, we noted an upregulation of PD-L1 expression in the DNA-PKi-treated SCLC cells in coculture compared to SCLC alone, suggesting a potential benefit of combining DNA-PKi with immunotherapy after cisplatin treatment.
To verify whether these effects depend on physical contact or secretion of chemokine or other signaling molecules, we cultured SCLC cells with PBMC-conditioned medium for 48 h and then added DNA-PKi and/or ENPP1i for additional 72 h. In these conditions we found MAVS upregulation while we did not observe any significant differences in STING expression ( D), confirming that the non-canonical MAVS/STING activation requires the physical interactions between cancer cells and immune cells.
Next, we mechanically separated SCLC cells from lymphocytes or monocytes after coculture and analyzed them individually to clarify whether the non-canonical STING/MAVS pathway could be predominantly activated in immune cells subtypes or in cancer cells after coculture ( E and H). We selected different SCLC cell lines (DMS79, H446, and H661) and found an increase in STING/MAVS in DMS79 and H661 cells after treatment with DNA-PKi, but not in H446 cells. These results may be related to the intrinsic features of the cell line and should be the focus of future studies. For instance, different molecular features have been implicated in modulating sensitivity to DDR inhibitors in SCLC cells. These results also confirmed the strong upregulation of both STING and MAVS in PBMC-derived lymphocytes and monocytes, independent of the cell line used in the coculture. The effect of the treatment on the mRNA expression levels of STING, MAVS, and IFI16 in monocytes cultured alone is shown in I. Together, these results provide the evidence that interaction between immune and cancer cells is needed for innate immune pathway activation and suggest that co-culture models represent a useful tool to investigate DNA/RNA sensors activation in the context of cancer-immune cells crosstalk.

## Effect of DNA-PK inhibition on macrophage polarization and NK cell-mediated cytotoxicity
Since immune NK-mediated antibody-dependent cell-mediated cytotoxicity is a mechanism of response to immunotherapy in tumors with high PD-L1 expression and can occur along with STING activation, and considering the GSEA results that indicated an increased NK-cell mediated cytotoxicity after sequential treatment of cisplatin and DNA-PKi in SCLC patients-derived PBMCs, we investigated the antibody-dependent cell-mediated cytotoxicity ability of patient-derived immune cells against SCLC cell lines cocultured with DNA-PKi or ENPP1i. We performed LDH cytotoxicity assay by using an anti-CD16 NK cell-neutralizing antibody as a negative control to assess whether the DNA-PKi-induced cytotoxicity was mediated by NK cells subpopulation. Furthermore, to better observe NK cell activity or blockade, we selected DMS79 and H1882 PD-L1-high cell lines. Neutralization of the NK cells subpopulation strongly reduced the cytotoxic effect on both PD-L1 high SCLC cell lines ( A), indicating that DNA-PKi-induced cytotoxicity in this model is mainly mediated by NK cells. Furthermore, on the basis of the differential effect of ENPP1i on whole PBMCs or NK cells only, we speculate that ENPP1i-induced immune cell-mediated cytotoxicity may be due to engagement of other immune subpopulations. As reported in B, SCLC patients-isolated lymphocytes cytotoxicity was significantly increased after DNA-PKi treatment in H1048 cells (p < 0.05). In contrast, a significant cytotoxic effect (p < 0.005) was observed in H1882 cells treated with ENPP1i ( D). It is possible that other mechanisms could be responsible for the cytotoxic effect observed in H1882 cells treated with ENPP1i and deserve further investigations.
 The M1/M2 macrophage paradigm plays a critical role in the pathogenesis of cancer, with M2-polarized macrophages having pro-tumoral features. Therefore, we established a model for studying the effect of DNA-PKi on macrophage polarization, starting from under treatment SCLC patient-derived monocytes. As described previously, we mechanically isolated monocytes from PBMCs by adhesion to a well plate for 1 h. Next, monocytes and H1048, H1882, or H82 cancer cells were cocultured for 48 h before DNA-PKi or ENPP1i exposure (2 μM) for additional 72 h. After incubation, the impact of treatment on monocyte polarization to M1 (pro-inflammatory and anti-tumoral) or M2 (anti-inflammatory and pro-tumoral) was studied, and cancer cell proliferation was assessed using the MTS assay. DNA-PKi decreased cancer cells viability when cocultured with monocytes. Blockade of ENPP1 in monocytes slightly reduced the viability of H1048, H82, and H1882 cells (81.12%, 75.55%, and 78.89%, respectively) ( C). We then collected monocytes after coculture with cancer cells and we performed analysis of M1/M2 polarization. M1 polarization was assessed by measuring the mRNA expression of the classical M1 markers TNFA, IL-6, and CXCL10, which are pro-inflammatory cytokines ( D). DNA-PKi increased the expression of pro-inflammatory markers. TNFA and IL-6 were not overexpressed in ENPP1i-treated monocytes, whereas CXCL10 expression was significantly increased in ENPP1i-treated monocytes. This finding is consistent with CXCL10 being a downstream target of the canonical cGAS-STING pathway and with the STING agonists being potent inducers of type I IFN-regulated chemokines (CXCL9 and CXCL10). Polarization of macrophages into alternatively activated macrophages, also known as M2 cells, is induced in vivo by IL-4 and IL-13. We also measured the mRNA expression of M2 markers (IL-10, IL4, and CCL22) in PBMC-derived monocytes cocultured with SCLC cell lines; however, in our conditions, we did not observe any significant increase in the expression of these genes, with the exception of CCL22 increase in H1048 cells ( E). Overall, we suggest that DNA-PKi induces anti-tumoral phenotypes in multiple SCLC patients-derived PBMCs thus promoting features of immune responsiveness and immune-cells mediated cytotoxicity.

## Effect of DNA-PK inhibition on 3D coculture spheroids and PBMC-derived immune cells
We have previously shown that co-culturing 3D spheroids from cell lines with patient-derived PBMCs is a valid surrogate for autologous models to functionally predict therapy-induced immune activation in vitro. To test the direct antitumor efficacy and potential antitumor immunity of the strategy using DNA-PKi plus immunotherapy (atezolizumab 10 μg/mL), we used 3D cocultures of SCLC cells grown as spheroids and PBMC-derived suspension lymphocytes. We estimated the ability of lymphocytes to migrate toward SCLC spheroids using this in vitro system. Spheroids from SCLC cell lines (H661, DMS79, H82, and H446) were obtained in vitro and SCLC PBMC-derived lymphocytes were added for 3 days. Cocultures were monitored and imaged, revealing the migration of immune cells in the plates toward the tumor spheroids. On day 3 of coculture, we added treatments for an additional 72 h and imaged the cells before analysis ( A). Subsequently, we analyzed the tumor spheroids for changes in gene and protein expression. Western blot analysis showed elevated expression levels of MAVS fibrillar form (upper band), STING and activation of the downstream signaling pathway (p-IRF3) in cells treated with DNA-PKi plus atezolizumab. Treatment with ENPP1i and atezolizumab as single agents also activated the STING pathway, but with lower efficacy than the combination. Moreover, atezolizumab plus DNA-PKi increased levels of cleaved caspase-7 in SCLC cells grown as spheroids in coculture with immune cells ( B and A). In addition, a significant increase in STING (p < 0.005), MAVS (p < 0.005), IFI16 (p < 0.005), and PD-L1 (p < 0.0005) gene expression levels was detected by RT-PCR in H82 cells grown as spheroids in 3D coculture and treated with the combination of atezolizumab plus DNA-PKi. Interestingly, cGAS levels did not increase after DNA-PK inhibition in combination with atezolizumab, confirming that DNA-PK inhibition induces STING upregulation independently of cGAS in SCLC cells ( C). This effect, together with immune cell-mediated cytotoxicity on tumor cells, results in the destruction of SCLC-derived spheroids in vitro. To quantify the antitumor effect, we analyzed the changes in tumorsphere size (expressed in the diameter range) induced by the treatments. D shows a reduction in the diameter range (100–200 μm) of tumor spheroids treated with DNA-PKi alone (frequency range FR 31.5%) and in combination with atezolizumab (FR 28.8%) compared to those treated with DNA-PKi alone (FR 46.7%), atezolizumab alone (FR 58.1%) or ENPP1i combined with atezolizumab (FR 29.8%). These results indicate that combination therapy with DNA-PKi and atezolizumab directly activated immune cells to disrupt the 3D spheroid structure. To confirm that the reduction in sphere diameter was due to enhanced immune cell activity and tumor sphere infiltration, we performed FACS analysis on 3D coculture and measured the percentages of infiltrating (IN) and noninfiltrating (OUT) immune cells as previously described ( E). By comparing the cellular proportions IN and OUT of the untreated spheroids, we observed a greater proportion of CD45+CD3+ lymphocytes in the spheroid structure (IN compartment) in PBMCs from healthy donors (73.8%) than in PBMCs from SCLC patients (63.2%), suggesting a slight reduction in immune cell infiltration ability in SCLC patients compared to that in healthy donor-derived immune cells ( F and B). This result suggests that the immune response could be intrinsically altered in patients with SCLC, thus requiring further studies and supporting the need for strategies for immune activation in these patients. We then tested the possibility of modulating the immune response in this system by adding atezolizumab plus DNA-PKi or ENPP1i to the cocultures. Combined treatment with atezolizumab plus DNA-PKi strongly increased spheroid infiltration by SCLC patient-derived lymphocytes, which accounted for 75.7% of the total immune cells infiltrated per spheroid compared to 64.3% of the infiltrating immune cells in the ENPP1i plus atezolizumab spheroids ( G). All these data on the effects of DNA-PKi and atezolizumab on SCLC models could be further extended in the future with in vivo studies to measure direct changes in intratumor infiltration.
 

## Effect of DNA-PK inhibition in ex-vivo SCLC cells derived from patient’s MPE
Here, we aimed to establish an ex vivo model to validate the role of DNA-PKi in activating STING/MAVS innate immune pathway in the context of maintenance therapy. In this regard, the lack of adequate tissue samples from diagnostic biopsies of SCLC patients leads to a general lack of opportunities to investigate SCLC biology in ex vivo models. Therefore, we established MPE-derived cell line from SCLC patient undergoing maintenance treatment with atezolizumab (MPE_1). The morphology of the established cell line was predominantly oval and round, with some cells having a fibroblast-like shape ( A). We showed activation of DNA-PK and immune pathway in MPE_1 culture by assessing the expression of DNA-PK and DNA/RNA sensors STING and MAVS by immunofluorescence ( B).
 Then we tested the effect of cisplatin (0.5 μM) alone and combined with atezolizumab (10 μg/mL) and/or with DNA-PKi (2 μM) for 72 h with the aim of proving the efficacy of sequential treatment with DNA-PKi after cisplatin treatment. We found that sequential treatment with cisplatin + atezolizumab → DNA-PKi (p < 0.0005) induced the most significant reduction of cell viability (%) ( C). We then performed western blot to assess whether the addition of DNA-PKi post-cisplatin may influence DNA/RNA sensor innate immunity activation to confirm the results obtained in in vitro and 2D/3D co-culture models previously presented. We found that the expression of STING and MAVS was increased by the addition of DNA-PKi after cisplatin or chemo-immunotherapy. Interestingly, the sequential treatment of cisplatin → DNA-PKi strongly increased the innate immune response through TBK1 protein phosphorylation and overexpression as compared to untreated control. In addition, the activation of STING downstream pathway is independent from cGAS expression, thus indicating the occurrence of non-canonical MAVS/STING activation upon DNA-PKi. This effect occurred along with a significant increase of DNA damage marker (H2A.X) in cisplatin → DNA-PKi MPE_1 cells ( D). We also confirmed western blot results by RT-PCR which showed a significant increase of DNAPK (p < 0.0005) and MAVS (p < 0.0005) after chemo-immunotherapy treatment. Moreover, the addition of DNA-PKi post-cisplatin strongly increased both STING (p < 0.0005) and MAVS (p < 0.0005) thus confirming that the addition of DNA-PKi post-chemotherapy plays a key role in sustaining multiple DNA/RNA sensors innate immune pathways ( E). In particular, since the MPE_1 cells were derived after chemotherapy treatment in SCLC patient and may potentially represent a sub-population of resistant cells, the increase in DNA-PK after chemo-immunotherapy suggested that its targeting can prevent therapeutic resistance.

## Discussion
SCLC is biologically characterized by high intrinsic DNA damage due to the universal loss of TP53 and the retinoblastoma gene (RB1). Our group and others have previously demonstrated that the combination of DDRis (such as PARPi, Chk1i, and WEEi) and immunotherapy plays a positive role in the immune response via the STING-dependent activation of PD-L1 and T lymphocytes . We also previously demonstrated that activation of the cGAS-STING signaling pathway in PBMCs from SCLC patients may be a potential predictive biomarker for response to immunotherapy, and high expression levels of STING are correlated with a better response to treatment. Thus, STING activation is a confirmed mechanism for enhancing SCLC immune responsiveness, but unfortunately, it is not easy to translate in a clinical setting, since STING agonists have low clinical applicability, and can be used only for local intratumoral administration. 
In the present study, we investigated the effect on induction of antitumor immune response of sequential treatment with cisplatin and DNA-PKi in SCLC cells, patients-derived immune cells and co-coculture systems and ex vivo models of SCLC cells isolated from MPE. By performing GSEA on RNA-seq data obtained from SCLC cell lines and SCLC patient-derived PBMCs treated with cisplatin, we demonstrated that chemotherapy-induced DNA damage and inhibition of the DDR pathway activate innate immune-related IFN signaling pathways. Interestingly, we showed that the addition of sequential treatment with DNA-PKi after cisplatin led to maintenance of the innate immune response, IFN-related pathways as well as CD8+ T cell and NK-cell activation pathways, thus confirming the efficacy of DNA-PKi after chemo-immunotherapy. In this regard, the cytotoxic effect of cisplatin activates DDR pathway and can also lead to the release of cytosolic DNA fragments that activate STING, thereby enhancing the recruitment and activation of immune cells through IRF3 nuclear translocation. , Given the immunogenic potential of cisplatin-induced DNA damage, there is a compelling rationale for utilizing DDR inhibitors as maintenance therapy following chemotherapy. , Through a comprehensive in vitro characterization using functional assays, we proved that DNA-PKi sustains a widespread antitumor immune response through noncanonical STING-MAVS complex activation in both SCLC cell lines and immune cells, somewhat reproducing the antiviral response. In detail, we show that DNA-PKi enhances STING activity by facilitating its translocation to mitochondria, where it forms complexes with MAVS further amplifying immune signaling. This mechanism could explain how DNA-PKi can sustain an active immune response after the induction of chemotherapy, promoting antitumor immunity. In addition, this STING-MAVS complex is more likely to occur when DNA-PKi treatment is performed in PBMCs derived from SCLC patients under chemo-immunotherapy treatment compared to naive patients, suggesting that this phenomenon may deserve further investigation as potential biomarker in patients.
Various studies have reported that high-NE SCLC lines grow as non-adherent floating aggregates that do not express STING, whereas low-NE SCLC cell lines grow as loosely adherent cells with STING derepression. , , We showed that the highest basal levels of STING were detected in H661 (adherent) cells compared to those in SCLC cell lines growing in suspension (H82, H2141, H524, and H209) or mixed (H446). Although the STING pathway is less transcriptionally active in the NE form, in our coculture systems, interaction with immune cells may impact basal STING expression levels. This phenomenon is accompanied by positive changes in immune cell metabolism, macrophage polarization, and NK cell activation.
Several studies indicate that combining DDR inhibitors with immune checkpoint inhibitors may synergistically improve therapeutic outcomes in relapsed SCLC by converting “cold” tumors into “hot” tumors through enhanced immune cell infiltration and activation. , Thus, to model the clinical efficacy of our results, we demonstrated that the combination of DNA-PKi and anti-PD-L1 drugs induced immune-mediated antitumor effects in in vitro 3D cocultures of SCLC cells and PBMCs, as shown by the increased ability of lymphocytes to infiltrate tumor spheroids. These results are consistent with those of other studies using tumor spheroids as tools to investigate tumor-lymphocyte interactions. The advantage of this 3D cocultures system derives from its simple, cheap, and fast setup and great adaptability to various culture conditions, thus enabling the analysis of dynamic and differential inter-patient responses in a controlled environment.
Specifically, we found that chemo-immunotherapy and DNA-PKi stress stimuli increased the intracellular protein levels of STING and full-length MAVS, which is the MAVS isotype capable of forming large prion-like fibril complexes on the mitochondrial membrane. MAVS is active only when it is bound to the mitochondria; its cleavage and detachment from the mitochondria significantly reduces its ability to activate the IFN-I signaling pathway. 
Here, we also described a model of the interplay of innate immune pathways in SCLC induced by cytosolic nucleic acid fragments released under treatment pressure. Independently of the canonical activation of the STING pathway prompted by DNA fragmentation through cGAS, DNA-PKi selectively guides STING to translocate to the mitochondria, where it assembles into MAVS fibrils and induces potentiated antitumor immune signals. In all experimental models, we demonstrated the difference in canonical versus noncanonical STING activation using ENPP1i treatment (which instead drives cGAS activation) as a control for the canonical pathway. The formation of the STING-MAVS complex further potentiates the activation of downstream inflammatory and T cell-recruiting signals and potentially increasing immune-responsiveness. Also, while harnessing this active antitumor immune response, the strategy of combination of anti-PD-L1 with cisplatin followed by DNA-PKi induces direct cytotoxic effects on tumor cells. In fact, he addition of DNA-PKi serves to further inhibit DNA repair mechanisms that would potentially resolve cisplatin-induced damage. By blocking DNA-PK, these inhibitors prevent effective repair of the DNA cross-links formed by cisplatin, thereby sustaining tumor damage and the consequent activation of immune pathways initiated by the DDR.
Taken together, our findings provide a biological rationale for using DNA-PKi with immunotherapy in SCLC, based on the activation of the inflamed phenotype through a combined STING-MAVS response. Notably, we concluded that the use of DNA-PKi in clinical treatment may be most beneficial for preventing tumor progression in patients following chemo-immunotherapy, as we demonstrated in the established ex vivo model of SCLC isolated from MPE of SCLC patient after chemo-immunotherapy. Additionally, the combination of DNA-PKi and ENPP1i or other similar agents (chemo-, radio-therapy) that activate both the canonical and noncanonical pathways of STING may have greater application in other clinical setting of relapsed SCLC patients with the aim of resensitizing tumor to immunotherapy and in other tumor types. Considering that the combination of DNA-PKi, immunotherapy, and radiotherapy or in combination with cisplatin has already been tested in phase I clinical trials with a good safety profile, , our data support a rational for future studies in SCLC patients using PBMCs as biomarkers tool.
In conclusion, we identified an unexpected function of STING in the mitochondrial membrane: control of immune cell activation through a previously unrecognized STING-MAVS axis co-activated in SCLC and in immune cells upon DNA-PK inhibition. Collectively, our results support further investigations of the mechanisms, biomarkers, and efficacy of DNA-PKi and immunotherapy combinations in sustaining antitumor immune response after chemo-immunotherapy in SCLC patients.

## Limitations of the study
The present study is subject to certain limitations inherent to the complex and heterogeneous nature of SCLC, particularly about the distinction between high-NE and low-NE subtypes that may have an impact on the applicability of the findings and suggest future explorations of these results in various subtypes of SCLC.
Regarding the models selected for the studies, the use of in vitro models, like 3D cocultures and patient-derived immune cells, while highly valuable for the direct link with clinical context, may not fully replicate the intricate tumor microenvironment found in vivo, potentially leading to an overestimation of immune-mediated antitumor effects. Therefore, future studies in in vivo models are needed to ascertain the effect over time of DNA-PKi in activating STING-MAVS-mediated innate immune pathway in SCLC immune and cancer cells.
In addition, we acknowledge the requirement for longitudinal studies to evaluate the long-term efficacy and safety of combining DNA-PKi with immunotherapy, particularly in light of the frequent rapid disease progression observed in SCLC patients. Finally, our analyses were based on a limited sample size, which could potentially impact the statistical power and broader applicability of our findings.
Collectively, these limitations underscore the necessity for further research to validate our results in terms of translational potential in clinical context.

## Resource availability

## Lead contact
Further information and requests for resources and reagents should be directed to and will be handled by the lead contact, Carminia Maria Della Corte (carminiamaria.dellacorte@unicampania.it).

## Materials availability
MPE-derived cell line generated in this study are available from the with a completed materials transfer agreement.

## Data and code availability

•All RNA-seq data generated during this study have been deposited in the Sequence Read Archive (SRA) with BioProject ID: PRJNA1208015 and are publicly available as of the date of publication. This paper analyzes existing, publicly available tumor gene expression data, accessible via the European Genome-phenome Archive: EGAS00001000925. Original western blot images have been deposited at Mendeley: https://doi.org/10.17632/x4xvsv6v39.1 and are publicly available as of the date of publication. Microscopy data reported in this paper will be shared by the upon request.
•This paper does not report original code.
•Any additional information required to respond to any question related to the data reported in this paper is available from the upon request.

## Acknowledgments
This study has been funded by MFAG AIRC (Project Number: 26237) (C.M.D.C), NIH/ NCI
R01-CA207295 (L.A.B), NIH/ NCI
U01- CA256780 (L.A.B), NIH/ NCI
P50-CA070907 (L.A.B), and NIH/ NCI
P30-CA016672 (L.A.B). We would like to acknowledge Novogene Corporation Inc. for RNA-seq analysis. We thank Dr. Ludovica D'Auria for assisting and for providing the Microscopy Facility at CEINGE-Biotecnologie Avanzate (Naples, Italy).

## Author contributions
Conceptualization: C.M.D.C., C.D.R., and F.M.; data curation: C.D.R., F.M., L.A., C.T., K.R., Q.W., and J.W.; formal analysis: V.T., F.P., S.Z., M.C., A.G., and V.N.; funding acquisition C.M.D.C.; investigation: C.M.D.C., C.D.R., F.M., F.I., and V.D.R.; methodology: C.D.R., F.M., L.A., F.I., V.D.R., V.T., F.P., C.T., G.D.G., D.M.D., A.D.L., D.C., S.N., G.M., and A.S.; project administration: C.M.D.C., K.R., F.D.V., E.M., T.T., S.N., G.M., A.S., L.A.B., and F.C.; resources: F.M., F.I., V.D.R., V.T., F.P., S.Z., A.G., L.A.B., F.C., and C.M.D.C.; software: C.D.R., L.A., K.R., Q.W., J.W., and L.A.B.; supervision: C.M.D.C., F.C., and C.T.; validation: F.I., V.D.R., V.T., and F.P.; visualization: C.D.R., F.M., L.A., D.C., S.N., and G.M.; writing—original draft: C.D.R., F.M., L.A., D.C., S.N., and G.M.; writing—review and editing: C.M.D.C., F.C., L.A.B., F.I., V.D.R., V.T., F.P., K.R., F.D.V., E.M., T.T., and A.S.

## Declaration of interests
Dr. Morgillo F. Received honoraria or consultation fees for speaker, consultancy, or advisory roles: Roche, Servier, Incyte, ESMO, and MSD. Dr. Papaccio F.: Private research funding from Merck, travel support from Diatech Pharmacogenetics, and recipient of an ESMO Research Fellowship sponsored by Amgen from 2018 to 2020. Dr Ciardiello D.: travel support from Sanofi, BMS and Merck KgA. Dr. Martinelli E.: Receipt of honoraria or consultation fees for speaker, consultancy, or advisory roles: Amgen, Bayer, Eisai, Merck Serono, Pierre Fabre, Roche, Servier, Incyte, ESMO, MSD; Travel grant: AstraZeneca, Pierre Fabre. Dr. Troiani T. Receipt of honoraria or consultation fees for speaker, consultancy, or advisory roles: Merck, Amgen, Pierre Fabre, Servier, MSD, Bayer, and Novartis. Dr. Napolitano S. received travel grants from Amgen, Merck KGaA, Bristol Myers Squibb, and Novartis outside the submitted work. Dr Martini G. reported receiving honoraria from Servier and Incyte outside the submitted work. Dr. Servetto A: Speaker Honoraria from Eli Lilly, MSD, Janssen, Roche, Novartis, and Gilead; Travel support from Bristol-Myers Squibb and AstraZeneca; Board advisor: MSD. Dr. De Vita F. serves consulting/advisory role for Roche, Bayer, BMS, Servier, Lilly, Astellas, MSD, Merck, Astra Zeneca, Dajichi. Dr. Byers L. received honoraria from Clinical Cancer Care Options, research funding from AstraZeneca, Amgen and Jazz Pharmaceuticals and serves consulting/advisory roles for Merck Sharp & Dohme Corp., Arrowhead Pharmaceuticals, Chugai Pharmaceuticals Co., AstraZeneca Pharmaceuticals, Genentech Inc., AbbVie, BeiGene, Jazz Pharmaceuticals, Puma Biotechnology, Amgen, Daiichi Sankyo, Boehringer Ingelheim, and Novartis. Dr. Ciardiello F. Receipt of honoraria or consultation fees for speaker, consultancy, or advisory roles: Amgen, Merck KGaA, MSD, Pierre Fabre, Pfizer, Roche, Servier; Institutional financial interests, financial support for clinical trials or contracted research; Amgen, Merck KGaA, MSD, Pierre Fabre, Pfizer, Roche, Servier. Dr. Della Corte C.M. reported receiving personal fees from Roche, MSD, and AstraZeneca, and travel grants from Amgen outside the submitted work.

## STAR★Methods

## Key resources table

 

## Experimental model and study participant details

## Study approval
After written informed consent was obtained from patients diagnosed with ES-SCLC, human samples were collected in accordance with the Declaration of Helsinki. The protocol for the use of these samples for research purposes was approved by the Ethics Committee of the University of Campania (“Luigi Vanvitelli”) and Naples (No. 280 on May 16, 2020).

## Sample size estimation
We enrolled patients (n=25) with a diagnosis of SCLC receiving one of the following treatments: chemotherapy (cisplatin) and/or an anti-PD-L1 antibody (atezolizumab, durvalumab) as per standard clinical practice. The patients ages ranged from 48 to 87 years (median = 65.7 years) and gender breakdown was 28.7% female and 71.3% male.

## How subjects/samples were allocated to experimental groups
The patients were grouped as follows: naïve patients (blood collected at baseline), post-cisplatin patients (blood collected at third day of treatment) and under treatment patients (blood collected after at least two cycles of chemo-immunotherapy treatment). For one SCLC patient (age 65 years old, male) undergoing maintenance therapy with anti-PD-L1 atezolizumab, we collected MPE samples for ex-vivo cell line generation.

## General informations on partecipants
Detailed patient demographic and clinical characteristics are displayed in .

## Cell lines
The SCLC cell lines NCI-H524 (ATCC Cat#CRL-5831; RRID:CVCL_1568), NCI-DMS79 (ATCC Cat#CRL-2049; RRID: CVCL_1178), NCI-H82 (ATCC Cat#HTB-175; RRID: CVCL_1591), NCI-H209 (ATCC Cat#HTB-172; RRID: CVCL_1525), NCI-H446 (ATCC Cat#HTB-171; RRID: CVCL_1562), NCI-H196 (ATCC Cat#CRL-5823; RRID:CVCL_1509) and NCI-H661 (ATCC Cat#HTB-183; RRID: CVCL_1577) were maintained in RPMI 1640 (Sigma-Aldrich, R8758) supplemented with 10% FBS (Sigma-Aldrich) and 1X penicillin–streptomycin (Sigma-Aldrich, P0781) in a humidity-controlled environment (37°C, 5% CO2). NCI-H1048 (ATCC Cat#CRL-5853; RRID: CVCL_1453), NCI-H2141 (ATCC Cat# CRL-5927; RRID: CVCL_1534), NCI-H1672 (ATCC Cat#CRL-5886; RRID: CVCL_1486) and NCI-H1882 (ATCC CAT# CRL-5903; RRID: CVCL_1504) cell lines were maintained in HITES medium supplemented with 5% FBS in a humidity-controlled environment (37°C, 5% CO2). Cell lines were obtained from and authenticated by the American Type Culture Collection (ATCC). Cell lines morphology was monitored, and the cell lines were routinely tested for mycoplasma using a mycoplasma detection kit (InvivoGen).

## Method details

## Peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMCs) isolation
Blood samples were collected in 8.5 ml EDTA tubes from patients with SCLC. PBMCs from patients with SCLC were isolated using lymphosep (Aurogene). Monocytes were mechanically isolated by adherence, and lymphocytes were separated by suspension. Suspension- or adhesion-isolated immune cells were grown for five days in complete medium supplemented with RPMI 1640 containing human autologous serum (10%), ultraglutamine I (1%), penicillin, and streptomycin (1%). Suspension-isolated immune cells were activated with beads coated with anti-CD3 and anti-CD28 (Life Technologies) at a ratio of 1 bead per 10 cells, and IL-2 (Miltenyi Biotech) at a concentration of 20 U/ml. After 24 h, DNA-PKi and/or ENPP1i at 2 μM were added for an additional 72 h.

## Reagents
Primary antibodies for western blot analysis against MAVS (D54A9E) (24930, 1:1000), STING (D2P2F) (13647, 1:1000), phospho-DNA-PKcs (Ser2056) (E9J4G) (68716, 1:1000), DNA-PKcs (E6U3A) (38168, 1:1000), IFI16 (D8B5T) (14970, 1:1000), phospho-TBK1/NAK (Ser172) (D52C2) (5483, 1:1000), TBK1/NAK (E8I3G) (38066, 1:1000), phospho-IRF-3 (Ser386) (E7J8G) (37829, 1:1000), cGAS (D1D3G) (15102, 1:1000), PD-L1 (E1L3N) (13684, 1:1000), Caspase-7 (9492, 1:1000), Phospho-Chk1 (Ser345) (133D3) (2348, 1:1000), Chk1 (2G1D5) (2360, 1:1000), Phospho-Chk2 (Thr68) (C13C1) (2197, 1:1000), Chk2 (2662, 1:1000), Phospho-Histone H2A.X (Ser139) (20E3) (9718, 1:1000), Histone H2A.X (2595), β-actin (8H10D10) (3700, 1:2000), GAPDH (14C10) (2118, 1:1000), were purchased from Cell Signaling (Danvers, MA), and α-Tubulin (AA13, 1:2000) was purchased from Sigma Chemical Co. Enpp-1-IN-1, Nedisertib (Peposertib, M3814), VX-803 (M4344), M4076, cisplatin, and atezolizumab were purchased from Selleck Chemicals (Houston, TX).

## RNA-sequencing analysis
SCLC cell lines (namely H82, H196, H524, DMS79, H2141, H1672) and PBMCs collected from SCLC patients under treatment (n = 6) were cultured in 6 well plates in appropriate culture medium for 24 h, prior to treatment with cisplatin (0.5 μM) and/or DNA-PKi (2 μM) for 72 h. Cells were harvested and RNA was purified using an RNeasy Plus Mini kit (QIAGEN). The samples were analysed by Novogene Co., Ltd. RNA was evaluated for degradation and contamination and the RNA concentration was assessed. 1 μg of total RNA from each sample was used for library preparation. Messenger RNA was purified from the total RNA using poly-T oligo-attached magnetic beads. After fragmentation, the first strand cDNA was synthesized using random hexamer primers, followed by second strand cDNA synthesis using either dUTP for the directional library or dTTP for the non-directional library. The non-directional library was prepared after end repair, A-tailing, adapter ligation, size selection, amplification, and purification. The directional library was prepared after end repair, A-tailing, adapter ligation, size selection, USER enzyme digestion, amplification, and purification. The library was checked with Qubit and real-time PCR for quantification and a bioanalyzer for size distribution detection. Quantified libraries were pooled and sequenced on an Illumina platform (NovaSeq X Plus Series PE150) according to the effective library concentration and data amount. Raw data in FASTQ format were first cleaned using fastp. Clean data (clean reads) were obtained by removing reads containing adapters, poly-N and low-quality reads from raw data. The reference genome hg38 from the NCBI website was used, and paired-end cleaned reads of the samples were mapped. The index of the reference genome was built using Hisat2 v2.0.5 and paired-end clean reads were aligned to the reference genome using Hisat2 v2.0.5. The mapped reads of each sample were assembled by StringTie (v1.3.3b) in a reference-based approach. Read counts were performed using FeatureCounts v1.5.0-p3, and differential expression analysis was performed using R with the DESeq2 package (v1.20.0). The resulting P-values were adjusted using Benjamini and Hochberg's approach for controlling the false discovery rate. Genes with an adjusted P-value <=0.05 found by DESeq2 were assigned as differentially expressed. GSEA analysis was performed using JAVA GSEA 3.0. All processed RNA-Seq data for SCLC patients-derived PBMCs generated in this study are included in . All processed RNA-Seq data for SCLC cell lines generated in this study are included in .

## Gene expression
Gene expression data included publicly available data for SCLC tumors (George et al., 2015). Tumor gene expression data is available via the European Genome-phenome Archive under the accession code EGAS00001000925.

## RNA extraction and cDNA synthesis
Total RNA was obtained from the cell lines using TRIsure reagent (Meridian Bioscience, BIO-38033). The RNA concentration was measured using a NanoDrop 2000 spectrophotometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific). After RNA extraction, cDNA was generated from 500 ng total RNA using the SensiFAST cDNA Synthesis Kit (Meridian Bioscience, BIO-65053) under the following conditions: 25°C for 10 min, 42°C for 15 min, and 85°C for 5 min.

## Gene expression analysis by quantitative reverse transcription-polymerase chain reaction (qRT-PCR)
mRNA expression levels of STING, MAVS, IFI16, cGAS, PD-L1, CXCL10, TNFα, IL6, IL10, IL4, CCL22 and DNAPK genes were evaluated by qRT-PCR with a QuantStudio 7-Flex (Applied Biosystems) using the SensiFAST SYBR Hi-ROX Kit (Meridian Bioscience, BIO-92005) under the following conditions: 50°C for 2 min (stage 1), followed by a denaturation step at 95°C for 10 min (stage 2), followed by 40 cycles at 95°C for 15 s and 60°C for 1 min (stage 3). All samples were run in duplicate, in 20 μL reactions and relative gene expression was determined by normalization to 18S, which was used as an internal control gene. The 2-ΔCt or 2-ΔΔCt method was used to calculate the relative gene expression. Nonspecific signals caused by primer dimers were excluded by dissociation curve analysis and the use of non-template controls (see for primer sequences).

## Western blot analysis
Protein lysates from SCLC cells and PBMCs were obtained by homogenization in RIPA lysis buffer [0.1% sodium dodecyl sulfate (SDS), 0.5% deoxycholate, 1% Nonidet, 100 mmol/L NaCl, 10 mmol/L Tris–HCl (pH 7.4), 0.5 mmol/L dithiothreitol, 0.5% phenylmethyl sulfonyl fluoride, protease inhibitor cocktail (Hoffmann-La Roche), and phosphatase inhibitor tablets (PhosSTOP; Roche Diagnostics)] and clarified by centrifugation at 15,000 rpm for 20 min at 4°C. Protein samples containing comparable amounts of proteins, estimated by a modified Bradford assay (Bio-Rad), were resolved by sodium dodecyl sulfate-polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis (SDS-PAGE) and electrotransferred onto 0.2 μm nitrocellulose membranes (Trans-Blot Turbo; Bio-Rad). After blocking the membranes for 90 min at room temperature, they were incubated overnight at 4°C with primary antibodies, followed by incubation with a secondary antibody for 1 h at room temperature. Horseradish peroxidase-conjugated anti-rabbit (Bio-Rad) and anti-mouse (Bio-Rad) antibodies were used as the secondary antibodies. Proteins were detected with Clarity Western ECL Substrate using a ChemiDoc (Bio-Rad). Images were analyzed using Image Lab 3.0.1. Original western blot images are available in this paper’s ( ).

## Immunoprecipitation
For the immunoprecipitation (IP) assay, proteins from cell lysates of SCLC cells or PBMC-derived immune cells (250–500 μg) were incubated for 2 h at 4°C with an anti-MAVS rabbit polyclonal antibody (Cell Signaling Technology, 1:50). Then, Protein A/G Plus-Agarose (Santa Cruz Biotechnology, CA, USA) was added to the protein-antibody complexes, which were incubated with shaking overnight at 4°C. The samples were then centrifuged at 12,000 rpm for 5 min. The supernatant was collected and used as the “unbound fraction.” The “immunoprecipitated fraction” was washed three times with phosphate-buffered saline (PBS). Proteins were eluted from Protein A/G Plus-Agarose, suspended in SDS buffer, and boiled at 100°C for 5 min before western blotting.

## Immunofluorescence
Cells (500.000/well) in 12-well plates were treated with DNA-PKi (2 μM), cisplatin (0.5 μM), and/or ENPP1i (2 μM) for 72 h. Before starting the protocol, 200 nM MitoTracker Deep Red (Cell Signaling Technology) and/or ER-Tracker (Cell Signaling Technology) were added to the culture medium for 45 min. The cells were then fixed for 20 min with a 4% paraformaldehyde (PFA) solution and permeabilized for 10 min with 0.1% Triton X-100 in phosphate-buffered saline (PBS) at room temperature. The cells were then incubated with a specific mouse monoclonal antibody against STING, MAVS, p-IRF3 and DNA-PK in blocking solution (3% BSA in TBS-Tween 0.1%, Sigma) for 2 h at 37°C followed by incubation with Alexa Fluor 488-conjugated anti-rabbit IgG antibodies (Jackson ImmunoResearch Laboratories, West Grove, PA, USA) or Alexa Fluor 647-conjugated anti-mouse IgG antibodies (Jackson ImmunoResearch Laboratories, West Grove, PA, USA) at a dilution of 1: 1000 for 1 h. The nuclei were stained with DAPI (1 μg/mL) (Sigma). Fluorescence was analyzed using an APOTOME microscope. The subcellular localization was assessed using a confocal microscope (Airy Scan 2, ZEISS, LSM980). The relative mean fluorescence intensity (MFI) was analyzed using the ImageJ software (NIH, Bethesda, MD, USA).

## Cell energy phenotype and glycolytic rate assay
A Seahorse XF96 instrument (Agilent) was used for the Glycolytic Rate Assay. Prior to the experiment, suspension-isolated immune cells were treated for 72 h with DNA-PKi or ENPP1i. On the day of the experiment, the treated cells were washed and seeded at a density of 5x104 cells/well in 96-well plates coated with Cell-Tak (Corning). The plate was centrifuged to facilitate cell attachment and was incubated at 37°C for 60 min. Glycolytic Rate Assay was performed according to the manufacturer’s instructions. Data analysis was performed using Wave Desktop 2.6 software (Agilent).

## RNA interference
MAVS-targeted siRNA (Silencer®, Thermo Fisher), ON-TARGETplus Human TMEM173 siRNA (340061, SMARTpool), ON-TARGETplus Human MB21D1 siRNA (115004, SMARTpool) and control non-targeting siRNA (Dharmacon Inc.) were used according to the manufacturer’s instructions. Briefly, cell suspension was plated at 40% confluence and allowed to grow in a humidified incubator in 5% CO2 at 37°C for 24 h. Cells were then transfected with 100 nmol/L siRNAs using Dharmafect reagent (Dharmacon). After 24 h, cells were treated with DNA-PKi or ENPP1i 2 μM for 72 h. After 72 h, cells were recovered and then lysed for western blot analysis. Three independent experiments were performed.

## MTS assay
After culturing with adhesion-isolated monocytes, SCLC cells were plated in a 96-well plate (∼3,000 cells per well) in serum-free medium, and 3-(4,5-dimethylthiazol-2-yl)-5 -(3-carboxymethoxyphenyl)-2-(4-sulfophenyl)-2H-tetrazolium (MTS; Abcam) was added to each well (10 μL/well) and incubated at 37°C for 2 h. Cell viability was determined spectrophotometrically by measuring absorbance at 490 nm. The data were expressed as the percentage of viable cells, considering untreated control cells as 100%. At least three independent experiments were performed in triplicate.

## Lactate dehydrogenase cytotoxicity assay
Cytotoxicity was assessed by measuring the lactate dehydrogenase (LDH) release from cancer cells into the culture medium. The LDH activity in the medium was determined using a commercially available kit (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA). The assay is based on the conversion of lactate to pyruvate in the presence of LDH, with a parallel reduction in nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide. The formation of nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide hydrate from the above reaction resulted in a change in the absorbance at 340 nm. Aliquots of media and warm reagents were mixed in a 96-well plate according to the manufacturer’s instructions, and the absorbance at 680 nm and 490 nm was recorded using an M200 Infinite Pro microplate reader (Tecan Trading AG, Switzerland). To determine LDH activity, the differential values of the 680-nm absorbance value (background signal from the instrument) and 490-nm absorbance value were calculated. The percentage of cytotoxicity was calculated according to the following formula:
%=(ExperimentalValue–EffectorCellsSpontaneousControl–TargetCellsSpontaneousControl)(TargetCellMaximumControl–TargetCellsSpontaneousControl)

## Spheroid formation and 3D coculture protocol
H661, DMS79, or H82 spheroids were generated by seeding 104 cells per well in ultralow attachment (Corning) round bottom 6 well plates in complete RPMI. Five days later, cocultures were initiated by adding 5x105 SCLC patients derived suspension-isolated immune cells per well pretreated with DNA-PKi or ENPP1i plus atezolizumab for 72 h before analysis.

## Flow cytometry
For flow cytometry, analysis of spheroids and immune cell cocultures, the OUT and IN compartments were isolated by first pooling the 6 coculture wells in 15 ml tubes. The spheroids were gently suspended and left to settle at the bottom of the tube. The supernatant cell suspension consisted of the non-infiltrating immune cells (OUT). These steps were repeated 2 times with PBS to wash spheroids from non-infiltrating immune cells. The spheroids were then disaggregated with Accutase (Merck), suspended in PBS (0.1% BSA) to obtain a single cell suspension (IN), and further analyzed by flow cytometry. At least 500,000 cells were incubated with fluorescently labeled monoclonal antibodies or their respective isotype controls (1/10 diluted 4°C for 30 min in the dark). After washing, the labelled cells were analyzed by flow cytometry using a BD FACSCanto II (Becton Dickinson, Mountain View, CA, USA). The antibodies used were mouse anti-human CD3 V500, mouse anti-human CD45 FITC, and mouse anti-human EpCAM PE (BD Biosciences). The data were analyzed using FACS Diva Software, version 8.0.

## Establishment of cell line from Malignant Pleural Effusion of SCLC patient
MPE_1 cell line was established from MPE derived from pathologically proven SCLC patient. MPE samples were directly transferred from the operating room to the laboratory for cell culture. Tumor cells were spun down by centrifugation the MPE sample at 300 rpm for 5 min, and re-suspended with DMEM F12 (GIBCO, CA, USA) supplemented with 10% FBS (Sigma-Aldrich) and 1% Penicillin/Streptomycin (Sigma-Aldrich). Collected cells were then seeded into T-25 cm2 flasks (Corning, NY, USA). Established cell lines were sustained in RPMI 1640 medium with 10% FBS and 1% (v/v) penicillin and streptomycin (10,000U/ml). Cultures were maintained in humidified incubators at 37°C in an atmosphere of 5% CO2 and 95% air. The initial passage was assigned when substantial tumor cell growth was detected, and successive passages were given at sub-confluence after trypsinization of the adherent cells. The floating cells were gathered by centrifuging the medium and dispersed by pipetting.

## Quantification and statistical analysis
The results are expressed as mean ± SEM. Two-group analyses were performed using unpaired t tests. Three or more groups with one independent variable were analyzed using one-way ANOVA. Three or more groups with two independent variables were analyzed using a two-way ANOVA. Statistical analyses were performed using Prism 8 (GraphPad Software, San Diego, CA, USA). All tests were two-tailed, and a P value < 0.05 was considered to indicate statistical significance. Data statistics and bioinformatics analyses for tumor gene expression data were performed using R (https://www.r-project.org/) version R 3.3.0, without the development of original custom codes. Immunoblot analyses, cell viability assays, and quantitative RT-PCR experiments were independently repeated a minimum of three times to ensure reproducibility. Western blotting signals were quantified by morphodensitometric analysis using ImageJ software (NIH, Bethesda, MD, USA). Briefly, the product of the area and optical density of each band was determined and normalized to the same parameter derived from equal loading used. Data are expressed as relative protein levels of each band compared to the corresponding equal loading ± SD. A final graphical summary was drawn in-house using the free BioRender platform.

Published: February 1, 2025

## Footnotes
Supplemental information can be found online at https://doi.org/10.1016/j.isci.2025.111943.

## Supplemental information

## Document S1. Figures S1–S5, Table S1, and Data S1–S12

## Table S2. Bulk RNA-sequencing results of DEGs analysis of SCLC patients-derived PBMCs, related to STAR Methods
A) DEG results of PBMCs treated with cisplatin versus untreated. B) DEG results of PBMCs treated with DNA-PKi versus cisplatin. C) DEG results of PBMCs treated with DNA-PKi versus CTR. D) DEG results of PBMCs treated with cisplatin → DNA-PKi versus CTR. E) DEG results of PBMCs treated with cisplatin → DNA-PKi versus Cisplatin.

## Table S3. Bulk RNA-sequencing results of DEGs analysis of SCLC cell lines, related to STAR Methods
A) DEG results of SCLC cell lines treated with cisplatin versus untreated. B) DEG results of SCLC cell lines treated with DNA-PKi versus CTR. C) DEG results of SCLC cell lines treated with cisplatin → DNA-PKi versus CTR. D) DEG results of SCLC cell lines treated with cisplatin → DNA-PKi versus Cisplatin.

## Table S4. GSEA results for comparing conditions within SCLC cell lines and PBMCs treated with cisplatin vs. CTR, related to Figure 1
A) GSEA results for comparing SCLC cell lines treated with cisplatin vs. CTR. B) GSEA results for comparing SCLC patients-derived PBMCs treated with cisplatin vs. CTR.

## Table S5. GSEA results for comparing conditions within SCLC cell lines and PBMCs treated with DNA-PKi vs. CTR, related to Figure 2
A) GSEA results for comparing SCLC cell lines treated with DNA-PKi vs. CTR. B) GSEA results for comparing SCLC patients-derived PBMCs treated with DNA-PKi vs. CTR.

## Table S6. GSEA results for comparing SCLC patients-derived PBMCs treated with cisplatin →DNA-PKi vs. cisplatin, related to Figure 3

## Table S7. GSEA results for comparing SCLC cell lines treated with cisplatin →DNA-PKi vs. cisplatin, related to Figure 4

## References
 

## Associated Data

## Supplementary Materials

## Document S1. Figures S1–S5, Table S1, and Data S1–S12

## Table S2. Bulk RNA-sequencing results of DEGs analysis of SCLC patients-derived PBMCs, related to STAR Methods
A) DEG results of PBMCs treated with cisplatin versus untreated. B) DEG results of PBMCs treated with DNA-PKi versus cisplatin. C) DEG results of PBMCs treated with DNA-PKi versus CTR. D) DEG results of PBMCs treated with cisplatin → DNA-PKi versus CTR. E) DEG results of PBMCs treated with cisplatin → DNA-PKi versus Cisplatin.

## Table S3. Bulk RNA-sequencing results of DEGs analysis of SCLC cell lines, related to STAR Methods
A) DEG results of SCLC cell lines treated with cisplatin versus untreated. B) DEG results of SCLC cell lines treated with DNA-PKi versus CTR. C) DEG results of SCLC cell lines treated with cisplatin → DNA-PKi versus CTR. D) DEG results of SCLC cell lines treated with cisplatin → DNA-PKi versus Cisplatin.

## Table S4. GSEA results for comparing conditions within SCLC cell lines and PBMCs treated with cisplatin vs. CTR, related to Figure 1
A) GSEA results for comparing SCLC cell lines treated with cisplatin vs. CTR. B) GSEA results for comparing SCLC patients-derived PBMCs treated with cisplatin vs. CTR.

## Table S5. GSEA results for comparing conditions within SCLC cell lines and PBMCs treated with DNA-PKi vs. CTR, related to Figure 2
A) GSEA results for comparing SCLC cell lines treated with DNA-PKi vs. CTR. B) GSEA results for comparing SCLC patients-derived PBMCs treated with DNA-PKi vs. CTR.

## Table S6. GSEA results for comparing SCLC patients-derived PBMCs treated with cisplatin →DNA-PKi vs. cisplatin, related to Figure 3

## Table S7. GSEA results for comparing SCLC cell lines treated with cisplatin →DNA-PKi vs. cisplatin, related to Figure 4

## Data Availability Statement

•All RNA-seq data generated during this study have been deposited in the Sequence Read Archive (SRA) with BioProject ID: PRJNA1208015 and are publicly available as of the date of publication. This paper analyzes existing, publicly available tumor gene expression data, accessible via the European Genome-phenome Archive: EGAS00001000925. Original western blot images have been deposited at Mendeley: https://doi.org/10.17632/x4xvsv6v39.1 and are publicly available as of the date of publication. Microscopy data reported in this paper will be shared by the upon request.
•This paper does not report original code.
•Any additional information required to respond to any question related to the data reported in this paper is available from the upon request.