822acssdJournal of Medicinal ChemistryJ Med ChemPMC1022604710226047102260473713418210.1021/acs.jmedchem.2c02101Small Molecules
Targeting DNA Polymerase Theta (POLθ)
as Promising Synthetic Lethal Agents for Precision Cancer Therapy
PismataroMaria
Chiara AstolfiAndrea BarrecaMaria Letizia PacettiMartina SchenoneSilvia BandieraTiziano CarboneAnna MassariSerena †Department
of Pharmaceutical Sciences, University of
Perugia, Via del Liceo 1, 06123 Perugia, Italy‡Department
of Pharmacy, University of Genoa, Viale Benedetto XV 3, 16132 Genoa, Italy§D3 PharmaChemistry, Istituto Italiano di Tecnologia, Via Morego 30, 16163 Genova, Italy*e-mail: serena.massari@unipg.it.
*e-mail: anna.carbone1@unige.it.
352023661064986498–65223052023© 2023 The Authors. Published by American Chemical SocietyPermits the broadest form of re-use including for commercial purposes, provided that author attribution and integrity are maintained (https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/).

## Abstract
 Synthetic lethality (SL) is an innovative strategy in
targeted
anticancer therapy that exploits tumor genetic vulnerabilities. This
topic has come to the forefront in recent years, as witnessed by the
increased number of publications since 2007. The first proof of concept
for the effectiveness of SL was provided by the approval of poly(ADP-ribose)polymerase
inhibitors, which exploit a SL interaction in BRCA-deficient cells,
although their use is limited by resistance. Searching for additional
SL interactions involving BRCA mutations, the DNA polymerase theta
(POLθ) emerged as an exciting target. This review summarizes,
for the first time, the POLθ polymerase and helicase inhibitors
reported to date. Compounds are described focusing on chemical structure
and biological activity. With the aim to enable further drug discovery
efforts in interrogating POLθ as a target, we propose a plausible
pharmacophore model for POLθ-pol inhibitors and provide a structural
analysis of the known POLθ ligand binding sites.

statusreleaseddisplay-pdfyesis-in-collection-domainyesis-olfnois-manuscriptnois-preprintnois-journal-matternois-scannednois-retractednoReceived 2022 Dec 23; Collection date 2023 May 25.

1.

## Introduction
Precision medicine represents
a promising therapeutic approach
in which therapies are selected based on the patient genotyping. , In cancer, tumor development and progression are often driven by
changes in different genes (e.g., mutation, upregulation, or downregulation)
that cooperate to ensure a growth advantage to cancer cells. However,
certain changes have to be present simultaneously in order to guarantee
survival of cancer cells, thereby representing cancer-specific vulnerabilities
that can be exploited to selectively target the tumor. In this context, cellular pathways responsible for the
repair of chromosomal double-strand breaks (DSBs) play pivotal roles
in cell growth and cancer development. , In particular,
DNA repair-deficient cancer cells are provided with selective growth
advantage, leading to genetic instability and the promotion of tumor
evolution, but they often become dependent on backup pathways, which
represent a cancer-specific vulnerability that can be targeted to
kill tumor cells. , 
Mammalian cells employ four
pathways to repair the highly cytotoxic
DSBs, thereby maintaining genomic integrity and cellular viability:
nonhomologous end-joining (NHEJ), homologous recombination (HR), single-strand
annealing (SSA), and alternative end joining (alt-EJ) or microhomology-mediated
end-joining (MMEJ). Two genetically distinct
mechanisms of MMEJ exist, of which the polymerase theta-mediated end-joining
(TMEJ) is the main one. 
NHEJ directly
ligates broken DNA ends and preferentially repairs
unresected DSB ends, whereas HR, SSA, and TMEJ require 5′ to
3′ nucleolytic resection of broken ends to generate ends with
3′ single-stranded DNA (ssDNA) overhangs. The two major pathways,
NHEJ and HR, are responsible for repairing the majority of DSBs.
NHEJ is the pathway preferentially adopted by the mammalian cells
to resolve DSBs and is active throughout the cell cycle. It promotes direct ligation of DNA ends through
synapsis, end processing, and ligation processes. The first component
of the NHEJ pathway recruited at the DSB is the Ku70–Ku80 (Ku)
dimer, which binds to the two DNA break
ends and protects them from end-resection. Ku dimer acts as a “tool
belt”, interacting and stabilizing other NHEJ proteins, including
DNA-dependent protein kinase catalytic subunit (DNA-PKcs) and DNA
ligase IV. , 
HR is a conservative error-free
DNA repair process limited to the
S- and G2 phases. HR is initiated by
MRN complex (MRE11, RAD50, and NBS1), which generates the 3′
single-stranded DNA and requires BRCA1
first and then BRCA2 to recruit RAD51. RAD51 is a recombinase capable of performing the essential steps
of the HR repair pathway, including strand invasion, homology search
on the sister chromatid and strand exchange. Because the repair of DSB occurs in the presence of homologous sister
chromatid as a template, HR is considered accurate and any missing
genetic information lost in the DSB or during end processing is recovered.
A cell can use either NHEJ or HR pathways, but the exact reason
why a cell opts for one pathway over another is unclear, even because
the choice of repair mechanism is continuously adjusted throughout
the cell cycle. However, several factors
may influence this choice including the break type, the cell cycle
phase in which the damage occurred, and the local chromatin environment. , Furthermore, the expression, activity, and availability of repair
complex components play a key role in the balance between the repair
pathways. In particular, post-translational modifications mediated
by cyclin-dependent kinases regulate DNA repair according to the cell-cycle
stage. , 
TMEJ is an error-prone repair mechanism
able to join 5′-resected
substrates by locating and pairing microhomologies present in 3′-overhanging
single-stranded tails. It involves poly(ADP-ribose) polymerase (PARP)
1, DNA ligase III, DNA polymerase theta (POLθ), and traditional
DNA resection factors. − The initial end resection is performed by MRN complex, a step shared
with the HR pathway. Then, TMEJ proceeds
through the annealing of exposed microhomologous sequences terminal
or internal to the broken ends, the fill-in synthesis of the flanking
single-stranded regions, the cleavage of the extraneous 3′-DNA,
and the final ligation step where the DNA ends are covalently bound
to each other. Readers are directed to
the paper of Pomeranz and co-workers for a comprehensive description
on the TMEJ. TMEJ serves as an essential
backup pathway to repair DSBs when NHEJ or HR are compromised, although
it was demonstrated that, in some contexts, TMEJ is preferred even
when HR and NHEJ are efficient. , 
Many cancers
are defective in canonical DNA repair pathways and
compensated for through activation of backup pathways for survival,
the inhibition of which kills only cancer cells, with fewer side effects
in noncancerous cells. This concept is
at the basis of synthetic lethality (SL), a revolutionary approach
for the development of new antitumor agents for precision oncology. − 
SL, first discovered in the early 1920s in fruit flies (Drosophila melanogaster) by Calvin Bridge and then observed in 1946 by Theodore Dobzhansky in Drosophila pseudoobscura, describes
the relationship between two genes in which alteration (e.g., mutation,
overexpression, inhibition) of one gene is tolerated, whereas combined
dysfunction of both genes causes cell death. In 1997, Hartwell and colleagues exploited the concept of SL to
develop anticancer-selective agents. Specifically,
they showed that pharmacological inhibition of a pathway that is synthetically
lethal with a cancer-specific alteration is lethal for tumor cells,
sparing nonmalignant cells. 
Evidence
of the effectiveness of this approach was provided by
the approval of PARP inhibitors (PARPi), which exploit a SL interaction
in HR deficient and particularly BRCA-deficient cells.
These cells are unable to repair the collapsed replication forks and
double-strand breaks, which result from PARP inhibition and trapping
on DNA. , HR defective BRCA1/2 mutant
tumors fail to repair PARP inhibition-induced damage, while normal
cells that have an intact HR pathway are largely unaffected by PARPi
treatments. 
The clinical success
of PARPi provided a proof-of-principle of
the SL approach. To date, four PARP1/2
inhibitors, olaparib, − rucaparib, , niraparib, and talazoparib, have received marketing authorization
in the United States and/or Europe. Despite the encouraging therapeutic
benefits of PARPi, these agents show some critical issues, such as
suboptimal clinical efficacy, ineffectiveness in certain DNA-repair
deficient cancers, and development of acquired and innate resistance. , The major resistance mechanism observed in preclinical and clinical
models was related to the reversion mutation in BRCA2, which allows the correct encoding of functional proteins, thus
restoring the HR pathway. Several additional resistance mechanisms
have been investigated in preclinical in vitro and in vivo models, such as a nonreversion-based mechanism that
restores HR pathway independently from BRCA genes
(e.g., loss of 53BP1), PARP1 mutation, and reduction of the drug concentration
in cells by upregulation of efflux pumps. 
For these reasons, there is an urgent need and opportunity
to identify
other synthetic lethal partners involved in DNA repair pathways for
the development of novel tailored therapies for BRCA-deficient tumors. In addition to the interaction between PARP inhibition
and mutations in BRCA1/2, numerous other synthetic
lethal interactions have been discovered in cancer. In recent years, a number of small molecules targeting
DNA damage response have been reported, including inhibitors of DNA-dependent
protein kinase (DNA-PK), ataxia-telangiectasia and Rad3 related (ATR),
ataxia-telangiectasia mutated (ATM), CHK1, WEE1, and POLθ, some
of which are currently being tested in clinical trials. − 
Among these synthetic lethal targets, the low-fidelity POLθ
(encoded by PolQ gene) emerged as particularly promising
for the treatment of BRCA1-deficient cancers. The first POLθ cellular role was identified
in Drosophila melanogaster through the analysis of
mus308 mutants hypersensitive to DNA cross-linking agents. , Subsequently, POLθ activity was associated with the backup
DNA error-prone repair pathway TMEJ, in
which it promotes end-joining of 3′ssDNA overhangs at DSB site. In particular, after synapses formation, POLθ
promotes first the annealing of both terminal and internal sequence
microhomology (2–6 base pairs), and then the fill-in synthesis
to extend the annealed overhangs. During terminal transferase activity,
POLθ oscillates between three different modes of nucleotide
insertion: templated in cis (snap-back), templated in trans, and nontemplated. 
Recently, the end-trimming activity of
POLθ has been reported,
which depends on dNTP-dependent endonuclease and allows processing
of DNA ends prior to DNA synthesis. 
POLθ belongs to the A-family polymerase and is a large size
(2590 residues in humans) multifunctional protein containing a superfamily
II N-terminal conserved helicase-like domain (referred to as POLθ-hel,
residues 32–899) and a C-terminal conserved DNA polymerase
domain (referred to as POLθ-pol, residues 1819–2590),
linked by an unstructured central region ( ). Both POLθ-hel and POLθ-pol
domains are crucial for TMEJ activity, while the central portion probably
has a regulatory role. , 
 POLθ is the only eukaryotic polymerase with
a helicase domain.
POLθ-hel is involved in the ATPase dependent displacement of
replication protein A (RPA) from DNA to promote TMEJ at the expense
of HR. These helicase activities favor the annealing of microhomologies,
thus allowing the extension of the annealed overhangs by POLθ-pol. , − Moreover, the ability of POLθ-hel to unwind,
in both ATP-dependent and -independent manner, different types of
DNA substrates with 3′-5′ polarity (replication forks,
blunt-ended DNA, and 3′ or 5′ overhangs) and RNA:DNA
hybrids has been recently demonstrated by biochemical assays. 
In addition to its polymerase activity
in TMEJ, POLθ-pol
is involved in translesion synthesis incorporating nucleotides opposite
an abasic site or thymine glycol lesions, in base excision repair (BER) of DNA damage through its 5′-deoxyribose
phosphate lyase functions, and in replication
fork repair. Moreover, POLθ also
functions during the first steps of DNA replication, influencing the
timing of replication initiation, and
it is implicated in hypermutation during antibody maturation. , 
Interestingly, POLθ is overexpressed in several human
cancers
(e.g., breast, ovarian, lung, gastric, and colorectal), whereas in
most normal cells it is either expressed at a low level or completely
absent, making this enzyme an ideal cancer-selective target. − The depletion of POLθ by siRNA and shRNA was demonstrated
to be useful: (i) in BRCA1-deficient cells in combination
with PARPi treatment, leading to synergistic antitumor effects and
a possible delay of PARPi resistance, (ii) to prevent the onset of PARPi resistance, as well as that of cis-platinum, due to TMEJ-dependent functional reversion
of BRCA2 mutations, , (iii) to improve
radiosensitization of different HR-proficient − as well as
p53-mutated tumor cells, and (iv) to
sensitize cancer cells to other chemotherapeutic agents, such as topoisomerases
I and II inhibitors. In addition, POLθ
showed synthetically lethal interactions with other DNA repair tumor
suppressor genes, such as FANCD2, RAD51C, and PALB2 involved in the HR pathway, RAD52 mediating SSA/BIR, ATM and ATR related with HR functionalities, and Ku70 and TP53BP1 controlling NHEJ. , 
All these findings suggest that POLθ activity inactivation
would provide a novel targeted therapeutic strategy in a variety of
tumor context, including HR- and NHEJ-deficient cancers. , , However, POLθ is still
largely unexplored as drug target and the potential to exploit POLθ/HR-genes
synthetic lethal interaction using small molecule POLθ inhibitors
is only at an early stage. The first potent and selective inhibitors
of POLθ DNA polymerase and ATPase activities have been recently
reported by several pharmaceutical companies, one of which just entered
clinical trials for the treatment of advanced or metastatic solid
tumors.
The aim of this review is to describe the current status
of the
POLθ inhibitor research field. An overview of all of the POLθ
small molecule inhibitors reported so far and their use in the treatment
of HR-deficient cancer and Shieldin deficiency associated cancer is
provided for the first time. Compounds are classified according to
their mechanism of action, i.e., POLθ-pol or POLθ-hel
inhibitors, trying to highlight structural similarities and differences,
as well as the approaches used for their identification and optimization.
Furthermore, the biochemical data and the number of compounds described
as POLθ-pol allosteric inhibitors allowed us to define their
common chemical features and propose a 3D pharmacophore model amenable
for ligand-based studies. Finally, a brief analysis of the available
POLθ crystallographic structures is provided, focusing on known
inhibitor binding sites.

2.

## Small Molecule POLθ Inhibitors
The identification of POLθ inhibitors is a research field
that has only recently attracted interest from the scientific community
and, particularly, from pharmaceutical companies. Most of the compounds
described to date have been reported in 16 PCT Patent Applications
(PAs) filed between 2016 and 2021, while the only five original papers
reporting POLθ inhibitors were published the first one in 2016, the next two in 2021, curiously on the same
day, , and the last two in 2022. , The latter, made public while we were about to finish this review,
are noteworthy because they report, for the first time ever, medicinal
chemistry studies on POLθ inhibitors.
The PAs and original
papers with relative details are summarized
in . Among the
16 PAs, 14 reported small molecules as POLθ inhibitors, while
2 reported their use for the treatment of HR-deficient tumors. Moreover,
10 and 6 PAs focused on inhibitors of POLθ-pol and POLθ-hel
activity, respectively. To the best of our knowledge, the first PA
reporting POLθ inhibitors was filed by Temple University of
the Commonwealth system of Higher Education (Temple University) and
is the unique reporting nucleotide analogues as polymerase activity
inhibitors. All the other PAs were filed
by (i) Artios Pharma Limited (Artios), a leading independent DDR company,
which focuses on POLθ-pol inhibitors, − (ii) Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Inc. (Dana-Farber), specialized
on precision oncology therapies, which focused on POLθ-hel inhibitors, − and (iii) Ideaya Biosciences, Inc. (Ideaya), a SL-focused precision
medicine oncology company that reported both classes of compounds. − Of note, one of the most recent original papers, which reported the development of POLθ-pol inhibitors,
was also published by a pharmaceutical company, Repare Therapeutics,
a clinical-stage precision oncology company focused on SL. A brief
description of each PA and original manuscript is given below, dividing
them according to the mechanism of action of the described compounds,
i.e., polymerase and helicase inhibitors.
 2.1.

## POLθ Polymerase Inhibitors
To best of our knowledge, the first PA describing POLθ inhibitors
was filed by Temple University in 2017 (WO2018/035410A1), which comprises concepts and compounds described
in a previous manuscript, published in 2016. The PA reports synthetic expanded-size DNA (xDNA, ) nucleotides and analogues that were efficiently recognized by POLθ as
substrates leading to the inhibition of the POLθ DNA synthesis
activity. The expanded-size deoxyribonucleotides were characterized
by the presence of an additional four-, five-, or six-membered ring
within the original base moiety, which was also decorated with different
substituents. The compounds were investigated as expanded-size deoxyribonucleoside
monophosphates (dxNMPs) and triphosphates (dxNTPs) and monophosphate
prodrugs. The incorporation of expanded-size dxNMPs into DNA by POLθ
was determined by evaluating the ability of the purified POLθ-pol
domain to perform primer extension in the presence of a single complementary
benzo-expanded dxNTP in vitro. Benzo-expanded dxNTPs
were known to form canonical base pairs and increase the width of
double-stranded DNA by 2.4 Å. Moreover, the dxNMPs bases exhibited
strong base stacking interactions. All four dxNTPs were efficiently
used by POLθ as substrates for primer-template extension. On
the other hand, Y-family (Polκ and Polη), X-family (Polβ),
B-family (Polδ, Polε Polα), and A-family (Polγ)
polymerases failed to incorporate dxNTPs into DNA or showed a significant
reduced ability to integrate xDNA analogues compared to POLθ.
Moreover, consecutive or closely spaced incorporation of two dxNMPs
strongly inhibited the DNA synthesis activity of POLθ, even
in the presence of all four original nucleotides, presumably due to
distortion of the polymerase active site that could prevent proper
positioning of the next incoming nucleotide or suppress forward translocation
of the enzyme.
 In 2020, Ideaya filed two PAs disclosing POLθ-pol
domain
inhibitors. PA WO2020/160213A1 reports
27 heteroarylmethylene derivatives (exemplified by compound 1, a, and SI, Figure S1), while WO2020/160134A1 discloses 61 strictly related acetamido
derivatives (exemplified by compound 2, b, and SI, Figure S2). The two series shared two (hetero)aromatic
portions, Ar1 and Ar2, which, in the majority
of compounds, were separated by four atoms, i.e., N/C–C–C–X,
although in heteroarylmethylene derivatives, the N/C–C atoms
were part of a heteroaromatic ring (Ar3, a), while in acetamido derivatives,
N–C was part of a tertiary amide. In the linker, most compounds
had a nitrogen atom as heteroatom and an unsubstituted methylene unit.
The ability of all the compounds to inhibit POLθ-pol activity
was determined using a fluorescence-based primer extension assay (PEA)
using POLθ-pol domain (residues 1819–2590). No individual
IC50 values (compound concentration that reduces by 50%
the POLθ-pol activity) were reported for the compounds, whose
activity spans from 10 μM to <200 nM. Depending on the IC50, each compound was assigned to one of four groups (IC50 = 10 μM to 1 μM, = 1 μM to 500 nM, = 500
nM to 200 nM, and <200 nM). Among the reported heteroarylmethylene derivatives, 19 showed an IC50 < 200 nM, while only 4 compounds displayed an IC50 = 1–10 μM. Out of the 61 described acetamido derivatives,
41 showed an IC50 < 200 nM, while no compounds displayed
an IC50 > 1 μM. No activity in cellular assays
has
been reported for any compound, and no follow-up papers have been
published at this time.
 In 2021, Ideaya filed two additional PAs disclosing
inhibitors
of POLθ-pol domain. PA WO2022/026548Al reports 16 additional acetamido derivatives (exemplified
by compound 3, c, and SI, Figure S3), in
which the molecule backbone, i.e., the Ar1 and Ar2 groups linked by a N–C(O)–C–X belt, was maintained
(the heteroatom within the linker was frequently a sulfur atom). PA
WO2022/026565Al discloses 31 cyclic
acetamido derivatives (exemplified by compound 4, d, and SI, Figure S4), in which the C–X within the
N/C–C–C–X linker was part of a nitrogen-based
heterocycle. Notably, in the last series, POLθ activity was
dependent on the stereochemistry at the C-2 carbon of the pyrrolidine
ring. The (S)-stereochemistry, as in compound 4 (IC50 < 200 nM), is associated with higher
potency, whereas the (R)-isomer of compound 4 shows an IC50 in the 1–10 μM range.
Assessment of compounds’ activity was performed using PEA,
as for analogues described above, with 5 acetamido derivatives showing
an IC50 < 200 nM and 3 displaying an IC50 in the 1–20 μM range, and 20 cyclic acetamido derivatives
showing an IC50 < 200 nM and 2 displaying an IC50 between 1 and 20 μM. No activity in cell-based assays
was reported but, in addition to the PEA, a luminescence-based inorganic
pyrophosphate (PPi) assay was used to determine the ability of compound 3 ( c) and 15 cyclic acetamido derivatives (10 compounds showed an IC50 < 200 nM) to inhibit POLθ-pol activity.
Cyclic
acetamido derivatives described above are strictly related
to those previously disclosed in PA WO2021/028643A1, the first PA filed by Artios in 2019. In this PA, 245 heterocyclic amide derivatives are reported as inhibitors
of POLθ-pol domain (exemplified by compound 5, e, and SI, Figure S5). In this series of compounds, many
nitrogen-based heterocycles were exploited as Cyc1, all
characterized by (S)-stereochemistry at the carbon
atom bearing the amide group. A PicoGreen-based PEA was employed to
measure the ability of the compounds to inhibit the POLθ-pol
activity in vitro by using a full-length protein
(amino acids 2–2590) expressed in baculovirus. In contrast
to previously reported PAs, individual IC50 values are
reported for the compounds, ranging from 2 nM to 1.76 μM. The
majority of these small molecules were particularly potent, with 203
of the 245 compounds displaying an IC50 < 200 nM, of
which 179 showing an IC50 < 100 nM and 49 compounds
an IC50 < 10 nM. The medicinal chemistry approach used
to identify and optimize some of these compounds has been recently
reported in an article, and one compound
(ART558) was in depth investigated in another recent
publication (see .).
In 2020, Artios
filed a PA (WO2021/123785A1 ) disclosing
66 heterocyclic derivatives (exemplified
by compound 6, f, and SI, Figure S6), which
showed the same N/C–C–C–X backbone characterizing
all the POLθ-pol inhibitors previously described. Nicely, in
these compounds, the N/C–C was part of a nitrogen-based heteroaromatic
ring (Ar3), analogously to heteroarylmethylene derivatives
( a), while
the C–X was part of a nitrogen-based heterocycle, characterizing
cyclic acetamido derivatives ( d) and heterocyclic amide derivatives ( e). As described before, the
compounds were assayed as POLθ-pol inhibitors in a PEA: their
IC50 values range from 3 nM to 3.2 μM. Out of the
66 compounds, 42 showed an IC50 < 200 nM, of which 23
showing an IC50 < 100 nM and 14 derivatives displayed
an IC50 < 10 nM. No activity in cell-based assays was
reported and, to date, no follow-up papers have been published.
A different chemical structure characterized compounds reported
in two PAs filed by Artios in 2019. PA WO2020/030924A1 reports 127 thiazoleurea derivatives (exemplified by compound 7, a, and SI, Figure S7) and PA WO2020/030925A1 discloses
215 strictly related heterocyclic substituted urea derivatives (exemplified by compound 8, b, and SI, Figure S8). The two series shared a central aromatic core, which was a thiazole
in thiazoleurea derivatives and a pyrazine in heterocyclic substituted
urea derivative; the core was linked to a substituted (hetero)aromatic
ring and an urea moiety further linked to a nitrogen-based aromatic
or aliphatic ring. The compounds were evaluated in a PEA, with thiazoleurea
derivatives showing IC50 values from 7 nM to 1.7 μM.
In particular, out of 127 compounds reported, 69 displayed an IC50 < 200 nM, of which 47 having an IC50 <
100 nM and only compound 7 an IC50 < 10
nM. Regarding heterocyclic substituted urea derivatives, a range of
IC50 values from 2 nM to 9 μM was reported, with
142 compounds showing IC50 < 200 nM, of which 96 exhibiting
an IC50 < 100 nM and 17 compounds an IC50 < 10 nM. No activity in cell-based assays was reported and, to
date, no follow-up papers are published. Compound 8 was
used in two studies, published in 2022, to investigate the basis of
genetic interaction between POLθ and BRCA1/2, but no mechanism
of action and target engagement studies have been reported. , 
 In the first study, Loizou and co-workers investigated
if ssDNA
gaps, which are considered to be the major lesions that drive cell
death in BRCA1/2-deficient cells treated with PARPi or cisplatin,
contributes to the genetic interaction between BRCA1/2 and POLθ. The authors demonstrated that loss of POLθ
activity in BRCA1-deficient cells exposes ssDNA, which causes replication
stress and deregulation of S-phase progression. In addition, a genome-wide
CRISPR-Cas9 knockout screen uncovered two modulators of the functional
interaction between BRCA1 and POLθ, the MRN complex and the
cyclin-dependent kinase 6 (CDK6), which promote the DNA damage induced
by compound 8 treatment through two different cellular
processes. Loss of MRN-complex activity suppresses nucleolytic processing
of gaps, while CDK6 loss reduces replication stress by diminishing
entry into S-phase. In this study, computational docking studies were
also performed for compound 8, suggesting that it binds
to an allosteric pocket in the thumb subdomain of POLθ.
Results reported by Loizou and co-workers were similar to those
reported by Boulton and co-workers, who demonstrated that POLθ
is a potent ssDNA gap filling enzyme. In particular, cooperation of POLθ-hel activity, which promotes
RPA displacement, and POLθ-pol activity, which promotes ssDNA-gap
fill-in, impaired the accumulation of ssDNA and postreplicative ssDNA
gaps in BRCA1 hypomorphs and BRCA2-depleted cells. Accordingly, accumulation
of ssDNA gaps was observed in POLθ-deficient cells upon BRCA1/2
loss or PARPi treatment. In addition, POLθ can promote microhomology-mediated
gap skipping by annealing microhomologies present at the 3′
ss-dsDNA junction and within the ssDNA gap, resulting in deletions
during gap repair.
In the second study, Costanzo and co-workers
revealed a POLθ-dependent
genome protection function preventing stalled forks rupture. In particular, isolated Xenopus laevis POLθ was shown to extend the stalled Okazaki fragments by
filling of ssDNA through its polymerase domain, leading to suppression
of the accumulation of ssDNA fork gaps arising at stalled forks. In
agreement, POLθ-pol inhibition by compound 8 resulted
in ssDNA gaps accumulation, which predispose to the formation of MRE11-NBS1-CtIP-dependent
DSBs in HR-defective cells mainly during the S-phase. These results
also raised a question about a possible resistance mechanism to POLθ
inhibitors in HR-defective cancer cells with nonlethal cancer mutations
in Mre11-Nbs1-CtIP genes.
2.1.1.

## POLθ-pol Inhibitors ART558, ART812,
and ART4215
Among the compounds reported
in PA WO2021/028643A1, one compound (compound 11, ART558, ) was investigated in depth in a recent publication. Moreover, during the final drafting of this review, Artios
reported a follow-up publication describing the medicinal chemistry
program that led to the discovery of ART558 and its analogue ART812 ( , and SI, Figure S9). 
 The authors performed an initial high-throughput
screening (HTS),
in which ∼165 000 compounds were evaluated by a PicoGreen-based
PEA to measure the polymerase activity of full-length (residues 2–2590)
POLθ protein expressed in Escherichia coli.
The screening campaign led to the identification of inhibitors with
IC50 values in the low micromolar range, among which compound 9 ( , and SI, Figure S9) was confirmed as
a specific hit showing a POLθ IC50 of 4.4 μM.
Compound 9 did not inhibit PolA and PolH polymerases,
was inactive in a POLθ interference assay, and did not bind
DNA. Moreover, this small molecule was active in a cellular MMEJ DNA
repair nanoluciferase reporter assay at low micromolar concentrations
without showing toxicity. Starting from compound 9, the
optimization initially focused on studying different moieties on the
pyridine ring, in which lipophilic substituents at the 3- and 4- positions
of the pyridine led to increased potency.
Among the synthesized
compounds, analogue 10 ( , and SI, Figure S9, POLθ IC50 = 400 nM)
was used for cocrystallization studies. A crystal form of POLθ-pol
domain (POLθ-PDΔinsert2) mutant in complex
with DNA and ddGTP was obtained (PDB 7ZUS). Compound 10 was soaked
into ternary complex crystals, and the structure was solved at 3 Å
resolution (PDB 7ZX0). The results highlighted that this small molecule was able to bind
an allosteric site located within the finger subdomain adjacent to
the nucleotide binding site. The pocket, which can exist only when
the fingers adopted the closed conformation, was created by the movement
of the Tyr2412 and Phe2416 side chains induced by the inhibitor binding.
The site was highly hydrophobic in nature and composed by 18 predominantly
hydrophobic residues. Indeed, compound 10 engaged in
extensive hydrophobic interactions within the pocket and, in addition,
its nitrile group formed a H-bond with Tyr2420. These data suggested
that ligand binding to the allosteric site locks POLθ-pol domain
in a closed conformation that prevents incorporation of nucleotides
into the DNA primer chain.
Based on the availability of the
experimental binding mode of compound 10, the authors
undertook structure-based drug design (SBDD)
efforts aimed to further optimize this molecule. The crystallographic
ligand conformation underlined the importance of the linker rigidity
to allow the correct orientation of the two aromatic rings (Ar1 and Ar2). Specifically, the presence of the N-substitution in the anilide group stabilized a cis conformation that was essential for the binding mode
of compound 10. By contrast, the O–CH2–C(=O) angle could span a range of values because it
is not constrained. Consequently, the ether linker was modified exploiting
different amino acids aiming to reduce the flexibility of this portion
of the molecule. The best result was obtained by introducing a proline
linker that was further decorated with a hydroxyl group in order to
decrease the lipophilicity (cLogD ∼ 4). Compound 11 (ART558, , and SI, Figure S9) showed the
best potency with a POLθ IC50 of 7.9 nM, a decreased
lipophilicity (mLogD = 3.5), and a good thermodynamic solubility of
381 μM. The crystallographic structure of POLθ-PDΔinsert2 in complex with ART558 (PDB 7ZX1) showed that compounds 10 and ART558 shared a conserved binding pose,
but the proline hydroxyl group of ART558 made an additional
H-bond with Glu2365 side chain, which, in concert with the rigidity
introduced by the proline linker, may be responsible for its improved
potency.
From additional studies, ART558 showed
the best biochemical,
cell MMEJ, and phenotypic potency, but biochemical potency improvement
did not translate in similar improvement in cells. Thus, further structural
optimization of ART558 was aimed at improving its PK
properties, such as trying to increase its very low metabolic stability
[intrinsic clearance (Clint) > 1500 μL/min/mg]
in
mouse liver microsomes. Optimization led to compound 12 (ART812, , and SI, Figure S9) showing excellent
potency (POLθ IC50 of 7.6 nM) and reduced lipophilicity
(mLogD of 2.8). With respect to ART558, ART812 also displayed an improved metabolic stability (Clint = 30 μL/min/mg in human hepatocytes) and solubility (880 μM).
This new derivative also exhibited good oral bioavailability in both
mouse and rat, and moderate-to-high exposure after a single oral dose.
Thus, in vivo PK/pharmacodynamic studies were performed
for ART812 in order to determine target engagement by
evaluating the induction of micronuclei in reticulocytes, which is
a marker of DNA damage. After 4-day treatment at the maximum tolerated
dose of 150 mg/kg BID, ART812 showed selective 2-fold
increase of micronuclei in reticulocytes with respect to control,
as measured by flow cytometry, analogously to POLθ loss in the
knockout mouse.
As reported above, before the publication of
the medicinal chemistry
work that led to the discovery of ART558 and ART812, Artios reported a thorough study in which both compounds were used
to demonstrate the potential clinical utility of POLθ inhibitors. Notably, initial studies aimed at determining
the mechanism of action, selectivity, and target engagement of ART558 were performed. In particular, mechanistic studies
were performed for ART558, showing a noncompetitive inhibition
with respect to dNTPs and uncompetitive inhibition with respect to
DNA, suggesting an allosteric binding site within the POLθ-pol
catalytic domain, as later confirmed by crystallographic studies. Moreover, ART558 induced POLθ
thermal stabilization, but only in the presence of DNA, as shown by
using differential scanning fluorimetry (DSF).
Interestingly, ART558 did not inhibit other human
DNA polymerases (Polα, Polγ, Polη, and Polν)
and showed no significant inhibition of 78 oncology-relevant kinases
as well as PARP1 and PARP2 at 10 μM. Furthermore, ART558 inhibited POLθ-mediated DNA DSB repair TMEJ in a dose-dependent
manner (EC50 = 150 nM, PCR and an adapted luminescence-based
DNA reporter assays), but it was unable to inhibit canonical NHEJ,
thus demonstrating its excellent selectivity. ART558 specificity
was also demonstrated by its ability to only enhanced radiosensitivity
in POLQ wild-type cells while having no effect in POLQ null cells, suggesting epistasis with POLQ deletion and an on-target effect.
Analogously to genetic inactivation
of POLQ that
confers SL in BRCA2 gene defective cells, ART558 sensitivity was observed in genetically engineered BRCA2–/– cells (PARPi sensitive)
compared to isogenic BRCA2wt cells (PARPi resistant). Moreover, ART558 plus
the PARPi olaparib showed a far greater effect on cell
survival, culture confluency, and apoptosis in BRCA2–/– cells than in BRCA2wt cells. ART558-induced SL and a combination effect with olaparib were
also observed in isogenic models of BRCA1-deficient
cells, and ART558 sensitivity was observed in tumor cell
lines with pathogenic BRCA1 mutations, suggesting
that these effects are not specific to BRCA2 mutant
cells, but also extend to BRCA1 mutant tumor cells.
Importantly, cell growth inhibition of BRCA1 or BRCA2 mutant cells was achieved at ART558 concentrations
that had minimal effects in nontumor epithelial cells or BRCA2wt tumor cells.
ART558 sensitivity was observed in an ex vivo cultured
tumor organoid derived from a BRCA1 mutant
breast cancer, but not in a BRCA1wt breast cancer organoid cultured under similar conditions.
Profound ART558 sensitivity was caused in BRCA1–/– cells
by siRNA targeting MAD2L2 (aka REV7) and SHLD2 (FAM35A), which encode
components of the MAD2L2/SHLD1/SHLD2/SHLD3 “Shieldin”
complex. This complex prevents DNA resection at DSBs and, importantly,
loss of Shieldin components causes PARPi resistance in BRCA1 mutant cells. However, ART558 sensitivity was not caused
by siRNA targeting MAD2L2 and SHLD2 in BRCA1wt cell, suggesting that combined defects
in BRCA1 and the Shieldin complex could be associated
with ART558 sensitivity.
Due to poor in
vitro metabolic stability in rat
microsomes shown by ART558, ART812 was used
to determine the ability of these compounds to target established BRCA1/SHLD2 defective tumors in vivo (rats
bearing established MDA-MB-436 BRCA1/SHLD2 defective tumors) because of its better PK profile. Dosing rats
with ART812 resulted in significant tumor inhibition
and was well tolerated.
The NHEJ factor 53BP1 (encoded by TP53BP1) recruits
Shieldin components to DSBs and loss of 53BP1, SHLD1 and SHLD3 causes PARPi resistance
in BRCA1 mutant cells. PARPi resistant SUM149 clones
generated with either SHLD1, SHLD3, or 53BP1 mutations exhibited ART558 sensitivity while being resistant to olaparib. Moreover,
while BRCA1 mutation produced a moderate increase
in ART558 sensitivity, and TP53BP1 mutation
alone did not cause ART558 sensitivity, the combination
of both mutations was associated with profound ART558 sensitivity. Additionally, cells of a tumor patient-derived ex vivo culture, with low BRCA1 and 53BP1 expression, were
resistant to olaparib or carboplatin but
sensitive to ART558. In assessing the mechanistic basis
of these findings, the authors proposed that the absence of 53BP1/Shieldin
function leads to an increase in resection and ssDNA when cells are
exposed to a POLθ inhibitor, where the resected DNA ends are
presumably repaired by a BRCA1-mediated process. On the other hand,
when both BRCA1 and 53BP1/Shieldin function are impaired, POLθ
becomes essential for repairing resected ssDNA caused by the exposure
of DSB ends to nucleases due to Shieldin loss; in these cells, POLθ
inhibition leads ultimately to SL. Finally, ART558 increased
biomarkers of ssDNA and SL in 53BP1-defective cells, while the inhibition
of DNA nucleases that promote end-resection reversed these effects,
suggesting their involvement in the SL mechanism-of-action.
The results of this study were reported in the PA WO2021/028644A1 filed by Artios in 2019. In particular, the
PA reported that the inhibition of POLθ is SL to cancer cells
that are resistant to PARP inhibition through loss of Shieldin components,
a finding with significant implications for the treatment of cancer
patients bearing tumors that are resistant to PARPi -based therapies.
In August 2022, Artios announced to have initiated a Phase 2 study
with ART4215 (undisclosed structure) in combination with
the oral PARPi talazoparib (TALZENNA). , ART4215 is the first oral small molecule POLθ
inhibitor to enter clinic trials.
Preclinical studies have demonstrated
that ART4215 may have broad potential clinical utility.
Currently, this drug
candidate is being evaluated in a first-in-human, global, open-label
Phase 1/2 study to assess its safety, tolerability, PKs, and clinical
activity as a monotherapy or in combination with talazoparib in patients with advanced or metastatic solid tumors. Initial safety
and tolerability data from the first Phase 1 dose cohorts demonstrated
that ART4215 was well tolerated. Results from Phase 1
are expected in the first half of 2023. Based on these data, a Phase
2 study (NCT04991480) has been initiated. In particular, a recommended
Phase 2 dose has been established for ART4215 in combination
with talazoparib. Moreover, a randomized expansion cohort
has been initiated to evaluate the combination in patients with BRCA-deficient breast cancer. The study is enrolling up
to 206 patients and is conducted at multiple oncology centers across
Europe and the USA. Phase 2 data are expected in August 2025.

2.1.2.

## POLθ-pol Inhibitors RP-6685
Very recently, Repare Therapeutics reported a new series of POLθ-pol
inhibitors. Also in this case, the pharmaceutical
company used HTS to test 350 000 compounds in a DNA PEA PicoGreen-based
assay using POLθ-pol domain (residues 1819–2590) expressed
in E. coli. The screening led to identify a mixture
of compound 13 ( , and SI, Figure S10) and
its N1-regioisomer, showing, once isolated, IC50 values
of 0.16 and 11 μM, respectively. Based on its potency, compound 13 was selected as a hit for follow-up, which was mainly targeted
to optimizing ADME properties. The first optimization efforts were
focused on the 3-(trifluoromethyl)-4,5,6,7-tetrahydro-2H-indazol-2-yl ring, and in one compound, the acetamide oxygen was
replaced by a sulfur atom, to give derivative 14 ( , and SI, Figure S10). Compound 14 exhibited
an improved anti-POLθ-pol activity (IC50 = 17 nM)
but the same low microsomal stability of compound 13.
Biophysical studies showed that compound 14 alone did
not induce any thermal stabilization of WT POLθ, as shown by
DSF, while a compound-based thermal shift was observed in the presence
of a dsDNA substrate providing a 5′ overhang, which mimics
the primer:template pair, indicating an uncompetitive mechanism of
action. Moreover, kinetic studies indicated a noncompetitive inhibition
with respect to dNTPs, thus suggesting for compound 14 a binding site within the POLθ-pol domain different from the
nucleotide-binding site. These results were further confirmed by X-ray
crystallography studies, in which compound 14 was cocrystallized
with an engineered construct of POLθ-pol (truncations in the
protein expression construct were engineered by deleting five flexible
loops that were not resolved in previously published structures) in
complex with dsDNA and ddGTP (PDB 8E23). An allosteric site located in the finger
subdomain opposite to the binding position of the incoming ddGTP emerged
as the binding site of compound 14. Of note, compound 14 and ART compounds previously described shared
the same allosteric binding site.
 Based on the binding mode of compound 14, a SBDD approach
was performed, leading to design compound 15 ( , and SI, Figure S10), which was cocrystallized with the
engineered construct of POLθ-pol (PDB 8E24). The solved ligand–protein
complex showed that (i) the Tyr2412 side chain interacted with the
Ar1 benzene ring and the R2 pyridazine ring
(which extended out from one end of the solvent exit channel) through
π–π stacking interactions, (ii) the backbone carbonyl
of Tyr2412 bound the partially positive R2 methylene group
through an electrostatic interaction, (iii) electrostatic interactions
were also present between the Glu2365 carboxylate and a pyridazine
carbon atom, and the Arg2419 guanidinium group and the amide carbonyl,
and (iv) the Ar2 2,4-bis(trifluoromethyl)phenyl moiety
filled a hydrophobic cavity, with the para-CF3 substituent establishing an electrostatic interaction with
Cys2386 sulfur atom. Final optimization of compound 14 was aimed to improve its PK properties, focusing on the free exposure
[total exposure in mouse plasma corrected for plasma protein binding
(PPB)]. Compound 16 (RP-6685, , and SI, Figure S10) showed the best profile, with an IC50 of 5.8 nM.
From a structural point of view, RP-6685 showed some
similarities with compounds previously described ( and ). In particular, the two aromatic systems (Ar1 and Ar2) connected by a central linker were present, even though
the four-atoms linker (N–C(=O)–C–X) characterizing
all the previous POLθ-pol inhibitors was shortened by deleting
the X atom in the RP-6685 series. On the other hand, RP-6685 was characterized by a more extended and bulkier R2 substituent, with respect to previous compounds; the R2 substituent was explored in depth in this work proving to
have a key role in imparting potency to the compound.
RP-6685 was further characterized showing high selectivity
for POLθ, being inactive against human DNA polymerases α,
ε, γ, λ, and μ. Moreover, this small molecule
potently inhibited the polymerase activity of full-length POLθ
produced in HEK293 cells (IC50 = 550 pM) but not the ATPase
activity. On-target activity of RP-6685 was also shown
in a DSB assay in which CRISPR/Cas9-mediated break was induced at
the AAVS1 locus in HCT116 cells (DSB can proceed by NHEJ and MMEJ): RP-6685 inhibited the MMEJ with an IC50 of 0.5
μM. Moreover, RP-6685 showed a dose-dependent decrease
(IC50 = 0.94 μM) of MMEJ in a traffic-light reporter
assay in HEK293 LIG4–/– cells, which are unable to repair DSBs by NHEJ (DSB can proceed
by MMEJ and HR).
When evaluated in a cell proliferation assay
employing isogenic
HCT116 BRCA2–/– and BRCA2+/+ cell
lines, RP-6685 showed a ca. 50-fold decrease in potency
in killing BRCA2–/– cells (IC50 values of 0.32 and >15 μM,
respectively),
with respect to the potency observed in the biochemical assay. Accordingly, RP-6685 treatment (oral administration at 80 mg/kg BID for
21 days) did not inhibit tumor growth in a BRCA2+/+ HCT116 mouse xenograft but tumor regression
was observed in the BRCA2–/– HCT116 xenograft during the first 8 days of treatment, although
it was not sustained throughout the treatment period. PK studies showed
that RP-6685 exposure declined by 55–67% over
a week of dosing, possibly due to induction of metabolizing enzymes.
Finally, pharmacodynamics studies performed on a BRCA2–/– HCT116 xenograft treated
with RP-6685 showed a modest trend toward increased micronuclei
and γH2AX, which are hallmarks of DNA damage.

2.1.3.

## Common Features of POLθ-pol Allosteric
Inhibitors
The amount of chemical and biological data collected
for the different chemical series of POLθ-pol inhibitors allowed
us to derive some general considerations, such as the definition of
the basic chemical structure for compounds reported in , , and . We have also attempted to use the
available information to delineate a structure–activity relationship
(SAR) for these inhibitors, with the goal of determining the key chemical
features responsible for the biological activity in vitro.
Achieving this objective presented a number of issues, in
particular: (i) many PAs reported compounds that were annotated with
activity ranges rather than the individual IC50 values,
(ii) derivatives described in the PAs show comparable activity, with
most of them having IC50 values ranging from 2 to 200 nM
and only a few molecules displaying IC50 = 1–10
μM, and (iii) some PAs reported a very large number of analogues.
These limitations aside, we have been able to derive some relevant
observations. First, regardless of the chemical series, the enzymatic
inhibition assay used to evaluate the potency of each molecule on
the isolated target was consistent across PAs. Second, the recently
published manuscripts describing the identification, optimization,
and cocrystallization of POLθ-pol ART and RP inhibitors, which bound to the same allosteric pocket,
provided a valuable contribution to better understand the mechanism
of action of these inhibitors and the role of some chemical features
in modulating the binding to POLθ or the PK properties.
Regarding the mechanism of action, the available crystallographic
structures suggested that the allosteric inhibitors ART558, ART812, and RP-6685 were able to interfere
with the catalytic cycle of DNA synthesis, during which the finger
domain adopted two main conformations ( ). Specifically, a close conformation of
the finger domain stabilized the binding of both the nucleic acid
and the incoming nucleotide to the enzyme. Following the incorporation
of the ddNTP to the nascent chain, an open conformation was adopted
by the finger domains to allow the translocation of the DNA and the
release of the pyrophosphate from the active site. The inhibitors
acting on this pocket locked the finger domain in the closed state
( ), hampering
the switch to the open state and causing the block of the cycle. Notably,
the fingers domain acquired a closed conformation only when the protein
is bound to the nucleic acid, thus explaining the observed nucleic
acid dependent activity for this POLθ allosteric inhibitors.
 Finally, the detailed analysis performed on all
the chemical series
of POLθ-pol inhibitors reported so far led us to summarize their
structures into five different scaffolds ( A), which clearly shared some common chemical
features, i.e., Ar1, Ar2, and the linker.
 Thanks to the availability of homogeneous and therefore
comparable
biological data, we have focused our attention on the most potent
inhibitors of all chemical families (IC50 ≤ 200
nM; activity class “++++” in PAs) to highlight important
characteristics of the three essential chemical groups, thus providing
some SAR insights.
Specifically, the Ar1group was always represented by a 6-membered
(hetero)aromatic
ring and, in particular, by a phenyl, a pyridine, or a pyrimidine.
The decoration of this moiety was not essential for activity. Indeed,
even though potent inhibitors were in most cases decorated with a
large variety of substituents of different size (e.g., H, F, Cl, Me,
OCF3, CN, vinyl, and cyclopropyl) and mainly hydrophobic
in nature, high activity compounds having an unsubstituted Ar1 moiety were also present ( B). By contrast, the modification of this
moiety was generally aimed at improving the compound PK properties.
For example, many of the reported compounds were characterized by
a fluorine atom at the p-position of the Ar1 benzene ring (often associated with a chlorine atom at the m-position) that prevented phenyl hydroxylation, thus increasing
the microsomal stability.
The Ar1 moiety was connected
to Ar2 by a linker, which appeared to be the
most variable part of the
molecules in terms of chemical modifications introduced. We considered
the linker as composed by a planar portion and a nonplanar one. In
scaffolds A, C, and E, the planar portion is made of an N-substituted amide motif, while in scaffolds B and D, it is embedded
in a 5- or 6-membered aromatic ring (Ar3). It is noteworthy
that, in the former series, all compounds showed a small N-alkyl substituents (R2). As demonstrated by crystallographic
data, this peculiar feature promoted a cis amide
conformation necessary for the correct orientation of Ar1 and Ar2 in the allosteric binding site. Indeed, in scaffolds
B and D, the amide linker was replaced by an aromatic ring system
that located the two principal substituents in a cis conformation. Additionally, in scaffold E, the extensive exploration
of the N-substitution (R2) permitted both
to improve compounds activity up to 200-fold, thanks to additional
interactions with the binding site, and to modulate the PK properties.
The nonplanar portion of the linker was characterized by a single
sp3 carbon in scaffold E, while in scaffolds A–D,
it always corresponded to a sp3 carbon (C*) bounded to
a heteroatom (X represented by a N, O, or S). The C*–X system
could be either a linear system, as in scaffolds A and B or embedded
in a ring system (Cyc1) as in scaffolds C and D.
However, unlike Ar3, Cyc1 was always a saturated
heterocyclic ring, with a chiral center corresponding to the C* position.
Interestingly, the (S)-stereochemistry at the C*
center in the heterocyclic ring is associated with potent inhibition
of the enzyme, as opposed to what was observed in compounds having
the (R)-stereochemistry. Finally, the Ar2group was always represented
by an (hetero)aromatic ring that could also be fused with a second
5- or 6-membered aliphatic or aromatic ring. The number and type of
substitutions on Ar2 seemed to be more conserved than the
reported substitutions on Ar1, with an overrepresentation
of trifluoromethyl, methyl and nitrile groups decorating a pyridine
ring. In this context, the pyridine ring was preferred over the benzene
to increase the hydrophilicity, the p-trifluoromethyl moiety could interact with Cys2386 through
electrostatic contacts (as shown by compound 15-POLθ-pol
crystal structure ), while the nitrile
moiety appeared to contribute to the conformational restriction of
Ar2 orientation (as shown for ART compounds ). Analogously to Ar1, potent compounds
were characterized by large and hydrophobic groups at Ar2.
To gain further insight into the minimal pharmacophore required
for POLθ inhibitory activity and to aid in the rational design
of novel POLθ allosteric ligands, we have developed a 3D ligand-based
pharmacophore model using one representative compound of each scaffold
as training set ( B).
The final model ( , see Supporting Information and Table S1 for additional details)
was characterized
by four features represented by two aromatic portions, corresponding
to Ar1 and Ar2, one hydrophobic region relating
to a substituent on the Ar2 ring and one acceptor group
placed in the planar portion of the linker. Although the presence
of an H-bond acceptor as a pharmacophore feature did not emerge from
the crystallographic data of ligand–receptor complexes available
to date, this intermolecular interaction cannot be ruled out given
the protein plasticity and/or the possibility of water-mediated hydrogen
bonding. Interestingly, in all compounds collected, the acceptor feature
overlapped with an sp2-hybridized heteroatom, in which
case this pharmacophore element also became an indicator of the presence
of an atom contributing to linker planarity.
 It is noteworthy that all the cocrystallized ligands
in their experimental
binding modes were able to properly fit the 3D model (Fitness >
1.9, ), thus
validating
this in silico tool and supporting its potential
use in future virtual screening campaigns for the identification of
new POLθ-pol allosteric inhibitors.

2.2.

## POLθ Helicase Domain Inhibitors
From 2020 to 2021, Ideaya filed two PAs reporting POLθ-hel
domain inhibitors characterized by a thiadiazolyl scaffold. PA WO2020/243459Al, filed in 2020, reported 232 thiadiazolyl
derivatives (exemplified by compound 22, a, and SI, Figure S11) characterized by a central N-(5-methoxy-1,3,4-thiadiazol-2-yl)acetamide portion linking
two (hetero)aromatic moieties, Ar1 and Ar2,
of which Ar1 was directly bound to a heterocycle (Cyc1). For 224 compounds out of the 232 reported in the PA, their
ability to inhibit the ATPase activity of POLθ was determined
in a NADH oxidation-coupled enzymatic assay by measuring the rate
of the ATP turn over. In this assay, the POLθ-hel domain (residues
1–899) expressed in baculovirus was used. As far as the inhibitory
activity is concerned, no individual IC50s were reported
and compounds were assigned to four groups depending on their potency
(IC50 = 10 μM to 1 μM, = 1 μM to 500
nM, = 500 nM to 200 nM, and <200 nM). Specifically, 136 compounds
showed an IC50 < 200 nM, while 36 compounds displayed
an IC50 in the 1–10 μM range.
 In 2021, Ideaya filed the most recent PA on POLθ
inhibitors
reported to date (WO2022/118210Al ).
The patent discloses 273 additional thiadiazolyl derivatives (exemplified by compound 23, b, and SI, Figure S12), strictly related to those previously reported. In particular,
also in these compounds the central N-(5-methoxy-1,3,4-thiadiazol-2-yl)acetamide
portion is linked to an aryl moiety (Ar1) that, in turn,
is connected to an aliphatic or aromatic cycle (Cyc1).
The central portion is also linked to a second aliphatic or aromatic
cycle (Cyc2), differently from compounds reported in a, which are characterized
by an aromatic Ar2 substituent in the same position. Analogously
to compounds described before, the ability of compounds to inhibit
the POLθ ATPase activity was evaluated by a NADH oxidation-coupled
enzymatic assay and compounds were gathered in different groups based
on their inhibitory potency (from 10 μM to <200 nM). Out
of the 273 reported compounds, 243 showed potent activity with an
IC50 value <200 nM, while only 10 displayed an IC50 in the 1–10 μM range. For both PAs, no activity
in cellular assays has been described for any compound and no follow-up
papers have been published at this time.
In 2022, Ideaya announced
selection of a potential first-in-class
POLθ-hel development candidate (undisclosed structure). Ideaya and GlaxoSmithKline (GSK) are collaborating
on the ongoing IND-enabling studies to support the evaluation of their
small molecule in combination with niraparib, a GSK’s
PARPi, for patients having tumors with BRCA or other HR mutations
or deficiency. The development candidate in combination with niraparib was reported to have robust in vivo efficacy, with significant tumor regressions and durable responses
in multiple cancer models. Subject to satisfactory completion of ongoing
preclinical and IND-enabling studies, Ideaya and GSK are targeting
an IND submission of the clinical candidate, allowing first-in-human
studies, in the first half of 2023.
Dana-Farber filed in 2016
a first PA (WO2017/070198A1 ) reporting
the discovery of a SL relationship
between HR-deficiency and POLθ blockade, a method for treating
HR-deficient cancers (also those resistant to PARPi), and a high-throughput
screening approach for identifying DNA polymerase ATPase activity
inhibitors. Then, from 2018 to 2020, the Institute filed three additional
PAs, in which small molecules POLθ ATPase activity inhibitors
were disclosed.
PA WO2019/079297A1 (filed in 2018),
provided a method for using 2-oxo-2H-chromene, naphthalene, and quinoline
derivatives in treating HR-deficient cancer. In particular,
the disclosure provided a method for: (i) determining that the HR-deficient
cancer contains a mutation or an alteration in a gene regulating homologous
recombination, (ii) treating HR-deficient cancer by administering
a therapeutically effective amount of a claimed compound alone or
in combination with an anticancer agent, i.e., platinum-based compounds
or PARPi, and (iii) inhibiting POLθ in a cancer cell.
Focusing on the 24 derivatives reported, 20 were characterized
by a 2-oxo-2H-chromene nucleus exemplified by compound 24 (novobiocin, NVB), while four
by a naphthalene or a quinoline core ( a, and SI, Figure S13). Among the reported compounds, NVB was the only derivative
evaluated in cells. Since the results are also described in a recent
publication reporting an in-depth characterization
of the compound, they are described below (see .).
 In 2020, Dana-Farber filed two PAs reporting NVB analogues.
In particular, PA WO2021/046220Al reported
27 2-oxo-2H-chromene derivatives (exemplified by compound 25, b, and SI, Figure S14). In these compounds, a 1-methylpiperidin-4-yloxy moiety and a methyl
group decorated the C-7 and C-8 positions of the scaffold, respectively.
Moreover, an urea moiety linked the core to a mono- or disubstituted
phenyl ring. The percentage of POLθ ATPase activity inhibition
of 14 compounds was measured in an ADP-Glo ATPase assay: an inhibition
of enzyme activity in the range 10–50% was observed for all
but one derivative, which showed 80% inhibition. The ability to kill BRCA1–/– versus BRCAwt RPEl cells was evaluated
for 18 compounds by employing the luminescence-based Rapid Cell Titer
Glow (CTG) cell viability assay. Compounds showed IC50s
ranging from 0.16 to 3.73 μM in BRCA1–/– RPE1 cells (resulting 200 times
more potent than NVB, having an IC50 = 86
μM) and from 0.42 to 5.33 μM in BRCAwt RPE1 cells: the highest selectivity ratio
observed was 2.75. For three compounds (at 100 μM concentration),
the ability to kill BRCA1–/– RPE1 cells was also confirmed in a clonogenic survival assay
(CSA). The same compounds also resulted more effective in killing BRCA1-mutated cancer cell lines (MDA-MB-436 and UWB1) than
their WT counterparts (MDA-MB-436 + BRCAl and UWBl + BRCA1) in the
CSA, demonstrating that the compounds induce SL with HR. Since NVB was reported to inhibit Hsp90 protein, 22 compounds were
evaluated for this activity: 17 compounds acted as selective POLθ
inhibitors while 5 derivatives were dual inhibitors of POLθ
and Hsp90. Additionally, the antiproliferative activity of 24 compounds
was evaluated in a panel of 11 cancer cell lines (as example, activity
of compound 25 was reported in b). The remaining three derivatives were
assayed in P53–/–- and P53–/–-BRCA1–/- RPE1 cells by CTG cell viability assay, resulting in IC50 values ranging from 0.04 to 0.11 μM in P53–/– RPE1 cells (NVB showed an IC50 of 358.4 μM) and from 0.008 to 0.05
μM in P53–/–-BRCA1–/– RPE1 cells (NVB showed an IC50 of
97.24 μM).
Regarding PA WO2021/046178Al, 14
derivatives were disclosed (exemplified by compound 26, c, and
SI, Figure S15), in which the 2-oxo-2H-chromene scaffold was replaced by a phenyl ring linked
to an additional phenyl or aliphatic cycle (Cyc1). Analogously
to NVB, an amide moiety (only one compound showed a urea
moiety as a linker) linked Cyc1 to an (hetero)aromatic
ring (Ar1). The percentage of POLθ ATPase inhibition
determined by ADP-Glo ATPase assay was reported only for two compounds
(70% and 30%), while 10 derivatives were assessed for their ability
to kill BRCA1–/– versus BRCA1wt RPEl cells (luminescence-based CTG cell viability assay). Compounds
showed IC50 values comparable to those of the analogues
previously mentioned, ranging from 0.32 to 5.56 μM in BRCA1–/– RPE1
cells and from 0.59 to 7.95 μM BRCA1wt in cells, the highest selectivity ratio being 2.8.
Additionally, the antiproliferative activity of the 14 small molecules
was evaluated in a panel of 11 cancer cell lines, but results were
disclosed only for 10 compounds in the MCF7 and SKBR3 cell lines,
with IC50s ranging from 0.4 to 5.1 μM and from 0.24
to 5.2 μM, respectively (as example, activity of compound 26 was reported in c). For the remaining four derivatives, the antiproliferative
activity in P53–/–- and P53–/–-BRCA1–/– RPE1 cells, measured in the CTG cell viability assay, was
reported, with IC50 values of 0.04–0.2 μM
and 0.05–0.5 μM, respectively.
2.2.1.

## POLθ-hel Inhibitor NVB
Analogously
to POLθ-pol inhibitor ART558, POLθ-hel inhibitor NVB was used to investigate the relevance of targeting POLθ
in cancer, and the results were reported in a recent publication. NVB is a well-known antibiotic able to bind
to the ATP-binding pocket of DNA gyrase and inhibit ATP hydrolysis.
Also in this case, the study started with a HTS in which 23 513
small molecules were evaluated as POLθ ATPase inhibitors based
on ADP-Glo luminescent assay. Significant reduction of POLθ
ATPase activity was shown by 72 compounds, which were further evaluated
in presence and absence of ssDNA, in order to exclude compounds that
directly interacted with ssDNA. Ten small molecules showed more than
50% inhibition both with and without ssDNA with a difference ≤15%.
Among them, NVB, suramin, aurintricarboxylic acid, and
reactive blue 2 resulted the most potent inhibitors, but only NVB showed high specific POLθ inhibition in a 32P-based radiometric ATPase assay and, thus, further studies were
focused on NVB.
NVB inhibited POLθ
ATPase activity with an IC50 of 24 μM but did not
significantly inhibit other six DNA repair-related proteins (HSP90AA1,
TRIP13, helicase BLM, RAD51, SMARCAL1, and CHD1). Specificity of NVB for POLθ was also confirmed: (i) by using NVB-conjugated beads, which pulled down both purified POLθ
ATPase domain (but not purified SMARCAL1, CHD1, BLM, or RAD51) and
POLθ-GFP expressed in cells, and (ii) by a thermal shift assay,
in which NVB was able to stabilize POLθ-GFP from
cell lysate and to increase in a dose-dependent manner the stability
of purified POLθ but not of BLM and MRE11.
NVB was also found to inhibit MMEJ activity in U2OS
cells (GFP-based alternative end joining reporter assay), but it had
little effect on HR activity (GFP-based direct repeat reporter assay).
Analogously to POLθ depletion, gamma irradiation in the presence
of NVB of U2OS cells slightly increased RAD51 foci and
γH2AX foci.
In vivo studies were performed
to determine the
activity of NVB in killing HR-deficient tumor cells. NVB treatment significantly reduced BRCA1-deficent genetically
engineered mouse model derived tumors and prolonged the overall survival
of tumor-bearing mice. Moreover, NVB impaired the growth
of FANCF-deficient TOV21G cancer cells (human ovarian cancer with
reduced HR capacity) in a mouse xenograft study without affecting
FANCF-complemented cells (TOV21G with FANCF cDNA).
Results obtained in vivo were further confirmed by in vitro CSA, which showed that NVB significantly
reduced the survival of BRCA1–/– and BRCA2–/– (TP53–/–) RPE1 cells, compared to isogenic WT cells. NVB exposure also induced apoptosis in BRCA1–/– but not in BRCA1wt cells in a dose-dependent manner,
and chromosomal aberrations and radial chromosomes in BRCA1–/– cells, confirming that NVB increased DNA damage.
Next, the authors demonstrated
that POLθ was the major target
of NVB in human cells by using POLQ–/– RPE1 and U2OS cells, which
showed higher tolerance to NVB compared to WT cells.
Moreover, since NVB had been previously described as
an inhibitor of HSP90 and TOP2, the authors demonstrated that NVB treatment at the concentration killing HR-deficient cells
did not inhibit these enzymes, discarding the hypothesis that the
cytotoxic effect of NVB was caused by off-target inhibition
of HSP90 and TOP2.
The synergism between NVB and
PARPi was also evaluated.
In particular, NVB reduced the IC50 of rucaparib by more than 20-fold in BRCA1–/– RPE1 cells and the IC50 of olaparib by more than 40-fold in HR-deficient
TOV21G cells, while it was unable to sensitize BRCA-proficient WT
cells to PARPi. This synergistic effect was further demonstrated in vivo by using nonobese diabetic SCID gamma mice bearing
tumors of the HR-deficient DF83 ovarian cancer patient-derived xenograft
model (PDX). Complete tumor regression was observed by administering
a submaximal dose of NVB and olaparib in
combination, without significant toxicity. Only a small degree of
tumor growth inhibition and partial tumor regression were instead
observed by using olaparib and NVB alone,
respectively. Additionally, in order to verify whether POLθ
inhibitors could be used to treat PARPi-resistant tumors, the PARPi-resistant
PDX model DF59 not responsive to olaparib was used. NVB alone inhibited tumor growth, also observing a tumor regression
when administered in combination with olaparib.
To understand the mechanism that allowed NVB to overcome
PARPi resistance, the authors generated four olaparib-resistant clones from BRCA1–/– RPE cells, showing multiple PARPi-resistance mechanisms. Clones
showed: (i) fork stabilization, (ii) RAD51 foci restoration, (iii)
decreased expression of REV7, and/or (iv) decreased expression of
53BP1. These data suggested a restoration of HR repair activity that
could partly result from downregulation of Shieldin complex and subsequently
of NHEJ repair. All the clones did not show BRCA1 re-expression and
were sensitive to NVB, indicating that NVB could overcome multiple mechanisms of acquired PARPi-resistance.
Depletion of POLθ in both clones and parental BRCA1–/– cells led to reduced
cell survival, confirming POLθ inhibition as the mechanism for NVB cytotoxicity.
The mechanism by which NVB kills cancer cells was
investigated by measuring DNA resection at DSBs generated by restriction
endonuclease AsiSI (induced by 4-hydroxytamoxifen) in U2OS cells by
(q)PCR, in the presence or absence of NVB. Cells treated
with NVB showed an amount of ssDNA around the DSB significantly
higher compared to those treated with DMSO.
To test if NVB was able to induce nonfunctional RAD51
foci, the latter were evaluated in tumor cells from PDX model treated
with PARPi and/or NVB (HR-deficient tumors with PARPi
resistance). Results showed that NVB induced elevated
DSB end resection and subsequent accumulation of ssDNA intermediates
and nonfunctional RAD51 loading, suggesting that this could be the
mechanism of cell killing by NVB in HR-deficient PARPi
resistant tumor cells. Finally, the authors determined that POLθ
expression levels correlated with cellular sensitivity to NVB, thus representing a predictive biomarker.
In 2022, D’Andrea
and co-workers reported an interesting
study in which they demonstrated that the simultaneous disruption
of the two DNA repair pathways MMEJ, via POLθ inhibitor NVB, and NHEJ, via DNA-PK inhibitor peposertib, led to accumulation of toxic levels of DSB end resection and apoptosis-mediated
cell death, resulting in synergistic SL. The synergistic action of the combined treatment was observed across
multiple cancer cell lines, including HR-proficient and HR-deficient
cells. Moreover, a combination of NVB with peposertib exhibited SL in TP53-deficient tumor cells, without
the use of additional cytotoxic chemotherapy. In particular, TP53-deficient cell lines, organoid cultures and PDX models
that were peposertib-resistant showed an increased sensitivity
to NVB. Based on these results, the authors hypothesized
that TP53-deficient cancer cells acquired resistance
to DNA-PK inhibitor peposertib thorough a compensatory
increase of POLθ expression and MMEJ pathway, of which they
became dependent, thus showing sensitivity to NVB. Interestingly, TP53-deficient cancer cells treated with NVB recovered sensitivity to peposertib, strongly supporting
the combination therapy based on NHEJ and MMEJ inhibitors in TP53 mutant cancers.

3.

## Structural Analysis of Known POLθ Inhibitor
Binding Sites
Atomic structures of full length POLθ
protein have not been
reported yet, although crystal structures of the POLθ-hel and
POLθ-pol domains are available ( ).
 Crystal structures of POLθ-hel (N-terminal)
domain include
protein residues ranging from 1 to 894 bound to either ADP (PDB 5A9F) or adenosine 5′-(β,γ-Imino)triphosphate
(AMP-PNP, PDB 5AGA), as well as the apo form (PDB 5A9J). Recently,
two additional cryo-EM structures of POLθ-hel were reported
in the apo form and in complex with an inhibitor. Eight POLθ-pol (C-terminal) domain crystal structures
are available and include residues spanning from 1823 to 2590, a primer:template
(DNA:DNA or DNA:RNA) chain of nucleic acid and an incoming 2′,3′-dideoxynucleotide
triphosphate (ddGTP or ddATP). It is worth noting that, in the first
released structures, the incoming nucleotide was the only cocrystallized
ligand (i.e., 4X0Q, 4X0P, 6XBU, and 7ZUS( )), whereas the recently disclosed complexes
(i.e., 7ZX0, 7ZX1, 8E23, and 8E24( )) showed both a nucleotide and an allosteric
inhibitor bound to POLθ-pol.
Despite the availability
of POLθ domains crystal structures,
no structure-based virtual screening campaigns have been reported
to date, while the recently disclosed cocrystal structures of POLθ-pol
domain have been used in the SBDD approach previously mentioned that
led to the discovery of potent inhibitors (i.e., ART812( ) and RP-6685, and ) able to impair POLθ-pol
activity by binding an allosteric pocket.
Apart from the latest
experimental structures released, it should
be noted that, in general, the structural studies conducted on POLθ
were mainly targeted to investigate the biological activity and mechanistic
aspects of the protein enzymatic function, and therefore the available
information on the presence of druggable regions in the POLθ
structure were very limited. Consequently, the 3D structures of both
polymerase and helicase are still poorly explored from a drug discovery
perspective. A discussion of POLθ’s structure and mechanisms
of action is beyond the scope of this review, and readers are directed
to recent reviews , − for a comprehensive discussion on this topic. However, the literature
data were analyzed focusing on the well-characterized inhibitors binding
pockets that could be explored within drug discovery programs based
on SBDD approach. A summary of this analysis is shown in , in which we report
the residues composing the most interesting regions to be explored
for each POLθ domain.
 3.1.

## Targeting POLθ-pol Pockets
The overall organization of the POLθ-pol domain is similar
to that of Taq DNA polymerase, where the exonuclease, thumb, and finger
subdomains are arranged around a right-hand palm subdomain. Additionally,
in the POLθ-pol structure, five unique and specific insertion
loops are present. These sequence inserts
represent protein sequences distinct from other helicase or polymerase
structures and can be considered unique features of POLθ. The palm subdomain hosts the strictly conserved
catalytic aspartate and glutamate residues (Asp2330, Asp2540, and
Glu2541) responsible for the coordination of a divalent Ca2+ ion essential for the enzymatic activity of the protein. 
The POLθ-pol domain contains two
well characterized ligand binding sites, named the active site and
the allosteric site ( ). Most of the approved drugs targeting polymerases block
the enzymatic activity by binding to the active site of the corresponding
targeted protein, making this pocket an appealing druggable site also
in the POLθ-pol domain. Indeed, the first PA disclosing POLθ
inhibitors back in 2017 (WO2018/035410A1) reported synthetic xDNA ( ) nucleotides and analogues that were efficiently used
by POLθ as substrates, thus inhibiting the POLθ DNA synthesis
activity by targeting the active site of POLθ-pol domain. This
pocket hosts the three well-conserved catalytic aspartate and glutamate
residues (Asp2330, Asp2540, and Glu2541) and can accommodate one nascent
DNA chain, an RNA–DNA template chain, and an incoming nucleotide.
Interestingly, depending on the template chain used (i.e., DNA or
RNA), the structural organization of the active site residues can
change, leading to a modification of the intermolecular interactions
established by the incoming nucleotide and POLθ-pol residues.
As an example, Pomerantz and co-workers reported the importance of
the Tyr2391 in stabilizing the ddGTP in the PDB 6XBU structure, in which
the POLθ-pol domain is bound to an RNA template molecule ( A). However, the same residue did not establish
any interaction in the PDB crystal structure 4X0Q, where a DNA template molecule is present ( B). This active site plasticity
needs to be considered in rational drug discovery approaches aimed
at identifying novel small molecule binders of the POLθ-pol
domain.
 Regarding the recently disclosed allosteric site
on the POLθ-pol
domain, , this pocket is flanked by six α-helices
and located in the finger subdomain opposite to the incoming ddGTP
( ). As already
mentioned, the discovery and characterization of this site ( ) took place thanks
to cocrystallization studies conducted on hit compounds identified
using a HTS approach on the POLθ-pol domain. The allosteric
pocket, created by the movement of Tyr2412 and Phe2416, is mainly
composed by hydrophobic residues and presents two exit paths separated
by the side chains of Arg2419 and Glu2365. Interestingly, it was demonstrated
that the occupation of these paths can enhance the affinity of the
inhibitors to the pocket. Indeed, the optimization of compounds 14 and 10 to compounds 15 and ART558, respectively, led to the establishment of a new interaction
with Glu2365 that dramatically improved the inhibitor potency. However,
while ART588 performed a H-bond contact with the Glu2365
side chain, the presence of compound 15 in the allosteric
binding site prompted the formation of a salt bridge between Glu2365
and Arg2419, which was absent in the apo protein. From the structural
point of view, this intramolecular interaction was allowed thanks
to the movement of the helix αN ( C).

3.2.

## Targeting POLθ-hel Pockets
The POLθ-hel domain is a member of the superfamily 2 (SF2)
helicases. The domain comprises five subdomains (D1–5), of
which two are the core helicase domains and three are closely associated
globular domains. The RecA-like domains D1 and D2 (residues 1–289
and 290–513, respectively) share a prototypical fold similar
to E. coli RecA and contain the core machinery required
for helicase activity, including ssDNA-binding motifs, the nucleotide-binding
site, and all of the core helicase motifs that are conserved across
SF2-family helicases. 
A recent
study described the cryo-EM structure of POLθ-hel domain in
complex with inhibitor NVB ( ). Initially, biochemical
assays were performed to determine the mechanism of action of NVB.
In particular, ATP and ssDNA competition assays performed with different
concentration of NVB indicated a noncompetitive and competitive inhibition
with respect to ATP and ssDNA, respectively. Then, cryo-EM structure
of the POLθ-hel domain in the apo state and in complex with
NVB were determined, showing a high similarity (root-mean-square deviation
of 0.94 Å). Of note, POLθ-hel domain in the cryo-EM structures
forms a homodimer rather than a tetramer as observed in the previously
reported crystal structures. 
The
NVB-POLθ-hel complex structure (PDB not disclosed) revealed
that the NVB binding site is distinct from the canonical NVB binding
site within the GyrB subunit of Staphylococcus aureus DNA gyrase, which is located next to the ATP binding site. Of note, the binding of NVB to a noncanonical
allosteric site was already reported for lipopolysaccharide-transport
proteins, while binding to the canonical
binding site was reported for other proteins, such as topoisomerase
IV (ParE) and HSP90. 
In the POLθ-hel domain, the NVB binding pocket
is a cleft
nestled in the central tunnel of POLθ-hel structure, and the
bound ligand is in close contact with D1, D2, and D4 subdomains ( ). The binding
of NVB at this site did not affect the overall organization of POLθ-hel
but increased its stability in a dose-dependent manner. The analysis
of the protein–ligand interactions revealed the presence of
strong and favorable intermolecular contacts. Specifically, the coumarin
system established a complex network of interactions with Phe422 (D2
subdomain, aromatic contacts), Val147, and Ser148 (D1 subdomain, H-bond
contacts), and Val147 and Gln753 (D1 and D4 subdomains, respectively,
hydrophobic contacts). The D1 domain residues Pro145, Phe146, Met220,
and Asp 223 stabilized the apolar hydroxyl benzoate isopentyl moiety
by performing hydrophobic interactions. Additionally, polar contacts
were described between the novobiose sugar and the D1 residues Leu151
and Thr175, the D2 residue Glu423, and the D4 residues Gln749 and
Ser750.
 The extensive positively charged surface inside
and outside the
central tunnels hosting the NVB binding site (especially the surface
from D2) suggested a potential nucleic acid binding interface and
that NVB might compete with ssDNA for protein binding. To test this
hypothesis, the NVB-POLθ-hel structure was superposed to the
Hel308–DNA complex structure (PDB 2P6R( )) because
the sequence feature of POLθ-hel domain is closely related to
HELQ/Hel308-type helicases, as well as RecQ-type helicases. Overall,
the structures are similar, but differential conformational changes
happen in different domains, with D4 exhibiting the most extensive
global conformational changes. Moreover, in the DNA-bound structure,
a larger space in the central tunnel was revealed, which implies conformational
changes when ssDNA and DNA duplex bind to the helicase domain. Focusing
on the NVB binding pose, the inhibitor overlaps with 3′ overhang
ssDNA and, in particular, vertically wedges between the overhang ssDNA’s
third and fourth unpaired bases. These data support that NVB competitively
impairs ssDNA binding and translocation.
Other SF2 family helicases
have been targeted by small molecules
in the context of SL, such as the homologue Brahma-related gene 1
(BRG1, also known as SMARCA4) and the Brahma homologue (BRM, also
known as SMARCA1), which belong to the Snf2-subfamily helicases, and
the human Bloom syndrome protein (BLM), which is a RecQ helicase.
Notably, inhibitors of these helicases showed a different ligand binding
pocket and mechanism of action with respect to the POLθ-hel
inhibitor NVB. Specifically, BRG1 and BRM are mutually exclusive DNA-dependent
ATPases of the large ATP-dependent SWI/SNF chromatin-remodeling complexes,
which are involved in transcriptional regulation of gene expression.
BRM is a critical SL target in BRG1-deficient cells. On the other hand, BLM is involved in the dissolution of
complex DNA structures and repair intermediates, and it was found
to be a promising SL target in a range of cancers with defects in
the DNA damage response. 
In 2018,
a class of potent dual urea-based inhibitors of BRM and
BRG1 ATPase activity was reported. Mechanistic
studies showed that compounds are partially competitive with ADP (SPR
assay using BRM) with a stoichiometric binding (SPR assay using BRM
and isothermal titration calorimetry using BRG1). Accordingly, cocrystal
structure of compounds with a fusion protein consisting of maltose-binding
protein and the N-RecA lobe (705–960) of the BRM ATPase domain
(PDBs: 6EG3 and 6EG2) confirmed that
compounds bind an allosteric pocket in the vicinity of the ATP binding
site, with the urea moiety trapping the catalytic Glu852.
In
2011, BLM inhibitors were cocrystallized with the target protein. Initially, mechanistic studies indicated that
a substituted benzamide compound does not interfere with BLM ATP-binding
site (unwinding assay) but has a noncompetitive mode of inhibition
with respect to ATP (ATP-turnover experiments). Co-crystallization
of BLM (the conformationally flexible Winged Helix domain was replaced
by a short poly glycine/serine linker connecting the Zinc-binding
domain to the helicase and RNase C-terminal domain) with the benzamide
compound, ADP/magnesium cofactor, and ssDNA-15 mer (PDB 7AUD) confirmed that
the inhibitor binds to an allosteric pocket. This small binding site
is located on the protein face opposite to that binding the nucleotide
and integrates amino acid side chains from both subdomains of the
helicase core and the Zn-binding domain. The authors proposed that
engagement of ssDNA by BLM led the protein aromatic-rich loop to acquire
a particular conformation, permitting the binding of the inhibitor
to the allosteric pocket, occupied and occluded by Trp803 in absence
of ssDNA. The ligand–protein interaction acts to “trap”
or stall the protein into a DNA-bound translocation intermediate,
thus impairing the conformational changes required for progression
to the successive step of the catalytic cycle. Nevertheless, further
kinetic studies to determine if benzamide compound has a passive or
induced binding mode are required.

4.

## Conclusions
Targeted therapies are
considered among the most advanced anticancer
strategies, moving from “one-size-fits-all” treatment
to biomarker-driven therapy, which relies on the patient-specific
characteristics. In the framework of precision medicine, the use of
inhibitors of DSB repair proteins, which induces cell death based
on the SL interactions, is a promising anticancer therapeutic approach.
Since the success of PARPi in targeting BRCA-mutated
cancer cells, there has been a growing interest in identifying DDR
factors as potential SL targets, even more strengthened by the increased
onset of PARPi resistance. Based on the observation that POLθ
is overexpressed and becomes essential in HR-deficient tumors, increasing
attention has been paid to POLθ as a novel SL target. The identification
of POLθ inhibitors is an emerging field, in which a few pharmaceutical
companies are the main players. Nevertheless, the drug discovery efforts
reported so far and herein described have already provided exciting
results, giving an outstanding contribution not only to the discovery
of POLθ inhibitors and the demonstration of their potential
therapeutic effectiveness, but also to expanding knowledge about the
role of POLθ in different cancer frameworks, including some
forms of drug-resistance.
First, inhibition of both the POLθ-pol
and POLθ-hel
domains has been proved to be feasible with small molecules. Specifically,
the former has been the most pursued, leading to the identification
of compounds endowed with anti-POLθ activity with potency in
the low nanomolar range, while only a few POLθ-hel inhibitors
have been reported, of which antibiotic NVB was the best
characterized. Focusing on POLθ-pol inhibitors, several chemical
series have been reported by different pharmaceutical companies, and
all those described to date, with the exception of nucleotide analogues
and urea derivatives, have some chemical features in common. Moreover,
cocrystal studies performed on two of them (ART and RP inhibitors) showed that they bind to the same allosteric
pocket, leading us to hypothesize that all the reported compounds
act as allosteric inhibitors targeting the same pocket.
Second,
very important insights came from studies performed on
POLθ-pol inhibitor ART558 and POLθ-hel inhibitor NVB. Initial characterization of these compounds included
studies to understand their mechanism of action and target engagement,
as well as the assessment of their selectivity against other targets.
They were then used as tools to increase the knowledge on POLθ
biology as well as investigate the relevance of targeting POLθ
in cancer. In addition to providing the first proof that the SL effect
between POLθ inhibition and BRCA-deficiency,
initially identified using genetic assays, could be reproduced by
selective small molecule, these studies showed that POLθ inhibitors
were able to (i) elicit SL with BRCA genes through
inhibition of at least one of the two POLθ activities, (ii)
show selective killing of HR-deficient cells over wild-type cells,
and (iii) potentiate the cytotoxic effect of PARPi in HR-deficient
tumor cells. Most importantly, POLθ inhibitors could be exploited
to target some forms of drug-resistance, such as PARPi resistance
caused by 53BP1/Shieldin defects in BRCA1 mutant
cancers and DNA-PK inhibitors resistance in TP53 mutant
cancers. These findings led to recognition of new genes that are SL
partners with POLθ inhibitors (alone or in combination with
other drugs), not only expanding the potential clinical use of inhibitors,
but also identifying new predictive biomarkers that are essential
in DDR inhibitor clinical trial design to determine whether a tumor
is likely to be sensitive or resistant to targeted therapy. In particular, loss of 53BP1/Shieldin or NHEJ,
as well as high POLQ expression are all predictive
biomarkers for POLθ inhibitors responsiveness. Moreover, BRCA1- or TP53-deficiency could serve as
predictive biomarker of the sensitivity of a tumor to POLθ inhibitors
in combination with PARPi and DNA-PK inhibitors, respectively.
The work done on both ART558 and NVB qualifies
them as important tools to explore the biology of POLθ. The
POLθ-pol inhibitor ART558 has been more extensively
characterized than the POLθ-hel inhibitor NVB,
as it was tested on many oncology-relevant targets besides other human
DNA polymerases. Therefore, ART558 has been added to
the chemical probes listed in the Chemical Probe Portal (https://www.chemicalprobes.org) and is currently in the process
of review by the Scientific Expert Review Panel (SERP) to assign it
a rating. Additional in vitro/in vivo characterization of ART558 will certainly favor its
qualification as a high-quality chemical probe. As such, it will represent an important asset in the efforts
to expand the knowledge on the biology of POLθ.
Third,
the search for POLθ inhibitors has already moved past
the discovery phase and has identified drug candidates. In 2022, POLθ-pol
inhibitor ART4215 has started a Phase 2 study in combination
with PARPi talazoparib for the treatment of BRCA-deficient breast cancer. Moreover,
a potential first-in-class POLθ-hel development candidate is
under evaluation in ongoing IND-enabling studies in combination with niraparib to treat BRCA-mutated or other
HR-impaired cancer cells.
In conclusion, this review furnishes
a snapshot of POLθ inhibitor
discovery and development, highlighting the potential that POLθ
inhibitors have in targeted anticancer therapy. Moreover, we provide
our own additional insights that could be exploited to identify new
POLθ inhibitor chemotypes. We propose a plausible 3D ligand-based
pharmacophore model for POLθ-pol inhibitors that could be used
to support LBDD approaches. In this context, we trust that this review
may represent a comprehensive source of chemical and biological information
on POLθ-pol inhibitors that could be exploited for the development
of more advanced models using state-of-the-art machine learning algorithms,
with the final aim of identifying new POLθ inhibitor chemotypes.

## Acknowledgments
M.C.P. was supported by Fondazione Umberto Veronesi–Postdoctoral
Fellowships 2022 (Synthetic Lethality by POLθ degradation as
an innovative approach in Precision Medicine Oncology). A.A. is a
temporary researcher (RTD-A) supported by PON “Ricerca e Innovazione”
2014–2020, Azione IV.6 (tematiche green) cod. 23-G-15435-1.

## Glossary

## Abbreviations Used
alt-EJalternative end joining
ATMataxia-telangiectasia
mutated
ATRataxia-telangiectasia
and Rad3 related
BERbase excision repair
BLMbloom syndrome protein
BRGBrahma-related gene 1
BRMBrahma homologue
CSAclonogenic survival assay
CTGcell titer glow
DDRDNA damage repair
DNA-PKDNA-dependent protein kinase
DNA-PKcsDNA-PK catalytic
subunit
DSBsDNA
double-strand breaks
DSFdifferential scanning fluorimetry
dxNMPsexpanded-size deoxyribonucleoside monophosphates
dxNTPsexpanded-size
deoxyribonucleoside triphosphates
GSKGlaxoSmithKline
HRhomologous recombination
KuKu70–Ku80
MMEJmicrohomology-mediated end-joining
NHEJnonhomologous
end-joining
MRNMRE11, RAD50, and NBS
NVBnovobiocin
PARPpoly(ADP-ribose) polymerase
PARPiPARP inhibitors
PAspatent applications
PDXpatient-derived xenograft
PEAprimer extension assay
POLθpolymerase
theta
POLθ-helPOLθ helicase
POLθ-polPOLθ polymerase
PPiinorganic pyrophosphate
RPAreplication protein A
SF2superfamily 2
SLsynthetic lethality
SPRsurface plasmon
resonance
SSAsingle-strand
annealing
ssDNAsingle-stranded DNA
TMEJtheta-mediated end-joining
xDNAexpanded-size DNA

## Biographies
Maria Chiara Pismataro obtained a degree cum Laude
in Pharmacy in 2014 at the University of Perugia and a II level master
in “Drug Design and Synthesis” at the University of
Siena. She received her Ph.D. in Pharmaceutical Sciences in 2019 at
the University of Milan after a year abroad at the University of Florida.
In 2022 and 2023, she was awarded “Postdoctoral Fellowships”
research grants from Fondazione Umberto Veronesi, for a research project
focused on the identification of novel potential Polθ inhibitors.
She is carrying out her project at the University of Perugia, under
the supervision of Prof. S. Massari. She is the author of eight publications.

Andrea Astolfi is
a temporary researcher (RTD-A) at
the University of Perugia. He received his Ph.D. in Pharmaceutical
Sciences from University of Perugia in 2018 and, in 2021, he received
a postdoctoral fellowship granted by “Fondazione Umberto Veronesi”.
His research activity was mainly focused on the application/development
of medicinal chemistry approaches towards the discovery (hit identification
and hit-to-lead optimization) of new compounds of pharmaceutical interest
such as kinase inhibitors, Dengue NS5 RNA-dependent RNA polymerase
inhibitors, antiprion agents, and S. Aureus NorA
efflux pump inhibitors. His contributions to these projects included
chemical library design, in silico strategies to
rationally discover new potent and safe bioactive compounds and physicochemical
and ADME-Tox profile prediction.

Maria Letizia Barreca is Associate Professor of Medicinal
Chemistry at the Department of Pharmaceutical Sciences of the University
of Perugia. She works in the field of in silico drug
design and discovery, and her research is mainly focused on the identification
of biologically active small compounds for neurodegenerative disorders,
infectious diseases, antimicrobial resistance, and more recently cancer.
She started her career at the University of Messina, then in 2000–2001
she was Visiting Scientist at the University of Houston and in 2007
moved to the University of Perugia. She is coauthor of 102 scientific
papers in international peer-reviewed journals and coinventor of three
patents related to novel bioactive compounds. She is cofounder of
the company Sibylla Biotech SpA. (https://www.sibyllabiotech.it/).

Martina Pacetti graduated cum Laude in Pharmacy in
2021 at the University of Perugia (Italy). To date, she is a Ph.D.
student in Medicinal Chemistry at the University of Perugia. Her research
activity is mainly focused on the design and synthesis of new drug-like
small molecules for neurodegenerative disorders and infectious diseases.

Silvia Schenone obtained
a degree in Medicinal Chemistry
in 1987 and in Pharmacy in 1988, both cum Laude at the University
of Genoa (Italy). She received a Ph.D. in Medicinal Chemistry and
assumed a researcher position in 1992. In 2001, she became Associate
Professor and, in 2016, Full Professor at the University of Genoa.
Her research focuses on the synthesis of kinase inhibitors. Prof.
Schenone’s team is also involved in structural studies on biological
macromolecules and molecular modelling applications in medicinal subjects.
She is the author of about 220 publications (HI 45). She teaches different
courses for the degree in Medicinal Chemistry, Pharmacy, and Biotechnology.
From November 2018 to present, Prof. Schenone is the Director of the
Department of Pharmacy, University of Genoa (Italy).

Tiziano Bandiera is Senior Researcher
and Principal
Investigator at the Istituto Italiano di Tecnologia (IIT) in Genoa.
He spent half of his career in the pharmaceutical industry, working
at Pharmacia Corporation and Nerviano Medical Sciences (NMS), before
joining IIT in 2008. At NMS, he contributed to the discovery of entrectinib,
a pan-TRK, ROS1, and ALK inhibitor approved in 2019 by the FDA, and
in 2020 by EMA, for the treatment of metastatic nonsmall cell lung
cancer and solid tumors. At IIT, his research activities focus on
the identification of new drugs for the treatment of cystic fibrosis,
inflammatory diseases, and cancer. Dr. Bandiera holds a Ph.D. degree
in Chemistry, has published more than 85 papers, and is an inventor
in more than 40 patent families.

Anna Carbone is an Associate Professor in Medicinal
Chemistry in the Department of Pharmacy at the University of Genoa
(Italy). She graduated in Pharmaceutical Chemistry and Technology
with honors in 2000, and she got her Ph.D. in Medicinal Chemistry
in 2003 at the University of Messina. From 2004 to 2017, she was Assistant
Professor at the University of Palermo. She spent two years (2010–2012)
as Marie Curie Fellow in the School of Chemistry at the University
of Nottingham. She gained remarkable expertise in the design, synthesis,
biological evaluation, and SAR studies of heterocyclic compounds endowed
with different biological activities. Her scientific research, documented
in 73 publications in peer-reviewed journals, is mainly focused on
the identification of small molecules possessing antitumor activity.

Serena Massari received
her Ph.D. in Medicinal Chemistry
from the University of Perugia in 2008. Since 2008, she worked as
postdoctoral researcher at the University, where she became Assistant
Professor in 2015 and Associate Professor in 2021. Her research activities
entail the selection of new druggable targets for innovative therapies,
design of new chemical entities with desired biological activities,
development of synthetic procedures for the preparation of compounds,
and SAR studies. Her research activity, documented by 70 scientific
publications in peer-review journals, has been mainly focused on development
of novel small drug-like molecules acting as antiviral agents. More
recently, she focused on the discovery of antitumor agents, such as
PARP and AKT inhibitors.

## Supporting Information Available
The Supporting Information is
available free of charge at https://pubs.acs.org/doi/10.1021/acs.jmedchem.2c02101.
Figures reporting a detailed description of structural
modification performed on compounds 1–16 and 22–26 and pharmacophore modeling
details (PDF)

## Author Contributions
M.C.P and
A.A. contributed equally.

The authors
declare no competing financial interest.

## Supplementary Material
jm2c02101_si_001.pdf

## References
 

## Associated Data

## Supplementary Materials
jm2c02101_si_001.pdf