pmcNucleic Acids ResNucleic Acids Res4narnarNucleic Acids Research0305-10481362-4962Oxford University PressPMC13096807PMC13096807.113096807130968074201178210.1093/nar/gkag336gkag3361Genome Integrity, Repair and ReplicationAcademicSubjects/SCI00010ATM promotes PFKP nuclear translocation to balance glycolysis and homologous recombination repair
LiuHaoyunData curationFormal analysisInvestigationMethodologyVisualizationWriting - original draftWriting - review & editing
Department of Radiation Medicine, School of Basic Medical Sciences, Peking University International Cancer Institute, Institute of Advanced Clinical Medicine, State Key Laboratory of Molecular Oncology, Peking University Health Science Center, Beijing 100191, China
Gastroenterology Center, Fujian Provincial Hospital, Fuzhou University Affiliated Provincial Hospital, Fuzhou, Fujian Province 350001, China
Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, School of Basic Medical Sciences, Peking University Health Science Center, Beijing 100191, China – ]. Endogenous and exogenous DNA damage, as well as DNA replication errors, are major contributors to genomic instability in cells. Among various DNA lesions, DNA double-strand breaks (DSBs) pose the greatest challenge to cells and are potentially lethal lesions [ ]. DSBs must be repaired promptly, and repair can be accomplished through two major pathways: error-prone nonhomologous end joining (NHEJ) and error-free homologous recombination (HR) [ ]. Glycolysis is the earliest observed alteration during metabolic reprogramming in tumor cells [ – ]. Although glycolysis is less efficient than oxidative phosphorylation, tumor cells preferentially rely on glycolysis (the Warburg effect) to maintain intracellular ATP levels comparable to those of normal cells [ ]. The most important reason why tumor cells utilize glycolysis is that it provides cells with essential biosynthetic intermediates to promote rapid tumor cell growth [ – ]. Glycolysis and the DNA damage repair (DDR) were originally proposed as two independent mechanisms operating within cells. However, there is increasing evidence that these two pathways are interdependent and inextricably linked.
HR is a high-fidelity pathway for DSBs repair. As a central executor of HR, RAD51 orchestrates all three phases of HR: pre-synapsis, synapsis and post-synapsis [ – ]. In the pre-synaptic phase, RAD51 is loaded onto single-stranded DNA (ssDNA) to form the nucleoprotein filament, a process mediated by BRCA2 [ ]. In the synaptic phase, the RAD51 filament invades the sister chromatid to search for homologous sequences, and then forms a joint molecule, consisting of a hetero-duplex and a displaced strand of ssDNA (D-loop). In the post-synaptic phase, RAD51 is displaced by RAD54 to allow polymerases to synthesize DNA across the breaks using the homologous strand as a template [ , ]. Given the core function of RAD51 in HR repair, RAD51 can interact with many proteins and is tightly regulated at multiple levels [ ]. For example, BRCA2 acts as a mediator to help RAD51 replace RPA on ssDNA for RAD51 filament assembly during HR [ ]. PALB2 [ ], RAD51AP1 [ ], and RAD54 [ ] have been shown to regulate the process of RAD51 for homologous DNA searching. RECQ5 [ , ], PARI [ ] and RTEL1 [ ] have been reported to negatively regulate the RAD51 filament in the later stages of HR. Intriguingly, as a positive regulator of glycolysis, RAD51 has the capacity to mediate pancreatic cancer cell proliferation, reduce intracellular reactive oxygen species (ROS) production and increase hypoxia inducible factor 1α (HIF1α) protein levels [ ]. This bifunctional role positions RAD51 as a potential integrator of metabolic and genomic stability.
Recently, some metabolites involved in the Warburg effect are important in establishing the relationship between glycolysis and the DDR [ – ]. For example, Chen H et al. reported that lactate, the product of glycolysis, induces NBS1 lactylation at lysine 388 (K388), which is essential for the formation of the MRE11-RAD50-NBS1 (MRN) complex and the recruitment of HR repair proteins to DSB sites to promote DNA repair [ ]. They identified a direct link between lactate accumulation, efficient DNA repair and chemotherapy resistance [ ]. Remarkably, a transient increase in glycolysis confers radioresistance by facilitating DNA repair in cancer cells [ , ]. Targeting the glycolytic pathway increases tumor sensitivity to radiotherapy [ , ]. The combination of ganetespib, a heat shock protein 90 (HSP90) inhibitor, and radiation attenuates the radiation-induced upregulation of pyruvate kinase M2 (PKM2) and platelet isoform of phosphofructokinase-1 (PFKP) expression and potentiates T cell-mediated antitumor immunity, resulting in a more potent antitumor effect than either treatment alone [ ]. These aforementioned studies indicate that the appropriate enhancement of glycolysis facilitates tumor cells’ resistance to radiotherapy. However, excessive glycolysis has been shown to exacerbate DNA damage [ – ]. In triple negative breast cancer cells, high glucose (HG) induces severe genomic instability while upregulating the expression of DDR genes. These findings reveal the critical necessity of DDR pathways in the presence of HG to counteract the extensive DNA damage [ ]. Kumar V et al. demonstrated that prolonged exposure to HG can increase cellular DNA damage and impair DDR, leading to senescence, and ultimately lung and kidney fibrosis in a diabetic mouse model [ ]. The same phenomena have been observed in patients with diabetes mellitus (DM) [ ]. The evidence analyzed previously underscores the existence of a delicate equilibrium between glycolytic activity and genomic maintenance, necessitating precise regulatory mechanisms in cancer cells.
Glycolysis supplies cancer cells with the energy and intermediates they need to survive, while several glycolysis-specific enzymes, such as hexokinase II (HK2) [ ], PKM2 [ , ] and phosphoglycerate mutase 1 (PGAM1) [ , ], additionally facilitate DDR. However, the effects of phosphofructokinase 1 (PFK1), the gatekeeper of glycolysis, on DDR remain unknown. PFK1 catalyzes the conversion of fructose 6-phosphate and ATP to fructose-1,6-bisphosphate (FBP) and ADP [ ]. PFK1 consists of three isoforms: PFKM (muscle type), PFKL (liver type) and PFKP (platelet type) [ ]. Among these, PFKP is the prominent PFK1 isoform that is highly expressed in various types of tumors [ – ]. PFKP acts as a key enzyme in glycolysis and participates in cancer progression by regulating cell proliferation, apoptosis, migration/metastasis, stemness, and reshaping the tumor microenvironment [ – ]. Importantly, PFKP exhibits metabolic enzyme activity exclusively in its tetrameric forms rather than in dimeric forms [ ]. Gao et al. reported that PFKP functions as a nucleocytoplasmic shuttling protein, and that cyclin D3-CDK6 can phosphorylate PFKP and promote its nuclear translocation through its dimerization. The dimeric form of PFKP enters the nucleus, where it interacts with c-Myc to increase the expression of C-X-C chemokine receptor type 4 (CXCR4), thereby facilitating T-cell acute lymphoblastic leukemia (T-ALL) cell invasion [ ]. On the basis of the characteristics related to nuclear-cytoplasmic translocation and the gatekeeping role of PFKP within glycolysis pathway, we are interested in whether PFKP can regulate DDR and serve as a bridging molecule that maintains homeostasis between glycolysis and DDR processes.
In our study, we identified PFKP as an interacting protein of RAD51. Subsequent investigations demonstrated that PFKP translocates to the nucleus and recruits CK2 independently of its glycolytic enzymatic activity. CK2 then phosphorylates RAD51 and enhances the interaction between RAD51 and BRCA2 to further promote the recruitment of RAD51 for HR repair under ionizing radiation (IR) or HG conditions. Mechanistically, we discovered that ATM senses the DSBs or ROS induced by IR or HG treatment and phosphorylates PFKP at residue T278 to promote its transition from tetramers to dimers. Nuclear PFKP acts as a scaffold for CK2-mediated RAD51 T13 phosphorylation, thereby enhancing the RAD51-BRCA2 interaction and HR efficiency. Additionally, targeting glycolysis with 2-deoxyglucose (2-DG) or inhibiting HR repair with a CK2 inhibitor enhances the sensitivity of tumor cells to radiotherapy. Clinically, diabetic cancer patients exhibit elevated nuclear PFKP levels across tumor types, suggesting the pathological relevance of this metabolic-DNA repair axis. These findings establish PFKP as a metabolic molecular switch to maintain a homeostatic balance between glycolysis and DDR, revealing a new therapeutic strategy that combines metabolism and radiation for patients with tumors, especially for individuals with concurrent diabetes.

## Materials and methods

## Cell culture
Human cervical carcinoma HeLa cells, pancreatic cancer PANC-1 cells, lung adenocarcinoma A549 cells, HEK293T, and U2OS cells were cultured in Dulbecco’s modified Eagle’s medium (DMEM, 12100-046, Gibco, USA) supplemented with 10% fetal bovine serum (FCS500, ExCell Bio, China) and 1% penicillin–streptomycin (P1400-100, Solarbio, China) at 37°C under 5% CO2. The cells were passaged at approximately 80% confluence using 0.25% trypsin–ethylenediaminetetraacetic acid (EDTA; T1300, Solarbio, China). The cells were treated with various stimulations at the following confluences: 80%–90% confluence for western blot and immunoprecipitation; 70%–80% confluence for plasmid transfection; 50%–60% confluence for cell cycle synchronization; 30%–40% confluence for small interfering RNA (siRNA) transfection, immunofluorescence assay and proximity ligation assay (PLA), respectively.

## Construction of plasmids and transfection
The coding sequences of PFKP, RAD51, and CK2α were subcloned and inserted into pDONR201 (Invitrogen) as entry clones and subsequently transferred into gateway-compatible destination vectors for the expression of N-S-protein-FLAG-Streptavidin binding peptide (N-SFB) and N-Myc tagged fusion proteins. All the point mutants were generated by a polymerase chain reaction (PCR)-based mutagenesis and verified by sequencing. Plasmids were transfected into cell lines at the following concentrations: 2 μg for a 35 mm diameter culture dish in 2 ml of medium, and 10 μg for a 100 mm diameter culture dish in 10 ml of medium, using Hieff TransTM Liposomal Transfection Reagent (40802ES02, Yeasen, China), according to the manufacturer’s protocol.

## RNA interference
RNA interference (RNAi) was performed as described [ ]. Briefly, a total of 2 × 105 cells were seeded in six-well plates 1 day prior to transfection. A transfection mixture containing 200 μl OPTI-MEM medium (MG-OPTI-100, Macgene, China), 40 nmol siRNA (GenePharma, China), and 2 μl transfection reagent INTERFER (101 000 028, Polyplus, France) was incubated at room temperature for 10 min, and then added to the cells. Cells were collected for further assays 48–72 h after the initial transfection. The siRNA sequences (5′-3′) used in this study are as follows: siPFKP, CGGGCAACCUGAACACCUATT; siMRE11, GAGCAUAACUCCAUAAGUA.

## Immunofluorescence
HeLa and PANC-1 cells were seeded on coverslips and transfected with different plasmids or siRNAs, cultured in HG (25 mM) medium for 24 h, or treated with or without 10 Gy IR released for 3 h. The cells were then fixed in 4% paraformaldehyde for 15 min at room temperature, followed by permeabilization in 0.25% Triton X-100 solution for 5 min. After blocking with phosphate buffered saline (PBS) buffer containing 1% bovine serum albumin (BSA) for 30 min at room temperature, the coverslips were incubated with the following primary antibodies for 1 h at room temperature. RAD51 (1:500, ab133534, Abcam, USA), BRCA2 (1:300, ab123491, Abcam, USA), PFKP (1:500, 13389–1-AP, Proteintech, China), phospho-ATM (S1981; 1:500, 5883S, CST, USA), Cyclin A2 (1:100, sc-271682, Santa Cruz, USA), γH2AX (1:500, 9718, CST, USA), c-Myc [1:100, c-40 (9E10), Santa Cruz, USA], and phospho-RPA2 (S4 + S8) (1:300, ab87277, Abcam, USA) antibodies were used, followed by incubation with species-specific fluorescently conjugated secondary antibodies for 30 min. The coverslips were then incubated with 4′, 6-diamidino-2-phenylindole (DAPI, 1 μg/ml) for 5 min. Finally, images were acquired using Zeiss Efficient Navigation (ZEN) microscopy software. The foci were quantified as discrete nuclear puncta with a signal intensity exceeding three times the average intensity of the nuclear background and an area ranging from 0.2 to 5 μm². Diffuse nuclear staining, potential imaging artifacts, and nonspecific cytoplasmic signals were excluded from the analysis.

## Cell cycle synchronization and flow cytometry assays
HeLa and PANC-1 cells were synchronized to G1/S phase by a double thymidine block, and then released for 6 h to progress into the S/G2 phase. For flow cytometry assay, cells were collected and fixed with 75% ethanol at 4°C overnight. After fixation, cells were washed three times with PBS and incubated with 100 μg/ml RNase A (R8021, Solarbio, China) at 37°C for 30 min. Following RNase A treatment, the samples were stained with 20 μg/ml propidium iodide (PI, P4170, Sigma–Aldrich, USA) and were analyzed using a flow cytometer (Beckman Coulter) with at least 1 × 105 cells collected per sample. Data analysis was performed with FlowJo software.

## Soluble fraction and chromatin fraction extraction
Cells were lysed with NETN buffer (20 mM Tris–HCl, pH 8.0; 100 mM NaCl; 1 mM EDTA, and 0.5% NP-40) on ice for 10 min. After centrifugation (15 000 rpm for 15 min at 4°C), the soluble fraction was collected and boiled in 4 × sodium dodecyl sulphate (SDS) loading buffer at 95°C for 5 min. The pellet was washed three times with NETN buffer and lysed in cold EBC2 buffer (50 mM Tris–HCl pH 7.5; 300 mM NaCl; 5 mM CaCl2 and 10 U of micrococcal nuclease). After sonication for 3 min, the sample was centrifuged at 15 000 rpm for 15 min at 4°C, and the supernatant was collected as the chromatin fraction.

## Nuclear fraction and cytoplasmic fraction extraction
Cells were lysed with ECBA buffer [50 mM Tris–HCl, pH 7.5; 100 mM NaCl; 0.05% NP-40; 1 mM EDTA; and 1 mM dithiothreitol (DTT)] on ice for 5 min. After centrifugation (15 000 rpm for 15 min at 4°C), the cytoplasmic fraction was collected and boiled in 4 × SDS loading buffer at 95°C for 5 min. The pellet was washed three times with ECBA buffer and lysed in cold radioimmunoprecipitation assay (RIPA) buffer (50 mM Tris–HCl, pH 7.4; 150 mM NaCl; 1% Triton X-100; 1% sodium deoxycholate; and 0.1% SDS). After sonication for 3 min, the sample was centrifuged at 15 000 rpm for 15 min at 4°C, and the supernatant was collected as nuclear fraction.

## Western blot
Cells were lysed with RIPA buffer or NETN buffer supplemented with 1 mM phenylmethylsulfonyl fluoride (PMSF) and 1 μg/ml aprotinin on ice for 10 min. After centrifugation (15 000 rpm for 15 min at 4°C), the soluble fraction was collected, and then boiled in 4 × SDS loading buffer at 95°C for 5 min. The protein was resolved via sodium dodecyl sulphate–polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis (SDS–PAGE) and then transferred to a PVDF membrane. After blocking with 5% BSA in Tris-buffered saline containing Tween20 (TBS-T) for 30 min at room temperature and washing in TBS-T buffer three times, the membrane was incubated with different primary antibodies overnight at 4°C. Pan-phosphorserine/threonine (Pan-Ser/Thr) (1:1000, AP1067, ABclonal, China), BRCA2 (1:1000, ab123491, Abcam, USA), PFKP (1:1000, 13389-1-AP, Proteintech, China), RAD51(1:1000, 14961-1-AP, Proteintech, China), Flag (1:10 000, F3165, Sigma–Aldrich, USA), RPA32/RPA2 (phospho S4 + S8) (1:500, ab87277, Abcam, USA), GAPDH (1:5000, KM9002, Sungene, China), Lamin A/C (1:1000, 10298–1-AP, Proteintech, China), α-Tubulin (1:5000, KM9007L, Sungene, China), c-Myc (1:500, S101-02, Santa Cruz, USA), CK2α (1:100, Sc-2738, Santa Cruz, USA), phospho-Histone H2A.X (Ser139; 1:1000, ab26350, Abcam, USA) antibodies were used. After washing three times in TBS-T buffer, the membranes were incubated with horseradish peroxidase-conjugated secondary antibodies (1:10 000, anti-rabbit, 31 460; anti-mouse, 31 430; both from Invitrogen, USA) for 1 h at room temperature. Enhanced chemiluminescence (180-5001, Tanon, China) was used to detect the protein band signals.

## Immunoprecipitation
For the endogenous immunoprecipitation assay, cells were lysed and a total of 1 mg of protein was extracted using 1 ml NETN buffer containing a protease inhibitor cocktail and phosphatase inhibitors with rotation at 4°C for 15 min. After removing the cell debris by centrifugation (15 000 rpm for 15 min at 4°C), the soluble fractions were collected. Then, 50 μl of the lysate was stored as Input, and the rest of lysate was incubated with different primary antibodies (2 μg) overnight at 4°C. The next day, 30 μl Protein A agarose (for rabbit-derived primary antibodies, 16–125, EMD Millipore Corp, USA) or Protein G Sepharose (for mouse-derived primary antibodies, 17 061 801, Cytiva, Sweden) was added for 2 h at 4°C. For the semi-exogenous immunoprecipitation assay. Cells were transfected with SFB-tagged plasmids 48 h, then were lysed with NETN buffer for 10 min on ice. After centrifugation (15 000 rpm for 15 min at 4°C), the soluble fraction was collected and then the 1 mg total protein incubated with the 30 μl S protein agarose beads (S-beads, S1402, Sigma–Aldrich, USA) for 4 h at 4°C. The beads were washed four times with NETN buffer and then boiled in 30 μl of 2 × SDS loading buffer at 95°C for 10 min. The samples were then subjected to SDS–PAGE and immunoblotting with specific antibodies.

## Tandem affinity purification-mass spectrometry
HeLa cells were transfected with SFB-RAD51 followed by treating with IR for 10Gy release 3 h and then lysed with NETN buffer on ice for 15 min. After sonication for 6 min and then centrifugation at 15 000 rpm for 15 min at 4°C, the supernatant was collected and incubated with streptavidin Sepharose beads for 3 h at 4°C. Subsequently, the resin was washed four times with NETN buffer and eluted three times with elution buffer (2 mg/ml biotin; 20 mM Tris–HCl, pH 8.0; 100 mM NaCl; 1 mM EDTA and 0.5% NP-40) for 4 h at 4°C. The eluates were combined and then incubated with S-beads for 3 h at 4°C. Finally, the beads were washed four times with NETN buffer and then boiled in 30 μl of 2 × SDS loading buffer at 95°C for 10 min. The samples were then separated via SDS–PAGE and protein bands were visualized by Coomassie Brilliant Blue staining. The eluted proteins were identified by mass spectrometry analysis.

## HR repair assay
After the siRNA-mediated silencing of PFKP in DR-GFP U2OS cells, the cells were infected with I-SceI lentivirus. After 48 h of infection, the cells were harvested and analyzed by flow cytometry. A minimum of 2 × 105 cells were collected to quantify the percentage of GFP-positive cells. The data were subjected to FlowJo for analysis. HR efficiency was calculated as the percentage of GFP-positive cells relative to the total number of cells.

## Expression and purification of GST-PFKP
The coding sequence of PFKP was inserted into the pGEX-6P1 vector to generate pGEX-GST-PFKP-His. The plasmid was introduced into the BL21 (DE3) Escherichia coli cells, and 0.1 mM isopropyl β-D-1-thiogalactopyranoside (IPTG) was added to induce protein expression. After culturing for 16 h at 16°C, the bacteria were harvested and lysed by sonication in T-buffer (25 mM Tris–HCl, pH 7.5; 10% glycerol; 0.5 mM EDTA; 1 mM DTT; and 0.05% Igepal) containing 400 mM KCl and protease inhibitors (aprotinin, chymostatin, leupeptin and pepstatin A at 5 mg/ml each, 1 mM phenylmethylsulfonyl fluoride). After centrifugation at 12 000 rpm for 30 min, the supernatant was collected and incubated with glutathione sepharose beads for 3 h at 4°C. The proteins were then eluted with T buffer containing 300 mM KCl and 0.5 mM glutathione. The purified proteins were concentrated and stored in small aliquots at −80°C.

## Expression and purification of His-RAD51
The coding sequence of RAD51 was inserted into the pET-28a (+) E. coli prokaryotic expression vector to generate pET-28a (+)-6 × His-RAD51. The plasmid was introduced into the BL21 (DE3) E. coli cells, and 0.1 mM IPTG was added to induce protein expression. After culturing for 16 h at 16°C, the bacteria were harvested and lysed by sonication in T-buffer containing 400 mM KCl and protease inhibitors (aprotinin, chymostatin, leupeptin and pepstatin A at 5 mg/ml each, 1 mM phenylmethylsulfonyl fluoride). After centrifugation at 12 000 rpm for 30 min, the supernatant was collected and incubated with His-beads for 3 h at 4°C. The proteins were then eluted with T buffer containing 300 mM KCl and 0.5 mM imidazole. The purified proteins were concentrated and stored in small aliquots at −80°C.

## 
In vitro pull-down assay
To evaluate the physical interaction between RAD51 and PFKP, the purified His-RAD51 and Flag-PFKP proteins were mixed in T50 buffer (25 mM Tris–HCl, pH 7.5; 10% glycerol; 0.5 mM EDTA; 50 mM KCl; 1 mM DTT; and 0.01% Igepal), and incubated at 4°C for 3 h. The protein mixture was then incubated with 20 μl His-beads at 4°C for 1 h. After centrifugation, the supernatant was collected and boiled in 4 × SDS loading buffer at 95°C for 3 min. The His-beads were washed six times with T50 buffer and boiled in 1 × SDS loading buffer at 95°C for 3 min, and then the supernatant and eluate fractions were analyzed by western blot.

## Proximity ligation assay
The proximity ligation assay (PLA) was operated using the Duolink PLA Fluorescence Detection Kit (DUO92101, DUO92008, Sigma–Aldrich, Sweden). HeLa cells were fixed in 4% paraformaldehyde for 15 min at room temperature, followed by permeabilization in 0.25% Triton X-100 solution for 5 min. After being blocked with PBS buffer containing 1% BSA for 30 min at room temperature, the cells were incubated with primary antibodies for 1 h at 37°C in a humidified chamber. Subsequent steps were performed in accordance with the manufacturer’s instructions. Briefly, the coverslips were incubated with anti-mouse MINUS and anti-rabbit PLUS PLA probes for 1 h at 37°C in a humidified chamber. The PLA probes were ligated with ligation reagent by incubation in a humidified chamber for 30 min at 37°C. Amplification was performed using Duolink in situ Detection Reagents Red Kit (DUO92101, Sigma–Aldrich, Sweden) in a humidified chamber for 100 min at 37°C. The coverslips were then incubated with DAPI for 5 min and the images were acquired with a fluorescence microscope.

## 
In vitro kinase assay
HEK293T cells were transfected with Flag-PFKP for 48 h, and lysed with NETN buffer, Flag-PFKP was immunoprecipitated with anti-Flag M2 affinity beads (A2220, Sigma, USA) and then eluted with Flag peptides (F4799, Sigma, USA). GST-PFKP-WT/G33A/F649L and His-RAD51 were purified from bacteria. The kinase reaction was performed at 37°C for 30 min in kinase buffer (25 mM Tris–HCl, pH 7.5; 5 mM beta-glycerophosphate; 2 mM DTT; 0.1 mM Na3VO4, and 10 mM MgCl2), supplemented with 100 mM ATP, and the reaction was terminated by boiling the samples in 4 × SDS loading buffer at 95°C for 5 min. The samples were then subjected to SDS–PAGE.

## Size exclusion chromatography
The size exclusion chromatography column (Superdex 200 Increase 10/300 GL, 28-9909-44, GE Healthcare, Sweden) was washed with distilled water and equilibrated with PBS. HeLa cells were lysed in lysis buffer (50 mM Tris–HCl, pH 7.5; 150 mM NaCl and 0.3% NP-40), and 400–500 μl cell lysate (3–5 mg/ml) was applied to the column and eluted with elution buffer phosphate buffered saline (PBS, 50 mM sodium phosphate and 0.15 M NaCl, pH 7.2). The flow rate was 0.3 ml/min. Each 500 μl fraction was collected, and 60 μl of each fraction was boiled in 20 μl 4 × SDS loading buffer at 95°C for 5 min, and then analyzed by western blot.

## Multi-angle light scattering assay
For the multi-angle light scattering (MALS) assay, a system containing an Optilab T-Rex refractive index detector (wop1-03, Wyatt Technology, USA), and a miniDAWN TREOS 3-angle MALS detector (wmd3-01, Wyatt Technology, USA) was used. Protein samples (20 μl) were loaded at a concentration of 0.7 mg/ml. Data were analyzed using ASTRA software.

## Extracellular acidification rate assay
The extracellular acidification rate (ECAR) of HeLa cells was measured using a Seahorse XFe96 Extracellular Flux Analyzer (103015–100, Seahorse Bioscience, USA). The ECAR was measured using a Seahorse XF Glycolytic Rate Assay Kit (103346–100, Agilent Technologies, USA) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. Briefly, 8000 HeLa cells per well were seeded overnight in a Seahorse XF 96-well culture microplate, followed by HG culture for 2 h or treated with 10 Gy IR, followed by a 2 h release, and then 25 μM ATM inhibitor KU-55933 for 1 h before measurements. For the measurements, cultured cells were washed twice and maintained in XF assay medium. After baseline measurements, rotenone plus antimycin A (Rote/AA, 5 μM) and 2-DG (0.5 M) solutions were sequentially injected into the wells of the culture microplate at the indicated time points for ECAR analysis. Data were analyzed using Seahorse XF 96 Wave software.

## Phosphofructokinase activity assays
Phosphofructokinase activity was measured with a phosphofructokinase activity assay kit (AKSU062U, BOXBIO, China). Briefly, the reaction was performed with either 1 × 108 HeLa cells or recombinantly purified PFKP (0.1 μg) in 1 ml of extraction buffer. The different reaction buffers were added according to the manufacturer’s instructions. When the reaction mixture was completely added, the absorbance was recorded at 340 nm after incubation at 37°C for 10 min. Phosphofructokinase activity was normalized to protein concentration.

## NADPH quantification
Intracellular NADPH was measured using an NADP/NADPH quantification kit (AK302, Bioss, China). A total of 1 × 106 HeLa cells were harvested, lysed in 1 ml extraction buffer, and then operated according to the manufacturer’s instructions. The absorbance was measured at 570 nm. NADPH levels were quantified by comparing them with an NADPH standard curve. NADPH levels were normalized to protein concentration.

## Intracellular ROS measurement
The amount of intracellular ROS was measured by the ROS assay kit (R272916, Aladdin, China). Briefly, HeLa cells were seeded overnight in a 12-well plate with a glass-like polymer bottom black frame, followed by HG culture for 2 h or a 2 h release after 10 Gy IR, and then 25 μM ATM inhibitor KU-55933 was added for 1 h. In vitro cultured cells were then washed three times with PBS and loaded with DCFH-DA diluted with serum-free culture medium to a final concentration of 10 μM and incubated at 37°C in the dark for 20 min. Cells were washed three times with serum-free cell culture medium to fully remove unincorporated DCFH-DA. As a positive control, Rosup was diluted with serum-free culture medium to a final concentration of 100 μM and added to HeLa cells and then incubated at 37°C in the dark for 1 h. Fluorescence signals from the cells were captured using a fluorescence microscope (Ex/Em = 488/525 nm).

## Cell proliferation assay
Cell proliferation assay was performed by Cell Counting Kit-8 (CCK-8, K1018, APExBIO, China). After being transfected with PFKP siRNA, cells (2 000 cells/well) were seeded into 96-well plates and treated with IR 3Gy. After 72 h of incubation, 10 μl of CCK-8 solution was added to each well, and the cells were incubated at 37°C for 0.5–2 h. DMEM containing 10% CCK-8 was used as a control. The absorbance of the plate at 450 nm was detected using an Infinite F50 Plus microplate reader (MIC9310, TECAN, Switzerland). Cell survival was calculated as the fold change in the OD normalized to the untreated group.

## Colony formation assay
HeLa, PANC-1 and A549 cells (1 000 cells/well) were seeded into six-well plates. After adherence to the plates, the cells were treated with CK2 inhibitor CX-4945 (10 μM) and the glycolysis inhibitor 2-DG (5 mM) for 24 h. After 14 days of culture, the cells were stained with 0.1% Coomassie Brilliant Blue staining buffer (40 ml methanol; 10 ml acetic acid; 50 ml ddH2O; and 0.1 g Coomassie Brilliant Blue) for 30 min at room temperature. The stained dishes were washed three times with PBS and then the cell colonies were counted.

## Human cancer specimens
Human squamous cell carcinoma of the uterine cervix, pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma, and lung adenocarcinoma samples from patients with and without DM were obtained from Peking University International Hospital. Informed consent was obtained from each patient, and the study was approved by the Ethics Committee of Peking University International Hospital (approval number 2024-KY-0109-01) in accordance with the Declaration of Helsinki.

## Immunohistochemistry staining
Paraffin-embedded human cancer tissue sections were stained with antibodies against p-ATM (S1981) (1:200, ab2793244, Abcam, USA), γH2AX (1:400, 9718, CST, USA), PFKP (1:1000, 13389-1-AP, Proteintech, China), RAD51 (1:400, ab133534, Abcam, USA), and CK2α (1:50, sc-2738s, Santa Cruz, USA). Tissue sections were quantitatively scored according to the staining intensity (no signal was marked as 0, faint reactivity as 1+, moderate reactivity as 2+, and strong reactivity as 3+) and percentage of positive cells (1, 0%–25%; 2, 26%–50%; 3, 51%–75% and 4, >75%). Total scores were obtained by combining the intensity and proportion scores.

## Quantification and statistical analysis
Each experiment was replicated at least three times. Statistical results for the number of foci were analyzed using Mann–Whitney rank sum tests to determine significance. A two-tailed unpaired Student’s t-test was used to assess the significance of differences between two selected groups. One-way analysis of variance was performed to compare data among multiple groups by using PRISM statistical analysis software (GraphPad Software, Inc., San Diego, CA). Survival analysis was performed using Kaplan–Meier analysis and curves were compared using the log-rank test. Statistical information for each experiment is shown in the figures and corresponding legends.

## Results

## PFKP is an interacting protein of RAD51 and can translocate to the nucleus upon IR stimulation
As a central effector of HR repair, RAD51 is an excellent target for investigating the relationship between glycolysis and HR repair. Therefore, we transfected S protein-FLAG-streptavidin (SFB)-tagged RAD51 into HeLa cells, and then performed tandem affinity purification coupled with mass spectrometry (TAP-MS) to identify the proteins that interact with RAD51. We successfully captured several previously reported RAD51-interacting molecules, including PLK1 [ ], RPA [ ], and BARD1 [ ] (Fig.  ). Notably, the rate-limiting enzyme of glycolysis, PFKP (the platelet type of phosphofructokinase 1), was identified as a binding partner of RAD51 (Fig. 1A). Moreover, we also captured PFKP in different TAP-MS analyses involving RAD51 paralogs ( ). These data suggest that PFKP may interact with RAD51. To verify the TAP-MS results, we transfected SFB-tagged RAD51 plasmids into HeLa cells and subsequently treated them with IR. Following IR stimulation, PFKP exhibited significantly enhanced binding to RAD51 (Fig. ). Endogenous Co-immunoprecipitation (Co-IP) assay results confirmed that PFKP interacts with RAD51 upon IR exposure (Fig.  ). Additionally, in vitro experiments demonstrated a direct interaction between His-RAD51 (purified from E. coli) and Flag-PFKP (obtained from HEK293T cells) (Fig.  and  ). These findings indicate that PFKP is an interacting protein of RAD51 and that the interaction between PFKP and RAD51 increased following IR treatment.
 To verify the domains involved in the interaction between PFKP and RAD51, we constructed truncated plasmids of PFKP (Fig.  ). Through the semi-exogenous Co-IP (S-beads pulldown), we found that the regulatory domain (RD) of PFKP interacts with RAD51 (Fig.  ). Notably, in situ PLA results revealed a significant increase in the interaction between PFKP and RAD51 within the nucleus after IR stimulation in HeLa cells, indicating that the nuclear localization of PFKP may be induced by IR exposure (Fig.  ). To substantiate this observation, we examined the subcellular localization of PFKP after IR stimulation. Our observations indicated that the total protein levels of PFKP were unchanged following IR stimulation. However, PFKP shuttled from the cytoplasm to the nucleus, and its recruitment to chromatin was significantly increased under IR stimulation in both HeLa and PANC-1 cells (Fig.  – ). This spatial redistribution was further validated by immunofluorescence analysis, the results of which revealed the IR-induced chromatin accumulation of PFKP both in HeLa and PANC-1 cells (Fig. ). Taken together, these results establish that PFKP is an interacting protein of RAD51 and can translocate to the nucleus in response to IR stimulation.

## PFKP promotes HR repair by enhancing the interaction of RAD51 with BRCA2
Next, we investigated the functional implications of the interaction between PFKP and RAD51 following IR treatment. We observed a decrease in the number of RAD51 foci following IR stimulation in both PFKP siRNA-treated HeLa and PANC-1 cells that were synchronized in S/G2 phase, suggesting that PFKP may affect the function of RAD51 in HR repair (Fig.  , and and ). To explore this issue, we conducted an HR reporter assay to measure HR efficiency (siMRE11 was used as a positive control) and found that HR efficiency was reduced in PFKP siRNA-treated cells, confirming the effect of PFKP on HR repair (Fig.  and ). Given that PFKP impacts the HR pathway, we next evaluated its role in maintaining genomic stability. As shown in , there was a notable increase in γH2AX protein levels as well as an increased number of γH2AX foci in PFKP siRNA-treated cells. These data demonstrate that PFKP helps maintain genome stability and promotes HR repair.
 Having established the function of PFKP in the regulation of RAD51, we next explored its role in the upstream components of RAD51 in the HR repair pathway. We observed that the number of pRPA2 (S4 + S8) foci, a marker of DNA end resection, did not differ between PFKP siRNA-treated and control HeLa cells after IR treatment, suggesting that PFKP does not participate in the DNA end resection step of HR following IR treatment (Fig.  ). The unaltered number of p-ATM (S1981) foci indicated that PFKP does not affect ATM activation (Fig.  ). Similarly, no significant changes in the number of BRCA1 or BRCA2 foci were detected between normal control and PFKP RNAi HeLa cells, indicating that PFKP does not influence the function of BRCA1 or BRCA2 after IR stimulation (Fig.  and  ). These phenomena were also observed in PANC-1 cells ( ), indicating that PFKP specifically modulates RAD51 functionality without affecting the upstream processes involved in HR under IR stimulation.
We subsequently investigated the mechanism by which PFKP promotes HR repair through RAD51. In the functional regulation of RAD51, BRCA2 initially recruits RAD51 to the sites of damaged DNA through a direct interaction [ , ]. Given that PFKP does not affect BRCA2 foci, we subsequently examined the interaction between RAD51 and BRCA2 upon IR stimulation. Endogenous and semi-exogenous Co-IP assays showed that the interaction between RAD51 and BRCA2 was markedly reduced in PFKP-knockdown (PFKP-KD) HeLa cells in response to IR stimulation (Fig.  and ). The similar results were also found in PANC-1 cells ( ). Conversely, Myc-PFKP overexpression significantly enhanced the RAD51-BRCA2 interaction compared with control cells, indicating that PFKP promotes HR repair by enhancing the interaction of RAD51 with BRCA2 (Fig.  ).

## PFKP indirectly phosphorylates RAD51 upon IR stimulation
Recognizing the facilitating role of PFKP in enhancing the interaction between RAD51 and BRCA2, we investigated how PFKP mediates this interaction. Plasmids encoding either wild-type PFKP (PFKP-WT) or a dimeric form lacking metabolic enzyme activity (PFKP-F649L) [ ] were transfected into PFKP-KD HeLa cells which were synchronized in S/G2 phase after IR treatment and then RAD51 foci were assessed by immunofluorescence. We found that the number of RAD51 foci was increased in both PFKP-WT- and PFKP-F649L-transfected PFKP-KD cells compared to untreated PFKP-KD cells, demonstrating that both forms can effectively compensate for the deficiency in RAD51 caused by PFKP knockdown (Fig.  , and and ). Additionally, the γH2AX foci results confirmed that, similar to WT PFKP, the F649L mutation also attenuated the increase in DNA damage associated with the loss of PFKP function (Fig.  ). Since the classical metabolic enzyme activity of PFKP is responsible for the production of fructose-1,6-bisphosphate (FBP) [ ], we next supplemented PFKP-KD cells with FBP. Notably, there was no change in the number of RAD51 foci within the FBP-supplemented groups compared with the FBP-lacking group, suggesting that replenishment with FBP cannot compensate for the loss-of-function effects on RAD51 caused by PFKP knockdown (Fig.  ). This observation indicates that PFKP positively regulates RAD51 recruitment independently of its canonical metabolic activity.
 Having excluded the classical metabolic enzyme activity of PFKP in RAD51 recruitment, we next examined whether PFKP affects RAD51 expression. We found that there was no significant change in RAD51 expression between control and PFKP siRNA cells (Fig.  ). We subsequently investigated other reported functions of PFKP, as a protein kinase in regulating RAD51 phosphorylation [ ]. We observed an increase in the level of RAD51 phosphorylation in nonspecific siRNA-transfected HeLa cells following IR treatment; however, this increase was significantly reduced in PFKP-KD cells by endogenous and semi-exogenous IP assays (Fig. and ). Similar results were detected in PANC-1 cells ( ). Furthermore, the exogenous overexpression of PFKP markedly increased serine/threonine phosphorylation levels of RAD51 (Fig.  ). Interestingly, PFKP was found to phosphorylate RAD51 in eukaryotic systems based on in vitro kinase assays (Fig.  ); however, when PFKP was expressed and purified from E. coli (a prokaryotic system), it lacked detectable kinase activity toward RAD51, despite PFKP itself possessing ATPase activity (Fig.  – ). Notably, this kinase activity was restored only upon the addition of eukaryotic Flag-tagged PFKP that may harbor interacting proteins, indicating that an additional PFKP-dependent kinase may exist to phosphorylate RAD51 (Fig. ). To further confirm the role of PFKP in RAD51 phosphorylation, PFKP-KD cells were reconstituted with either PFKP-WT or PFKP-G33A mutant (a point mutant lacking ATPase activity) and then exposed to IR. We found that, like PFKP-WT, PFKP-G33A effectively restored the number of RAD51 foci reduced by PFKP knockdown (Fig.  and ). Meanwhile, both PFKP-WT and PFKP-G33A reduced the elevated levels of γH2AX foci observed in PFKP-KD cells (Fig.  ). These findings indicate that PFKP indirectly facilitates RAD51 phosphorylation, suggesting that this process may require an additional PFKP-dependent kinase to phosphorylate RAD51.

## PFKP enhances the RAD51-BRCA2 interaction by recruiting CK2 to phosphorylate RAD51
So, what is the direct kinase responsible for RAD51 phosphorylation? We purified the Flag-PFKP protein from HEK293T cells and the His-RAD51 protein from E. coli, and subjected them to an in vitro kinase assay. The RAD51 proteins were then isolated via western blot, and the phosphorylation sites of RAD51 were detected by mass spectrometry (MS). Through analyzing MS data for potential phosphorylation sites on RAD51, we found that RAD51 was phosphorylated at threonine 13 (T13) residue (Fig.  ). To validate this phosphorylation site, the T13 residue of RAD51 was mutated to either T13A (a phosphorylation-deficient mutation) or T13E (a phosphorylation-mimicking mutation), which were then transfected into HeLa cells. Semi-exogenous Co-IP revealed that the IR-enhanced interaction between RAD51 and BRCA2 was significantly diminished in cells expressing the RAD51-T13A mutant compared with cells expressing wild-type RAD51. Conversely, the interaction increased in cells expressing the RAD51-T13E mutant, confirming that T13 phosphorylation is essential for stabilizing the RAD51-BRCA2 interaction (Fig.  ). Casein kinase 2 (CK2) was previously shown to phosphorylate RAD51 at T13 residue and promote its recruitment to DSBs [ ]. After searching the MS results for PFKP-WT and PFKP-F649L interaction proteins, we were surprised to discover that both PFKP-WT and PFKP-F649L can interact with the catalytic subunit of CK2 (CSNK2A1) and its regulatory subunit (CSNK2B). Moreover, PFKP-F649L pulled down a greater number of CK2 subunit peptides than PFKP-WT (Fig.  ). Therefore, we hypothesized that CK2 is the kinase recruited by PFKP to mediate IR-induced RAD51 phosphorylation. To further test this, we first performed S-beads pulldown experiments, which demonstrated that PFKP interacts with CK2 and that this interaction is markedly enhanced following IR exposure (Fig.  ). Furthermore, an in vitro kinase assay revealed markedly elevated RAD51 phosphorylation upon co-incubation with PFKP purified from eukaryotic cells, which was attenuated by the CK2 inhibitor CX-4945 (Fig.  ). We also observed an increase in RAD51 phosphorylation following IR stimulation, as detected using both a phospho-CK2 substrate antibody and a phospho-Thr/Ser antibody. However, neither the CK2 inhibitor CX-4945 nor PFKP depletion had an additive effect on RAD51 phosphorylation levels, suggesting that PFKP and CK2 inhibition act within the same pathway (Fig.  ). Based on these data, we propose a model in which PFKP recruits CK2 to phosphorylate RAD51, thereby stabilizing the interaction between RAD51 and BRCA2 following IR stimulation.
 Next, we clarified the mechanism by which PFKP recruits CK2 to facilitate RAD51 phosphorylation. We found that PFKP interacts with CK2 via its regulatory domain following IR stimulation ( ). Through rescue experiments, we found that reintroducing the regulatory domain of PFKP into PFKP-KD cells effectively reversed the reduction in RAD51 foci ( ) and the increase in γH2AX foci in PFKP-deficient cells ( ). Meanwhile, these phenomena were abolished by the CK2 inhibitor ( and ). These data demonstrate that PFKP recruits CK2 via its regulatory domain, which is crucial for maintaining the function of RAD51. Additionally, we found that the protein level of CK2α was not altered in PFKP-KD cells after IR stimulation; however, the recruitment of CK2α to chromatin was significantly reduced in these cells (Fig.  and  ). We also observed a marked impairment in the recruitment of CK2α to DSB sites in both HeLa and PANC-1 PFKP-KD cells following IR stimulation, as assessed by PLA (Fig.  and ). Concurrently, the PLA results revealed a reduction in the interaction between CK2α and RAD51 in both HeLa and PANC-1 PFKP-KD cells after IR stimulation (Fig.  and ). These results demonstrate that PFKP can recruit CK2 to DSB sites while enhancing the interaction between CK2 and RAD51.
Compared with that in PFKP-KD cells, re-expression of Myc-PFKP-WT in PFKP-KD cells markedly increased the interaction between CK2α and RAD51 (Fig.  ) or γH2AX ( ), as detected by PLA. Notably, reconstitution of PFKP-KD cells with either Myc-PFKP-G33A or Myc-PFKP-F649L fully restored the colocalization of CK2α with RAD51 or γH2AX, demonstrating that PFKP acts as a scaffold protein to recruit CK2 to RAD51, independent of its canonical metabolic activity (Fig.  and ). Collectively, these findings indicate that PFKP enhances the interaction of RAD51 with BRCA2 by recruiting CK2 to phosphorylate RAD51.

## ATM phosphorylates PFKP and promotes its translocation to the nucleus
Having elucidated the function of PFKP in HR repair, we next identified upstream regulators of PFKP in this process. In vertebrate cells, the DDR is regulated primarily by three kinases: ataxia-telangiectasia mutated (ATM), ATM and Rad3-related (ATR), and DNA-dependent protein kinase (DNA–PK) [ , ]. Therefore, we assessed the IR-induced recruitment of PFKP to chromatin following treatment with ATM, ATR or DNA–PK inhibitors. We first measured the total levels of PFKP and observed that they were unchanged after treatment with the aforementioned inhibitors in both HeLa and PANC-1 cells (Fig.  and ). Interestingly, IR-induced nuclear translocation of PFKP was effectively inhibited when these cells were treated with the ATM inhibitor (Fig.  and ). Moreover, compared with other inhibitors, the ATM inhibitor significantly inhibited the recruitment of PFKP to chromatin upon IR stimulation (Fig.  ). These findings position ATM as a primary kinase responsible for promoting PFKP nuclear translocation and chromatin binding.
 We subsequently explored the mechanism through which ATM influences PFKP translocation into the nucleus. Immunoblotting revealed that the level of PFKP phosphorylation increased under IR stimulation (Fig.  ). Upon treating HeLa cells with ATM, ATR and DNA–PK inhibitors, the increase in PFKP phosphorylation levels induced by IR was inhibited only in the ATM inhibitor group (Fig.  ). ATM preferentially phosphorylates SQ/TQ motifs [ ]. Utilizing an antibody specific for SQ/TQ motifs, we detected that phosphorylated (p)-SQ/TQ increased significantly after IR stimulation, and that this increase could be mitigated by treating cells with an ATM inhibitor (Fig.  ). Among the four candidate SQ/TQ sites in PFKP, the T278A mutation effectively inhibited p-SQ/TQ signal, showing its critical role in PFKP phosphorylation. This strongly suggests that T278 is the primary site for ATM-induced PFKP phosphorylation (Fig.  ). We transfected PFKP-WT, PFKP-T278A (a phosphorylation-deficient mutation), or PFKP-T278E (a phosphorylation-mimicking mutation) plasmids into HeLa cells, and the western blot results further confirmed the role of T278 in PFKP phosphorylation (Fig. ). Moreover, the nuclear translocation of PFKP was significantly impaired in cells expressing the PFKP-T278A mutant and reversed in cells expressing the PFKP-T278E mutant, revealing the important role of T278 phosphorylation in facilitating PFKP nuclear translocation (Fig.  ). Furthermore, we evaluated the biological relevance of ATM-regulated PFKP T278 phosphorylation. Reconstitution with either PFKP-WT or PFKP-T278E mutant significantly increased the number of RAD51 foci in PFKP-KD cells compared with control cells. In contrast, expression of the PFKP-T278A mutant did not enhance RAD51 foci formation (Fig.  ). Conversely, γH2AX foci were markedly reduced in PFKP-WT- or PFKP-T278E-reconstituted cells, whereas PFKP-T278A expressing cells retained high levels of γH2AX foci, mirroring that in PFKP-KD cells (Fig.  ). These findings demonstrate that ATM phosphorylates PFKP at residue T278, which is crucial for its nuclear translocation and DDR.

## ATM phosphorylates PFKP to mediate the homeostatic balance between glycolysis and HR repair
In terms of HR repair, we elucidated the role of PFKP in IR-stimulated HR repair. Given its gatekeeper function in glycolysis, we sought to determine whether PFKP serves as a bridge molecule between glycolysis and HR repair. To address this issue, we examined whether this regulatory mechanism operates under conditions that promote glycolysis. HG is a potent stimulant that can induce glycolysis. HG exposure has been reported to lead to intracellular ROS accumulation, an event associated with genomic instability [ ]. Therefore, HG stimulation was employed for our subsequent experiments. Initially, we observed that the number of γH2AX foci progressively increased with different doses of HG stimulation (Fig.  ). When cells were treated with N-acetylcysteine (NAC), an ROS scavenger, there was a significant reduction in the number of HG stimulation-induced γH2AX foci ( ). These findings suggest that HG can induce DNA damage, potentially through a mechanism involving ROS.
 Next, we analyzed the effects of PFKP on RAD51 and its upstream factors following HG-induced DNA damage. The number of RAD51 foci significantly decreased in both HeLa and PANC-1 PFKP-siRNA treated cells after HG stimulation (Fig.  and ). Additionally, we observed that PFKP did not affect the upstream signaling of RAD51 but specifically regulated RAD51 upon HG stimulation in both HeLa and PANC-1 cells ( ). Subsequent experiments demonstrated that HG stimulation promoted the formation of p-ATM (S1981) foci, which was suppressed by NAC ( ). Moreover, HG stimulation markedly promoted both the nuclear translocation of PFKP and its chromatin recruitment in HeLa and PANC-1 cells (Fig.  – , and ). Meanwhile, these effects were abolished by an ATM inhibitor (Fig. , and and ). Furthermore, we noted that the interaction between PFKP and CK2α or RAD51 in HeLa cells was enhanced under HG conditions ( and ). These results suggest that a similar mechanism mediated by the ATM-PFKP-RAD51 pathway also applies to HG stimulation and further establishes a link between glycolysis and HR repair through PFKP.
Given the bridging role of PFKP in linking glycolysis to HR repair, we then investigated the mechanism by which PFKP links these two processes. The tetrameric form of PFKP is primarily responsible for its metabolic enzyme activity [ ]. During the G1 phase, CDK6 has been reported to phosphorylate PFKP and facilitate its transition from tetramers to dimers, thereby promoting its trafficking to the nucleus [ , ]. Consequently, we tested whether ATM influences PFKP oligomerization to mediate its metabolic enzyme activity. Size exclusion chromatography revealed that PFKP exists as both tetramers and dimers in HeLa cells (Fig.  and ). Stimulation with either IR or HG shifted the equilibrium from tetramers toward dimers, which was blocked by an ATM inhibitor (Fig.  ). The data from MALS analysis demonstrated that PFKP T278A effectively decreased the dimers/tetramers ratio, and that this phenomenon could be reversed by PFKP T278E, indicating the critical role of T278 phosphorylation in regulating the transition between the PFKP tetrameric and dimeric states (Fig.  and  ). We subsequently transfected PFKP-WT and PFKP-F649L into cells and found that the expression of PFKP-F649L significantly enhanced the interaction between PFKP and RAD51 ( ). These observations indicate that ATM acts upstream of PFKP and phosphorylates PFKP at residue T278 to promote the transition of PFKP from tetramers to dimers, thereby facilitating HR repair.
Finally, we explored the effect of the ATM-mediated PFKP tetramer-dimer switch on balancing glycolysis and HR repair. Compared with cells treated with IR or HG, those treated with the ATM inhibitor exhibited an increased glycolytic capacity (Fig.  ), elevated ROS levels ( ), enhanced PFK1 activity (Fig.  ), and decreased NADPH levels (Fig.  ). Overall, our findings indicate that PFKP serves as a molecular switch to balance glycolysis and HR repair through ATM-mediated phosphorylation at residue T278.

## Targeting the balance between glycolysis and the HR repair pathway may increase the sensitivity of tumors to radiotherapy
PFKP acts as a key enzyme in glycolysis and plays a critical role in tumor development [ ]. An analysis of data from The Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA) revealed that PFKP is highly expressed in multiple tumors, and its elevated expression correlates with poorer clinical prognosis for patients suffering from various cancers, including cervical cancer, pancreatic adenocarcinoma and lung adenocarcinoma (Fig.  and  ). These data imply an oncogenic function of PFKP, suggesting that it could be a potential target for cancer therapy. To test our hypothesis, we conducted colony formation assays to evaluate the impact of PFKP on the proliferative potential of HeLa cells. As shown in Fig.  , colony formation efficiency was significantly lower in PFKP-KD cells than in control cells following IR treatment, indicating that the absence of PFKP may increase the sensitivity of tumor cells to radiotherapy. Haven clarified the role of PFKP in recruiting CK2 to DNA damage sites, and owing to the lack of specific PFKP inhibitors, we treated tumor cells with the glycolysis inhibitor 2-DG combined with the CK2 inhibitor CX-4945 to simultaneously target glycolysis and the HR repair pathway. CCK-8 assay results demonstrated that the combined application of CX-4945 and 2-DG markedly enhanced the sensitivity of HeLa, PANC-1 and A549 tumor cells to radiotherapy (Fig.  , and and ). Additionally, colony formation assays revealed significant decreases in colony formation efficiency within the combination group after IR stimulation (Fig.  , and and ). These findings demonstrate that targeting both glycolysis and the HR repair pathway may increase tumor sensitivity to radiotherapy.
 Clinically, hyperglycemia is a prevalent characteristic of DM. To confirm the function of PFKP as a bridging molecule that balances homeostasis between glycolysis and HR repair, we collected tumor tissues from 10 diabetic patients and 10 nondiabetic patients across three different cancer types and conducted immunohistochemical staining. As anticipated, we detected higher levels of phosphorylated ATM (p-ATM), γH2AX, CK2α, and RAD51 in tumors from DM patients than in those from non-DM patients in the squamous cell carcinoma of the uterine cervix, pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma and lung adenocarcinoma (Fig. , and and ). The nuclear PFKP score was also significantly greater in DM-associated tumor patients than in those without such associations (Fig.  , and and ). These findings indicate that PFKP translocation into the nucleus to promote HR repair is more pronounced in tumor patients with DM than in those without DM.
In summary, these data demonstrate that the simultaneous targeting of glycolysis and the HR repair pathway may provide therapeutic benefits for patients with tumors, particularly in individuals with concurrent DM.

## Discussion
While tumorigenesis relies on glycolysis and DDR pathways, the regulatory mechanisms enabling cancer cells to balance glycolytic flux with genomic stability are critically important yet remain undefined. Our study identifies PFKP as a critical molecular nexus that integrates these processes. Under normal conditions, PFKP predominantly exerts its phosphofructokinase activity to promote glycolysis within tumor cells. In contrast, upon excessive glucose or IR stimulation, ATM senses damaged DNA. On the one hand, activated ATM phosphorylates PFKP at T278 residue, which promotes the switch of PFKP from tetramers to dimers and its subsequent translocation to the nucleus. In the nucleus, PFKP acts as a scaffold protein to recruit CK2, which in turn phosphorylates RAD51 at T13 residue and subsequently enhances RAD51 binding to BRCA2 to promote HR repair and prevent excessive DNA damage. On the other hand, the reduction in tetrameric PFKP diminishes its metabolic enzymatic activity and facilitates redirection of glycolytic flux to the pentose phosphate pathway (PPP). This increases NADPH production, which promotes ROS scavenging, thereby mitigating DNA damage (Fig.  ). Through this dynamic regulation, tumor cells maintain glycolysis at appropriate levels, which not only benefits cancer cell proliferation but also prevents excessive DNA damage, thereby conferring a growth and survival advantage by preserving cellular homeostasis in response to metabolic alterations.
 Recently, several glycolytic enzymes have been reported to translocate into the nucleus and interact with damaged DNA or the DNA repair machinery. PKM2 has been shown to be phosphorylated by ATM at the T328 site in response to IR and oxidative stress, leading to its accumulation in the nucleus. The phosphorylated form of PKM2 (pT328-PKM2) enhances the recruitment of CtBP-interacting protein (CtIP) to DSBs and facilitates DNA end resection by phosphorylating CtIP, thereby promoting HR-mediated DSBs repair [ ]. PGAM1 has also been demonstrated to facilitate DSB end resection through its enzymatic activity, which regulates the stability of CtIP. Inhibiting the enzyme activity of PGAM1 decreases CtIP protein levels, impairs HR repair, and thus sensitizes BRCA1/2-proficient breast cancers to PARP inhibitors [ ]. Other glycolytic enzymes, such as aldolase and glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate dehydrogenase (GAPDH), are also implicated in DDR processes [ , ]. However, it remains unclear whether PFK1, a key enzyme of glycolysis, plays a role in the DDR. Here, we revealed a previously unidentified role for PFKP in HR repair. We found that PFKP translocates to the nucleus, where it positively regulates RAD51 to promote HR repair (Figs – , and – ). While investigating the function of PFKP in HR repair, we discovered that PFKP mediates this process through its noncanonical metabolic activities. The impact of the PFKP-F649L mutation on HR deficiency caused by PFKP deletion indicates that PFKP positively regulates RAD51 independently of its canonical metabolic activity (Fig. and  ). Indeed, PFKP is involved in various physiological processes beyond metabolism due to its noncanonical activities. For example, PFKP can act as a protein kinase that catalyzes the serine phosphorylation of the developmental regulator Lin41 to promote the expression of endodermal specification genes [ ]. PFKP also phosphorylates ATG4B at residue S34, enhancing the activity of ATG4B and promoting p62 under conditions of amino acid deprivation [ ]. Furthermore, Chen et al. reported that the interaction between PFKP and AMPK is augmented during glucose starvation, and the PFKP-AMPK interaction promotes the mitochondrial recruitment of AMPK, which then phosphorylates acetyl-CoA carboxylase 2 (ACC2), enhancing long-chain fatty acid oxidation [ ]. Our findings revealed that PFKP also acts as an interaction protein critical for IR- or HG-stimulated HR repair by recruiting CK2, which then phosphorylates RAD51 and enhances its binding affinity to BRCA2, thereby promoting HR repair (Fig.  , and ).
CK2 is a serine/threonine kinase involved in DDR [ ]. Recent studies have reported that CK2 participates in transcription-coupled nucleotide excision initiation by phosphorylating CSB [ ]. Furthermore, CK2 has emerged as a critical and multifaceted regulator of HR, orchestrating key steps from the initial signaling of DNA damage to the final execution of strand exchange. During the initial stage of HR, CK2 mediates the amplification of early damage signals. NRDE2 binds to CK2 subunits, facilitating the assembly and enhancing CK2 holoenzyme activity. This NRDE2-mediated activation of CK2 subsequently leads to the phosphorylation of the DNA damage adaptor protein MDC1. This promotes the recruitment of the MRN complex (MRE11-RAD50-NBS1) to DNA break sites, initiating DNA end resection [ ]. During the execution phase of HR repair, CK2 phosphorylates HTATSF1, facilitating its binding to TOPBP1. This promotes the S-phase-specific recruitment of TOPBP1 to damaged chromatin, which is essential for subsequent RPA/RAD51-dependent HR [ ]. CK2 can also regulate the core recombinase RAD51 directly [ ]. Yata K et al. revealed that PLK1-mediated phosphorylation of RAD51 at serine 14 (S14) promotes subsequent CK2-mediated phosphorylation at threonine 13 (T13). This phosphorylation cascade facilitates the recruitment of RAD51 to DNA damage sites and its assembly into functional nucleoprotein filaments, which execute DNA strand search and exchange. This promotes the subsequent HR repair process and thus enhances cellular resistance to genotoxic stresses [ ]. In our study, we observed that following IR stimulation, RAD51 is phosphorylated at residue T13, and that CK2 is a protein kinase of RAD51 (Fig.  - ). Interestingly, CK2, rather than PFKP, serves as the protein kinase for RAD51. This raises an intriguing question: why does PFKP function primarily as an interaction partner to recruit CK2 for the phosphorylation of RAD51 instead of directly phosphorylating RAD51 itself? This question warrants further investigation.
In our study, we found that ATM senses DSBs or ROS induced by IR or HG treatment, and phosphorylates PFKP at residue T278. This promotes its transition from tetramers to dimers, thereby enhancing HR efficiency. In normal cells, DSBs are primarily repaired by two major pathways: NHEJ and HR. The cell cycle phase is a key factor in determining which pathway is chosen. In mammalian cells, NHEJ operates throughout the cell cycle except during the M phase, whereas HR is restricted to the S/G2 phases after DNA replication [ ]. For two-ended DSBs in the G2 phase, normal human cells use NHEJ to repair approximately 70% of breaks, with the remaining 30% relying on HR [ ]. Although NHEJ is faster and serves as the predominant DNA repair pathway, it is error-prone and often results in insertions or deletions. In contrast, HR is a highly accurate repair mechanism that offers significant advantages to cellular genomic integrity. As a key regulator of the DSB response, ATM plays a central, multifaceted role in HR, from initiation to completion [ , ]. Numerous HR factors, including MRE11, CtBP-interacting protein (CtIP), BRCA1, BLM, and the nuclease EXO1, are substrates of ATM [ ]. In mammalian cells, CtIP is essential for DSB resection and, together with the MRN complex, it promotes the initial stage of DNA resection processing. ATM facilitates this process by phosphorylating CtIP at Thr859 [ ]. Furthermore, ATM is required in conjunction with Artemis for the efficient formation of ssDNA and RAD51 foci at radiation-induced DSBs during the G2 phase [ ]. Bakr A et al. demonstrated that ATM inhibition reduces HR efficiency and leads to an increased number of residual RAD51 and γH2AX foci in both S- and G2-phase cells. This indicates that ATM also functions in the later stages of HR, following the formation of the RAD51 nucleoprotein filament [ ]. Beyond its established role in regulating the HR pathway, we here have discovered that ATM also phosphorylates the key glycolytic enzyme PFKP. ATM mediates PFKP phosphorylation at residue T278 to increase its nuclear translocation (Fig.  – and ). Our size exclusion chromatography results revealed that both IR and HG stimulation shifted PFKP from tetrameric to dimeric forms, and ATM inhibitor effectively inhibited the shift of the PFKP from tetramers to dimers (Fig.  ). When the PFKP T278 site was mutated to T278A, the switch of PFKP from tetramers to dimers was significantly attenuated. These effects were reversed by transfection with PFKP T278E, which demonstrated the critical role of ATM in the PFKP tetramer-to-dimer switch (Fig.  and  ). By linking glycolysis with HR repair, ATM integrates metabolic regulation with the DNA damage response, providing a novel extension to the known ATM-driven HR pathways. Expect for ATM, researcher has also found that cyclin D3/CDK6 facilitates PFKP nuclear translocation. Although both cyclin D3-CDK6 and ATM can phosphorylate PFKP and promote its nuclear translocation, the scenarios in which they occur and their core functions are distinct. Under physiological conditions, cyclin D3/CDK6 facilitates PFKP nuclear translocation by dimerization. This conformational change exposes the nuclear localization signal (NLS) of PFKP, enabling its interaction with importin-9. Subsequently, nuclear PFKP stimulates the expression of C-X-C chemokine receptor type 4 (CXCR4), a key chemokine receptor that mediates leukemia homing and infiltration, thereby promoting the invasion of T-ALL cells [ ]. In contrast, under conditions of DNA damage, such as IR or HG stimulation, ATM is rapidly activated and phosphorylates PFKP. This promotes its nuclear translocation to participate in HR repair and safeguard genomic integrity. While these two pathways are initiated by distinct upstream signals, they collectively constitute a “homeostasis-stress” dual-safeguard regulatory network that ensures precise control of PFKP.
Epidemiologically, people with DM are susceptible to increased risk, accelerated progression, and increased mortality rates for several types of cancers, including pancreatic, colorectal, hepatocellular, lung, and breast cancers [ – ]. Large meta-analyses have indicated that individuals with both cancer and DM experience a 15%–25% increase in mortality compared with those who suffer from cancer alone [ , ]. Consequently, DM is closely linked with tumorigenesis and cancer progression. Understanding the molecular mechanisms underlying both the epidemiological associations and mechanistic links between DM and cancer has received considerable attention as an area of therapeutic interest. The results of the present study revealed that PFKP promotes HR repair through the ATM-PFKP-RAD51 pathway while maintaining the homeostasis between glycolysis and DDR upon HG or IR stimulation in cancer cells (Fig.  , and and ). To validate our proposed mechanism, tissue samples were collected from patients diagnosed with tumors alone or tumors combined with DM. We discovered that the capacity of PFKP to translocate into the nucleus is significantly greater in patients with DM than in those with tumors alone (Fig.  , and and ). This observation may partly explain why DM is associated with a higher incidence, faster progression, and greater mortality of several cancers. Furthermore, we discovered that targeting the balance between glycolysis and the HR repair pathway could increase tumor sensitivity to radiotherapy, which may be particularly beneficial for patients with tumors, especially those with DM (Fig.  – , and ).
In our study, we revealed a novel function of PFKP as a bifunctional regulator of glycolysis and HR repair. Upon IR or HG stimulation, PFKP is phosphorylated by ATM and subsequently translocates to the nucleus where it acts as an interaction protein to recruit CK2. This recruitment leads to the CK2-mediated phosphorylation of RAD51, thereby enhancing RAD51 binding to BRCA2 and promoting HR repair. The clinical correlation between diabetic hyperglycemia and PFKP nuclear accumulation provides mechanistic insight into accelerated cancer development and high mortality in diabetic patients with tumors. Additionally, PFKP, CK2, or the inhibition of the glycolysis pathway is an actionable target for radiotherapy in a wide range of tumor cells. Taken together, our findings elucidate how cancer cells exploit PFKP to balance glycolysis and DDR, and provide novel avenues for developing metabolism-focused combination therapies.

## Supplementary Material
gkag336_Supplemental_File

## Acknowledgements
We are deeply grateful to Prof. Ling Liang (School of Basic Medical Sciences, Peking University) for guidance on the Size Exclusion Chromatography Experiment. We also appreciate Kuangda Lu (Department of Biomedical Engineering, Peking University) for providing access to the ionizing radiation instrument.

Author contributions: Haoyun Liu (Data curation [equal], Formal analysis [equal], Investigation [equal], Methodology [equal], Visualization [equal], Writing – original draft [equal], Writing – review & editing [equal]), Ming Zhang (Investigation [equal], Methodology [equal]), Zhanzhan Xu (Investigation [equal], Methodology [equal], Validation [equal], Writing – review & editing [equal]), Zexin Yang (Formal analysis [equal]), Yichen Pan (Formal analysis [equal]), Yongtai Bai (Methodology [equal]), Xinhui Zhao (Formal analysis [equal]), Weibin Wang (Supervision [equal]), Yang Yang (Conceptualization [equal], Funding acquisition [equal], Project administration [equal], Supervision [equal], Validation [equal], Visualization [equal], Writing – original draft [equal], Writing – review & editing [equal]), Jiadong Wang (Conceptualization [equal], Funding acquisition [equal], Project administration [equal], Resources [equal], Supervision [equal], Validation [equal] Writing – review & editing [equal])

## Supplementary data

Supplementary data is available at NAR online.

## Conflict of interest
None declared.

## Funding
This work was supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China (82472744, 82230089), the National Science Fund for Distinguished Young Scholars (82125031), and the National Key R&D Program of China (2022YFA1302800). Funding to pay the Open Access publication charges for this article was provided by the National Natural Science Foundation of China (82472744, 82230089), the National Science Fund for Distinguished Young Scholars (82125031) and the National Key R&D Program of China (2022YFA1302800).

## Data availability
The authors declare that all data of this study are available within the article and the Supplementary information and Source data files. The mass spectrometry proteomics data on the identification of RAD51 phosphorylation, RAD51-interaction proteins and PFKP-interaction proteins have been deposited in the ProteomeXchange Consortium (https://www.ebi.ac.uk/pride/login) via the PRIDE partner repository with the dataset identifier PXD070095.