3686acsomegaACS OmegaACS OmegaAmerican Chemical SocietyPMC1058626310586263105862633786766610.1021/acsomega.3c05069Conjugated Nanoparticles
for Solid Tumor Theranostics:
Unraveling the Interplay of Known and Unknown Factors
ChavdaVivek P BalarPankti C NallaLakshmi Vineela BezbaruahRajashri GogoiNiva Rani GajulaSiva Nageswara Rao PengBerney MeenaAvtar S CondeJoão PrasadRajendra †Department
of Pharmaceutics and Pharmaceutical Technology, L.M. College of Pharmacy, Ahmedabad 380001, India‡Pharmacy
Section, L.M. College of Pharmacy, Ahmedabad 380001, India§Department
of Pharmacy, Koneru Lakshmaiah Education
Foundation, Vaddeswaram, Andhra Pradesh 522302, India∥Department
of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Faculty of Science
and Engineering, Dibrugarh, 786004 Assam, India⊥Department
of Pharmaceutical Analysis, GITAM School of Pharmacy, GITAM (Deemed to be University), Rushikonda, Visakhapatnam, Andhra Pradesh 530045, India#Department
of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, University
of California at Los Angeles, Los
Angeles, California 90095, United States¶Department
of Biotechnology, All India Institute of
Medical Sciences (AIIMS), Ansari
Nagar, New Delhi 110029, India●ToxOmics,
NOVA Medical School, Faculdade de Ciências Médicas,
NMS|FCM, Universidade Nova de Lisboa, Lisboa 1169-056, Portugal■School
of Biochemical Engineering, Indian Institute
of Technology (BHU), Varanasi 221005, India*Email: rajendra.bce@iitbhu.ac.in; rajendra.prasad@tufts.edu.
*Email: vivek.chavda@lmcp.ac.in.
51020238413765437654–3768420102023© 2023 The Authors. Published by American Chemical SocietyPermits non-commercial access and re-use, provided that author attribution and integrity are maintained; but does not permit creation of adaptations or other derivative works (https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/).

## Abstract
 Cancer diagnoses have been increasing worldwide, and
solid tumors
are among the leading contributors to patient mortality, creating
an enormous burden on the global healthcare system. Cancer is responsible
for around 10.3 million deaths worldwide. Solid tumors are one of
the most prevalent cancers observed in recent times. On the other
hand, early diagnosis is a significant challenge that could save a
person’s life. Treatment with existing methods has pitfalls
that limit the successful elimination of the disorder. Though nanoparticle-based
imaging and therapeutics have shown a significant impact in healthcare,
current methodologies for solid tumor treatment are insufficient.
There are multiple complications associated with the diagnosis and
management of solid tumors as well. Recently, surface-conjugated nanoparticles
such as lipid nanoparticles, metallic nanoparticles, and quantum dots
have shown positive results in solid tumor diagnostics and therapeutics
in preclinical models. Other nanotheranostic material platforms such
as plasmonic theranostics, magnetotheranostics, hybrid nanotheranostics,
and graphene theranostics have also been explored. These nanoparticle
theranostics ensure the appropriate targeting of tumors along with
selective delivery of cargos (both imaging and therapeutic probes)
without affecting the surrounding healthy tissues. Though they have
multiple applications, nanoparticles still possess numerous limitations
that need to be addressed in order to be fully utilized in the clinic.
In this review, we outline the importance of materials and design
strategies used to engineer nanoparticles in the treatment and diagnosis
of solid tumors and how effectively each method overcomes the drawbacks
of the current techniques. We also highlight the gaps in each material
platform and how design considerations can address their limitations
in future research directions.

statusreleaseddisplay-pdfyesis-olfnois-manuscriptnois-preprintnois-journal-matternois-scannednois-retractednoReceived 2023 Jul 14; Accepted 2023 Sep 19; Collection date 2023 Oct 17.

## Introduction
Cancer is considered the most lethal form
of human malignancy and
the leading cause of mortality globally. − The National Cancer Institute
defined a solid tumor as an abnormal tissue mass devoid of liquid
or cysts, such as lymphomas, carcinomas, and sarcomas, that could
be malignant or benign. However, the tumor
is not always associated with cancer. At the same time, the majority
of malignancies become solid tumors in the tissue where they first
arise, such as the bladder, breast, cervical colon, endometrial, kidney,
liver, lung, melanoma, mesothelioma, ovary, prostate, pancreas, skin,
and thyroid. Similar to normal tissue,
tumor neovascularization may involve angiogenesis, migration, immunosuppression,
cell proliferation, invasion, vasculogenesis, and metastasis. The
tumor vasculature is quite different from the vasculature of normal
tissues both functionally and morphologically. Small tumors smaller
than 2 mm in diameter are mostly perfused by nearby host tissues. In cases when a solid tumor reaches a threshold
size, diffusion does not provide access to the inner tumor microenvironment.
Therefore, the size of a tumor plays a significant role in dependent
drug delivery mechanisms. , Tumor growth and expansion
are closely associated with newly emerging microvessels, implying
that microcirculation is critical in the development, diagnosis, metastasis,
and treatment of solid tumors. , Also, blood flow to
solid tumors is crucial in delivering chemotherapeutic agents to the
tumor site. , Nevertheless, compared to normal
tissues, tumor tissues exhibit comparable arterial pressure but lower
venous pressure. This pressure gradient leads to blood flow, which
is insignificant in the core portion of a tumor but higher in the
peripheral compartment. Moreover, the
blood viscosity in the tumor microenvironment is higher than in the
normal tissues, given the presence of tumor cells and more giant molecules
like protein, causing an increase in the flow resistance in tumor
microcirculation leading to compromised drug bioavailability at the
target site. This justifies the heterogeneous blood flow within a
solid tumor, which is lower within the tumor mass when compared with
the marginal cells, leading to variable drug bioavailability and,
thus, lesser therapeutic efficiency.
Current cancer statistics
show that solid tumors comprise around
85% of all malignancies worldwide. The
FDA has approved numerous monoclonal antibodies against immunological
checkpoints PD-1, PD-L1, and CTLA-4 for cancer treatments, out of
which a small number of 25% are employed as first-line treatment for
solid tumors. This deficit may be attributable
to the obstacles in obtaining enough exposure in the tumor microenvironment
of solid tumors. The efficacy of cancer treatment in a solid tumor
is contingent on the targeted and effective delivery of the therapeutic
cargos to the tumor cells. Cases with inadequate drug delivery to
the target site could develop residual tumor cells, leading to relapse
and regrowth of tumors and possibly the buildout of resistant tumor
cells.
Carcinoma is a broader classification of solid tumors,
including
breast, prostate, and colon cancer. Statistics have shown that invasive
ductal carcinoma accounts for more than 80% of all breast cancer diagnoses
and is the leading cause of cancer-related mortality in females. On
the other hand, in the male population, prostate cancer is the most
common malignancy that accounts for the fifth most significant cause
of mortality among men. Colon cancer is also the leading cause of
mortality in the US. The statistics show
the urgency to immediately develop novel methods and tools to mitigate
solid tumors. Nanotheranostic approaches involve using nanoparticles
(NPs) for diagnostic and therapeutic purposes. − Nanomedicine
with theranostic capabilities can circulate through the body, avoid
the host’s defense, and deliver drugs and diagnostic agents
to the targeted site for cellular and molecular-level diagnosis and
treatment. − The therapeutic and diagnostic agents are combined
into a single theranostic platform that can be linked to a biological
ligand for targeted delivery. Nanotheranostics also offer responsive
drug release, synergistic and combined therapy, codelivery of siRNA,
multiple therapeutic approaches, oral administration, delivery to
the brain through the blood–brain barrier, and protection from
intracellular autophagy. Refer to for the basic understanding of the application
of nanoparticles in both diagnosis and treatment. Exosome-based delivery
systems are also under different stages of development for cancer
treatment. , 
 The use of nanotheranostics in solid tumors, including
drugs undergoing
preclinical and clinical trials as well as current challenges and
future issues, will be highlighted in this review. Arranja et al.
presented the fundamental concepts behind the utilization of nanoparticles
for targeting tumors, emphasizing the advantages associated with incorporating
imaging techniques to identify suitable patients and customize nanomedicine
therapies. In addition, Siddique et al.
explored the latest breakthroughs in cancer theranostics facilitated
by functionalized nanoparticles. By gaining insights into the ongoing
advancements and progress in nanoparticle-based cancer theranostics,
the authors cover the forthcoming obstacles and prospects in this
innovative approach to treating cancer. However, this review delves into a specific aspect of nanothermostics
in managing solid tumors using various materials. This review stands
out from previous reviews in terms of its narrowed scope, innovative
methodologies, incorporation of recent literature, and consideration
of alternative viewpoints. By leveraging these distinguishing factors,
this review aims to contribute new perspectives, deepen the understanding,
and advance the knowledge within the field.

## Epidemiology of Solid Tumors
According to a Global
Burden Disease study, the cancer burden has
expanded most in the low and low–middle social-demographic
index (SDI) quintiles during the past decade ( ). The findings of this thorough analysis
indicate that the worldwide cancer burden is large and expanding,
with burden varying by SDI. These findings give thorough and comparable
estimates that have the potential to aid global efforts toward equitable
cancer control. Such estimations are critical for enhancing global
cancer outcome equity and attaining important SDG targets for cancer
and other noncommunicable disease burden reduction. 
 The prevalence of one or more types of cancer has
burdened every
nation in the world. According to GLOBOCAN 2020, there were 10.3 million
cancer-related deaths and 19.3 million new disease cases worldwide. Of these instances, female breast cancer (11.7%),
lung cancer (11.4%), and prostate cancer (7.3%) were the most frequently
diagnosed cancers worldwide. The combined
cancer mortality shows that of all cancer-related fatalities lung
cancer (18%), liver cancer (8.3%), stomach cancer (7.7%), and breast
cancer (6.9%) were the leading causes of cancer death. According to
data on cancer incidence and mortality by sex, the most common cancers
found in men are lung (14.3%), prostate (14.1%), nonmelanoma skin
(7.2%), and stomach (7.1%) cancers. In
contrast, the most common cancers found in women are breast (24.5%),
lung (8.4%), and cervix (6.5%) cancers. 
Cancer, behind cardiovascular disorders, is the second most
significant
cause of disease-associated mortality worldwide. A complete investigation of cancer related to the environment,
social, and economic conditions and hereditary factors can be done
using country-specific counts and analyses of cancer incidences and
deaths. The country-specific authorities
provide information on specific regional efforts to avoid or control
cancer programs and more comprehensive data on regional cancer incidences
and mortality. The country-specific examination of cancer burden also
emphasizes prioritizing regional and national efforts to prevent cancer
based on the cancer patterns seen. 

## Challenges in the Management of Solid Tumors
Treating
solid tumors is a challenging task for the healthcare
system. Current diagnoses and treatments, even the standard ones,
are loaded with pitfalls. In this era, developing advanced formulations
to cope with challenges is crucial. However, many researchers are
working to compensate for the complexity of solid tumor malignancies. Early diagnosis is crucial to increasing the
probability and ease of treatment. The development of technology has
brought new advances in diagnostic approaches. For instance, liquid
biopsies are a widely accepted technique for diagnosis. It incorporates
cDNA, which targets genomic alteration and mutation hotspots to detect
the cancerous mass. It was noted that
genomic dissimilarities are rare in pediatric patients, which complicates
the detection process. Other diagnostic
strategies employ the use of invasive techniques, which patients and
physicians do not prefer. Biopsies, a gold standard diagnostic approach,
are especially susceptible to producing false-positive as well as
false-negative results. They might consider low-grade fibromyxoid
sarcoma as benign when it is in fact a malignant form. In comparison, benign lesions such as fibrous
histiocytoma, cellular benign fibrous histiocytoma, and many more
are mistaken for malignant forms of tumors. , Radiation diagnostics such as magnetic resonance imaging (MRI),
computed tomography (CT), and positron emission tomography (PET) scans
are involved in the diagnosis. MRI is widely used but is not preferred
for detecting retroperitoneal sarcoma. All these hurdles demand the development of novel approaches to
attain better diagnostic characteristics.
Even after a successful
diagnosis, treating cancer is a significant
obstacle. Resection and other surgical interventions are standard
methodologies for treating solid tumors. However, it was noted that
in the resection of neuroblastoma the chances of complications such
as infiltration of the growth pattern are observed, reducing its usage
as a therapeutic measure. USFDA has approved
“rituximab” as an effective antineuroblastoma agent;
many others are under clinical supervision. Although selective and
compelling, add-on studies are required to claim patient selection
for any specific immune-based therapy. Another widely used method is central venous catheters (CVCs), especially
in pediatric patients. The probability of consequences could be as
high as 40%. Problems can also occur
during the operation, such as life-threatening arrhythmia, thoracic
duct damage, nerve damage, arterial puncture, and even fatality. Hyperthermic intraperitoneal chemotherapy (HIPEC)
and combination therapy of HIPEC and cytoreductive studies are widely
studied in many clinical trials, especially for treating solid tumors
in ovarian cancer. A study concluded that more than 95% of patients
(n = 245) were observed to have at least a single
adverse effect after 6 weeks of chemotherapy. It was also observed
that patients with only surgery or surgery along with HIPEC had an
adverse diagnosis of grade 3 or grade 4 by 25% and 27%, respectively. 

## Functional Material Platforms in Cancer Theranostics
The enormous hurdles in the management of solid tumors, in the
fields of both diagnosis and treatment, demand an innovative approach
to dealing with the disease. Nanotheranostics research is an emerging
area that ensures effective diagnosis and targeted therapy of the
moiety. It promises a minimum adverse reaction and maximum efficacy
of the formulation. The primary building blocks of nanotheranostics
are NPs, which include aptamers, DNA nanostructures, metallic nanoparticles
(MNPs) such as gold and silver, dendrimers and copolymer-based or
lipid-based NPs, magnetic NPs, iron oxide NPs, mesoporous silica NPs,
or quantum dot NPs. NPs have unique attributes, including a high surface-area-to-volume
ratio and quantum confinement, allowing for successful modulation
in various fields. The following section
comprehensively reviews key material platforms used to synthesize
nanoparticles for theranostic applications.

## Lipid-Based Nanoparticles
Lipid-based nanoparticles
involve liposomes, solid–lipid nanoparticles (SLNs), nanostructured
lipid carriers (NLCs), etc. , Liposomes, composed
mainly of biocompatible and biodegradable phospholipids organized
in a bilayer structure, are extensively studied nanoparticle drug
delivery systems capable of encapsulating both hydrophobic and hydrophilic
drugs. Addition of cholesterol to their
formulations improves the stability and enhances the permeability
of hydrophobic drugs through the bilayer membrane, resulting in different
liposome types including multilaminar vesicles (MLVs), large unilamellar
vesicles (LUVs), and small unilamellar vesicles (SUVs) with sizes
ranging from 0.5 to 100 nm. SLNs are
a new colloidal drug delivery system composed of physiological lipids
that remain solid at both room and body temperature, with particles
ranging in size from 50 to 1000 nm. Solid lipids, including mono-,
di-, or triglycerides, fatty acids, and complex glyceride mixtures,
form a matrix material for drug encapsulation, stabilized by surfactants
or polymers. SLNs provide significant advantages, including site-specific
targeting, long-term physical stability, controlled release of both
lipophilic and hydrophilic drugs, labile drug protection, low cost,
ease of preparation, and low toxicity effects on human granulocytes. However, SLNs have some disadvantages, such
as moderate drug-loading capacity and drug expulsion due to crystallization
under storage conditions. NLCs, a second
generation of lipid-based nanocarriers, are a combination of solid
and liquid lipids, developed to overcome SLN limitations. They have
higher drug loading capacity and avoid drug expulsion during storage
by preventing lipid crystallization. NLCs are composed of glyceryl
tricaprylate, ethyl oleate, isopropyl myristate, and glyceryl dioleate,
have particle sizes similar to SLNs, can be surface-modified and targeted,
and offer controlled drug release. However, they also have disadvantages
such as drug expulsion after polymorphic transition and low loading
capacity. 

## Soft Molecule Polymeric Nanoparticles
By combining
various functional units with soluble macromolecules using self-assembling
copolymers, polymeric NPs can be produced. In the synthesis of polymeric
NPs, conventional natural polymers like chitosan, gelatin, albumin,
sodium alginate, and poly(lactic-co-glycolic acid)
(PLGA), as well as synthetic polymers like poly(lactic acid), poly
glutamic acid, polyglycolide, polyaspartic acid, and polyanhydride,
are frequently used. Practical methods
are needed to reduce immunogenicity and antigenicity and to lengthen
the residence period and stability inside the biological system for
polymeric NPs. Therefore, polyethylene glycol (PEG) is added to nanocarriers
to shield the polymeric nanocarrier from steric hindrance and renal
clearance. Additionally, physiochemical characteristics like crystallinity,
molecular weight, hydrophobicity, and polydispersity index control
how quickly the polymeric NPs dissolve and transport drugs. Polymeric NPs are uniquely modified to produce
hydrophobic environments to encapsulate hydrophobic medications to
the designated target. Nanocapsules,
nanospheres, polymeric micelles, drug–polymer conjugates, dendrimers,
polymersomes, and polyplexes are examples of polymeric NPs. 
Dendrimers have demonstrated great promise
as nanocarriers for the delivery of tumor-specific drugs. Dendrimers
have a specific architecture and composition, are highly branching,
and have a monodispersed weight distribution. Substantial positive charges on dendrimers make them effective transfecting
agents, and functional groups on their surfaces enable them to be
functionalized with antibodies, peptides, folate, and other targeted
compounds. Dendrimers have limitations,
including that dendrimers can interact with proteins, organelles,
and membranes of nanoscale cells. The lipid bilayer may interact with
dendrimers with cationic surface groups, increasing permeability while
reducing the integrity. , 
Spheroid nanoplatforms
with a hydrophilic shell and a hydrophobic
core are known as polymeric micelles. They are more drawn to disease
therapies due to their high payload with lower dimensions, thermodynamic
stability, and kinetic stability. When
used as a three-in-one nanocarrier system in cancer therapy, PEG-poly(lactic
acid) micelles can transport hydrophobic medicines, including paclitaxel
17-allyamino-17-demethoxygeldanamycin and rapamycin. In addition,
they can be used as a near-infrared (NIR) optical imaging agent due
to PEG-block-polycaprolactone micelles that are entrapped
with the drug carbocyanine. A multipurpose
MRI and drug delivery agent are possible when superparamagnetic IONPs
and DOX are confined within the core of polymeric micelles.
Drug–polymer conjugates are made by covalent bonding through
various chemical methods based on the functional groups of the drug
and polymeric carriers involved. The two primary forms of conjugates
are protein and drug conjugates with suitable polymers. N-(2-Hydroxypropyl) methacrylamide
(HPMA) is the most effective polymer for theranostic drug–polymer
conjugates. HPMA-based conjugates are favored in theranostics because
they are stable, nontoxic, and biocompatible for in vivo use. , Chemical conjugation and copolymerization
are the standard ways of functionalizing HPMA copolymers with diagnostic
and therapeutic agents.
Lipid-based nanoparticles involve liposomes,
solid lipid nanoparticles
(SLNs), nanostructured lipid carriers (NLCs), etc. Liposomes, composed mainly of biocompatible and biodegradable
phospholipids organized in a bilayer structure, are extensively studied
nanoparticle drug delivery systems capable of encapsulating both hydrophobic
and hydrophilic drugs. Addition of cholesterol to their formulations
improves stability and enhances permeability of hydrophobic drugs
through the bilayer membrane, resulting in different liposome types
including multilaminar vesicles (MLVs), large unilamellar vesicles
(LUVs), and small unilamellar vesicles (SUVs) with sizes ranging from
0.5 to 100 nm. SLNs are a new colloidal drug delivery system composed
of physiological lipids that remain solid at both room and body temperature,
with particles ranging in size from 50 to 1000 nm. Solid lipids, including
mono-, di-, or triglycerides, fatty acids, and complex glyceride mixtures,
form a matrix material for drug encapsulation, stabilized by surfactants
or polymers. SLNs provide significant advantages, including site-specific
targeting, long-term physical stability, controlled release of both
lipophilic and hydrophilic drugs, labile drug protection, low cost,
ease of preparation, and low toxicity effects on human granulocytes. However, SLNs have some disadvantages, such
as moderate drug-loading capacity and drug expulsion due to crystallization
under storage conditions. NLCs, a second
generation of lipid-based nanocarriers, are a combination of solid
and liquid lipids, developed to overcome SLN limitations. They have
higher drug loading capacity and avoid drug expulsion during storage
by preventing lipid crystallization. NLCs are composed of glyceryl
tricaprylate, ethyl oleate, isopropyl myristate, and glyceryl dioleate,
have particle sizes similar to SLNs, can be surface-modified and targeted,
and offer controlled drug release. However, they also have disadvantages
such as drug expulsion after polymorphic transition and low loading
capacity. 

## Metallic Nanoparticles
MNPs feature an inorganic metal
or metal oxide center typically encased in an organic or inorganic
substance or metal oxide shell. Gold
nanoparticles (AuNPs) ( ), silver nanoparticles (AgNPs), and Fe2O3NPs have been used as contrast agents in imaging techniques and as
carriers for drug delivery. The biocompatibility,
stability, and high absorption and scattering of light of AuNPs, the
antimicrobial properties of AgNPs, and the magnetic moment of Fe2O3NPs have made them ideal for nanotheranostics. Further research is needed to optimize their
use in nanodiagnostics and nanotherapy.
 AuNPs have been widely studied for their use in
nanotheranostics
due to their biocompatibility, stability, and high absorption and
scattering of light. AuNPs have been
the focus of significant research in nanotheranostics to treat solid
tumors. AuNPs possess exceptional physical
and chemical traits due to their varying shapes and dimensions. The
core of AuNPs, made of gold, is primarily inert and nonharmful to
living things. Additionally, producing AuNPs is a straightforward
process, and the particles’ size can be controlled within a
specific range, typically between 1 and 150 nm. Finally, AuNPs can serve as efficient drug delivery systems
as their various features and sizes allow for drug-controlled release
in specific areas. AuNPs are potential
drug delivery agents due to their unique physical and chemical properties. They can increase the pharmacokinetics of drugs,
reducing side effects and allowing for targeted delivery of higher
doses. AuNPs have been used to deliver small molecules and large biomolecules
such as proteins, DNA, and RNA. However, the size, charge, and surface
chemistry of AuNPs must be considered to create an effective delivery
system. Research has shown that AuNPs
can be highly targeted in cancer cells and that the size of the AuNPs
affects their uptake and intracellular fate. Studies have also shown that AuNPs linked with drugs can be rapidly
and efficiently concentrated in tumor cells. AuNPs can also cause
specific photothermal damage to tumor cells when combined with near-infrared
rays.
AgNPs also have antimicrobial properties and have been
used in
wound healing and treating infections. AgNPs have been used as contrast agents in imaging techniques such
as CT and photoacoustic imaging and as carriers for drug delivery. Fe2O3NPs have a high magnetic
moment and have been used as contrast agents in MRI. Fe2O3NPs have also been used for magnetic hyperthermia. The
magnetic properties of Fe2O3NPs are utilized
to generate heat when subjected to an alternating magnetic field,
leading to the destruction of cancer cells. Refer to for a discussion of AgNPs as a potential anticancer agent.
 MNPs have several general properties that make
them advantageous
for theranostics, such as nanometric size, improved permeability retention,
high surface area for molecular therapeutic binding, and surface functionalization
with cancer-homing ligands for cancer treatments. Moreover, due to their inherent biocompatibility, affordability,
and unique magnetic properties under external magnetic fields, MNPs represent a significant category of NPs
in the current theranostic research. The
magnetic characteristics of MNPs typically include ferromagnetism
and superparamagnetism. , Theranostics is currently
receiving a lot of interest from MNPs such as gadolinium, nickel,
manganese, and iron oxide-based nanoformulations. , Most nanoformulations used in theranostic applications are neutralized
because charged NPs can connect to cells in an unintended manner,
while neutral MNPs can lengthen blood vessel circulation times. MRI positron emission tomography and single-photon
emission computed tomography frequently use surface-functionalized
MNPs as contrast agents. , MNPs are also often
employed to generate heat at the targeted cells. A well-researched
method for tumor-targeted drug delivery is magnetoreception or gene
transfection utilizing MNPs. Magnetofection can be used effectively
in target drug delivery.

## Gold–Silica Hybrids
Uncoated gold nanorods may
aggregate in solutions and melt when exposed to laser light, both
of which significantly alter their optical characteristics. However, they can withstand aggregation and
shape change under a variety of circumstances when their surface is
suitably treated or chemically modified using silica, thereby preserving
their optical characteristics. Studies
by Mitichei et al. showed that a tightly bound silica shell surrounding
gold nanorods effectively prevents the production of a hydroxyl radical
and singlet oxygen. Furthermore, numerical simulations that account
for the application of short pulses of laser light demonstrate that
the plasmonic field improvement at the nanoparticle area is reduced
after the silica layer is added, rendering them ideal for a variety
of biological advancements (refer to ).
 Also, studies conducted by Mueller et al. demonstrated
hydrophobically
modified, silica-coated gold nanorods as a versatile theranostic agent.
The studies also showed that when contrasted with passive drug release
in the absence of ultrasound, ultrasound-mediated circumstances resulted
in a 2-fold higher release of nanomedicines. He et al. reported a high-performance combination treatment for
ablating cancer cells that combined photothermal therapy with chemotherapy
to increase therapeutic effectiveness using silica-encapsulated gold
nanorods. Numerous photoresponsive applications
are possible using gold nanorods, such as photothermal therapy, chemotherapy,
imaging, and cancer treatment.

## Gold Nanoparticles
Since all the catalytic, magnetic,
and optical properties of gold nanoparticles are influenced by their
size and shape, a lot of attention has recently been paid to controlling
the shape and size of gold nanoparticles. Also, due to their compatibility,
conjugation with biomolecules, and adjustable optical characteristics
that are caused by the shape and size of the gold nanoparticles, they
play a significant role in biological sciences. Additionally, gold nanoparticles display a variety of shapes,
including spherical, suboctahedral, decahedral, icosahedral multiple-twined,
tetrahedral, nanotriangles, hexagonal (platelets), and nanorods. In
contrast to spherical nanoparticles, triangular gold nanoparticles
exhibit desirable optical characteristics. 
Metallic nanoparticles have intrigued scientists for more
than a century, and they are now widely used in engineering and the
biological sciences. , The remarkable antibacterial
characteristics of silver nanoparticles against harmful viruses, bacteria,
and other nucleus-containing pathogens have been shown to make them
particularly helpful. The scientific
community also believes that these metallic nanoparticles are harmless
when used for gene and medication delivery. Additionally, metallic
nanoparticles can simultaneously provide therapeutic and diagnostic
options. 

## Quantum Dots
Quantum dots (QDs) are nanoscale semiconductor
particles with unique optical and electronic properties. They have
gained attention recently due to their potential applications in various
fields, including nanomedicine. In particular,
QDs have shown promise as a platform for nanotheranostics in solid
tumors. QDs have been utilized as nanotheranostics due to their unique
properties, such as high photostability, large absorption cross-section,
and size-tunable fluorescence emission. This makes them suitable for
imaging and therapeutic purposes. , To date, various
types of QDs from groups II–VI such as Zn(S, Se), Cd(S, Se,
Te), IV–VI Pb(S, Se), I–VI Ag2(S, Se), II–V
Cd3(P, As)2, and III–V In(P, As) as well
as ternary I–III–VI QDs (where I = Cu or Ag, III = Ga
or In, VI = S or Se) have been successfully utilized in biomedical
fields. , QDs comprise a fluorescent core surrounded
by a crystal shell that protects the center from ionization within
biological systems. Their exceptional
optical properties make them ideal for biomedical applications. Their
narrow and symmetrical emission profiles provide color purity and
accurate emission stability. Their broad excitation range and high
molar absorption coefficients allow for high-throughput detection.
Moreover, their high photoluminescence (PL), quantum yield (QY), and
resistance to photobleaching offer the potential for long-term monitoring
of biological processes. Additionally, their relatively long PL lifetimes
enable the reduction of autofluorescence. As a result, QDs have been proposed as versatile contrast imaging
agents that can be applied to a range of imaging modalities, including
infrared fluorescence, positron emission tomography, CT, MRI, and
PA imaging. , QDs can be engineered with various
biological molecules, such as antibodies, peptides, and aptamers,
which improve their biocompatibility for targeted drug delivery. 
Wang et al. showed that graphene QDs conjugated with folic acid (FA) could be
used for antitumor drug delivery. Their biocompatibility, optical
properties, high surface-to-volume ratio, and carboxylic groups for
conjugation with anchoring molecules make them suitable for targeted
drug delivery and real-time monitoring. QDs can also be used as carriers
for siRNA (short, double-stranded, small interfering RNAs) to induce
RNA interference and inhibit protein translation. They can be photostable
beacons for monitoring siRNA delivery. QDs’ therapeutic efficacy has led to their application in
photothermal (PTT) and photodynamic (PDT) therapy. PTT requires NIR-absorbing platforms that induce hyperthermia
at the target site and cause cellular damage, while PDT requires photosensitizers
to generate reactive oxygen species (ROS) to destroy cancer tissues.
However, these applications may have limitations with other NPs and
require further study. QDs such as Cu2(OH)PO4 have been identified as promising agents to overcome these limitations
and enhance disease treatment. Tungsten
sulfide QDs have also shown promise for synergistic PTT and radiotherapy
with dual-modal imaging. Carbon QDs develop into an intelligent theranostic
nanomaterial for detecting and treating cancer. Yang-Wang et al. synthesized
a biofriendly trichrome-tryptophan-sorbitol carbon QD from natural
tryptophan via the one-pot hydrothermal method that shows stronger
green fluorescence in hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC), generates reactive
oxygen species leading to autophagy of HCC cells, and performs significant
tumor inhibition by inducing autophagy through a p53-AMPK pathway in vitro and in vivo with minimal systemic
toxicity. However, toxicological effects
of QDs, especially those based on heavy metals, have been reported,
so further study is needed before clinical application. Refer to for an understanding
of the application of various techniques in the management of head
and neck cancer.
 Aptamers are single-stranded RNA or DNA molecules
that can bind
specifically to target molecules, such as proteins or small molecules,
through their specific 3D structures. They have been used in nanotheranostics, which can act as molecular
targeting agents for delivering diagnostic and therapeutic agents
to specific cells or tissues. Aptamers
can be conjugated to NPs, such as QDs or liposomes, and direct them
to specific cellular targets. This can enhance the specificity and
efficiency of disease diagnosis and treatment. Moreover, aptamers
can also be used as therapeutic agents themselves through their ability
to modulate the activity of target molecules or to trigger specific
cellular responses. , Using aptamers in nanotheranostics
holds great promise for developing new and effective treatments for
various diseases.

## Carbon Quantum Dots
Carbon-based quantum dots, otherwise
known as carbon dots (CDs) or C-dots, were first discovered in 2004
from the purification of single-walled carbon nanotubes and have been
since made using laser ablation and hydrothermal methods. CDs are
quasi-0D multicolor photoluminescent carbon nanomaterials possessing
high quantum yield, good biocompatibility, excellent stability, strong
absorption, and small sizes. These intrinsic properties of carbon
dots are attractive candidates for important applications such as
nanomedicine, catalysis, energy storage, and optoelectronics. By combining 13C labeling and whole-body
imaging, Yang et al. were the first to examine the biodistribution
pattern of carbon dots in 2009. The mice’s C-dot biodistribution
and translocation were completed. It was discovered that carbon dots
can easily spread throughout the entire body but are unable to penetrate
the blood–brain barrier (BBB). Moderate buildup was seen in
some organs, including the spleen, liver, and kidney. Additionally, by labeling the carbon dots with 125I, Tao et al. carried out
a toxicity and biodistribution investigation. A two-compartment model
was used to conduct a pharmacokinetic investigation of carbon dots.
C-dots had a 0.1 h distribution half-life and a 2.1 h clearance half-life.
With the exception of the brain, there was a moderate buildup of carbon
dots in the spleen, liver, and kidney, which was consistent with Yang
et al.
Sun et al. conducted in vitro and in vivo studies on carbon dots, examining their impact on
MCF-7 cells (human breast cells) and HT-29 cells (human colorectal
adenocarcinoma). They employed Trypan Blue and MTT assays to evaluate
viability, proliferation, and cell mortality after exposing the cells
to carbon dots. The carbon dots were synthesized using PEG1500N laser
ablation and surface passivation techniques. Results demonstrated
that these nanoscale carbon particles exhibited robust photoluminescence
in solution and the solid state, even with simple surface passivation.
The emitted light from the carbon dots remained stable without blinking
or photobleaching. The researchers concluded that these highly emissive
carbon dots could have applications comparable to or surpassing those
of extensively studied silicon counterparts. 
In theranostic applications, NIR carbon dots have been used
to
photothermally image and ablate H22 tumors generated from the subcutaneous
injection of H22 hepatoma ascites. Internalized
CDs in the tumors were irradiated with a 655 nm laser, raising internal
temperatures to over 65 °C and causing significant tumor volume
reduction following treatment ( ). To increase tumor uptake, carbon dots have been
synthesized to mimic amino acids to facilitate the specific uptake
of nanoparticles into tumors and cancer cells via specific carrier
transporters such as LAT1. Here, carbon dots enabled the imaging and
delivery of therapeutics to brain tumors with high specificity and
efficiency in a U87-tumor-bearing mouse. Theranostic carbon dots have
also been engineered to produce NIR-II emission for deep in
vivo imaging and photothermal therapy. These carbon dots
are a new type of NIR-II CD-based probe synthesized from watermelon
juice as the carbon source and are small enough to be physiologically
cleared renally. Aside from photothermal
treatments, carbon dots may also be conjugated with folic acid and
combined with chloroquine or docetaxel to deliver therapeutics. CDs have also been functionalized with dendrimers
and complexed to plasmid DNA to deliver genetic material. In summary, CDs are an exceptional alternative
to conventional bioimaging probes such as quantum dots, which suffer
from toxicity issues. Their outstanding optical properties combined
with their excellent biocompatibility and simple, low-cost synthesis
make carbon dots suitable candidates as next-generation bioimaging
fluorescent probes.
 

## Nanoparticle Strategies in Theranostics
The development
of nanosensor and nanomedicine technologies in
recent years has paved the way for promising ways to use nanotheranostics
in cancer treatment. The transport and effectiveness of biological
and conventional treatments can be improved by conjugating nanotheranostics
agents of various types, such as gold, silver, and magnetic NPs, along
with nanoshells and nanocages. This nanotheranostics strategy is based
on controlling NPs (1–200 nm) by taking advantage of certain
unique qualities, including large surface area, optical and magnetic
characteristics, low melting point, and mechanical strength. They are now frequently utilized for targeted
drug administration, aptamer delivery, and diagnostic imaging of various
disease stages by MRI, CT, PET, single photon emission tomography,
photoacoustic imaging and surface-enhanced Raman spectroscopy (SERS),
ultrasound, etc. Because of their potential
as therapeutic and diagnostic tools, protein-based NPs have recently
attracted much attention. DNA origami,
a synthetic form of 3D DNA lattices, has also been employed as a theranostic
agent, allowing different chemotherapeutic drugs to be segregated
into the hollow areas inside the lattice. This tactic has been proposed
to improve the effectiveness of controlled drug delivery and cancer
biomarker identification. Different
thrombolytic agents can be delivered through microbubbles of perfluorocarbon
NPs and echogenic liposomes, along with superparamagnetic iron oxide
NPs or poly(acrylic acid)-coated magnetic NPs. 
By targeting proteins unique to a particular cancer
tissue type,
nanotheranostics drugs can be employed as a tailored cancer treatment
strategy. This is made possible by a targeted anticancer drug delivery
strategy that allows for real-time tracking of the biodistribution
and drug release of NPs used to inhibit solid tumors, such as magnetic,
gold, silica NPs, and nanocarbon organic NPs, as well as liposomes,
micelles, dendrimers, proteins, and biopolymers. − Numerous biomedical applications have been made possible by nanotheranostics,
including effective drug administration across the blood–brain
barrier, multimodal and combinatorial therapy, siRNAs, and a combination
of bioligands for specific molecular targeting. NPs can successfully transfer a range of targeted agents
(such as peptides, aptamers, monoclonal antibodies, nucleic acids,
chemotherapeutics, etc.) to malignant cells because of their surface
alterations. , Diverse NPs can be utilized
simultaneously to visualize tumor development using MRI, fluorescence,
or other optical techniques. So, using a nanotheranostics technique,
the prognosis of various cancer types can be identified and tracked,
along with targeted and site-specific tumor cell obliteration. In
this section, we outline nanoparticle design strategies associated
with imaging and the therapeutic treatment of solid tumors. We review
imaging modalities such as MRI, fluorescence, and PET; therapeutic
strategies such as drug nanoencapsulation and photodynamic therapy;
and targeting strategies such as employing biomimetic materials to
increase tumor uptake efficiency.

## Magnetotheranostics
MNPs have attracted much attention
from cancer nanotheranostics
in recent years due to their numerous applications in MRI and multimodal
imaging, efficient delivery of both gene and conventional chemotherapies,
and the hyperthermal killing of cancer cells. MNPs are smaller (∼100 nm) than traditional theranostic
agents, allowing quicker delivery and increased tissue penetration. MNPs, particularly iron oxide NPs, have high
surface area-to-volume ratios that allow for a wide range of pre-
and postsynthesis modifications, including chemotherapeutic drugs
and targeting moieties. To detect cancer
cells in soft tissue, modified MNPs can be utilized as contrast agents
in MRI scans. Unlike MNPs that have not been modified, modifications
can also be made to lessen their cytotoxicity. To improve their activity, surface changes with 3-(2-aminoethyl
amino) propyl trimethoxysilane and further conjugation with polyethylenimine-FA
are surface treatments with MNPs. These treatments enhance the specificity
of cancer cells for efficient therapy. Targeted drug delivery, slowing the growth of tumors, and employing
MRI contrast imaging to track MNP accumulation in tumor tissue are
the main ways that MNPs are utilized to treat glioblastoma. 
Sahu et al. employed a PEGylated Tb3+ coating on IONPs
combined with Ce3+-sensitized gadolinium phosphate nanorice
to increase the multifunctionality of IONPs. This multifunctional nanorice became a successful drug delivery
system for DOX due to its mesoporous structure and abundance of negatively
charged functional groups on the surface. Using a confocal laser scanning
microscope, the nanorice produces a green light that enables tracking
and monitoring its cellular uptake and accumulation. Using the MCF-7
and HeLa cell lines, the impact of these modified IONPs loaded with
DOX was examined in vitro. The DOX-loaded IONPs appear
to hold promise for future improvements in the treatment efficacy
of these malignancies. 
For effective
drug delivery, therapy shown in 4T1 tumor-bearing
female balb/c mice, and trimodal image-guided monitoring in the presence
of NIR/X-ray, preadsorbed IONPs on PEGylated WS2 nanosheets coated
with DOX-loaded mesoporous silica (WS2-IO@MS-PEG) can be used. In addition, PTT is a noninvasive therapeutic
strategy with many advantages, including increased selectivity, decreased
systemic toxicity, and remote controllability. Yu et al. developed MoS2/Fe3O4 nanotheranostics for magnetically targeted photothermal therapy
guided by magnetic resonance/photoacoustic imaging MoS2 that transformed NIR light into heat, and Fe3O4NPs served as the target moiety that was directed by an external
magnetic field to the tumor site. The
MoS2/Fe3O4 composite (MSIOs) functionalized
with biocompatible PEG was created using a straightforward two-step
hydrothermal process. Additionally, the obtained MSIOs show good biofluid
stability and minimal toxicity in vitro and in vivo. Due to their superparamagnetic characteristic and
complete NIR absorption, the MSIOs can be used as a dual-modal probe
for T2-weighted MR and photoacoustic tomography imaging. In addition,
we show that magnetically focused photothermal ablation of cancer
is successful. In addition, this showed that magnetically focused
photothermal ablation of cancer is successful. These findings point
to the potential of the multifunctional MSIOs for cancer theranostics
and demonstrate the potential for localized photothermal ablation
of cancer that is spatially driven by the magnetic field.
MoS2–iron oxide (MoS2–IO) nanocomposites
can be further modified and used as a PET theranostic agent by surface
absorbtion of the positron-emitting radioisotope 64Cu.
This configuration enables the imaging of tumor growth and metastasis
by producing a potent in vivo system capable of photothermal
ablation (MoS2), magnetically guided delivery (IONPs),
and 3D imaging of the body/physiological processes (64Cu).
In PTT, MoS2–IO-(d)PEG, which are MoS2–IO nanocomposites modified with double PEGylation, have demonstrated
potential for tumor ablation in 4T1 (murine breast cancer) cells.
When mice tumors were injected with MoS2–IO-(d)PEG
and subjected to NIR laser, the surface temperature increased by roughly
51 °C in 5 min; however, when MoS2–IO-(d) PEG
was not present, the temperature increased by only 5 °C. 
By incorporating MRI contrast agents
into polymeric nanoparticles,
it becomes possible to enhance the visibility of tumors in MRI scans.
These contrast agents can be encapsulated within or attached to the
surface of polymeric nanoparticles. One example of a copolymer used
for this purpose is PLA-TPGS (poly(lactic acid)-d-α-tocopheryl
polyethylene glycol 1000 succinate). It becomes a multimodal imaging
approach by combining PLA-TPGS with MRI contrast agents and fluorescent
contrast agents. The addition of fluorescent contrast agents allows
for visualization using fluorescence imaging techniques in addition
to MRI. Furthermore, a specific contrast dye called Cy5.5 can be conjugated
with iron nanoparticles, creating a complex that combines the fluorescent
properties of Cy5.5 with the MRI contrast capabilities of iron nanoparticles.
The resulting complex enables tumor imaging using both MRI and fluorescence
techniques. In addition, dendrimers
serve as another type of delivery agent characterized by their highly
branched spherical structure. A research study demonstrated a specific
dendrimer as a theranostic delivery system capable of carrying both
an MRI contrast diagnostic agent called Cy5.5 and the anticancer drug
paclitaxel. This dendrimer exhibited high cellular uptake; i.e., it
was effectively taken up by the target cells. Moreover, it displayed
reduced adverse effects on nontarget organs, minimizing potential
harm to healthy tissues due to the dendrimer’s design and properties. 

## Plasmonic Theranostics
NPs made of silver and gold
have enormous potential as theranostic
agents. They have the benefits of simplicity in synthesis, bioconjugation,
and surface changes that make AuNPs more biocompatible and less cytotoxic. With the same multimodal imaging capabilities
and application flexibility as MNPs, AuNPs provide a greater range
of therapeutic and diagnostic utility for treating cancer. SERS nanoantennas can be conjugated with the
FDA-approved antibody cetuximab, inhibiting cancer via epidermal growth
factor receptor deactivation. , SERS nanoantennas
are created by capping AuNPs with a Raman reporter entrapped in larger
polymers. Raman signals generated by the SERS nanoantenna can be recorded
simultaneously to measure a tumor’s size and inhibition. SERS nanoantennas are an up-and-coming nanotheranostics
agent for treating ovarian cancer and neuroblastoma due to their greater
payloads than lipofection, effective cellular absorption, low toxicity,
quick endosomal escape, and increased half-lives (refer to ).
 Gold nanoclusters (AuNCs) are yet another exciting
class of theranostic
agents due to their characteristics including minimal photobleaching,
little cytotoxicity, and improved Stokes-shifted emission. Red, green, and blue fluorescences that can
be used for imaging are released by fluorescent AuNCs coupled with
chitosan biopolymers, and these fluorescences are identified by taking
UV–vis spectra. The therapeutic substances can be delivered
to the target tissue via these NPs. For instance, using the prodrug
5-fluorocytosine (5-FC), which is transformed into the pro-apoptotic
toxin 5-fluorouracil (5-FU) by the activity of the cytosine deaminase-uracil
phosphoribosyltransferase (CD-UPRT) enzyme, AuNCs loaded with the
suicide gene CD-UPRT can kill HeLa cells. 
A gold–silver nanoshell (Ag/AuNS) can be modified with
glucose
oxidase to selectively target, screen for, and destroy cancer cells
in early stage malignancies. Additionally
demonstrated to be effective site-specific theranostic agents were
gold-core gold-shell (Au@Au) or gold-core silver-shell (Au@Ag) NPs
coupled with activatable aptamer probes (AAPs; carrying a fluorophore).
As shown in A549 cells, such Au@Ag/Au-AAP nanoassemblies can be used
for PTT guided by high-contrast imaging systems. As anticancer theranostic drugs, biosynthesized (bAgNPs)
are also helpful. For example, Olax scandens leaf extract and AgNO3 combine to create b-AgNPs, which fluoresce brilliant red
inside cells and could potentially be used as an imaging diagnostic
tool. Significant anticancer activities in human breast cancer, murine
melanoma, and lung cancer have been shown by these NPs. 
Natarajan et al. developed a unique cancer-targeting
assembly comprising
AuNPs with quantum dots, miR-491, and mAb-ChL6 connected through streptavidin/biotin
to effectively transfect cancer cells and cause death in specific
cancer cells for imaging and targeted therapy. This study evaluated the capacity to target and induce
apoptosis using confocal and electron microscopy. The study findings
showed that miR-491 specifically caused apoptosis in breast cancer
cells compared to healthy breast cells. Over 72 h, miR-491’s
ability to induce apoptosis was increased. Compared to untreated breast
cancer cells, AuNP-coupled miR-491 displayed higher apoptotic effect
(>80%) and transfection efficiency. An inductively coupled plasma
mass spectrometer was used to estimate the microRNA transfected into
the cancer cells. The imaging and treatment of breast cancer could
benefit from this unique nanogene molecular assembly. The mAb-GNP-miR491-Qdot
construct successfully transfected into the HBT3477 cells and caused
apoptosis. This research work may also influence the development of
clinical therapies for prevalent cancer forms. 
In another study, Zhu et al. developed multifunctional
dendrimer-entrapped
gold nanoparticles (Au DENPs) covalently coupled with alpha-tocopheryl
succinate (α-TOS) for use in the theranostic treatment of certain
cancers. In this study, amine-terminated
poly(amidoamine) dendrimers of generation 5 (G5.NH2) were
conjugated with fluorescein isothiocyanate, PEG-modified α-TOS,
and PEGylated FA and used as templates to create Au DENPs. The remaining
dendrimer terminal amines were then acetylated. Different methods
were used to characterize the developed multifunctional Au DENPs.
The authors demonstrated the water dispersibility and stability of
the Au DENPs, which have a Au core size of 3.3 nm and 9.8 α-TOS
molecules per dendrimer and are stable at various pH and temperature
levels as well as in different aqueous media. The FA modification
on the Au DENPs allows excellent targeted CT imaging of the cancer
cells in vitro and the xenografted tumor model in vivo. It also provides for efficiently targeting the
particles of cancer cells overexpressing FA receptors (FAR). The therapeutic
activity is unaffected by α-TOS covalent conjugation and substantially
increased water solubility. Notably, the produced multifunctional
Au DENPs can impart the precise therapeutic efficacy of α-TOS
to the FAR-overexpressing cancer cells in vitro and
the xenografted tumor model in vivo due to the function
of FA-directed targeting. The created multifunctional Au DENPs have
the potential to be innovative theranostic nanoplatforms for targeted
CT imaging and cancer therapy. 
Gold nanoparticles have garnered significant attention in scientific
research due to their extraordinary plasmonic characteristics and
the advantageous ratio between their surface area and volume. These
properties have prompted extensive exploration of their potential
utility in detecting biomarkers. Biomarker molecules or substances
in elevated amounts in the blood, serum, or specific cancerous regions
play a crucial role in aiding diagnosis. However, detecting specific
biomarkers in extremely low concentrations presents a formidable challenge,
necessitating the development of highly sensitive detection strategies. Photoacoustic imaging (PAI) is an imaging technique
that offers noninvasive real-time information by converting absorbed
short-pulsed laser energy into ultrasound signals through the thermoelastic
effect. These ultrasound waves are captured by transducers placed
on the tissue surface, which convert the mechanical waves into electrical
signals. After appropriate processing, an image is formed, representing
the distribution of absorbed optical energy. Unlike ultrasound imaging,
PAI overcomes the limitations associated with the mechanical properties
of biological tissues and provides enhanced tissue contrast based
on the optical properties of different tissues. Gold nanoparticles
(AuNPs) are particularly advantageous in PAI due to their high molar
extinction coefficient, which enables maximum light absorption. They
also offer optimal tissue penetration, minimizing interference from
intrinsic chromophores, and are not susceptible to photobleaching.
In PAI, AuNPs can serve as exogenous contrast agents for detecting
various tumors by monitoring functionalized receptors’ passive
or active accumulation. They can also be utilized for intravascular
PA imaging of macrophages in atherosclerotic plaques. Moreover, PAI
using gold nanoparticles as contrast agents enables the tracking of
stem cells. GNPs can be efficiently loaded into stem cells and are
not significantly exocytosed. A contrast agent system composed of
inert gold nanorods bound with a ROS-sensitive near-infrared dye (IR775c)
allows for real-time tracking of cell viability with the high spatial
and temporal resolution, facilitating the assessment of the efficacy
and contribution of cell therapies.

## Hybrid Nanotheranostics
Silica nanoparticles (SiNPs)
have unique features that make them
valuable as nanotheranostic agents, including biodegradability, biocompatibility,
wide surface area and pore volume, and thermal and chemical stability
( ). The main
benefit of SiNPs as a theranostic platform comes from their porosity.
By managing the porosity, various theranostic cargos can be delivered
to multiple cancer cell types in a controlled, sequential, and multifunctional
manner. For instance, porous SiNPs coupled
with Alexa Fluor-488, iRGD peptide, and dibenzocyclooctyl can be utilized
as a theranostic agent. As a nanotheranostic
agent, docetaxel and silica nanorattles conjugated with luteinizing
hormone-releasing hormone (LHRH), Pseudomonas aeruginosa exotoxin 40 (PE40), and docyanine green fusion protein can be employed
(antimitotic chemotherapeutic). Following LHRH’s targeting
of cancer cells, docetaxel inhibits cell proliferation, and PE40 exhibits
cytotoxic action. For image-guided drug delivery and therapy for cancer,
the docyanine green signal is recorded. 
 Europium- (Eu) and Gd-conjugated mesoporous SiNPs
(MSN) have been
evaluated as theranostic agents (EuGd-MSN). EuGd-MSN has been utilized
in conjugation with camptothecin (CPT) (EuGd-MSN-CPT) to target cancer
cells while concurrently assessing the effects of the application
using MRI and fluorescence imaging. Qianjun
He et al. developed mesoporous carbon@silicon-silica nanotheranostics
for synchronous delivery of insoluble drugs and luminescence imaging. In this study, using a bottom-up self-assembly
strategy in conjunction with an in situ one-step
carbonization/crystallization method, a hierarchical theranostic nanostructure
(CS-MSNs) was developed. This structure contains carbon and Si nanocrystals
encapsulated in mesopores and within mesoporous SiNPs. In addition
to having a large payload of insoluble medicines and a particular
NIR-to-Vis luminescence imaging characteristic, CS-MSNs also showed
a limited size distribution. The bioconjugated CS-MSNs with a PEGylated
phospholipid compound and hyaluronic acid demonstrated excellent dispersivity.
They could selectively target cancer cells overexpressing CD44, deliver
insoluble drugs into these cells, subsequently kill them effectively,
and fluorescently image them simultaneously in a novel and appealing
NIR-to-Vis luminescence imaging fashion, offering a promising opportunity
for cancer theranostics. 

## Graphene Theranostics
A two-dimensional layer of sp2-bonded carbon known as
graphene is anticipated to offer ground-breaking uses in nanotechnology. Nanomaterials based on graphene oxide (GO)
have recently attracted much interest. Graphene-based nanotheranostics
agents have several physical benefits over other nanotheranostics
platforms, including a large surface area, colloidal stability, ease
of surface modification and functionalization, and superior electrical
and mechanical capabilities. Graphene-based nanotheranostics agents,
such as graphene nanosheets, which have shown increased apoptosis
in CD44+ KB carcinoma cells utilizing NIR imaging, can
allow image-guided tumor ablation via synergistic PTT. 
Yang et al. demonstrated that the poly(amidoamine)
dendrimer-grafted
gadolinium-functionalized nanographene oxide nanoparticles (Gd-NGOs)
are efficient delivery systems for chemotherapeutic drugs as well
as highly specialized gene-targeting compounds like miRNAs to cancer
cells. Epirubicin (EPI), an anticancer
drug, could simultaneously bind to the positively charged Gd-NGO surface
and interact with the negatively charged Let-7g miRNA. They discovered
that this combination of Let-7g and EPI (Gd-NGO/Let-7g/EPI) established
noticeably higher transfection efficiency than Gd-NGO/Let-7g or Gd-NGO/EPI
but also produced more potent inhibition of cancer cell development.
The authors used human glioblastoma (U87) cells as a model. When compared
to Gd-NGO/EPI (3.4 mg/mL EPI), the concentration of Gd-NGO/Let-7g/EPI
needed to inhibit cellular growth by 50% (IC50) was much
lower (to the equivalent of 1.3 mg/mL EPI). Additionally, Gd-NGO/Let-7g/EPI
could be employed as a contrast agent for MRI to locate and quantify
drug delivery to tumor regions and determine the extent of blood–brain
barrier opening. These findings indicate a potential nonviral vector
for chemoembolization therapy and molecular imaging diagnosis in upcoming
clinical applications. 
Taratula
et al. developed a nanotheranostics system with novel
low-oxygen graphene nanosheets chemically altered with polypropyleneimine
dendrimers loaded with phthalocyanine (Pc) as a photosensitizer. Such a molecular structure prevents graphene
nanosheets from dampening the Pc’s fluorescence, enabling fluorescence
imaging. The developed nanoplatform was coupled with poly(ethylene
glycol) to increase biocompatibility and LHRH peptide to deliver drugs
precisely to tumors ( ). Notably, photothermal treatment using graphene nanosheets
and Pc’s ROS production utilized low-power NIR irradiation
of a single wavelength. With a lethal effectiveness of 90%–95%
at low Pc and low-oxygen graphene doses, combinatorial phototherapy
improved the demise of ovarian cancer cells, likely giving cytotoxicity
to the combined effects of produced ROS and mild hyperthermia. Pc
put onto the nanoplatform has been proven effective as a NIR fluorescent
agent for imaging-guided drug delivery in an animal investigation.
Because of this, the developed Pc–graphene nanoplatform has
excellent potential to be a successful NIR theranostic probe for imaging
and combined phototherapy. 
 

## Bioresponsive Theranostics
Lipid- and polymer-based
nanotheranostics agents provide the widest
variety of cellular compatibilities, biodegradability, quick cellular
absorption, and no toxicity. Due to their diagnostic applications,
stimulation generation, thermodynamic stability, targeting ability,
circulating longevity, and ease of in vivo customization, , lipids , and polymers − have been frequently used as nanocarriers. Due to their dual in vivo imaging modes, superparamagnetic MRI and fluorescence
imaging in NIR, PEGylated liposomes linked with IONPs and infrared
dye (l-IONP/DiR) are promising as theranostic agents. 
For targeted cancer therapy and imaging,
Parhi et al. examined
the imaging and diagnostic capabilities of Trastuzumab (Tmab)-functionalized
lipid-based NPs loaded with rapamycin and QDs. Various in vitro cellular experiments
were used to evaluate the therapeutic evaluation of drug-loaded NPs.
In HER 2 positive SKBR 3 breast cancer cell line experiments, the
results demonstrated the improved therapeutic efficacy of targeted
drug-loaded NPs over native and unconjugated NPs. Additionally, molecular
analysis of the therapeutic advantages of rapamycin-loaded Tmab-conjugated
NPs indicated enhanced downregulation of the mTOR signaling pathway,
leading to increased cell death. In a 2D monolayer and a 3D tumor
spheroid model, targeted multifunctional NPs have demonstrated remarkable
bioimaging capabilities. As a result, one might expect that such a
multimodal nanotheranostics technique will someday prove to be a valuable
tool for better cancer management. Besides,
PEGylated liposomes linked with IONPs and l-IONP/DiR are
promising as theranostic agents due to their dual in vivo imaging modes, superparamagnetic MRI, and fluorescence imaging in
NIR. To create a PGN-l-IONP/DiR
nanocomposite that prevented the growth of MDA-MB-231 (breast) tumor
cells, researchers loaded l-IONP/Dir with antihuman PGN635
monoclonal antibody (specific for phosphatidylserine, which is exposed
in tumor blood vessel endothelial cells but not in normal tissue endothelial
cells). MRI and optical imaging were used to diagnose the PGN-l-IONP/DiR activity. 
A potential
nanotheranostic agent can be made of polymeric NPs
coupled with Gd ions and biotinylated vascular endothelial growth
factor receptor antibodies and loaded with the anti-HCC medication
sorafenib. Several protein kinases, including receptor tyrosine kinases
and serine or threonine kinases, are inhibited by this. Du et al. developed a theranostic agent made
of GX1-conjugated poly(lactic acid) NPs encasing Endostar (GPENs)
and labeled with the near-infrared dye IRDye 800CW to increase colorectal
tumor targeting and treatment effectiveness in vivo.( ) The in vivo fluorescent
molecular imaging results showed that in mice with colorectal cancers
GPENs more precisely targeted tumors than free IRDye 800CW ( ). Additionally,
bioluminescence imaging and immunohistology tests were used to assess
the antitumor efficacy, which showed that GPENs had better antitumor
efficacy on subcutaneous colorectal xenografts than other treatment
groups. Thus, GPENs, a novel GX1 peptide-directed form of nanoscale
Endostar, can be employed as a theranostic agent to enable real-time
monitoring of treatment efficacy in vivo and permit
more effective targeted therapy. 
Optical imaging is a noninvasive diagnostic method that enables
the visualization of tissues using various techniques such as near-infrared
(IR), fluorescent, and bioluminescent methods. In this approach, specific
dyes are administered to the patient prior to imaging to facilitate
the detection and analysis of tissues. To enable the effective use of these dyes in nanotheranostics, it
is crucial to employ various delivery strategies, including both chemical
and physical methods. Chemical approaches involve conjugating the
dyes with lipids or polymers, while physical methods focus on nanoencapsulation.
One successful example involved the conjugation of a pyrene polymer
with an optical imaging dye, resulting in a nanoparticulate formulation.
This approach demonstrated excellent tissue penetration capabilities
and significantly enhanced fluorescence intensity, offering improved
performance for optical imaging applications (refer to ).
 

## Biomimetic Theranostics
Recent years have seen a substantial
increase in interest in protein-based
nanotheranostic drugs. − Therapeutic and diagnostic substances
have been transported inside engineered protein nanocages. , Due to the proteinaceous structure of these nanocages, modifications
can be made to both their internal and external surfaces. Drugs, aptamers,
and contrast agents can be loaded onto the surface through internal
surface modifications, while external surface modifications can facilitate
ligand conjugation. The pyruvate dehydrogenase
multienzyme complex in Bacillus stearothermophilus produces naturally occurring protein nanocages (E2 nanocages), which
are 24 nm in size. These nanocages can
be a flexible scaffold transporting theranostic drugs since they self-assemble
from 60 monomeric units to produce a thermostable lattice structure. Ferritin nanocages have become popular in cancer
theranostics, similar to E2 nanocages. CD71, overexpressed in tumor
cells, has a natural affinity for the ferritin-heavy (H) chain. , This unique property of ferritin can be used to find ferritin nanocages
more specifically targeted to cancer cells, increasing the likelihood
of effective theranostic drug delivery. , Other groups of protein-based nanotheranostics agents, including
protein nanocages, also show great promise. Examples of effective
theranostic agents include nanoradiopeptides and fluorescent peptide
nanoprobes. , Additionally, researchers have
created nanocomposites inspired by lipoproteins and shown theranostic
potential in cancer treatment. Recently,
novel cancer nanotheranostics agents were created via drug-induced
self-assembly of altered albumins. 
Rong et al. developed protein-based photothermal theranostics for
imaging-guided cancer therapy. In this
study, a rigid cyclohexenyl ring was deliberately added to the heptamethine
chain to create a heptamethine dye called CySCOOH, which has a high
fluorescence intensity and good stability. The HSA@CySCOOH nanoplatform
is particularly effective for NIR fluorescence/photoacoustic/thermal
multimodality imaging and photothermal tumor ablation due to the covalent
attachment of CySCOOH onto human serum albumin (HSA). In vitro and in vivo tests were conducted to systematically
assess the theranostic potential of HSA@CySCOOH. Most intriguingly,
complete tumor eradication was accomplished in mice with 4T1 tumors
by intravenous injection of HSA@CySCOOH (CySCOOH, 1 mg/kg; 808 nm,
1.0W/cm2 for 5 min). No weight loss, apparent toxicity,
or tumor recurrence was noted. The practical application of this protein-based
nanotheranostics for cancer photothermal theranostics is made more
accessible by its high water dispersibility, lack of off-target cytotoxicity,
good biodegradability, and biocompatibility in its as-prepared state. Besides, along with whey, milk, and soy proteins,
other proteins, like zein, gelatin, legumin, gliadin, elastin, and
collagen, have also been employed as nanodrug/signaling agent carriers. , In addition, a recent revolutionary approach to semiconductor nanocrystal
production that uses protein nanoreactors has shown promise as a cancer
theranostic tool. The nanoplatforms
with their examples being employed for nanotheranostic applications
in several biomedical engineering applications for treating solid
tumors are listed in .
 

## Translational View
With all the uncertainty and possible
hurdles affecting the molecule’s
effectiveness, checking it in a living system before being marketed
is crucial. In the initial research stage, animal models are incorporated
to ensure various parameters such as safety, lethal dose, toxic dose,
mechanism of action, etc. Wilmes et al. used dynamic contrast-enhanced
MRI along with Axitinib in mice having a xenograft of a breast tumor. This leads to a decrease in angiogenesis. A
significant reduction in the tumor was observed just in 3 weeks. In
a week, the scientist noted a decrement in the perfusion of tumors
compared to the control. Another study
by Zhang et al. included the coadministration of PLGA and autophagy.
Experimentation on mice concluded that tumor size in mice reduces
to half compared to PLGA administration in just 20 days (refer to ). This explains the
effect of combination therapy in the diagnosis and treatment. Das et al. designed a molecule with four moieties,
including a targeting agent, methotrexate, fluorochromem, and a targeting
agent. The study concluded that in 24
h, the target accumulation of the drug was 19.14 and 8.62 times higher
in human lung and breast cancer cells, respectively (in mice). It
also facilitates the controlled release of methotrexate to promote
a long-duration action. 
 

## Interplay of Known and Unknown Factors
Nanotheranostics
represents a cutting-edge field at the intersection
of nanotechnology and medical science, offering potential breakthroughs
in diagnosing and treating solid tumors. Although it is an efficient
strategy that may offer a more personalized and target-specific approach
for cancer, it still has limitations that need to be addressed before
successfully integrating this technology into the clinics. Moreover,
the interplay of known and unknown factors in nanotheranostics is
crucial for its success in effectively combating solid tumors. Enzymatic
degradation, a significant limitation in nanotheranostics, hampers
its affinity toward the target. Researchers
have used LXL-1 aptamers as a nanotheranostics tool to precisely bind
with the target molecule with high affinity and stability in treating
triple-negative breast tumors. Still, the aptamer was easily degraded
by nucleases, thus decreasing its bioavailability at the tumor site. , Similar enzymatic degradation was also seen with platelet-derived
gold-factor-aptamers conjugated with AuNPs intended to target a unique
protein on the breast cancer cell line. Also, the 26-mer G-rich DNA aptamer selectively targets the nucleolin
receptor in certain solid tumors but is still liable to enzyme degradation. Hence, nanotheranostics approaches for solid
tumors must still be enhanced and integrated into aptamer-based targeted
diagnostic tools.
In nanotheranostics, modified virus-like particles
are undoubtedly
used extensively to target solid tumors due to their ability to escape
the endosomes before lysosomal degradation, thereby increasing drug
bioavailability. However, most virus-like
particles demonstrate tropism to heparin sulfates, which restricts
their application as targeted nanotheranostics. However, some virus-like
particles exhibit natural tropism to specific organs or tissues, such
as HEV-like particles for hepatocytes, , but it is
also associated with a limitation of the eliciting innate immune response
because of the presence of viral proteins that get easily absorbed
by the dendritic cells. Therefore, despite
the advantages associated with virus-like particles, such as adaptability,
effective cell entry, biocompatibility, absence of endosomal sequestration,
and multivalency, this nanotheranostics tool is still in the preliminary
phase and requires animal model validation. Many studies have also
been done with light-sensitive nanotheranostics for treating solid
tumors. However, despite their biocompatibility and light-sensitive
ability, this tool’s primary challenge is the drug field’s
poor pharmacokinetics. , Additionally, low
permeation of light-sensitive drugs via nanotheranostics into the
solid tumor is associated with phototoxicity, which stays in the systemic
circulation for several weeks, which limits its use as a nanotheranostic. , Photosensitive nanotheranostics also pose the challenge of photobleaching,
making room for more improvements. Critical challenges associated
with metallic nanotheranostics − include retarded degradation
and high cytotoxicity. In contrast, with nonmetallic nanotheranostics,
the premature release of payload, with biological nanotheranostics,
is a high-affinity binding with target proteins and quantum-dot-based
nanotheranostics in rapid first-pass metabolism and clearance. 
Besides, most of the nanotheranostics
used in solid tumor studies
are intended for targeted therapy and diagnostics; current research
in nanotheranostics mainly focuses on strategically integrating therapeutic
and imaging techniques that ultimately limit the therapeutic efficacy
locally at the tumor site while enhancing drug absorption. One major
challenge for nanotheranostics assessment in tumor models is to simulate
actual clinical conditions that must be addressed to restrict cancer
progression and improve efficacy. Many studies used QDs coencapsulating
a cytotoxic drug in lipid nanoparticles as a theranostic tool for
a xenografted murine melanoma model, which showed escalated blood
circulation time. Also, studies formulating
surface-modified temperature-sensitive liposomes encapsulating chemotherapeutic
agents and an MRI agent clearly showed enhanced drug release at the
target site of the gliosarcoma. These
few examples of research studies show a tremendously promising field
for developing better nanotheranostics for solid tumors. Nanotheranostics
with adequate auxiliary systems can accelerate diagnostic analysis
and efficient treatment, improving patient compliance and survival.
Nanotheranostics may also become an invaluable tool in the upcoming
and future era of personalized therapeutics to choose the more appropriate
treatment regimens, predict therapeutic responses, and track the patients’
clinical development. Moreover, mastering the cellular and molecular
connection in nanotheranostics with solid tumors and being competent
at combining numerous modalities into one system remain a significant
challenge that needs a potential answer. Overall, this discovery should
undoubtedly pique pharmaceutical firms’ attention very shortly
for developing efficient theranostic nanoplatforms and the eventual
release of such revolutionary nanotheranostics onto the market.

## Conclusion
Cancer has remained one of science’s
most vexing mysteries
for centuries due to the variety of its etiologies. A complete cure
for the disease is still improbable, despite the commendable increase
in cancer patient survival rates brought about by better therapeutic
and diagnostic procedures. Therefore, research is required to find
cutting-edge cancer treatment and diagnosis methods. One of the advanced
techniques, theranostics, offers a two-pronged advantage in cancer
management. In light of nanotechnology, this integrated approach has
become incredibly relevant. The tumor targeting and selectivity of
NPs make them promising for cancer therapy. These NPs can offer protection
from the immune system and increase their blood circulation times
via surface modifications. To increase the effectiveness of NPs in
targeting tumors, active targeting ligands can be added to their surfaces.
NPs can be employed as functional building blocks to create “all-in-one”
delivery systems that incorporate all necessary functionalities. All-in-one
NPs can treat cancer by combining therapy, diagnosis, and monitoring
procedures. Theranostic qualities can be tailored in NPs to create
nanotheranostic agents by loading them with a mixture of therapeutic
drugs and diagnostic probes. These nanocomposites can be customized
for targeted drug delivery and are valuable tools for obliterating
cancer cells while concurrently evaluating the drug’s efficacy.
Nanotheranostic agents have become a wise strategy to identify the
“route and reach” of the drugs and coordinate cancer
treatment.
Despite the potential of nanotheranostics, successful
clinical
translation faces numerous obstacles. The scientific research community
is working hard to get these nanotheranostics into clinical trials.
Optimizing tumor accumulation/retention, the biodistribution of administered
NPs and understanding how these nanomaterials interact with biological
systems are currently critical challenges for all forms of cancer.
The material utilized to develop the nanoplatform and its inherent
ability to interact with the tumor microenvironment may be connected
to our observed active and passive transportation differences. However,
a promising future for polymeric-, metallic-, and lipid-based nanosystems
combining diagnostic and therapeutic functions is anticipated. For
this, noninvasive imaging techniques are strongly required to assess
specificity receptor binding and internalization mechanisms of the
nanosystems into the tumor cells. To accomplish this, it is necessary
to develop a thorough understanding of how they interact, including
a safety evaluation, from a biological standpoint. On the other hand,
pharmaceutical companies must conduct clinical trials and introduce
this nanotheranostics into the market to succeed. As was covered in
this article, there are many ways to understand the function of nanotheranostics,
particularly in cancer treatment.
In conclusion, the interplay
of the known and unknown factors in
conjugated nanoparticle-based theranostics for solid tumors is a dynamic
process that requires consistent ongoing research and dedication.
While significant progress has been made, further exploration and
understanding of the unknown factors will drive the next wave of innovations
in cancer diagnosis and therapy. Additionally, more effort should
be put into scaling up the synthesis, evaluating the toxicity over
time, and creating regulated guidelines for nanotheranostics. Moreover,
as we continue to unravel the mysteries surrounding these nanoscale
agents, the future of cancer treatment looks increasingly promising,
offering renewed hope for patients and healthcare providers alike.

## Acknowledgments
Dr. Rajendra Prasad
thanks the director of IIT-BHU,
Varanasi, U.P., for encouraging and providing the necessary facility
and support. Dr. Rajendra would also like to thank the School of Biochemical
Engineering, IIT-BHU. J.C. acknowledges the European Research Council
– ERC Starting Grant 848325 for financial support.

## Author Contributions
Conceptualization:
V.P.C., R.P. Data curation: V.P., S.N.R.G. Formal analysis: R.B.,
R.P., V.P.C. Investigation: V.P.C., R.P., P.C.B., N.R.G. Project administration:
P.C.B. Resources: L.V.N. Software: L.V.N. Supervision: V.P.C., R.P.,
S.N.R.G. Validation: S.N.R.G., V.P.C., R.P. Visualization: V.P.C.,
R.P., J.C., A.S.M. Roles/Writing: V.P.C., R.P., P.C.B., L.N.V., B.P.,
R.B., N.R.G., S.N.R.G.

The authors
declare the following competing financial interest(s): J. Conde is
a co-founder and shareholder of TargTex S.A. Targeted therapeutics
for Glioblastoma Multiforme. R.P. is a part of national and international
patents related to gold, silica, and liposome nanoparticles. All the
other authors confirm no competing interests.

## References