379blackwellopenInternational Journal of CancerInt J CancerPMC1328463313284633132846334197284610.1002/ijc.70479Hypoxia Induces a Mitotic Survival Advantage After Radiotherapy in Head and Neck Cancer Cells
WeggeMarilyn DokRüveyda DuboisLudwig J NuytsSandra 
1
Laboratory of Experimental Radiotherapy, Department of Oncology, KU Leuven, University of Leuven, Leuven, Belgium
2
Department of Radiation Oncology, Leuven Cancer Institute, UZ Leuven, Leuven, Belgium
3
The M‐Lab, Department of Precision Medicine, GROW‐School for Oncology and Reproduction, Maastricht University, Maastricht, the Netherlands
4
Division of Cancer Sciences, School of Medical Sciences, Faculty of Biology, Medicine and Health, The University of Manchester, Manchester, UK*

Correspondence:
 
Sandra Nuyts (sandra.nuyts@uzleuven.be)

✉Corresponding author.
1342026159410421042–10552362026© 2026 The Author(s). International Journal of Cancer published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd on behalf of UICC.This is an open access article under the terms of the http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/ License, which permits use and distribution in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited, the use is non‐commercial and no modifications or adaptations are made.

## ABSTRACT
Hypoxia is an important cause of radiotherapy resistance in head and neck cancers. Cancer cells adapt to hypoxic conditions through various molecular alterations, leading to treatment resistance and tumor progression. A deeper understanding of these hypoxia‐induced molecular alterations is essential for future development of effective hypoxia targeting and radiosensitizing therapies. In this study, we tracked (post‐)hypoxic cells at single‐cell level in HPV‐negative and HPV‐positive HNSCC models using a hypoxia fate mapping system. We found that (post‐)hypoxic cells drive regrowth after radiotherapy in 3D conditions and showed an increased resistance to radiation. Transcriptomic analysis showed that post‐hypoxic cells are characterized by a gene expression signature mainly defined by checkpoint regulation. Consistent with these findings, radiotherapy resistant post‐hypoxic cells showed a reduced number of radiotherapy‐induced micronuclei and mitotic spindle aberrations, indicating a mitotic survival advantage. Inhibition of mitotic checkpoint proteins ATR and CHK1/2 increased the radiosensitivity of post‐hypoxic cells. In conclusion, our findings indicate that radiotherapy resistance in HNSCC cells is associated with mitotic survival advantage of post‐hypoxic cells, independent of HPV‐status.
Keywords: head and neck cancer, human papillomavirus, hypoxia, mitosis, radiotherapy

What's new?

Hypoxic tumor environments significantly limit radiotherapy effectiveness against cancer, particularly in head and neck squamous cell carcinoma (HNSCC). Here, the authors tracked hypoxic and post‐hypoxic cells using a hypoxia‐fate mapping system in human papillomavirus (HPV)‐positive and HPV‐negative HNSCC models. Post‐hypoxic cells showed increased radiation resistance and spurred tumor regrowth following radiotherapy, regardless of HPV status. These cells were metabolically rewired and notably exhibited a checkpoint‐dependent phenotype and reduced radiotherapy‐induced mitotic damage. Radiosensitivity was re‐established with targeted checkpoint inhibition, indicating that mitotic survival of post‐hypoxic cells is strongly linked to radiotherapy resistance in HNSCC and is overcome with targeted treatments.

Hypoxic tumor environments significantly limit radiotherapy effectiveness against cancer, particularly in head and neck squamous cell carcinoma (HNSCC). Here, the authors tracked hypoxic and post‐hypoxic cells using a hypoxia‐fate mapping system in human papillomavirus (HPV)‐positive and HPV‐negative HNSCC models. Posthypoxic cells showed increased radiation resistance and spurred tumor regrowth following radiotherapy, regardless of HPV status. These cells were metabolically rewired and notably exhibited a checkpoint‐dependent phenotype and reduced radiotherapy‐induced mitotic damage. Radiosensitivity was re‐established with targeted checkpoint inhibition, indicating that mitotic survival of posthypoxic cells is strongly linked to radiotherapy resistance in HNSCC and is overcome with targeted treatments.
 
statusreleaseddisplay-pdfyesis-in-collection-domainyesis-olfnois-manuscriptnois-preprintnois-journal-matternois-scannednois-retractednoRevised 2026 Mar 13; Received 2024 Aug 5; Accepted 2026 Mar 25; Issue date 2026 Aug 15.

## Abbreviations
DEFdose enhancement factor
FDRfalse discovery rate
GDCgenomic data commons
GSEAgene set enrichment analysis
Hfmhypoxia fate‐mapping
HIFhypoxia‐inducible factor 1
HNSCChead and neck squamous cell carcinoma
HPVhuman papillomavirus
LQlinear quadratic
NESnormalized enrichment score
NHEJnon‐homologous end joining
PFAparaformaldehyde
SACspindle assembly checkpoint
ssGSEAsingle‐sample gene set enrichment analysis
STRshort tandem repeat
TCGAThe Cancer Genome Atlas
ULAultra‐low attachment
1.

## Introduction
Radiotherapy plays a key role in the treatment of head and neck squamous cell carcinoma (HNSCC). Locoregional tumor control can be achieved in the majority of patients, especially in patients with radiosensitive human papillomavirus (HPV)‐positive tumors. However, the overall risk of disease recurrence for locally advanced HNSCC remains high, at about 40%–60% for HPV‐negative tumors [ ]. Resistance to radiotherapy remains a major cause for these recurrences, and tumor hypoxia plays a crucial role herein [ ].
Hypoxia is a common feature in HNSCC and has a negative influence on the radiotherapy response, resulting in a poor prognosis. The radiosensitizing effect of oxygen is attributable to the fixation of radical‐induced DNA damage, inducing an on average three times higher radiotherapy response in well‐oxygenated cancer cells compared to hypoxic cancer cells [ ]. In addition, cancer cells adapt to hypoxic circumstances by various hypoxia‐induced molecular alterations, leading to tumor progression and metastasis [ , ]. A major modulator of the adaptational response to hypoxia is hypoxia‐inducible factor (HIF‐1), a heterodimeric protein that consists of two subunits, HIF‐1α and HIF‐1β [ , ]. In hypoxic circumstances, HIF‐1α associates with HIF‐1β after translocation to the nucleus, where it binds to hypoxia response elements resulting in transcription of its target genes. These target genes function in various processes, affecting tumor cell survival, proliferation, DNA repair, angiogenesis, protein synthesis, metabolism and tumor immunity [ , , ].
In order to overcome the negative influence of hypoxia, hypoxia targeting strategies have been extensively investigated, however, with limited clinical success. The primary reasons for this failure are the absence of effective and validated hypoxia stratification methods and a limited understanding of hypoxia‐induced molecular alterations [ , ]. Better understanding of these alterations in cancer cells is needed to develop successful hypoxia targeting agents, thereby improving the radiotherapy response and prognosis of patients with HNSCC.
Therefore, in this study, we aimed to investigate the hypoxia‐induced molecular alterations and their influence on radiotherapy resistance in HNSCC by tracking the fate of hypoxic cells at single‐cell level using a hypoxia fate‐mapping vector [ ].

2.

## Material and Methods
2.1.

## Cell Lines and Reagents
HPV‐negative HNSCC cell line FADU (FaDu, RRID:CVCL_1218, Dr. Krause, University Dresden) and CAL33 (CAL‐33, RRID:CVCL_1108, DSMZ) were cultured in DMEM (Thermo Fisher Scientific), with addition of 10% fetal bovine serum (FBS, Thermo Fisher Scientific) and 1% sodium pyruvate (Thermo Fisher Scientific). HPV‐positive HNSCC cell line SCC154 (UPCI‐SCC‐154, RRID:CVCL_2230, DSMZ) and SCC47 (UM‐SCC‐47, RRID:CVCL_7759, Dr. Carey, University Michigan) were cultured in MEM (Thermo Fisher Scientific) with addition of 10% FBS, 1% L‐glutamine (Thermo Fisher Scientific), and 1% non‐essential amino acids (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Cell lines were incubated at 37°C and passaged via trypsinization. All cell lines were authenticated using short tandem repeat (STR) profiling within the last 3 years. All experiments were performed with mycoplasma‐free cells.
Irradiations were performed with Small Animal Radiation Research Platform (X‐strahl), with following parameters: x‐rays, 220 kV photons, dose rate of 4 Gy/min, 13 mA, copper filter of 0.15 mm, source‐to‐skin distance of 35 cm and broad focus.
Inhibitors AZD6738 (0.5 μM), AZD7762 (0.25 μM), and NU7441 (0.5 μM) were purchased from Selleck Chemicals and were dissolved in dimethylsulfoxide (DMSO, Sigma‐Aldrich).

2.2.

## Hypoxia Fate‐Mapping Vector
The hypoxia fate‐mapping vector created by Godet et al., consisting out of CMV‐loxp‐DsRed‐loxp‐eGFP (#141148, Addgene) and 4xHRE‐MinTK‐CRE‐ODD (#141147, Addgene), was introduced in HPV‐negative (FADU, CAL33) and HPV‐positive (SCC154, SCC47) HNSCC cell lines as described previously [ ]. Zeocin (Invitrogen) was added to the medium of cells for selection (200 μg/mL) of #141148‐transduced cells. Following selection, cells were sorted to remove DsRed‐negative cells. Sorted DsRed‐positive cells were transduced with vector #141147. Hypoxia fate‐mapped cell lines were placed in 1% O2 for 96 h to confirm the switch from DsRed to GFP expression under hypoxia. Hypoxia fate‐mapped (hfm) cell lines are referred to as “name cell line‐hfm.”

2.3.

## Spheroids and Spheroid Derived Cells
Spheroids were created with the use of 96‐well ultra‐low attachment (ULA) plates (Corning) [ ]. Medium containing 20% FBS and 1% penicillin–streptomycin (Thermo Fisher Scientific) was refreshed biweekly and spheroid growth was determined with an inverted widefield microscope (Olympus IX71). Spheroids were irradiated with a single dose of 0, 4, and 8 Gy when reaching a mean area of 500 μm. For drug inhibition experiments, spheroids were treated with DMSO or with the indicated inhibitor 2 h before radiotherapy. Medium was refreshed 72 h after drug exposure.
Hfm spheroids were treated with 1.25% Trypsin (T1426, Sigma‐Aldrich) for 1 h at 37°C at three distinct time points: baseline (prior to radiotherapy, T1), the reduction phase (defined as the time point with the lowest mean spheroid area after radiotherapy, T2), and the regrowth phase (when the mean area reached 1.5 times the baseline, T3). Alternatively, spheroids at baseline were processed to isolate post‐hypoxic (GFP‐positive) and non‐hypoxic (DsRed‐positive) cell populations using fluorescence‐activated cell sorting (BD Influx, BD Biosciences) to obtain clearly defined post‐hypoxic and non‐hypoxic fractions.

2.4.

## Clonogenic Assay
Cells were seeded at different densities and irradiated with increasing doses of 0, 2, 4, and 6 Gy. For ATR inhibition, DMSO or AZD6738 0.5 μM was given 2 h before radiotherapy.
After 2–3 weeks, colonies were fixed with 2.5% glutaraldehyde in PBS, stained with 0.4% crystal violet (Sigma‐Aldrich), and counted with Gelcount (Oxford Optronix). Plating efficiencies were calculated by dividing the number of colonies by the number of seeded cells. Survival fractions were determined by normalization to the plating efficiencies of non‐irradiated controls [ ].
The survival fractions were fitted using the linear quadratic (LQ) model with the following formula: Y = exp(−1*(A*X + B*X^2)). With Y = fraction of cells surviving, X = radiotherapy dose, A = coefficient for linear killing, B = coefficient for quadrating killing.
For ATR inhibition experiments, dose enhancement factors were defined as the ratio of mean average survival of the cells treated with radiotherapy and DMSO divided by the mean average survival of cells treated with radiotherapy and AZD6738.

2.5.

## Immunofluorescence
Spheroids were cultured with 20 μg/mL of pimonidazole (Hypoxyprobe OmniKit HP3, Hypoxyprobe) for 2 h at 37°C, fixed with 4% paraformaldehyde (PFA), and permeabilized with 0.1% Triton X‐100 (Sigma‐Aldrich) in 0.5% BSA‐PBS and incubated with the following primary antibodies: rabbit anti‐pimonidazole (1:250, HypoxyProbe OmniKit HP3, Hypoxyprobe) and mouse anti‐Ki‐67 (1:200, 9449, Cell Signaling Technology). This was followed by incubation with secondary antibodies, including anti‐rabbit Alexa Fluor 647 (1:500, A21241, Thermo Fisher Scientific) and goat anti‐mouse Alexa Fluor 488 (1:500, 4408, Cell Signaling Technology). Nuclei were counterstained with DAPI (1:500, D9542, Sigma‐Aldrich). Images were captured using Nikon C2 plus confocal microscope. For analysis, z‐stacks were projected using maximum intensity projections. Quantification of the fluorescence signal was performed in Fiji (ImageJ) by measuring the mean maximum intensity. Manders' overlap coefficients were calculated across individual confocal slices using the colocalization analysis tool in Nikon Elements AR software.
For analysis of mitotic spindle structure, FADU and SCC154 cells were seeded on coverslips in 6‐well plates and fixed with 4% PFA at baseline, or at 20 h and 52 h after radiotherapy, respectively. Following fixation, coverslips were blocked using TrueBlack IF Background Suppressor (23,012, Biotium) and incubated with a primary antibody against α‐tubulin (DM1A, 1:250, ab7291, Abcam). Secondary staining was performed at room temperature using anti‐mouse Alexa Fluor 488 antibody (1:500, 4408, Cell Signaling Technology) and DAPI (1:1000, D9542, Sigma‐Aldrich), both diluted in TrueBlack IF blocking buffer. Coverslips were mounted with ProLong Gold Antifade Mountant (P10144, Thermo Fisher Scientific). Imaging was performed using a Nikon C2 plus confocal microscope, and analysis was carried out in Fiji (ImageJ) by counting the number of dividing cells with spindle aberrations.
For yH2AX staining, cells were seeded in black 96‐well plates (655180, Greiner Bio‐one), fixed with 4% PFA and permeabilized with 0.3% Triton X‐100 (Sigma‐Aldrich) in 0.5% BSA‐PBS. Cells were stained with primary antibody targeting phospho‐H2AX Ser139 (1:200, JBW301, Merck Millipore), followed by staining with anti‐mouse Alexa Fluor 635 secondary antibody (1:1000, A31574, Thermo Fisher Scientific). Nuclei were counterstained with DAPI (1:1000, D9542, Sigma‐Aldrich). For micronuclei and cell death analysis, cells were fixed and stained with DAPI. Images for yH2AX, micronuclei and cell death analysis were acquired using the Operetta CLS High Content Analysis System (20×, PerkinElmer) and quantified using Fiji (ImageJ).

2.6.

## Doubling Time Assay
Cells were seeded in 96‐well plates and fixed from day 1 until day 7 via sulforhodamine B assay. Doubling times were determined as described [ ].

2.7.

## Cell Cycle Analysis
Cells were fixed with 70% ethanol and stained with 1 mg/mL DAPI (D9542, Sigma‐Aldric). Cell cycle distribution was analyzed using the BD FACSVerse (BD Biosciences). Flow cytometry data were processed with FACSVerse software, using manual gating for cell cycle analysis.

2.8.

## Immunoblotting
Proteins were isolated using RIPA buffer (150 mM sodium chloride, 1% Triton X‐100, 0.50 sodium deoxycholate, 0.10% SDS and 50 mM tris pH 8.0) including protease and phosphatase inhibitors (Roche). Protein concentrations were calculated via Bradford assay (Bio‐rad) with albumin bovine serum (Sigma‐Aldrich). 10–15 μg was loaded onto SDS‐PAGE (Invitrogen). Primary antibodies included BUB1 (1:1000, EPR18947, Abcam), MAD2 (1:1000, ab97777, Abcam), ATM (1:1000, 28736, Cell Signaling Technology), ATR (1:1000, 27903, Cell Signaling Technology), β‐actin (1:1000, 8457, Cell Signaling Technology) and vinculin (1:1000, V9131, Sigma‐Aldrich). Corresponding secondary antibodies were anti‐rabbit IgG (1:3000, 7074, Cell Signaling Technology) and anti‐mouse IgG (1:3000, 7076, Cell Signaling Technology). Protein bands were detected using enhanced chemiluminescence (ECL, PerkinElmer) and visualized with the AI680 Western blot imaging system (GE Healthcare). Densitometric analysis was performed using ImageJ, and band intensities were normalized to their respective loading controls (β‐actin or vinculin).

2.9.

## 
RNA Sequencing and Data‐Analysis
Experiments were performed using post‐hypoxic and non‐hypoxic HPV‐negative FADU‐hfm and HPV‐positive SCC154‐hfm cells. Total RNA was extracted (RNeasy Mini Kit, Qiagen) and RNA‐sequencing libraries were prepared with the QuantSeq 3′ mRNA‐Seq V2 Library Prep Kit (Lexogen). Sequencing was performed on the Illumina NextSeq 2000 platform. Reads were quality‐checked and aligned to the human reference genome (hg38) using HISAT2 (version 2.2.1). Samples failing quality control or identified as statistical outliers by principal component analysis of variance stabilized counts and Cook's distance metrics were excluded prior downstream analysis.
The final dataset comprised 4 non‐hypoxic and 5 post‐hypoxic replicates of HPV‐negative FADU‐hfm cells, and 5 non‐hypoxic and 4 post‐hypoxic replicates of HPV‐positive SCC154‐hfm cells (GSE319374). Normalization and differential expression analyses were performed using DESeq2 package [ ] with prior filtering of low counts. All post‐hypoxic samples were compared with all non‐hypoxic samples.
Gene set enrichment analysis (GSEA) was performed using genes ranked by Wald statistics. Enrichments were tested against Hallmark collections from Molecular Signatures Database (MSigDB v2025.1) [ , ] using fgsea package [ ]. Gene sets with at least 10 genes were filtered and pathways with false discovery rate (FDR) < 0.05 were considered significantly enriched. Enrichment results were summarized by normalized enrichment score (NES) and visualized using ggplot2.
From these analyses, three upregulated (oxidative phosphorylation, fatty acid metabolism, interferon alpha response) and three downregulated (mitotic spindle, G2M checkpoint, E2F targets) pathways were selected. For each of these pathways, leading‐edge genes were extracted and used as RNA‐seq derived pathway drivers of hfm‐cells.
RNA‐seq data from the NCBI Gene Expression Omnibus (GEO, accession: GSE126609) were analyzed. The dataset consists of RNA sequencing from MDA‐MB‐231 human breast cancer cells in hypoxic (GFP‐positive) and non‐hypoxic (Dsred‐positive) conditions as described in [ , ]. Gene‐level count data (GFP and DsRed conditions) were normalized and analyzed in DESeq2, followed by GSEA analysis as described above.
RNA sequencing and clinical data for HNSCC were obtained from The Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA) project and were downloaded from the Genomic Data Commons (GDC) portal (https://portal.gdc.cancer.gov/) [ ]. Only primary tumors were retained. Gene expression was quantified using the GDC STAR pipeline, log2 transformed TPM values were used for downstream analyses. Genes with detectable expression in < 10% of the samples were excluded from the analysis.
Single‐sample gene set enrichment analysis (ssGSEA) was performed using the GSVA package to compute pathway activity score per sample [ , ]. Pathway and gene level patterns were visualized using heatmaps with pheatmap. A gene‐based post‐hypoxia score for each sample was calculated as the mean gene‐wise z‐score of pooled leading‐edge genes from the three upregulated pathways minus the mean gene‐wise z‐score of pooled leading‐edge genes from the three downregulated pathways. The median leading‐edge gene based post‐hypoxia score was used to divide samples into low and high expression groups. Kaplan–Meier survival curves and log‐rank test were used to assess overall survival.
Analyses were performed in R 4.5.1 [ ] with Bioconductor 3.21.

2.10.

## Statistical Analysis
Statistical significance was tested by two‐tailed t‐test or two‐way ANOVA. The extra sum‐of‐squares F test was used to determine differences between LQ‐fitted clonogenic survival curves. Statistical analysis was performed using Graphpad prism 10 with p values < 0.05 considered statistically significant.

3.

## Results
3.1.

## (Post‐)hypoxic Cells Determine the Regrowth Phase of HNSCC Spheroids
To investigate the fate of hypoxic cells after radiotherapy and their role in radiotherapy resistance, we made use of a previously generated hypoxia fate‐mapping construct [ ] in 3D spheroids (Figure  ). This fate‐mapping construct allows tracking of hypoxic and post‐hypoxic cells by a permanent oxygen dependent fluorescent switch from red (DsRed) in normoxic to green (GFP) fluorescence in hypoxic conditions. In addition, to confirm the presence of hypoxia, we performed whole mount pimonidazole staining of the spheroids.
 In line with our previous report [ ], radiotherapy caused an initial reduction phase (T2), followed by a subsequent regrowth phase (T3), in all our HNSCC spheroid models (Figure  ). T2 is defined as the lowest mean area after radiotherapy, while T3 is defined as baseline (T1) mean area multiplied with 1.5 after radiotherapy. As expected, the HPV‐positive SCC154‐hfm and SCC47‐hfm spheroids demonstrated a greater reduction in mean area and a delayed regrowth compared to the HPV‐negative FADU‐hfm and CAL33‐hfm spheroids (Figure  ), highlighting the increased sensitivity of HPV‐positive models.
The reduction phase (T2) was accompanied by a decrease in GFP‐intensity, indicating a reduction in (post‐)hypoxic cells (Figure  ). This decrease was on average 1.4‐ and 1.02‐fold for HPV‐negative FADU‐hfm and CAL33‐hfm spheroids and 1.3‐ and 1.6‐fold for HPV‐positive SCC154‐hfm and SCC47‐hfm spheroids. In line with this, we observed an average decrease of pimonidazole intensity of 1.9‐ and 1.2‐fold for HPV‐negative FADU‐hfm and CAL33‐hfm spheroids and of 1.4‐ and 1.7‐fold for HPV‐positive SCC154‐hfm and SCC47‐hfm spheroids.
The regrowth phase (T3) was accompanied with an increase of (post‐)hypoxic cells, with an average increase of 1.3‐fold for HPV‐negative spheroids and of 2.5‐ and 2.4‐fold for HPV‐positive SCC154‐hfm and SCC47‐hfm spheroids. Accordingly, the pimonidazole intensity increased on average 1.6‐ and 1.5‐fold for HPV‐negative FADU‐hfm and CAL33‐hfm spheroids and 1.4‐ and 1.5‐fold for HPV‐positive SCC154‐hfm and SCC47‐hfm spheroids. Although the increase in pimonidazole intensity during the regrowth phase correlated with an increase in GFP signal, the spatial overlap between pimonidazole‐ and GFP‐positive areas remained limited, as indicated by the Manders' overlap percentages for both HPV‐negative and HPV‐positive hfm‐spheroids (Figure  ). This observation highlights the presence of post‐hypoxic cells (GFP‐positive, pimonidazole‐negative) next to hypoxic cells (GFP‐positive, pimonidazole‐positive). Overall, these findings suggest a role for the (post‐)hypoxic population in regrowth after radiotherapy.

3.2.

## Post‐Hypoxic Cells Are More Radiotherapy Resistant
As we showed that (post‐)hypoxic cells contribute to regrowth after radiotherapy, we investigated whether this was due to an increased survival capacity and, consequently, increased radiotherapy resistance. Therefore, we evaluated the intrinsic radiosensitivity of cells obtained from hfm‐spheroids during the reduction and regrowth phase by clonogenic assays (Figure  ). Indeed, cells obtained from both HPV‐negative and HPV‐positive hfm‐spheroids from the regrowth phase (T3‐derived cells) demonstrated a significantly greater clonogenic survival compared to cells derived from the reduction phase (T2‐derived cells). Cells derived from HPV‐positive hfm‐spheroids retained their higher radiosensitivity compared to cells derived from HPV‐negative hfm‐spheroids.
 To determine whether the regrowth driven by the (post‐)hypoxic cells was associated with increased proliferative capacity, we measured the doubling times of sorted post‐hypoxic and non‐hypoxic cells (Figure  ). As non‐irradiated spheroids were dissociated into single cells and cultured under normoxic conditions, the GFP‐positive population in 2D culture represented exclusively post‐hypoxic cells, with no contribution from hypoxic cells.
Overall, HPV‐negative FADU‐hfm cells showed lower doubling times compared to HPV‐positive SCC154‐hfm cells, on average 21 h compared to 35 h (p = 0.0002), respectively consistent with their intrinsically faster growth rate. In both HPV‐negative and HPV‐positive fate‐mapped cells, no significant differences were found in doubling times. These findings suggest that the increase in (post‐)hypoxic cell population after radiotherapy is not associated with their inherent proliferation capacity.
We next assessed whether the regrowth phase could be attributed to an increased radiotherapy resistance of post‐hypoxic cells (Figure  ). HPV‐negative and HPV‐positive post‐hypoxic cells, cultured in normoxic conditions, showed a significant increase in clonogenic survival compared to non‐hypoxic cells.
We also tested whether we could recapitulate this increased radiotherapy resistance of the post‐hypoxic population in 3D settings (Figure  ). We found a greater mean area reduction, compared to non‐irradiated controls, in non‐hypoxic spheroids compared to post‐hypoxic spheroids. The mean area reduction of non‐hypoxic FADU spheroids was on average 2.3‐fold, compared to 1.6‐fold for post‐hypoxic FADU spheroids (p = 0.003). For HPV‐positive SCC154 spheroids, the mean area reduction was on average 2.6‐fold for non‐hypoxic spheroids, compared to 1.9‐fold for post‐hypoxic spheroids (p < 0.0001). Since regions of naturally occurring hypoxia develop in 3D spheroids, we could also detect GFP‐positive cells in spheroids from the sorted non‐hypoxic (DsRed‐positive) population. However, in general, hypoxic regions were limited in these spheroids.
Overall, our results indicate that post‐hypoxic cells show an increased radiotherapy resistance compared to non‐hypoxic cells for both HPV‐negative and HPV‐positive fate‐mapped models, confirming their substantial contribution to regrowth after radiotherapy.

3.3.

## Post‐Hypoxic Cells Show no Differences in DNA Repair Kinetics
Since our results demonstrate that regrowth after radiotherapy is driven by radioresistant post‐hypoxic cells, we investigated the hypoxia‐induced molecular mechanisms underlying this resistance. DNA damage repair plays a crucial role in cell survival after radiotherapy and has been postulated to be influenced by hypoxia [ , , ]. To determine whether the increased radiotherapy resistance of post‐hypoxic cells can be attributed to alterations in DNA double strand break repair capacity, we examined γH2AX foci kinetics after radiotherapy in both post‐hypoxic and non‐hypoxic cells (Figures  and ). Overall, HPV‐positive SCC154‐hfm cells showed an increased number of residual γH2AX foci 24 h after radiotherapy compared to HPV‐negative FADU‐hfm cells (p < 0.0001), highlighting the higher intrinsic radiosensitivity of HPV‐positive HNSCC. Both in the non‐irradiated controls and in the radiotherapy conditions, no significant differences were observed in the average number of γH2AX foci between post‐hypoxic and non‐hypoxic cells.
 
3.4.

## Post‐Hypoxic Cells Show Checkpoint Reliance After RT

Next, we performed RNA sequencing on non‐hypoxic and post‐hypoxic hfm‐cells, followed by GSEA analysis. Post‐hypoxic cells showed transcriptional downregulation of E2F targets, G2/M checkpoint and mitotic spindle gene sets and upregulation of oxidative phosphorylation, fatty acid metabolism and interferon alpha response pathways (Figure  ). Consistent with our results, RNA‐seq data from GSE126609 showed reduced G2/M and E2F pathway enrichment in GFP‐positive post‐hypoxic cells (Figure  ) [ , ], suggesting that the transcriptional changes seen in the post‐hypoxic tumors are recurrent across multiple cancer types.
 Next, we assessed the relevance of the post‐hypoxia associated pathways in TCGA‐HNSCC cohort (Figure  ). Stratification of the TCGA‐HNSCC cohort by the median leading‐edge gene based hypoxia score showed a non‐significant trend of poor overall survival in samples showing a higher level of post‐hypoxic score (p = 0.058; Figure  ).

3.5.

## Post‐Hypoxic Cells Show Altered Mitotic Fidelity
To further elucidate this checkpoint reliance, we first investigated the cell cycle response after radiotherapy (Figure  ). Radiotherapy typically induces a G2/M arrest, with a prolonged arrest often associated with radiosensitivity [ , ]. Consistent with this, HPV‐positive SCC154‐hfm cells showed a prolonged G2/M arrest lasting up to 72 h, with on average 45% of non‐hypoxic and post‐hypoxic cells remaining in the G2/M phase. In contrast, HPV‐negative FADU‐hfm cells resolved the G2/M arrest within 24 h after radiotherapy, with on average 23% and 29% of non‐hypoxic and post‐hypoxic cells in the G2/M phase. Under non‐irradiated conditions, the percentage of non‐hypoxic and post‐hypoxic cells in G2/M was on average 19% and 17% for SCC154‐hfm models and on average 26% and 23% for FADU‐hfm models. Nevertheless, we did not observe significant differences in cell cycle kinetics between post‐hypoxic and non‐hypoxic cells.
Radiotherapy can also induce mitotic defects, such as multipolar spindles and chromosome mis‐segregation, resulting in the formation of micronuclei and chromosomal instability [ ]. Therefore, we next quantified micronuclei as a marker of aberrant mitosis and mitotic catastrophe (Figure  and ) [ , , ]. The percentage of cells with micronuclei in non‐irradiated control conditions was on average 10% for HPV‐negative FADU‐hfm cells and 11% for HPV‐positive SCC154‐hfm cells and did not differ between post‐hypoxic and non‐hypoxic cells. After radiotherapy, post‐hypoxic cells showed a significantly lower number of micronuclei compared to non‐hypoxic cells. In FADU‐hfm cells, 27% and 19% of post‐hypoxic cells were micronucleated at 24 h and 48 h, compared to 55% and 39% non‐hypoxic cells (p < 0.0001). Similarly, in SCC154‐hfm cells, the post‐hypoxic fraction showed on average 13% and 22% micronuclei, compared to 22% and 33% in non‐hypoxic cells at 24 h and 48 h after radiotherapy (p < 0.0001). Of note, the extended G2/M delay in HPV‐positive cells resulted in fewer mitotic divisions and micronuclei accumulation over time.
To investigate whether there was a correlation between the number of micronuclei and cell death, we assessed the percentage of dead cells (Figure  ). Consistent with the micronuclei data, post‐hypoxic cells showed a lower number of cell deaths compared to non‐hypoxic cells. For HPV‐negative FADU‐hfm cells, this was on average 3% for post‐hypoxic cells and 5% (p = 0.001) for non‐hypoxic cells. For HPV‐positive SCC154‐hfm cells, the percentage of dead cells was on average 3% for post‐hypoxic cells, whereas this was 6% (p < 0.0001) for non‐hypoxic cells.
Next, we investigated the mitotic spindle formation and checkpoint protein expression in post‐hypoxic cells (Figures  and ). In non‐irradiated conditions, spindle aberrations did not differ between post‐hypoxic and non‐hypoxic cells. After radiotherapy, mitotic spindle aberrations were seen in 29% of dividing post‐hypoxic FADU cells and in 50% of non‐hypoxic FADU cells (p = 0.0001). In HPV‐positive SCC154‐hfm cells, radiotherapy‐induced mitotic spindle aberrations occurred in 30% of dividing post‐hypoxic cells, and in 48% of non‐hypoxic cells (p = 0.0001).
Next, we assessed the expression of ATR, ATM, and the spindle assembly checkpoint (SAC) proteins BUB1 and MAD2 (Figure  ). ATR plays a role in cell cycle checkpoint activation and mitotic spindle function and is frequently upregulated in radioresistant cancers [ , ]. While RNA levels of ATR and MAD2 were not significantly altered between post‐hypoxic and non‐hypoxic cells, protein expression was increased in post‐hypoxic cells compared to their non‐hypoxic counterparts. BUB1 and ATM expression did not show consistent differences between post‐hypoxic and non‐hypoxic cells.

3.6.

## Checkpoint Inhibition Radiosensitizes Post‐Hypoxic Cells
We next investigated whether inhibition of checkpoint regulators could overcome the radioresistant phenotype seen in post‐hypoxic cells. In 3D spheroid models (Figure  ), combining radiotherapy with AZD6738 resulted in a greater reduction in spheroid size in post‐hypoxic cells compared to non‐irradiated controls, with an average reduction of 4.7‐ versus 2.3‐fold for FADU‐hfm cells (p = 0.0087) and of 10.8 versus 4.6‐fold for SCC154‐hfm cells (p = 0.0157). The 2D clonogenic assays showed that ATR inhibition increased the radiosensitization in both post‐hypoxic and non‐hypoxic cells, independent of HPV‐status (Figure  ). However, the radiosensitizing effect was significantly greater in post‐hypoxic cells (Figure  ), with a dose enhancement factor (DEF) at 6Gy of 10.3 for post‐hypoxic FADU‐hfm cells and 3.8 for non‐hypoxic cells (p < 0.0001). Similarly, in SCC154‐hfm cells, the DEF at 6Gy was 9.9 for post‐hypoxic cells and 3.4 for non‐hypoxic cells (p = 0.0008).
 Similar to ATR inhibition, combined treatment with the CHK1/2 inhibitor AZD7762 resulted in a significantly greater reduction in mean spheroid area in post‐hypoxic cells compared to non‐hypoxic cells (Figure  ). In contrast, inhibition of non‐homologous end joining (NHEJ) using the DNA‐PK inhibitor NU7441, a key regulator of double‐strand break repair, did not lead to differential radiosensitivity between post‐hypoxic and non‐hypoxic cells (Figure  ).
To determine whether the increased radiosensitization through checkpoint inhibition was linked to mitotic survival advantage, we evaluated the effect of ATR inhibition on radiotherapy‐induced mitotic spindle aberrations (Figure  ) and micronuclei formation (Figure  ). In FADU‐hfm cells, ATR inhibition increased radiotherapy‐induced mitotic spindle aberrations and micronuclei formation by an average of 1.6‐ and 2.5‐fold, respectively, in post‐hypoxic cells compared to DMSO treated controls. In non‐hypoxic cells, the increase in radiotherapy‐induced spindle aberrations and micronuclei was on average 1.1‐ and 1.3‐fold following AZD6738 treatment compared to DMSO treated conditions. Similarly, in SCC154‐hfm cells, ATR inhibition resulted in an average 2.0‐fold increase in radiotherapy‐induced spindle aberrations and micronuclei, whereas non‐hypoxic cells showed smaller increases of 1.1‐ and 1.2‐fold, respectively.
In line with these findings, ATR inhibition combined with radiotherapy increased cell death in post‐hypoxic cells compared to non‐hypoxic cells (Figure  ). In post‐hypoxic FADU‐hfm and SCC154‐hfm cells, cell death increased on average by 2.8‐ and 3.4‐fold, respectively. In non‐hypoxic cells, the average increase was 1.4‐ and 1.5‐fold, respectively.

4.

## Discussion
Hypoxia and hypoxia‐induced molecular alterations play a crucial role in radiotherapy resistance and cancer progression [ , ]. Although hypoxia has been extensively investigated in HNSCC, the findings have been inconclusive, with several studies reporting similar levels of hypoxia and oxygen enhancement ratios as well as comparable in vitro radiotherapy sensitivity between HPV‐negative and HPV‐positive HNSCC [ , , , ]. In contrast, a large randomized clinical trial testing the addition of nimorazole to radiotherapy showed to be beneficial only in HPV‐negative tumors [ , ].
In this study we showed that radiotherapy resistance and regrowth in HNSCC spheroids are driven by (post‐)hypoxic cells that acquired a mitotic survival advantage, irrespective of HPV‐status. An increase in hypoxic cells following radiotherapy was also reported by Megenakis et al., supporting the relevance of hypoxia‐induced molecular alterations in radiotherapy resistance [ ]. To our knowledge, this is the first study to investigate hypoxia‐induced molecular alterations by tracking hypoxic and post‐hypoxic HNSCC cells using a hypoxia fate mapping system in combination with 3D spheroid models.
Single cell tracking of hypoxic glioma, lung and breast cancer cells has shown increased proliferation and migration, enhanced metastatic potential and increased treatment resistance [ , , , , , ]. Moreover, hypoxic cells have shown to retain their aggressive phenotype even after reoxygenation, suggesting the presence of a hypoxic memory [ , , ]. In line with these observations, we found that post‐hypoxic HNSCC cells showed increased radiotherapy resistance and a survival advantage.
To explore the hypoxia‐induced molecular alterations underlying this radiotherapy resistance, we assessed the cellular and transcriptomic responses in post‐hypoxic cells. Post‐hypoxic cells showed fewer radiotherapy‐induced micronuclei and spindle aberrations. We acknowledge that while micronuclei are often associated with mitotic catastrophe, their presence does not always result in cell death, making them a less reliable marker for mitotic catastrophe [ , , ].
Nevertheless, the combination of reduced number of radiotherapy‐induced micronuclei and spindle aberrations, decreased cell death and increased clonogenic survival suggests that post‐hypoxic cells acquire a mitotic survival advantage.
In line with this, post‐hypoxic cells showed increased expression of ATR and MAD2, two proteins involved in mitotic checkpoint regulation. Moreover, inhibition of checkpoint regulators such as ATR and CHK1/2 radiosensitized post‐hypoxic cells, underscoring the importance of mitotic fidelity in radioresistant post‐hypoxic cells.
In line with these functional changes, bulk RNA‐seq and GSEA analyses showed a transcriptional profile characterized by downregulation of E2F target, G2/M checkpoint and mitotic spindle pathways, together with upregulation of oxidative phosphorylation, fatty acid metabolism and interferon response pathways. The transcriptomic profile suggests that post‐hypoxic cells undergo metabolic rewiring consistent with reoxygenation and loss of hypoxia gene signature and adopt a metabolically active, checkpoint dependent phenotype [ , , , ].
Despite the absence of the classical hypoxia‐associated gene signature, the leading‐edge gene based post‐hypoxia signature showed a non‐significant trend toward poor overall survival in TCGA‐HNSCC cohort, suggesting a possible association between hypoxia‐driven adaptations and patient outcome. However, these findings do not establish a clear association between post‐hypoxia based transcriptional changes and radiotherapy outcome; therefore, validation in an independent cohort with well‐annotated radiotherapy treatment parameters and detailed local outcome data is needed.
While our data demonstrate that post‐hypoxic cells are characterized by transcriptomic and functional changes associated with radiotherapy resistance, it remains unclear whether these survival mechanisms arise through the selective expansion of pre‐existing subpopulations or result from stable hypoxia‐induced alterations. This is an important limitation of the current study and highlights the need for future work aimed to understand the mechanisms by which post‐hypoxic cells acquire or maintain radiotherapy resistance.
In this study, we primarily used in vitro cell lines and 3D spheroids to investigate cellular responses at a mechanistic level. Although these models allow the investigation of hypoxia‐related processes under controlled conditions, they do not fully capture the spatial and temporal heterogeneity within tumors. Therefore, validation of our findings in more complex systems including in vivo models will be necessary. Recently, Godet et al. characterized post‐hypoxic cells in breast cancer using spatial transcriptomics, highlighting the importance of oxygen gradients in vivo [ ]. Applying a spatial transcriptomics approach to hfm‐based in vivo HNSCC models could elucidate how post‐hypoxic and hypoxic cells respond to radiotherapy within a microenvironment characterized by fluctuating oxygenation.
In addition, investigation of epigenetic regulatory mechanisms could provide further insights into the stability of the post‐hypoxic phenotypes and their contribution to radiotherapy resistance.
In conclusion, hypoxia‐driven post‐hypoxic HNSCC cells show a mitotic survival advantage following radiotherapy, which is associated with increased radiotherapy resistance in vitro conditions.

## Author Contributions

Marilyn Wegge: conceptualization, methodology, investigation, formal analysis, funding acquisition, visualization, writing – original draft, writing – review and editing. Rüveyda Dok: conceptualization, methodology, investigation, formal analysis, supervision, funding acquisition, writing – original draft, writing – review and editing, visualization. Ludwig J. Dubois: conceptualization, supervision, writing – review and editing. Sandra Nuyts: conceptualization, supervision, funding acquisition, writing – review and editing.

## Funding
This work is supported by Stichting tegen Kanker fund (C/2020/1463). S.N. is supported by clinical research mandate from the Flemish Foundation of Scientific Research (FWO‐Vlaanderen, 18B4122N). M.W. was supported by the Emmanuel van der Schueren fellowship for pre‐doctoral researchers from Kom op Tegen Kanker.

## Ethics Statement
The experiments were performed with approval from the Ethics Committee Research UZ/KU Leuven (S63252; approval date 18 December 2019).

## Conflicts of Interest
The authors M.W., R.D. and S.N. declare no conflicts of interest. L.J.D. reports, outside the submitted work, minority shares in Convert Pharmaceuticals and LivingMed Biotech.

## Supporting information

Figure S1: (A) Growth curves of HPV‐negative (FADU‐hfm and CAL33‐hfm) and HPV‐positive (SCC154‐hfm and SCC47‐hfm) hfm‐spheroids. (B) Relative mean spheroid area of the indicated models at different phases post‐radiotherapy treatment. Radiotherapy induced a distinct reduction phase (T2), followed by a regrowth phase (T3) in HNSCC spheroid models. T1 = day of radiotherapy, T2 = time point of lowest mean spheroid area post‐radiotherapy, T3 = time point at which the mean area reached 1.5× the baseline value. (C) Summary of the relative mean spheroid areas of HPV‐negative and HPV‐positive hfm‐spheroids across different post radiotherapy phases. Data are presented as mean ± SEM, n ≥ 10 spheroids per group. p values were calculated using the Mann–Whitney test with false discovery rate (FDR) correction for multiple comparisons. p < 0.05 were considered significant. (D) Ki67 staining of FADU spheroids at baseline and at regrowth after radiotherapy treatment with 8 Gy. Images are merged z‐projections of the maximum intensities, acquired using Nikon C2 plus. Scale bar = 100 μm.

Figure S2: (A) Overlap between (post‐)hypoxic GFP‐positive and pimonidazole‐positive regions in hfm‐spheroids, assessed by average Manders' overlap coefficient. The average Manders' overlap was calculated across individual confocal slices using the colocalization analysis tool in Nikon Elements AR software. Data are presented as mean ± SEM for n ≥ 3 spheroids. p values between T2 and T3 fractions were determined using two‐way ANOVA with Sidak's correction for multiple comparisons. (B) Baseline population doubling times of non‐hypoxic and post hypoxic HPV‐negative FADU‐hfm and HPV‐positive SCC154‐hfm HNSCC cells. Data are presented as the mean ± SEM for n ≥ 2 independent biological repeats. p values were calculated using the Mann–Whitney test. (A, B) *p values < 0.05, p = not significant.

Figure S3: (A) Number of γH2AX foci per nucleus among all measured fields in non‐hypoxic and post‐hypoxic HNSCC cells. γH2AX was determined at indicated time points after 2Gy. p values, ns = no significance, were calculated using two‐way ANOVA with Sidak's correction for multiple comparisons. (B) Representative immunofluorescence images of the γH2AX foci (yellow) and corresponding nuclei (blue). Images were acquired with Operetta CLS (20×, PerkinElmer). Scale bar = 100 μm, ns = not significant, hfm: hypoxia fate‐mapped.

Figure S4: (A) Top 20 hallmark GSEA GFP‐positive and DsRed‐positive breast cancer tumors from GSE126609. Dot plot showing the NES for significantly enriched Hallmark pathways (FDR < 0.05). Positive NES indicate upregulation in (post‐)hypoxic GFP‐positive tumors relative to non‐hypoxic DsRed‐positive tumors. Dot color and size represent FDR and set size, respectively. (B) Z‐scored ssGSEA enrichment of the 6 pathways across TCGA‐HNSCC primary tumors. (C) Kaplan–Meier analysis of overall survival in HNSCC patients from TCGA cohort stratified by median leading‐edge gene based post‐hypoxia score. ssGSEA: single‐sample gene set enrichment analysis, HNSCC: head and neck squamous cell carcinoma, TCGA: the cancer genome atlas.

Figure S5: (A) Cell cycle distribution of HPV‐negative (FADU‐hfm) and HPV‐positive (SCC154 hfm) non‐hypoxic and post‐hypoxic cells (percentage %) in G1, S and G2/M phase at indicated time points after a radiotherapy dose of 6 Gy. Data are presented as the mean ± SEM (upper error bar shown) for n = 3 independent biological repeats. (B) Representative cell cycle plots of cell cycle distribution. Cell cycle distribution was analyzed under non‐irradiated conditions and at indicated time points after 6 Gy. Analysis was performed using BD FACSVerse using manual gating for cell cycle analysis based on DNA content. Representative plots were generated with FlowJo software (v10.10). The horizontal axis (linear scale) represents DAPI fluorescence intensity (DNA content), while the vertical axis (linear scale) indicates cell count.

Figure S6: (A) Representative immunofluorescence images showing micronuclei formation and cell death in HPV‐negative (FADU‐hfm) and HPV‐positive (SCC154‐hfm) non‐hypoxic and post hypoxic cells. Images were acquired using Operetta CLS (20×, PerkinElmer). Scale bar = 100 μm. (B) The percentage of dead cells 48 h after a radiotherapy dose of 6Gy. Data are presented as the mean ± SEM for n = 3 independent biological repeats. p values were calculated using two way ANOVA with Bonferroni multiple comparisons correction. **p < 0.01, ****p < 0.0001. (C) Fluorescent images of mitotic spindle formation after radiotherapy in HNSCC cells. Upper panel: original confocal images acquired with a Nikon C2 plus. Scale bar = 50 μm. Lower panel: magnified views of representative spindle morphologies. Left: normal bipolar spindle; middle: aberrant multipolar spindle; right: aberrant unipolar spindle. Blue = DAPI, green = α‐tubulin, hfm: hypoxia fate‐mapped.

Figure S7: (A) Western blot analysis of ATR and ATM in non‐hypoxic and post‐hypoxic HNSCC cells under baseline, non‐irradiated conditions. Immunoblotting was performed for ATM (350 kDa), ATR (300 kDa), and loading controls vinculin (116 kDa) and β‐actin (45 kDa). Protein expression levels were normalized to the loading controls. Data are presented as mean ± SEM, n = 3 independent biological repeats for ATR and n = 2 independent biological repeats for ATM. (B) Western blot analysis of MAD2 (22 kDa), BUB1 (130 kDa), and the loading control β‐actin (45 kDa). Protein expression levels were normalized to the loading controls. Data are presented as mean ± SD, n = 2 independent biological repeats. Statistical analysis was performed using two‐way ANOVA with Sidak's correction for multiple comparisons. *p < 0.05, **p values < 0.01, ns = not significant, hfm: hypoxia fate‐mapped.

Figure S8: (A) LQ‐fitted clonogenic survival curves of non‐ and post‐hypoxic HPV‐negative FADU‐hfm and HPV‐positive SCC154‐hfm HNSCC cells after AZD6738 (ATR inhibitor), or DMSO with(out) radiotherapy. Data are presented as the mean ± SEM (upper error bar shown) for n = 3 independent biological repeats. p values were calculated using extra sum‐of‐squares F test. (B) Dose enhancement factor of AZD6378 (ATR inhibitor), compared to radiotherapy with DMSO at 6Gy. (C) The ratio of cell death following treatment with AZD6738 (ATR inhibitor), with or without radiotherapy, compared to DMSO treatment with or without radiotherapy. (B, C) Data are presented as the mean ± SEM for n = 3 independent biological repeats. Statistical analysis was performed using two‐way ANOVA with Sidak's multiple comparisons correction. (A–C) *** p < 0.001, ****p < 0.0001, ns = not significant, hfm: hypoxia fate‐mapped.

## Acknowledgements
We thank Hilde Geeraerts for her help with the irradiations.

## Data Availability Statement
The RNA sequencing data have been deposited in the GEO database (GSE319374). All the other data supporting the findings of this study are available within the article and its and can be made available upon reasonable request from the corresponding author.

## References
 

## Associated Data

## Supplementary Materials

Figure S1: (A) Growth curves of HPV‐negative (FADU‐hfm and CAL33‐hfm) and HPV‐positive (SCC154‐hfm and SCC47‐hfm) hfm‐spheroids. (B) Relative mean spheroid area of the indicated models at different phases post‐radiotherapy treatment. Radiotherapy induced a distinct reduction phase (T2), followed by a regrowth phase (T3) in HNSCC spheroid models. T1 = day of radiotherapy, T2 = time point of lowest mean spheroid area post‐radiotherapy, T3 = time point at which the mean area reached 1.5× the baseline value. (C) Summary of the relative mean spheroid areas of HPV‐negative and HPV‐positive hfm‐spheroids across different post radiotherapy phases. Data are presented as mean ± SEM, n ≥ 10 spheroids per group. p values were calculated using the Mann–Whitney test with false discovery rate (FDR) correction for multiple comparisons. p < 0.05 were considered significant. (D) Ki67 staining of FADU spheroids at baseline and at regrowth after radiotherapy treatment with 8 Gy. Images are merged z‐projections of the maximum intensities, acquired using Nikon C2 plus. Scale bar = 100 μm.

Figure S2: (A) Overlap between (post‐)hypoxic GFP‐positive and pimonidazole‐positive regions in hfm‐spheroids, assessed by average Manders' overlap coefficient. The average Manders' overlap was calculated across individual confocal slices using the colocalization analysis tool in Nikon Elements AR software. Data are presented as mean ± SEM for n ≥ 3 spheroids. p values between T2 and T3 fractions were determined using two‐way ANOVA with Sidak's correction for multiple comparisons. (B) Baseline population doubling times of non‐hypoxic and post hypoxic HPV‐negative FADU‐hfm and HPV‐positive SCC154‐hfm HNSCC cells. Data are presented as the mean ± SEM for n ≥ 2 independent biological repeats. p values were calculated using the Mann–Whitney test. (A, B) *p values < 0.05, p = not significant.

Figure S3: (A) Number of γH2AX foci per nucleus among all measured fields in non‐hypoxic and post‐hypoxic HNSCC cells. γH2AX was determined at indicated time points after 2Gy. p values, ns = no significance, were calculated using two‐way ANOVA with Sidak's correction for multiple comparisons. (B) Representative immunofluorescence images of the γH2AX foci (yellow) and corresponding nuclei (blue). Images were acquired with Operetta CLS (20×, PerkinElmer). Scale bar = 100 μm, ns = not significant, hfm: hypoxia fate‐mapped.

Figure S4: (A) Top 20 hallmark GSEA GFP‐positive and DsRed‐positive breast cancer tumors from GSE126609. Dot plot showing the NES for significantly enriched Hallmark pathways (FDR < 0.05). Positive NES indicate upregulation in (post‐)hypoxic GFP‐positive tumors relative to non‐hypoxic DsRed‐positive tumors. Dot color and size represent FDR and set size, respectively. (B) Z‐scored ssGSEA enrichment of the 6 pathways across TCGA‐HNSCC primary tumors. (C) Kaplan–Meier analysis of overall survival in HNSCC patients from TCGA cohort stratified by median leading‐edge gene based post‐hypoxia score. ssGSEA: single‐sample gene set enrichment analysis, HNSCC: head and neck squamous cell carcinoma, TCGA: the cancer genome atlas.

Figure S5: (A) Cell cycle distribution of HPV‐negative (FADU‐hfm) and HPV‐positive (SCC154 hfm) non‐hypoxic and post‐hypoxic cells (percentage %) in G1, S and G2/M phase at indicated time points after a radiotherapy dose of 6 Gy. Data are presented as the mean ± SEM (upper error bar shown) for n = 3 independent biological repeats. (B) Representative cell cycle plots of cell cycle distribution. Cell cycle distribution was analyzed under non‐irradiated conditions and at indicated time points after 6 Gy. Analysis was performed using BD FACSVerse using manual gating for cell cycle analysis based on DNA content. Representative plots were generated with FlowJo software (v10.10). The horizontal axis (linear scale) represents DAPI fluorescence intensity (DNA content), while the vertical axis (linear scale) indicates cell count.

Figure S6: (A) Representative immunofluorescence images showing micronuclei formation and cell death in HPV‐negative (FADU‐hfm) and HPV‐positive (SCC154‐hfm) non‐hypoxic and post hypoxic cells. Images were acquired using Operetta CLS (20×, PerkinElmer). Scale bar = 100 μm. (B) The percentage of dead cells 48 h after a radiotherapy dose of 6Gy. Data are presented as the mean ± SEM for n = 3 independent biological repeats. p values were calculated using two way ANOVA with Bonferroni multiple comparisons correction. **p < 0.01, ****p < 0.0001. (C) Fluorescent images of mitotic spindle formation after radiotherapy in HNSCC cells. Upper panel: original confocal images acquired with a Nikon C2 plus. Scale bar = 50 μm. Lower panel: magnified views of representative spindle morphologies. Left: normal bipolar spindle; middle: aberrant multipolar spindle; right: aberrant unipolar spindle. Blue = DAPI, green = α‐tubulin, hfm: hypoxia fate‐mapped.

Figure S7: (A) Western blot analysis of ATR and ATM in non‐hypoxic and post‐hypoxic HNSCC cells under baseline, non‐irradiated conditions. Immunoblotting was performed for ATM (350 kDa), ATR (300 kDa), and loading controls vinculin (116 kDa) and β‐actin (45 kDa). Protein expression levels were normalized to the loading controls. Data are presented as mean ± SEM, n = 3 independent biological repeats for ATR and n = 2 independent biological repeats for ATM. (B) Western blot analysis of MAD2 (22 kDa), BUB1 (130 kDa), and the loading control β‐actin (45 kDa). Protein expression levels were normalized to the loading controls. Data are presented as mean ± SD, n = 2 independent biological repeats. Statistical analysis was performed using two‐way ANOVA with Sidak's correction for multiple comparisons. *p < 0.05, **p values < 0.01, ns = not significant, hfm: hypoxia fate‐mapped.

Figure S8: (A) LQ‐fitted clonogenic survival curves of non‐ and post‐hypoxic HPV‐negative FADU‐hfm and HPV‐positive SCC154‐hfm HNSCC cells after AZD6738 (ATR inhibitor), or DMSO with(out) radiotherapy. Data are presented as the mean ± SEM (upper error bar shown) for n = 3 independent biological repeats. p values were calculated using extra sum‐of‐squares F test. (B) Dose enhancement factor of AZD6378 (ATR inhibitor), compared to radiotherapy with DMSO at 6Gy. (C) The ratio of cell death following treatment with AZD6738 (ATR inhibitor), with or without radiotherapy, compared to DMSO treatment with or without radiotherapy. (B, C) Data are presented as the mean ± SEM for n = 3 independent biological repeats. Statistical analysis was performed using two‐way ANOVA with Sidak's multiple comparisons correction. (A–C) *** p < 0.001, ****p < 0.0001, ns = not significant, hfm: hypoxia fate‐mapped.

## Data Availability Statement
The RNA sequencing data have been deposited in the GEO database (GSE319374). All the other data supporting the findings of this study are available within the article and its and can be made available upon reasonable request from the corresponding author.