pmcPLoS OnePLoS One440plosoneplosPLOS One1932-6203PLOSPMC13175348PMC13175348.113175348131753484213360210.1371/journal.pone.0349130PONE-D-26-097391Research ArticleMedicine and Health SciencesOncologyCancers and NeoplasmsGenitourinary Tract TumorsProstate CancerMedicine and Health SciencesUrologyProstate DiseasesProstate CancerBiology and Life SciencesGeneticsGene ExpressionBiology and life sciencesGeneticsGene expressionGene regulationSmall interfering RNABiology and life sciencesBiochemistryNucleic acidsRNANon-coding RNASmall interfering RNABiology and Life SciencesMolecular BiologyMolecular Biology TechniquesMolecular Probe TechniquesImmunoblottingResearch and Analysis MethodsMolecular Biology TechniquesMolecular Probe TechniquesImmunoblottingBiology and life sciencesBiochemistryProteinsDNA-binding proteinsBiology and Life SciencesBiochemistryProteinsPost-Translational ModificationPhosphorylationBiology and life sciencesGeneticsGene expressionDNA transcriptionBiology and Life SciencesBiochemistryHormonesAndrogensIdentification of CAND1 as a DNA-dependent protein kinase-regulated coactivator of androgen receptor and the ARv7 splice variant
Proteomic assays identify AR/ARv7 coactivatorshttps://orcid.org/0000-0002-8289-7522HamiltonRoss A.ConceptualizationFormal analysisInvestigationVisualizationWriting – original draftWriting – review & editing https://orcid.org/0000-0002-5046-9021PaulBasilFormal analysisInvestigationVisualizationWriting – review & editing https://orcid.org/0000-0001-9433-6805YiPingFunding acquisitionResourcesWriting – review & editing RajapaksheKimalFormal analysisVisualizationWriting – review & editing PanigrahiAnil K.Formal analysisInvestigationResourcesWriting – review & editing GrimmSandra L.Formal analysisVisualizationWriting – review & editing CoarfaCristianFormal analysisFunding acquisitionVisualizationWriting – review & editing MalovannayaAnnaFormal analysisFunding acquisitionVisualizationWriting – review & editing WeigelNancy L.ConceptualizationFormal analysisFunding acquisitionResourcesSupervisionWriting – original draftWriting – review & editing LonardDavid M.Formal analysisFunding acquisitionWriting – review & editing FouldsCharles E.ConceptualizationFormal analysisProject administrationSupervisionWriting – original draftWriting – review & editing 1
Department of Molecular and Cellular Biology, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, Texas, United States of America2
Department of Biology and Biochemistry, Center for Nuclear Receptors and Cell Signaling, University of Houston, Houston, Texas, United States of America3
Dan L. Duncan Comprehensive Cancer Center, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, Texas, United States of America4
Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Pharmacology,‌‌ Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, Texas, United States of America5
Mass Spectrometry Proteomics Core, Advanced Technology Cores, ‌‌Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, Texas, United States of America6
Lester and Sue Smith Breast Center, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, Texas, United States of America7
Department of Medicine, Baylor College of Medicine,‌‌ Houston, Texas, United States of AmericaCuligZoranEditor files. The raw MS proteomics data for the the (-/+) ARv7 ARE pulldowns have been deposited to the ProteomeXchange Consortium via the PRIDE partner repository with the dataset identifier PXD021462. These raw data are now publicly available.

## Data Availability
All relevant data are within the paper and its files. The raw MS proteomics data for the the (-/+) ARv7 ARE pulldowns have been deposited to the ProteomeXchange Consortium via the PRIDE partner repository with the dataset identifier PXD021462. These raw data are now publicly available.

## Introduction
Prostate cancer is the most common non-cutaneous cancer in American men, and the second most common cause of cancer death in U.S. males [ ]. Because of the importance of the androgen receptor (AR), a hormone-activated transcription factor (TF), in the growth of both normal prostate and prostate cancer, androgen deprivation therapies (ADTs) and androgen receptor signaling inhibitors (ARSI) are used to treat prostate cancer patients with metastatic prostate cancer [ – ]. Initially, tumors respond to ADT, but resistance typically develops within two years resulting in castration-resistant prostate cancer (CRPC) [ – ].
Despite the resistance to ADT/ARSI, most CRPC remain dependent on AR [ ] and there are no established cures. The mechanisms behind aberrant AR reactivation contributing to CRPC include specific AR mutations, AR overexpression/amplification, de novo steroidogenesis, altered expression of coregulators (CoRs), AR hypersensitivity to androgens and expression of constitutively active AR variants [ – ]. The AR variants lacking the ligand binding domain (LBD) are expressed in some CRPC as a result of alternative splicing events and/or genomic rearrangements [ , – ]. The most prevalent and well characterized AR splice variant is ARv7, which contains the amino (N)-terminus and DNA binding domain as well as a small strech of unique amino acid sequence [ ]. Expression of ARv7 correlates with resistance to second generation ADT/ARSI therapies such as abiraterone/enzalutamide [ , ] suggesting a key role for variants in resistance to ADT. The lack of an LBD means that other portions of the molecule or its downstream activities must be targeted to block its activity. Unlike estrogen receptor alpha (ERα) whose major transactivation domain and site for interactions with coactivators is the LBD [ , ], the major transactivation domain in AR is in the N-terminus and both functional studies [ ] and recent cryoEM structural studies [ ] show that the p160 steroid receptor coactivator family members interact with the N-terminus of AR.
Nuclear receptors act as TFs by recruiting a variety of CoR proteins with enzymatic activities to specific DNA binding sites (reviewed in [ , ]). Proteins with a variety of enzymatic activities have been identified as interacting with AR and variants and playing a role in its transcriptional activity (reviewed in [ – ]); however, identification of additional proteins, many of which interact transiently or in complexes and often are low abundance proteins, is incomplete. Thus far, approaches including co-immunoprecipitation (Co-IP) with immunoblotting and/or mass spectrometry (MS) [ – ] and ‘proximity mapping’ using in vivo biotinylation of AR or ARv7 and their pulldown [ , ] have been used to identify the AR/ARv7 interactors. However, the interactions of AR/ARv7 with their coactivators on DNA may be very different from those in solution, and thus methods such as rapid IP MS of endogenous proteins (RIME) assays [ ] or chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP) assays (e.g., [ , ]) have been performed to identify AR-associated CoRs in an unbiased or targeted fashion, respectively. One limitation of these assays is that a large variety of complexes are pulled down, not only the protein complexes bound to AR or AR variants, but those bound to other TFs linked to the same DNA fragment. Since AR and ARv7 bind to common sites, but also to unique sites in the DNA [ ], this approach is not optimal for identifying differences in protein binding in AR versus ARv7 complexes.
To identify proteins that interact with AR and ARv7, we took advantage of some of our previous studies of estrogen receptor alpha (ERα). Previously, we developed estrogen response element (ERE) DNA pulldown assays combined with unbiased liquid chromatography (LC)-MS to identify proteins associated with ERα and to determine the contribution of proteins to the transcriptional activity of ERα [ ]. Among the interesting findings from the ERα study was the observation that DNA-dependent protein kinase (DNA-PK) enhanced the transcriptional activity of ERα by dynamically modulating the composition of the ERα complexes via phosphorylation of ERα and some coregulators [ ].
DNA-PK also has been reported to associate with AR in the absence of DNA and to stimulate AR target genes such as PSA and TMPRSS2 in prostate cancer cells [ ], revealing it as a coactivator. More recently using a proximity-biotinylation approach, DNA-PK was shown to associate with ARv7 and DNA-PK knockdown/inhibition reduced expression of its target genes, including PSA, KLK2, and UBE2C, suggesting a coactivator role [ ]. However, mechanistically how DNA-PK functions as a coactivator of AR/ARv7 was not examined.
In this study, we employed biochemical approaches to investigate the proteomics of ARv7-CoR complexes and compared them to isolated AR-CoR complexes. We used a DNA fragment containing three AREs, in order to directly compare AR and ARv7 capacity to recruit coregulators and regulate transcription. This study identified a new ARv7 coactivator (CAND1) that appears to have a higher affinity for ARv7 as compared to AR and uncovered a role for DNA-PK in regulation of the stability of AR/ARv7-ARE complexes.

## Materials and methods

## Reagents
All chemicals used to make buffers for preparing nuclear extracts, purifying FLAG-tagged AR (M2 beads and 3xFLAG peptide), inducing expression of ARv7 (doxycycline), cell-free transcription, and performing ChIP assays were from Sigma-Aldrich. R1881 was purchased from Perkin Elmer. Protease inhibitors, AMP-PNP, ECL Plus, and UniversalLibrary Probes for qPCR were purchased from Roche. PCR reagents, SuperScript II Reverse Transcriptase, Dynabeads M280 streptavidin, and NuPage gels were purchased from Invitrogen. SDS sample buffer and Protein A/G Magnetic Dynabeads were purchased from Pierce. Mini-PROTEAN TGX Precast gels were purchased from Bio-Rad. 1x kinase buffer and ATP were purchased from Cell Signaling Technology. DNA-PK inhibitor NU7441 was purchased from Tocris Bioscience. λ protein phosphatase (LPP) was purchased from New England Biolabs. TransIT-TKO was purchased from Mirus. Tri-reagent was purchased from Molecular Research Center, Inc. For qPCR, Taqman Universal master mix II and SYBR green mix were purchased from Applied Biosystems. PCR purification kit was purchased from Qiagen. Sources and usage conditions for antibodies used in this study are given in S1 Table in .

## Cell lines
LNCaP cells (RRID:CVCL_0395) were obtained from the BCM tissue culture core (originally from the ATCC as catalog #CRL-1740), while LNCaP-doxycycline (dox)-inducible ARv7 cells (LNCaPpHageAR--V7; RRID:CVCL_A1BM) were described previously [ ]. Short tandem repeat profiling (STR) validated LNCaP and LNCaP-dox inducible ARv7 cell line authenticity (done at MD Anderson, January of 2019). The cell lines were cultured for no longer then 3 months after a thaw of the STR validated stock. All lines were tested for mycoplasma every 3 months and tested negative. LNCaP lines were maintained in RPMI 1640 media (Invitrogen) (supplemented with 10% fetal calf serum and penicillin/streptomycin) and switched to hormone-depleted media (10% charcoal stripped fetal calf serum) before treatments. The LNCaPpHageAR--V7 cells were carried in medium containing G418 to maintain selection pressure, but G418 was not included in experimental plates.

## Nuclear extract preparation
The nuclear extract (NE) preparation from HeLa S3 cells (purchased from National Cell Culture Center) was conducted following the standard Dignam protocol [ ], while extraction of LNCaP cells was done according to our published method for MCF-7 NE preparation [ ]. Bradford assays (Bio-Rad) were utilized to determine protein concentration and aliquots were snap-frozen in liquid nitrogen and stored at -80oC until usage.

## Recombinant AR/ARv7 purification
Recombinant AR protein was purified using Sf9 insect cells that were infected with a Flag epitope-tagged AR expressing baculovirus (courtesy of the BCM Monoclonal Antibody/Recombinant Protein Expression Core Facility). Cells were cultured in the presence of 1 µM R1881 for 24 hours post-infection and then harvested 24 hours later. Cells were then washed and centrifuged at 4oC for 10 min at 5,000 rpm. Purification of AR from cell pellets was based on [ ], with some modifications as listed. Cell pellet was then resuspended in 50 mL hypotonic buffer with 1 µM R1881 (not DHT) and complete mini protease inhibitors (Roche) and not Protease Inhibitor Cocktail Set III. Nuclei were then resuspended in 12 mL of nuclear extraction buffer with 1 µM R1881, without β-glycerophosphate and NaF, and complete mini protease inhibitors and extracted as described [ ]. Extract was then clarified by centrifugation at max speed (12,000 rpm, not 50,000xg) for 30 min and supernatant containing protein was transferred to a clean chilled tube. M2 FLAG beads, not Streptavidin Mutein Matrix gel, were washed 3 times in equilibration buffer (10 mM Tris-HCl (pH 8.0), 0.3 M NaCl). Beads were resuspended in the 12 mL nuclear extract and incubated overnight at 4oC with gentle mixing by rotation. After this, beads with bound AR were gently spun down at 500xg and the supernatant was removed. Beads were then resuspended with 1.25 ml wash buffer containing 1 µM R1881 and transferred into 1.5 mL Eppendorf tubes. Washes were done twice. Flag-tagged AR protein was eluted from the beads using 250 µl elution buffer without biotin containing 1 µM R1881 and 3xFLAG peptide (0.4 µg/mL). Beads were incubated on ice for 10 min and 4 elutions were repeated. Elutions were pooled and flash frozen in liquid nitrogen. Protein concentration was determined by Coomassie blue staining versus known amounts of bovine serum albumin (BSA). Purified ARv7 protein, provided by Dr. Ping Yi, was prepared using a similar procedure except that R1881 was not included.

## 3xARE-E4 DNA fragment synthesis
Three copies of a canonical ARE from the rat TAT gene was cloned into pIE-0 as described previously (called pPRE3-E4) [ ]; this construct has a minimal TATA box from the Adenovirus E4 gene downstream of the 3xAREs. A 853 bp 3xARE-E4 doubly biotinylated fragment was made from this construct by PCR using Taq DNA polymerase and E4BioF/E4BioR primers biotinylated at their 5’ ends (sequences shown in S2 Table in ).

## Androgen response element (ARE) pulldown assay with and without ATP treatment (ATP for kinase activation)
30 µl M280 streptavidin Dynabeads were prepared for biotinylated DNA binding as in [ ]. Beads were then resuspended in 150 µl D-PBS and incubated with 2 µg of biotinylated 3xARE-E4 DNA for 1 hour at 4°C. DNA-bound beads were washed as described above. Two µg recombinant purified AR or 0.25 µg purified ARv7 (or listed amounts in figure legends) or its storage buffer were then added along with the appropriate ligand (100 nM R1881 or 0.1% ethanol as vehicle control) first to the 3XAREs beads for 10 minutes at room temperature in a final volume of 150 µl supplemented with Buffer D (20 mM HEPES, pH 7.9, 10% glycerol, 0.1 M KCl, 0.2 mM EDTA, 0.5 mM PMSF, and 0.5 mM DTT) to pre-bind the AR proteins for use in HeLa NE ARE pulldowns. Beads were pelleted and all supernatant containing unbound AR protein was removed. The ARE DNA beads were then resuspended with 1 mg clarified (by centrifugation at 12,000 rpm for 15 min at 4oC) HeLa NE or LNCaP NE. Additional EDTA/EGTA was added for a final concentration of 1 mM. Reactions were incubated with rotation at room temperature for 45 min. Beads were washed twice using ice-cold NETN buffer (20 mM Tris-Cl, pH7.5, 150 mM NaCl, 1 mM EDTA, 0.5% lgepal CA-630), followed by one wash in ice-cold D-PBS. PBS was removed and beads were resuspended in 20–30 µl 2x SDS sample buffer to be boiled. Protein samples were loaded on 4–15% Mini-PROTEAN TGX™ Precast gels for immunoblotting (30–50% of final beads) or on NuPage gels (8% Bis-Tris in MOPS buffer) for MS (for preparative separation-gel slice excision) (90% of final beads). ATP treatment (to activate associated kinases) of AR/ARv7 CoR complexes (i.e., in vitro phosphorylation) involved resuspending the washed complexes in 1x kinase buffer containing 0.5 mM ATP and incubating them at 30oC for up to 30 min. Where appropriate, AMP-PNP was added in place of ATP or NU7441 was pre-incubated for 5 minutes before adding ATP. λ protein phosphatase (LPP) or LPP Buffer was added 5 minutes post-ATP (30 min) treatment addition. After incubation, the beads were pelleted by magnet, the supernatant was removed, and the beads were resuspended in 20–30 µl 2x SDS sample buffer for subsequent immunoblotting analysis (30–50% of final beads).

## Cell-free transcription assay
These assays (run in duplicate) utilized the above 3xARE-E4 template, except it was assembled into chromatin using HeLa core histones and a salt dilution method that we previously described [ ]. Briefly, the chromatized 3xARE-E4 DNA template (0.2 pmoles) was incubated with 50 µg HeLa cell NE, with and without purified AR with 100 nM R1881 or ARv7 (the amount of AR or ARv7 added to reactions is indicated in respective figures), 1 mM ATP, 0.9 mM acetyl CoA, 2% poly(vinyl alcohol), Hepes buffer and salts as defined in [ ], in a 50 µl reaction at room temperature for 25 min. 5 µL of 5 mM NTPs were then added to allow for active transcription and the samples were transferred to 30°C for 50 min. RNA was isolated by Tri-reagent and further treated with Turbo DNase (Ambion) to remove any remaining DNA template. Two µL of each purified RNA sample (5% of the final volume) were then used in One-step RT-qPCR reactions (Bioline) utilizing the E4F (forward) and E4R (reverse) primer pair (sequences shown in S2 Table in ). An additional RT-qPCR reaction containing 10 fmoles of the template DNA was included to normalize Ct values. Results were normalized to the E4 transcript levels from the reactions without any recombinant AR or ARv7 protein added (i.e., basal transcription) to determine relative E4 mRNA fold change.

## Immunoblot analysis
Immunoblotting was performed essentially as we have previously described [ ]. Primary antibody diluted in blocking buffer (5% nonfat milk and PBS) was incubated with PVDF blot strips for at minimum 2 hours to overnight at 4oC, followed by at least three PBS washes. Secondary HRP-conjugated antibodies in blocking buffer were added (sheep anti-mouse or donkey anti-rabbit, GE Healthcare; rabbit anti-goat, Santa Cruz) for 1 hour followed by at least three final PBS washes. Signal was developed on X-ray film via ECL Plus. Cropped immunoblot images were quantified via Image J (free download from NIH) where cited. All raw, uncropped immunoblot images are provided in .

## Mass spectrometry analysis
ARE pulldown samples in SDS sample buffer were submitted to the BCM Mass Spectrometry Proteomics Core to be analyzed by liquid chromatography-mass spectrometry (LC-MS) as described previously [ ].

## siRNA knockdowns
LNCaP cells or LNCaP dox-inducible ARv7 cells were plated in 12-well dishes (for gene expression analyses) at 1x106 cells per well in 10% fetal calf serum containing RPMI 1640 medium as indicated above and then medium was exchanged with charcoal stripped 10% fetal calf serum containing RPMI 1640 medium. Cells were then transfected in triplicate with 50 nM of targeting siRNA or a non-targeting siRNA using TransIT-TKO transfection reagent for 2 days. For gene expression analyses, where required, R1881 or dox was added to cells after two days of knockdown and were harvested 24 hours later. siRNAs for ANP32A and CAND1 were custom designed in sets of three by Sigma-Aldrich before being pooled together. The non-targeting control used with ANP32A and CAND1 was Mission siRNA Universal negative control #1 (Sigma-Aldrich). These siRNAs were validated for knockdown at the mRNA level by RT-qPCR. siRNAs targeting DNA-PKcs were from Santa Cruz Biotechnology and previously validated [ ], with siRNA-A as the non-targeting control. siRNAs for SRC-3 were custom designed in sets of three by Sigma-Aldrich before being pooled together and were previously validated [ ]. All siRNA sequences are detailed in S3 Table in .

## DNA-PK inhibition
LNCaP cells or LNCaP dox-inducible ARv7 cells were plated in 12-well dishes as above. After two days, cells were treated with the DNA-PK inhibitor NU7441 for 1 hour before adding R1881 or dox. After 24 hours the cells were harvested for RNA purification and cDNA synthesis. NU7441 was dissolved in DMSO and stored at −20°C.

## Gene expression analysis
RNA isolated from a well of a 12-well plate of LNCaP cells was harvested using Tri-reagent, following the manufacturer’s instructions. The RNA concentrations were quantified by Nanodrop (ThermoFisher Nanodrop Lite). One µg of each RNA sample was used to make cDNAs by First-Strand cDNA Synthesis using SuperScript II Reverse Transcriptase. cDNAs (20 µl) were then diluted with 180 µl of DEPC-treated water. To analyze gene expression, 2 µl of cDNAs were added to qPCR reactions along with Taqman Universal master mix II (Applied Biosystems), 200 nM primers (designed using Roche Diagnostics Universal ProbeLibrary System Assay Design), and the appropriate UniversalLibrary Probes, on a StepOnePlus machine (Applied Biosystems). Gene expression was normalized to human GAPDH mRNA and relative mRNA level was determined by the delta Ct method [ ]. Primers used for qPCR are shown in S4 Table in .

## Chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP) assays
LNCaP dox-inducible ARv7 cells were grown in 15 cm dishes as above and treated (-/+) dox or (-/+) R1881 as indicated in legend. Cells were then crosslinked with 1% formaldehyde at room temperature, quenched with 125 mM glycine, and then harvested by scraping in cold PBS (containing Xpert protease inhibitors (GenDEPOT)). Lysates were prepared in 250 µl FA lysis buffer [ ] with protease inhibitors, frozen in dry ice/ethanol bath for 5 min, thawed, and then chromatin was sheared in a water bath sonicator (Bioruptor from Diagenode). Samples were sheared at 30% amplitude for 10 cycles of 20 seconds on and 20 seconds off and then centrifuged for 5 min at 13,000 rpm. 60 µl of supernatant was aliquoted for quality control check for sizes of DNA fragmentation as revealed on agarose gels. 180 µl of supernatant was diluted 10-fold with ChIP dilution buffer (0.55% Triton X-100, 1.2 mM EDTA pH 8.0, 16.8 mM Tris pH 8.0, 167 mM NaCl) containing protease inhibitors. Input controls were moved to separate tubes (150 µl of the lysate) and the remainder was pre-cleared with 25 µL of Protein A/G Magnetic Dynabeads conditioned with 0.5 µg/µL sheared salmon sperm DNA for 30 min at 4oC with rotation. Immunoprecipitations were performed with 50 µL of the above Dynabeads using 2 µg of AR, CAND1, or control rabbit IgG antibodies incubated overnight at 4oC with rotation. After serial washes (each done two times and sequentially) in 1 mL ice-cold low salt TSE I buffer [ ], high salt TSE II buffer [ ], and TE buffer (10 mM Tris-Cl pH 8.0 and 1 mM EDTA pH 8.0), the precipitated DNA was eluted three times from the beads by incubation in 50 µL elution buffer (1% SDS, 100 mM NaHCO3) at room temperature for 10 min. Crosslinking of pooled eluted DNA was reversed by incubating eluants for at least 6 hours at 65oC and DNA fragments were purified on spin columns from a PCR purification kit. Two µL out of 90 µL eluted ChIP samples were quantified by qPCR using SYBR green chemistry and primers flanking known AREs of the PSA gene enhancer or the FKBP5 promoter. Enrichment of AR/ARv7 or CAND1 at AREs of PSA gene enhancer or FKBP5 gene was normalized to input chromatin and presented as percentage of input chromatin as we have described [ ]. Relative quantification of each sample was performed against a standard curve plotted using serial dilution of pooled input. S2 Table in details ChIP-qPCR primer sequences.
 

## Bioinformatics analysis
The expression of CAND1 mRNA across normal, clinically localized primary prostate tumor and metastatic tumor samples was evaluated using two prostate cancer patient cohorts: Varambally and colleagues ([ ], GSE3325) and Cai and colleagues ([ ], GSE32269). Further, clinical relevance of CAND1 mRNA expression was evaluated with The Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA-PRAD) and Glinsky [ ] prostate cancer cohorts. Patients in both cohorts were divided into top 45% and bottom 45% according to the CAND1 mRNA expression and significance was assessed via survival package in R statistical system with log-rank test (P < 0.05) and the Cox proportional hazard test (P < 0.05).

## Immunodepletions from nuclear extract
Our detailed protocol for immunodepletion of antigens from HeLa NE was published [ ]. Immunodepletion of candidates was confirmed by immunoblotting. To immunodeplete DNA-PKcs, 16 µg of mouse DNA-PKcs antibody or 16 µg mouse IgG were incubated with 2 mg of HeLa NE (S1 Table in provides antibody details) and three rounds of immunodepletion were done.

## Statistical analysis
Representative experiments are shown in this manuscipt, but each was done three independent times. Within an experiment, single comparisons were carried out using a two-tailed, unpaired Student t-test in Excel. Error bars in each figure represent the standard error of the mean (SEM) from independent biological triplicates, unless noted in a particular figure legend. p < 0.05 was considered statistically significant. Statistical significance for the bioinformatics data was tested as described above.

## Results

## Establishing an ARE pulldown assay to characterize ARv7 CoR complexes
The human AR gene is encoded by 8 exons: exon 1 encodes the N-terminal domain (NTD) that contains the potent AF1 transactivation domain [ – ], exons 2 and 3 encode the DNA binding domain (DBD), exon 4 encodes the hinge region, which includes the nuclear localization signal, and exons 4–8 encode the LBD. ARv7 is truncated after exon 3 and contains 16 unique amino acids from cryptic exon 3 ( , top). To compare the transcriptional activity of ARv7 with AR on a defined promoter driven by three AREs, cell-free transcription assays were developed and employed. An 853 bp DNA construct containing three AREs from the rat TAT gene coupled to the Adenovirus E4 minimal promoter (3xARE-E4) was assembled into chromatin (via salt dilution) using purified HeLa core histones. The chromatinized DNA template was then incubated with human recombinant purified AR or ARv7 protein, HeLa S3 cell nuclear extract (NE) as a source of the RNA polymerase II (pol II) transcriptional machinery and relevant CoRs, and the potent synthetic agonist R1881 (for AR activation) or DMSO vehicle (for ARv7). After allowing the pre-initiation complex to form, ribonucleotide triphosphates (NTPs) were added to initiate transcription. The transcriptional activity of AR and ARv7 was determined via RT-qPCR by directly measuring the output of synthesized E4 transcripts. As expected, an increasing amount of AR or ARv7 led to enhanced E4 mRNA transcripts; however, significantly less ARv7 protein was required to produce the same transcriptional output as AR ( , bottom). Importantly, these data are consistent with prior cell-based assays measuring expression of an ARE-dependent reporter gene as a function of expressed AR or ARv7 [ ].
To identify proteins that interact with ARv7 and AR, an ARE pulldown assay was employed that utilized a biotinylated 3xARE-E4 fragment produced by PCR from the template used above for cell-free transcription ( ). The DNA was bound to magnetic streptavidin coated beads, then pre-incubated with recombinant ARv7 or AR protein to pre-bind it to the AREs to limit other TFs binding the AREs. We first tested how the recombinant ARv7 would bind DNA versus AR by titrating various amounts with a set amount of 3xARE DNA-beads. At amounts tested, similar ARv7 and AR DNA binding were observed (S1A Fig in ). The beads were then incubated with HeLa S3 cell NE as a source of CoRs, and agonist ligand (R1881) for AR. After stringent washes to minimize non-specific background protein binding to the DNA, the samples were assayed for ARv7 and AR remaining on the beads. We found that much less ARv7 and AR were bound after incubation with NE and washes (S1A Fig in , see asterisks). NE from the HeLa S3 cell line is the “workhorse” used because it is an excellent source of RNA pol II machinery and CoRs and it also does not express AR or ARv7, allowing for controlled ARE pulldowns (-/+) purified recombinant protein to determine if CoR recruitment is indeed AR- or ARv7-dependent. We next tested which amount of ARv7 or AR to add into the system for optimal recruitment of a known AR coactivator, CARM1 [ ]. From titration assays, 2.0 µg AR and 0.25 µg ARv7 revealed the best recruitment of CARM1 to the ARE-containing beads (S1B Fig in , left panel). Interestingly, unlike AR, we found that increasing ARv7 to 1 µg in the ARE pulldowns led to a reduction in both CARM1 and another known AR coactivator, E6-AP [ ] (S1B Fig in , right panel). Thus, we determined from these titration experiments the optimal amounts of ARv7 (0.25 µg) and AR (2 µg) to add to the same amount of 3xARE-beads and HeLa NE for recruitment of coregulators.
As HeLa cells are derived from a cervical carcinoma, some coregulators recruited to AR or ARv7 could be specific to this line and not a prostate cancer cell. To begin to address this concern, we performed ARE pulldowns from nuclear extracts of LNCaP prostate cancer cells that endogenously express AR. We found that endogenous AR when incubated with R1881 recruited known coactivators (CBP, SRC-3, and CARM1) from prostate cancer cells (S1C Fig in ) similar to when HeLa NE and recombinant AR is employed (see below).

## Mass spectrometry identified ANP32A and CAND1 as previously undescribed ARv7 associated proteins that display enhanced recruitment with ARv7 over AR
As there are many known AR interacting CoRs already (e.g., [ ]) and significantly less is known about ARv7, ARE pulldowns were submitted for unbiased screening analyses by liquid chromatography (LC)-MS analysis (-/+) ARv7 protein in order to identify and characterize the ARv7 recruited complexes. The MS results identified many proteins that were recruited in an ARv7-dependent fashion, including the known AR coactivator CBP (gene symbol: CREBBP) [ , ] ( ; provides the full searchable list of all bound proteins). In addition to CBP, shows seven additional MS candidates characterized as potential “transcriptional coregulators” based on our prior extensive analysis [ ] that were recruited by ARv7 and further validated by immunoblotting ( ; S1D Fig in ). Some of the candidates have not been previously described to play a role in AR signaling (e.g., CCR4-NOT complex subunit CNOT2, RNA pol II negative elongation factor complex subunit NELF-E, RNA pol II elongation factor SUPT6H (also called SPT6), 19S proteasome subunit PSMC5 (also called SUG1), and cullin-associated NEDD8-dissociated protein 1 (CAND1, also called TIP120 [ ]) or with limited data as an AR coactivator, acidic leucine-rich nuclear phosphoprotein 32 family member A (ANP32A) [ ] or as an AR corepressor, NELF-B (also known as cofactor of BRCA1 or COBRA1 [ ]). Many of these potential CoRs also were recruited by R1881-bound AR from HeLa NE ( ) and LNCaP NE (S1C Fig in ).
When directly comparing AR- and ARv7- CoR complexes by immunoblotting, ARv7 demonstrated a noticeably enhanced recruitment of a subset of AR-associated proteins including ANP32A, CAND1, and CARM1 ( , with quantification of CAND1 and ANP32A recruitment relative to AR isoform levels in three experiments shown in the right panel). As CARM1 is a known AR coactivator, we chose to focus on determining whether ANP32A and CAND1 are, indeed, AR/ARv7 coregulators. Notably, significantly less ARv7 protein was required to recruit these specific candidate coregulators compared to AR, similar to the above cell-free transcription data ( ).

## Knockdown of ANP32A or CAND1 in LNCaP and LNCaP doxycycline-inducible ARv7 cells demonstrates coactivator roles for AR and ARv7 target gene expression
To determine the functional relevance of ANP32A and CAND1 for AR transcriptional activity, LNCaP cells were used to investigate effects on AR target gene expression. LNCaP cells were grown in charcoal stripped serum (CSS) to prevent activation of the endogenous AR by the endogenous androgens in FBS and to establish a baseline for AR target gene expression. The cells were then treated with small interfering RNAs (siRNAs) targeting known AR coactivators (MED1 [ ] or SRC-3 [ ]) or our candidates (ANP32A or CAND1) for 48 hours for efficient knockdown followed by the addition of 10 nM R1881 for 24 hours. One siRNA non-targeting sample (Ctrl) was also treated with the AR antagonist enzalutamide (formerly called MDV3100) for 1 hour prior to the addition of R1881 as a quality control to demonstrate inhibition of AR target gene expression. The inclusion of SRC-3 and MED1 knockdown serve as positive controls as their knockdown in LNCaP cells has been reported to reduce the expression of the AR target gene, PSA [ , ]. As expected, SRC-3 and MED1 knockdown significantly reduced R1881-induced PSA expression. Interestingly, knockdown of ANP32A or CAND1 also significantly reduced the R1881-induced expression of PSA ( ). These results suggest ANP32A and CAND1 may function as coactivators of androgen-liganded AR transcriptional activity.
In order to test the functional relevance of ANP32A and CAND1 with ARv7, doxycycline (dox)-inducible LNCaP cells [ ] were employed. In the presence of dox, the tet repression of ARv7 is released allowing for ARv7 mRNA expression and ARv7 induction of its specific target genes (such as EDN2 that is not induced by AR [ ]) (S2A Fig in ). When the LNCaP-ARv7 cells are grown in CSS serum, they can be treated with: 1) R1881 to investigate endogenous AR-driven target gene expression or 2) dox to investigate ARv7-driven target gene expression with minimal impact from the endogenous AR ( ). Robust siRNA mediated knockdown of ANP32A and CAND1 significantly reduced the AR (+R1881) driven expression of PSA and EXTL2 ( ; S2B Fig in ) with no effect on basal expression. PSA is a well-known target gene of AR (and ARv7), and EXTL2 was previously reported to be an AR-specific target gene [ ]. Additionally, the knockdown of ANP32A and CAND1 significantly reduced the ARv7-driven expression of its specific target genes EDN2 and ETS2 [ ] ( ). As a control, ARv7 mRNA expression was measured upon ANP32A or CAND1 knockdown and it was not reduced in either case, suggesting the reduced ARv7 target gene expression was not simply due to a loss of ARv7 mRNA expression (S2C Fig in ). Lastly, we tested the effect of dual knockdown of ANP32A and CAND1 on AR and ARv7 target gene expression. The combination knockdown significantly further reduced the gene expression of AR and ARv7 target genes (S3 Fig in ). Collectively these results suggest that the newly identified AR and ARv7-associating proteins, ANP32A and CAND1, function as AR and ARv7 coactivators.

## Bioinformatic analyses of CAND1 expression in human prostate cancer clinical datasets demonstrate significant correlation with prostate cancer progression, metastasis, and worse patient prognosis
Results from the above cell-free and cell-based assays suggest ANP32A and CAND1 have coactivator functions for AR and ARv7 and may play a role in prostate cancer. To address this, the expression of ANP32A and CAND1 mRNA was evaluated in two human prostate cancer clinical datasets made up of clinically localized primary and metastatic tumor samples (Varambally and colleagues [ ]; Cai and colleagues [ ]). CAND1 mRNA expression significantly correlated with metastatic prostate cancer progression in both datasets ( , left and middle). ANP32A did show an increase in mRNA expression between normal and primary prostate cancer when evaluated with The Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA)-PRAD; however, this increase was not statistically significant ( , right). Furthermore, the clinical relevance of CAND1 gene expression was evaluated with The Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA)-PRAD and Glinsky [ ] prostate cancer cohorts. Patients in both cohorts were divided into top 45% and bottom 45% according to the CAND1 gene expression. These analyses demonstrated with significance that high CAND1 mRNA expression correlated with increased risk of recurrence and poorer patient survival ( ). Collectively, these findings suggest that CAND1 may contribute to driving prostate cancer progression and metastasis through modulating AR and ARv7 activity.

## CAND1 co-localization with AR and ARv7 at target genes in LNCaP doxycycline-inducible ARv7 cells
To further validate the functional interaction of CAND1 with AR and ARv7 at endogenous gene AREs, we conducted chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP) studies in LNCaP dox-inducible ARv7 cells using AR or CAND1 antibodies ( ). As expected, using an N-terminal antibody for AR that recognizes both AR and ARv7, ChIP in these cells demonstrated R1881-induced AR localization at the PSA enhancer (PSAenh) and FKBP5 gene promoter AREs. When the cells were treated with dox to induce ARv7 expression, ChIP assays demonstrated that ARv7 localized at these same loci, albeit with less occupancy as compared to AR ( ). Importantly, CAND1 ChIP assays revealed that CAND1 co-localized at the same AREs with AR and ARv7 either in response to R1881 or dox, respectively ( ). Furthermore, because the same N-terminal antibody was used for AR and ARv7 ChIP, direct comparisons can be made between them. Taking the ratio of CAND1 enrichment over AR or ARv7 enrichment suggests that smaller amounts of chromatin-bound ARv7 can recruit more CAND1 than chromatin-bound AR; this is especially evident at the FKBP5 gene ARE ( ). Collectively, these results indicate that CAND1 functions as a coactivator of both AR proteins and that ARv7 has a greater capability for recruiting this coactivator to these gene loci than AR.

## DNA-PK dynamically regulates the AR- and ARv7-CoR complexes and stabilizes their interactions with ANP32A and CAND1
Although the ARE pulldown assay primarily is used to identify the “core or stable” CoR complexes recruited with AR and ARv7 to DNA, it also can be used for determining if regulatory enzymes, such as kinases, may modify the ARs themselves or alter their CoR complexes. To determine if there were any kinases that regulated the AR complex, the ATP treatment (or kinase) assay was employed. Here, the standard ARE pulldown is conducted (-/+) recombinant AR protein. After final washes, the DNA-bound AR-CoR complexes are pelleted by magnet and resuspended in 1x kinase buffer. Upon the addition of ATP, the reactions are moved to 30oC for up to 30 min. Interestingly, gel mobility shifts of AR were detected by SDS-PAGE within 5 min of ATP addition ( ).
Typically, protein gel mobility shifts indicate a post-translational modification has occurred (e.g., phosphorylation). To determine if the AR gel shifts might indeed be due to phosphorylation, the AR-CoR complexes were treated with ANP-PMP (a non-hydrolyzable form of ATP) to compare with ATP, or ATP-treated complexes were then treated with λ protein phosphatase (LPP) to counteract any phosphorylation events due to kinases. Strikingly, the AR gel mobility shifts were significantly attenuated in both the ANP-PMP and LPP-treated reactions ( ), indicating that AR was being phosphorylated by a kinase. Considering that DNA-dependent protein kinase (DNA-PK) has been shown to be involved with AR signaling and prostate cancer progression [ , ], another ATP treatment reaction was included with NU7441, a highly specific and potent DNA-PK inhibitor [ ]. Inhibiting DNA-PK with NU7441 significantly reduced the AR gel mobility shifts indicating that DNA-PK was at least one of the kinases targeting AR ( ).
To further support this finding, the catalytic subunit of DNA-PK (DNA-PKcs) was immunodepleted from HeLa NE to investigate the effects of losing DNA-PK on AR phosphorylation. Loss of DNA-PK significantly increased the amount of unphosphorylated AR when compared to the IgG control NE reactions ( ). Because there are many kinases from the HeLa NE that could be phosphorylating AR, the ATP treatment assay was repeated using purified proteins only. Incubating 3xARE-E4 DNA with recombinant AR, recombinant DNA-PK holoenzyme (DNA-PKcs in complex with Ku70/Ku80) with or without ATP demonstrated an ATP-dependent AR gel mobility shift, and this shift was significantly reduced in the presence of NU7441 ( , left panel). Additionally, ARv7 gel mobility shifts were seen when purified ARv7 was tested in place of AR ( , right panel). Collectively, these data suggest that DNA-PK directly phosphorylates both androgen‌‌ receptors.
After establishing AR/ARv7 as a DNA-PK target, the relationship between DNA-PK and other components of the AR- and ARv7-CoR complexes was investigated. Interestingly, upon ATP-treatment the interaction of CAND1 and ANP32A in the AR-CoR complexes was noticeably stabilized during the 30°C treatment period and this stabilization was reduced in the presence of NU7441 ( , left panel). This suggests that DNA-PK enzymatic activity is important for stabilizing the association of ANP32A and CAND1 within the AR complex. Furthermore, ATP treatment of ARv7-CoR complexes demonstrated a similar effect with ANP32A and CAND1 being stabilized in the complex, and upon NU7441 treatment, this effect was similarly lost ( , right panel). Additionally, as a quality control, a phospho-serine DNA-PKcs antibody was used to immunoblot serine 2056 (pS2056) of DNA-PK. DNA-PK can auto-phosphorylate itself at this residue and it is known to be an activating mark [ ]. ATP treatment increased phosphorylation of serine 2056 and inhibiting DNA-PK with NU7441 reduced it, as expected ( , right panel). Collectively, these findings suggest that DNA-PK stabilizes the interaction of ANP32A and CAND1 in the biochemically isolated AR- and ARv7-CoR complexes.

## DNA-PK functions as a coactivator of AR and ARv7 target genes both in cell-free transcription and cell-based assays
Given the above data of DNA-PK phosphorylating AR/ARv7 and stablizing ANP32A and CAND1 in the AR/ARv7 complexes, we next asked what effect the loss of DNA-PK activity would have on AR/ARv7 driven cell-free transcription. We observed reductions in both AR and ARv7-driven transcription when NU7441 was added to the reactions ( ), directly showing that DNA-PK stimulates AR and ARv7 transcription in vitro. Importantly, DNA-PK inhibition with NU7441 did not have any repressive effect on basal transcription, thereby ruling out any trivial effects on the RNA pol II transcriptional machinery (S4A Fig in ).
To further support these cell-free transcription findings, the role of DNA-PK was tested in LNCaP dox-inducible ARv7 cells grown in CSS serum. The cells were transiently transfected with DNA-PKcs siRNAs for 48 hours before being treated with R1881 or dox to test effects of DNA-PK depletion on both AR and ARv7 target gene expression. Knockdown of DNA-PKcs (controls shown in S4B Fig in ) significantly reduced the expression of PSA and FKBP5, which are shared AR and ARv7 target genes ( , left and middle panels). Loss of DNA-PKcs also significantly reduced EXTL2 and RASSF3, two AR-specific target genes [ ] (S5A Fig in ). EDN2, an ARv7-specific target gene [ ], also displayed significant reduction in expression upon DNA-PKcs knockdown ( , right panel). Importantly, DNA-PK depletion did not reduce, but actually increased, ARv7 mRNA levels (S5B Fig in ). In sum, loss of DNA-PK diminishes the expression of both AR and ARv7 target genes supporting its role as an AR and ARv7 coactivator.
 To complement the above knockdown data, we tested the effects of inhibiting DNA-PK activity on AR/ARv7 target gene expression in LNCaP dox-inducible ARv7 cells. These cells were starved in CSS for 48 hours before being treated with NU7441 (two different doses) for 1 hour before being treated with R1881 or dox for 24 hours to induce AR and ARv7 activity, respectively. Inhibiting DNA-PK resulted in reduction of AR/ARv7-driven expression of PSA ( , top panel) and FKBP5 ( , middle panel), and of the ARv7-specific target gene EDN2 ( , bottom panel). Collectively, the data in suggest that DNA-PK is a bona fide coactivator of both AR and ARv7 transcriptional activity, consistent with previous reports from the Knudsen [ , ] and Gaughan laboratories [ ].

## Discussion
There is compelling evidence that ARv7 expression correlates with resistance to second generation ADT/ARSI [ , ] implicating ARv7 as a contributor to CRPC. Although ARv7 regulates many of the same gene targets as AR, several reports have identified genes that are preferentially regulated either by AR or ARv7 [ , , – ]. Differential binding to chromatin is one mechanism for preferential regulation, but differences in recruitment of CoRs likely also contributes to unique activities. Because binding to DNA can alter the structure of proteins, we sought to identify proteins that interact with ARv7 bound to DNA and to ask whether AR showed a similar capacity to interact with these proteins. To eliminate differences due to potential binding of other transcription factors, we developed an assay using a biotinylated DNA fragment containing a promoter with three upstream AREs, but no known consensus binding sites for other transcription factors. This template was sufficient to induce AR- or ARv7-dependent transcription in the presence of HeLa nuclear extract and purified receptor ( ). To optimize detection of associated proteins, levels of purified ARv7 used in the binding assay were titrated and the amount yielding the highest recruitment of a known AR coactivator, CARM1 (S1B Fig in ), was used for an unbiased mass spectrometry analysis of proteins that interacted with ARv7 bound to DNA. Numerous proteins were identified ( ; see S5 Table for the full searchable list) and further validated by immunoblotting ( ; S1C and S1D Figs). Several novel proteins were identified. To test whether these proteins also bound to AR, the amount of AR that bound the highest levels of CARM1 was identified (S1B Fig in ) and used to detect other proteins associated with AR. ARv7 was substantially more transcriptionally active than AR on our tested 3xARE template ( ) and more AR was required to optimally recruit CARM1 (S1B Fig). None of the candidates were uniquely specific for ARv7, but CARM1, CAND1, and ANP32A exhibited both more absolute binding to ARv7 and proportional binding relative to the amount of receptor ( ).
The potential coregulators with enhanced recruitment to ARv7 warranted further investigation of their functional relevance for AR and ARv7 activity. CAND1 was originally identified as TIP120, a TATA-binding protein (TBP)-interacting protein that stimulated RNA pol I, II, and III transcription [ ] and associated with SUG1 in a ~ 800 kDa complex [ ], but it was not reported as an AR coactivator. ANP32A was originally called pp32 and one group reported that it associated with AR and retinoblastoma protein [ ]. However, neither protein was identified as being associated with ARv7. There are limited data published on their roles in AR/ARv7-driven transcription and this is why they became the focus of further study. Here, we filled this knowledge gap by showing that knockdown of ANP32A and CAND1 in LNCaP and LNCaP dox-inducible ARv7 cells significantly reduced both AR and ARv7 target gene expression ( ; S2 and S3 Figs in ). Moreover, CAND1 was recruited by both AR and ARv7 at two target genes ( ), but the ratio of CAND1 occupancy to ARv7 was higher than that of CAND1 occupancy to AR as was observed in our in vitro assays ( ).
A previous study correlated higher CAND1 mRNA and protein in prostate tumors versus normal tissue [ ]. However, the clinical significance of these elevated expressions was not investigated. In this study, bioinformatic approaches investigating the clinical relevance of CAND1 in human prostate cancer sample datasets revealed that CAND1 mRNA expression correlated with metastatic prostate cancer; high CAND1 expression correlated with poor patient prognosis and an increased risk of recurrence ( ). Our findings are consistent with a report that high CAND1 mRNA levels were associated with higher tumor recurrence and decreased overall survival in prostate cancer patients [ ]. The discovery of CAND1 as a coactivator for both AR and ARv7 implies it or its interaction surfaces could be novel therapeutic targets in CRPC.
DNA-PK has been reported to associate with AR and ARv7 to stimulate their transactivation [ , ], which we have further confirmed in cell-free transcription and cell-based assays by depleting DNA-PK using siRNA or inhibiting its activity with NU7441 ( ; ; S4B and S5 Figs in ). However, its exact role(s) in the transcriptional activation process had not been identified. We found that DNA-PK activation induced phosphorylation of both AR and ARv7 as judged by phosphatase-sensitive gel mobility shifts that also were sensitive to DNA-PK depletion and inhibition ( ). That the phosphorylation was a direct result of DNA-PK activation rather than secondary to another DNA-PK dependent activity was confirmed using purified DNA-PK ( ). Based on our previous study with ERα [ ], it is likely that AR is one of several/many proteins phosphorylated by DNA-PK that contribute to AR isoform activity. To complement our cell-free ARE DNA pulldown experiments, AR and ARv7-driven cell-free transcription was reduced by inhibition of DNA-PK ( ). We found that one component of the role of DNA-PK activity is to mediate enhanced stabilization of CAND1 and ANP32A association with AR and ARv7 bound to AREs ( ). These studies are consistent with our previous study of ERα-coregulator complexes showing a role for DNA-PK in phosphorylating known activating serines of both ERα and SRC-3 and stabilizing coactivator binding in those complexes [ ]. Given the data presented here and in a prior report [ ] showing that ARv7 is very sensitive to DNA-PK inhibition, DNA-PK targeting may be a good therapeutic approach treating ARv7-expressing dominant CRPCs. A recent Phase 1b clinical trial (NCT02833883) of metastatic CRPC patients that have progressed on ADT tested the safety and efficacy of combining CC-115, a dual DNA-PK and mammalian target of rapamycin (mTOR), with enzalutamide [ ]. While the combination was well tolerated, CC-115 was insufficient to inhibit DNA-PK but showed a trend to decreased PSA response in patients with PI3 kinase alternations. This study suggests that additional DNA-PK inhibitors should be tested for better efficacy in the CRPC patients, such as a new trial of peposertib in combination with radium-223 (NCT04071236).
ARv7 lacks exons 4–8 of AR and contains only a small amount of unique sequence, which to date has not been shown to have any function beyond presumably substituting for the nuclear localization signal found in exon 4. Thus, it was possible that ARv7 would interact with a subset of AR coregulators and not exhibit any preferential/unique interactions. However, three proteins, CAND1, CARM1, and ANP32 interacted more strongly with ARv7 as compared to AR in our biochemical, cell-free ARE pulldown assay ( ). Importantly, the enhanced interaction of CAND1 with ARv7 was confirmed in prostate cancer cells using ChIP assays ( ). Our recent cryo-EM study [ ] showed that the N-terminus of AR interacts with the C-terminus, consistent with earlier biochemical studies (e.g., [ ]). Thus, the C-terminus of AR may be competing for interactions with CoRs contributing to the enhanced binding of some coactivators to ARv7 and its enhanced activity, at least, on promoters containing only AREs. Inhibition of AR isoforms lacking the C-terminal LBD has been challenging, although there are now different antagonists that bind the N-terminus and reduce prostate cancer growth in pre-clinical xenograft models (e.g., UT-143 [ ], EPI-7170 [ ], SC912 [ ], and the PROTAC NP18 [ ]). Our studies suggest that, in addition to approaches that reduce the expression of AR isoforms or inhibit isoform activity by binding the N-terminus, targeting identified coactivators or their interactions with AR and ARv7 should be effective in blocking activity and thus growth of AR isoform-dependent tumors.

## Supporting information
S1 File

## Supplementary Material.
This file contains S1-S4 Tables, Legends for S1-S5 Fig, and S1-S5 Fig.
(DOCX)
S5 Table

## List of all proteins identified by mass spectrometry in ARv7 ARE DNA pulldowns (searchable Excel file).
(XLSX)
S6 Fig

## Raw, uncropped images of all immunoblots with respective assayed proteins labeled with arrows (separate PDF file).
(PDF)

The authors thank members of the Tissue Culture Core (Judy Roscoe, Javier Pacheco, and Cheryl Parker), the Mass Spectrometry Proteomics Core (Dr. Sung Yun Jung, Antrix Jain, and Bhoomi Bhatt), and the Monoclonal Antibody / Recombinant Protein Production Core (Kurt Christensen) for their technical assistance with cell culture, MS/proteomics analyses and PRIDE database submission, and recombinant protein purification. The authors thank the late Drs. Bert W. O’Malley and Ming-Jer Tsai and Dr. Sophia Tsai for critical comments on the manuscript.
 10.1371/journal.pone.0349130.r001Decision Letter 0
CuligZoranAcademic Editor© 2026 Zoran Culig2026Zoran Culighttps://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/This is an open access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License, which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original author and source are credited.Submission Version0
1 Apr 2026

-->PONE-D-26-09739-->-->Identification of CAND1 as a DNA-dependent protein kinase-regulated coactivator of androgen receptor and the ARv7 splice variant -->-->PLOS One
Dear Dr. Foulds,
Thank you for submitting your manuscript to PLOS ONE. After careful consideration, we feel that it has merit but does not fully meet PLOS ONE’s publication criteria as it currently stands. Therefore, we invite you to submit a revised version of the manuscript that addresses the points raised during the review process.
Please submit your revised manuscript by May 16 2026 11:59PM. If you will need more time than this to complete your revisions, please reply to this message or contact the journal office at plosone@plos.org. When you're ready to submit your revision, log on to https://www.editorialmanager.com/pone/ and select the 'Submissions Needing Revision' folder to locate your manuscript file.
Please include the following items when submitting your revised manuscript:-->
A letter that responds to each point raised by the academic editor and reviewer(s). You should upload this letter as a separate file labeled 'Response to Reviewers'.
A marked-up copy of your manuscript that highlights changes made to the original version. You should upload this as a separate file labeled 'Revised Manuscript with Track Changes'.
An unmarked version of your revised paper without tracked changes. You should upload this as a separate file labeled 'Manuscript'.
-->
If you would like to make changes to your financial disclosure, please include your updated statement in your cover letter. Guidelines for resubmitting your figure files are available below the reviewer comments at the end of this letter.
If applicable, we recommend that you deposit your laboratory protocols in protocols.io to enhance the reproducibility of your results. Protocols.io assigns your protocol its own identifier (DOI) so that it can be cited independently in the future. For instructions see: https://journals.plos.org/plosone/s/submission-guidelines#loc-laboratory-protocols. Additionally, PLOS ONE offers an option for publishing peer-reviewed Lab Protocol articles, which describe protocols hosted on protocols.io. Read more information on sharing protocols at https://plos.org/protocols?utm_medium=editorial-email&utm_source=authorletters&utm_campaign=protocols.
As the corresponding author, your ORCID iD is verified in the submission system and will appear in the published article. PLOS supports the use of ORCID, and we encourage all coauthors to register for an ORCID iD and use it as well. Please encourage your coauthors to verify their ORCID iD within the submission system before final acceptance, as unverified ORCID iDs will not appear in the published article. Only the individual author can complete the verification step; PLOS staff cannot verify ORCID iDs on behalf of authors.
We look forward to receiving your revised manuscript.
Kind regards,
Zoran Culig
Academic Editor
PLOS One
Journal Requirements:
When submitting your revision, we need you to address these additional requirements.
1. Please ensure that your manuscript meets PLOS ONE's style requirements, including those for file naming. The PLOS ONE style templates can be found at
https://journals.plos.org/plosone/s/file?id=wjVg/PLOSOne_formatting_sample_main_body.pdf and

https://journals.plos.org/plosone/s/file?id=ba62/PLOSOne_formatting_sample_title_authors_affiliations.pdf

2. PLOS ONE now requires that authors provide the original uncropped and unadjusted images underlying all blot or gel results reported in a submission’s figures or Supporting Information files. This policy and the journal’s other requirements for blot/gel reporting and figure preparation are described in detail at https://journals.plos.org/plosone/s/figures#loc-blot-and-gel-reporting-requirements and https://journals.plos.org/plosone/s/figures#loc-preparing-figures-from-image-files. When you submit your revised manuscript, please ensure that your figures adhere fully to these guidelines and provide the original underlying images for all blot or gel data reported in your submission. See the following link for instructions on providing the original image data: https://journals.plos.org/plosone/s/figures#loc-original-images-for-blots-and-gels.
In your cover letter, please note whether your blot/gel image data are in Supporting Information or posted at a public data repository, provide the repository URL if relevant, and provide specific details as to which raw blot/gel images, if any, are not available. Email us at plosone@plos.org if you have any questions.
3. PLOS requires an ORCID iD for the corresponding author in Editorial Manager on papers submitted after December 6th, 2016. Please ensure that you have an ORCID iD and that it is validated in Editorial Manager. To do this, go to ‘Update my Information’ (in the upper left-hand corner of the main menu), and click on the Fetch/Validate link next to the ORCID field. This will take you to the ORCID site and allow you to create a new iD or authenticate a pre-existing iD in Editorial Manager.
4. We note that the grant information you provided in the ‘Funding Information’ and ‘Financial Disclosure’ sections do not match.
When you resubmit, please ensure that you provide the correct grant numbers for the awards you received for your study in the ‘Funding Information’ section.
5. Thank you for stating in your Funding Statement:
S.L.G., K.R., and C.C. were partially supported by CPRIT grants RP200504 and RP210227, by NIH P30 shared resource grant CA125123, by NIEHS grants P30 ES030285 and P42 ES027725, and by NIH grants S10OD032185, U54CA274321, and R21DE032344.
Please provide an amended statement that declares *all* the funding or sources of support (whether external or internal to your organization) received during this study, as detailed online in our guide for authors at http://journals.plos.org/plosone/s/submit-now. Please also include the statement “There was no additional external funding received for this study.” in your updated Funding Statement.
Please include your amended Funding Statement within your cover letter. We will change the online submission form on your behalf.
6. Please expand the acronym “NIH” and “CPRIT” (as indicated in your financial disclosure) so that it states the name of your funders in full.
This information should be included in your cover letter; we will change the online submission form on your behalf.
7. Thank you for stating the following in the Competing Interests/Financial Disclosure section:
C.E.F and D.M.L disclose other support from CoRegen, Inc. unrelated to the current study.
We note that one or more of the authors are employed by a commercial company: CoRegen, Inc.
a. Please provide an amended Funding Statement declaring this commercial affiliation, as well as a statement regarding the Role of Funders in your study. If the funding organization did not play a role in the study design, data collection and analysis, decision to publish, or preparation of the manuscript and only provided financial support in the form of authors' salaries and/or research materials, please review your statements relating to the author contributions, and ensure you have specifically and accurately indicated the role(s) that these authors had in your study. You can update author roles in the Author Contributions section of the online submission form.
Please also include the following statement within your amended Funding Statement.
“The funder provided support in the form of salaries for authors [insert relevant initials], but did not have any additional role in the study design, data collection and analysis, decision to publish, or preparation of the manuscript. The specific roles of these authors are articulated in the ‘author contributions’ section.”
If your commercial affiliation did play a role in your study, please state and explain this role within your updated Funding Statement.
b. Please also provide an updated Competing Interests Statement declaring this commercial affiliation along with any other relevant declarations relating to employment, consultancy, patents, products in development, or marketed products, etc.
Within your Competing Interests Statement, please confirm that this commercial affiliation does not alter your adherence to all PLOS ONE policies on sharing data and materials by including the following statement: ""This does not alter our adherence to  PLOS ONE policies on sharing data and materials.” (as detailed online in our guide for authors http://journals.plos.org/plosone/s/competing-interests) . If this adherence statement is not accurate and  there are restrictions on sharing of data and/or materials, please state these. Please note that we cannot proceed with consideration of your article until this information has been declared.
Please include both an updated Funding Statement and Competing Interests Statement in your cover letter. We will change the online submission form on your behalf.
8. When completing the data availability statement of the submission form, you indicated that you will make your data available on acceptance. We strongly recommend all authors decide on a data sharing plan before acceptance, as the process can be lengthy and hold up publication timelines. Please note that, though access restrictions are acceptable now, your entire data will need to be made freely accessible if your manuscript is accepted for publication. This policy applies to all data except where public deposition would breach compliance with the protocol approved by your research ethics board. If you are unable to adhere to our open data policy, please kindly revise your statement to explain your reasoning and we will seek the editor's input on an exemption. Please be assured that, once you have provided your new statement, the assessment of your exemption will not hold up the peer review process.
9. If the reviewer comments include a recommendation to cite specific previously published works, please review and evaluate these publications to determine whether they are relevant and should be cited. There is no requirement to cite these works unless the editor has indicated otherwise.
10. Please review your reference list to ensure that it is complete and correct. If you have cited papers that have been retracted, please include the rationale for doing so in the manuscript text, or remove these references and replace them with relevant current references. Any changes to the reference list should be mentioned in the rebuttal letter that accompanies your revised manuscript. If you need to cite a retracted article, indicate the article’s retracted status in the References list and also include a citation and full reference for the retraction notice.
Additional Editor Comments:
The authors have addressed important issue of coregulator action of full length and variant androgen receptor. There are some minor suggestions for revision.
[Note: HTML markup is below. Please do not edit.]
Reviewers' comments:
Reviewer's Responses to Questions
-->Comments to the Author
1. Is the manuscript technically sound, and do the data support the conclusions?
The manuscript must describe a technically sound piece of scientific research with data that supports the conclusions. Experiments must have been conducted rigorously, with appropriate controls, replication, and sample sizes. The conclusions must be drawn appropriately based on the data presented. -->
Reviewer #1: Yes
**********
-->2. Has the statistical analysis been performed appropriately and rigorously? -->
Reviewer #1: Yes
**********
-->3. Have the authors made all data underlying the findings in their manuscript fully available?
The PLOS Data policy requires authors to make all data underlying the findings described in their manuscript fully available without restriction, with rare exception (please refer to the Data Availability Statement in the manuscript PDF file). The data should be provided as part of the manuscript or its supporting information, or deposited to a public repository. For example, in addition to summary statistics, the data points behind means, medians and variance measures should be available. If there are restrictions on publicly sharing data—e.g. participant privacy or use of data from a third party—those must be specified.-->
Reviewer #1: Yes
**********
-->4. Is the manuscript presented in an intelligible fashion and written in standard English?
PLOS ONE does not copyedit accepted manuscripts, so the language in submitted articles must be clear, correct, and unambiguous. Any typographical or grammatical errors should be corrected at revision, so please note any specific errors here.-->
Reviewer #1: Yes
**********
-->5. Review Comments to the Author
Please use the space provided to explain your answers to the questions above. You may also include additional comments for the author, including concerns about dual publication, research ethics, or publication ethics. (Please upload your review as an attachment if it exceeds 20,000 characters)-->
Reviewer #1: This is an elegant mechanistic study on novel co-factors of AR and ARv7 in prostate cancer. The experiments are well designed and conclusions are justified by the results.
Please see some minor points below:
Line 80, p4: please add more recent studies on AR interactome, using co-IP and MS. For example: PLoS One. 2024 Dec 13;19(12):e0309491. doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0309491. eCollection 2024.PMID: 39671399
Line 102 p5: typo (coactivator)
Line 132 p6: typo, profiling twice
Line 154 p7: where are the modifications highlighted? This should be clearly indicated.
Figure 1 A, bottom panel: it is not clear what the labels DMSO/Vehicle and DMSO/100nM R1881 refer too. This is not described in the main text either.
Lines 391-393, p16: The authors explain why they use NE from Hela which is essentially to pick a cell line without AR/ARv7 and a good source of RNA pol II machinery and CoRs. However, would the CoRs be less specific to prostate cancer than using a prostate cancer cell line without AR/ARv7, such as PC3 or DU154? This point should be at least discussed.
Figure 4 A: the scale for the bottom graphs is different from the top, which is understandable considering the amount of change. However, in the bottom panel changes are a fraction of those at the top. Is there any repercussion on the biological significance and interpretation of these results?
Figure 5B: Are the labels at the top correct? Should second lane be + ATP?
Line 719 p29: typo ‘TATA binding interacting protein’.
**********
-->6. PLOS authors have the option to publish the peer review history of their article (what does this mean?). If published, this will include your full peer review and any attached files.
If you choose “no”, your identity will remain anonymous but your review may still be made public.
Do you want your identity to be public for this peer review? For information about this choice, including consent withdrawal, please see our Privacy Policy.-->
Reviewer #1: No
**********
[NOTE: If reviewer comments were submitted as an attachment file, they will be attached to this email and accessible via the submission site. Please log into your account, locate the manuscript record, and check for the action link "View Attachments". If this link does not appear, there are no attachment files.]
To ensure your figures meet our technical requirements, please review our figure guidelines: https://journals.plos.org/plosone/s/figures
You may also use PLOS’s free figure tool, NAAS, to help you prepare publication quality figures: https://journals.plos.org/plosone/s/figures#loc-tools-for-figure-preparation.
NAAS will assess whether your figures meet our technical requirements by comparing each figure against our figure specifications.
-->
10.1371/journal.pone.0349130.r002Author response to Decision Letter 1
Submission Version1
8 Apr 2026

A. Response to Academic Editor’s Concerns:
1. Please ensure that your manuscript meets PLOS ONE's style requirements, including those for file naming.
>After thorough review, our manuscript meets PLOS ONE’s style requirements.
2. PLOS ONE now requires that authors provide the original uncropped and unadjusted images underlying all blot or gel results reported in a submission’s figures or Supporting Information files.
>We have added all raw, uncropped images of immunoblots as S6 Fig in the Supporting Information.
When you submit your revised manuscript, please ensure that your figures adhere fully to guidelines.
> We used PLOS’s free figure tool, NAAS, to prepare publication quality figures for our six Figures.
>Per PLOS, supporting figures and supporting tables do not follow the same requirements as tables and figures in the main body of your manuscript, because PLOS hosts them on servers that can handle a wider variety of file types than our published articles. Because of this, we did not use NAAS to check any supporting information files that are presented as .DOCX, .XLSX, or .PDF files.
In your cover letter, please note whether your blot/gel image data are in Supporting Information.
>This has been indicated in our cover letter.
3. PLOS requires an ORCID iD for the corresponding author in Editorial Manager on papers submitted after December 6th, 2016. Please ensure that you have an ORCID iD and that it is validated in Editorial Manager.
>I have validated my ORCID iD as “0000-0003-4908-1473” in Editorial Manager.
4. We note that the grant information you provided in the ‘Funding Information’ and ‘Financial Disclosure’ sections do not match. When you resubmit, please ensure that you provide the correct grant numbers for the awards you received for your study in the ‘Funding Information’ section.
>We apologize for the error.
We have now revised the financial disclosure to read:
“The study was funded by National Institutes of Health grants R01HD007857 and R01HD008188 (DML); P42ES027725 SubProject 7644 and U54CA274321 SubProject 9353 (CC); and P30CA125123 SubProject 8884 (AM); Cancer Prevention and Research Institute of Texas grant RP150648 Project 2 (NLW); Department of Defense Congressionally Directed Medical Research Program grants W81XWH-17-1-0236 (NLW) and W81XWH-21-1-0404 (PY). The above funders had no role in study design, data collection and analysis, decision to publish, or preparation of the manuscript. CoRegen, Inc. provided support in the form of salaries for authors [AKP, PY, DML, and CEF], but did not have any additional role in the study design, data collection and analysis, decision to publish, or preparation of the manuscript. The specific roles of these authors are articulated in the ‘author contributions’ section. There was no additional external funding received for this study.”
5. Thank you for stating in your Funding Statement:
S.L.G., K.R., and C.C. were partially supported by CPRIT grants RP200504 and RP210227, by NIH P30 shared resource grant CA125123, by NIEHS grants P30 ES030285 and P42 ES027725, and by NIH grants S10OD032185, U54CA274321, and R21DE032344.
Please provide an amended statement that declares *all* the funding or sources of support (whether external or internal to your organization) received during this study, as detailed online in our guide for authors at http://journals.plos.org/plosone/s/submit-now. Please also include the statement “There was no additional external funding received for this study.” in your updated Funding Statement.
> As noted above, we have now revised the financial disclosure to read:
“The study was funded by National Institutes of Health grants R01HD007857 and R01HD008188 (DML); P42ES027725 SubProject 7644 and U54CA274321 SubProject 9353 (CC); and P30CA125123 SubProject 8884 (AM); Cancer Prevention and Research Institute of Texas grant RP150648 Project 2 (NLW); Department of Defense Congressionally Directed Medical Research Program grants W81XWH-17-1-0236 (NLW) and W81XWH-21-1-0404 (PY). The above funders had no role in study design, data collection and analysis, decision to publish, or preparation of the manuscript. CoRegen, Inc. provided support in the form of salaries for authors [AKP, PY, DML, and CEF], but did not have any additional role in the study design, data collection and analysis, decision to publish, or preparation of the manuscript. The specific roles of these authors are articulated in the ‘author contributions’ section. There was no additional external funding received for this study.”
>We have removed previous funding sources either provided by BCM PIs that are not on this manuscript or that simply supported cores (Daniel Kraushaar-CPRIT RP200504, Dean Edwards-CPRIT RP210227, Vlad Sandulache- NIH R21DE032344, Cheryl Walker- NIH P30ES030285, and Susan Hilsenbeck- NIH S10OD032185).
6. Please expand the acronym “NIH” and “CPRIT” (as indicated in your financial disclosure) so that it states the name of your funders in full.
This information should be included in your cover letter; we will change the online submission form on your behalf.
> As noted above, we have now revised the financial disclosure to read:
“The study was funded by National Institutes of Health grants R01HD007857 and R01HD008188 (DML); P42ES027725 SubProject 7644 and U54CA274321 SubProject 9353 (CC); and P30CA125123 SubProject 8884 (AM); Cancer Prevention and Research Institute of Texas grant RP150648 Project 2 (NLW); Department of Defense Congressionally Directed Medical Research Program grants W81XWH-17-1-0236 (NLW) and W81XWH-21-1-0404 (PY). The above funders had no role in study design, data collection and analysis, decision to publish, or preparation of the manuscript. CoRegen, Inc. provided support in the form of salaries for authors [AKP, PY, DML, and CEF], but did not have any additional role in the study design, data collection and analysis, decision to publish, or preparation of the manuscript. The specific roles of these authors are articulated in the ‘author contributions’ section. There was no additional external funding received for this study.”
>This information is listed in the cover letter.
7. Thank you for stating the following in the Competing Interests/Financial Disclosure section:
C.E.F and D.M.L disclose other support from CoRegen, Inc. unrelated to the current study.
We note that one or more of the authors are employed by a commercial company: CoRegen, Inc.
> We apologize for this oversight.
We have revised the Competing Interest Statement as:
“AKP, PY, DML, and CEF disclose salary support from CoRegen, Inc. unrelated to the current study. This does not alter our adherence to PLOS ONE policies on sharing data and materials. All other authors have nothing to disclose.”
>This information is listed in the cover letter.
a. Please provide an amended Funding Statement declaring this commercial affiliation, as well as a statement regarding the Role of Funders in your study. If the funding organization did not play a role in the study design, data collection and analysis, decision to publish, or preparation of the manuscript and only provided financial support in the form of authors' salaries and/or research materials, please review your statements relating to the author contributions, and ensure you have specifically and accurately indicated the role(s) that these authors had in your study. You can update author roles in the Author Contributions section of the online submission form.
Please also include the following statement within your amended Funding Statement.
“The funder provided support in the form of salaries for authors [insert relevant initials], but did not have any additional role in the study design, data collection and analysis, decision to publish, or preparation of the manuscript. The specific roles of these authors are articulated in the ‘author contributions’ section.”
If your commercial affiliation did play a role in your study, please state and explain this role within your updated Funding Statement.
> As noted above, we have now revised the financial disclosure to read:
“The study was funded by National Institutes of Health grants R01HD007857 and R01HD008188 (DML); P42ES027725 SubProject 7644 and U54CA274321 SubProject 9353 (CC); and P30CA125123 SubProject 8884 (AM); Cancer Prevention and Research Institute of Texas grant RP150648 Project 2 (NLW); Department of Defense Congressionally Directed Medical Research Program grants W81XWH-17-1-0236 (NLW) and W81XWH-21-1-0404 (PY). The above funders had no role in study design, data collection and analysis, decision to publish, or preparation of the manuscript. CoRegen, Inc. provided support in the form of salaries for authors [AKP, PY, DML, and CEF], but did not have any additional role in the study design, data collection and analysis, decision to publish, or preparation of the manuscript. The specific roles of these authors are articulated in the ‘author contributions’ section. There was no additional external funding received for this study.”
>As Funding Statement has been revised, we updated the Author Contributions section of the online submission form including “funding acquisition” by NLW, CC, and AM.
b. Please also provide an updated Competing Interests Statement declaring this commercial affiliation along with any other relevant declarations relating to employment, consultancy, patents, products in development, or marketed products, etc.
Within your Competing Interests Statement, please confirm that this commercial affiliation does not alter your adherence to all PLOS ONE policies on sharing data and materials by including the following statement: "This does not alter our adherence to PLOS ONE policies on sharing data and materials.” (as detailed online in our guide for authors http://journals.plos.org/plosone/s/competing-interests). If this adherence statement is not accurate and there are restrictions on sharing of data and/or materials, please state these. Please note that we cannot proceed with consideration of your article until this information has been declared.
> We have revised the Competing Interest Statement as:
“AKP, PY, DML, and CEF disclose salary support from CoRegen, Inc. unrelated to the current study. This does not alter our adherence to PLOS ONE policies on sharing data and materials. All other authors have nothing to disclose.”
Please include both an updated Funding Statement and Competing Interests Statement in your cover letter. We will change the online submission form on your behalf.
>Cover letter for the revision now includes both statements.
8. When completing the data availability statement of the submission form, you indicated that you will make your data available on acceptance. We strongly recommend all authors decide on a data sharing plan before acceptance, as the process can be lengthy and hold up publication timelines. Please note that, though access restrictions are acceptable now, your entire data will need to be made freely accessible if your manuscript is accepted for publication.
> The raw MS proteomics data for the the (-/+) ARv7 ARE pulldowns deposited to the ProteomeXchange Consortium via the PRIDE partner repository with the dataset identifier PXD021462 is now public. We have cited this on lines 327-329 of the revised manuscript and with Reference #52.
>This is listed in the cover letter.
9. If the reviewer comments include a recommendation to cite specific previously published works, please review and evaluate these publications to determine whether they are relevant and should be cited.
>We reviewed the one citation that Reviewer #1 requested. It is relevant and is now cited as Reference #33.
10. Please review your reference list to ensure that it is complete and correct. If you have cited papers that have been retracted, please include the rationale for doing so in the manuscript text, or remove these references and replace them with relevant current references. Any changes to the reference list should be mentioned in the rebuttal letter that accompanies your revised manuscript. If you need to cite a retracted article, indicate the article’s retracted status in the References list and also include a citation and full reference for the retraction notice.
>We reviewed the reference list. No retracted papers were cited.
>We only have two changes:
• As noted above, we reviewed the one citation that Reviewer #1 requested. It is relevant and is now cited as Reference #33.
• We have cited as Reference #52 the following database as it has now been made public: “Bhatt B, Hamilton RA. Project Name: Proteomic analyses identify ANP32A and CAND1 as androgen receptor and splice variant coactivators, whose interactions are regulated by DNA-dependent protein kinase. ProteomeXchange Consortium via PRIDE. Accession: PXD021462 (Publication Date: April 6, 2026): http://www.ebi.ac.uk/pride.”
11. The authors have addressed important issue of coregulator action of full length and variant androgen receptor. There are some minor suggestions for revision.
>We have fully addressed each concern of the Academic Editor (above) and Reviewer #1 (below).
B. Response to Reviewer #1’s Concerns:
This is an elegant mechanistic study on novel co-factors of AR and ARv7 in prostate cancer. The experiments are well designed and conclusions are justified by the results.
>Thank you for your evaluation of our study. We appreciate the reviewer’s comments that have improved the manuscript.
Please see some minor points below:
1. Line 80, p4: please add more recent studies on AR interactome, using co-IP and MS. For example: PLoS One. 2024 Dec 13;19(12):e0309491. doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0309491. eCollection 2024.PMID: 39671399
>Thank you for this suggestion. As this PLoS One paper did AR IP-MS and found Ku70/Ku80 and PELP1 as known coregulators, we now cite it as new Reference #33.
2. Line 102 p5: typo (coactivator)
>This has been corrected.
3. Line 132 p6: typo, profiling twice
>This has been corrected.
4. Line 154 p7: where are the modifications highlighted? This should be clearly indicated.
>We apologize this was not clear. We have revised this section of the Methods to make clear what the modifications were.
5. Figure 1 A, bottom panel: it is not clear what the labels DMSO/Vehicle and DMSO/100nM R1881 refer too. This is not described in the main text either.
>We apologize this was not clear. We have made a revised Fig 1A in the revised submission and described the legends in the main text now.
6. Lines 391-393, p16: The authors explain why they use NE from Hela which is essentially to pick a cell line without AR/ARv7 and a good source of RNA pol II machinery and CoRs. However, would the CoRs be less specific to prostate cancer than using a prostate cancer cell line without AR/ARv7, such as PC3 or DU154? This point should be at least discussed.
>To address the reviewer’s concern, we state in the revised manuscript: “As HeLa cells are derived from a cervical carcinoma, some coregulators recruited to AR or ARv7 could be specific to this line and not a prostate cancer cell.” For some experimental support, however, we performed an ARE DNA pulldown with endogenous AR coming from LNCaP prostate cancer cell nuclear extract (-/+) two different R1881 agonist concentrations and observed similar coregulator recruitments as with HeLa cell nuclear extract programmed with recombinant AR and R1881 (presented as a new S1C Fig). We also have included the raw immunoblot data in a revised S6 Fig for new S1C Fig. These additions are presented in lines 402-407.
>We have not done any ARE DNA pulldowns from PC3 or DU-145 cells. HeLa cells were used only to identify potential coregulator candidates with subsequent functional validation in LNCaP prostate cells using siRNA knockdown of candidates testing for an effect on known AR/ARv7 target genes. We also performed bioinformatic analyses of patient prostate cancer samples for the validated new candidates.
7. Figure 4 A: the scale for the bottom graphs is different from the top, which is understandable considering the amount of change. However, in the bottom panel changes are a fraction of those at the top. Is there any repercussion on the biological significance
AttachmentSubmitted filename: Response to Reviewers.docx
10.1371/journal.pone.0349130.r003Decision Letter 1
CuligZoranAcademic Editor© 2026 Zoran Culig2026Zoran Culighttps://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/This is an open access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License, which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original author and source are credited.Submission Version1
27 Apr 2026

Identification of CAND1 as a DNA-dependent protein kinase-regulated coactivator of androgen receptor and the ARv7 splice variant
PONE-D-26-09739R1
Dear Dr. Foulds,
We’re pleased to inform you that your manuscript has been judged scientifically suitable for publication and will be formally accepted for publication once it meets all outstanding technical requirements.
Within one week, you’ll receive an e-mail detailing the required amendments. When these have been addressed, you’ll receive a formal acceptance letter and your manuscript will be scheduled for publication.
An invoice will be generated when your article is formally accepted. Please note, if your institution has a publishing partnership with PLOS and your article meets the relevant criteria, all or part of your publication costs will be covered. Please make sure your user information is up-to-date by logging into Editorial Manager at Editorial Manager® and clicking the ‘Update My Information' link at the top of the page. For questions related to billing, please contact billing support.
If your institution or institutions have a press office, please notify them about your upcoming paper to help maximize its impact. If they’ll be preparing press materials, please inform our press team as soon as possible -- no later than 48 hours after receiving the formal acceptance. Your manuscript will remain under strict press embargo until 2 pm Eastern Time on the date of publication. For more information, please contact onepress@plos.org.
Kind regards,
Zoran Culig
Academic Editor
PLOS One
Additional Editor Comments (optional):
No further comments necessary.
Reviewers' comments:
10.1371/journal.pone.0349130.r004Acceptance letter
CuligZoranAcademic Editor© 2026 Zoran Culig2026Zoran Culighttps://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/This is an open access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License, which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original author and source are credited.PONE-D-26-09739R1
PLOS One
Dear Dr. Foulds,
I'm pleased to inform you that your manuscript has been deemed suitable for publication in PLOS One. Congratulations! Your manuscript is now being handed over to our production team.
At this stage, our production department will prepare your paper for publication. This includes ensuring the following:
* All references, tables, and figures are properly cited
* All relevant supporting information is included in the manuscript submission,
* There are no issues that prevent the paper from being properly typeset
You will receive further instructions from the production team, including instructions on how to review your proof when it is ready. Please keep in mind that we are working through a large volume of accepted articles, so please give us a few days to review your paper and let you know the next and final steps.
Lastly, if your institution or institutions have a press office, please let them know about your upcoming paper now to help maximize its impact. If they'll be preparing press materials, please inform our press team within the next 48 hours. Your manuscript will remain under strict press embargo until 2 pm Eastern Time on the date of publication. For more information, please contact onepress@plos.org.
You will receive an invoice from PLOS for your publication fee after your manuscript has reached the completed accept phase. If you receive an email requesting payment before acceptance or for any other service, this may be a phishing scheme. Learn how to identify phishing emails and protect your accounts at https://explore.plos.org/phishing.
If we can help with anything else, please email us at customercare@plos.org.
Thank you for submitting your work to PLOS ONE and supporting open access.
Kind regards,
PLOS ONE Editorial Office Staff
on behalf of
Dr. Zoran Culig
Academic Editor
PLOS One