pmcCell Rep MedCell Rep Med3954cellrepsmedCell Reports Medicine2666-3791ElsevierPMC12281405PMC12281405.112281405122814054056204210.1016/j.xcrm.2025.102202S2666-3791(25)00275-71022021ArticleTargeting synthetic lethality between non-homologous end joining and radiation in very-high-risk medulloblastoma
DeCarloAlexandria MacLeodGraham Fernandes da SilvaCarolina ShenLi Qing PovilaikaiteJulija DeaneMadeline AragaoLucas SieMariska TerminiDeborah MageeJonathan GudenasBrian SukumaranSneha CharronFrederic MarcellusRichard Al-AwarRima AmanAhmed ReynaudDenis TrolatAmarine Wybenga-GrootLeanne TaboriUri NörCarolina HardingShane M. MoranMichael F. NorthcottPaul A. DirksPeter AngersStephanestephane.angers@utoronto.ca RamaswamyVijayvijay.ramaswamy@sickkids.ca 1Developmental, Stem Cell and Cancer Biology Programme, Arthur and Sonia Labatt Brain Tumour Research Centre, Hospital for Sick Children, Toronto, ON M5G 0A4, Canada2Department of Medical Biophysics, University of Toronto, Toronto, ON M5G 1L7, Canada3Donnelly Centre for Cellular and Biomolecular Research, University of Toronto, Toronto, ON M5S 3E1, Canada4Center of Excellence in Neuro-Oncology Sciences (CENOS), Department of Developmental Neurobiology, St. Jude Children’s Research Hospital, Memphis, TN, USA5Montreal Clinical Research Institute (IRCM), Montreal, QC H2W 1R7, Canada6Integrated Program in Neuroscience, McGill University, Montreal, QC H3A 1A1, Canada7Department of Anatomy and Cell Biology and Division of Experimental Medicine, McGill University, Montreal, QC H3A 0G4, Canada8Department of Medicine, University of Montreal, Montreal, QC H3T 1J4, Canada9Drug Discovery Program, Ontario Institute for Cancer Research, Toronto, ON M5G 0A3, Canada10Leslie Dan Faculty of Pharmacy, University of Toronto, Toronto, ON M5S 3M2, Canada11SPARC BioCentre, Hospital for Sick Children, Toronto, ON M5G 0A4, Canada12Division of Haematology/Oncology, Hospital for Sick Children, Toronto, ON M5G 1E8, Canada13Princess Margaret Cancer Center, University Health Network, Toronto, ON M5G 2C4, Canada14Department of Radiation Oncology and Immunology, University of Toronto, Toronto, ON M5T 1P5, Canada15Program in Cell Biology, Hospital for Sick Children, Toronto, ON M5G 0A4, Canada16Department of Molecular Genetics, University of Toronto, Toronto, ON M5S 1A8, Canada17Department of Biochemistry, University of Toronto, Toronto, ON, Canada∗Corresponding author stephane.angers@utoronto.ca∗∗Corresponding author vijay.ramaswamy@sickkids.ca18These authors contributed equally
19Senior author
20Lead contact
1572025246202567493504102202611202430320253052025240620252307202523072025© 2025 The Authors2025https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/).

## Summary
Specific and biologically informed treatments for medulloblastoma, especially for the highly lethal TP53-mutant SHH subgroup, remain elusive, where radiotherapy is the primary treatment modality. Leveraging genome-wide CRISPR-Cas9 dropout screening in combination with lethal doses of radiotherapy, we identify loss of p53 as the main driver of radiation resistance in SHH medulloblastoma. A negative-selection CRISPR-Cas9 screen across multiple models of Trp53-deficient SHH medulloblastoma reveals a strong synthetic lethal interaction between components of the non-homologous end-joining pathway and radiation, particularly DNA-dependent protein kinase (DNA-PK) and its binding partners. Both genetic and pharmacological perturbation of DNA-PK enhance radiosensitivity in TP53-deficient SHH medulloblastoma, leading to cell death. In vivo treatment of both somatic and germline TP53-mutant SHH medulloblastoma models with peposertib, a small-molecule inhibitor of DNA-PK, significantly improves survival when combined with radiotherapy, strongly supporting further clinical investigation.

## Graphical abstract
 

## Highlights
•Genome-wide CRISPR-Cas9 screens in bona fide SHH medulloblastoma models
•Trp53 mutations drive resistance to radiotherapy in SHH medulloblastoma
•DNA-PK identified as a radiation-specific vulnerability in TP53-mutant medulloblastoma
•DNA-PK inhibition potently sensitizes tumors to standard-of-care radiotherapy

DeCarlo et al. perform whole-genome CRISPR-Cas9 dropout screens to uncover radiation-specific therapeutic vulnerabilities in models of very-high-risk medulloblastoma. Components of the non-homologous end-joining (NHEJ) pathway emerge as synthetically lethal with radiotherapy. In vivo, treatment with the DNA-protein kinase inhibitor peposertib potently resensitizes TP53-mutant medulloblastoma to radiation.

## Keywords
medulloblastomaradiationDNA repairnon-homologous end joiningDNA-protein kinasepeposertibp53subgrouppmc-status-qastatus0pmc-status-liveyespmc-status-embargonopmc-status-releasedyespmc-prop-open-accessyespmc-prop-olfnopmc-prop-manuscriptnopmc-prop-legally-suppressednopmc-prop-has-pdfyespmc-prop-has-supplementyespmc-prop-pdf-onlynopmc-prop-suppress-copyrightnopmc-prop-is-real-versionnopmc-prop-is-scanned-articlenopmc-prop-preprintnopmc-prop-in-epmcyespmc-license-refCC BY-NC-NDPublished: June 24, 2025

## Introduction
Medulloblastoma is the most common malignant brain tumor of childhood and comprises four core molecular subgroups termed WNT (Wingless), SHH (Sonic Hedgehog), group 3, and group 4, each with distinct demographics, genetics, and outcomes. , , Current therapy, which dates back to the 1980s, is multimodal, involving aggressive surgical resections, craniospinal irradiation, and cytotoxic chemotherapy, resulting in 5-year survival rates of approximately 50%–60% for metastatic disease and 80% for non-metastatic disease. , , Radiotherapy remains the most effective treatment for medulloblastoma and has been the cornerstone of therapy since the early 1950s, with chemotherapy introduced in the 1980s providing marginal improvements in outcomes. , Except for WNT medulloblastoma, which has been prioritized for clinical trials to reduce treatment intensity due to high survival rates, therapy is not tailored to the underlying molecular subgroup. A substantial proportion of patients are overtreated; however, the subset of patients who relapse has remained consistent despite increased doses of radiotherapy and chemotherapy. The long-term side effects of this aggressive therapy on the developing brain are increasingly recognized, leaving most survivors with lifelong disabilities, including stroke, hearing loss, growth failure, hormonal deficiencies, and cognitive impairment, highlighting the need for new treatment approaches. 
Clinical stratification currently lacks a biological basis and does not prioritize new therapies for patients with the worst prognosis. Advances in molecular characterization have significantly improved our understanding of the biological heterogeneity across medulloblastomas, clearly identifying some tumors as very high risk with extremely poor outcomes. One such high-risk group is TP53-mutant SHH medulloblastoma (SHH-MB), which comprises a substantial portion of relapses and deaths in childhood. , 
TP53 mutations in SHH-MB can occur both as somatic mutations and as germline mutations in the context of Li-Fraumeni syndrome. These tumors are characterized by genomic instability, frequent amplification of MYCN and/or GLI2, aneuploidy, and chromothripsis. , Survival rates for both somatic and germline TP53-mutant SHH-MB are dismal, with overall survival of below 20% in most cohorts. , , , SHH-MB tumors often relapse locally in the surgical cavity despite high doses of radiation, including a boost to the local tumor bed to 55.8 Gy, in contrast to group 3 and group 4 tumors, which almost exclusively relapse in the metastatic compartment. , This suggests that radiation resistance is a significant cause of relapse and death in TP53-mutant SHH-MB. Furthermore, the few survivors of germline TP53-mutant SHH-MB almost always develop a second malignancy as a result of their therapy, leading to very poor long-term survival. , 
TP53 mutations can also emerge at relapse, yet clear mediators of radiation resistance in medulloblastoma, particularly SHH-MB, have yet to be identified and validated. , 
Genome sequencing of SHH-MB has revealed a highly unstable genome with many somatic copy-number alterations, including focal amplifications and deletions; however, there is a paucity of somatic nucleotide variants and actionable alterations. Most cases involve dominant-negative mutations with loss of 17p, while a subset has TP53 deletions. SHH pathway activation typically occurs downstream through MYCN and/or GLI2 amplification, rendering SHH pathway inhibitors like vismodegib ineffective. Preclinical approaches to targeting TP53-mutant SHH-MB have been limited, and the only open clinical trial specifically for TP53-mutant SHH-MB, PNET5, focuses on omitting alkylator therapy and limiting the field of radiotherapy rather than introducing targeted compounds. , 
Radiotherapy is by far the most effective therapy for medulloblastoma. Despite the high relapse rates in very-high-risk groups, including TP53-mutant SHH-MB, survival is significantly extended in radiated compared to non-irradiated patients. In the absence of clear actionable targets, one very attractive option is to pursue rational radiosensitizers, which have the potential to both increase the efficacy of radiotherapy and reduce radiation doses to patients with favorable outcomes, such as average-risk TP53-wild-type SHH-MB. , , , Although the children’s oncology group has conducted large studies of chemotherapy as a radiosensitizer, these studies have shown no benefit for the TP53-mutant SHH-MB subset of patients. , 
In this study, we applied genome-wide CRISPR-Cas9 positive and negative screening to discover that loss of p53 is the major determinant of radiation resistance in SHH-MB. Notably, we observed that dropout of key mediators of the non-homologous end-joining (NHEJ) pathway, specifically DNA-dependent protein kinase (DNA-PK) and its binding partners, is the only synthetic lethal interaction with radiotherapy. Inhibition of DNA-PK using peposertib, a potent and selective small-molecule inhibitor of DNA-PK, effectively radiosensitizes patient-derived orthotopic models of both somatic and germline TP53-mutant SHH-MB. Our results provide compelling evidence that DNA-PK inhibition is an effective therapeutic strategy to radiosensitize very-high-risk TP53-mutant SHH-MB and warrants further investigation.

## Results

## p53 loss confers resistance to radiotherapy in SHH-MB
To understand the role of p53 status and radiation response in SHH-MB, we generated radiation dose-response curves from cell lines derived from four different Ptch+/−;Trp53+/−
het (SHHtrp53) tumors and two Ptch+/−;Trp53+/+ (SHHwt 1) tumors ( A). We observe that SHHtrp53 models are significantly more resistant to radiotherapy than SHHwt models, whereby a lethal dose in SHHwt models was determined to be 4 Gy compared to over 8 Gy in our SHHtrp53 models ( A). 
In order to elucidate potential mechanisms of radiation resistance, we performed two separate positive-selection genome-wide CRISPR-Cas9 screens in our SHHwt model whereby we treated cells with lethal doses of 4 and 6 Gy of radiation following transduction with the mouse Toronto knockout (mTKO) library ( B and A). Integrated guide RNAs (gRNAs) within the remaining resistant population were sequenced, and strikingly, only three genes showed significant enrichment of gRNAs within a 10% false discovery rate (FDR) threshold in both the 4 and 6 Gy experiment (4 Gy: Trp53, Huwe1, and Ubf2 (upstream binding transcript; 6 Gy: Chek2, Trp53, and Wdr26). Trp53 (4 Gy: p = 5.94 × 10−13, FDR = 1.6 × 10−8, normZ = 7.1; 6 Gy: p = 2.19 × 10−7, FDR = 0.002, normZ = 5.05) was top ranked and remained as the only overlapping significant gene dropout between the two screens ( C; ). To confirm that Trp53 loss alone confers resistance to radiotherapy, we then introduced a retrovirus with the Trp53DD allele into the SHHwt 1 model to create an isogenic model of SHHtrp53 loss, and we observe that p53 deficiency significantly increases resistance to radiotherapy ( B). Ptch+/−;Trp53−/− (null) and DAOY p53-mutant human medulloblastoma showed similar radiation dose-response curves as the SHHtrp53 models ( C and S1D). Low-pass whole-genome sequencing of the four SHHtrp53 models showed numerous copy-number changes reminiscent of human TP53-mutant SHH-MB; however, introduction of the Trp53DD allele did not, suggesting that Trp53 deficiency alone is sufficient to cause radiation resistance in SHH-MB ( E and S1F).
To evaluate DNA repair capacity in our models, we measured levels of γH2AX—a marker of DNA double-strand breaks (DSBs)—over 48 h following radiation exposure ( D–1F). All models exhibited increased γH2AX expression 1 h post radiation. However, while SHHwt maintained elevated expression at the 6-h time point, SHHtrp53 (including our dominant-negative isogenic model) returned to baseline levels by 6 h. This suggests that impaired p53 function may attenuate DNA repair capacity compared to wild-type p53, consistent with p53’s known role in DNA damage response (DDR). Together, these findings indicate that p53 deficiency alone confers radiation resistance in SHH-MB and impairs DSB repair efficiency.

## Genome-wide CRISPR-Cas9 screening identifies modulators of radiation sensitivity in Trp53-deficient SHH-MB
Having identified that p53 deficiency confers resistance to radiotherapy and attenuates the DNA damage response, we asked whether this could be leveraged to uncover synthetic lethal interactions suitable for radiosensitization. To identify genes that might sensitize SHHtrp53 to radiation, we performed genome-wide negative-selection CRISPR-Cas9 screens across three SHHtrp53 models and one SHHwt model ( A). The SHHtrp53 models were transduced with the mTKO library, treated with a sublethal radiation dose (4 Gy), and propagated for 14 doublings. Samples were collected at multiple doubling time points post irradiation and sequenced to identify depleted gRNAs, indicating perturbations that sensitized cells to radiation. Synthetic lethal interactions were determined using normZ scores, with hits meeting a negative normZ threshold (FDR < 10%) considered potential radiosensitization targets. Notably, multiple genes across all models exhibited sensitizing effects, particularly those involved in DNA break repair pathways ( B). A lethal dose of 8 or 12 Gy (4 Gy × 3 doses) was also applied to all three SHHtrp53 models to assess resistance-conferring genes (positive normZ score); however, no common genes or pathways emerged ( A–S2C). 
Although each individual screen identified multiple genes contributing to radiation sensitization (FDR < 10%; ), only three genes were common across all three models ( C): PRKDC (Protein kinase DNA-activated catalytic gene encoding DNA-PK), DCLRE1C (DNA crosslink repair 1C gene encoding artemis), and XRCC6 (X-ray repair cross complementing 6 gene encoding Ku70, the core component of the Ku70/80 heterodimer). All three encode essential proteins in NHEJ, the predominant pathway for repairing DNA DSBs. Interestingly, within each screen, most genes involved in NHEJ were depleted across all SHHtrp53 models, as indicated by their negative normZ score ( B and 2D). In the SHHwt model treated with a sublethal dose of radiation, we only observed enrichment of PRKDC, which was depleted at the end of the screen, without enrichment of other components of the NHEJ pathway ( B; ). Surprisingly, no common hits were identified in homologous recombination, another major repair pathway for DSBs, across our models. Further analysis through quantile normalization of endpoint normZ scores (including SHHwt data) revealed a clear enrichment of NHEJ-related gene dependencies specifically in SHHtrp53 models ( E). While SHHwt cells showed some sensitivity to PRKDC disruption ( E), the p53-deficient models demonstrated a unique reliance on NHEJ following radiotherapy. This dependency likely reflects their impaired overall DNA repair capacity after DSB induction, suggesting that NHEJ inhibition represents a promising therapeutic vulnerability worthy of functional validation.

## Genetic and pharmacological targeting of DNA-PK sensitizes SHH-MB to radiation
PRKDC encodes DNA-PK, an essential kinase for DNA repair that coordinates end-processing and end-ligation during NHEJ through interactions with additional proteins involved in DSB repair. DNA-PK is thought to be the master regulator of NHEJ and is activated through either autophosphorylation or ATM (Ataxia-Telangiectasia Mutated)-mediated transphosphorylation, whereby autophosphorylation is critical for NHEJ function. Several small-molecule inhibitors against DNA-PK have been developed that are both specific and potent; however, both artemis and the Ku70/80 heterodimer are non-targetable, and as such, DNA-PK was prioritized as a potential therapeutic target. To confirm that genetic knockout of DNA-PK is synthetically lethal with radiation, we generated a CRISPR-Cas9 single-gene knockout of PRKDC ( A). Knockout was confirmed by western blot ( B), and we show that knocking out PRKDC successfully sensitizes SHHtrp53 models to radiation while having no significant effect on cell fitness in non-radiated cells. To validate our findings through an orthogonal approach, we performed short hairpin RNA (shRNA)-mediated knockdown of PRKDC in Daoy-MB cells, which harbor a missense homozygous C242F mutation in TP53 ( B–3D). Western blot analysis confirmed successful knockdown using three independent shRNA constructs ( C). PRKDC knockdown significantly sensitized DAOY-MB to 6 Gy radiation (p < 0.0001 for all shRNAs). Notably, treatment with peposertib (a DNA-PK inhibitor) in combination with PRKDC knockdown showed minimal additional effect on cell viability, supporting the on-target specificity of the inhibitor ( B, bottom row). 
We next screened a panel of clinically available small-molecule inhibitors targeting DNA-PK using 12-point dose-response curves with and without radiotherapy ( A). Both peposertib (also known as nedisertib) and AZD7648 displayed significant radiosensitization across three SHHtrp53 models, with minimal effect of the drug alone ( E, A, and S3D). Furthermore, we observe that peposertib is a potent radiosensitizer of the human SHH-MB model DAOY and more potently radiosensitizes Trp53DD-transduced Ptch+/− cells compared to its isogenic pair ( F and E). We next performed Caco-2 permeability assays, an indicator of which compounds are blood-brain barrier permeable based on their ability to move through tight junctions with minimal efflux. We screened the four active DNA-PK inhibitors and observe that peposertib is a putative stable blood-brain barrier-permeable compound with minimal efflux ( F). Human and mouse liver microsomal assays were then performed to assess hepatic breakdown and observe ideal stability of all four drugs including peposertib ( G). Overall, this suggests that the DNA-PK inhibitor peposertib is a potent radiosensitizer, with similar effects to knocking out PRKDC, confirming small-molecule DNA-PK inhibition as a promising therapeutic target.

## Therapeutic inhibition of DNA-PK sustains sensitization over several cell doublings
Within the context of radiation, the effects are often not immediate but instead become apparent after several cell doublings, during which cells accumulate DNA damage. This accumulation ultimately leads to cell death several days after the initial insult. Therefore, to fully understand the potential of DNA-PK inhibition as a radiosensitizing strategy, it is necessary to investigate the long-term effects. We treated SHHtrp53 ( A and A) and human DAOY cells ( B) with and without radiation and peposertib and monitored their growth over several cell doublings. Using IncuCyte Live Cell Imaging ( A, A, and S4B), we tracked cell growth over 7 days following treatment with peposertib, radiation, or their combination. 
Although radiation did slow cell growth, cells treated with radiation alone still had positive growth and were able to reach approximately 50% confluency over the 7 days, supporting an inherent resistance through their ability to continue to replicate. In contrast, when peposertib is combined with radiation, cell confluence remains the same over the 7 days, appearing to plateau growth at 96 h ( A and 4B). Peposertib alone had no effect on cell growth.
We then assessed clonogenic survival of SHHtrp53 and SHHwt cells in response to both peposertib and radiotherapy and observed a significant reduction in clonogenic capacity with the combination therapy in SHHtrp53 only, whereas peposertib alone had no effect on colony formation ( C and 4D). Taken together, this suggests that the combination of radiotherapy and DNA-PK inhibition sensitizes cells through a combination of cell death and impaired long-term clonogenic survival, with no effect on non-radiated cells, and that this effect may be more pronounced in p53-deficient SHH-MB. To further investigate the potential of peposertib treatment among other groups of medulloblastoma, we performed 12-point dose-response curves with and without 1 Gy of radiation across two group 3 MYC-amplified medulloblastoma models ( E and 4F). The addition of peposertib sensitized both models to radiation, with a particularly pronounced effect on the TP53-mutant (C141F) recurrent model MB002 and a dose response in the treatment-naive model 2112FH. This supports the potential use of peposertib as a radiosensitizer beyond SHH-MB, extending to additional high-risk groups. We analyzed the gene expression of PRKDC across multiple datasets of primary medulloblastoma and normal brain regions, where we observe significantly higher expression of PRKDC in medulloblastoma groups compared to normal brain regions ( C). Overall expression was high across all groups with a trend to slightly higher expression in group 3γ/subtype II, enriched for MYC-amplified group 3 medulloblastoma tumors ( D). Taken together, these findings suggest that peposertib may offer broader therapeutic potential within the patient population, extending its applicability beyond SHH-MB to other high-risk groups.

## Therapeutic inhibition of DNA-PK increases DNA damage and induces cell death in Trp53-deficient SHH-MB
The DDR consists of both cell death and cell survival mechanisms to either stop cell cycle progression to facilitate DNA repair or to induce cell death or senescence if the damage is irreparable. To further understand how the inhibition of DNA-PK influences the DDR to sensitize SHH-MB to radiation and to confirm our results from , we first investigated DNA damage through utilizing a comet assay ( A and 5B). This demonstrated that inhibition of DNA-PK by peposertib significantly increases DNA damage following 1 h of radiotherapy (p = 0.0003), and this damage is sustained 24 h following radiotherapy (p = 0.01). We then looked at three essential effector pathways within the DDR. Utilizing flow cytometry for propidium iodide, annexin V, and β-galactosidase, we investigated the percent of the cell population entering cell death, cell-cycle arrest, and senescence following radiation with or without peposertib over 96 h. 
The combination of peposertib and radiation resulted in a significant increase in cell death compared to radiation alone, observed 96 h after treatment ( C and 5D). Consistent with its role as a selective and potent radiosensitizer, peposertib alone had no impact on cell viability during this time. Similarly, the combination treatment caused a shift from S phase to a significant increase in G2 cell-cycle arrest at 96 h post treatment ( B and S5C) compared to the vehicle but not compared to radiation alone. Additionally, we assessed levels of senescence by measuring β-galactosidase activity and found a slight but non-significant increase in senescence in cells treated with combination therapy at 96 h ( E). Although increases in G2 cell-cycle arrest and senescence were observed, the only significant increase in cell death occurred between radiation alone and the combination of radiation and peposertib. These findings indicate that upon DNA-PK inhibition, radiation induces elevated levels of DSBs that cannot be repaired, resulting in enhanced cell death. This highlights peposertib’s ability to sensitize cells to radiation without affecting cells that are not treated with DNA-damaging agents in Trp53-deficient SHH-MB.

## Inhibition of DNA-PK with peposertib results in potent radiosensitization in vivo
Based on our promising in vitro findings that both genetic and pharmacological inhibition of DNA-PK radiosensitize p53-deficient SHH-MB, we evaluated the combination of peposertib and radiotherapy in vivo. Two human p53-mutant SHH-MB patient-derived orthotopic models (patient-derived xenograft [PDX]) were used: one somatic TP53-mutant PDX harboring a MYCN, MDM4, and CDK4 amplification (SJMBSHH-14-4106) and one germline TP53-mutant PDX harboring a MYCN amplification (SJMBSHH-13-5634). Cells were stereotactically implanted into the cerebella of 6-week-old NRG (NOD rag gamma) mice, and 10 days after implantation, animals were randomized to four arms: vehicle × 5 days, peposertib 50 mg/kg twice daily × 5 days, 2 Gy radiation daily × 5 days, and peposertib 50 mg/kg twice daily plus 2Gy radiation daily ( A). Computed tomography-guided radiotherapy was delivered to the brain and cerebellum. In the SJMBSHH-14-4106 model, peposertib alone did not increase survival compared to vehicle; however, the combination of peposertib and radiotherapy significantly increased survival compared to radiotherapy alone ( C, p < 0.0001 log rank, p = 0.017 for radiation alone vs. combination therapy). Four animals in the combination arm and four animals in the radiation arm had no tumor within the radiation field upon necropsy but had metastatic disease along the spinal cord but not in the brain or cerebellum ( E, A, and S6B). One animal in the combination arm had in-field failure (M1), and the remaining four animals remain alive and tumor free at over 100 days post treatment. To determine if treatment of the metastatic compartment would provide even additional benefit, we treated an additional cohort of the SJMBSHH-14-4106 model with 10 Gy of craniospinal irradiation in combination with or without peposertib ( B and 6D) following tumor engraftment visualized by MRI ( F and 6G). Again, we observe a significant increase in survival in our combination arm ( D, p = 0.0001 log rank, p = 005 for radiation alone vs. combination therapy). Here, we saw complete tumor reduction that was sustained compared to the cohort of radiation alone, which all succumbed to local recurrence ( G). Although it has been previously reported that peposertib has good brain tumor penetration, , we confirmed tumor and brain penetrance of peposertib in our studies. We treated NRG mice with two doses 4 hours apart with either vehicle or peposertib. Mice were euthanized the same day, and normal cerebellum and tumor tissue were collected. Utilizing liquid chromatography-mass spectrometry, we were able to confirm high levels of peposertib in the tumor and 4 times less accumulation in adjacent cerebellum ( D). 
In the SJMBSHH-13-1-5634 model, there was also a significant survival benefit observed for the combination of peposertib and radiotherapy versus radiotherapy alone, with no survival benefit observed for peposertib alone ( A, p = 0.001 log rank). No significant weight loss was observed between radiation alone and radiation plus peposertib ( A–S7C). Two animals in the combination therapy arm and two animals in the radiation alone arm died of hydrocephalus 3 weeks after treatment with similar Evans index between the radiation alone and radiation plus peposertib arms ( D). A small volume of tumor was identified in these animals, and the remaining three animals died of local failure significantly later than the animals in the radiation alone arm ( B, 7C, and 7D). In the radiotherapy alone arm, all animals had visible tumor by both MRI and at necropsy ( C). To determine if there are differences in cell death and proliferation following radiation and peposertib treatment, we treated tumor-bearing animals with two doses of either peposertib or vehicle 4 h apart, administered radiation 2 hours after the first dose of peposertib and collected brains 4 h after treatment, and assessed immunoreactivity to both caspase-3 and Ki-67. A trend toward increased caspase-3 immunoreactivity and decreased Ki-67 is observed in the radiation plus peposertib group, suggesting increased cell death immediately following treatment ( E). Taken together, our results reveal that the combination of DNA-PK inhibition using peposertib and radiation significantly improves survival in human PDX models of very-high-risk TP53-mutant SHH-MB. 

## Discussion
Despite aggressive multimodal therapy, TP53-mutant SHH-MB remains one of the most formidable challenges in pediatric oncology. Numerous strategies have been employed globally, including recent efforts to omit alkylator therapy; however, none have achieved clinical success, and survival outcomes remain grim. Preclinically, there has been a significant lack of promising therapeutic targets for TP53-mutant SHH-MB that demonstrably improve survival in vivo. Furthermore, there has been a limited identification of radiosensitizers with activity in validated SHH-MB models.
Our findings using genome-wide positive-selection screens that loss of Trp53 as the main mediator of radioresistance in SHH-MB are consistent with previous studies using a sleeping-beauty transposon system combined with radiotherapy, and with human studies of relapsed medulloblastoma. Indeed, in human studies sequencing primary and recurrent SHH-MB, TP53 mutations emerge at relapse in a subset of relapsed tumors and are conserved from diagnosis through recurrence, with a preponderance for local relapse in the high-dose radiation field. Overall, the observation that TP53 inactivation is responsible for radiation resistance both at diagnosis and at relapse supports its role in being the major modulator of radiation failure in both murine and human SHH-MB. Other genes involved in DNA repair including Chek2, Huwe1, and Ubef2 were identified in the resistance arm; however, these have not been so far associated with human medulloblastoma relapses.
We devised an innovative genome-wide approach to identify synthetic lethal interactions with radiotherapy. Our finding that only components of NHEJ are synthetically lethal with radiotherapy is surprising as p53 has known roles in both homologous recombination and NHEJ, suggesting that this might represent a specific vulnerability in medulloblastoma. A limitation of our screen is the use of in vitro models of murine SHH-MB, due to the lack of bona fide human models of SHH-MB that propagate in vitro; however, our models display many features consistent with human TP53-mutant SHH-MB including chromosomal instability and significant radioresistance. Our observation that inhibition of DNA-PK, the prime mediator of NHEJ, is a potent radiosensitizer in two bona fide PDX models of somatic and germline TP53-mutant SHH-MB establishes this as a promising treatment strategy that should be pursued in this very-high-risk group. Our observation of in vitro sensitization of two patient-derived MYC-amplified group 3 models supports the use of peposertib as a radiosensitizer across other very-high-risk groups of medulloblastoma, including at relapse where TP53 mutations commonly emerge. , , 
Previous studies have alluded to using p53 status as a predictive biomarker for response to DNA-PK inhibition due to the prominent role p53 plays within the DDR. When treated with a combination of radiation and DNA-PK inhibition, tumors with normal p53 status increase their protective pathways through reinforced cell-cycle arrest. In contrast, tumors with dysregulated p53 function accumulate genomic instability and result in cell death through mitotic catastrophe. , Other studies have found consistent interactions between DNA-PK and p53 in determining radiation sensitivity. 
Peposertib is currently being evaluated in human clinical trials as a radiosensitizer in a variety of entities including head and neck cancers and relapsed glioblastoma. A phase 1 study of relapsed glioblastoma showed a very promising safety profile when combined with radiotherapy, and further developments are likely (NCT04555577). Peposertib also appears to be relatively brain penetrant based on our mass spectrometric studies, and a previous pharmacokinetic study of brain metastasis suggests much higher accumulation of peposertib into tumor with a disrupted blood-brain barrier compared to tumor, where accumulation was substantial in the tumor core as compared to normal brain. , Our in vivo findings of a significant extension of survival with the combination of peposertib and radiotherapy further support a model whereby peposertib has sufficient accumulation into medulloblastoma tumors; however, further human studies are required to confirm this finding.
A concern regarding the use of peposertib is the potential for radiosensitization of normal tissues; however, the risk can be mitigated through highly focal radiation techniques, such as proton radiotherapy, and a lower penetrance of drug in the normal brain. Peposertib may also have therapeutic potential for other subgroups of medulloblastoma, including MYC-amplified group 3 tumors and those in which TP53 mutations arise at relapse. Our observation that the introduction of a dominant-negative p53 allele confers resistance further supports this possibility. Currently, there is a scarcity of effective preclinical therapeutic candidates for treating p53-mutant SHH-MB, and our discovery that peposertib is a potent radiosensitizer in vivo for this high-risk group warrants further clinical investigation. Overall, our findings support advancing the combination of peposertib and radiotherapy into early-phase clinical trials for very-high-risk medulloblastoma, including both germline (Li-Fraumeni syndrome) and somatic variants.

## Limitations of the study
A limitation within the field of medulloblastoma is the lack of human bona fide models of SHH-MB that propagate in vitro. The study mitigates these challenges through the use of a panel of sporadic murine models of SHH-MB for our in vitro screens as well as by validating results in human DAOY cells, and bona fide immunocompetent sporadic models of TP53-mutant SHH harboring MYCN and GLI2 amplifications are lacking. This prevents further investigation of in-field toxicity with DNA-PK inhibition. We further leverage a cross-species approach through human orthotopic PDX in vivo studies; however, results may not reflect male versus female sex patients equally. The study would benefit from a larger panel of PDX models that accurately represent high-risk medulloblastoma across both sexes.

## Resource availability

## Lead contact
Further information and requests for resources and reagents should be directed to and will be fulfilled by the lead contact, Vijay Ramaswamy (vijay.ramaswamy@sickkids.ca).

## Materials availability
Unique reagents generated in this study are available from the after completion of a materials transfer agreement.

## Data and code availability

•All the data and details of analytical methods are available from the lead contact upon reasonable request. Complete data from the CRISPR-Cas9 screening can be found in supplementary tables.
•This paper does not report any original code.
•Any additional information required to reanalyze the data reported in this paper is available from the upon request.

## Acknowledgments
A.D. is supported by a doctoral scholarship (CGS-D) from the 10.13039/501100000024Canadian Institutes of Health Research (CIHR), the Ontario Graduate Scholarship (OGS), and Flank Fletcher Memorial Fund. S.M.H. is supported by the 10.13039/501100000038Natural Sciences and Engineering Research Council of Canada (NSERC) 10.13039/100002806Discovery Grant (RGPIN 2019 0481), the 10.13039/501100004376Terry Fox Research Institute, the 10.13039/100009812Princess Margaret Cancer Foundation, the 10.13039/501100025092Ontario Ministry of Health, and the Ministry of Long Term Health and Planning in the Province of Ontario. M.F.M. is supported by grants from 10.13039/501100000024CIHR (PJS-512593) and the Canadian Cancer Society (CCS; Challenge Grant 707407). V.R. is supported by a Canada Research Chair in Pediatric Neuro-Oncology and operating funds from 10.13039/501100000024CIHR (PJT- 488102 and PJT- 400627), the Meagan Bebenek Foundation, 10.13039/100003287Rally Foundation for Childhood Cancer Research and Kids Join the Fight, Canadian Cancer Society, the Garron Family Cancer Centre, and the C.R. Younger Foundation. This project has been made possible with the financial support of Health Canada, through the Canada Brain Research Fund, an innovative partnership between the Government of Canada (through Health Canada) and Brain Canada and the Alvin Segal Family Foundation. The views expressed herein do not necessarily represent the views of the Minister of Health or the Government of Canada. S.A. is supported by the 10.13039/501100000024CIHR (PJT-169054).

## Author contributions
Conceptualization, A.D. and V.R.; methodology, A.D., G.M., S.A., and V.R.; formal analysis, A.D., G.M., and V.R.; investigation, A.D., C.F.d.S., L.Q.S., J.P., M.D., L.A., M.S., D.T., J.M., B.G., S.S., D.R., A.T., L.W.-G., S.M.H., and M.F.M.; resources, R.M., R.A.-A., A.A., F.C., C.N., P.A.N., P.D., U.T., and V.R.; data curation, A.D., G.M., A.A., P.A.N., and V.R.; writing – original draft, A.D. and V.R.; writing – review and editing, A.D., G.M., S.A., and V.R.; supervision, P.A.N., U.T., P.D., S.A., and V.R.; project administration, V.R.; funding acquisition, V.R.

## Declaration of interests
The authors declare no competing interests.

## STAR★Methods

## Key resources table

 

## Experimental model and study participant details

## Cell culture
C57BL/6 Trp53+/− and Ptch1+/− mice were crossed where sporadic tumors arise in the same anatomical location and exhibit histology seen in MB. Cell lines used for in-vitro assays were derived from transgenic murine models generated from tumors at endpoint in either germline Ptch1+/−;Trp53+/+ or Ptch1+/−;Trp53+/− C57BL/6 mice. These tumors were dissected and dissociated by gentle pipetting in PBS followed by filtering through nylon filters, following by resuspension in serum-free neural stem cell media (SHH2, SHH3, SHH4). SHHtrp53 #156 and SHHwt #130 were generated by Ward et al. Cells were maintained in serum-free neural stem cell media (DMEM/F12, B27, N2) containing 20 ng/mL epidermal growth factor (EGF) and 20 ng/mL basic fibroblast growth factor (FGF) on laminin-coated plates. Group 3 MB lines MB002 and 2112 were grown in suspension in the same serum-free neural stem cell media described above. For the generation of the isogenic model, Ptch1+/−;Trp53+/+ cells were infected with an MSCV-p53DD-GFP retrovirus and maintained as described above. Daoy cells were maintained in DMEM plus 10%FBS. STR analysis was completed for human cell lines and copy numbers were analyzed for murine cell lines. All cell lines were tested for mycoplasma contamination.

## Mouse housing and husbandry
5–6-week-old NRG mice (Jackson Labs) were used. Mice were housed in Biohazard barrier level 2 facility at a maximum density of 5 mice per cage for the duration of the study. Food and water was administered ad libitum with dietary supplementation of ensure during treatment. Animal care guidelines are as per the Animal Resource Center at UHN and is accredited by the Canadian Council on Animal Care.

## Peposertib brain extraction
Male NRG mice, aged 5–6 weeks, were orthotopically injected with 260,000 cells of SJMBSHH-14-4106. Tumor engraftment was monitored weekly using MRI scans. Once the tumors had grown sufficiently and the mice began exhibiting clinical symptoms, they were treated via oral gavage with two doses of either vehicle or peposertib, administered 4 h apart at a dose of 50 mg/kg per treatment. Within 2 h of receiving the second dose, the mice were euthanized, and both normal cerebellum and bulk tumor tissues were collected and flash-frozen for analysis of peposertib brain penetrance using mass spectrometry. Tissues were homogenized with 5% BSA and mixed with 100uL of pH buffer and 500uL of ethyl acetate. Samples were shaken vigorously for 5 min followed centrifuging at 7500 rpm for 10 min at 4°C. The top organic solvent layer was separated out and dried under nitrogen followed by reconstitution in 100uL of water and acetonitrile (70/30) and injected by LC-MS/MS.
The LC system consisted of an Agilent 1290 Infinity. The chromatographic separation was achieved using a Phenomenex Synergi Fusion-RP (4 μm, 50 × 20 mm) column and a gradient of 0.1% formic acid in water (A) and 0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile (B) at 0.5 mL/min over a run time of 5 min. Mass spectrometry was performed on a AB Sciex QTRAP 5500 utilizing electrospray ionization (ESI) in positive-ionization multiple reaction monitoring (MRM) mode. The mass-to-charge (m/z) transitions for peposertib were 483.0/447.2.

## In vivo survival studies
Male NRG mice 5–6 weeks of age were orthotopically injected with 260 000 cells from either SJMBSHH-14-4106 and SJMBSHH-13-1-5634 PDX models kindly provided by St. Jude’s Children’s Research Hospital. These models are only propagated in vivo. Sex of the recipient mouse was matched to the sex of the PDX model as determined by genotyping using methylation profiling. Cells were orthotopically injected into the hindbrain of mice with injection coordinates off 2mm to the right of the midline and 2mm below the interparietal suture and an injection depth of 2.3 to 2.5mm into the cerebellum. Following 10 days after injections mice divided into four treatment cohorts: vehicle alone, vehicle with radiation, peposertib alone, and peposertib with radiation. Vehicle was prepared as follows (300 mM sodium citrate buffer, 0.25% methylcellulose, 0.25% tween): 300 mM Sodium Citrate was prepared, pH 2.5. Methyl cellulose was added with constant mixing until the powder became completely dissolved. Lastly, Tween 20 was added. We allowed the solution to mix for 1-2 min to become completely homogeneous and the final pH was adjusted to 2.5.
The peposertib treated cohort were treated with 50 mg/kg twice a day via oral a gavage. If treated in combination with radiation (5 × 2Gy), the first dose of peposertib was given 2 h prior and 2 h after radiation for five consecutive days. Image-guided radiation was delivered to the brain using the 10 × 20mm collimator and a bilateral beam arrangement. For craniospinal radiation, 2Gy was delivered in a bilateral beam arrangement to the brain, cervical spine, and thoracic spine using the 10 × 20mm, C10, and 10 × 30mm collimators, respectively. Mice were monitored with weekly or biweekly MRI’s. Humane endpoints were reached with 20% loss of maximum body weight or if clinically symptomatic. At endpoint, tumor cells were collected and whole brain and spine was formalin-fixed for IHC analysis.

## Method details

## Low pass whole-genome sequencing
To identify genomic copy-number aberrations from mouse whole-genome sequencing (WGS) data, adapter trimming was performed using bbmap (v37.28) with k-mer based trimming (k = 23, mink = 11) and minimum read length filtering (minlen = 30). Next, we aligned the trimmed reads to the mouse reference genome (mm10) using bwa (v0.17.7). Duplicate reads were removed, and base quality scores were recalibrated using GATK (v4.1.1), using known SNP and indel sites from the mouse genome. To call copy-number aberrations we used QDNAseq (R package v1.40.0) to process the BAM files, including read binning, bias correction, filtering, and normalization. Lastly, segmentation of the normalized copy numbers was performed, and results were exported in BED format for downstream visualization.

## Radiation dose-response curves
2000-4000 cells/well (cell-type dependent) were plated in laminin-coated 96-well plates and left to adhere overnight. The following day, cells were treated with increasing doses of radiation using Best Theratronics. 72-h after treatment, cells were treated with 10% volume of AlamarBlue viability reagent and incubated for 2–3 h. Fluorescence was measured with a plate reader and cell viability was inferred by fluorescent intensity. Data was normalized to 0Gy plates and a positive control.

## Whole genome Crispr Cas-9 screening
CRISPR-Cas9 screens were performed using the mouse Toronto knockout library (mTKO) containing 94 528 targeting gRNAs and 418 non-targeting gRNAs. Approximately 200 000 000 cells were bulk transduced at an MOI of 0.3 with the gRNA library, with the addition of 0.8ug/ml of polybrene, for a minimum of 200-fold coverage and seeded onto 40 laminin-coated 10 cm dishes. 24 h following transduction, media was replaced with media containing 1ug/ml of puromycin. Following 72 h of puromycin selection, cells were combined and collected into two 50 000 000 T0 samples and stored in −80 for later processing. The remaining cells were seeded across 30 plates (2 million per plate) for 2–3 doublings to allow for sufficient genome editing. Cells were then divided into 3 replicates, each containing 20 million cells seeded across 10 plates. For radiation sensitivity and resistance screens, two additional treatment arms were divided into 3 replicates per experimental arm with 20 million cells seeded across 10 plates per replicate. Sensitivity and resistance arms were treated with an experimentally determined single sublethal dose and a lethal dose every 2–3 doubling for a total of 3 fractions, respectively. Cell numbers were maintained to support a minimum of 200-fold library coverage. At timepoints of approximately 7 (midpoint) and 14 (endpoint) doublings from T0, samples were collected in a minimum of 20 million cell aliquots (200-fold coverage) for gDNA extraction. 

## Genomic DNA library preparation and sequencing
Genomic DNA was extracted from T0, midpoint, and endpoint frozen cell pellets using QiaAMP DNA Blood Maxi Kit following the manufacturer’s protocol, followed by ethanol precipitation and resuspension at a concentration of 400ng/uL. For each sample, 50ug of gDNA was amplified in twenty 50uL PCR reactions using the KAPA HiFi Master Mix and 1uM of each outer TKOv3 primer for 18 amplification cycles. PCR reactions were pooled and 5uL was used as a template for a subsequent PCR reaction to add TrueSeq adaptor sequences and unique combinations of i5 and i7 barcode sequences to each sample. These reactions were performed using KAPA HiFi Master Mix and 5uL of a 10uM stock of barcode primers for 14 amplification cycles. Barcoded PCR products were gel purified and submitted for next generation sequencing using Illumina NextSeq500. T0 was sequenced at a depth of 500-fold and all other samples were sequenced at a depth of 200-fold.

## CRISPR-Cas9 gene knockout studies
For single gene knockout studies, individual gRNAs were ligated into a BsmBI digested pLentiGuide mCherry/GFP-2A-Puro. Approximately 3.5 million HEK293T cells were seeded on 10cm plates 24 h prior to transfection with 6 μg of lentiviral vector, 3.6 μg of PsPAX2 plasmid and 2.4 μg of VSV-G plasmid with OptimMEM and X-tremeGENE 9. Viral media was harvested 48–72 h post-transfection, centrifuged at 1000 x g for 5 min and filtered prior to concentrating with Lenti-X concentrator. Cells were then transduced with the above lentivirus and selected with 1ug/ml puromycin following 72 h. Knockout was confirmed via western blots.

## shRNA knockdown gene studies
For single gene knockdown studies, individual shRNAs targeting PRKDC were ligated into pLV[shRNA]-mCherry:T2A:Puro-U6 constructs with three unique sequences (shRNA 1, shRNA 2, shRNA 3). The control shRNA used was pLV[shRNA]-EGFP/Puro-U6>Scramble. 500 000 cells were plated per well in a 6-well plate and left to adhere overnight. The following day, the plating media was changed to media containing 1 μg/mL of polybrene and lentivirus at an MOI of 2 for a 24-h transduction. Following transduction, media containing the virus was removed and replaced with a media containing 2 μg/mL of puromycin for selection. Cells were maintained in puromycin for 10 days to ensure complete selection. Knockdown was confirmed via western blots.

## Drug dose-response curves
Cells were plated at 2000–4000 cells/well (cell-type dependent) in laminin-coated 96-well plates and left to adhere overnight. Cells were treated DNA damage inhibitors Peposertib (Selleck Chemicals, cat#S8586), AZD7648 (Selleck Chemicals, cat#S8843), CC-115 (Selleck Chemicals, cat#S7891), BAY-8400 (MedChemExpress, cat#HY-132293), AZD1390 (Selleck Chemicals, cat#S8680)) at a 12-point concentration curve ranging from 5000 nM to 5 nM using the Tecan D300e Digital Dispenser. 1–2 h following treatment, cells were treated with 0Gy or a sublethal dose of radiation (2Gy or 4Gy). 72-h after radiation, cells were treated with 10% volume of AlamarBlue viability reagent and incubated for 2–3 h. Fluorescence was measured with a plate reader and cell viability was inferred by fluorescent intensity. Data was normalized per plate to a DMSO vehicle control and a positive control.

## Liver microsomal metabolic stability
In the Phase I analysis, test compounds were incubated at a final concentration of 1 μM, a level assumed to be well below Km values to ensure linear reaction conditions and prevent saturation. Working stocks were first diluted to 40.0 μM in 0.1 M potassium phosphate buffer (pH 7.4) before being added to the reaction vials. CD-1 mouse (male) or pooled human liver microsomes (Corning Gentest) were used at a final protein concentration of 0.5 mg/mL. Duplicate wells were prepared for each time point (0 and 60 min). The reactions were conducted at 37°C in an orbital shaker set to 175 rpm, with the DMSO concentration held constant at 0.1%. Each reaction had a final volume of 100 μL, including the addition of an NADPH-Regeneration Solution (NRS) mix (Corning Gentest), which contained glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase, NADP+, MgCl2, and glucose 6-phosphate. At the 60-min time point, reactions were stopped by adding 200 μL (2 volumes) of ice-cold acetonitrile containing 0.5% formic acid and an internal standard. Samples were then centrifuged at 4,000 rpm for 10 min to remove debris and precipitated proteins. Around 150 μL of the supernatant was transferred to a new 96-well microplate for LC/MS analysis.
A narrow-window mass extraction LC-MS analysis was performed on all samples using a Waters Xevo quadrupole time-of-flight (QTof) mass spectrometer to determine the relative peak areas of the test compounds. The percent remaining was calculated using the formula:%remaining=AA0×100Where A is area response after incubation and A0 is area response at initial time point.

## Caco-2 assay
Human epithelial Caco-2 cells (CRL-2102, C2BBe1) are seeded at a density of 40,000 cells per well on high-density PET membrane inserts with a 1.0 μm pore size and a surface area of 0.31 cm2. These cells are used 21 or 22 days post-seeding, by which time the cell monolayers are fully polarized and differentiated. The permeability assay buffer consists of Hanks Balanced Salt Solution (HBSS) supplemented with 10 mM HEPES and 15 mM glucose, at a pH of 7.4. The dosing buffer includes 5 μM metoprolol (positive control), 5 μM atenolol (negative control), and 100 μM lucifer yellow, while the buffer in the receiver chamber contains 1% bovine serum albumin (BSA). The final concentration of the dosing solution is 5 μM in the assay buffer. Digoxin is used as a P-gp substrate control. Cell monolayers are dosed on either the apical side (A-to-B) or the basolateral side (B-to-A) and incubated at 37°C in a shaker set to 65 rpm. Samples for LC-MS analysis are collected from both the donor and receiver chambers at 120 min. Each determination is carried out in duplicate.
Narrow-window mass extraction LC-MS analysis is conducted for all samples using a Waters Xevo quadrupole time-of-flight (QTof) mass spectrometer to determine the relative peak areas of the parent compound. The percentage of transported drug is calculated based on these peak areas relative to the initial dosing concentration.

## Western blotting
Western blotting was performed to investigate total and phosphorylated levels of H2AX and DNAPKcs protein utilizing specific antibodies. Cell lysate samples containing 20μg of protein were loaded next to a colorimetric protein ladder and separated by weight through sodium dodecyl sulfate-polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis (SDS-PAGE) on 12% polyacrylamide gels for ∼100 min at 110V. For DNA-PKcs, equal amounts of lysates were loaded onto NuPAGE 3–8% Tris-Acetate Gel. Samples were subsequently transferred to a 0.2μm PVDF membrane and blocking buffer (5% skim milk in TBST) was then added for 1 h at room temperature. The PVDF membrane was incubated overnight with primary antibody at a temperature of 4°C, and the following day, after antibody removal and washing, the membrane was incubated with HRP-linked IgG anti-rabbit or anti-mouse secondary antibody for 1 h at room temperature. Signal intensity was detected using the SuperSignal West Pico PLUS ECL substrate and visualized using a Licor Odyssey FC blot imager. Densitometry of the bands was performed with the ImageJ Software. Data was normalized to protein loading control and untreated control sample.

## IncuCyte live cell imaging confluence assay
Cells were plated at 300 cells/well (0Gy plate) and 600 cells/well (2Gy or 4Gy plate) in laminin-coated 96-well plates and left to adhere overnight. The following day, cells were treated with the experimentally determined IC50 of peposertib (250nM) for 1h followed by 0Gy or a sublethal dose of radiation (2Gy or 4Gy). Real-time cell growth and cell death was monitored using the IncuCyte Live-Cell Imaging System (Essen Biosciences Inc). Phase contrast images were taken every 1.5 h at 10× magnification in 4 separate fields of view per well over 7 days. Real time growth was calculated as percent confluence.

## Clonogenic assay
Cells were plated at 300 cells/well (0Gy) and 600–900 cells/well (2Gy or 4Gy) in laminin-coated 6-well plates) in regular (0Gy) or conditioned (2Gy or 4Gy) media and left to adhere overnight. The following day cells were treated with 250 nM of peposertib or a vehicle control (DMSO) for 1h followed by 0Gy or a sublethal dose of radiation (2Gy or 4Gy). Cells were left for 14 days following treatment with media top-up every 96 h. At endpoint, colonies were fixed with glutaraldehyde (6.0% v/v) stained with crystal violet (0.5% w/v) for 30 min. Colonies were imaged by the Nikon smz25 dissection microscope and manually counted. Surviving fraction was calculated by dividing the number of colonies by number of cells seeded multiplied by plating efficiency using the equations below.PE=#ofcoloniesformedinuntreatedcellsnumberofcellsseeded×100SF=#ofcoloniesformedaftertreatment#ofcellsseeded×PE

## Comet assay
SHHtrp53 cells were treated DMSO, 250nM peposertib, 4Gy of radiation, or a combination of treatments over and collected after 1 and 24 h following treatment. Cells were pelleted and resuspended in cold PBS at 1x105 cells/ml. Resuspended cells were combined 1:10 with molten LMAgarose and quickly spread onto CometSlides placed in the dark at 4oC for 1 h to dry. Slides were then immersed in cold CometAssay Lysis Solution and incubated at 4oC overnight. The following morning, slides were removed from lysis buffer and immersed in 1X neutral electrophoresis buffer (1M Tris Base and 3M Sodium Acetate) for 30 min at room temp. Slides were placed in CometAssay ES II apparatus and submerged in neutral electrophoresis buffer. Electrophoresis was run at 21V for 45 min at 4oC. Following electrophoresis, slides were immersed in DNA precipitation solution (13.4% 7.5M Ammonium Acetate in 95% Ethanol) for 30 min at room temp followed by immersion in 70% ethanol for 30 min at room temp. Slide were then dried at 37oC for 15 min to bring the cells to a single plane for observation. 100ul of SYBR Gold (1ul in 30mL TE buffer, pH 7.5) was placed onto each circle of dried agarose and stained for 30 min at room temp and protected from light. Slides were rinsed briefly in water, then dried completely at 37oC. Comet slides were imaged within 72 h after staining. Comet tail lengths were analyzed using the Open Comet v1.3.1 plugin for ImageJ.

## Flow cytometry
SHHtrp53 cells were treated DMSO, 250nM peposertib, 4Gy of radiation, or a combination of treatments over 48 and 96 h. Cells were collected and resuspended in one million cells/ml per sample. Samples were fixed with either 4% PFA (senescence assay) or 70% cold ETOH (cell cycle analysis). Cells were spun down and washed with PBS. For the senescence assay, cells were incubated for 1h at 37°C without CO2 with 1:500 dilution of the probe for β-galactosidase hydrolysis followed by another PBS wash. Β-Gal signal was measured using a 488 nm excitation laser and 515/30nm bandpass filter. For cell cycle analysis, cells were spun down and washed with PBS followed by resuspension in 500uL of FxCycle Propidium Iodide (PI)/RNase staining solution. PI signal was measured using 561nm excitation laser and. 586/15nm bandpass filter. For Annexin/PI cell death assay, unfixed cells were resuspended in 100uL of 1x Annexin Binding Buffer and incubated for 15 min at room temperature with 5uL of Annexin V-FITC and 1uL of 100ug/ml propidium iodide working solution. 400uL of 1x Annexin Binding Buffer was added; samples were kept on ice until analysis. AnnexinV-FITC signal was measured using 488nm excitation laser and 515/30 bandpass filter; PI signal was measured using 561nm excitation laser and 610/20nm bandpass filter. Samples were acquired on a 5 laser FACSymphony A3 analyzer running FACSDiva9 software (BD Biosciences). Data analysis was performed using FlowJo software, version 10.10 (BD Biosciences).

## Analysis of gene expression across human datasets
Relative gene expression values of human PRKDC were analyzed using the R2 platform (http://r2.amc.nl) across several datasets. Human gene expression generated on the Affymetrix U133p2 platform of normal brain (GSE11882), cerebellum (GSE3526), and medulloblastoma (Northcott et al., Nature 2017; Thompson et al., JCO 2006) , were visualized using the megasampler feature and normalized data exported for probe 208694_at. A medulloblastoma dataset of 763 samples profiled on the Afflymetrix Gene 1.1T array was analyzed by subgroup and subtype (probe 8150599).

## Immunohistochemistry
Brain and spine tissue were formalin fixed (10%). Brain was cut sagittal, and spine was cut axially placed is formalin-fixed, paraffin embedded (FFPE) blocks. FFPE blocks were thinly sliced, dewaxed, and stained with hematoxylin and eosin or stained with the Ki67 antibody at a 1:600 dilution and caspase-3 at a 1:1000 dilution. Cancerous tissue was used as a positive control and normal heart and brain tissue was used as a negative control when optimizing antibodies. Stained slides were imaged at 20x using the 3DHistech Slide Scanner. Images were visualized using QuPath0.5.1 software.

## Analysis of genome-wide screen data
Using MAGECK count function, read counts for individual gRNAs from triplicate samples were mapped to a gRNA library. The BAGEL algorithm was used to normalize gRNA reads to sequencing depth and to calculate the log2 fold-change relative to T0. Using a reference set of essential and non-essential genes, BAGEL computes a Bayes Factor (BF) of essentiality. To determine modifiers to radiation resistance and sensitivity, DrugZ analysis was performed to calculate gene-level Z-scores. DrugZ normalizes read counts, calculates fold change and estimates the standard deviation for each fold change. It then provides a Z score transformation and combines guide scores across replicates to a single gene score. Sensitizing genes were defined by a negative NormZ score within the 10% FDR threshold. Resistance genes were defined as a positive NormZ score within the 10% FDR threshold.

## Quantification and statistical analysis
Statistical details of which tests were for each experiment can be found in figure legends. Unless otherwise stated, all statistical tests were completed with GraphPad Prism 9. All assays were conducted independently in triplicate. p values 0.05 were considered statistically significant. Unless otherwise stated, data represents mean, and error bars represent SD. For in vivo orthotopic xenograft experiments, survival analysis was performed using the Kaplan-Meier method with Log Rank to compute statistical significance.

 

## Supplemental information

## Document S1. Figures S1–S7

## Table S1. Genes conferring radiation resistance in SHH-MB
(a) Ranked gene list conferring radiation resistance in SHHwt treated with 4 Gy. (b) Ranked gene list conferring radiation resistance in SHHwt treated with 6 Gy.

## Table S2. Gene lists from all screens at midpoint and endpoint
(a) Ranked gene list conferring radiation sensitization at midpoint in SHHtrp53#156. (b) Ranked gene list conferring radiation sensitization at endpoint in SHHtrp53#156. (c) Ranked gene list conferring radiation sensitization at midpoint in SHHtrp53#3. (d) Ranked gene list conferring radiation sensitization at endpoint in SHHtrp53#3. (e) Ranked gene list conferring radiation sensitization at midpoint in SHHtrp53#4. (f) Ranked gene list conferring radiation sensitization at endpoint in SHHtrp53#4. (g) Ranked gene list conferring radiation sensitization at midpoint in SHHwt. (h) Ranked gene list conferring radiation sensitization at endpoint in SHHwt.

## Table S3. Gene lists from all lethal radiation screens
(a) Ranked gene list conferring radiation resistance in SHHtrp53#156 treated with 8 Gy. (b) Ranked gene list conferring radiation resistance in SHHtrp53#156 treated with 12 Gy. (c) Ranked gene list conferring radiation resistance in SHHtrp53#3 treated with 8 Gy. (d) Ranked gene list conferring radiation resistance in SHHtrp53#3 treated with 12 Gy. (e) Ranked gene list conferring radiation resistance in SHHtrp53#4 treated with 8 Gy. (f) Ranked gene list conferring radiation resistance in SHHtrp53#4 treated with 12 Gy.

## Table S4. Sequences for single gene studies
(a) Sequences for gRNA knockouts. (b) Sequences for shRNA knockdowns.

## Document S2. Article plus supplemental information

Supplemental information can be found online at https://doi.org/10.1016/j.xcrm.2025.102202.