pmcNucleic Acids ResNucleic Acids Res4narnarNucleic Acids Research0305-10481362-4962Oxford University PressPMC12350093PMC12350093.112350093123500934080829810.1093/nar/gkaf767gkaf7671AcademicSubjects/SCI00010Nucleic Acid TherapeuticsGene editing in hematopoietic stem cells by co-delivery of Cas9/sgRNA ribonucleoprotein and templates for homology-directed repair in ‘all-in-one’ lentivirus-derived nanoparticles
AndersenSofieDepartment of Biomedicine, Aarhus University, Aarhus C 8000, Denmark
RNA and Gene Therapies, Global Research Technologies, Novo Nordisk A/S, Måløv 2760, Denmarkhttps://orcid.org/0000-0001-5690-7603WolffJonas HolstDepartment of Biomedicine, Aarhus University, Aarhus C 8000, DenmarkSkovThomas WisbechDepartment of Biomedicine, Aarhus University, Aarhus C 8000, DenmarkJannsJacob HørlückDepartment of Biomedicine, Aarhus University, Aarhus C 8000, DenmarkDavisLuther JohnDepartment of Biomedicine, Aarhus University, Aarhus C 8000, DenmarkHaldrupJakob HDepartment of Biomedicine, Aarhus University, Aarhus C 8000, Denmark ], a gene editing system that is easily tailored and more flexible than its predecessors [ ], greatly accelerated the further development of genome editing strategies. However, potency and safety of CRISPR/Cas9-based genome editing strongly depend on how gene editing tool kits are administered to cells, and there is still an unmet need for vehicles supporting co-delivery of entire tool kits as well as high, but short-term, DNA cleavage activity. Here, we explore the use of lentivirus-derived nanoparticles (LVNPs) for the combined delivery of ribonucleoprotein (RNP) complexes consisting of Cas9 protein and single guide RNA (sgRNA) together with a repair template for homology-directed repair (HDR).
Upon targeted recognition of DNA by Cas9/sgRNA RNPs, the Cas9 endonuclease creates a DSB [ ], which will induce repair by endogenous cellular machineries. The most prevalent repair pathway is nonhomologous end-joining (NHEJ), which leads to formation of insertions and deletions (indels) potentially resulting in gene knockout (KO). If NHEJ is not initiated, actions of the end resection machinery will allow DSB repair by microhomology-end joining (MMEJ) or by HDR via homologous recombination [ , ]. HDR relies on the presence of repair template DNA with arms of homology to the targeted sequence and in general requires a longer 3’ single-stranded DNA tail after end resection, whereas MMEJ only needs exposure of relatively short homologous DNA sequences that can anneal to each other [ ]. As the kinetics of HDR repair have been shown to be slower than NHEJ, but faster than MMEJ [ , ], inhibition of NHEJ may further induce HDR. Especially inhibition of DNA-dependent protein kinase (DNA-PK), using small molecule inhibitors like M3814 [ , ] and AZD7648 [ ], has been implemented to increase HDR in multiple cell types.
For CRISPR/Cas9 to become widely clinically applicable, there is a need for delivery methods that can ferry protein (Cas9), RNA (sgRNA), and a repair template (DNA or RNA that can be converted into DNA) into cells and tissues. The current procedure to support HDR-based gene editing in hematopoietic stem and progenitor cells (HSPCs) ex vivo is based on electroporation of RNPs consisting of recombinant Cas9 and synthetic sgRNA followed by delivery of the homologous DNA repair template typically using vectors based on adeno-associated virus (AAV) [ ]. While this strategy is highly effective and the desired transient exposure to Cas9 is achieved, the treatment is known also to have a marked negative effect on the viability of the cells [ ]. Furthermore, this approach is limited to certain cell types and obviously not suited for in vivo applications. More recently, lipid nanoparticles have been developed for delivery of Cas9 messenger RNA and sgRNA, with apparent reduced toxic impact on the HSPCs in terms of clonal potential and engraftment [ ]. Engineered retrovirus-derived particles [often referred to as virus-like particles (VLPs)] have emerged as an alternative delivery approach, which is based on the ability of foreign proteins to hitch-hike on viral polypeptides during assembly of virions. We originally developed this technology based on engineered HIV-1-derived lentiviral (LV) particles for delivery of transposases [ ], early stage designer nucleases [ ], and Streptococcus pyogenes Cas9 (SpCas9) [ ] by fusing the additional protein to the N-terminus of the Gag/GagPol protein. We recently showed that LVNPs can transfer ready-to-function RNPs leading to effective and precise targeted DNA cleavage in recipient cells including retina pigment epithelium cells in the mouse [ ]. Such data match reported findings showing Cas9 function in primary T-cells ex vivo and in vivo after lentivirus-based Cas9 delivery [ ]. Also, RNP-loaded particles based on murine leukemia virus (referred to as Nanoblades) have been developed [ ] and were further optimized by others resulting in engineered VLPs (eVLPs) supporting base editor RNP incorporation leading to effective in vivo base editing [ ]. Furthermore, packaging of prime editor RNPs was first demonstrated in LVNPs [ ] and more recently in eVLPs [ ], in the latter case showing prime editing in mouse retina.
For some applications of genome editing, it is desired to insert larger DNA fragments. As one example, insertion of a complementary DNA (cDNA) fragment may represent a one-size-fits-all approach targeting multiple disease-causing variants as an alternative to developing treatments for individual patients [ ]. Therefore, techniques are needed that combine Cas9/sgRNA and repair template delivery. In early work, we showed targeted gene insertion in cells treated with LVNPs containing pairs of zinc-finger nucleases as well as the repair template sequence [ ]. More recently, Mangeot and colleagues demonstrated HDR in target cells treated with Cas9/sgRNA-loaded Nanoblades coated with single-stranded DNA oligonucleotides (ssODNs) [ ], and along the same lines, ssODNs have been electroporated into VLPs, although resulting in only modest levels of HDR [ ]. Moreover, Capin et al. recently packaged Cas9/sgRNA and DNA in engineered baculovirus particles resulting in modest knock-in (KI) efficiencies using HDR or homology-independent targeted integration [ ].
In this study, we demonstrate the capacity of LVNPs to accommodate and deliver Cas9/sgRNA RNPs with vector RNA, which upon reverse transcription serves as a repair template for HDR-directed gene editing. Using this ‘all-on-one’ LVNP delivery approach, we show potent and precise gene correction in a human erythroid progenitor cell line (HUDEP-2) carrying the HBB E6V mutation causing sickle cell disease (SCD) and demonstrate a potential of this approach in HSPCs from healthy donors. Our data represent a first step toward using a single vehicle for delivering all components for CRISPR-based gene correction or genomic insertion of DNA fragments by HDR.

## Materials and methods

## Plasmid construction
The lentiviral vector construct carrying the repair template for the reporter cells, pCCL/LHA(PGK)-mCherry-linker-RHA(GFP), was constructed by digestion of pCCL/PGK-eGFP with BoxI and XhoI following insertion of three fragments: LHA(PGK) amplified from pCCL/PGK-d2eGFP-IRES-puro, mCherry amplified from pLV/guide-mCherry [ ] including the 18 bp linker in the reverse primer, and RHA(GFP) amplified from pCCL/PGK-d2eGFP-IRES-puro including PAM silencing mutations in the primers.
pSpCas9-DN1S-pMDLg/pRRE-D64V was cloned by digesting pSpCas9-pMDLg/pRRE-D64V with HindIII and BshTI following insertion of Cas9-DN1S fragment amplified from pX458M-53BP1-DN1S (Addgene, plasmid 131045).
The vector construct containing the repair template for HBB-GFP KI with sgRNA1 and 2, respectively, were made as follows. First, the SFFV promoter was introduced instead of the UBC promoter in the plasmid GW175/UBC [ ], resulting in GW175/SFFV. GW175/UBC was digested with I-SceI and KpnI, and the SFFV promoter was retrieved by likewise digesting AAV6-WGR-SFFV-GFP-BGH [ ] with I-SceI and KpnI and ligating the GW175 backbone with the SFFV promoter with T4 DNA Ligase (Thermo Scientific). The cassette with homology arms (HAs) for sgHBB1 and SFFV-TurboGFP-polyA was transferred to a lentiviral backbone, by digesting pCCL/PGK-eGFP [ ] with BoxI and XhoI, and polymerase chain reaction (PCR)-amplifying the cassette from GW175/SFFV which was then inserted into pCCL. HAs for sgHBB2 were constructed by PCR amplifying 3′ and 5′ HAs from HEK293T genomic DNA (gDNA). In parallel, the SFFV-TurboGFP-polyA cassette was PCR-amplified from GW175/SFFV.
pCCL plasmids carrying repair templates for either HBB-GFP KI or GFP-mCherry KI without HAs were constructed using the XhoI/BoxI-digested pCCL/PGK-eGFP [ ] and inserting PCR fragments omitting HAs from the respective repair template plasmids.
Lentiviral vector constructs carrying the repair template with sequence encoding the E6V variant were generated with different length of HAs [pCCL/LHA(HBB)-E6V-RHA(HBB)-40-bp or -400-bp HAs]. These constructs were made by digestion of pCCL/PGK-eGFP [ ] with XhoI/BoxI following insertion of the fragment containing HAs surrounding the mutation amplified from a gene fragment (Twist Bioscience). The vector plasmid containing the V6E repair template with 400-bp HAs was constructed in the same digested backbone, by inserting two PCR fragments amplified from the pCCL/LHA(HBB)-E6V-RHA(HBB)-400 bp HAs with primers containing the V6E-causing variant.
All plasmids were assembled with NEBuilder HiFi DNA Assembly (NEB) if not stated otherwise, and primers are listed in . sgRNA-expressing plasmids were cloned as previously described [ ]. Plasmids that were produced in this work will be made available through Addgene.

## Cell culture and establishment of reporter cell lines
All cell lines were maintained at 37°C and 5% CO2. Lenti-X 293T and HeLa cells were cultured in Dulbecco’s modified Eagle’s medium High Glucose (Sigma–Aldrich) supplemented with 5% Fetal Bovine Serum (FBS), 100 U/ml penicillin, and 100 μg/ml streptomycin. K562 cells were cultured in RPMI-1640 (Sigma–Aldrich) with 10% FBS, 100 U/ml penicillin, and 100 μg/ml streptomycin.
HeLa-d2eGFP and K562-d2eGFP reporter cell lines were established by transducing naive HeLa and K562 cells with supernatant LV/PGK-d2eGFP-IRES-puro [ ] at a low multiplicity of infection (MOI) following positive selection with 1 μg/ml puromycin. Resulting colonies were single-cell expanded in 96-well plates, and copy number was determined for relevant clones using digital droplet PCR (ddPCR).
HUDEP-2 cells (RIKEN BRC Cell Bank) were cultured in StemSpan SFEM (STEMCELL Technologies) supplemented with 3 U/ml erythropoietin (EPO), 50 ng/ml SCF, 10−6 M dexamethasone, 1 μg/ml doxycycline, and 100 U/ml penicillin. Cells were passaged twice a week when reaching 8 × 105 cells/ml.
A HUDEP-2 clone carrying the HBB-V6E variant (SCD-HUDEP-2) was established by nucleofection of 6 μg Cas9 protein (IDT), 3.2 μg modified synthetic sgRNA HBB 2 (Synthego), and ssODNs (IDT), and the cells were treated with 2 μM M3814 for 24 h after nucleofection. sgRNA and ssODN sequence are listed in . One week after nucleofection, the treated cells were seeded at a low dilution in 96-well plates with maximum one cell per well to establish single cell clones. Wells with cells were identified by visual inspection and expanded for 1–2 weeks before 50–100 000 cells were harvested for QuickExtract DNA Extraction (Lucigen) according to manufacturer’s protocol (using 20 μl for 1 × 105 cells). PCR amplification of HBB amplicon and Sanger sequencing (Eurofins) using primers listed in was performed to identify homozygous clones.

## Digital droplet PCR
Copy numbers were estimated by ddPCR on gDNA extracted using the procedure described below. Purified gDNA was digested with HindIII (FastDigest, Thermo Fisher), and 10 ng digested gDNA was used in a multiplex ddPCR reaction. Copy numbers of the puromycin resistance gene (as a measure of the d2eGFP cassette) and the mCherry reporter gene were estimated alongside albumin gene quantification as reference, assuming three albumin copies per cell [ ], using ddPCR Supermix for Probes (No dUTP) (Bio-Rad). Samples were analyzed on a QX200 Droplet Reader (Bio-Rad) using CNV experiment setup in the QuantaSoft software (Bio-Rad). Primers and probes used are listed in .

## LV and LVNP production and transduction
Lentiviral (LV) preparations were produced in P10 dishes with 4 × 106 Lenti-X 293T cells. Cells were co-transfected the day after seeding with 3 μg pRSV-Rev, 3.75 μg pMD.2G, 9.1 μg pMDLg/pRRE-D64V, 3.9 μg pLVNP2.0-Cas9 (Addgene, #206880), and 13 μg plasmids encoding lentiviral transfer plasmid, and/or sgRNA-expressing plasmid at the ratio of 75:25 for repair template:sgRNA unless stated otherwise, using standard calcium phosphate transfection. The day after transfection, the medium was renewed and the following day the supernatant was harvested and concentrated by ultracentrifugation after filtration through a 0.45 μm filter. Ultracentrifugation was performed at 25 000 rpm for 2 h at 4°C through a 20% sucrose cushion. The resulting pellet was resuspended in phosphate-buffered saline (PBS)-/- resulting in a preparation that was concentrated ∼300 times. The suspension was then centrifuged at 2000 × g for 3 min to remove debris and stored at −80°C. HIV-1 p24 concentrations were measured by enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA) (XpressBio). LVNP Cas9 concentrations were measured by ELISA (XpressBio). All transductions on K562, HUDEP-2, and HeLa cell lines were performed with 8 μg/ml polybrene present during transduction, and the medium was renewed the following day.

## Culturing and transduction of HSPCs
Mobilized peripheral blood (mPB) CD34+ HSPCs were acquired from healthy voluntary blood donors under informed consent from Aarhus University Hospital under the umbrella of the PASCAL-MID research center through funding provided by the Innovation Fund Denmark. HSPCs were cultured in StemSpan SFEM II (STEMCELL Technologies) supplemented with 20 U/ml P/S, 100 ng/ml SCF, 100 ng/ml TPO, 100 ng/ml Flt3-ligand, 30 ng/ml IL-6, and 30 ng/ml IL-3 (all from Peprotech), 35 nM UM171 (STEMCELL Technologies), and 1 μM SR1 (STEMCELL Technologies) at 37°C and 5% CO2. HSPCs were thawed and dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO) was diluted gradually by dropwise addition of pre-heated Roswell Park Memorial Institute (RPMI) medium, following centrifugation at 300 × g for 5 min and subsequent resuspension in the culture medium. HSPCs were seeded at 1 × 105 cells/ml and expanded for 3 days prior to LVNP treatment, unless otherwise specified.
LVNP treatment of HSPCs was carried out in 96-well plates coated with RetroNectin (RN) (Takara Bio) for suspension cells (Thermo Fisher) according to manufacturer’s protocol using centrifugation of RN-conjugated viral particles. Briefly, RN was added to the plate and incubated at 4°C overnight. The following day, the RN was removed (and reused), and the plate was incubated with 2% bovine serum albumin (BSA) in PBS for 30 min at room temperature, followed by a wash with PBS. LVNPs were added to appropriate wells, and bound to the RN by centrifugation at 2000 × g, at 32°C for 2 h. HSPCs were added to the plate in a density of 1 × 106 cells/ml in presence of 4 mg/ml LentiBoost (Sirion Biotech), 1 μM AZD7648 (MedChem Express), and 8 μM Cyclosporine H, unless otherwise specified. The following day, the cells were diluted to a density of 1 × 105 cells/ml, and the cells were subsequently resuspended in culture medium without AZD7648 48 h after LVNP treatment. Cells were harvested for analysis 7 days after LVNP treatment.

## Colony-forming unit assay
Two days after LVNP treatment, 800 cells were seeded in 1.1 ml MethoCult™ H4435 Enriched (STEMCELL Technologies, #04435) in a 35-mm dish according to the manufacturer’s instructions. The plates were then incubated for 14 days at 37°C. Subsequently, colonies were counted and scored blinded based on morphology using an inverted microscope. Following manual counting, the cells were resuspended and washed in PBS, and the total cell number was counted using flow cytometry using NovoCyte 2100 Analyzer (Agilent) and analyzed by NovoExpress v. 1.5.6. Two technical replica plates were seeded for each sample. The average of both plates was used as one data point for colony counts. The total cell number represents the number of cells in two technical replicates.

## Confocal microscopy
In a 12-well plate, 5 × 104 cells per well were seeded onto coverslips (Fisher Scientific, CB00130RAC20MNZ0) 24 h prior to fixation. The cells were fixed in 4% paraformaldehyde (Fisher Scientific, 12323148) for 20 min at room temperature, washed once in Dulbecco's phosphate-buffered saline (DPBS) for 5 min, permeabilized in 0.2% (v/v) Triton X-100 (Sigma–Aldrich, T8787) in 1× DPBS for 10 min at room temperature, and blocked in 0.1% (v/v) Triton X-100, 3.0% (w/v) BSA in 1× DPBS for 20 min at room temperature. The cells were then incubated with mouse monoclonal anti-Lamin A/C antibody (Santa Cruz Biotechnology sc-376248) diluted 1:50 in 0.05% Triton X-100, 1.5% BSA in DPBS for 1 h at room temperature, followed by three 5 min washes in DPBS, and incubation with Alexa Fluor 647-conjugated Goat anti-Mouse antibody (Thermo Fisher Scientific, A21236) diluted 1:1000 in 0.05% Triton X-100, 1.5% BSA in DPBS for 1 h at room temperature. Cells were washed once in DPBS, incubated in 5 μg/ml 4′,6-diamidino-2-phenylindole (DAPI) (Thermo Fisher Scientific, D1306) in DPBS for 10 min at room temperature, washed twice more for 5 min in DPBS, then mounted on a glass slide with ProLong™ Diamond Antifade Mountant (Thermo Fisher Scientific, P36961) and left to cure overnight at room temperature in the dark. Cells were imaged with a ×63 1.4 NA Plan Apochromat lens on a Zeiss LSM800 inverted confocal laser scanning microscope with a GaAsP detector, using 405, 488, and 640 nm diode lasers, at 0.2%–0.3% of maximum power, to excite DAPI, eGFP, and Alexa Fluor A647, respectively. A long pass (655 nm) filter was used in the far-red channel to protect the detector from overexposure. Detector pinholes were set to 1 Airy unit on all channels, with a pixel dwell of 0.81 μs, and frame averaging of 4. Images were acquired using Zen v2.6 Blue edition (Carl Zeiss Microscopy GmbH).

## Flow cytometry
Indel and KI analyses based on fluorescence were performed using flow cytometry. Samples were prepared in fluorescence-activated cell sorting (FACS) buffer [PBS, 1% BSA, 2.5 mM ethylenediaminetetraacetic acid (EDTA), and 25 mM HEPES]. Propidium Iodide at a concentration of 1.25 mg/ml was included in experiments with K562, HUDEP-2 cells, and HSPCs, when no mCherry signal was to be detected in other ways, to exclude dead cells. For experiments reporting on KO rates, the KO percentage was calculated by subtracting the percentage of d2eGFP-positive cells in each sample with that of the untreated samples. Fluorescence was measured on a NovoCyte 2100YB Analyzer (Agilent) equipped with two lasers (488 and 561 nm) and analyzed by NovoExpress v. 1.5.6. Gating strategies are shown in , , , and .

## gDNA extraction and Sanger sequencing for ICE analysis
gDNA for indel analysis and ddPCR was either extracted using a standard NaCl/EtOH extraction or using QuickExtract (Lucigen) according to manufacturer’s protocol (modified by using 20 μl for 1 × 105 cells). For NaCl/EtOH extraction, cells were lysed in chorion villus lysis buffer supplemented with Proteinase K (Thermo Fisher) in a ratio of 1:100 (vol:vol). Cells were lysed at 55°C for ∼2 h, followed by addition of 6M NaCl to remove proteins. The samples were centrifuged at 13 000 rpm for 5 min at 4°C, and the supernatant was moved to a new tube, following another centrifugation step. The DNA was extracted using ice cold 100% EtOH, and the resulting pellet was subsequently washed in 70% EtOH and resuspended in an appropriate amount of sterilized H2O.
For Sanger sequencing (Eurofins Genomics) followed by indel analysis, PCR was performed using Phusion High-Fidelity PCR Master Mix with HF buffer (Fisher Scientific) and primers spanning the region of interest. Primers used are listed in . Indel analyses and HDR analyses were performed with ICE Analysis (Synthego) or DECODR v3.0 (decodr.org) using an untreated sample as control. All analysis results were based on a R2 value ≥0.9.

## Long read sequencing
PCR amplicons were amplified using Platinum SuperFi II (Thermo Fisher Scientific, #12369050) with 35 cycles, according to the manufacturer’s instructions. Hereafter, the amplicons were purified using HighPrep PCR beads (MagBio, # AC-60050). 200 fmol of each amplicon was used as input for library prep using the Native Barcoding kit (Oxford Nanopore Technologies, #SQK-NBD114.24). Primers are listed in . Library prep was performed according to the manufacturer’s instructions. Sequencing was conducted on a PromethION flow cell to a depth corresponding to ∼100 000 reads per sample.
For the analysis, adapters were removed by MinKNOW during base calling. Fragmented amplicons were removed by filtering out reads that did not contain both primer sequences. Hereafter, the reads were mapped to the reference amplicon with minimap2. The subsequent SAM files were converted to BigWig files using samtools and deeptools. Coverage values were extracted from the BigWig file for each base in the reference and normalized to the maximum coverage of the given sample. They were then binned with a bin width of 100. These values were subsequently plotted.

## Next generation sequencing and analysis
PCR amplicons for Illumina sequencing were generated using Phusion Plus MM (Fisher Scientific) for all reactions using primers listed in , with template material of >300 ng purified gDNA or >5 μl QuickExtract lysate corresponding to ∼25 000 cells. Since all samples included repair template delivery, an initial PCR was run with primers binding outside the HAs, and the resulting amplicon was gel-extracted and used in the following reaction. The first PCR attached part of the Truseq adapters and was run for eight cycles, and the second PCR attaching the remaining part of the adapter and i5 and i7 indices was likewise run for eight cycles on 4 ng of purified amplicon. The amplicons were purified using HighPrep™ PCR Clean-up System (MAGBIO, #AC-60050), with an initial exclusion of large amplicons using 1.2× ratio followed by 0.6× ratio, and otherwise according to manufacturer’s protocol. The yield was determined using Qubit 1× double-stranded DNA (dsDNA) HS assay according to manufacturer’s protocol. The resulting amplicons were pooled and sequenced with 150-bp paired-end reads on an Illumina iSeq100. Editing rates were analyzed using CRISPresso2 [ ].

## Statistics
Statistical analyses were performed using Prism v.10. Statistical details for experiments, where relevant, are stated in the figure legends. P-values are indicated with asterisks; *P<.05, **P<.01, and ***P<.001. The abbreviation ‘ns’ is used to indicate nonsignificant relationships.

## Results

## Establishment and characterization of reporter cell lines for detection of targeted gene disruption and HDR
In this work, Cas9 is packaged in the LVNPs as an N-terminal fusion to Gag and GagPol polypeptides that assemble during particle production. Cas9 carries a nuclear localization signal (NLS) in each end of the protein and is in the fusion configuration flanked downstream by a protease cleavage site (PCS) and a Pleckstrin homology (PH) domain (Fig. ). The PCS is recognized by the viral protease encoded by the Pol gene, allowing Cas9 to be released upon maturation of the viral particle, whereas the PH domain is expected to support anchorage of Cas9-containing fusion polypeptides in the plasma membrane. To quantify Cas9-mediated KO and HDR-based KI, we first established reporter cell lines (Fig. ) with expression of a destabilized version of the enhanced green fluorescent protein (d2eGFP). Using a bicistronic design, the d2eGFP gene was introduced into HeLa, HEK293, and K562 cells together with an antibiotic resistance gene (encoding puromycin N-acetyltransferase) using lentiviral transduction at a low MOI (0.1–0.2) to ensure low copy numbers per cell following puromycin selection. d2eGFP has a half-life of ∼5.5 h compared to ∼26 h for eGFP [ ], which allowed measurement of targeted gene KO as reduced d2eGFP expression by flow cytometry shortly after gene editing. With this model, targeted KI of the mCherry reporter gene by HDR was evident in cells expressing both d2eGFP and mCherry (Fig. and  and , bottom panels).
 Among three tested d2eGFP-directed sgRNAs, one sgRNA (in the following referred to as sgGFP) most effectively reduced d2eGFP expression in pools of puromycin-resistant cells treated with Cas9/sgGFP-loaded LVNPs (LVNP/Cas9-sgGFP) ( and ). We then screened a series of HEK293-d2eGFP, K562-d2eGFP and HeLa-d2eGFP clones for potent d2eGFP KO with LVNP/Cas9-sgGFP ( ) and chose two clones (HeLa-d2eGFP c.100.1 and K562-d2eGFP c.50.2; from now on referred to as HeLa-d2eGFP and K562-d2eGFP) for which we determined vector copy numbers (2 and 1 copy, respectively; ). For both cell lines, we observed a dose-dependent increase in d2eGFP-negative cells following treatment with LVNP/Cas9-sgGFP (Fig. and  ), which correlated with indel formation with increasing LVNP dose (Fig. and  ), thus validating the flow cytometry-based readout as a measure of gene disruption.

## Kinetics of DNA cleavage and DNA repair template availability after lentiviral RNP and vector RNA delivery
We then set out to examine the potential of HDR editing in the reporter cell lines. Initially, we tested the kinetics of targeted DNA cleavage after LVNP delivery and observed the first indels after 10 and 16 h in HeLa-d2eGFP (Fig. ) and K562-d2eGFP (Fig. ) cells, respectively. In both cell lines, the indel levels increased to >80% after 48 h. These data fully match previous findings in another cell type [ ]. Furthermore, we observed in both cell lines that the appearance of indels generated by NHEJ was delayed 4 h in the presence of the DNA-PK inhibitor M3814 (Fig. F and ). Next, to analyze the availability of repair template DNA after delivery of vector RNA carrying the repair template sequence, we quantified repair template DNA levels over time after transduction with an IDLV carrying a HDR repair template encoding a promoter-less mCherry gene flanked by 400-bp HAs (Fig. , scenario 2). For HeLa-d2eGFP and K562-d2eGFP cells, levels of reverse-transcribed repair template DNA peaked at 20 and 12 h after transduction, respectively (Fig. and  ), and more than half of the peak level was observed already 8 h after transfection. As expected, the presence of M3814 did not affect DNA levels after IDLV transduction (Fig. H and  ). Altogether, our data suggest that repair template DNA derived from IDLV vector RNA becomes available in a time window that overlaps with that of DNA cleavage. We therefore set out to combine the delivery of Cas9/sgRNA RNPs and a repair template for repair in ‘all-in-one’ LVNPs.

## mCherry KI by HDR following delivery of Cas9/sgRNA RNPs and repair template sequence in ‘all-in-one’ LVNPs
To generate ‘all-in-one’ LVNPs, we packaged LVNPs with Cas9/sgGFP RNPs and vector RNA carrying the repair template with the HA-flanked mCherry gene (referred to as mC) and transferred medium from cells producing LVNP/Cas9-sgGFP-mC directly to recipient cells. However, despite effective DNA cleavage leading to d2eGFP KO, mCherry KI was barely detectable in HeLa-d2eGFP cells exposed to increasing doses of LVNP/Cas9-sgGFP-mC in the absence of M3814 ( ). In the presence of M3814 mCherry, however, KI was evident in a dose-dependent fashion leading to KI in >20% of the cells with LVNPs corresponding to 90 ng p24 ( ).
To be able to apply higher numbers of particles, LVNPs were purified and concentrated by ultracentrifugation. In HeLa-d2eGFP, treatment with LVNPs up to a dose corresponding to 150 ng p24 led to mCherry KI without M3814 treatment (6.3 ± 0.8%) (Fig. ). In the presence of M3814, the prevalence of mCherry-positive cells reached 53.1 ± 0.2%, whereas cells treated with an IDLV, which did not contain Cas9/sgGFP RNPs, but carried the mC repair template sequence, had frequencies of mCherry-positive cells comparable to untreated samples (Fig. ). Importantly, cells that became mCherry-positive upon LVNP treatment remained positive for d2eGFP (Fig. ), matching the d2eGFP expression of untreated HeLa-d2eGFP cells ( ), indicating that the repair template sequence was correctly introduced by HDR without disturbing expression of the d2GFP gene. In a subsequent setup, we compared mCherry KI rates with Cas9-containing LVNPs carrying different combinations of sgRNA and mC repair template (sgGFP-mC, sgCtrl-mC, sgGFP only, and mC only). We visualized the different outcomes by plotting GFP against mCherry, allowing distinct populations of HeLa-d2eGFP cells (Fig. ) and K562-d2eGFP cells ( ) to be defined. These included unmodified GFP-positive/mCherry-negative cells (Q1), GFP-positive/Cherry-positive cells with correct KI (Q2), GFP-negative/mCherry-positive cells with irregular KI or random integration of the repair template (Q3), and GFP-negative/mCherry-negative cells with KO of d2eGFP and no insertion (Q4). In both HeLa-d2eGFP and K562-d2eGFP, only LVNPs carrying Cas9, sgGFP, and the mC repair template supported dose-dependent levels of KI, reaching 57.4% ± 2.9 mCherry-positive cells in HeLa-d2eGFP (Fig. ) and 28.6% ± 0.6 in K562-d2eGFP (Fig. ) with a dose corresponding to 150 ng of p24. Notably, LVNPs carrying sgCtrl (targeting the AFF1 gene) resulted in potent targeted indel formation in AFF1 ( and C). The continued expression of d2eGFP in mCherry-positive cells (Fig. , Q2) and the appearance of a unique PCR fragment ( and E) argued that KI was precise at the expected site upstream from the d2eGFP gene. In accordance, we also found that delivery of mC repair templates without HAs did not support mCherry KI ( ). From our quad gating strategy, we noticed that samples treated with LVNP/Cas9-sgGFP tended to shift the population left along with mCherry axis. Considering that the mC repair template was not included in these LVNPs, we used this readout to set a refined gate for assessment of irregular KI events (GFP-negative/mCherry-positive) in samples treated with ‘all-in-one’ LVNPs ( and B). Based on this gating strategy, we detected frequencies of irregular mCherry KI at most at 0.3% ± 0.04 in HeLa-d2eGFP and at 0.6% ± 0.02 in K562-d2eGFP cells treated with ‘all-in-one’ LVNPs. The background levels measured in cells treated with LVNP/Cas9-sgGFP were 0.06% ± 0.1 in HeLa and 0.03% ± 0.01 in K562 ( and D).
 In both reporter cell lines, we noted that d2eGFP KO decreased as mCherry KI rates increased with increasing dosages of LVNP/Cas9-sgGFP-mC (Fig.  and  , and ) and that the combined level of d2eGFP KO and mCherry KI did not vary with dose ( ). This led us to speculate that the amount of repair template DNA could be a limiting factor for LVNP-mediated HDR. Therefore, to potentially enhance vector RNA packaging in LVNPs, we increased the ratio of repair template plasmid to sgRNA plasmid during LVNP production (from 75:25 to 95:5). This led to higher KI rates in HeLa-d2eGFP cells (from 46.4 ± 1.8% to 53.1 ± 0.7%; P= .008), but did not affect KI rates in K562-d2eGFP (P= .4) ( ). Since the 95:5 ratio showed a tendency toward reduced on-target cleavage leading to d2eGFP KO ( ), we continued using the 75:25 ratio in our production schemes.
As another approach to optimize LVNPs for co-delivery of RNPs and repair template, we explored ways of inhibiting NHEJ locally at the DSB rather than globally with M3814. DN1S, a dominant negative variant of the tumor suppressor P53-binding protein (53BP1) (previously shown to inhibit NHEJ effectively [ ]) was fused N-terminally to Cas9 and packaged into LVNPs together with sgRNA and repair template. Treatment of HeLa-d2eGFP cells with LVNP/Cas9-DN1S-sgGFP-repair template did in fact result in higher KI rates (5.8 ± 0.1% versus 7.2 ± 0.1% mCherry-positive cells for Cas9 and Cas9-DN1S, respectively with 150 ng p24 in the absence of M3814 and 50 ± 0.1% versus 60 ± 0.1% in the presence of M3814) ( ). However, as the absence of M3814 resulted in high d2eGFP KO due to repair by NHEJ ( ), and the presence of the drug resulted in markedly higher mCherry KI rates, we performed all the following experiments with the unfused version of Cas9 in combination with M3814 treatment, unless otherwise stated.

## Gene KI at endogenous loci with ’all-in-one’ LVNPs
To explore targeted KI in endogenous loci using LVNPs, we first adapted a previously published strategy to tag the LMNA gene encoding lamin A/C with full-length eGFP [ ] (Fig. ), allowing KI to be quantified by flow cytometry ( ). It was verified first that LVNPs carrying Cas9/sgLMNA RNPs effectively supported indel formation at the targeted site in the LMNA gene in HeLa and K562 cells (Fig. ). Next, treatment of both cell lines with increasing doses of LVNP/Cas9-sgLMNA-eG resulted in dose-dependent incorporation of the eGFP gene tag (Fig. and  ), leading to 45.0 ± 2.4% eGFP-positive HeLa cells and 13.3 ± 0.2% eGFP-positive K562 cells, in both cases with a dose of LVNPs corresponding to 150 ng p24. For LVNPs packaged with the sgCtrl, the number of eGFP-positive cells was at background level, suggesting that KI by LVNP/Cas9-sgLMNA-eG was mediated by DNA cleavage followed by HDR. Notably, by confocal microscopy, we also found that the eGFP signal in eGFP-positive cells localized to the nuclear membrane. This was supported by staining with anti-Lamin A/C and the nuclear stain DAPI, which revealed a clear overlap between eGFP, Lamin A/C, and DAPI ( ). LVNP/Cas9-sgCtrl-eG treated cells showed no eGFP signal at the nuclear membrane, suggesting that precise KI led to a functional fusion protein, as we have previously seen for a Lamin A/C eGFP fusion [ ]. Moreover, flow cytometry analyses unveiled two distinct populations after eGFP KI, which we have previously determined to represent cells that are either homozygous or heterozygous for the eGFP insertion [ ] ( ). We noted a tendency of proportionally more cells with homozygous KI after treatment with the higher LVNP doses (100-150 ng p24) relative to the lowest dose (50 ng p24) (P = .004 and P = .007 for 50 ng p24 compared to 100 ng and 50 ng p24 compared to 150 ng, respectively) ( ).
 Next, we explored the possibility of targeting a common HBB gene variant, Glu6Val (E6V), which causes SCD. Among four sgRNAs targeted to sites near the HBB variant, two sgRNAs (sgHBB1 and sgHBB2) supported high indel rates after LVNP/Cas9-sgHBB delivery (Fig. E and  and B). KI into this locus was initially examined by flow cytometry by packaging a HA-flanked repair template (referred to as SFFVeG) carrying an eGFP gene driven by the SFFV promoter into the LVNPs (Fig. F and  ). In K562 cells, the number of eGFP-positive cells increased with increasing doses of LVNP/Cas9-sgHBB-SFFVeG, reaching a mean of 17.1% and 11.1% for sgHBB1 and sgHBB2, respectively (Fig. ). Control LVNPs with the irrelevant sgCtrl only produced transient levels of eGFP expression, which reached background levels after 14 days (Fig. G and and C). Moreover, background levels were observed with LVNPs carrying the SFFVeG repair template without HAs ( ), suggesting that stable eGFP expression was achieved by HDR. Notably, the viability of cells treated with LVNPs was unaffected by the treatment ( and ), indicating that the cells tolerated both RNP and repair template vector delivery by LVNPs.

## High on-target, reduced off-target DNA cleavage with LVNP-directed RNP delivery
We have previously observed a reduced tendency of LVNP-delivered RNPs to cleave in experimentally confirmed off-target loci [ ]. For sgHBB1, two off-target sites, OT1 and OT2, are already known [ ] ( ), and we set out to compare levels of off-target DNA cleavage using LVNPs as an RNP vehicle relative to state-of-the-art RNP nucleofection. Consistently, high on-target indel rates were seen with two different doses of LVNP (Fig. ; 95.3 ± 0.3% and 96.9 ± 0.4% for 75 and 100 ng, respectively). This mimicked the indel rate achieved with the highest dose of nucleofected RNPs (96.5 ± 0.5%), whereas on-target indel formation declined to 79.0 ± 13.3% after nucleofection with one-fourth the amount of RNP (Fig. ). Notably, both delivery approaches led to detectable indel formation at OT1 and OT2. For OT1, which is a known prominent off-target site, indel rates were 26.7 ± 0.9% and 29.1 ± 1.8% after exposure to 75 and 100 ng of LVNPs, respectively (Fig. ). In contrast, the highest dose of nucleofected RNPs resulted in an indel rate of 74.3 ± 3.8%. At the cost of reduced on-target activity, indel formation in OT1 could be reduced to the level observed with LVNPs by reducing the amount of nucleofected RNPs (Fig. ). Indel formation at OT2 was markedly lower for all conditions. Nonetheless, the high dose of nucleofected RNP also in this case led to the highest level of indel formation (Fig. ). To explain these differences, we measured the cellular Cas9 protein levels by ELISA. As expected, it was not possible to detect Cas9 in LVNP-treated cells by ELISA, which reflects the overall low levels of transferred Cas9 with LVNPs. In contrast, increased levels of Cas9 over background was observed in cells nucleofected with the highest RNP dose (Fig. ), suggesting that the tendency to induce off-target DNA cleavage was increased by a higher cellular level of Cas9. Collectively, our findings support the notion that the ratio of on/off-target DNA cleavage is dependent on RNP availability, and that the delivery approach may influence this ratio.

## 
HBB gene correction in HUDEP-2 cells carrying the SCD variant
To provide proof-of-concept for therapeutic gene correction using ‘all-in-one’ LVNPs, we aimed at correcting the E6V variant (Fig. ) in CD34+ human umbilical cord-derived erythroid progenitor-2 cells (HUDEP-2), which have previously been used in studies of SCD [ ]. First, we designed a repair template referred to as E6V ( ) to introduce the A > T HBB variant in wt cells. To prevent re-cutting after successful HDR, two silent base substitutions were introduced, which abolished targeting by both sgHBB1 and sgHBB2. We flanked the repair template with short 40 bp HAs, which have previously been shown to support smaller insertions [ ], and compared KI rates to the regular repair template flanked by 400 bp HAs. In K562 cells treated with LVNPs (100 ng p24) carrying Cas9 complexed with sgHBB1 or sgHBB2 and the E6V repair template with 400 bp HAs, the KI rates were 37.0 ± 4.4% and 31.7 ± 1.5% for sgHBB1 and sgHBB2, respectively. In contrast, we did not observe KI with repair templates carrying 40 bp HAs or with LVNPs carrying the sgCtrl (Fig. ), although the LVNPs were highly efficient at creating indels ( ). Interestingly, although LVNPs packaged with sgHBB1 resulted in higher KI rates than LVNPs with sgHBB2 in K562 cells, the overall editing rate (including indel formation and the combined effect of editing and indel formation) was higher for sgHBB2 ( ), indicating that the E6V repair template in combination with sgHBB1-directed cutting resulted in higher levels of HDR in K562 cells. In HUDEP-2 cells, Cas9-loaded LVNPs with either sgHBB1 or sgHBB2 were highly efficient at inducing indels after delivery of relatively low dosages (50 and 75 ng p24) of Cas9/sgRNA-containing LVNPs ( ). Notably, treatment with LVNP/Cas9-sgHBB1-E6V and LVNP/Cas9-sgHBB2-E6V (both with 400 bp HAs) yielded KI rates ranging from 26%–40% (Fig. ) with no or very little effect on the viability of the cells ( ).
 To generate a model for correcting the HBB variant causing SCD (Fig. ), we used a nucleofection-based approach to generate a HUDEP-2 cell line (SCD-HUDEP-2) that was homozygous for the variant and did not carry additional modifications in the HBB gene (  and B). Treatment of this cell line with LVNPs (500 ng p24) carrying Cas9/sgHBB (either sgHBB1 or sgHBB2) and the V6E repair template installing the corrected sequence resulted in potent HBB correction, ranging from 14% with sgHBB2 to 30% with sgHBB1 in the absence of M3814 (Fig. ). These findings demonstrated that ‘all-in-one’ LVNPs supported robust HDR in SCD-HUDEP-2 cells even without inhibiting NHEJ. In the presence of M3814, however, correction rates were further increased to >40% (Fig. ). We noted a small effect on the viability of cells exposed to this dose of LVNPs (relative to untreated cells) and additional impact of adding M3814 (Fig. ). Combined, our data demonstrate the capacity of all-in-one LVNPs to correct a single-nucleotide variant with high efficacy, even without inhibiting NHEJ-directed repair.

## HDR-directed gene editing in HSPCs by combined RNP and repair template delivery in LVNPs
RNP nucleofection combined with delivery of repair template DNA using vectors based on AAV6 or nucleofection of ssODNs has become a standard approach for HDR-directed gene editing in HSPCs. However, current ex vivo cell therapy approaches are labour-intensive and expensive, and there is a growing demand for new delivery approaches with potential for in vivo therapies targeting bone marrow and potentially mobilized hematopoietic stem cells. As a first step in this direction, we examined indel formation in mPB CD34 + HSPCs from healthy donors. Using standard VSV-G-pseudotyped LVNPs carrying Cas9/sgHBB1 RNPs (500 and 1000 ng p24), we obtained indel rates up to 28% in HSPCs (Fig. ). Notably, indel rates after LVNP RNP delivery could be further increased to 42% by restricting the innate immune response against lentiviral uptake using cyclosporine H (CsH) [ ] (Fig. ). In the following, we therefore included CsH during administration of LVNPs to HSPCs.
 We then treated HSPCs from a single healthy donor (donor 1) with VSV-G-pseudotyped LVNPs (900 ng p24) carrying Cas9/sgHBB1 RNPs and the E6V repair template used previously to introduce the SCD mutation. Both Sanger sequencing ( ) and NGS ( ) showed robust gene editing with KI rates of 16.8% and 28.8% when the cells were treated with two different DNA-PK inhibitors, M3814 and AZD7648, respectively ( ). In addition, AZD7648 showed less cytotoxicity in HSPCs relative to M3814 ( ), supporting the use of AZD7648 in HSPCs. We then performed a series of E6V incorporation experiments in HSPCs from two healthy donors (donor 1 and 2) treated with all-in-one LVNPs packaged with either sgHBB1, sgHBB2, or sgCtrl in the presence of AZD7648. Based on targeted NGS, we observed the highest level of E6V introduction in donor 1 (average level of 9.8% KI in donor 1 relative to 8.3% for donor 2), but also for both donors and for both sgRNAs we observed substantial variation in editing rates across the different experiments ranging from 5.4% with sgHBB1 in donor 2 to 28.8% with sgHBB1 in donor 1 (Fig. ). As expected, LVNPs loaded with sgCtrl did not result in any editing at the HBB locus. Also, on-target KI was accompanied by the introduction of indels in the cell population with levels ranging from 16.5%–19.4% of all alleles ( ).
Inhibition of NHEJ has been linked to the formation of large deletions surrounding the sgRNA cut site [ , ]. To explore the formation of larger deletions in our LVNP-treated samples, we performed Nanopore-based long read sequencing of 5.7kb spanning the cut site of sgHBB1 and sgHBB2. Throughout the analyzed region the maximum loss of coverage was 6.5% for sgHBB1 and 5.1% for sgHBB2, indicative of the emergence of larger deletions surrounding the cut site (Fig. ). This suggested that larger deletions at the on-target site, which have been observed with other delivery methods, were also seen after LVNP-based RNP delivery. Overall, however, treatment with LVNPs had only a small impact on the HSPC viability, which did not differ between LVNPs carrying different sgRNAs ( ). Also, this effect was only transient, and viability and cell numbers were fully reestablished after 7 days in culture
To evaluate the ‘all-in-one’ LVNP delivery approach against a state-of-the-art method, we performed nucleofection with Cas9/sgRNA RNPs and a ssODN as a repair template in HSPCs. With ‘all-in-one’ LVNPs packaged with sgHBB1 we achieved 6.1 ± 0.5% KI compared to 45.7 ± 0.7% with the standard dose of Cas9/sgRNA RNPs + ssODNs (Fig. ). Expectedly, the high dose of Cas9/sgRNA RNP delivered by nucleofection resulted in 7.5-fold higher KI than with ‘all-in-one’ LVNPs. Notably, we also found that the increased on-target KI was accompanied with increased off-target activity as shown by 9.9-fold higher off-target activity at the OT1 site (indel formation of 7.0 ± 0.4% with LVNPs versus 69.1 ± 1.8% with RNP nucleofection; Fig. ). We assessed cell viability and expansion on day 2 and 7 following treatment. On day 2, the viability of HSPCs treated with LVNPs were higher than cells treated with RNP nucleofection (96.4 ± 0.5% versus 90.4 ± 1.7%), although both showed a drop in viability compared to untreated cells (98.6 ± 0.1%; ). The reduced viability correlated with slower expansion rates, as samples treated with RNP nucleofection showed a loss of cells at day 2 (−13 ± 10.2%), whereas cell numbers in LVNP-treated samples were increased by 62.3 ± 27.6% on day 2 ( ). Moreover, LVNP treatment did not alter or reduce the colony-forming potential of the HSPCs, whereas the colony-forming potential of nucleofected cells was substantially reduced (Fig. ). Likewise, the total number of cells in the CFU assay did not differ between untreated and LVNP-treated HSPCs but was markedly reduced in RNP-treated samples (Fig. ). Notably, we compared the levels of administered total Cas9 by RNP nucleofection and LVNP delivery. In samples of ‘all-in-one’ LVNP/Cas9-sgHBB1-EV6 the Cas9 concentration was 0.4 ± 0.1 ng/μl corresponding to a total of 1.6 × 109 Cas9 molecules/μl. Based on the conditions used to treat HSPCs, dosages of 4.8 × 106 and 1.1 × 108 Cas9 molecules/cell were administered with LVNPs and by RNP nucleofection, respectively, arguing that levels of administered Cas9 were ∼23-fold higher during nucleofection. This estimate aligns with our inability to detect intracellular Cas9 following treatment with LVNPs, in contrast to the clear detection of Cas9 after nucleofection with RNPs (Fig. ).
Altogether, our observations provide the first proof for establishing ‘all-in-one’ LVNPs for co-delivery of Cas9/sgRNA RNPs and vector RNA carrying the repair template. Overall, these findings show that vector RNA sequences upon generation of dsDNA by reverse transcription can serve as template for targeted repair in a DNA cleavage site created by Cas9/sgRNA RNPs delivered in the same batch of LVNPs. This new delivery system supports HDR-mediated gene editing in various cell types and in human HSPCs with minimal toxic impact on the cells.

## Discussion
For many applications of therapeutic gene editing, the vision is to correct pathogenic gene variants by the simplest means. At present, base and prime editing approaches, tailored to fix a patient’s mutation in a fully individualized fashion, stand out as elegant and safe ways of correcting the genome without generating double-stranded breaks in DNA or relying on the availability of a DNA template for repair by HDR. However, many treatment scenarios may still require insertion of larger segments of DNA, and one-size-fits-all cDNA insertion strategies seem attractive for treating larger groups of patients rather than working out separate therapies, each with their own set of safety precautions and regulatory issues, for each patient. Over the last decade, we and others have developed engineered particles based on gamma-retroviruses and lentiviruses as transport vehicles of proteins with short-term function in target cells [ , , , ]. Evidence showing potent viral uptake of Cas9 protein in complex with sgRNA [ , ] has intensified the focus on developing virus-derived nanoparticles for therapeutic translation. Correction strategies based on HDR typically combine two different delivery approaches or co-delivery of viral vectors carrying Cas9 and sgRNA expression cassettes as well as the repair template. Such delivery systems may often require exquisite timing of delivery and may potentially challenge safety more than a single-vehicle approach. Until now, except for attempts to either coat the viral surface with DNA oligonucleotides [ ], or electroporate DNA into the particles [ ], retrovirus-based Cas9/sgRNA RNP delivery approaches have not been combined with repair template delivery in a single delivery unit. In the present study, we worked toward generating engineered ‘all-in-one’ lentiviral particles, LVNPs, for gene editing by combining packaging of Cas9/sgRNA RNPs with single-stranded vector RNA, which upon reverse transcription in the recipient cell is converted to a dsDNA template. Using this approach, we were able to achieve robust HDR rates in multiple cell types, including up to 28% HDR in HSPCs.
Gene correction by HDR is activated by and therefore relies on generation of a DSB, which may ignite a p53-induced DNA damage response (DDR). On top of that, introduction of foreign DNA, here in the form of an HDR repair template, triggers a related response. Delivery of repair template DNA using AAVs effectively supports HDR due to high titers and efficient uptake, leading to high availability of the repair template. In HSPCs, however, induced DDRs caused by AAV vector transduction have been shown to reduce clonal diversity and have negative impact on HSPC repopulation potential and engraftment [ ]. Also, recent findings have shown frequent concatemeric DNA insertion in HSPCs after AAV transduction [ ]. For conventional HSPC-directed gene therapy, lentiviral vectors are now the standard delivery approach, due to several properties, including cargo capacity, capacity to transduce both dividing and nondividing cells, low immune activation, and pseudotyping enabling targeting of relevant cell types [ ]. On several occasions, IDLVs have been utilized as repair template delivery vehicles [ , ]. Recently, Ferrari et al. compared the use of AAV and IDLV repair templates in HSPCs and showed higher editing efficiency using IDLV-based repair template delivery after in vivo transplantation due to HSPCs retaining their engraftment potential and clonality [ ].
Already prior to this study, we envisioned that timing issues related to simultaneous delivery of ready-to-work RNPs and vector RNA that needs to undergo reverse transcription could potentially challenge an ‘all-in-one’ LVNP-based delivery strategy. Also, we wondered if the amount of reverse-transcribed dsDNA under these conditions was sufficient to support HDR. However, studies of indel formation and repair template availability over time suggested that indels do not appear until 8–10 h after LVNP delivery. This reflects that DNA cleavage is initiated earlier and supports findings showing detection of repair factors at the cut site 8 h after LVNP exposure [ ]. This time frame leaves time for the repair template to be produced. Also, reverse transcription of the vector RNA is initiated already 2 h after viral entry [ ], which in our case led to high levels of dsDNA repair template after 10 h peaking a few hours later. Despite indication of DNA levels rising around the time of cutting, we did not in our cell line models observe appreciable HDR without inhibiting repair by NHEJ. The positive effect of DNA-PK inhibition on HDR rates could thus reflect that a slight delay in NHEJ allowed the repair template to become available at a higher concentration or that repair template DNA levels in general were too low to support HDR without restriction of NHEJ. To circumvent the use of small molecule inhibitors, we sought to include small peptides in the LVNPs that could have the same effect. Fusion of a dominant-negative variant of 53BP1, DN1S, to Cas9 has been shown to inhibit NHEJ effectively in K562 cells and patient-derived B-lymphocytes [ ]. By packaging Cas9-DN1S fusion protein in the LVNPs alongside of a repair template, we were able to increase HDR rates significantly at one dose without the use of M3814. However, the effect was relatively small, and this approach needs further optimization prior to further use. In recent studies, i53, a peptide inhibiting 53BP1 [ , ], as well as an engineered variant of RAD18, e18 [ ], were found to boost HDR, and future studies will show whether incorporation of such effectors in LVNPs could mitigate the need for NHEJ inhibitors with potential global effect on the cells.
Although therapeutic treatment of monogenic blood disorders like SCD may be possible by conventional gene therapy [ ], the risk of insertional mutagenesis is inevitable. Thus, genome editing by CRISPR/Cas9 has been studied as an alternative, which is potentially safer and more effective [ , , ]. Ex vivo approaches based on treatment of HSPCs by Cas9/sgRNA nucleofection and repair template delivery by AAV6 transduction are effective and seem highly promising, but these are also labour-intensive and appear to have a higher negative impact on HSPC engraftment than previously envisioned [ ]. Thus, the development of alternative approaches that do not impact the engraftment potential or may eventually support robust in vivo HSPC editing is needed. Our findings provide an example of enveloped nanoparticles showing great promise as a safe and robust approach for delivery of CRISPR/Cas9 gene editing tool kits, including repair template sequences for targeted genomic insertion. With further optimization, including development of new pseudotypes, we believe this technology has potential as an in vivo delivery tool that may also be able to reach the bone marrow hematopoietic compartment.

## Supplementary Material
gkaf767_Supplemental_File

## Acknowledgements
We thank Charlotte Thornild Møller for excellent technical support and acknowledge the FACS Core Facility at Aarhus University for assistance with flow cytometry.

Author contributions: S.A. and J.G.M. conceived the study. S.A. designed, performed, and analyzed the experiments. E.A.T. assisted in the construction and design of plasmids. J.H.W. assisted in HSPC experiments and sequencing. T.W.S. performed CFU-assays and sequencing. J.H.J. performed LVNP quantification. L.J.D. performed confocal microscopy. D.H., A.L.R., and B.K.M. provided HSPCs. J.H.H., D.R., J.L., and R.O.B. assisted in study design. S.A., E.A.T., and J.G.M. wrote the manuscript. All authors have read and approved the manuscript.

## Supplementary data

Supplementary data is available at NAR online.

## Conflict of interest
R.O.B. holds equity in Kamau Therapeutics and UNIKUM Therapeutics and is a cofounder of UNIKUM Therapeutics J.G.M. is a member of the Scientific Advisory Board of nChromaBio. The company was not involved in the present study. The remaining authors declare no competing interests.

## Funding
S.A. was funded through an industrial PhD fellowship by The Innovation Fund Denmark and Novo Nordisk A/S. The project was partially funded by project grants from the Innovation Fund Denmark (PASCAL-MID, 8056-00010A), Novo Nordisk Foundation (NNF22OC0080684), and Independent Research Fund Denmark (4285-00102B). Furthermore, funding for the Bigfoot Cell Sorter was provided by the Carlsberg Foundation (personal grant to J.G.M.; ID CF21-0363).

## Data availability
The data underlying this article are available within the article and in its online supplementary material. Amplicons generated for editing analysis through CRISPResso2 are uploaded to Gene Expression Omnibus, excluding samples protected by the General Data Protection Regulation. GEO accession ID: GSE283171. Original plasmids are available upon request from the corresponding author and will be made available through Addgene.