445elsevierwtDNA RepairDNA Repair (Amst)PMC1208617512086175120861754031954610.1016/j.dnarep.2025.103840Weaponizing CRISPR/Cas9 for selective elimination of cells with an aberrant genome
TavellaSara di LilloAlessia ContiAnastasia IannelliFabio Mancheno-FerrisAlexandra MattiValentina Di MiccoRaffaella FagagnaFabrizio d’Adda di aInstitute of Molecular Genetics (IGM), National Research Institute (CNR), Pavia, ItalybIFOM ETS - The AIRC Institute of Molecular Oncology, Milan, ItalycSan Raffaele Telethon Institute for Gene Therapy (SR-Tiget), IRCCS San Raffaele Hospital, Milan, ItalydUniversity School of Advanced Studies IUSS, Pavia 27100, ItalyeLead Contact, Italy⁎Corresponding authors at: Institute of Molecular Genetics (IGM), National Research Institute (CNR), Pavia, Italy. sara.tavella@ifom.eufabrizio.dadda@ifom.eu
1Present address: ThermoFisher Scientific - mRNA department, Monza, Italy.
2Present address: Division of Hematopathology, IEO European Institute of Oncology IRCCS, Milan, Italy.
3Present address: SG S.r.l., Viguzzolo, Italy.
520251491038401038402052025© 2025 The AuthorsThis is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/).

## Abstract
The CRISPR/Cas9 technology is a powerful and versatile tool to disrupt genes’ functions by introducing sequence-specific DNA double-strand breaks (DSBs). Here, we repurpose this technology to eradicate aberrant cells by specifically targeting silent and non-functional genomic sequences present only in target cells to be eliminated. Indeed, an intrinsic challenge of most current therapies against cancer and viral infections is the non-specific toxicity that they can induce in normal tissues because of their impact on important cellular mechanisms shared, to different extents, between unhealthy and healthy cells. The CRISPR/Cas9 technology has potential to overcome this limitation; however, so far effectiveness of these approaches was made dependent on the targeting and inactivation of a functional gene product. Here, we generate proof-of-principle evidence by engineering HeLa and RKO cells with a promoterless Green Fluorescent Protein (GFP) construct. The integration of this construct simulates either a genomic alteration, as in cancer cells, or a silent proviral genome. Cas9-mediated DSBs in the GFP sequence activate the DNA damage response (DDR), reduce cell viability and increase mortality. This is associated with increased cell size, multinucleation, cGAS-positive micronuclei accumulation and the activation of an inflammatory response. Pharmacological inhibition of the DNA repair factor DNA-PK enhances cell death. These results demonstrate the therapeutic potential of the CRISPR/Cas9 system in eliminating cells with an aberrant genome, regardless of the expression or the function of the target DNA sequence.
Keywords: Precision medicine, CRISPR/Cas9, DNA damage, Cancer, Viral infections

## Highlights
•Cas9 can be repurposed to eradicate aberrant cells by inducing sequence-specific DSBs.
•Cas9 can specifically target DNA regions absent in healthy cells, regardless of their expression or function.
•Cas9-induced DSBs cause DDR, inflammation, reduced viability and increased mortality.
•Pharmacological inhibition of the DNA repair factor DNA-PK enhances cell death.

statusreleaseddisplay-pdfnois-in-collection-domainyesis-olfnois-manuscriptnois-preprintnois-journal-matternois-scannednois-retractednoReceived 2025 Jan 28; Revised 2025 Mar 27; Accepted 2025 Apr 23.

1.

## Introduction
DNA damaging agents, such as radiation and chemotherapy, are the most frequent treatments used to induce extensive DNA damage and impair proliferation of cancer cells. A strategy to enhance the efficacy of these therapies is their combination with inhibitors of DNA repair, often exploiting DNA repair deficiencies in tumors . Inevitably, these treatments can cause collateral DNA damage also in normal tissues, with consequent undesirable side effects . For this reason, the identification of cancer-specific genomic abnormalities and their targeting with sequence-specific DNA damaging agents could selectively eliminate cells bearing these DNA alterations, while sparing normal cells lacking the target DNA. Sequence-specific DNA damaging agents could also represent the first approach able to eradicate latent infections. Indeed, current antiviral therapies only limit viral replication; for this reason, a cell harbouring a silent integrated provirus that does not express any viral gene product presently cannot be effectively targeted.
The CRISPR/Cas9 technology, initially discovered in bacteria as an adaptive immune defense system, has rapidly been adopted in several studies for its simplicity and efficiency and it is currently employed for different purposes, mainly related to genome editing . Indeed, one of its major applications is to disrupt or correct genes for functional studies. This paved the way for the initiation of clinical trials aimed at treating genetic disorders as well as common diseases such as cancers and viral infections , leading to the recent first FDA-approved CRISPR/Cas9-based gene therapy . The most common genome editor is the endonuclease Cas9 that, thanks to a single guide RNA (sgRNA), targets a complementary DNA sequence and introduces a DNA double-strand break (DSB). The ribonucleoprotein (RNP) complex formed by the Cas9 protein and the RNA guide has emerged as the best option to act in vivo due to its rapid mechanism of action, its fast degradation and thus reduced off-target effects , , . However, the generation of Cas9-induced DSBs elicits the DNA damage response (DDR), a prompt cellular reaction aimed at sensing the lesion, signal its presence and promote its repair . The detection of a DSB activates apical kinases, leading to the phosphorylation of several protein targets, including the serine 139 of the histone variant H2AX (γH2AX), that promotes the recruitment of additional DDR proteins such as the p53-binding protein 1 (53BP1), and the formation of cytologically-detectable nuclear foci . This cascade of events results in a transient cell-cycle arrest to prevent the propagation of the damaged genome to daughter cells and allow its repair. The repair pathways involved are mainly two: homology directed repair (HDR) and non-homologous end joining (NHEJ) . HDR occurs only in the S and G2 phases of cell cycle, it requires a homologous chromosome as template for repair and it is error-free , . In mammals, DNA ends are sensed by meiotic recombination 11 (MRE11), RAD50 and Nijmegen breakage syndrome 1 (NBS1) proteins forming the MRN complex. Upon binding, MRN starts resecting DNA ends in combination with CtIP, BRCA1 and EXO1 . Replication protein A (RPA) recognizes single-stranded DNA and protects DNA integrity . RPA is then removed by the recombinase RAD51 that, together with BRCA2-PALB2 and BRCA1, promotes strand invasion into the homologous DNA region forming a displacement loop (D-loop) . The resulting intermediate is then resolved through different mechanisms, ultimately finalizing DSB repair . NHEJ, instead, promotes the re-ligation of DNA ends. Within this pathway, the canonical NHEJ (c-NHEJ) is the main pathway involved in the repair of DSBs in mammalian cells and it works in all the phases of the cell cycle; however, it is prone to mutations . DNA ends are bound by Ku70/Ku80 heterodimer that recruits the DNA-dependent protein kinase catalytic subunit (DNA-PKcs) that phosphorylates itself and other targets, including Artemis, to process DNA ends and prepare them for ligation. This step is mediated by DNA ligase IV in collaboration with X-ray repair cross-complementing protein 4 (XRCC4) . Alternative end joining (alt-EJ), also known as microhomology-mediated end joining (MMEJ), requires short homologous sequences present at the broken DNA ends and depends on a different subset of proteins, including DNA ligase III and DNA polymerase θ
 .
As soon as the lesion is repaired, the cell cycle is restored. On the contrary, unrepaired DNA damage leads to persistent DDR activation that can trigger programmed cell death (apoptosis) or cell-cycle arrest. This cell-cycle arrest then can lead to cellular senescence . DNA damage can also induce the formation of micronuclei, cytoplasmic chromatin fragments surrounded by a nuclear envelope-like structure , . Defects in their envelope integrity cause the activation of the cGAS-STING pathway, when the DNA is recognized by the cyclic GMP-AMP synthase (cGAS) which catalyzes the production of the second messenger cyclic GMP-AMP (cGAMP) which in turn activates the stimulator of interferon genes (STING). This ultimately leads to the expression of inflammatory cytokines , , , secreted factors modulating the immune and inflammatory responses, and chemokines, leukocytes-attracting cytokines . In addition, cGAS can also be activated by chromatin bridges, the result of fused chromosomes that fail to segregate .
It has been reported that Cas9-mediated DSBs trigger apoptosis. This concern emerged because of false positive results generated in loss-of-function screenings in various cancer cell lines when DSBs were introduced by Cas9 in amplified regions of the genome , , . While this observation has important implications to interpret CRISPR/Cas9 screens results, it also highlights the toxic impact that Cas9-induced DSBs have on cell viability.
For this reason, we tested the use of Cas9 to generate sequence-specific DSBs selectively in cells carrying genomic abnormalities, while sparing normal cells that lack the target DNA sequence. Potential uses include targeting cancer-specific chromosomal rearrangements and cells infected with an integrated, even silent, proviral genome. Here we show that Cas9-mediated DSBs trigger DDR and cause cell death in a sequence-specific manner in a cell system harbouring a non-functional DNA target sequence. To enhance efficacy by reducing DNA repair capability of targeted cells and thus augmenting cells death, we combined the effects of Cas9-induced DNA damage with inhibition of DNA repair through c-NHEJ by the use of NU7441, an inhibitor of DNA-PK (DNA-PKi) . Altogether, these results support the potential of “weaponizing” the CRISPR-Cas9 technology as a DNA damaging agent that works specifically in cells with an aberrant genome while sparing normal cells, including cases in which the target DNA sequence is not actively expressed or functional.

2.

## Results
2.1.

## Generation of an experimental cell model system to study the consequences of Cas9-induced DSBs
To investigate the potential use of Cas9 as a sequence-specific DNA damaging agent, we created an experimental cell system based on a silent Green Fluorescent Protein (GFP) construct. Specifically, we took advantage of the pLenti-CMV-MCS-GFP-SV-puro lentiviral vector expressing the GFP protein. We removed the enhancer and transcriptional promoter regions present upstream of the GFP gene within the lentiviral vector by an inverse PCR using two divergent primers to generate a construct that does not detectably express the GFP. The obtained pLenti-CMV-MCS-GFP-SV-puro Δpromoter lentiviral vector was used to infect HeLa, a cervical carcinoma cell line, and RKO, a colon carcinoma cell line. Infected cells were selected by puromycin resistance to establish two stable cell lines, hereafter named HeLa and RKO GFP cells, harbouring the GFP sequence integrated in their genome ( ). These two cell lines mimic a system with a genomic alteration absent in the parental cell lines (indicated as HeLa and RKO WT cells). Real time-quantitative PCR (RT-qPCR) on genomic DNA extracted by these cell lines indicated that ∼ 12 copies of the pLenti-CMV-MCS-GFP-SV-puro Δpromoter vector are integrated per cell ( A). Additional PCR analyses confirmed the structural integrity of the integrated construct as determined by the presence of the GFP sequence and the absence of the promoter region in HeLa GFP cells compared to a HeLa cell line carrying the GFP gene with a functional promoter used as a positive control ( B).
 To confirm that the insertion of the GFP sequence in the genome of HeLa and RKO cells did not alter their sensitivity to DNA damage compared to their parental counterparts, we irradiated HeLa WT, HeLa GFP, RKO WT and RKO GFP cell lines to induce random DNA damage and we monitored their survival by the IncuCyte® Live-Cell Analysis System, a live-cell imaging and analysis system that enables visualization and measurement of cells viability over time. Cells numbers were counted by the Incucyte Cell-By-Cell Analysis Software in combination with the Incucyte Cytotox Dye, a fluorescent reagent that allows real time quantification of cell death by labeling cells with compromised membrane integrity. We observed a significant reduction in the number of HeLa and RKO alive cells in the irradiated conditions (IR) compared to the not irradiated ones (NI, ), that correlated with an increased percentage of dead cells, as measured by the Cytotox Dye ( ). Cells viability and death rates were independent of the presence of the integrated GFP sequence, demonstrating that WT and GFP cells respond similarly to DNA damage induction.
Then, we designed a RNA guide for the Cas9 endonuclease targeting the GFP sequence and tested its efficiency in inducing a DSB in the desired DNA region by direct in situ breaks labeling, enrichment on streptavidin and next-generation sequencing technique (BLESS) . Through lentiviral transduction we delivered into HeLa GFP cells Cas9 with either the GFP guide or a scramble guide as a negative control not recognizing any sequence into the human genome. Using two sets of primers flanking the DSB site to amplify BLESS-enriched DNA ( ), we confirmed DSB induction in the target GFP region selectively when cells were treated with the GFP guide ( C). To further validate DSB induction, we monitored by immunofluorescence (IF) the activation of the DDR in WT and GFP cells transduced with the vector expressing the Cas9 together with either the scramble or the GFP guide by scoring for the formation of γH2AX and 53BP1 foci ( D). While all the conditions tested were expressing the Cas9 protein, increased levels of DDR activation above the background were observed only in HeLa GFP cells treated with the GFP guide ( E). Similar findings were obtained in RKO cells ( ).
In summary, these results confirm the generation of a suitable set of two isogenic cells lines to study the impact of sequence-specific DSBs induction by Cas9.

2.2.

## DSBs induced by Cas9 activate an inflammatory response
While studying DDR activation following Cas9-mediated DSBs induction, we observed an increase in micronuclei formation as detected by DAPI staining in both HeLa ( A,B) and RKO GFP cells ( ) upon transduction with the Cas9 vector expressing the GFP guide, compared to negative controls. A sizeable fraction of these micronuclei stained positive for cGAS ( A,C), suggesting the engagement of the cGAS/STING pathway. In addition to micronuclei, chromatin bridges, abnormal structures generated upon chromosomes segregation failure, were preferentially observed in GFP cells when treated with the GFP guide, possibly exacerbating cGAS activation, consistent with previous reports ( D,E).
 Since the localization of cGAS to micronuclei induced by DNA damage can trigger an inflammatory response , we investigated transcriptional alterations in HeLa GFP cells by RNA-sequencing (RNA-seq; ). By comparing the gene expression profiles of cells transduced with Cas9 together with either the GFP or the scramble guide, we observed the deregulation in the expression of a set of 41 genes ( ,D). This effect was modest at the level of individual genes, but upon pathway analysis, we observed a significant upregulation of several inflammatory pathways such as the inflammatory_response, IL6_JAK_STAT3_signaling and interferon_gamma_response, and the downregulation of DNA_repair and G2M_checkpoint pathways ( F;
 ).
RT-qPCR experiments confirmed the induction of proinflammatory cytokines and chemokines in GFP cells treated with the GFP guide, indicating increased expression of IL6, IL1β and CXCL10 compared to cells treated with the scramble guide ( G). In addition, cells treated with the GFP guide showed a trend toward increased levels of TNF and IL8 mRNAs ( ).
Overall, these results indicate that DNA damage induced by Cas9 causes the activation of an inflammatory response through the formation of micronuclei and chromatin bridges, with consequent engagement of the cGAS-STING pathway.

2.3.

## DSBs induced by Cas9 kill target cells
We next investigated if DNA damage induced by Cas9 in the GFP sequence could selectively kill HeLa and RKO GFP cells, while sparing WT cells lacking the target sequence. We thus transduced HeLa GFP cells with Cas9 bearing either the scramble or the GFP guide; in parallel, we performed the same experiment in WT cells to confirm the absence of potential Cas9 off-targets . We then monitored cell proliferation and death over-time by Incucyte with the Cytotox Dye. After Cas9 transduction, we observed a reduction in the number of viable HeLa GFP cells and a parallel increase of cell death when treated with Cas9 carrying the GFP guide, compared to negative controls ( A,B). WT cells viability was not significantly affected by these treatments, indicating the specificity of Cas9 in inducing DSBs and consequent cell death only in GFP cells expressing Cas9 carrying the GFP guide ( A,B). These results were recapitulated in the RKO cell system: only RKO GFP cells treated with Cas9 carrying the GFP guide showed decreased viability ( ) and increased mortality ( ), compared to negative controls, confirming the specificity of the treatment.
 To support these results and explore the long-term consequences of Cas9-induced DSBs on viability of GFP cells, we performed a colony formation assay, which allows the study of cell survival based on the capability of a single cell to generate a colony. We observed a significant reduction in clonogenic survival of GFP cells following the treatment with Cas9 carrying the GFP guide, compared to the scramble conditions ( C,D;
 ), confirming the previous set of results.
While investigating the consequences of Cas9-induced DSBs, we also noticed a general increase in HeLa GFP cell size after the treatment with Cas9 bearing the GFP guide. By taking advantage of the Incucyte Cell-By-Cell Analysis Software, we identified and counted cells with an area either smaller or bigger than 1000 μm2
 for each condition. These analyses showed that HeLa GFP cells were significantly bigger upon DSBs generation, compared to the scramble condition ( E,F). This phenomenon can be partially explained by the observation that a percentage of GFP cells presents more than one nucleus per cell when treated with the GFP guide ( G,H;
 ). This could be a consequence of mitotic errors arising from cell-cycle progression in the presence of unrepaired DNA damage , consistent with the downregulation of DNA_repair and G2M_checkpoint pathways observed in RNA-seq data ( F). The premature entrance of irremediably damaged cells in mitosis is known to trigger morphological alterations, such as micronuclei and multinucleation, leading to the formation of giant, polyploid cells , .
Overall, these results generated in two distinct cancer cell lines demonstrate that Cas9-mediated DSBs trigger multinucleation and selectively kill target cells, with visible effects days and weeks after Cas9 treatment.

2.4.

## Pharmacological DNA repair inhibition enhances DSBs-induced cell death
Since the NHEJ pathway is the main DSB repair mechanism, we tested the impact of its inhibition by the use of NU7441, an inhibitor of DNA-PK (DNA-PKi) , a factor that plays a central role in c-NHEJ. This to increase the lethality of Cas9-induced DSBs in GFP cells and investigate the effects of combining sequence-specific DNA damage with the inhibition of its repair. As a proof-of-concept, we irradiated HeLa WT and GFP cells and treated them with either DNA-PKi or its vehicle (DMSO) as control. WT cells were treated in parallel with GFP cells to verify their equal sensitivity. The study of cell survival monitored by Incucyte with its Cytotox Dye revealed that, as expected, cells were more sensitive to DNA-PK inhibition when irradiated, independently from the presence of the GFP sequence, confirming that DSB induction and repair inhibition reduce cell viability ( ) and increase mortality ( ). Similar results were observed in RKO WT and GFP cells ( ).
We next tested the impact of DNA-PK inhibition upon sequence-specific DSB generation by Cas9. We observed that in WT cells, the combination of DNA-PKi and Cas9 treatments did not or only slightly increased DDR markers, as determined by the quantification of γH2AX and 53BP1 foci ( ). Differently, in GFP cells, DNA-PK inhibition in combination with Cas9-induced DSBs further increases γH2AX and 53BP1 foci formation, compared not only to the undamaged conditions but also to GFP cells treated only with the Cas9 expressing the GFP guide ( A,B).
 We then evaluated the consequences of DNA-PK inhibition in the presence of Cas9 in both HeLa WT and GFP cells in terms of cell viability and mortality in Incucyte. The combination of the two treatments only slightly reduced proliferation of HeLa WT cells independently from the RNA guide used ( ). Differently, in HeLa GFP cells, DNA-PK inhibition reduced proliferation and increased cell death most strongly when combined with Cas9 targeting the GFP sequence, compared to the other conditions ( C,D).
A similar behavior was observed in RKO cells: the inhibition of DNA-PK had only a minimal impact on cell viability and mortality of WT cells, with comparable effects on cells treated with either the scramble or the GFP guide ( ) while, in RKO GFP cells, DNA-PKi impacted on proliferation and increased mortality when combined with the Cas9 loaded with the GFP guide ( E,F).
Taken together, these results indicate that Cas9 can selectively kill cells harbouring an exogenous DNA sequence integrated in their genome by introducing sequence-specific DSBs. Moreover, the impact of Cas9 can be significantly enhanced by pharmacologically inhibiting the repair of the damage generated by the nuclease through the use of DNA-PK inhibitors.

2.5.

## A Cas9 RNP complex is equally effective in killing target cells
Among the methods available to deliver Cas9 to target cells, the RNP-based approach is the one preferred for in vivo purposes, due to its rapid mechanism of action and transient nature, representing a therapeutically-relevant alternative to lentiviral delivery. For this reason, we tested whether our results could be reproduced by delivering a pre-assembled ribonucleoprotein (RNP) complex made of Cas9 and a guide RNA. We delivered Cas9 loaded with either the scramble guide or the GFP guide by cell electroporation and evaluated DNA damage generation and DDR activation by IF. Since electroporation can be genotoxic causing a non-specific slight increase of γH2AX foci, we measured 53BP1 foci formation and we observed their accumulation in HeLa and RKO GFP cells when treated with the RNP and the GFP guide ( A,B;
 ). Also in this setting, we observed the induction of a significant amount of micronuclei and chromatin bridges upon DNA damage generation by Cas9 in GFP cells ( C–F;
 ). Finally, when we evaluated the long-term effects of RNP-induced DSBs on both HeLa and RKO GFP cells, we observed a significant reduction in clonogenic survival of these cells upon treatment with Cas9 and the GFP guide ( G,H;
 ).
 Overall, these findings indicate that RNP-based approaches effectively confirm and recapitulate the effects of DSBs generated by Cas9 when transduced, making this a valid alternative for potential therapeutic applications.

3.

## Discussion
The CRISPR/Cas9 technology has been widely exploited in several fields, including cancer research. In addition to its use as a tool to explore mechanisms that promote tumorigenesis , it has also been proposed as a way to eliminate cancer cells by targeting single nucleotide variants, small insertion-deletion mutations, intronic regions or gene amplifications , , , .
However, while the strategies just mentioned highlighted the ability of the CRISPR/Cas9 approach to target genomic sites with unprecedented precision, they also raise some concerns. Specifically, the targeted DNA sequences are either partially or entirely shared between cancer and healthy cells, potentially leading to DSBs generation also in the genome of normal cells, with consequent undesired side effects. This risk is exacerbated by the tolerance of the RNA guide to bind DNA regions with few mismatches . In addition, these approaches mainly target functional DNA sequences, such as introns and amplified genes, without investigating whether Cas9-induced toxicity stemmed from DSBs generation or gene function disruption.
Other applications of the CRISPR/Cas9 system include the treatment of viral infections. In the last years, Cas9 has been used to impede the expression of factors essential for viral replication and propagation and to disrupt or mutate host genes expressing the receptors required for the viral entry . Moreover, strategies to excise proviral DNA from infected cells have been proposed for HIV treatment . Specifically, RNA guides were designed to target and cut within the long terminal repeats (LTRs) and the Gag gene to excise large portions of the HIV genome with the aim of eliminating multiple viral genes and allowing the survival of infected cells. However, this approach rarely results in the complete removal of the viral genome, which may have long-term consequences on the fitness of surviving cells. In addition, it has been shown that while the CRISPR/Cas9 technology can effectively target the HIV proviral genome, the NHEJ repair process can generate viral escape variants . These variants, if mutations occur in the viral essential genes targeted by Cas9, could potentially cause unexpected consequences. Considering all this, a safer strategy to eradicate latent reservoirs would be to specifically target a DNA region that is neither expressed, functional, nor regulatory. Moreover, the approach here proposed, which combines Cas9-induced DSBs and DNA-PK inhibition, effectively reduces the risks of generating escape mutants by selectively eliminating infected cells.
This would be well suited for all viruses that integrate into the genome of host cells, including both DNA viruses and RNA viruses with a dsDNA intermediate that can integrate as a provirus. Specifically, DNA viruses such as Hepatitis B virus, which integrates in the host genome and replicate in the liver, appear particularly indicated to be targeted by the CRISPR/Cas9 technology due to the accessibility of this organ by different drug delivery methods.
Indeed, the in vivo delivery of the CRISPR/Cas9 components remains a challenge. Currently, there are two main delivery strategies: viral and non-viral. Among viral-based methods, the most commonly used vectors are adeno-associated viruses (AAVs), adenoviruses (AVs) and lentiviruses (LVs). AAVs have already been approved for some clinical trials due to their non-pathogenic features. However, although rarely, they can integrate in the host genome . Another limitation of an AAVs approach is their limited cargo capacity, due to their reduced size . AV vectors, in contrast, offer a higher packaging capacity and do not integrate into the host genome. However, they are highly immunogenic . LV vectors can carry larger cargos and have been engineered to minimize the production of viable viral particles in the host cells and to activate the host immune system. However, they integrate into the host genome. For this reason, nonintegrating LVs vectors have been developed . Despite these advancements, viral vectors can still elicit a host immune response and cause off-target effects due to the prolonged expression of Cas9 and potential mutagenesis from random vector insertion. As a result, chemical delivery methods have emerged as safer and more versatile alternatives . Examples include lipid and lipid-derived nanoparticles (LNPs), polymer-based nanoparticles, cell-penetrating peptides and inorganic nanoparticles such as gold-based nanoparticles . Among these, LNPs have been extensively studied for their efficiency and safety. Clinical trials have demonstrated their potential, leading to the approval of LNP-based therapeutics by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) .
It has been reported that CRISPR/Cas9 loss-of-function screens give false positive results when highly amplified genes are targeted by Cas9 , with two independent groups reporting a positive correlation between gene copy number and DNA damage-induced cell death. The authors hypothesized that targeting amplified regions could impact on cell proliferation because of the generation of multiple DSBs rather than gene function disruption , . This unmeant consequence indicates the potential of using the CRISPR/Cas9 technology to inflict sequence-specific DNA damage to eliminate cells carrying an aberrant genome, while sparing normal cells that lack the target DNA sequence of interest.
Here we propose an approach that allows to target any sequence in a cancer or viral genome, regardless of whether it is functional or not. In this use, Cas9 is not employed to disrupt the expression of a gene product which is necessary for the survival of the malignant cell, but it is the DSB induction per se that causes cell death. As proof-of-concept, we developed cell models by integrating a non-essential and not actively transcribed GFP sequence to simulate cells bearing an aberrant genome. Since GFP was delivered by a lentiviral vector, this system fittingly simulate infected cells carrying a silent integrated proviral genome. This infection results in the generation of cell pools containing approximately 12 copies of the GFP construct integrated per cell, reflecting better the physiological heterogeneity observed in infected cells and in cancer than a clonal population. Treatment with Cas9 could potentially induce ∼ 24 DSBs, a number sufficient to eliminate target cells, in line with previous reports .
We experimentally observed that Cas9-mediated DSB induction within the GFP sequence activates DDR and elicits an inflammatory response. Previous studies reported that cytokines and chemokines, once released, can attract immune cells that eliminate the inflamed cells , . Here we show increased expression of proinflammatory cytokines and chemokines, such as IL6, IL1β and CXCL10, in GFP cells treated with the GFP guide, suggesting a link between Cas9-induced DNA damage and inflammation, mediated by the generation of micronuclei and chromatin bridges, in agreement with previous reports , . This process activates the cGAS/STING pathway, triggering an inflammatory response that could facilitate the recruitment of immune cells at sites of inflammation promoting the clearance of malignant cells.
Most importantly, we observed that Cas9-induced DSBs selectively kill cells carrying the target DNA. The morphological alterations that these cells display, such as micronuclei, chromatin bridges and multinucleation, are consistent with the features of mitotic catastrophe (MC), a type of cell death that occurs when cells enter mitosis before completing DNA repair , . In this sense, Cas9-induced cell death seems to recapitulate the effects observed by other DNA damaging agents: ionizing radiation and radiotherapy, for example, can lead to the formation of multinucleated giant cells and cause MC in case of dysregulated mitosis , , . Although it has been reported that cells with a functional p53 protein are counter-selected upon editing with Cas9 , and transient p53 inactivation increases proliferation and precise genome editing efficiency of hematopoietic stem cells without impacting on genome stability , p53 is normally expressed in RKO cells and it is undetectable in HeLa cells , suggesting that the here reported Cas9-induced cell death is independent of the p53 status.
We also show that the use of a DNA repair inhibitor amplifies the toxicity of Cas9-induced DSBs. Since the main pathway involved for repair of DSBs inflicted by Cas9 is the NHEJ , we used a pharmacological inhibitor of DNA-PK, a key factor in this pathway . It has already been demonstrated that DNA-PK inhibition sensitizes cancer cells to DNA damaging agents and thus similar inhibitors are in clinical trials for the treatment of advanced solid tumors , . In addition, the combination of Cas9 with DNA-PK inhibition has been already employed to increase the rates of HDR-mediated repair of Cas9-induced DSBs to facilitate the incorporation of a desired modification in the target genome , thus validating this combined use. Here, instead, we coupled the generation of sequence-specific DSBs with DNA-PK inhibition to selectively kill HeLa and RKO GFP cells only.
Excitingly, FDA has recently approved two Cas9-based treatments for sickle cell disease, where patients’ hematopoietic stem cells are isolated, edited ex vivo and transplanted back into patients (https://www.fda.gov/news-events/press-announcements/fda-approves-first-gene-therapies-treat-patients-sickle-cell-disease). In addition, several clinical trials are now registered to test the efficacy and safety of in vivo delivery of CRISPR/Cas9 . Examples include the treatment of Transthyretin (TTR) Amyloidosis, where Cas9 mRNA and sgRNA targeting TTR are delivered in the liver by systemic administration of lipid nanoparticles (LNP) , and treatment of Leber congenital amaurosis type 10 (LCA10), where an adeno-associated viral vector carrying Cas9 and guide RNAs is injected into patients’ eyes , . Thanks to the progress made in administering Cas9 in vivo, it is possible that our approach will be soon tested to treat patients affected by cancer or infectious diseases.
Altogether, our results provide a proof-of-concept of the potential of the CRISPR/Cas9 system as a sequence-specific DNA damaging agent to eliminate aberrant cells by targeting genomic regions that may not be expressed or functional. This opens the possibility to develop a precision therapy approach for highly personalized treatments.

4.

## Limitations of the study
While CRISPR-based technologies hold great promise, the long-term effects of the treatment are complex and not entirely predictable, raising concerns about unintended consequences. One potential risk is that cutting within a target DNA sequence could cause genomic instability, potentially leading to resistance and more aggressive forms of cancer, or perhaps provirus reactivation. To mitigate these risks, combinatory strategies may be safer and more effective. In our study, we propose the combination of sequence-specific DSBs generation with the inhibition of their repair to prevent survival of resistant cells. However, if some cells escape the treatment, investigating the mechanisms involved and exploring alternative combinatory strategies would be crucial.
A feasible approach to enhance Cas9-induced DNA damage is the multiplexed targeting of the DNA region of interest, leading to multiple DSBs which are more challenging for cells to repair and survive. Moreover, in the case of provirus reactivation, combining Cas9-induced DNA damage with antiretroviral therapies should be considered to prevent viral spreading.
In addition, the identification and development of more efficient and precise Cas9 variants could help in the optimization of more targeted strategies.

5.

## Methods
5.1.

## Cell line generation
HeLa and RKO cells were infected with the pLenti-CMV-MCS-GFP-SV-puro plasmid (#73582, Addgene) , previously depleted of the promoter and enhancer regions by inverse PCR using two divergent primers ( ), to generate HeLa and RKO GFP stable cell lines that do not express the GFP protein. The number of GFP construct integrations was compared to the actin gene, assumed to be present in two copies per cell (primers sequences are listed in ). The number of GFP copies was calculated according to the equation:
 N° of integrations = 2(Ct actin – Ct GFP)
HeLa WT and GFP cells were grown under standard tissue culture conditions (37 °C, 5 % CO2) in DMEM, supplemented with 10 % FBS, 2 mM L-Glutamine and 1 % Penicillin/Streptomycin. RKO WT and RKO GFP cells were grown under standard tissue culture conditions (37 °C, 5 % CO2) in MEM, supplemented with 10 % FBS, 2 mM L-Glutamine, 0.1 mM NEAA, 1 mM NaPyr and 1 % Penicillin/Streptomycin.
All cell lines were tested mycoplasma negative by two independent tests: 1) PCR-based detection of mycoplasma DNA ; 2) biochemical test to determine the presence of mycoplasma enzymes (Lonza LT07-418).

5.2.

## Ionizing radiation (IR)
Ionizing radiation (1 Gy) was generated by a high-voltage X-rays generator tube (Faxitron X-Ray Corporation).

5.3.

## CRISPR/Cas9 plasmid preparation
The lentiCRISPRv2-puro lentiviral vector (#98290, Addgene) that contains the humanized Streptococcus pyogenes (hSpCas9) and the sgRNA on the same backbone was used to deliver Cas9 to target cells. The sgRNA against the GFP sequence was designed by using different CRISPR design tools to compare efficiency scores and possible off-targets. The sequence for the scramble sgRNA used as a negative control was obtained from Liao et al. . Sequences are listed in . The two sgRNAs were individually cloned in the Cas9 lentiviral plasmid; to insert the sgRNA of interest in the lentiviral vector, the Addgene cloning protocol was followed. Stbl3 recombination-deficient bacteria (Invitrogen C7373-03) were transformed with the final plasmids, according to the manufacturer’s instructions.

5.4.

## Lentiviral infection protocol
To produce the lentiviral particles to transduce the GFP or the CRISPR/Cas9 constructs in HeLa and RKO cells, HEK293T cells were transfected with either pLenti-CMV-MCS-GFP-SV-puro Δpromoter or lentiCRISPRv2-puro vectors together with the plasmids coding for the lentiviral packaging proteins following the calcium phosphate transfection method .
Before infecting target cells, viral titer was calculated using the Lenti-X GoStix Plus (Takara, Cat#631281). After infection, cells were collected at different time points.

5.5.

## Direct in situ breaks labeling, enrichment on streptavidin and next-generation sequencing (BLESS)
The BLESS technique was performed to evaluate the generation of DSBs in the GFP sequence upon Cas9 treatment, accordingly to Crosetto et al. , with minor modifications. Samples were analyzed by quantitative PCR (BLESS-qPCR). BLESS qPCR primers were designed in the 300 bp surroundings of the site of interest ( ). qPCR with the selected primers was performed on the final BLESS products and on the genomic input. The enrichment was expressed as % of input:
% of input = (BP/IN) × 100
BP = 2-Ct BLESS Products, obtained after the PCR step
IN = 2-Ct Input

5.6.

## Incucyte experiments
To study viability and mortality of HeLa and RKO cells after the different treatments described, cells were plated in 6 multiwell plates. DNA damage was generated 24 h after (either 1 Gy irradiation or Cas9 infection); one day later cells were plated into 96 multiwell plates to follow cell proliferation in Incucyte. To count dying cells, Incucyte Cytotox Dye (Sartorius #4633; 400x final concentration) was added to the medium. Cells behavior was monitored either in Incucyte S3 or in Incucyte SX5 for the indicated number of days; the relative number of alive cells normalized on day 0 and the percentage of dead cells was obtained by using the IncuCyte® Live-Cell Analysis System, that allows to count cells based on their size, morphology and fluorescence.
For all the experiments, the DNA-PK inhibitor NU7441 (Selleckchem S2638) was dissolved in 100 % DMSO and added to the growth medium at the final concentration of 1 µM.
More in details, the combinatory effects of DNA damage generation and inhibition of its repair in HeLa and RKO cells was validated by pre-treating cells with either DMSO or NU7441 and exposing them to an acute dose of radiation (1 Gy) one hour later. 24 h after DNA damage induction, cells were plated in a 96 well plate, NU7441 (1uM final concentration) was refreshed in the culture medium and cell behavior started to be monitored in Incucyte.
In the lentiviral setting, cells were plated and the day after all conditions were infected with a fresh lentivirus carrying either Cas9 with the scramble guide or Cas9 with the GFP guide. Cells were then treated with either DMSO or NU7441 three days after Cas9 delivery to avoid any interference with the integration of the lentivirus carrying the endonuclease into the genome of target cells.

5.7.

## Immunofluorescence (IF)
IF experiments were carried out in cultured cells as previously described . Images were acquired using either the widefield Olympus Upright Olympus AX70 or the widefield Olympus Upright BX51 and the MetaVue software. Comparative immunofluorescence analyses were performed in parallel with identical acquisition parameters. CellProfiler 3.1.9 or ImageJ were used to analyse images.

5.8.

## Antibodies
Anti-γH2AX (rabbit monoclonal, clone 20E3, Cell Signaling #9718, 1:1000); anti-53BP1 (goat polyclonal, Bethyl A303-906A, 1:1000); anti-CRISPR/Cas9 (mouse monoclonal, clone 7A9–3A3, Sigma-Aldirch ab191468, 1:1000); anti-cGAS (rabbit monoclonal, clone D1D3G, Cell Signaling 15102, 1:200) were used as primary antibodies. Donkey anti-mouse Alexa 488 IgG (Life Technologies, 1:500, excitation wavelength 495 nm, emission wavelength 519 nm); donkey anti-rabbit Cy3 IgG (Jackson Immuno Research, 1:500, excitation wavelength 550 nm, emission wavelength 570 nm), donkey anti-goat Alexa 647 IgG (Life Technologies, 1:500, excitation wavelength 650 nm, emission wavelength 665 nm) were used as secondary antibodies.

5.9.

## Nucleic acids extraction, standard RT-qPCR and RNA-seq
Maxwell® RSC simplyRNA Tissue Kit (Promega) was used to isolate total RNA from cells, according to the manufacturer’s instructions. DNase I (Qiagen) treatment was performed to remove any potential residual contamination of genomic DNA. Purified total RNA was reverse-transcribed using the SuperScript VILO Reverse Transcriptase (Invitrogen) with random primers. Roche SYBR Green-based RT–qPCR experiments were performed on either Roche LightCycler 480 or Roche LightCycler 96 using RPLP0 control gene for normalization. Each reaction was performed in technical triplicate (primer sequences are listed in ).
For RNA-seq, RNA from HeLa GFP cells was quantified with Qubit fluorimeter and checked for integrity on Agilent Bioanalyzer 2100; the library was then prepared with the Illumina stranded mRNA prep Ligation kit for polyA transcripts and cells treated with Cas9 carrying either the scramble or the GFP guide were sequenced with the GU_NextSeq550 sequencer, following the manufacturer’s instructions. Taking advantage of the nf-core/rnaseq pipeline , reads were aligned to the hg38 assembly human reference genome with the STAR aligner and quantified with Salmon . Differential gene expression analysis was performed using the Bioconductor package DESeq2 and tests for differential expression exploiting a negative binomial distribution-based model.
Pre-ranked gene set enrichment analysis (GSEA) for evaluating pathway enrichment in transcriptional data was carried out with the Bioconductor package fgsea and clusterProfiler , using the Hallmarks gene set available from the GSEA Molecular Signatures Database (https://www.gsea-msigdb.org/gsea/msigdb/genesets.jsp?collections). The gglplot2 package was used to do the volcano plot, the heatmaps were done with complexHeatmap and enrichplot packages.
DNeasy Blood and Tissue Kit (Qiagen) was used to extract DNA from cells, according to the manufacturer’s instructions. Roche SYBR Green-based RT-qPCR experiments were performed on either Roche LightCycler 480 or Roche LightCycler 96. Each reaction was performed in technical triplicate (primer sequences are listed in ).

5.10.

## Colony formation assay
For the lentiviral delivery approach, HeLa and RKO GFP cells were plated in 6 multiwell plates and infected the day after with a freshly prepared lentivirus expressing the Cas9 loaded with either the scramble or the GFP guide. Seven days after infection, the condition treated with the scramble guide was counted and 400 HeLa cells were plated, while for the condition treated with the GFP guide the same volume of medium where cells were resuspended was plated, in order to amplify the differences between treatments. For RKO, 200 cells were plated. Colonies were then fixed one week after with ethanol and stained with crystal violet.
For the RNP-based approach, HeLa and RKO GFP cells were electroporated with the RNP complex and immediately plated in 6 multiwell plates (400 HeLa GFP cells; 200 RKO GFP cells). Colonies were then fixed two weeks after with ethanol and stained with crystal violet.

5.11.

## Ribonucleoproteins (RNPs) electroporation
HeLa and RKO cells were electroporated with 25/50 pmol of RNPs using SE Cell Line 4D-Nucleofector X Kit, according to the manufacturer’s instructions. CN-114 and EN-113 programs were selected for HeLa and RKO cells, respectively (V4XC-1032, Lonza). RNPs were assembled by incubating SpCas9 protein (sNLS-SpCas9-sNLS Nuclease, Cat. Num. 9212, Aldevron) with synthetic cr:tracrRNA (Alt-R CRISPR-Cas9 tracrRNA, Cat. Num. 1072534, Integrated DNA Technologies) at 1:1.5 molar ratio for 10–20 minutes at room temperature (RT, 25°C). 0.1 nmol of Alt-R Cas9 Electroporation Enhancer (Alt-R Cas9 Electroporation Enhancer, Cat. Num. 1075916, Integrated DNA Technologies) was added before electroporation according to the manufacturer’s instructions to improve procedure efficiency . Cells were electroporated with either a guide RNA with no predicted activity in the human genome (Alt-R CRISPR-Cas9 Negative Control crRNA #1, Cat. Num. 1072544, Integrated DNA Technologies), as negative control, or a guide RNA with high specificity for the GFP gene (Alt-R CRISPR-Cas9 crRNA, Integrated DNA Technologies, the sequence is listed in ). After electroporation, cells were resuspended in the culture medium and seeded for subsequent analyses.

5.12.

## Statistical analysis
P values were calculated with Prism 9 software. Statistical analyses were performed with either t-test or one-way ANOVA test, as indicated, and represented as the mean ± SEM. Asterisks in the figures indicate p values. *p < 0.05, **p < 0.005, ***p < 0.0005, ****p < 0.0001.
For RNA-seq, p values were calculated as the number of random genes with the same or more extreme normalized enrichment score (NES) value divided by the total number of generated gene sets; then, they were adjusted with a Benjamini-Hochberg correction.

## CRediT authorship contribution statement
Sara Tavella: Writing – review & editing, Writing – original draft, Visualization, Project administration, Investigation, Conceptualization. Alessia di Lillo: Writing – review & editing, Investigation. Anastasia Conti: Writing – review & editing, Resources, Investigation. Fabio Iannelli: Writing – review & editing, Formal analysis. Alexandra Mancheno-Ferris: Writing – review & editing, Visualization. Valentina Matti: Investigation. Raffaella Di Micco: Writing – review & editing, Resources. Fabrizio d'Adda di Fagagna: Writing – review & editing, Writing – original draft, Supervision, Project administration, Funding acquisition, Conceptualization.

## Ethics declarations
R.D.M. and A.C. are inventors of patents on applications of gene editing in HSPCs owned and managed by the San Raffaele Scientific Institute and the Telethon Foundation.
All the other authors declare no competing interests.

## Declaration of Generative AI and AI-assisted technologies in the writing process
During the preparation of this work the authors used ChatGPT in order to improve language and readability. After using this tool, the authors reviewed and edited the content as needed and take full responsibility for the content of the publication.

## Data availability
All raw RNA-seq data are available in the E-MTAB-14730 dataset (ENA database). The study includes three biological replicates for HeLa GFP cells treated with the GFP guide and two biological replicates for cells treated with the scamble guide. The experimental design is described in the Methods section of the manuscript. The list of genes detected by RNA-seq is provided as .
Code, scripts and all other data supporting the findings of this study are available from the corresponding authors upon reasonable request.

## Declaration of Competing Interests
The authors declare the following financial interests/personal relationships which may be considered as potential competing interests: R.D.M. and A.C. are inventors of patents on applications of gene editing in HSPCs owned and managed by the San Raffaele Scientific Institute and the Telethon Foundation. All the other authors declare no competing interests.
If there are other authors, they declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper.

## Acknowledgements
We thank IFOM Cell Culture, Sequencing and Imaging Facilities for technical help; all F.d.A.d.F. lab members for discussions.
F.d.A.d.F.’s laboratory is supported by: ERC Advanced Grant (TELORNAGING - 835103); ERC POC (TELOVACCINE - 101113229); AIRC-IG (30471); AIRC-IG (21762); AIRC 5 × 1000 (21091); Telethon (GMR23T2007); Progetti di Ricerca di Interesse Nazionale (PRIN) (2020CXFL4T); PRIN (2022R7LH5T); AriSLA (DDR&ALS FG_24_2020); POR FESR InterSLA (DSB.AD004.294); Fondazione Regionale per la Ricerca Biomedica (Regione Lombardia) (EJPRD19-206 PROGERIA, GA 825575); Next Generation EU, in the context of the National Recovery and Resilience Plan, Investment PE8 Project Age-It and Investment CN3 National Center for Gene Therapy and Drugs based on RNA Technology; FOE Virus-Memory (FOE 2020, FOE 2021). S.T. was a PhD student within the European School of Molecular Medicine (SEMM), previously supported by an AIRC fellowship (Guglielmina Lucatello e Gino Mazzega, 22458) and now by PNRR-CN3. R.D.M laboratory is supported by the European Research Council (consolidator grant 101003186, ReviveSTEM), and Fondazione Telethon (SR-Tiget Core Grant, Tele21-E5). R.D.M. is a New York Stem Cell Foundation Robertson Investigator. A.C. is an early career scientist in the European Hematology Association and the American Society of Hematology Translational Research Training in Hematology (EHA and ASH TRTH).

## Footnotes
Appendix ASupplementary data associated with this article can be found in the online version at doi:10.1016/j.dnarep.2025.103840.

## Contributor Information
Sara Tavella, Email: sara.tavella@ifom.eu.
Fabrizio d’Adda di Fagagna, Email: fabrizio.dadda@ifom.eu.

Appendix A.

## Supplementary material

Supplementary Table 1. List of genes detected by RNA-seq. The status for each gene is indicated (1: upregulated, − 1: downregulated, 0: unmodified). HELA-G5 represents HeLa GFP cells treated with the GFP guide; HELA-SCR indicates HeLa GFP cells treated with the scramble guide

Fig. S1. (A) Schematic representation of cell lines creation. HeLa and RKO cells were infected with a lentivirus carrying the GFP sequence that integrated in multiple sites. (B) Viability of HeLa and RKO cells 4 days after irradiation. NI = not irradiated cells; IR= irradiated cells. N = 3 independent experiments. One-way ANOVA test. (C) Mortality of HeLa and RKO cells 4 days after irradiation. N = 3 independent experiments. One-way ANOVA test. (D) Schematic representation of the qPCR primers designed for the BLESS protocol. (E) Representative immunofluorescence images showing Cas9, γH2AX and 53BP1 stainings in RKO WT and GFP cells 3 days after Cas9 treatment. Nuclei were stained with DAPI. Original magnification 60x, scale bar 10 μm. (F) Quantitative analyses of γH2AX and 53BP1 foci in RKO WT and GFP cells 3 days after Cas9 treatment. N = 4 independent experiments. At least 60 cells per condition were analysed for each experiment. One-way ANOVA test. Fig. S2. (A) Representative immunofluorescence images showing micronuclei formation in RKO WT and GFP cells 3 days after Cas9 treatment. Nuclei were stained with DAPI. Original magnification 60x, scale bar 10 μm. (B) Quantitative analyses of the percentage of micronuclei positive cells 3 days after Cas9 treatment. N = 3 independent experiments for WT conditions, N = 4 independent experiments for GFP conditions. At least 60 cells per condition were analysed for each experiment. One-way ANOVA test. (C) Volcano plot of DEGs analysis comparing HeLa GFP cells expressing the GFP guide vs HeLa GFP cells expressing the scramble guide. The x-axis represents the log fold-changed (logFC) and the y-axis the negative logarithm (base 10) of the adjusted p value. Each point represents a gene. DEGs (adjusted p value < 0.05) are highlighted, with upregulated genes (logFC > 0) in red and downregulated genes (logFC < 0) in blue. The non differentially expressed genes are represented in gray. (D) Heatmap representing gene expression levels of 41 DEGs (p value adjusted < 0.05). Their logFC are indicated by color intensity (upregulated genes in red: logFC > 0; downregulated genes in blue: logFC < 0). (E) Heatmaps showing gene expression levels of five deregulated hallmark pathways. Gene expression levels are indicated by color intensity (upregulated genes in red: logFC > 0; downregulated genes in blue: logFC < 0). The logFC scale is specific for each pathway. (F) RT-qPCR for TNF and IL8 mRNA expression levels in HeLa GFP cells 3 days after Cas9 treatment. N = 3 independent experiments. Fig. S3. (A) Viability of RKO WT and GFP cells 6 days after Cas9 treatment. N = 3 independent experiments. One-way ANOVA test. (B) Mortality of RKO WT and GFP cells 6 days after Cas9 treatment. N = 3 independent experiments. One-way ANOVA test. (C) A representative experiment showing the difference, in terms of colonies, between RKO GFP cells treated with the scramble guide or the GFP guide. (D) Quantification of the number of colonies in n = 3 independent experiments. t-test. (E) Representative images of multinucleated RKO cells 3 days after the treatment with Cas9 carrying the GFP guide. Nuclei were stained with DAPI. Original magnification 60x, scale bar 10 μm. (F) Quantification of the percentage of cells with > 1 nucleus. N = 4 independent experiments. One-way ANOVA test. Fig. S4. (A) Viability of HeLa WT cells 4 days after irradiation, in combination with either DMSO or DNA-PKi. N = 3 independent experiments. One-way ANOVA test. (B) Viability of HeLa GFP cells 4 days after irradiation, in combination with either DMSO or DNA-PKi. N = 3 independent experiments. One-way ANOVA test. (C) Mortality of HeLa WT cells 4 days after irradiation, in combination with either DMSO or DNA-PKi. N = 3 independent experiments. One-way ANOVA test. (D) Mortality of HeLa GFP cells 4 days after irradiation, in combination with either DMSO or DNA-PKi. N = 3 independent experiments. One-way ANOVA test. (E) Viability of RKO WT cells 4 days after irradiation, in combination with either DMSO or DNA- PKi. N = 4 independent experiments. One-way ANOVA test. (F) Viability of RKO GFP cells 4 days after irradiation, in combination with either DMSO or DNA-PKi. N = 4 independent experiments. One-way ANOVA test. (G) Mortality of RKO WT cells 4 days after irradiation, in combination with either DMSO or DNA-PKi. N = 3 independent experiments. One-way ANOVA test. (H) Mortality of RKO GFP cells 5 days after irradiation, in combination with either DMSO or DNA-PKi. N = 3 independent experiments. One-way ANOVA test. (I) Representative immunofluorescence images showing Cas9, γH2AX and 53BP1 stainings in HeLa WT cells 4 days after Cas9 treatment, in combination with either DMSO or DNA-PKi. Nuclei were stained with DAPI. Original magnification 60x, scale bar 10 μm. (J) Quantitative analyses of γH2AX and 53BP1 foci in HeLa WT cells 4 days after Cas9 delivery, in combination with either DMSO or DNA-PKi. N = 3 independent experiments. At least 50 cells per condition were analysed for each experiment. One-way ANOVA test. (K) Viability of HeLa WT cells 5 days after Cas9 treatment, in combination with either DMSO or DNA-PKi. N = 3 independent experiments. One-way ANOVA test. (L) Mortality of HeLa WT cells 5 days after Cas9 treatment, in combination with either DMSO or DNA-PKi. N = 3 independent experiments. One-way ANOVA test. (M) Viability of RKO WT cells 4 days after Cas9 treatment, in combination with either DMSO or DNA-PKi. N = 3 independent experiments. One-way ANOVA test. (N) Mortality of RKO WT cells 4 days after Cas9 treatment, in combination with either DMSO or DNA-PKi. N = 3 independent experiments. One-way ANOVA test. Fig. S5. (A) Representative immunofluorescence images showing 53BP1 staining in RKO GFP cells 20 h after RNP treatment. Nuclei were stained with DAPI. Original magnification 60x, scale bar 10 μm. (B) Quantitative analyses of 53BP1 foci in RKO GFP cells 20 h after RNP treatment. N = 1. At least 40 cells per condition were analysed. (C) Representative immunofluorescence images showing micronuclei formation in RKO GFP cells 48 h after RNP treatment. Nuclei were stained with DAPI. Original magnification 60x, scale bar 10 μm. (D) Quantitative analyses of the percentage of micronuclei positive cells 48 h after RNP treatment. N = 3 independent experiments. At least 20 cells per condition were analysed for each experiment. t-test. (E) A representative experiment showing the difference, in terms of colonies, between RKO GFP cells treated with the scramble guide or the GFP guide. (F) Quantification of the number of colonies in n = 3 independent experiments. t-test

## Data availability
Data will be made available on request.

## References
 

## Associated Data

## Supplementary Materials
Supplementary Table 1. List of genes detected by RNA-seq. The status for each gene is indicated (1: upregulated, − 1: downregulated, 0: unmodified). HELA-G5 represents HeLa GFP cells treated with the GFP guide; HELA-SCR indicates HeLa GFP cells treated with the scramble guide
Fig. S1. (A) Schematic representation of cell lines creation. HeLa and RKO cells were infected with a lentivirus carrying the GFP sequence that integrated in multiple sites. (B) Viability of HeLa and RKO cells 4 days after irradiation. NI = not irradiated cells; IR= irradiated cells. N = 3 independent experiments. One-way ANOVA test. (C) Mortality of HeLa and RKO cells 4 days after irradiation. N = 3 independent experiments. One-way ANOVA test. (D) Schematic representation of the qPCR primers designed for the BLESS protocol. (E) Representative immunofluorescence images showing Cas9, γH2AX and 53BP1 stainings in RKO WT and GFP cells 3 days after Cas9 treatment. Nuclei were stained with DAPI. Original magnification 60x, scale bar 10 μm. (F) Quantitative analyses of γH2AX and 53BP1 foci in RKO WT and GFP cells 3 days after Cas9 treatment. N = 4 independent experiments. At least 60 cells per condition were analysed for each experiment. One-way ANOVA test. Fig. S2. (A) Representative immunofluorescence images showing micronuclei formation in RKO WT and GFP cells 3 days after Cas9 treatment. Nuclei were stained with DAPI. Original magnification 60x, scale bar 10 μm. (B) Quantitative analyses of the percentage of micronuclei positive cells 3 days after Cas9 treatment. N = 3 independent experiments for WT conditions, N = 4 independent experiments for GFP conditions. At least 60 cells per condition were analysed for each experiment. One-way ANOVA test. (C) Volcano plot of DEGs analysis comparing HeLa GFP cells expressing the GFP guide vs HeLa GFP cells expressing the scramble guide. The x-axis represents the log fold-changed (logFC) and the y-axis the negative logarithm (base 10) of the adjusted p value. Each point represents a gene. DEGs (adjusted p value < 0.05) are highlighted, with upregulated genes (logFC > 0) in red and downregulated genes (logFC < 0) in blue. The non differentially expressed genes are represented in gray. (D) Heatmap representing gene expression levels of 41 DEGs (p value adjusted < 0.05). Their logFC are indicated by color intensity (upregulated genes in red: logFC > 0; downregulated genes in blue: logFC < 0). (E) Heatmaps showing gene expression levels of five deregulated hallmark pathways. Gene expression levels are indicated by color intensity (upregulated genes in red: logFC > 0; downregulated genes in blue: logFC < 0). The logFC scale is specific for each pathway. (F) RT-qPCR for TNF and IL8 mRNA expression levels in HeLa GFP cells 3 days after Cas9 treatment. N = 3 independent experiments. Fig. S3. (A) Viability of RKO WT and GFP cells 6 days after Cas9 treatment. N = 3 independent experiments. One-way ANOVA test. (B) Mortality of RKO WT and GFP cells 6 days after Cas9 treatment. N = 3 independent experiments. One-way ANOVA test. (C) A representative experiment showing the difference, in terms of colonies, between RKO GFP cells treated with the scramble guide or the GFP guide. (D) Quantification of the number of colonies in n = 3 independent experiments. t-test. (E) Representative images of multinucleated RKO cells 3 days after the treatment with Cas9 carrying the GFP guide. Nuclei were stained with DAPI. Original magnification 60x, scale bar 10 μm. (F) Quantification of the percentage of cells with > 1 nucleus. N = 4 independent experiments. One-way ANOVA test. Fig. S4. (A) Viability of HeLa WT cells 4 days after irradiation, in combination with either DMSO or DNA-PKi. N = 3 independent experiments. One-way ANOVA test. (B) Viability of HeLa GFP cells 4 days after irradiation, in combination with either DMSO or DNA-PKi. N = 3 independent experiments. One-way ANOVA test. (C) Mortality of HeLa WT cells 4 days after irradiation, in combination with either DMSO or DNA-PKi. N = 3 independent experiments. One-way ANOVA test. (D) Mortality of HeLa GFP cells 4 days after irradiation, in combination with either DMSO or DNA-PKi. N = 3 independent experiments. One-way ANOVA test. (E) Viability of RKO WT cells 4 days after irradiation, in combination with either DMSO or DNA- PKi. N = 4 independent experiments. One-way ANOVA test. (F) Viability of RKO GFP cells 4 days after irradiation, in combination with either DMSO or DNA-PKi. N = 4 independent experiments. One-way ANOVA test. (G) Mortality of RKO WT cells 4 days after irradiation, in combination with either DMSO or DNA-PKi. N = 3 independent experiments. One-way ANOVA test. (H) Mortality of RKO GFP cells 5 days after irradiation, in combination with either DMSO or DNA-PKi. N = 3 independent experiments. One-way ANOVA test. (I) Representative immunofluorescence images showing Cas9, γH2AX and 53BP1 stainings in HeLa WT cells 4 days after Cas9 treatment, in combination with either DMSO or DNA-PKi. Nuclei were stained with DAPI. Original magnification 60x, scale bar 10 μm. (J) Quantitative analyses of γH2AX and 53BP1 foci in HeLa WT cells 4 days after Cas9 delivery, in combination with either DMSO or DNA-PKi. N = 3 independent experiments. At least 50 cells per condition were analysed for each experiment. One-way ANOVA test. (K) Viability of HeLa WT cells 5 days after Cas9 treatment, in combination with either DMSO or DNA-PKi. N = 3 independent experiments. One-way ANOVA test. (L) Mortality of HeLa WT cells 5 days after Cas9 treatment, in combination with either DMSO or DNA-PKi. N = 3 independent experiments. One-way ANOVA test. (M) Viability of RKO WT cells 4 days after Cas9 treatment, in combination with either DMSO or DNA-PKi. N = 3 independent experiments. One-way ANOVA test. (N) Mortality of RKO WT cells 4 days after Cas9 treatment, in combination with either DMSO or DNA-PKi. N = 3 independent experiments. One-way ANOVA test. Fig. S5. (A) Representative immunofluorescence images showing 53BP1 staining in RKO GFP cells 20 h after RNP treatment. Nuclei were stained with DAPI. Original magnification 60x, scale bar 10 μm. (B) Quantitative analyses of 53BP1 foci in RKO GFP cells 20 h after RNP treatment. N = 1. At least 40 cells per condition were analysed. (C) Representative immunofluorescence images showing micronuclei formation in RKO GFP cells 48 h after RNP treatment. Nuclei were stained with DAPI. Original magnification 60x, scale bar 10 μm. (D) Quantitative analyses of the percentage of micronuclei positive cells 48 h after RNP treatment. N = 3 independent experiments. At least 20 cells per condition were analysed for each experiment. t-test. (E) A representative experiment showing the difference, in terms of colonies, between RKO GFP cells treated with the scramble guide or the GFP guide. (F) Quantification of the number of colonies in n = 3 independent experiments. t-test

## Data Availability Statement
All raw RNA-seq data are available in the E-MTAB-14730 dataset (ENA database). The study includes three biological replicates for HeLa GFP cells treated with the GFP guide and two biological replicates for cells treated with the scamble guide. The experimental design is described in the Methods section of the manuscript. The list of genes detected by RNA-seq is provided as .
Code, scripts and all other data supporting the findings of this study are available from the corresponding authors upon reasonable request.
Data will be made available on request.