pmcMater Today BioMater Today Bio3810mtbioMaterials Today Bio2590-0064ElsevierPMC12681844PMC12681844.112681844126818444136245110.1016/j.mtbio.2025.102579S2590-0064(25)01150-01025791Review ArticleEngineered cellular drug delivery: Strategies and applications
LuJuan HuangWuxinrui TangBeikang YangPu TianJingtianjing001@csu.edu.cn LeiLanjielanjielei2023@zjsru.edu.cn aDepartment of Rheumatology and Immunology, The Second Xiangya Hospital of Central South University, Changsha, 410011, Hunan, ChinabClinical Medical Research Center for Systemic Autoimmune Diseases in Hunan Province, Changsha, 410011, ChinacKey Laboratory of Artificial Organs and Computational Medicine in Zhejiang Province, Institute of Translational Medicine, Zhejiang Shuren University, Hangzhou, 310015, China⁎Corresponding author. Department of Rheumatology and Immunology, the Second Xiangya Hospital of Central South University, Changsha, 410011, Hunan, China. tianjing001@csu.edu.cn⁎⁎Corresponding author. lanjielei2023@zjsru.edu.cn122025191120253549712010257915720251211202518112025191120250812202509122025© 2025 The Authors2025https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/).Cell-based drug delivery systems (CDDS) offer advantages like biocompatibility and tissue homing. However, it faces challenges owing to the complex physiological environment in the body during drug transport, such as the inhibitory immune microenvironment of tumors and the highly selective blood-brain barrier. Additionally, CDDS has limitations, including poor targeting and uncontrolled drug release. Engineered cellular drug delivery systems (ECDDS) have emerged to overcome these hurdles, providing enhanced target specificity, improved barrier crossing, and precise drug release mechanisms. Customizable through chemical and bioengineering strategies, ECDDS represent a versatile platform for precision medicine. While numerous reviews exist on living cell delivery systems, a focused analysis of ECDDS remains limited. This review bridges that gap by offering a comprehensive analysis of contemporary engineering methods and design approaches for ECDDS. We further examine the in vivo fate of these systems and their applications in therapy, imaging, and diagnosis. Importantly, we propose a unified "three-axis" design framework—spanning carrier biology, drug properties, and tissue microenvironment—to guide the rational development of future ECDDS.

## Graphical abstract
The present review analyzes ECDDS. The text provides a comprehensive overview of the engineering methodologies and design approaches pertinent to ECDDS. The text then goes on to discuss the challenges in clinical translation, concluding with a discussion of ECDDS's transformative potential for precision therapy and diagnostics. 

## Highlights
•Engineered cellular drug delivery systems (ECDDS) overcome limitations of conventional cell-based systems.
•ECDDS hold transformative potential for precision therapy and diagnostics.
•Integrating carrier biology, drug properties, and tissue microenvironmentguides the development of ECDDS.

## Keywords
BiomaterialsBiomedical applicationsDelivery systemsCell membraneTargeted therapypmc-status-qastatus0pmc-status-liveyespmc-status-embargonopmc-status-releasedyespmc-prop-open-accessyespmc-prop-olfnopmc-prop-manuscriptnopmc-prop-legally-suppressednopmc-prop-has-pdfyespmc-prop-has-supplementnopmc-prop-pdf-onlynopmc-prop-suppress-copyrightnopmc-prop-is-real-versionnopmc-prop-is-scanned-articlenopmc-prop-preprintnopmc-prop-in-epmcyes1

## Introduction
The practical use of traditional chemical medications in living organisms frequently faces challenges such as inadequate solubility [ ], brief retention periods [ ], ineffective penetration of biological barriers [ , ], and a deficiency in targeting specificity [ ]. Recently, drug delivery systems based on biologically derived materials have been developed to address these challenges. Bio-derived materials used as drug carriers include cells and their derivatives [ , , , ], bacteria [ , , , ], fungi, viruses [ , , , ], and proteins [ , , , ]. Notably, cells have the unique ability to participate directly in therapeutic interventions, such as cell therapy for immune diseases [ , , ], and serve as carriers within a broader class of vehicles that exhibit optimal biocompatibility and minimal immunogenicity [ , , ]. This broad class of carriers has gained considerable attention and has applications in drug delivery. Cell-based drug delivery systems (CDDS) employ various cell types as vehicles, enabling drugs to harness these cells’ inherent characteristics and protein functions. This improves biocompatibility and facilitates an active response to the intricate immune landscape within the body, thus ensuring effective targeting and improving the therapeutic efficacy of drugs. However, the use of living cells for drug delivery poses several challenges. Living cells respond to physiological signals, migrate to target sites, and release therapeutic agents through endocytosis, membrane fusion, or activation-induced release. Despite these advantages, the stability of such drug-loaded cells in complex physiological environments is often compromised, and their function is susceptible to disruption by the microenvironment [ , ]. Moreover, the mechanisms involved in drug release are more complex than simple cellular degradation or lysis. Beyond intercellular drug transfer mediated through communication channels—including gap junctions [ ], tunnel nanotubes (TNTs) [ ], and extracellular vesicles (EVs) [ ], the kinetics of drug release are significantly influenced by the initial loading strategy [ ]: Endogenous loading typically results in active secretion via EVs, whereas exogenous modification often relies on membrane fusion or endocytosis-triggered release in response to specific microenvironmental cues.
These limitations have led to the development of engineered cell–drug delivery systems (ECDDS) to overcome these hurdles. ECDDS involves the modification of cells using chemical or bioengineering techniques to enhance their targeting ability, drug-loading capacity, and biological activity, thereby enabling efficient drug transport. Engineered cell carriers can be designed to express specific receptors for improved targeting, secrete therapeutic proteins to support drug therapy, and hybridize with other biological materials [ , , ]. In addition, advances in engineering technology can facilitate the mass production of engineered cells, potentially reducing costs and increasing accessibility.
ECDDS vectors encompass various cell types, including red blood cells (RBCs) [ ], platelets [ ], macrophages [ ], neutrophils [ ], T cells [ ], and natural killer (NK) cells [ ]. By leveraging the natural properties of each cell carrier, ECDDS optimizes them through intracellular engineering [ ], extracellular engineering [ ], hybridization [ ], and the modulation of cellular bioactivities [ ]. As illnesses modify the in vivo environment, this optimization enhances the ability of ECDDS to target disease sites more precisely, adapt to the disease microenvironment, and maximize the therapeutic efficacy.
ECDDS differs from engineered cell therapy [ , , , ] in that it focuses on utilizing engineered cells to deliver drugs or target genes for disease treatment, whereas engineered cell therapy focuses on using cells to regulate immune responses for the treatment of immune-related disorders. Their applications are also different, with ECDDS having a broader scope encompassing both imaging and detection functions. In contrast, engineered cell therapy is a specialized form of cell therapy that is primarily involved in the treatment of immunity-related diseases.
Although numerous studies and reviews have been conducted on CDDS, many predominantly catalogue applications or treat engineering strategies in isolation, lacking a unified conceptual framework for their rational design. This review distinguishes itself by moving beyond a descriptive account to present a cohesive "three-axis" design paradigm that systematically integrates carrier biology, drug properties, and tissue microenvironment. By framing recent advancements through this unique lens, we provide not only a comprehensive overview but also a practical design playbook, offering valuable and novel insights to guide the future development and clinical translation of ECDDS.

2

## Engineering cells for engineered cell-based drug delivery systems
The development of ECDDS is contingent upon a comprehensive understanding of the biological properties of primary carrier cells and the engineering strategies employed to enhance their therapeutic potential. To provide a structured comparison of key cell types used in this field, summarizes the fundamental biological characteristics of major cellular carriers alongside the corresponding engineering techniques utilized to develop these advanced delivery platforms. 
2.1

## Red blood corpuscles
RBCs comprise 25 % of all cells in the body and more than 99 % of all blood cells. Their unique biconcave structure and absence of nuclei maximize their membrane surface area and intracellular space, providing opportunities for drug-loading and binding. The RBC membrane serves as a platform for drug-loading and facilitates the targeted accumulation of various surface ligands. The RBC membrane protects the drug-loading process from the serum environment and regulates its biological activity as needed. Additionally, RBCs circulate throughout the body over prolonged periods because of the attachment of the CD47 glycoprotein on their membrane to the signal-regulating protein α (SIRPα) present on the surface of macrophages. This interaction transmits inhibitory “don't eat me” signals, preventing clearance by mononuclear phagocytes. The primary role of circulating RBCs is to transport oxygen from the alveoli to tissues via hemoglobin and eliminate carbon dioxide following gas exchange. This allows RBCs to reach each organ and tissue effectively, establishing a biological basis for precise drug delivery to hypoxic tumors and the management of vascular embolic conditions. The biological properties of RBCs, such as their naturally high drug-loading capacity, prolonged circulation, biocompatibility, low immunogenicity, and cost-effectiveness, underscore their potential as a platform for drug delivery.
However, a major drawback of using natural RBCs for drug delivery is the absence of innate targeting capabilities in certain cell types. Researchers have explored various engineering approaches, including genetic engineering, membrane hybridization, and membrane modification, to modify RBC surfaces with targeted motifs. For example, a Y-shaped allosteric targeting ligand of gliomas has been incorporated into the RBC membrane, enabling it to cross the blood-brain barrier (BBB) and target gliomas [ ]. Another strategy involves fusion of the RBC membrane with liposomes [ , , , ], where the liposomes reduce the CD47 density to levels similar to those in senescent RBCs, and the resulting red blood cell-liposome complexes (RLPs) are internalized through receptor-mediated endocytosis, facilitating degradation in the lysosome. This process further inhibits the CD47-SIRPα axis and macrophage cytocytosis, prolonging the half-life of ECDDS, representing another promising strategy for engineering RBCs.

2.2

## Platelets
Disk-like platelets are devoid of nuclei and originate from megakaryocytes. Platelets play a crucial role in hemostasis after vascular injury and are involved in wound healing, inflammation, and thrombosis. However, platelets also have diverse immune functions facilitated by unique membrane proteins on their surfaces. Platelets express a range of proteins, such as formyl peptide receptors, toll-like receptors (TLRs), and chemokine receptors (CCRs), which allow them to identify bacteria. Additionally, glycoprotein VI (GPVI) and C-type lectin-like receptor 2 (CLEC-2) enhance immune escape capabilities, BBB penetration, and tumor targeting. Recently, platelet-cloaked nanoparticles (NPs) have drawn increasing attention because of their capacity to elude immune detection, attach to subendothelial areas, and aid in the identification of pathogens [ , , , ]. Platelets carry specific integrins, glycoproteins, and complement regulatory proteins, enabling NPs to bind to the surface of damaged endothelial cells, including those at sites of local inflammation [ , ], tissue damage [ ], thrombotic lesions [ ], and certain tumors [ ].
Activated platelets are vital for facilitating the metastatic spread of tumors by accumulating around circulating tumor cells, aiding their survival in the blood, and defending them from immune attacks. Platelet-derived factors, including transforming growth factor beta 1 (TGF-β1) and vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF), are critical immunosuppressants that reduce tumor immunosensitivity. TGF-β1 promotes epithelial-mesenchymal transition in tumor cells and impedes the differentiation of cytotoxic T lymphocytes, while increasing the production of regulatory T lymphocytes. VEGF induces angiogenesis and promotes the formation of premetastatic niches in tumor cells. These properties suggested that platelets could be hybridized with liposomes to form a carrier (PM-Lipo) that could serve as a drug delivery vehicle, improving the stability of encapsulated quercetin and vincristine. The hybridized platelets demonstrated improved stability, and the delivered drugs inhibited both the lactate transporter protein MCT-4 and glycolytic enzyme PKM2, thereby disrupting glycolytic metabolism in platelets. This disruption inhibits platelet activation. Utilizing these platelets as delivery vehicles for anticancer drugs [ ] not only kills cancer cells, but also blocks platelet-tumor cell interactions, thereby preventing cancer cell metastasis.
However, the source of platelets, inter-individual variations, and complexity of large-scale production hinder their broader application. In addition, the inherent sensitivity of platelets to activation and their relatively poor process stability exacerbate these problems. Engineered platelets may offer a solution to some of these limitations by facilitating a more stable and efficient drug delivery.

2.3

## Macrophages
Macrophages are crucial for both innate and adaptive immunity. They are involved in vital immunosurveillance activities, such as phagocytosis, antigen presentation, and immunosuppression [ ]. The initial recruitment of macrophages to inflamed tissues is driven by chemokines and cytokines. Macrophages can differentiate into two distinct phenotypes, M1 and M2, each of which secretes a different cytokine. M1 macrophages release cytokines that promote inflammation and anticancer reactions, whereas M2 macrophages release cytokines that counteract inflammation and tumor growth. The occurrence of two distinct M1/M2 polarization phenotypes is often known as “macrophage polarization.” For example, the transformation of M1 macrophages into M2 macrophages can be induced by loading the AMP-activated protein kinase activator zwitterionin into macrophages, thereby facilitating the restoration of immune homeostasis in the synovium in rheumatoid arthritis (RA) [ ].
Macrophages also exhibit chemotactic behavior, allowing them to penetrate solid tumors. They can be recruited to the tumor microenvironment (TME) by chemokines, such as CCL2. Because of their chemotactic properties, macrophages can access areas that are usually difficult to reach using conventional drug delivery methods. CCR2 on the surface of macrophages interacts with the ligand, monocyte chemoattractant protein-1 (MCP-1), mediating the chemotaxis of tumor-associated macrophages (TAM) into the TME. This interaction can be exploited by functionalizing NPs with MCP-1, allowing targeted delivery to the tumor site via CCR2 binding to the macrophage surface [ ]. These characteristics make macrophages promising vehicles for the efficient delivery of therapeutic agents into solid tumors, serving as powerful carriers of small-molecule drugs and macromolecules, including proteins and nucleic acids. The use of macrophages as drug delivery vehicles is based on their advantageous characteristics, such as prolonged circulation time, abundant surface receptors, and active targeting ability. Considering their critical role in the immune system, macrophages have significant potential as carriers for therapeutic applications in disease treatment.
However, the loading of NPs or drugs may alter macrophage activity, potentially reducing their chemotactic migration to solid tumors. Additionally, the efficiency of drug transport by macrophages varies depending on their activation state. Furthermore, the rate of phagocytosis can influence drug-loading. To enhance drug efficacy, it is necessary to engineer macrophages to overcome these limitations.

2.4

## Neutrophils
Neutrophils serve as the primary line of defense against infections [ ]. Upon encountering inflammatory stimuli, these cells migrate to the sites of infection, inflammation, and tissue injury. They then perform roles in antimicrobial and inflammatory processes. The ability to recognize and engulf pathogens is facilitated by the ability to detect pathogen-associated molecular patterns (PAMP). When inflammatory signals and chemotactic cues are detected, activated neutrophils move to the affected tissues, bolstering their recruitment and activation. The natural inflammatory response of neutrophils and their ability to cross physical barriers enable them to effectively deliver drugs to sites of inflammation [ , , ].
Neutrophils exhibit unique phenotypes and functions in cancer cells. Tumor-associated neutrophils (TANs) are classified into two subtypes: anti-tumor N1 and pro-tumor N2. The anti-tumor functions of N1 TANs are mediated by myeloperoxidases (MPO) and reactive oxygen species (ROS). Additionally, the release of N1 TANs promotes anti-tumor effects through MPO and ROS, as well as the secretion of inflammatory cytokines and chemokines, which recruit and activate other immune cells. In addition, N1 TANs directly kill cancer cells via antibody-dependent cytotoxicity. Therefore, N1 TANs play a critical role as anti-tumor effectors in immunotherapy-responsive tumors. To maintain the N1 phenotype, a poly(lactic acid)-hydroxyacetic acid copolymer (PLGA), a cell adhesion micropatch, has been used to activate neutrophils for anti-tumor effects [ ].
Similar to macrophages, neutrophils are attracted to tumors and can recruit and activate additional immune cells. This chemotactic behavior can be exploited to load neutrophils with chemotherapeutic agents and target them to the tumor site, thereby reducing the systemic response [ , ].
However, challenges such as the short lifespan of neutrophils, complexity of their recruitment process, and propensity of drug-loaded neutrophils to be phagocytosed by mononuclear macrophages need to be addressed. These issues highlight the need to develop engineered neutrophils with improved therapeutic efficacy.

2.5

## Natural killer cells
NK cells, which originate from the bone marrow, are the third major type of lymphocytes, along with T and B cells [ ]. NK cells play crucial immunomodulatory functions by releasing cytotoxic molecules, such as granzymes and perforins, triggering target cell death via death receptor-mediated pathways, such as FasL/Fas, and secreting chemokines and cytokines, such as RANTES and IFN-γ. NK cells are crucial in cancer immunotherapy because of their natural capacity to target and destroy malignant cells. Additionally, acquiring NK cells from allogeneic donors is straightforward, making them valuable resources for cellular relay immunotherapy. However, the abilities of NK cells are inherently limited owing to the absence of cell-specific receptors.
To address this limitation, engineered cellular drug-loading strategies have emerged, which involve the modification of NK cells using chimeric antigen receptors (CARs) for the precise targeting of antigens expressed on the surface of tumors. Siegler et al. [ ] engineered the NK92 human NK cell line to express CAR, thereby reorienting its anti-tumor specificity and combining immunotherapy with chemotherapeutic drug delivery. NK cells have been used as carriers for crosslinked multilamellar liposomal vesicles loaded with paclitaxel (PTX) to boost the effectiveness of ex vivo chemotherapy in a cancer model overexpressing human epidermal growth factor receptor 2 (Her2) and CD19. These models demonstrate the efficacy of ex vivo and in vivo chemotherapy in reducing off-target toxicity. Despite these advances, genetic engineering of NK cells remains challenging because of the risks associated with transgene insertion mutagenesis, complex procedures, and safety concerns. Furthermore, the effectiveness of NK cell-based radioimmunotherapy is limited, particularly in the treatment of solid tumors. This limitation is partly attributable to the immunosuppressive characteristics of the TME, which impair the efficacy of NK cell-based immunotherapies. Addressing these challenges is imperative for the successful clinical implementation of engineered NK cell CDDS.
Nevertheless, engineered NK CDDS have been created to exploit the capacity of NK cells to traverse the BBB formed by tight junctions of vascular endothelial cells, enabling them to reach the foci of most brain tumors [ ], such as glioblastoma (GBM).

2.6

## T lymphocytes
T cells have the potential to function as drug carriers and directly deliver therapeutics to the sites of pathogenesis. However, T cells are less efficient at phagocytosing drug particles than other cell types, primarily because of their small size, high nucleus-to-cytoplasm ratio, absence of phagocytic activity, and low endocytosis rates. Consequently, engineering strategies for T cells have focused on chimeric antigen receptor T (CAR-T) and T cell receptor T (TCR-T) therapies, which involve gene editing to activate T cells for targeted destruction of cancer cells through specific receptor-mediated recognition. Consequently, T cells modified with functional molecules represent a specialized engineered cellular drug delivery strategy.
In CAR-T/TCR-T cell therapies, T cells are engineered to express molecules that elicit therapeutic effects, such as CARs and TCRs. Wang et al. [ ] developed T cell membrane-encapsulated NPs with aggregation-induced emission (AIE) properties. T cell shells were designed to target CD133 and epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR), providing a novel approach for targeting GBM cells and GSCs for cancer treatment. Yaman et al. [ ] developed a biomimetic drug-carrier system by transducing T cell membranes with CAR. This design of anti-human EGFR 2 (HER2) CAR-T cell membranes involved the encapsulation of the anticancer drug cisplatin. Consequently, the resulting CAR-engineered, cell-loaded nanodrug system holds significant promise as a specialized cellular drug-carrying system with the potential to enhance the efficacy of cancer treatment.

3

## Methods for engineering cell carriers
3.1

## Strategies for modifying targeting ability: intracellular vs. extracellular engineering
In order to provide a more comprehensive clarification of the engineering strategies employed, a reclassification of these strategies has been undertaken based on the fundamental approach and timing relative to cell disruption: The processes of intracellular engineering (pre-modification) and extracellular engineering (post-modification) are pivotal in this context. The framework delineates a distinction between two modes of modification of the cell: the first is internal, occurring through genetic or metabolic alterations; the second is external, involving direct attachment to the isolated membrane.
The cell membrane structure is built around three key elements: a lipid bilayer featuring phospholipids/cholesterol, along with protein molecules such as glycolipids and glycoproteins. These proteins are either attached to the outer edges of the lipid layer or embedded within its hydrophobic core. Cell membranes serve as protective biological barriers for intracellular organelles, regulate metabolic processes, facilitate nutrient and waste transport, and mediate cell contact-dependent signaling. Engineered cell membranes can be modified using three main strategies: pre-modification, post-modification, and cell membrane hybridization. Pre-modification refers to changes introduced before the parent cell is disrupted. Post-modification involves the addition of new elements to the cell membrane following isolation. Cell membrane hybridization involves combining membranes from distinct cell types to produce hybridized membranes with customized characteristics.
To provide a clearer comparison and summary, the key features, advantages, and limitations of these three primary engineering strategies are systematically outlined in below. 
3.1.1

## Pre-modification: intracellular engineering
Pre-modification involves altering the genetic or metabolic makeup of parental cells to adjust cellular membrane characteristics. This approach involves the pretreatment of parent cells to fine-tune the production of certain proteins, tweak the balance of lipid elements, or reconfigure the architecture of hydrocarbon chains in the cell membrane. Vesicles obtained using this method maintained cell membrane properties similar to those of parental cells [ ]. In contrast to post-production methods, pre-modification offers flexibility in the development of new cell lines with precise accuracy, enduring alterations, long-term effects, and improved therapeutic outcomes. Advances in synthetic biology and clinical achievements in CAR-T cell therapy have positioned genetic engineering as a pivotal technique for various biomedical applications.
For example, vector cells can be genetically engineered to express affinity ligands that target tumor-specific antigens. Ning et al. [ ] engineered macrophages to enhance their homing ability to tumors. Macrophages with a specific affinity for HER2+ cells (denoted as AE-Mφ) were generated by first integrating specific gene sequences, including anti-HER2+ antibodies, into the macrophage genome via lentivirus infection. These macrophages stably express anti-HER2 affinity ligands on their surface. NPs containing doxorubicin (DOX) were loaded onto modified macrophages. Owing to the extracellular arm-like structural domains of the anti-HER2 antibody, the NPs exhibited high specificity and affinity for HER2 tumor cells. These engineered macrophages not only specifically bind to HER2 on tumor cells to inhibit tumor growth but also facilitate the targeted delivery of chemotherapeutic agents to solid tumors.
This strategy has also been applied to modify T cells. For example, CAR-engineered T cells have been loaded with cisplatin-containing NPs [ ]. Additionally, HER2-resistant CAR-T cells were modified using a lentiviral transducer encoding an anti-HER2 plasmid. These HER2 CAR-T cells were subsequently encapsulated in the chemotherapeutic drug, cisplatin. Membrane-encapsulated cisplatin NPs showed sustained drug release for up to 21 d under physiological conditions and effectively restrained the growth of HER2+ cancer cells. This immunomodulated cell membrane encapsulation system not only improved the targeted delivery of chemotherapeutic drugs, but also provided sustained drug release, reduced the accumulation of drugs in non-specific organs, and minimized systemic side effects.
Beyond their utility as engineered drug carriers, CAR-T cells have themselves emerged as a transformative therapeutic modality [ ]. CAR-T cell therapy has established itself as a breakthrough paradigm in the treatment of hematological malignancies, with compelling clinical outcomes observed across relapsed/refractory B-cell acute lymphoblastic leukemia, chronic lymphocytic leukemia, and multiple myeloma [ ]. The regulatory approval of multiple CD19-directed CAR-T products, including axicabtagene ciloleucel and tisagenlecleucel, for various B-cell non-Hodgkin lymphomas marks a significant expansion in the clinical application of this technology [ ]. Nevertheless, the ongoing expansion of clinical trials into pediatric populations and diverse solid tumors reflects the sustained momentum and therapeutic promise of CAR-T cell platforms.

3.1.2

## Post-modification strategies: extracellular engineering
Post-modification involves the use of proteins, nucleic acids, and synthetic components to modify the cell membranes. This is typically accomplished by anchoring ligands to the cell surface via fusion with the transmembrane structural domain of a protein located on the cell membrane.
3.1.2.1

## Proteins
Proteins are tethered to cell membranes via coupling or insertion. Specific antibodies are commonly inserted into the cell membrane to target antigens in RBCs. RBCs lack inherent targeting properties; therefore, research has focused on enhancing their targeting ability through site-selective antibody modification of drug-carrying RBC membranes. Presentation of antibodies on the carrier surface enables accurate drug targeting and guarantees delivery to the target site. A recent study [ ] examined the synthesis of antibody-lipid conjugates (ALC) via site-selective acetylation of Lys 248 in human immunoglobulin G (IgG) for the development of the HER2-selective antibody trastuzumab (Tras-RBC). In this approach, a site-selectively modified antibody is coupled to a lipid via the Fc structural domain. This modification enabled the uniform display of IgG on the surface of RBCs, with the Fab structural domain extending outward to bind to the target antigen. These antibody-displaying RBCs, referred to as immuno-RBCs, specifically bind to antigen-expressing tumor cells, ensuring precise targeting and drug delivery ( A). The trans-RBCs were then loaded with a photosensitizer (PS) to specifically target cells overexpressing HER2. Upon photolysis, PS is released into the malignant cells, inducing photodynamic cytotoxicity. This approach demonstrated the assembly of immuno-RBCs on therapeutic antibodies through site-selective lipid coupling and the integration of PS-targeting cancer cells. This method can be adapted for the surface modification of membrane-enclosed vesicles or lipid NPs to enable antibody-directed drug delivery. Light irradiation following the binding of cancer cells to immuno-RBCs loaded with PS and cancer-targeting IgG triggers the production of ROS in RBCs, leading to cellular bursting and the release of PS and ROS into cancer cells, thereby effectively killing them. The insertion of lipid derivatives of proteins into the lipid bilayer of vesicles enhances the retention of the intact structure of membrane proteins because protein anchoring does not disrupt membrane surface proteins. However, chemical modification of proteins with lipid fractions may alter the conformation of the attached proteins. Thus, carefully designed strategies for site-specific coupling of proteins to lipid fractions are necessary to minimize potential structural alterations. 
Proteins can be tethered to cell membranes via affixation or insertion; however, these methods must be optimized for individual proteins. Fusion proteins are often prone to misfolding, reduced functionality owing to spatial site blocking, and low-level expression. Recently, novel strategies have emerged to uncouple transmembrane anchoring and soluble ligand expression, providing a modular approach for functionalization. One such strategy involves the use of SpyTag-SpyCatcher binding pairs, which is a widely used method for coupling proteins to nanoparticle (NP) surfaces. This framework allows the sequential labeling of multiple ligands with a SpyTag oligopeptide, facilitating their stable linkage to a substrate modified with SpyCatcher via the autonomous creation of an isopeptide bond. Krishnan et al. [ ] developed a modular NP system by genetically modifying cell membranes using SpyCatcher as an anchor point. Cell membranes modified to express SpyCatcher were isolated and encapsulated onto the surface of the core of PLGA NPs to generate SpyCatcher-functionalized NPs. After coating the NP cores with the modified films, the base nanopreparations were functionalized using SpyTag-tagged ligands ( B). The versatility of this method was validated using three distinct SpyTag-labeled targeting agents. Each variant exhibited a clear binding affinity in vitro for cells overexpressing the matching receptor. This approach illustrates that modular design principles can benefit CNP platform development by simplifying the introduction of functional components without the need for time-consuming engineering.
Recent studies [ ] have demonstrated the possibility of forming extracellular matrices that mimic the cellular microenvironment by assembling them on the surface of T cells using the DOPA-containing tripeptide—KGdelta. This peptide underwent phase separation to form a condensate with liquid-like fluidity. Surface engineering of cohesin facilitates trastuzumab embedding in the cell membrane. Specifically, surface modification of NK cells enhances their ability to recognize HER2-positive cancer cells, boosting their cytotoxic activity through an antibody-dependent cell-mediated effect. When embedded in this cohesive material, the antibody adopts a random orientation, with the subpopulation correctly oriented for binding to cancer cells. These findings highlight the potential of cohesins as novel materials for cell surface functionalization and offer promising therapeutic opportunities for engineered immune cell carriers ( C).

3.1.2.2

## Nucleic acids
Nucleic acids are used in cell surface engineering owing to their several advantageous characteristics. First, nucleic acids are readily synthesized through conventional phosphoramidite chemistry with chemical modifications using functional groups, further conferring additional functionality to the synthesized nucleic acids. Watson–Crick pairing enables predictable nucleic acid programmability. This allows the creation of precisely controllable nucleic acid materials. Third, the sequences of these molecules can be programmed to offer significant flexibility in the design and construction of materials. Fourth, functional nucleic acids, such as aptamers and DNA enzymes, possess independent structures that perform specific non-genetic functions in biosensing, disease diagnosis, and therapy [ ]. Aptamers are synthetic nucleic acids (DNA or RNA) that bind to targets through specific 3D structures. Aptamers offer several advantages over antibodies, including rapid evolution, simple and reproducible synthesis, high programmability, ease of site-specific modification, greater stability, longer shelf-life, smaller size, lower immunogenicity, and cost-effectiveness. The ease of screening, synthesis, and chemical modification of nucleic acid aptamers has led to their emergence as promising candidates for targeted drug delivery. Various synthetic methods have been developed to facilitate the attachment of nucleic acids to cell surfaces, enabling their stable binding to substrates via covalent bonds [ ]. Functional groups such as ─SH, ─NH, ─COOH, or maleimide can be introduced into aptamers, allowing them to react with the corresponding functional groups on the substrate surface. Surface immobilization of aptamers can be achieved via non-covalent bonding methods, such as the classic streptavidin-biotin connection [ ], snug fit of hydrophobic forces [ ], or an attractive pull of electrostatic attractions. Interestingly, aptamers with hydrophobic components can be effectively anchored to cell membranes by exploiting the same hydrophobic forces [ ].
Aptamers can modify cell membrane surfaces via covalent interactions. For example, Zhang et al. [ ] engineered NK cell membranes by incorporating TLS11a- and PDL1-specific aptamers targeting HepG2 cells for hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) treatment. The TLS11a aptamer, which selectively targeted HCC cells, was chemically attached to the NK cell surface. In addition, a PDL1 targeting aptamer was introduced to modulate PD1/PDL1 signaling for enhanced immunotherapy. Both aptamers were covalently linked to the surface of NK cells via metabolic glycan biosynthesis and click chemistry. Specifically, DBCO-labeled aptamers covalently bind to NK cell surface azido groups via copper-free click chemistry. NK cells engineered with the two aptamers demonstrated strong selectivity toward tumor cells, leading to increased cytokine secretion, increased apoptosis, and greater tumor infiltration, resulting in enhanced therapeutic efficacy against solid tumors.
Considering that tumors have a slightly acidic microenvironment owing to elevated glycolytic metabolism and inadequate perfusion, the combination of aptamers with pH-responsive structures offers the potential for precise drug delivery in cancer therapy. Chen et al. [ ] developed an isgc8-tFNA logic nanoprobe and integrated it into cells to monitor extracellular pH and deliver targeted drugs concurrently. The nanoprobe comprises five oligonucleotide chains. s1, s2, and s3 bind to the cell surface, s4 has pH-sensitivity and FRET tags, and includes the isgc8-antisense oligonucleotide (ASO) chimera. The chimera uses the nucleic acid aptamer sgc8 to target PTK7, a receptor overexpressed in cancer cells. To inhibit tumor cell growth and metastasis, an ASO targeting miR-21 was selected as the therapeutic domain and a sequence hybridized with the i-matrix of S4 served as the junction domain. The i-matrix, a four-stranded DNA secondary structure, is widely used as a pH switch in nanotechnological applications because it comprises cytosine-rich sequences that fold in a pH-dependent manner. In an acidic extracellular environment, the nanoprobe's cytosine-rich sequence forms an i-motif in an acidic extracellular milieu, positioning Cy 3 and Cy 5 near each other to activate FRET, thereby releasing the sgc8-ASO chimeric strand. The sgc8-ASO-chimeric strand recognizes PTK7 on cancer cell surfaces, thus facilitating its entry into cells and inducing the silencing of miR-21. This silencing effectively impedes tumor cell migration, rendering cancer cells incapable of metastasis. Consequently, the sgc8-ASO-chimeric chain requires both an acidic microenvironment and the presence of an aptamer-targeting marker on the tumor cell surface to release its antisense oligonucleotide drug, ensuring precise, targeted therapy ( ). 
Aptamer-modified ECDDS has been utilized in antimicrobial therapies, along with their widespread use in oncology. For example, RBC membranes were modified with specific aptamers targeting S. aureus [ ] and encapsulated in gold/polydopamine (Au/PDA) composite NPs to create a novel photothermal antimicrobial therapeutic platform. This aptamer modification enables bacteria-specific targeting of RBC membranes, thereby minimizing systemic thermal reactions during photothermal therapy (PTT).

3.1.2.3

## Polymers
Polymers have also been used for extracellular engineering [ ]. Polymer layers applied to the outer surface of cell membranes serve as a protective barrier, enhancing biocompatibility and stability in vivo, and as a dynamic shell that regulates cellular phenotypes and immune responses of carrier cells. Network coating refers to the deposition of a crosslinked polymer network on the cell surface for engineering, which includes techniques such as layer-by-layer (LbL) shell formation, in-situ crosslinked networks, and individual grafted polymer chains.
LbL is widely used for coating multilayer films on substrates, including living cell surfaces. The sequential deposition of oppositely charged polyelectrolytes forms multilayer films on their surfaces. The first layer is attached via electrostatic, physical, or hydrogen bonds. The subsequent layers were connected via ionic or van der Waals forces. The LbL coatings varied in thickness, which was controlled by the layer count and thickness for precision. LbL coatings range in thickness from tens of nanometers, with the number of layers and the thickness of each layer providing precise control over the final coating thickness. Alginate is commonly used as the first layer of cell surface coatings because of its biocompatibility and ease of use. Alginate and other polymers are crosslinked to form microcapsules that envelope red blood cells [ ] and lymphocytes [ ]. These polymer shells protect carrier cells from environmental damage and reduce immunogenicity, thus enhancing drug delivery efficiency.
In-situ crosslinked networks refer to networks of crosslinked polymers directly deposited on the cell surface. These networks, which are composed of polymers and cross-linkers, create matrix structures by binding to the carrier cells. For example, metal-phenolic networks utilize metal-phenol coordination to assemble bioactive nanocomplexes on cell surfaces, integrating biomolecules through complexation involving the mixing of biomolecules with selected polyphenols, such as tannins or gallic acid, followed by the incubation and addition of selected cell stock solutions, metal solutions, and buffers to facilitate surface adsorption and metal ion coordination. For example, boric acid-catechol bioconjugation has been used to synthesize liposome-blocking polypeptides containing cationic boric acid groups in the side chain. These polypeptides were inserted into macrophage membranes and ligated with a tannic acid-cerium complex to form a mimetic nanoweb via boric acid-polyphenol-metal ion interactions [ ]. These mesh-like nanostructures facilitate the capture and removal of lipopolysaccharides (LPS) and bacteria while enhancing bacterial clearance ( A). 
In addition, the polyphenol-cerium nanostructures reduced inflammation and improved the water stability of the nanonet system. This engineered macrophage membrane delivery system enhanced drug enrichment at the site of infection.
The grafting of polymers onto cell surfaces is essential for cell engineering and enhancement. This can be achieved by adding preformed chains or by surface polymerization. This method links polymers to the surface, thereby influencing cell behavior and targeting. Polymer grafting can be performed via covalent or non-covalent mechanisms. Covalent grafting typically involves grafting natural chemical groups, such as amines, sulfhydryls, and carboxylic acids, onto the cell membrane. Bio-orthogonal functional groups, such as azides, also play a crucial role in covalent cell surface engineering, particularly through metabolic glycan labeling. In contrast, non-covalent methods involve anchoring polymers to the cell membrane by immobilizing various components, such as monomers, initiators, and chain transfer agents, in the polymerization reaction. Compared with electrostatically attached polymers, grafted polymers offer superior cytocompatibility and stable attachment, even after washing. For example, the integration of copper-free click chemistry with metabolic sugar engineering [ ] has enabled covalent grafting of polymers onto dendritic cell (DC) membranes, thereby enhancing the adhesion between DCs and T cells. This amplified the stimulatory effect on T cell activation. Polymannose was synthesized via a polymerization process using 2-methacryloylaminomannose and 4-cyanovaleric acid dithiobenzoate, and then conjugated with DBCO-maleimide. Azide-labeled DCs were generated by treating bone marrow DCs with tetraacetyl-N-azidoacetylmannosamine. These DCs were modified with the synthesized glycopolymer and treated with ovalbumin (OVA) via fluoroalkane-grafted polyethyleneimine to enhance T cell adhesion and activation ( B).

3.1.3

## Cell membrane hybridization
Hybrid membranes, which are created by fusing cell membranes with plasma membranes from different cells, liposomes, bacteria, and other sources, can harness the unique properties of the parental membranes. These advancements have significantly broadened the scope of natural cell membranes for drug delivery and clinical therapy. Compared with natural cell membranes, hybrid membranes exhibit enhanced stability in physiological environments, improved circulation time, increased resistance to phagocytosis, and targeted delivery capabilities. These properties enable a wide range of applications in various biological contexts. The development of hybrid membrane fabrication technologies has resulted in various types of hybrid membranes. The proposed classification system is based on different sources of membrane components. Accordingly, hybrid membranes can be divided into three main categories: membranes created by the fusion of (1) different cell membranes, (2) cell membranes with bacteria, and (3) cell membranes with liposomes.
3.1.3.1

## Cell-cell hybridization
Hybrid cell membranes inherit biological functions distinct from those of both homologous and heterologous cell types [ ]. From a methodological perspective, the fusion of membranes from different cells is typically achieved using physical or chemical fusogens.
Polyethylene glycol (PEG)-mediated fusion serves as a widely adopted chemical method for membrane hybridization [ ]. Its mechanism relies on PEG's steric exclusion and dehydration effects, where high concentrations (30–50 % w/v) displace interfacial water molecules, reduce intermembrane distance, and overcome electrostatic repulsion to drive lipid bilayers from hemifusion to complete fusion [ ]. While valued for operational simplicity and cost-effectiveness, this approach suffers from critical limitations including non-specific fusion leading to heterogeneous products, potential membrane protein denaturation, and residual PEG that may trigger immune responses [ ]. These drawbacks necessitate additional purification steps and have prompted exploration of alternative methods.
Ultrasonication offers a physical alternative that avoids chemical fusogens [ ]. Through cavitation effects, ultrasound generates localized shear forces that disrupt lipid packing and induce membrane fusion [ ]. This method enables rapid preparation of hybrid vesicles without introducing exogenous chemicals. However, the intense energy involved often causes irreversible damage to membrane integrity and protein function, while substantial heat generation and parameter-dependent reproducibility limit its broader application [ ]. Consequently, sonication remains most suitable for preliminary studies where preserving biological activity is less critical.
Hybridization of macrophages and tumor cells loaded with chemotherapeutic agents has been used to enhance both humoral and cellular anti-tumor immunity [ ]. Yu et al. [ ] designed hybrid cellular nanovesicles by fusing M1-type macrophage nanovescicles with 4T1 tumor cell membranes for DOX delivery. Tumor antigens, which are typically derived from dead tumor cells, tumor lysates, and tumor-derived nanovesicles, are phagocytosed by M1-type macrophages and play a key role in anti-tumor humoral immunity. This process leads to the presentation of tumor epitopes on macrophage surfaces. T cells recognize these epitopes, are activated, and secrete cytokines that stimulate B cells. These stimulated B cells further differentiate into plasma and memory cells. Plasma cells secrete specific antibodies that bind to tumor antigens, thereby activating anti-tumor humoral immunity. Tumor cell-derived nanovesicles retain the membrane structure and biological information of donor cells, enabling homologous targeting and rendering them effective carriers for active targeting.
Macrophage-derived nanovesicles have been extensively used to modify the immune microenvironment within tumor tissues or lymph nodes. TAMs are the predominant immunosuppressive cell type in “cold” tumors, inhibiting cytokine secretion from other immune cells and promoting tumor growth and metastasis. M1-type macrophages repolarize TAMs and induce tumor cell death. Furthermore, the fusion of macrophages with tumor cells enables targeting of both tumor tissues and lymph nodes, resulting in the effective activation of anti-tumor cells and humoral immunity. Moreover, loaded chemotherapeutic agents such as DOX can induce tumor immunogenic cell death (ICD), which leads to the release of tumor antigens and damage-associated molecular patterns (DAMPs), further enhancing anti-tumor immune responses. Zhang et al. [ ] generated iron oxide (Fe3O4) NPs loaded with indocyanine green (ICG) and imiquimod by fusing 4T1 breast cancer cell membranes with RAW264.7 cell membranes for combination breast cancer therapy. Their findings indicated that hybrid membrane carriers derived from tumor cell membranes could activate anti-tumor cellular immunity by self-carrying tumor antigens. Additionally, these carriers enhance anti-tumor humoral immunity through macrophage repolarization and germinal center B cell activation.
Furthermore, a hybridized membrane dual-drive precision delivery system is being developed to induce postoperative immunotherapy that incorporates CD47 blockade for targeted delivery and modulation. This system leverages the common properties of platelets and neutrophils, both of which accumulate at wound sites and contribute to key pathophysiological processes. The precision delivery system consisted of platelet–neutrophil hybrid membranes loaded with R848 NPs [ ]. The delivery system was designed to target and modulate immunopharmaceuticals at the tumor site, considering the pathological features of platelet aggregation and neutrophil recruitment induced by the inflammatory microenvironment following tumor surgery. Upon precise delivery guided by fluorescence imaging, R848 targets and reprograms M2 macrophages into M1 macrophages, serving as an adjuvant to stimulate DCs maturation and activate T cell immunity. The combination of R848-induced polarization and CD47 blockade enhances phagocytosis by macrophages while promoting T cell-mediated cellular immune responses that ultimately inhibit tumor recurrence and metastasis, and prolong survival time after surgery. Platelet and neutrophil membranes retain the advantages of progenitor cells. In particular, hybrid membranes combine the targeting properties of both their constituent membranes, enabling dual-drive targeting and deeper tumor penetration. Additionally, platelets and neutrophil membranes trap circulating tumor cells via specific adhesion to receptors, disrupting their immune interactions and preventing metastasis. This hybrid system drives targeted delivery by combining dual-targeting effects. Hybridization of these two functionally similar cell membranes enables dual-targeting and accumulation, offering a significant advantage over single-cell membrane delivery strategies. A similar approach utilized hybrid membranes composed of RBC and platelet membranes [ ], where the hybrid membrane exhibited the targeting capability of platelets toward myocardial fibroblasts and collagen, while also possessing the long-term recycling capacity of RBC membranes.
However, further optimization is required to enhance the preparation, efficiency, and stability of these hybrid membranes for broader applications.

3.1.3.2

## Cells and bacteria
In addition to eukaryotic cell membranes, prokaryotic bacterial membranes, specifically bacterial outer membrane vesicles (OMVs), are also critical for the development of hybrid membranes. OMVs, which closely resemble bacterial outer membranes, play a significant role in bacterial survival and defense. They contain a variety of bioactive molecules that play important roles in signaling, immune stimulation, and homologous targeting. OMVs are known to accumulate at infection sites and possess potent immunostimulatory properties, based on which E. coli-derived OMVs have been hybridized with RBC membranes [ ], creating camouflaged nanocarriers that can evade capture by the reticuloendothelial system (RES) and prolong the circulation time. Camouflaged nanocarriers were created by incorporating CD47, a natural RBC membrane marker, and PAMPs from OMVs, which enabled non-specific targeting by activating DCs. Hybrid membranes were modified with PAMPs inherited from OMVs to achieve non-specific anti-tumor immunomodulation by activating DCs. These hybrid membranes were attached to metal-organic framework (MOF)-modified mesoporous silica (MS) for chemoadjuvant ascorbic acid (AA)-acid-mediated immunotherapy. Bortezomib (BTZ) was loaded onto magnesium-doped MS NPs (BTZ@MMS, BMM), followed by the immobilization of AA with zeolite imidazolium ester framework 8 (ZIF-8), which was decorated on the surface of the BMM to prepare BMM@ZIF-AA (BMMZA). The released BTZ induces robust ICD and promotes antigen presentation, leading to enhanced DC maturation and increased tumor cell sensitivity to immunotherapy. In addition, the coexistence of OMV and released Mg synergistically increased T cell infiltration and activation. This enhances ICD-associated immunogenicity and potentiate AA-mediated immunotherapy, leading to optimized therapeutic efficacy in suppressing local tumor growth and inhibiting lung metastasis. Microenvironmental CD8+ T cells induced by AA exhibit potent cytotoxicity and anti-tumor activity.
In addition to E. coli, Pseudomonas aeruginosa [ ] has been fused with engineered macrophages for the targeted and sustained treatment of tumor metastasis. In this approach, the P. aeruginosa-secreted toxin is re-adsorbed onto the membrane surface, and gold NPs (AuNPs) are encapsulated as an adjuvant. The hybridized cell carriers effectively adsorb the P. aeruginosa-secreted toxin on their surface, mitigating its toxicity without disrupting its structure, thereby stimulating an anti-toxin immune response. Furthermore, macrophage membranes neutralize endotoxins, such as LPS, through various interactions. Therefore, hybridization of macrophage membranes with OMVs reduces LPS-induced OMV toxicity and promotes immune activation, aiding the clearance of bacterial cells and secreted toxins.

3.1.3.3

## Cells and liposomes
Liposomes are small artificial vesicles with a stable lipid bilayer structure similar to that of extracellular vesicles (EVs), and are typically produced using methods such as thin-film hydration, ultrasonic dispersion, and microfluidic systems. Liposomes are widely used as hybrid membrane constructs owing to their sophisticated preparation methods, excellent drug delivery properties, low systemic toxicity, and adaptability. They can be directly mixed with various cell membranes to form hybrid nanovesicles. For example, RBC membranes hybridized with liposomes [ , ] can mimic the CD47 density found on senescent RBCs, allowing them to bind with high affinity to SIRPα on macrophages, but without triggering signaling. The resulting RLP binds to SIRPα and induces its lysosomal degradation. Ly6G antibody-coupled RLP (aRLP) has been used to enhance tissue specificity for cardiac repair, enabling it to bind to neutrophils and accumulate at sites of inflammation. In addition, the natural targeting properties of lipids can be used to enhance the targeting capabilities of cell carriers. Liposomes are broadly categorized as cationic (positively charged), anionic (negatively charged), or neutral, based on their ionic charges. Positively and negatively charged lipids are commonly used to formulate liposomes for active targeting and improving cellular uptake. For example, positively charged lipids readily interact and fuse with negatively charged cell membranes, such as anionic phospholipids, sialic acid-containing glycolipids, glycoproteins, proteoglycans, and membrane proteins, thereby enhancing cellular uptake via endocytosis.
Dimethyldioctadecylammonium bromide (DDAB), a synthetic cationic lipid with a charged head and hydrophobic tail, facilitates gene delivery and vaccine development via liposome and lipid NP formation, enabling the efficient transfer of genetic material into cells. DDAB-modified liposomes have been used to modify activated neutrophil membranes to target lung tissue in acute respiratory distress syndrome (ARDS) [ ]. A similar strategy was used to hybridize M2-type macrophages with liposomes [ ].

3.2

## Regulating the biological behavior of carrier cells
Cell-based drug delivery is uniquely influenced by cellular behavior and can be categorized into three main areas: phenotype, transport, and activation. Optimizing delivery requires the modulation of these behaviors, as cell phenotype and activation are directly correlated with migratory capacity. For instance, M1 macrophages exhibit elevated levels of CCR2, CCR4, and CX3CR1 expression compared with M2 macrophages. This increased expression results in a stronger affinity for inflammatory tissues, including tumors. Moreover, M1 macrophages have been shown to possess superior abilities to phagocytose tumor cells, secrete cytokines, and sustain the activation of downstream adaptive immune responses compared with M2 macrophages (Jones et al., 2022). Consequently, the strategic stimulation of macrophages with polarizing reagents has emerged as a promising approach to modulate their behavior, thereby enhancing drug delivery efficacy.
A wide range of reagents can modulate macrophage phenotypes and activation states, including TLR agonists such as R848, CpG ODN, LPS, and poly (I:C); cytokines such as IFN-γ, interleukin (IL)-4, IL-10, and IL-13; and NPs such as silica, gold, and iron NPs.
For example, decitabine (DAC) promotes macrophage polarization, thereby enhancing targeting efficacy. Xing et al. [ ] demonstrated that ICG-modified macrophages loaded with an MOF-structured DAC (IDN@MC) can induce cancer cell pyroptosis. Initially, DAC-loaded ZIF-8 NPs (DZNPs) were synthesized, comprising Zn2+ and 2-methylimidazole. The pH-sensitive release behavior of the loaded DAC was observed in the DZNPs, with enhanced release rates and cumulative drug release in acidic environments owing to ZIF-8 nanomaterial degradation. The release of DAC was minimal (approximately 18 %) at physiological pH (7.4), thereby maximizing the macrophage encapsulation. Acidic conditions (pH 6.5 and 5.5) have been shown to significantly enhance the release of D-amino acids (DACs), facilitating nuclear translocation and M1 macrophage polarization. The presence of inducible nitric oxide synthase (iNOS), an M1 macrophage marker, was used to characterize macrophage polarization. After 12 h of incubation, the percentage of iNOS-positive IDN@MC and DZNP@MC cells increased significantly (45.3 % and 48.4 %, respectively) ( A). This can be attributed to the sustained degradation of DZNPs in the intracellular acidic environment, leading to the release of DAC and subsequent M1 polarization of host macrophages. The macrophage shell plays a dual role, facilitating self-driving mechanisms and serving as a drug-carrier, thereby enhancing tumor targeting and precise drug delivery. Furthermore, DAC has been shown to shift tumor cells from apoptosis to pyroptosis. Cellular pyroptosis plays a critical role in regulating immunosuppression, enhancing immunogenicity, and modulating the tumor immune microenvironment to activate immune responses. 
In addition to their activation during drug delivery, macrophages can be pretreated to enhance their drug delivery potential. Pre-polarized macrophage membranes can encapsulate drugs and further improve their targeting capabilities. For example, macrophages pre-stimulated with Mycobacterium marinum [ ] have demonstrated enhanced targeting and killing properties against M. tuberculosis.
Similarly, the biological behavior of cellular carriers other than macrophages plays a critical role in determining drug delivery outcomes. For example, resting neutrophils exhibit a limited ability to internalize NPs, whereas activated neutrophils are capable of fully internalizing albumin NPs and exhibit a greater migratory capacity. These findings emphasize the need to regulate neutrophil activation to optimize drug delivery. The migratory properties of neutrophils depend on the expression of β-integrins on their surface. These integrins are essential for neutrophil migration to sites of inflammation, such as in ARDS. Activated β-integrins bind to intercellular adhesion molecule (ICAM)-1/2 on the endothelial surface of the pulmonary vasculature, facilitating neutrophil infiltration into the inflamed lungs. Notably, the interaction of activated neutrophil β-integrins with ICAM-1 in cis has been shown to inhibit further adhesion. Divalent cations (Ca2+, Mg2+, and Mn2+) enhance β-integrin affinity via conformational changes. Prolonged incubation with Ca2+/Mg2+activates β-integrins [ ] and improves their migratory and internalization capabilities ( B).
Platelets are also used as drug carriers because of their natural ability to localize to tumors. However, platelet activation leads to tumor-induced blood vessel formation, potentially intensifying disease progression. To prevent premature activation of platelet-based drug carriers, treatment with activation inhibitors, such as rivaroxaban and tyrosine kinase inhibitors, is recommended. Tailored modulation of the biological behavior of carrier cells is crucial for advancing the next generation of effective cell-based drug delivery technologies.

4

## Engineered cellular drug delivery strategies
4.1

## Loading strategies
Cells are highly effective candidates for use as drug carriers. Specifically, the cytoplasmic space is suitable for hydrophilic drugs, while the lipid bilayer is ideal for hydrophobic drugs. Moreover, cell membranes with charged or reactive groups, such as amino and sulfhydryl groups, can facilitate drug attachment via physical adsorption (electrostatic binding) or chemical binding (covalent bonding). In gene editing therapies, therapeutic genes are seamlessly incorporated into the DNA of specific cells, leading to the development of specialized cell types, such as CAR-T and TCR-T cells. The delivery of these drugs depends on the unique characteristics of the drug and the intended role of the selected cellular carrier.
Several techniques have been developed to create carrier cells, including the encapsulation of therapeutic agents within the cell or coupling them to the extracellular surface. These methods have a minimal impact on the biological integrity of cells, ensuring their viability and functionality as drug carriers ( ). 
4.1.1

## Loading the cellular internal space: hypotonic swelling, electroporation, ultrasound, coextrusion, and phagocytosis
A primary benefit of employing cells as drug delivery vectors is the substantial internal space within the cytoplasm that accommodates therapeutic agents. Encapsulating drugs in the intracellular space is a simple and cost-effective method suitable for industrial production. Various drug encapsulation systems have been developed, including those based on hypotonic swelling, electroporation, phagocytosis, and ultrasonic encapsulation. The optimal method for drug encapsulation varies depending on the cell type. For example, mature RBCs, which lack nuclei and organelles, possess a large intracellular space ideal for drug-loading. The osmotic elasticity of the RBC membrane allows drug-loading into the cell interior via hypoosmotic swelling, which is a well-established drug encapsulation method for RBCs.
Hypotonic treatment is widely used for loading therapeutic agents into RBCs. During this process, RBCs are placed in a hypotonic medium, which causes them to swell and form pores of approximately 10–500 nm in size, enabling hydrophilic, water-soluble molecules to enter them passively along a concentration gradient. Subsequently, a hypertonic medium was introduced to reseal the pores and encapsulate the drug within the cells. The addition of ATP and metabolic intermediates, followed by incubation at 37 °C, improves cell recovery, ensuring that the drug-loaded RBCs remain intact and viable during in vivo administration. These methods have been optimized so that the circulation half-life of drug-loaded RBCs does not differ significantly from that of unmodified RBCs. The ERYCAPS® process is an industrialized, automated encapsulation method based on hypoosmotic dialysis. This process encapsulates L-asparaginase (ASNase) in RBCs, allowing the cells to act as circulating bioreactors that hydrolyze plasma asparagine and glutamine into aspartic acid, glutamic acid, and ammonia. A study [ ] evaluating the effects of hypoosmotic dialysis via the ERYCAPS® process on RBC function revealed certain alterations in the metabolomic profile of processed cells compared to unprocessed RBCs. However, the proteomic profiles remained unchanged. This process induces specific morphological changes in RBCs and increases the release of EVs. Although there was a decline in deformability, the processed RBCs were not mechanically held in the spleen-mimicking device. In the mouse model, the half-life of processed RBCs was not significantly affected. Notably, encapsulating ASNase in RBCs prolongs its half-life in vivo compared to that of the free enzyme. These findings suggest that while hypoosmotic dialysis encapsulation may alter certain RBC properties, the in vivo lifespan of the cells or their ability to function as drug carriers is not significantly affected.
Electroporation is a widely used strategy for cellular drug delivery. Electroporation involves the application of a short high-voltage pulse to enhance cell membrane permeability, thereby increasing the uptake of the transported drug. This technique allows the preparation of drug delivery carriers with stable properties and high encapsulation efficiency. Electroporation has been successfully used to load macromolecular drugs into RBCs [ ]. Temporary pores emerge in the PM when the transmembrane potential triggered by an electric field exceeds a critical level. This allows extracellular molecules to enter the cytoplasm via processes such as diffusion, electrophoresis, and electroosmosis [ ]. A previous study [ ] demonstrated that the electroporation process for loading drugs into RBCs did not significantly affect the mean corpuscular volume, blood viscosity, or deformability. In another study [ ], a synthetic method was developed to load DOX into RBCs via electroporation. The results showed that DOX-loaded RBCs could circulate for extended periods without being retained in the spleen or liver. The half-life of RBC-DOX indicated that electroporation minimally altered the structural properties of the loaded RBCs. Rao et al. [ ] demonstrated that microfluidic electroporation could effectively promote the synthesis of cell membrane-encapsulated NPs (CM-NPs). During this process, Fe3O4 magnetic NPs (MNs) and RBC membrane-derived vesicles (RBC-vesicles) were mixed and exposed to an electric pulse in a microfluidic device, effectively incorporating the MNs into the RBC membrane. The therapeutic efficacy of the resulting RBC-MNs was found to be significantly superior to that of RBC-MNs prepared using conventional extrusion methods, possibly because of the preservation of intact cell membrane encapsulation.
Ultrasound is widely used for intracellular drug-loading in laboratory settings. Exposure of cell membranes to ultrasound increases their permeability, thereby enhancing the uptake of exogenous molecules. This phenomenon, known as sonoporation, has been successfully used to deliver a wide range of therapeutic agents, including NPs, nucleic acids, and monoclonal antibodies [ , ]. In this process, ultrasound facilitates the encapsulation of cell membranes following coincubating the “cargo” with the cell membranes. Liu et al. [ ] demonstrated the use of ultrasound to load PLGA into RBC membranes. Ultrasound-mediated encapsulation offers several advantages, such as simplicity, cost-effectiveness, ease of application, and safety. However, this technique results in carrier particles with nonhomogeneous properties, indicating the need for further optimization.
In addition to ultrasound, coextrusion is a technique commonly used for the production of CM-NPs in laboratories. This method involves the mechanical extrusion of NPs alongside cell membranes to form NP-encapsulated cell membrane structures. This process comprises three fundamental steps: membrane extraction, preparation of core nanocarriers, and fusion. The physical coextrusion method entails the extrusion of NPs and cell membranes through porous polycarbonate membranes. Prior to extrusion, suitable cell membranes are extracted via hypoosmotic treatment, repeated freezing and thawing, or ultrasonic disruption. Coextrusion has been shown to produce NPs of uniform size while preserving membrane proteins; however, its intricate nature hinders mass production [ ]. Additionally, large-scale production is hindered by the need for high extrusion pressures and the deposition of materials on polycarbonate membrane filters, resulting in sample loss.
Alternative methods, such as mechanical disruption or electroporation, can also be used to create large pores in cell membranes, facilitating the diffusion of protein drugs. However, these methods often lead to membrane damage, which compromises the structural integrity of the cells and renders them more susceptible to destruction or recognition by the host immune system. For example, in RBCs, membrane disruption typically results in partial irreversible damage to cell structure and morphology. Consequently, researchers have begun to explore alternative loading strategies that exploit the inherent biological properties of cells. One promising approach is to leverage the phagocytic activity of certain cells, such as neutrophils and macrophages, to directly load drugs. This method is simple and economical, and is favored for large-scale production. The ability of macrophages to carry drugs depends on their phagocytic activity. Notably, direct loading of drugs into macrophages often leads to significant cellular toxicity. To address this, nanocarriers are increasingly being used to enhance drug delivery to macrophages. Xue et al. [ ] utilized the phagocytic capability of macrophages to load Fe@Fe3O4-DHCA NPs by coincubating cells for several hours. Similarly, the phagocytic capacity of neutrophils has also been used for drug-loading. Several studies have demonstrated the ability of neutrophils to efficiently phagocytose drug-loaded NPs [ , ]. Chen et al. [ ] confirmed NP-abPTX phagocytosis by neutrophils following incubation of neutrophils with FITC-labeled NP-abPTX for 1, 2, and 4 h at 37 °C. Moreover, the sustained presence of inflammatory stimuli enhanced the phagocytosis of NP-abPTX by neutrophils.
In cells that do not naturally undergo phagocytosis, fluid shear and peptide penetration can be used to load drugs without causing mechanical damage to the cell membranes. Casagrande et al. [ , ] demonstrated that fluid shear stress can temporarily open naturally occurring pores in RBC membranes, thereby facilitating the diffusion of molecules into the cytoplasmic fluid. The RBC membrane exhibits significant variability in its behavior and can withstand deformation to some extent. Researchers have optimized geometric and hydrodynamic parameters to induce temporary pore openings, allowing the diffusion of molecules without causing mechanical damage to cells. By optimizing the fluid shear forces and molecular concentrations, certain limitations of intracellular transport, such as cell membrane pore constriction, can be overcome. In addition to fluid shear, cell-penetrating peptides (CPPs) are also used for cellular drug-loading. CPPs are short peptides (3–30 amino acid residues) capable of transporting covalently linked macromolecules, including proteins and drug carriers, across the cell membranes of all organ types, including the brain. This suggests that CPPs may be an effective means of delivering drugs and proteins to cells, including RBCs. The encapsulation technology proposed by He et al. reported non-selective cell internalization mediated by CPPs (also known as protein transduction structural domains). This principle enables transduction in all cell types, including RBCs. This approach involves covalent binding of proteins to CPPs via disulfide bonds. CPPs' strong membrane-penetrating capability of CPPs enables the internalization of CPP-protein conjugates, such as CPP-ASNase, into RBCs without harming RBCs' structure or function of RBCs, even without disrupting cell membranes. High levels of cytoplasmic glutathione and reductase activity within RBCs promote the dissociation of CPP from its protein counterparts via the degradation of disulfide bonds. This dissociation indicates that the cell-impermeable ASNase remains permanently encapsulated within RBCs. This protects against host immune detection and clearance via the RES or endogenous mechanisms.

4.1.2

## Loading on the surface of the cell membrane: surface attachment
The surface attachment of drugs to the exterior of carrier cells offers several distinct advantages over intracellular drug loading. These benefits include circumventing issues related to lysosomal digestion, limited intracellular space, low loading capacity, and inability to regulate drug release. However, certain non-lipid-soluble drugs face challenges when crossing cell membranes. To address these issues, researchers have focused on attaching drugs to cell membrane surfaces. Various non-covalent interactions are commonly employed for the surface loading of NPs or drug carriers. Alternatively, covalent conjugation methods can be used to attach drugs or drug carriers to the cell surface, if they possess charged or reactive groups.
Non-covalent methods primarily rely on electrostatic interactions, hydrogen bonding, van der Waals forces, and hydrophobic interactions [ ] to load drugs or NPs onto the cell membrane, requiring minimal modification of both cells and NPs, provided that the NPs are positively charged or sufficiently hydrophobic. Mammalian cells naturally carry negatively charged surfaces owing to the presence of phosphate, carboxylic acid, and silicic acid groups on biomolecules. This property enables the positively charged NPs to adhere to the cell surface through electrostatic interactions. However, positively charged NPs are cytotoxic [ ]. In addition to electrostatic interactions, non-covalent forces, such as hydrophobic interactions, van der Waals forces, and hydrogen bonding, can be used to attach NPs to cell membranes. The active adsorption of NPs by RBCs is primarily mediated by non-covalent interactions [ ]. The primary advantage of non-covalent methods lies in their simplicity and the ability to preserve cellular functions. However, non-covalent attachment lacks the stability required for sustained NP retention on the cell membrane, owing to the fluidity of the lipid bilayer. This leads to difficulty in controlling the attachment process and increases the potential for detachment of NPs from the membrane caused by shear stress from blood flow or in vivo cell-cell interactions.
Another non-covalent approach for drug delivery involves ligand–receptor interactions, such as biotinylation, and leverages naturally occurring receptors on the cell surface, eliminating the need for cell modification. Biotinylation differs from other non-covalent techniques by offering a highly specific and robust linkage, with binding constants (Ka) as high as 1015 M−1, which is one of the strongest known biological linkages. This approach is inexpensive, simple, rapid, stable, and resistant to high temperatures, proteolytic hydrolases, and extreme pH conditions. In recent decades, biotinylation has gained widespread use in biotechnology, including in studies on the extracellular attachment of drug molecules to RBCs. Wang et al. [ ] developed a rational drug-loading strategy using RBCs as carriers. They used DOX-loaded RBCs as a DDSs and modified the RBCs with cyclic arginine-glycine-aspartic acid (RGD) peptides (cRGDs) to enhance active targeting. RGD is a well-known ligand of integrin αVβ3, which is a receptor involved in cell-to-cell adhesion and transmission. RGD-targeted DDS can enhance drug delivery to tumor cells with high αVβ3 expression, thereby improving the therapeutic efficacy. However, biotinylation requires the purification of target cells to avoid non-specific attachment, as similar receptors are present in multiple cell types. Additionally, the choice of the ligand is critical because using an inappropriate ligand for receptor-specific attachment can render the system ineffective. Another drawback of ligand–receptor interactions is their potential to inadvertently trigger unwanted biological responses. Although biotinylation does not generally affect cellular functions, a biotin-coupled system can be immunogenic in vivo, limiting its application in some contexts. Covalent techniques use cell surface reactive groups, such as amino, thiol, and sugar moieties. N-hydroxysuccinimide esters are prevalent in the formation of stable bonds with drugs or particles. Orthogonal groups were introduced using compounds, such as azidoglycine and azidophosphatidylcholine. Wang et al. [ ] employed covalent bonding to attach oxaliplatin-containing nanocomplexes to RBC membrane surfaces. This attachment was achieved using a covalent linker (O-[N-(6-Maleimidohexanoyl)aminoethyl]-O-[3-(N-succinimidohexanoyloxy)-3-oxopropyl] poly [ethylene glycol] 3000) to form stable bonds between the nanocomplexes and the RBC membrane. The maleimide-thiol adduct reacted with the C-terminal cysteine residue of the ERY1 peptide, a 12-amino acid peptide with high affinity for the RBC membrane protein glycophorin-A, which allowed targeted attachment of the antigen to the surface of mouse RBCs. This method enabled the effective attachment of more than 100 NPs, ranging from 100 to 300 nm in diameter, to RBCs without adversely affecting RBC function. Furthermore, they extend the circulating half-life of drug molecules and maintain their cellular functionality and stability. The covalent bond ensures a strong cell–drug interaction, preventing particle shedding and uptake by non-target tissues, such as the liver and spleen. However, this covalent approach presents several challenges [ ]. First, the random conjugation of NPs to sugar groups on glycoproteins can interfere with their biological activity. Second, maleimides, particularly activated esters, are unstable in water-based environments and may bind nonspecifically to proteins in cell culture media. A blocking step is often required to prevent the unreacted maleimides from binding to unwanted proteins. Third, conjugation to large sterically hindered entities, such as cells, NPs, amides, and thioethers, can result in slow bond formation at low concentrations owing to limited reactant diffusion. Additionally, the physiological perturbations inherent in these strategies may disrupt critical cellular functions, such as those governed by cell surface molecules and membranes. Covalent approaches often result in low drug-loading, which leads to increased immunogenicity.

4.1.3

## Integration of genes into the vector cell genome
Genetic modification offers a novel drug manufacturing method that allows the expression of specific ligands or proteins in cells, intracellularly, or in EVs. This method enables the accurate spatial regulation of synthesized cytosolic or anchored proteins, simplifying the directed expression of receptors or protein therapeutics. Gene transfer, which is valued for its stability and reproducibility, is broadly applied to cells such as T cells, NK cells, and macrophages.
CAR T cells and, more recently, CAR NK cells have demonstrated efficacy against hematological cancers [ , , ]. CAR modification significantly enhanced the anti-tumor activity of T and NK cells. However, their effectiveness against solid tumors is limited by difficulties in trafficking and penetration. Therefore, in addition to optimizing the cells themselves [ ], CAR cells have been genetically engineered to secrete cytokines and enhance their therapeutic effects [ ]. For example, HER2-resistant CAR-T cells have been engineered to secrete IL-10, which promotes CAR-T cell proliferation and effector functions. This modification has led to the complete regression of various solid and metastatic tumors in xenograft mouse models, including colon cancer, breast cancer, melanoma, and pancreatic cancer. Additionally, IL-10 CAR-T cells induce a stem cell-like memory response, providing long-lasting protection against tumor recurrence. The localization of engineered proteins can be precisely controlled to either the cytoplasm or the cell membrane. Additionally, the combination of CAR cell therapy allows the elimination of target cells by CAR-expressing T cells and NK cells through cytotoxic mechanisms, such as perforin and granzyme release and death receptor interactions. However, CAR-based therapies present significant clinical challenges [ ]. One concern is the potential for CAR-engineered cells to mistakenly target healthy cells if neoantigens are not uniquely expressed in tumor cells. To mitigate this risk, CAR vectors may be engineered to co-express suicide genes, enabling the selective elimination of CAR-T cells in the event of uncontrollable adverse effects. In addition to CAR therapies, gene editing methods targeting RBCs are gaining attention. Mature RBCs lack nuclei; therefore, direct engineering via transfection or transduction is limited. Consequently, erythroid progenitor cells have been genetically modified to express specific proteins or peptides that are retained on the surface of mature RBCs.

4.2

## Design strategy for engineered cellular drug delivery systems ( )
The rational design of an ECDDS is a multi-factorial process that requires synergistic optimization across three core axes: the biological properties of the carrier cell, the nature of the drug, and the pathophysiological features of the target tissue. The following sections elaborate on this three-axis design strategy, providing a framework for customizing cells for specific therapeutic missions.
4.2.1

## Based on cell biology
The design and implementation of an ECDDS relies on the biological properties of cells, targeted engineering modifications, and functional optimization based on an understanding of internal cellular mechanisms. The following section explores the strategies for designing efficient and safe ECDDS based on these biological properties.
4.2.1.1

## Chemotaxis/targeting
Targeted drug delivery systems are crucial to ensure therapeutic efficacy. This targeting can leverage a cell's inherent biological properties and, through modifications to the cell membrane, can enhance the recognition of specific tissues or cell types. Many cells possess chemotactic and targeting capabilities. For example, immune cells, such as lymphocytes, neutrophils, and macrophages, exhibit strong chemotactic responses and migrate to sites of infection, inflammation, or tumors. Chemotaxis serves as an effective defense mechanism and provides a basis for the targeted delivery of engineered cellular drugs. The TME is particularly conducive to immune cell aggregation, where various immune cells accumulate within the tumor lesions. This specificity can be harnessed by the ECDDS, particularly in tumor therapy. For example, macrophages, with their tumor-homing properties, can serve as carrier cells and inherently offer natural targeting ability. To further refine targeting and overcome immunosuppression in the TME, specific antibodies can be incorporated into the membranes of engineered macrophages to enhance their recognition and targeting of tumor cells. This method promotes a more precise and effective immunosuppressive effect within the TME [ ], allowing the targeting and elimination of tumor cells with high antigenic expression. Similar phenomena are observed in inflammatory environments, such as intervertebral disc lesions, where M1 macrophages accumulate and release cytokines such as IL-1β and tumor necrosis factor (TNF)-α. Macrophages engineered with high TrkA expression and encapsulated MnO2 NPs have been employed to treat intervertebral disc inflammation [ ]. This approach utilizes convergent and homologous targeting of macrophages to ensure precise drug delivery to the affected areas.
Activated platelets also exhibit chemotaxis toward damaged endothelial cells via complement regulatory proteins on their surfaces. They can be passively targeted by self-labeling markers, such as CD47, or exhibit active targeting through surface antigens, including CLEC-2, P-selectin, integrin α6β1, and integrin αIIbβ3. This renders platelets ideal carriers for drug delivery, particularly in cardiovascular diseases such as atherosclerosis, which is characterized by inflammation and lipid accumulation in plaques. The encapsulation of drug-loaded NPs within platelet-derived [ ] membranes enhances their interaction with endothelial cells and macrophages, both in homeostatic and inflammatory states. This characteristic is particularly advantageous for targeted anti-inflammatory therapies. Moreover, the ability of platelets to penetrate the BBB has led to their use in treating neurological inflammatory diseases, such as Alzheimer's disease (AD) [ ] and traumatic brain injury [ ]. Additionally, platelets play a significant role in tumor metastasis; therefore, they have been engineered as delivery vehicles for anticancer drugs, targeting and destroying cancer cells while preventing interactions between platelets and cancer cells, thereby inhibiting metastasis.
RBCs lacking inherent targeting properties can be engineered to acquire these capabilities. For example, the insertion of ligands into the RBC membrane coupled with affinity-biotin interactions [ ] enables RBCs to traverse the BBB and tumor stroma, facilitating efficient drug delivery to glioma tissues. Additionally, RBC membranes have been combined with targeting liposomes [ ], thereby conferring specific targeting properties. Furthermore, the incorporation of magnetic particles, such as Fe3O4 and NPs [ ] within RBCs allows for precise manipulation and navigation under an external magnetic field.

4.2.1.2

## Capacity of cells to carry drugs
The drug-carrying capacity of a cell directly affects the efficiency of drug delivery, which is determined by its ability to take up, store, and release drugs. Cellular drug-loading can be categorized into two types: internal and membrane surface drug-loading. Internal drug-loading is influenced by factors such as cell membrane permeability and biological characteristics of the cell, such as cell type and internal environment. In contrast, drug-loading on the membrane surface is influenced by surface moieties and hydrodynamic factors within the vasculature.
Cell membrane permeability is a key factor affecting drug-loading efficiency. The size, polarity, and charge of a drug molecule significantly influence its ability to penetrate the cell membrane. For example, hydrophobic drugs are more likely to pass freely through the cell membrane than polar or charged drugs. Consequently, it is essential to regulate cell permeability when designing drug-loading systems using methods such as hypotonic swelling, electroporation, sonication, or CPPs. For example, drug-loading into RBCs via hypoosmotic swelling is facilitated by their unique biconcave structure. Although electroporation and sonication are commonly used to enhance membrane permeability, hypoosmotic swelling is constrained by the size of the drug, limiting the encapsulation of larger NPs. Moreover, internal drug-loading often requires precise control to avoid membrane disruption, which can compromise the cell biocompatibility. In contrast, alternative loading methods such as sonication and electroporation, although effective, can cause significant cellular damage, necessitating further optimization to improve NP loading efficiency.
The biological properties of different cell types significantly influence the drug-loading. Phagocytic cells, such as macrophages and neutrophils, can directly load drugs into cells, with the extent of loading determined by their phagocytic capacity. For example [ ] coating nanodrugs with E. coli membranes enhances neutrophil phagocytosis, improves efficiency, and prevents drug leakage. However, the situation becomes more complex because of the presence of small molecules or enzyme systems within the cytoplasm that play crucial roles in drug metabolism. The effective concentration of the drug inside the cell is often reduced because of enzymatic breakdown of the drug, which affects its therapeutic effect. Additionally, the intracellular pH plays a critical role in drug metabolism by influencing drug ionization and bioavailability. For example, many anticancer drugs exhibit enhanced solubility in acidic environments, which facilitates endocytosis through the cell membrane. Furthermore, contemporary drug-loading methodologies typically require drugs to traverse the lysosomes. This process can lead to the degradation of nanostructures and accelerate drug release, thereby compromising drug-loading efficiency. To address these challenges, effective drug-loading processes must ensure both high drug-loading and nanostructure stability. Liu et al. [ ] demonstrated an innovative approach for encapsulating nanodrugs in E. coli-derived exosomes for delivery into macrophages via folliculin-mediated endocytosis. This strategy bypasses lysosomal processing, thereby preserving nanostructural integrity, reducing drug degradation, and enhancing drug-loading efficiency.
Drug-loading onto membrane surfaces can be achieved using various methods. One approach involves non-covalent interactions to load NPs or particles onto the cell surface. Alternatively, drugs or drug-carrier particles can attach to charged or reactive moieties on the cell membrane via covalent conjugation. Balancing the extent of coupling and loading on the engineered cell surface is crucial to ensure that normal physiological functions are maintained, while allowing for prolonged circulation time. These methods significantly expand the range of cargoes that can be loaded onto the cell surface, including biomolecules (such as enzymes, antibodies, and functional peptides), drugs, imaging probes, antigens, and even larger substances (such as NPs or nanorobots). For example, the amphiphilic ionic polymer poly (2-[N-oxide-N,N-diethylamino] ethyl methacrylate) (OPDEA)-based micelles have been shown to attach to RBC membranes via phospholipid-associated affinities [ ]. Similarly, polyphenolic tannins facilitate the supramolecular assembly of protein-based drug cargoes on the surface of DCs, thereby enabling localized drug delivery [ ]. However, this strategy exposes the drug to the in vivo environment, where it may be influenced by hemodynamics and the tissue microenvironment, potentially leading to off-target effects and reduced drug-carrying efficiency. Nevertheless, this exposure allows the drug to respond to the blood environment, facilitating more direct in vivo actions, such as drug release.

4.2.1.3

## Biocompatibility and safety
In the design of CDDS, ensuring the biocompatibility and safety of the carrier cells is critical. A key strategy for achieving this goal is to minimize the immunogenicity of the drug delivery system. Engineered cells must demonstrate high viability and stability to maintain their functionality in vivo. The source and properties of the carrier cells significantly influence the biocompatibility of the system. Commonly used cell types include RBCs, platelets, and immune cells. For example, RBCs have a long lifespan of up to 120 days and can prevent drug clearance by macrophages in the RES, greatly extending the circulating half-life of the drug and enhancing its efficacy during delivery [ ]. Nanodrugs assembled on RBC surfaces via lipid fusion [ ] have an elimination half-life of 74.75 ± 8.77 h, significantly longer than the 33.56 ± 2.36 h observed for nanodrugs alone. Platelets with a circulating half-life of approximately 30 h can inhibit immune clearance owing to the surface expression of CD47. This “self-tag” interacts with SIRPα on immune cells. Platelet membrane-encapsulated anticoagulants [ ] demonstrated enhanced biocompatibility and a prolonged blood half-life, showing effective therapeutic outcomes for deep vein thrombosis lesions at reduced doses. In contrast, the activity and function of immune cells can vary significantly across different microenvironments, potentially affecting cytocompatibility [ ]. For example, in gouty inflammatory lesions caused by uric acid accumulation, M1-type macrophages are prevalent. These macrophages can be reprogrammed to the M2 phenotype by M2 macrophages and their secreted vesicles to counteract inflammatory factors. Nanomedicines, such as uricase, encapsulated in M2-type macrophage membranes hybridized with RBC membranes, improve the inflammatory microenvironment in gout [ ]. Thus, selecting an appropriate cell source and understanding its biological functions are crucial for optimizing CDDS design.
The rational selection and engineering of cellular carriers must be guided by a systematic evaluation of their intrinsic biological properties. Key considerations include the following: the leveraging of innate homing capabilities (e.g., neutrophil chemotaxis to inflamed tissues or macrophage tropism for tumors) for passive targeting; the matching of cargo capacity to cellular structure (e.g. the utilisation of the large cytoplasmic volume of RBCs for small molecules or the phagocytic activity of macrophages for particulate loads) while accounting for potential metabolic degradation; and the prioritisation of biocompatibility through the retention of "self-markers" such as CD47 to extend circulation half-life. In the final analysis, the selection of cell type determines the viable engineering pathways and the functional scope of the resulting delivery system.

4.2.2

## Based on the nature of the drug
4.2.2.1

## Physicochemical properties
Physicochemical properties of a drug significantly affect its design strategy of ECDDS. Key factors, such as particle size, hydrophilicity, lipophilicity, surface charge, and stability, can affect the development of engineered cellular carriers.
Different drug-loading strategies may be required based on the physicochemical characteristics of the drug. For example, the size of a drug molecule determines its ability to penetrate the cell membrane. Smaller molecules can diffuse more readily, whereas larger molecules may require specialized delivery systems, such as NPs or cell membrane encapsulation, to facilitate entry. Additionally, molecular morphology can affect drug-loading in engineered cells. For example [ ], discoidal folic acid-modified DOX-containing MS NPs (FRMSNs) demonstrated enhanced binding and internalization in K562 cells through multivalent interactions. Bioelectronic microscopy visualized the "planar" contact of the discoidal particles with the cells, and quantitative analysis confirmed that these interactions improved the binding affinity to folate-binding proteins, thereby enhancing the active targeting efficiency.
The solubility of drugs in aqueous (hydrophilic) or lipid (hydrophobic) environments is another critical factor that determines loading strategies. Hydrophobic drugs are often better suited for membrane surface incorporation, whereas hydrophilic drugs tend to be better encapsulated within cells. The charge of a drug also influences its interaction with a typically charged cell membrane. For example, cationic (positively charged) drugs promote endocytosis via electrostatic interactions.
The stability of a drug under physiological conditions is crucial for effective delivery. Drugs that are prone to degradation may require protective encapsulation, such as in NPs, to maintain their potency until release. Moreover, physicochemical properties can guide the design of targeting mechanisms. Drugs conjugated to ligands or antibodies can be engineered to bind specifically to receptors on target cells, thereby enhancing drug uptake. This is especially relevant in engineered cells, where the cell surface can be modified to improve the targeting and delivery efficiency.

4.2.2.2

## Biocompatibility and toxicity
The toxicity of pharmaceuticals and the biocompatibility of their byproducts are critical factors in the design of an ECDDS. Commonly used organic drugs, such as PLGA and liposomes, are inherently biodegradable. PLGA, a multifunctional synthetic polymer that can be engineered into NPs to encapsulate various drug types, is the most widely used platform for loading drugs into engineered cells [ ]. Liposomes are spherical vesicles composed of at least one lipid bilayer that readily fuses with cell membrane vesicles [ ]. These properties make them key components in the design of drug-carrying systems.
Most inorganic materials are biocompatible. Among inorganic nanostructures, MS is considered biocompatible and biodegradable, breaking down into nontoxic, water-soluble silicic acid. This material is frequently employed in ECDDS because of its high porosity, large surface area, and high drug/photosensitizer loading capacity [ ]. Fe3O4 NPs, which release iron ions as biodegradation byproducts, are generally nontoxic. Biocompatibility depends on constituent metals and ligands. Zinc-based MOFs, such as ZIF-8, are relatively safe because they release naturally occurring Zn2+ ions. Gold particles, another commonly used biocompatible inorganic material, are inert but not biodegradable, which raises concerns regarding their potential accumulation. To address these concerns, the use of nano- or ultra-small gold templates is recommended to facilitate rapid renal clearance. Gold particles can be adapted into various shapes, including NPs, nanocages, nanorods, and nanoshells, all of which can be incorporated into an ECDDS.

4.2.2.3

## Stimuli-responsiveness
In addition to the previously discussed physical, chemical, and biocompatibility properties, stimuli-responsiveness is exhibited by a class of macromolecules known as stimuli-responsive polymers. These polymers undergo reversible or irreversible structural changes upon exposure to specific signals, resulting in the transformation of the bulk behavior of the macromolecular system. Stimuli-responsive polymers respond to the external environment by producing detectable changes in their physical and chemical properties. These polymers are important because of their applications in various domains, such as drug release, nanocatalysis, chemical sensing, and biotechnology. When integrated into an ECDDS, stimuli-responsive polymers enable the design of engineered cells that load specific agents, such as photothermites, magnetothermites, pH-sensitive responders, and acoustic sensitizers, either inside the cells or on their surface. These systems can then induce membrane destruction through external triggers such as near-infrared (NIR) light [ , , , ], in vitro magnetic fields [ ], changes in extracellular pH [ , ], and ultrasound [ ]. A common strategy in ECDDS involves the introduction of drug-carrying structural chains onto the carrier cell membrane to enable precise drug release.
Sonodynamic therapy (SDT) is a promising design strategy that uses ultrasound to generate ROS in macrophages loaded with acoustic sensitizers that specifically target tumor cells [ ]. Unlike photodynamic therapy (PDT), SDT offers deep tissue penetration with minimal damage to the surrounding healthy tissues. The non-ionizing nature, high control, and low cost of SDT make it an increasingly viable treatment for deep tissue tumors. In addition to direct tumor cell death via ROS generation, SDT can stimulate anti-tumor immune responses by producing tumor antigens from tumor cell fragments. The use of macrophage-conditioned media, derived from macrophages and grafted with 4-(4,4,5,5-tetramethyltetramethyl-1,3,2-dioxaborolan-2-yl)benzyl acrylate, encapsulated with ROS-responsive particles, the acoustic sensitizers Ce6 and JQ1, represents a significant advancement in this field. These particles incorporate a bromostructural domain protein 4 (BRD4) inhibitor, which downregulates programmed death ligand-1 (PD-L1) expression and enhances GBM immune sonodynamic therapy ( A). The apolipoprotein E peptide-modified macrophage membrane coating provided NPs with low immunogenicity, effective BBB permeability, prolonged circulatory half-life, and excellent biocompatibility. Upon accumulation in tumor cells, ROS-responsive polymer cores are degraded by ultrasound-induced ROS, resulting in rapid release of encapsulated drugs. ROS production not only results in tumor death via acoustic kinetic therapy but also induces ICD, further activating the anti-tumor immune response. JQ1, once unleashed, puts the brakes tumor cell growth and stimulates the immune system by dialing down PD-L1 expression on tumor cell surfaces. This, in turn, boosts drug absorption and reduces adverse side effects ( B). 
The formulation of an ECDDS is contingent upon meticulous adaptation to the physicochemical and therapeutic characteristics of the drug payload. In selecting a loading strategy, it is imperative to consider the drug properties, taking into account the type of agent (hydrophilic or hydrophobic) and the nature of the cargo. For hydrophilic agents, intracellular encapsulation is the preferred approach, whereas for hydrophobic or macromolecular cargo, membrane integration or covalent conjugation are more suitable.Ensuring material safety is also of paramount importance. This can be achieved by prioritising biodegradable and metabolically inert carriers, such as PLGA or phospholipids, in order to mitigate the risk of chronic toxicity. In addition, incorporating environmental responsiveness is essential. This can be achieved through the use of pH-sensitive bonds, enzyme-cleavable linkers, or thermosensitive polymers, which can confine drug release to pathological niches. This axis underscores the notion that the behaviour of drugs in vivo can be programmed through intelligent carrier–cargo pairing.

4.2.3

## Based on characteristics of the target tissue
The design of an ECDDS must consider various factors within the target tissue microenvironment, including hypoxia, immune composition, pH levels, and specific in vivo barriers, such as the BBB. These elements directly influence the migration, function, and efficacy of carrier cells, thereby affecting both the drug release and overall performance of the delivery system. For example, an acidic microenvironment may enhance the release of specific drugs, whereas variations in the immune microenvironment may affect cellular chemotaxis and functionality. Additionally, in vivo barriers significantly influence the interactions between cells and drug-carrying systems. For example, the BBB exhibits varying permeability to immune cells depending on the physiological state. To optimize drug delivery, ECDDS should not only include countermeasures to overcome the challenges posed by these factors, but also be tailored to exploit the unique properties of the target tissue for improved therapeutic outcomes.
4.2.3.1

## Hypoxia
Microenvironmental hypoxia is a characteristic feature of various diseases, including bacterial infections, inflammatory conditions, and TME. Two main strategies have been developed for designing ECDDS targeting hypoxic microenvironments: (1) utilizing engineered cells as carriers to deliver or generate oxygen, and (2) inhibiting cellular respiration through the delivered drug to reduce oxygen consumption.
In hypoxic infectious microenvironments, such as those caused by Staphylococcus aureus, impaired chemotaxis and respiratory bursts hinder the bactericidal activity of neutrophils. To address this, an ECDDS can be designed to deliver oxygen, thus improving the bactericidal efficacy of neutrophils. For example, red blood cell membranes (RBCM) have been coated with NPs [ ] encapsulating the antimicrobial drug naftifine (Naf) and oxygen-carrying hemoglobin (Hb), resulting in Hb-Naf@RBCM NPs. Iron-containing Hb not only catalyzes the oxidation of hydrogen sulfide, enhancing the susceptibility of S. aureus to oxidants and improving neutrophil chemotaxis, but also delivers oxygen to alleviate hypoxia in infected tissues, thereby restoring neutrophil respiratory burst activity. In addition to direct oxygen delivery, drugs can alleviate tissue hypoxia by metabolizing hydrogen peroxide into oxygen. For example, in atherosclerosis, colchicine modified with manganese dioxide (Col@HMnO2-macrophage membrane [MM]) was encapsulated within macrophage membranes [ ]. This system autonomously generates oxygen by breaking down excess hydrogen peroxide at the inflammatory atherosclerotic (AS) sites. The generated oxygen reduced the hypoxic microenvironment of the plaques, which subsequently downregulated hypoxia-inducible factor (HIF-1α) and enhanced cholesterol efflux, ultimately inhibiting foam cell formation and ameliorating the hypoxic microenvironment ( A). 
In addition to the strategies aimed at delivering oxygen, another common approach for alleviating tissue hypoxia, particularly in the TME, is to inhibit cellular respiration. Hypoxia in the TME results from an abnormal and dysfunctional tumor vasculature, which contributes to an immunosuppressive environment. This hypoxic state promotes angiogenesis, metabolic reprogramming, extracellular matrix remodeling, epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT), p53 inactivation, and immune evasion. Targeting the oxygen consumption by tumor cells is an effective strategy for alleviating hypoxia. One promising approach is the inhibition of mitochondrial respiration, which reduces oxidative phosphorylation and, consequently, oxygen consumption. Atovaquone (ATO), a low-molecular-weight therapeutic agent used to treat malaria and Pneumocystis carinii pneumonia, has shown the potential to alleviate tumor hypoxia. ATO inhibits cytochrome bc1 complex (complex III) in the mitochondrial respiratory chain, thereby conserving oxygen. Encapsulation of ATO within hybrid membranes derived from macrophages and cancer cells [ ] has been shown to further inhibit mitochondrial respiration, reduce oxygen consumption in solid tumors, and enhance the efficacy of ICD, while mitigating the adverse effects of hypoxia.
In addition to alleviating hypoxia by targeting tissue properties, we exploited this hypoxic environment to design a hypoxia-activatable multimodal molecular imaging and photoimmunotherapy for sensitive cancer diagnosis and effective treatment [ ]. For example, we synthesized a molecular probe, BN-O, based on a nitrogen-oxide structure, which undergoes a chemical transformation from an “A-A” form to a “D-A” form under hypoxic conditions ( B). This conversion activates the NIR response, enabling strong NIR-II fluorescence/photothermal (FL/PA) signaling. Hypoxia-triggered photodynamic and photothermal effects promote ICD and activate the stimulator of the interferon gene (STING) pathway, thereby enhancing both innate and adaptive immunity. Additionally, a vascular-disrupting agent remodels the TME, depriving the tumor of nutrients and oxygen and further exacerbating the hypoxic condition to amplify the effects of hypoxia-activated phototherapy. This nanoagent not only impedes the growth of primary tumors, but also inhibits distant tumor progression while stimulating protective immune memory against lung metastases.

4.2.3.2

## Immune microenvironment
The complex immune microenvironments present in various pathological states of target tissues have driven the development of specialized ECDDS designed to target these diverse and intricate microenvironments. A prime example of such a microenvironment is the TME, which consists of various cell types, including TAMs, immune cells (such as T cells), fibroblasts, and endothelial cells. TAMs play a crucial role in tumor growth and metastasis by promoting an immunosuppressive environment and facilitating tumor cell escape from immune surveillance. Therefore, a key strategy in tumor therapy is to overcome immunosuppression by exploiting the infiltrative properties of immune cells to target tumor sites. For example, CAR-T-cell-encapsulated NPs have been developed for solid tumor therapy using CAR technology. One such system, ACSP@TCM, involves the encapsulation of Au/CuSe and 3-bromopyruvic acid within CAR-T-cell membranes [ ]. This CAR-T cell membrane-based system exhibited superior targeting efficacy compared to tumor cell membrane-based systems. Additionally, ACSP@TCM demonstrated absorptive, synergistic, and chemodynamic/photothermal therapy (PTT) effects, inducing ICD in NALM 6 cells. This induction of ICD in tumor cells results in the release of DAMPs, which activate the immune response and promote CAR-T-cell infiltration into tumors. CAR-T cell binding to tumor cells via the immune synapse induces tumor cell elimination via three primary mechanisms: expression of TNF ligands, secretion of specific cytokines, and release of perforin. Furthermore, 3-bromopyruvic acid inhibits lactate efflux by interfering with glycolysis and modulating TME acidity, creating a more favorable environment for CAR-T cell survival. In autoimmune diseases such as RA, macrophages play a pivotal role in the inflammatory processes underlying RA synovitis. Macrophages represent the predominant leukocyte population (≥40 %) in the synovial infiltrate. Activated macrophages (M1 macrophages) produce a range of cytokines that exacerbate joint inflammation in patients with RA. To address this problem, NPs encapsulated in macrophage membranes [ ] were designed to efficiently target inflamed joints using 2-aminoethoxydiphenyl borate, a lipophilic boron-containing compound that downregulates inflammatory factors by crossing cellular membranes. This drug delivery system aimed to inhibit M1 macrophage polarization and promote polarization toward the anti-inflammatory M2 phenotype, thereby reducing synovial inflammation in RA.

4.2.3.3

## pH
The pH of the microenvironment significantly influences the efficiency of ECDDS. Delivery efficiency can be enhanced by tailoring drug delivery systems according to the pH of specific target tissues. For example, tumor tissues typically exhibit reduced pH owing to oncogenic transformation and abnormal metabolism. The acidic environment provides opportunities for the use of pH-responsive drugs. Chemical structures such as ZIF-8 and covalent organic frameworks (COFs) have shown considerable potential. These materials disintegrate in the TME, facilitating drug release and improving therapeutic efficacy.
ZIF-8, a pH-responsive structure, demonstrates good biocompatibility and stability under physiological conditions, but disintegrates under acidic conditions. Therefore, they have been employed in ECDDS designed to target acidic microenvironments [ ]. For example, ZIF-8 [ ] has been integrated into engineered cell carriers by hybridizing bacterial OMVs with RBCM. The ZIF8 shell of these carrier cells rapidly disintegrates upon encountering the acidic TME, leading to drug release. Similarly, COFs generated through Schiff base reactions have demonstrated the capacity to degrade in acidic tumor environments [ ], making them suitable for use in engineered cellular carriers that enable drug release under acidic conditions.
Furthermore, certain diols form reversible borate bonds with boric acid in aqueous solutions, thereby creating cyclic borate esters that dissociate in acidic environments. For example, phenylboronic acid (PBA) has been grafted onto the hydrophilic polymer poly(methyl vinyl ether-alt-maleic anhydride) (PMVEMA), resulting in the formation of PMVEMA-PBA [ ]. This polymer was then loaded with the chemotherapeutic drug, DOX, forming PMVEMA-PBA-DOX. The complex self-assembles into nanostructures (denoted as DOX NPs), which are encapsulated in MM to form MM@DOX NPs. The borate bond between PBA and DOX selectively responds to the low pH of the TME, triggering the release of DOX within the tumor cells.

4.2.3.4

## Blood-brain barrier
The central nervous system (CNS) is considered an immune-privileged site owing to its unique anatomical features, and the BBB plays a critical role in regulating the delivery of pharmaceutical agents to the brain. The BBB comprises specialized endothelial cells, capillary and astrocyte basement membranes, pericytes, and astrocyte terminal pedicles. The BBB acts as a selective biological filter that separates the blood from the CNS. Under steady-state conditions, engineered carrier cells encounter substantial hurdles in reaching the brain parenchyma from the bloodstream. This is mainly because they must traverse the vascular endothelium and glial junctions. Additionally, low expression levels of endothelial cell adhesion molecules further hinder the entry of peripherally engineered carrier cells into the CNS parenchyma. Collectively, these barriers impede the effective delivery of drugs to the CNS. Healthy immune systems restrict the presence of immune cells in the blood vessels, preventing brain infiltration. Microglia and peripheral macrophages constitute the primary innate immune response in the brain. However, under pathological conditions, such as inflammation or injury, the CNS microenvironment undergoes changes that trigger the production of pro-inflammatory cytokines, chemokines, and adhesion molecules. These molecules facilitate the recruitment of peripheral immune cells to the BBB, thereby disrupting its integrity and allowing them to infiltrate the brain. Consequently, engineered carrier cells are increasingly being used to deliver drugs to the CNS by harnessing the immune cell infiltration process. Under conditions such as ischemic stroke or traumatic brain injury [ ], neutrophils are among the first peripheral immune cells recruited to the affected site. These cells accumulate in the perivascular space and subsequently infiltrate the infarcted brain parenchyma, thereby playing a critical role in modulating the immune microenvironment during stroke. Consequently, neutrophil delivery of drugs offers distinct advantages in the treatment of ischemic stroke [ ]. For example, A151, an oligonucleotide containing telomerase repeats, is delivered by neutrophils [ ]. A151 was encapsulated in a targeting peptide (TP) and a salivary acid-modified PDA. The expression of TGase on the surface of endothelial cells facilitates the adhesion of the TP peptide, acting as a docking site for nanomedicines. These nanomedicines can efficiently recognize and direct neutrophils to endothelial cells. This system promotes neutrophil reprogramming from NETosis to apoptosis via the histone glutamate inhibition pathway, which is regulated by ROS scavenging. Additionally, the oxidative degradation of PDA by ROS releases A151 into apoptotic bodies (ABs), which are internalized by microglia, inducing polarization toward an anti-inflammatory M2 phenotype. This process was further facilitated by inhibition of the cGAS-STING pathway. This reprogramming of neutrophils and microglia significantly alleviated the inflammatory response associated with ischemic stroke by reducing NET release.
To further enhance drug delivery to the CNS, receptor-mediated endocytosis and other mechanisms can be used to facilitate BBB crossing. A promising approach involves the use of ECDDS modified with specific ligands to target the BBB. The trans-Golgi network (TGN) ligand, comprising 12 amino acids screened by phage display, facilitates BBB crossing. This strategy has been applied to treat AD by modifying the RBC membrane [ ] with TGN and encapsulating curcumin (CUR) NPs.
The effective design of ECDDS must take into account the pathophysiological features of the target tissue. This involves the engineering of carriers to navigate biological barriers, such as the functionalization of surfaces with ligands that mediate trans-BBB transport or the leveraging of immune cell adhesion molecules for endothelial diapedesis; the programming of microenvironment-triggered drug release using cues such as acidosis, hypoxia, or overexpressed enzymes; and the counteraction of local immunosuppression or fibrosis through the local delivery of immunomodulators or ECM-remodeling agents. A comprehensive understanding of the disease microenvironment.

5

## Fate of engineered cellular drug delivery systems in vivo
ECDDS encounters complex in vivo environments involving processes such as circulation, crossing biological barriers, drug release, and metabolic clearance. Understanding these processes is crucial for designing ECDDS that are optimized to better navigate the complexities of the in vivo environment compared with natural CDDS. This optimization enhances the therapeutic efficacy while minimizing side effects. Ongoing research on the in vivo behavior of these systems will facilitate their development into effective personalized therapeutic strategies for a broad range of diseases.
5.1

## In vivo circulation and distribution
The pharmacokinetics of the ECDDS resemble those of living cell-based systems. Both are primarily administered intravenously, circulate in the bloodstream, and are subject to hemodynamic forces and phagocytosis by the monocyte–macrophage system. Normal RBCs circulate in the blood for up to 120 days; however, the pharmacokinetics of drug-loaded RBCs may differ. For example, drug-loading shortens the RBC lifespan, possibly because of drug-induced damage to the RBC membrane, altering its deformability [ ]. Deformability refers to the ability of an RBC to revert to its original biconcave shape after deformation and is linked to membrane elasticity, stiffness, and rigidity. Notably, engineered RBCs have enhanced deformability when armored organic drug-carrying frameworks such as ZIF-8 are incorporated into their outer membranes [ ]. These frameworks did not affect CD47 expression, which is crucial for oxygen transport and release. Additionally, the armored structures improve RBC stiffness and adhesion, increasing their retention of elasticity and enabling successful passage through capillary microvessels as small as 5 μm in width and height.
Despite their limited circulation time, the ability of immune cells to home to specific sites enhances their targeted biodistribution, particularly in inflammation and tumors. This homing ability enables the passive targeting of lesions. Moreover, engineered immune cells can be genetically modified to overexpress membrane proteins that bind to target tissues, thereby improving homing [ ]. For example, engineered macrophages overexpressing integrins α4β1 and α4β7 show enhanced retention at sites of inflammation in the colon, tripling their retention time from 24 to 72 h compared to free drugs.
Additionally, engineered cell carriers, such as NPs, can aggregate and accumulate in the lungs through mechanical interception if their size is too large. For example, when supramolecular peptide nanofibers are attached to the surface of platelets via an in vivo hitchhiking [ ], increased platelet volume facilitates rapid and efficient lung aggregation, improves clearance efficiency, and reduces systemic toxicity.

5.2

## Crossing barriers
Various living CDDS utilize distinct mechanisms to traverse biological barriers. For example, RBCs can deform and navigate through narrow capillaries, which allows them to penetrate tissues and deliver drugs to lesion sites. In contrast, macrophages and neutrophils actively migrate to sites of inflammation or tumors based on their phagocytic capacity and chemotactic responses to cross the endothelial barrier. T lymphocytes and NK cells can penetrate the TME; however, their efficacy is often limited by immunosuppressive conditions within tumors. Notably, the ECDDS can significantly enhance the efficiency of crossing biological barriers through targeted optimization. The BBB, a highly specialized endothelial barrier, presents a significant challenge for conventional drug delivery systems in delivering drugs to the CNS. In ECDDS, macrophages and neutrophils are frequently utilized as carriers because of their high expression of α4 and β1 integrins [ ], which bind to vascular endothelial adhesion molecule-1 (VCAM-1) on endothelial cells, enabling them to cross the BBB and reach the diseased CNS. However, even when drugs enter the CNS, they must overcome efflux pumps, such as P-glycoprotein, which exports drugs out of the CNS, impeding the accumulation of therapeutics and reducing their efficacy. Higher drug doses or more efficient targeted drug systems are typically required to effectively treat CNS diseases. However, high doses can lead to significant side effects. Engineered cells can overcome these challenges effectively through precise targeting. Cao et al. [ ] have developed Angiopep-2-modified macrophage-encapsulated bionic NPs for targeted GBM therapy. Angiopep-2 specifically binds to the lipoprotein receptor-related protein 1 receptor, enhancing NP translocation across the BBB and drug delivery to gliomas. Additionally, overexpression of α4 or β1 integrins on macrophages facilitates BBB penetration by VCAM-1 binding, enabling targeted delivery to gliomas. In this approach, macrophages are genetically engineered to express Angiopep-2, while the small activating RNA for ALOX15, a key gene involved in ferroptosis, is encapsulated in mesoporous dopamine (MPDA). Modified macrophages encapsulated in saALOX15-loaded MPDA were used for targeted therapy of GBM.
Furthermore, engineered platelets can serve as drug carriers to cross the BBB. Platelets possess abundant proteins on their surfaces, such as CD47, integrins, CLEC-2, and P-selectin, which facilitate immune evasion, BBB crossing, and tumor targeting. For example, platelets loaded with miR-375 nanosheets inserted with rabies virus glycoprotein peptide showed an enhanced ability to cross the BBB and accumulate in the GBM, thereby improving drug efficacy [ ].

5.3

## Release of drug
Drug release from drug-carrying systems into the target tissues is crucial for therapeutic efficacy. The key difference between ECDDS and living CDDS is their capacity for controlled release. In living CDDS, drug release primarily depends on the natural degradation or rupture of cells. Drugs encapsulated within living cells are typically released via natural membrane permeability or upon cell death, rendering the release process less controllable. In contrast, ECDDS utilizes gene editing or surface modification to facilitate specific drug release mechanisms.
ECDDS can be designed to release drugs in response to various signals or environmental changes, such as alterations in pH, acoustic fields, magnetic fields, or the presence of NIR light. These stimuli can be applied either in vitro or naturally in pathophysiological environments. For example, NIR light-induced drug release can be achieved by engineering cells to load photosensitizers, such as AuNPs or ICG, onto the surface or within the cell membrane. Upon the application of NIR light in vitro, the cell membrane opens, triggering the release of the encapsulated drug.
In addition to external stimuli, such as ultrasound, magnetic fields, and NIR light, ECDDS can exploit changes in the tissue microenvironment, such as the pH difference between normal and diseased tissues. Normal tissues maintain a pH of 7.4, whereas tumor tissues are typically weakly acidic, with a pH of approximately 6.8. By incorporating pH-sensitive polymers or acid-labile chemical bonds into engineered cell carriers, drug release can be triggered via protonation or bond cleavage in the acidic TME. Similarly, hypoxic conditions within the TME can be used to control drug release, further enhancing the precision and control. Although certain living CDDS may also respond to environmental changes, these responses are typically inherent biological properties and are not as specifically engineered as in the case of ECDDS, which can be optimized for targeted, controlled drug release in response to defined stimuli.

5.4

## Metabolic clearance
The clearance of CDDS from the circulation is primarily mediated by the mononuclear phagocyte system (MPS), which includes the liver and spleen. Drug-loaded RBCs are cleared by phagocytes in these organs, whereas immune cells may remain in the lungs after intravenous administration before being redistributed to other organs. For example, in contrast to free drugs, which primarily accumulate in the liver and kidneys, membrane surface drug-loaded RBCs accumulate significantly in the lungs and liver. This accumulation may result from the squeezing of RBCs during passage through narrow capillaries in the pulmonary vascular system, combined with shear forces generated by the high blood flow from the heart. This aids in the transfer of NPs from RBCs to pulmonary capillary endothelial cells. However, ECDDS can modify metabolic pathways and clearance mechanisms through gene editing or surface modification. For example, engineered cells may express specific surface molecules that influence the targeting of the carrier cells and reduce their accumulation in the liver and kidneys. After hybridizing platelets with RBC membranes to create drug-loaded cell carriers encapsulating the BRD4 inhibitor, JQ1 [ ], the hybridized carriers expressed glycoproteins IIb/IIIa and VI on the platelet membrane surface, facilitating the targeting of collagen and collagen-secreting activated fibroblasts. Moreover, CD47 surface protein from RBCs prevents phagocytosis by MPS, decreases toxicity and side effects, enhances JQ1 delivery to fibrotic areas of the heart, and reduces its accumulation in the liver and kidneys.
Surface modifications can also reduce interactions with immune cells, leading to slower clearance rates of engineered cell carriers. For example, hybridizing RBC membranes with liposomes can mimic the CD47 density found in senescent RBCs [ , ]. This results in a high binding affinity to SIRPα on macrophages without triggering signaling, thus inhibiting macrophage-mediated phagocytosis and extending the half-life of the drug carriers.
Additionally, newly engineered RBC drug-carrying systems can be developed by assembling renally cleared copper sulfide (CuS) nanodots onto the outer membrane of RBCs through lipid fusion methods [ ]. Upon intravenous administration, the CuS nanodots, initially bound to RBCs, disassemble and are propelled by the blood flow to selectively accumulate in the tumor tissues. When exposed to near-infrared laser light, these nanodots demonstrated remarkable photothermal properties, effectively targeting and destroying tumor cells. The small size of these nanodots enabled their excretion via the kidneys within 72 h, effectively clearing the system and maintaining a sufficient concentration of CuS to exert a robust tumor-killing effect.

6

## Applications
ECDDS has demonstrated significant potential in the treatment of various diseases, including tumors, infectious diseases, and autoimmune disorders, offering novel therapeutic strategies. In cancer therapy, these systems can deliver chemotherapeutic agents, photosensitizers, radiation therapy sensitizers, tumor vaccines, and other therapeutic agents to enhance anti-tumor efficacy. In infectious diseases, ECDDS facilitates the targeted delivery of antibiotics, improves precision, and minimizes systemic side effects. Furthermore, these systems are promising for imaging and diagnostic applications and offer innovative approaches for lesion localization and disease detection.
ECDDS has demonstrated significant potential across a broad spectrum of diseases. To systematically summarize these applications, this section is organized into four key areas: anti-tumor therapy, infectious diseases, autoimmune disorders, and central nervous system (CNS) diseases, highlighting the versatile therapeutic and diagnostic capabilities of these engineered systems.
To systematically summarize these applications and their underlying engineering approaches, the key strategies, and engineered cell types across different disease areas are comprehensively outlined in . 
6.1

## Anti-tumor therapy
In anti-tumor therapy, ECDDS primarily loads chemotherapeutic agents and photosensitizers or enhances cellular immunotherapies by leveraging the cytotoxic potential of the carrier cells (see ). Unlike conventional chemotherapeutics, which often face challenges, such as high off-target toxicity, systemic adverse effects, or reduced efficacy owing to unfavorable immune microenvironments, ECDDS are designed to capitalize on the unique characteristics of TMEs for precise targeting and optimized drug delivery.
In chemotherapy, ECDDS frequently employs agents such as DOX [ , , ] and PTX [ ] to selectively deliver therapeutics to tumor sites, thereby minimizing systemic toxicity. Innovations in cell carrier design have improved targeting mechanisms, structural stability, and circulation times. For example, HER2 affinity groups have been genetically incorporated into macrophage membrane constructs that encapsulate DOX-loaded PLGA NPs [ ], specifically targeting HER2-positive cancer cells, while enhancing affinity-mediated cell therapies. Additionally, optimizing drug-bearing cells by fusing them with liposomes [ ], such as RBC-liposome hybrids, improves colloidal stability and maneuverability, thereby facilitating nanovesicle fabrication.
In addition to delivering chemotherapeutic agents, ECDDS can transport photosensitizers, enabling their application in PDT and PTT. Photothermal agents, like other biomaterials, facilitate immune recognition and clearance from the circulation via MPS. Therefore, engineered cells with low immunogenicity, extended circulation time, and specific anti-tumor properties are essential for photosensitizer delivery. For example, spleen and lymph node cells from OT-1 mice were treated with OVA257-264 peptide and IL-2 to expand OT-1 T cells for tumor-reactive cell production. These tumor-reactive T cells were loaded with photosensitizers, and engineered cell carriers were employed as a bridge to combine cell therapy with PTT. Gold NPs (sAuNPs) that aggregate into gold nanoclusters are incorporated into T cells [ ]. T cells carrying sAuNPs proliferated extensively and exhibited enhanced anti-tumor activity. Antigen escape or loss of target antigen expression can diminish T cell effectiveness, in which case, PTT can be employed to further eradicate tumors ( A). In contrast, although live cell carrier systems can effectively deliver and release drugs at tumor sites, the released drugs may also damage the surrounding immune cells within the TME, potentially reducing therapeutic efficacy. However, ECDDS, which loads tumor-reactive T cells with photosensitizers, releases heat only when immune cells can no longer control tumor progression, thereby minimizing collateral damage. Additionally, ECDDS can utilize intracellularly loaded photosensitizer NPs to enhance the biological activity of carrier cells, such as by promoting macrophage polarization to improve targeting and anti-tumor activity. For example, hollow mesoporous carbon (C) NPs modified with hyaluronic acid (HA) and ICG are encapsulated within macrophages [ ]. HA with a molecular weight of <800 kDa promotes macrophage polarization to the M1 phenotype, thereby activating macrophages [ ]. The HA-modified C NPs not only ensured efficient ICG delivery with high drug-carrying capacity and inhibited premature leakage, but also facilitated macrophage polarization, enhancing therapeutic efficacy. 
ECDDS can also transport radiotherapy sensitizers for enhanced radiation therapy. Ma et al. [ ] developed M1 macrophage vectors that overexpress catalase and anti-PD-L1 on their surface. Catalase alleviates tumor hypoxia by catalyzing the endogenous production of hydrogen peroxide in tumors, thereby enhancing the efficacy of radiotherapy ( B). Following radiotherapy, tumor cells initiate DNA damage repair (DDR), which is effectively inhibited by nedisertib, a DDR inhibitor loaded onto macrophages. This inhibition increased cell death, promoted lymphocyte infiltration, and altered the inflammatory TME. Furthermore, it leads to the upregulation of immunosuppressive cells, such as M2-type TAMs. M2 macrophages suppress effector T cell and NK cell activity by secreting immunosuppressive cytokines, such as IL-10 and TGF-β, thereby diminishing the host immune response to tumor cells. In contrast, engineered M1 macrophages can repolarize M2 TAMs to the M1 phenotype. Additionally, anti-PD-L1 nanobodies on the macrophage surface alleviate T cell immunosuppression, ultimately remodeling the tumor immune microenvironment and enhancing the effectiveness of radiotherapy. The inclusion of radiotherapy sensitizers in engineered cells not only facilitates targeted delivery, but also remodels the tumor immune microenvironment, an effect that is not achievable with live cells or other drug delivery platforms.
Moreover, ECDDS can be utilized as a tumor vaccine for anticancer applications. Tumor vaccines, which typically consist of tumor-associated antigens and immune adjuvants, stimulate and enhance anticancer immune responses. Engineered tumor cells [ , , ] or DCs [ ] can be loaded with immune adjuvants, representing an emerging application of ECDDS in cancer immunotherapy.

6.2

## Infectious diseases
ECDDS, which are widely utilized in anti-tumor therapy, have gained increasing attention in the treatment of infectious diseases because of their ability to address the challenges posed by conventional antibiotics, such as drug resistance, toxicity, and lack of targeting. These systems can mitigate the potential toxicity risks associated with antibiotic treatment and reduce the development of bacterial resistance. RBC and macrophage membranes are commonly used for anti-infection applications. RBC membranes encapsulate NPs that neutralize pore-forming toxins from various bacteria, whereas macrophage membranes inherit the ability of macrophages to take up endotoxins and pro-inflammatory cytokines, thereby aiding in the control of diseases, such as sepsis. Despite their advantages, single biological membranes often have inherent limitations, including poor stability, reduced fluidity, and challenges in membrane modification. Therefore, engineering strategies are required to overcome these limitations.
One such strategy is the fusion of natural macrophage membranes with artificial lipid membranes to encapsulate the broad-spectrum antibiotic ciprofloxacin, and treat infected tissues [ ]. In this ECDDS, the macrophage membrane sequesters endotoxins and inflammatory cytokines, whereas the lipid membrane enhances the adaptability of the carrier cell membrane, improving properties such as mobility and enabling the insertion of bacterial anchoring molecules. To further improve bacterial targeting, amphiphilic dextran cholesterol (Dex) was incorporated into the hybrid membranes of nanovesicles (Dex-MφM-LPs). Owing to its amphiphilic nature, Dex stabilizes the lipid bilayer interface in aqueous solutions and interacts with bacterial membranes through its hydrophobic portion, thereby facilitating anchoring to the bacterial cell wall or membrane ( ). Additionally, the release of Ciprofloxacin can be regulated by adjusting the cholesterol content of the lipids. Through these engineering modifications, Dex-MφM-LPs effectively neutralize LPS and inflammatory cytokines, exhibit high affinity binding to S. aureus and E. coli, and demonstrate strong antimicrobial effects in vitro. 
ECDDS offers advantages over traditional antibiotic therapies by integrating PTT with conventional antibiotics. This combination provides spatiotemporal controllability, minimal invasiveness, and effective bactericidal properties, and reduces the risk of bacterial resistance. Liu et al. [ ] developed an NIR light-responsive nanomedicine that co-loaded the classical antibiotic amikacin (AM) with a highly efficient photosensitizer, black phosphorus quantum dots (BPQDs), for precise antimicrobial treatment. AM, a positively charged antibiotic, and BPQDs, which are negatively charged photosensitizers, were first absorbed via electrostatic interactions. Liposomes served as nanocarriers to deliver AM (AB@Lip) and BPQDs. Subsequently, the RBC and macrophage membranes were extracted and fused to form hybrid membranes, which were wrapped around AB@Lip to create AB@LRM NPs. Following intravenous injection, AB@LRM NPs specifically targeted the infected site owing to the targeting properties of macrophage membranes and the long-circulating ability of RBC membranes. Furthermore, the combination of phototherapy and chemotherapy enhances the bactericidal effect because BPQDs disrupt bacterial membranes and promote the penetration of AM into bacteria. This synergistic approach demonstrated significant efficacy in a bacterial pneumonia model of Pseudomonas aeruginosa. The treatment significantly reduced residual bacteria in the lung tissues, alleviated pulmonary edema, improved the lung inflammatory environment, extended the animal's survival time, and exhibited a strong antimicrobial effect.

6.3

## Other diseases
ECDDS has also been explored in other disease areas, such as autoimmune diseases. Despite engineered immune cells being commonly used in cell therapy [ ] with significant advancements, their application in autoimmune diseases remains underdeveloped. For the treatment of RA [ ], macrophage membranes overexpressing TNF-α receptors were used as carriers to encapsulate phosphatase and tensin homolog (PTEN) mRNA (mPTEN). This approach aimed to upregulate PTEN levels in fibroblast-like synoviocytes of the intra-articular lining of joints (CIA-FLS). The mR@P-mPTEN system efficiently targeted and delivered mPTEN to RA joints, addressing the instability issues associated with mRNA delivery. Additionally, the engineered macrophage membrane not only served as a carrier for mPTEN, but also exerted anti-inflammatory effects. The TNF-α receptor overexpressed on the surface of mR@P-mPTEN bound and neutralized the pro-inflammatory factor TNF-α. The broad applicability of engineered cells in autoimmune diseases highlights the strong potential of combining engineered cells with drug delivery systems, yielding a synergistic effect, where “1 + 1 > 2.” This combination enhances both therapeutic efficacy and versatility, and demonstrates substantial practical value. Beyond serving as passive carriers, engineered immune cells have the capacity to be designed as active, self-regulated drug factories. This concept was demonstrated by a seminal study through the creation of engineered macrophages for the treatment of RA [ ]. Researchers genetically engineered bone marrow-derived macrophages using a lentiviral vector encoding a synthetic gene circuit, where the expression of the therapeutic agent—IL-1 receptor antagonist (IL-1Ra)—was controlled by an NF-κB inducible promoter. This design facilitates the autonomous sensing of the inflammatory RA microenvironment (via NF-κB signalling) by the engineered cells, and subsequent production of anti-inflammatory biologics in a feedback-controlled manner. In a murine model of RA, these engineered macrophages effectively homed to inflamed joints and mitigated disease severity. This work provides a robust proof-of-concept for advanced ECDDS that can dynamically interface with disease pathology to deliver therapeutics in an autoregulated fashion, thus opening new avenues for the treatment of RA and other inflammatory diseases.
ECDDS can also be used to treat inflammatory cardiovascular diseases. For example [ ], ZIF-8 NPs containing small interfering RNAs (siRNAs) targeting interferon regulatory factor 1 (IRF-1) (siIRF1) were wrapped in a T-lymphocyte-macrophage hybrid membrane to treat myocarditis. The hybrid membrane coating facilitated the specific targeting of M1 macrophages both in vivo and in vitro. Moreover, siIRF1 delivery effectively suppressed IRF1 expression in IFN-γ-stimulated macrophages and inhibited focal prolapse.
In addition, ECDDS has also been applied to AD. Gao et al. [ ] encapsulated NPs containing CUR within RBC membranes modified with T807 and triphenylphosphine (TPP) molecules on their surface. CUR, a potent natural antioxidant derived from turmeric, has shown promise in alleviating AD symptoms. However, its clinical use is limited by its poor physicochemical properties and low brain bioavailability. In contrast, engineered RBC-encapsulated T807/TPP-RBC-NPs effectively alleviate AD symptoms both in vitro and in vivo by reducing mitochondrial oxidative stress and inhibiting neuronal death. This intravenous, mitochondria-targeted drug delivery system offers a promising platform for the treatment of inflammatory brain diseases. In addition, a recent study has demonstrated a multi-targeting strategy for AD using engineeredosome (RPDA@Rb-A) fabricated by hybridizing membranes from brain microvascular endothelial cellosome and macrophageosome [ ]. The design of the study made use of the natural homing ability of endothelialosomes to cross the BBB, as well as the inflammation-targeting capacity of macrophageosomes to accumulate at AD pathological sites. The hybridosome formulation was loaded with polydopamine NPs, resveratrol, and Aβ-targeting aptamers, thereby enabling a multifaceted therapeutic approach. This approach involved the use of near-infrared laser-induced local heat for the degradation of toxic Aβ aggregates, the enhancement of microglial clearance of Aβ, and the modulation of neuroinflammation via efficient drug delivery. This robust platform for multi-pathway intervention in AD overcomes the critical challenges of central nervous system drug delivery.

6.4

## Detection and imaging
In addition to their widespread use in disease treatment, ECDDS have versatile applications in fields such as detection, anticoagulation, and imaging, owing to their diverse drug-loading and engineering strategies. For example, these systems can be employed in assays that utilize engineered cell membranes encapsulating NPs to detect and isolate rare cells, such as fetal cells, in the maternal blood for noninvasive prenatal diagnosis(NIPD). However, the low purity of isolated fetal RBCs significantly limits the efficacy of NIPD. RBC membrane coatings can enhance the capture efficiency of target cells by reducing non-specific protein adsorption and retaining modified antibodies on magnetic beads. Additionally, leukocyte membranes have been used to separate rare cells to improve anti-leukocyte adsorption without compromising capture efficiency because homologous leukocytes do not form clusters during circulation. Wang et al. [ ] fused and encapsulated RBCM and white blood cell membranes into MNs, which were further modified with anti-CD147 antibodies, to isolate fNRBCs from maternal peripheral blood in simulated spiked blood samples. This approach achieved a significant increase in the separation efficiency (approximately 90 %) and purity (approximately 87 %). RBCM enhanced targeting, prevented protein adsorption, and reduced antibody blockade, while the leukocyte membrane reduced leukocyte–leukocyte interactions, further improving purity. This strategy overcomes the limitations of the current cell-based NIPD platforms and demonstrates the potential of cell membrane-encapsulated MNs for the detection and isolation of rare cells from peripheral blood samples.
ECDDS systems also have applications in imaging, in which imaging agents encapsulated in engineered cell carriers with enhanced targeting capabilities provide more precise feedback on the lesions. For example, macrophages treated with M. marinum express M. tuberculosis-specific receptors [ ]. These engineered cells were then encapsulated in the photothermal molecule TPE-BT-BBTD, which exhibited AIE properties, fluorescence emission in the NIR region IIb, and excellent photothermal conversion efficiency. Upon intravenous injection of NPs into mice with H37Ra-induced tuberculosis, the NPs selectively accumulated in the tuberculosis nodules of the lungs, resulting in sustained scattered hyperfluorescence. This study confirms the accuracy of BBTD@PM NPs for targeted and sustained monitoring. The achieved imaging resolution far surpassed that of traditional NIR-I techniques, enabling the precise detection of minute granulomas as small as 0.2 mm in diameter. This level of detail significantly outshines the roughly 1.0 mm resolution offered by standard clinical computed tomography scans. Furthermore, pathological evaluation of the lung tissue revealed that they targeted tuberculous nodules, penetrated necrotic regions, and specifically bound to internal M. tuberculosis via receptor-ligand interactions. Thereafter, the photothermal properties of BBTD@PM NPs using 1064 nm laser irradiation led to the targeted death of M. tuberculosis bacteria, along with reduced pathological damage and inflammation in the lung tissue. The combination of imaging and PTT is a promising strategy for the treatment of ECDDS.
As evidenced by the broad applications, the rational design of ECDDS hinges on a synergistic integration of carrier biology, drug properties, and tissue-specific pathophysiology. To provide a clear and actionable overview of this holistic strategy, we summarize these key design considerations in the ECDDS Design Playbook ( ).

7

## Conclusions
In conclusion, this review has synthesized the rational design strategies and advancing applications of Engineered Cellular Drug Delivery Systems (ECDDS). We have proposed a synergistic "three-axis" paradigm that integrates carrier biology, drug properties, and target tissue pathophysiology to guide the creation of highly personalized and controllable delivery platforms. The clinical translation landscape for these systems is maturing variably, with CAR-T cells leading in hematologic malignancies, while engineered RBCs and platelets show near-term promise, and macrophage/neutrophil-based systems confront more complex preclinical hurdles. Ultimately, the full potential of ECDDS hinges on overcoming intertwined challenges in scalable manufacturing, clarifying regulatory pathways, and ensuring comprehensive safety and biosecurity. Realizing the next generation of ECDDS therapies will therefore demand intensified multidisciplinary collaboration to translate these sophisticated living technologies from bench to bedside.

## CRediT authorship contribution statement
Juan Lu: Writing – review & editing, Writing – original draft, Software, Formal analysis. Wuxinrui Huang: Software, Data curation. Beikang Tang: Methodology. Pu Yang: Validation, Software. Jing Tian: Project administration, Funding acquisition. Lanjie Lei: Funding acquisition.

## Declaration of competing interest
The authors declare the following financial interests/personal relationships which may be considered as potential competing interests: Jing Tian reports financial support was provided by Hunan Provincial Health Commission. If there are other authors, they declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper.

 

## Glossary

AAAscorbic acid
ABApoptotic bodies
ADAlzheimer's disease
AIEAggregation-induced emission
ARDSAcute respiratory distress syndrome
ASAtherosclerotic
BBBBlood-brain barrier
CARChimeric antigen receptor
CDDSCell-based drug delivery systems
CNSCentral nervous system
COFCovalent organic frameworks
CPPCell-penetrating peptides
CuSCopper sulfide
DDRDNA damage repair
ECDDSEngineered cellular drug delivery systems
EGFREpidermal growth factor receptor
HAHyaluronic acid
ICDImmunogenic cell death
LbLLayer-by-layer
MMMacrophage membrane
MOFMetal-organic framework
MPSMononuclear phagocyte system
MSMesoporous silica
NKNatural killer
OMVOuter membrane vesicles
PAMPPathogen-associated molecular patterns
RARheumatoid arthritis
RBCMRed blood cell membranes
ROSReactive oxygen species
STINGStimulator of interferon gene
TAMTumor-associated macrophages
TANTumor-associated neutrophils
TGNTrans-Golgi network
TLRToll-like receptors
TNFTumor necrosis factor
TPTargeting peptide
VEGFVascular endothelial growth factor

## Data availability
No data was used for the research described in the article.

## Acknowledgements
This study was supported by the Scientific Research Project of Hunan Provincial Health Commission (D202303107058), 10.13039/501100005356Zhejiang Shuren University research project (2023R053) and the fundamental research funds for the Central Universities of Central South University (2024ZZTS0955).