358wtpaNature geneticsNat GenetPMC660945266094526609452EMS832423125397910.1038/s41588-019-0455-2High-throughput identification of human SNPs affecting regulatory element activity
van ArensbergenJoris PagieLudo FitzPatrickVincent D de HaasMarcel BaltissenMarijke P ComoglioFederico van der WeideRobin H TeunissenHans VõsaUrmo FrankeLude de WitElzo VermeulenMichiel BussemakerHarmen J van SteenselBas 
1Division of Gene Regulation, Oncode Institute, Netherlands Cancer Institute, Amsterdam, the Netherlands
2Department of Biological Sciences, Columbia University, New York, New York, USA
3Department of Systems Biology, Columbia University Medical Center, New York, New York, USA
4Department of Molecular Biology, Oncode Institute, Radboud Institute for Molecular Life Sciences, Radboud University Nijmegen, 6525 GA Nijmegen, The Netherlands
5Department of Haematology, University of Cambridge, Cambridge, UK
6Department of Genetics, University Medical Center Groningen, University of Groningen, Groningen, The Netherlands
7Estonian Genome Center, Institute of Genomics, University of Tartu, Tartu, Estonia*Correspondence should be addressed to J.v.A. (joris.van.arensbergen@gmail.com) or B.v.S. (b.v.steensel@nki.nl).
286201951711601160–116928122019Users may view, print, copy, and download text and data-mine the content in such documents, for the purposes of academic research, subject always to the full Conditions of use:http://www.nature.com/authors/editorial_policies/license.html#termsThe publisher's version of this article is available at Nat Genet

## Abstract
Most of the millions of single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in the human genome are non-coding, and many overlap with putative regulatory elements. Genome-wide association studies (GWAS) have linked many of these SNPs to human traits or to gene expression levels, but rarely with sufficient resolution to identify the causal SNPs. Functional screens based on reporter assays have previously been of insufficient throughput to test the vast space of SNPs for possible effects on regulatory element activity. Here, we leveraged the throughput and resolution of the SuRE reporter technology to survey the effect of 5.9 million SNPs, including 57% of the known common SNPs, on enhancer and promoter activity. We identified more than 30,000 SNPs that alter the activity of putative regulatory elements, partially in a cell-type specific manner. Integration of this dataset with GWAS results may help pinpoint SNPs that underlie human traits.

statusreleaseddisplay-pdfyesis-in-collection-domainyesis-olfnois-manuscriptyesis-preprintnois-journal-matternois-scannednois-retractednohas-published-versionnoIssue date 2019 Jun 14.

## Introduction
About 85 million SNPs have been identified in human genomes . The vast majority of these are located in non-coding regions, and a typical human genome has about 500,000 variants with non-reference alleles overlapping regulatory elements such as enhancers and promoters . It is becoming increasingly clear that such non-coding SNPs can have substantial impact on gene regulation , thereby contributing to phenotypic diversity and a wide range of human disorders – .
GWAS and expression quantitative trait locus (eQTL) mapping can identify candidate SNPs that may drive a particular trait or disorder , or the expression level of individual genes , , respectively. Unfortunately, even the largest GWAS and eQTL studies rarely achieve single-SNP resolution, largely due to linkage disequilibrium (LD). In practice, tens to hundreds of linked SNPs are correlated with a trait. Although new fine-mapping techniques – , integration with epigenomic data , deep learning computational techniques and GWAS of extremely large populations can help to achieve higher resolution, pinpointing of the causal SNPs remains a major challenge.
Having a list of all SNPs in the human genome that have the potential to alter gene regulation would mitigate this problem. Ideally, the regulatory impact of SNPs would be measured directly. Two high-throughput methods have been employed for this purpose. First, changes in chromatin features such as DNase sensitivity and various histone modifications have been mapped in lymphoblasts or primary blood cells derived from sets of human individuals with fully sequenced genomes – . Here, the chromatin marks serve as proxies to infer effects on regulatory elements, with the caveat that a change in regulatory activity may not always be detected as a change in chromatin state, or vice versa. Furthermore, many traits do not manifest in blood cells, and other cell types are more difficult to obtain for epigenome mapping.
An alternative functional readout is to insert DNA sequence elements carrying each allele into a reporter plasmid. Upon transfection of these plasmids into cells, the promoter or enhancer activity of these elements can be measured quantitatively. Different cell types may be used as models for corresponding tissues in vivo. Large-scale versions of this approach are referred to as Massively Parallel Reporter Assays (MPRAs), which have been applied to screen tens of thousands of SNPs – . Each of these studies has yielded tens to at most several hundreds of SNPs that significantly alter promoter or enhancer activity. As these MPRA studies have covered only a tiny fraction of the genome, it is likely that many more SNPs with regulatory impact are to be discovered.
Here, we report application of an MPRA strategy with a > 100-fold increased scale compared to previous efforts. This enabled us to survey the regulatory effects of 5.9 million SNPs in two different cell types, providing a resource that helps to identify causal SNPs among candidates generated by GWAS and eQTL studies. The data are available for download, and can be queried through a web application (https://sure.nki.nl).

## Results

## A survey of 5.9 million SNPs using SuRE
We applied our Survey of Regulatory Elements (SuRE) technology to systematically screen millions of human SNPs for potential effects on regulatory activity. SuRE is an MPRA with sufficient throughput to query entire human genomes at high resolution and high coverage . Briefly, random genomic DNA (gDNA) fragments of a few hundred base pairs are cloned into a promoter-less reporter plasmid that, upon transfection into cultured cells, only produces a transcript if the inserted gDNA fragment carries a functional transcription start site (TSS) ( ). The transcript is identified and quantified by means of a random barcode sequence that is unique for every insert, allowing for a multiplexed readout of millions of random DNA fragments. Importantly, because active promoters as well as enhancers generate transcripts, activity of both types of elements can be assayed quantitatively by SuRE .
 To survey a large cross-section of SNPs present in the human population, we chose four sequenced genomes of individuals from 4 different populations ( ). From each genome we generated two independent SuRE libraries that each contained ~300 million random gDNA fragments of 150-500 bp ( ; ). In these libraries a total of 2,390,729,347 unique gDNA fragments were sequenced from both ends, mapped to the reference genome and linked to their unique barcode. Among these fragments, 1,103,381,066 carried at least one SNP for which we identified both alleles in our libraries. These libraries enabled us to test promoter/enhancer activity of both alleles of 5,919,293 SNPs, which include 4,569,323 (57%) of the ~8 million known common SNPs (minor allele frequency [MAF] > 5%) world-wide . Importantly, each SNP allele is covered by 122 different gDNA fragments on average ( ), which provides substantial statistical power.
We introduced these libraries by transient transfection into human K562 and HepG2 cell lines. K562 is an erythroleukemia cell line with strong similarities to erythroid progenitor cells . HepG2 cells are derived from a hepatocellular carcinoma, and serve as an approximate representation of liver cells. After transfection of the SuRE libraries into each cell line we isolated mRNA and counted the transcribed barcodes by Illumina sequencing. Three independent biological replicates yielded a total of 2,377,150,709 expressed barcode reads from K562 cells and two biological replicates yielded 1,174,138,611 expressed barcode reads from HepG2 cells.

## Identification of thousands of SNPs with regulatory impact
From these data we first constructed strand-specific tracks of SuRE enrichment profiles for each of the four genomes ( ). This revealed thousands of peaks that generally colocalize with known enhancers and promoters ( ), as reported previously . For a subset of peaks, the magnitude varied between the four genomes and showed a correlation with a particular allele of a coinciding SNP. For example, in K562 cells we detected a strong SuRE signal overlapping with SNP rs6739165 in the genomes that are homozygous for the C allele, but no signal in the genome that is homozygous for the A allele, and an intermediate signal in the genome that is heterozygous for this SNP ( ).
In order to systematically annotate SNPs we combined for each transfected cell line the complete SuRE datasets from the four genomes. The sequencing data of the SuRE libraries then enabled us to group for each SNP the overlapping gDNA fragments by the two alleles ( ). This allowed us to identify SNPs for which fragments carrying one allele produced significantly different SuRE signals compared to those carrying the other allele. Because all of these fragments differ in their start and end coordinate, the activity of each allele is tested in a multitude of local sequence contexts, providing not only statistical power but also biological robustness. For each SNP we calculated a P value, and we used a random permutation strategy to estimate false discovery rates (FDR) ( ). We also required that the strongest allele showed an average SuRE signal of at least 4-fold over background. We refer to the resulting SNPs at FDR < 5% as reporter assay QTLs (raQTLs).
This analysis yielded a total of 19,237 raQTLs in K562 cells and 14,183 in HepG2 cells ( ). The average allelic fold change of these SNPs was 4.0-fold (K562) and 7.8-fold (HepG2) ( ). In 72% of cases the SuRE effect could be assigned to a single SNP; when SNPs were spaced less than ~200 bp apart, their effects could typically not be resolved ( ).
Most raQTLs were detected in either K562 or HepG2 cells, but not in both ( ). The overlap may be underestimated due to the somewhat arbitrary FDR and expression cutoffs used to define these sets ( ). Nevertheless, many SNPs show clear cell type specific effects ( ). For example, rs4265625:G creates regulatory activity in HepG2 only ( ). This is interesting, because rs4265625 lies in POU2AF1, a gene that has been linked to primary biliary cirrhosis – a liver disease – in a GWAS . In about 1,300 instances, a K562-specific raQTL and a HepG2-specific raQTL are in strong LD (R2 > 0.8). An interesting possibility is that the two raQTLs in such linked pairs may contribute to the regulation of a common target gene, but each in a cell type specific manner.

## raQTLs are enriched for known regulatory elements
We systematically analyzed the overlap of the raQTLs with known regulatory elements in K562 cells . Compared to all SNPs analyzed, raQTLs showed 5-15 fold enrichment for promoter and enhancer related chromatin types, and depletion for repressed or transcribed chromatin types ( ). We also observed strong enrichment of raQTLs in DNase hypersensitive sites (DHS) ( ). This is consistent with SuRE signals overlapping with enhancers or promoters, as shown previously .
 Some of the raQTLs are heterozygous in the genome of K562 cells. For these SNPs we investigated whether the allelic imbalance observed by SuRE was reflected in a corresponding imbalance in the DHS signal. For example, the SuRE signal at rs12985827, a non-coding SNP in an intron of the APC2 gene, has a strong bias for the C allele (the alternative allele, ALT) over the T allele (the reference allele, REF) ( ). Indeed, it shows a similar allelic imbalance for DHS ( ). Among the 616 raQTLs that were heterozygous in K562 and showed sufficient DNase-seq coverage, we observed a strong skew for higher DNase sensitivity at the more active allele, compared to 616 heterozygous non-raQTL control SNPs that overlapped DHSs ( ). We found a similar but less pronounced trend in H3K27ac and ATAC-seq data from K562 cells ( ). We conclude that available epigenomic data is generally consistent with the SuRE results.

## Altered transcription factor binding sites at raQTLs
The observed changes in enhancer or promoter activity are likely explained by SNPs changing transcription factor (TF) binding motifs. For example, the T allele of rs12985827 disrupts an EGR1 binding motif and leads to reduced SuRE activity ( , ). To investigate this systematically, we made use of the computationally predicted changes in TF motifs in the SNP2TFBS database . Among the set of raQTLs in K562 and HepG2 cells, 31% and 38% are predicted to alter the motif of at least one TF, respectively. This is a 1.6-fold and 1.9-fold larger proportion than for all SNPs, respectively ( ). Moreover, 67% and 69% of the raQTLs showed concordance between the predicted effect on motif affinity and SuRE expression, i.e., the allele with the weakest motif resemblance had the lowest SuRE expression ( ). We note that 100% concordance should not be expected in this analysis, for example because not all TF binding motifs are known, some may be misannotated, and some TFs can act as repressors.
 We expected that motifs in raQTLs reflect the sets of TFs that are selectively active in the respective cell types. Indeed, raQTLs in K562 were enriched for motifs of TFs that are primarily active in the erythroid blood lineage, such as GATA and STAT factors, while raQTLs in HepG2 cells were enriched for motifs of TFs that are specific for liver cells, such as HNF factors ( ). Disruptions of the TP53 motif also appeared to be relatively more consequential in HepG2, which is presumably related to the known inactivation of TP53 in K562 cells but not in HepG2 cells . Together, these data point to a general concordance between the detected changes in SuRE activity and predictions based on sequence motif analysis.

## No evidence for strong negative selective pressure on raQTLs
It has been observed that genes that do not have cis-eQTLs are more likely to be loss-of-function (LOF) intolerant genes, possibly reflecting selection against variants acting upon such genes , . We found that the fraction of SNPs that are raQTLs was significantly but only slightly lower in the proximity of LOF intolerant genes than in the proximity of LOF tolerant genes ( ). However, for a set of control SNPs that were matched to the raQTLs for their SuRE activities and coverage in the SuRE libraries we observed a similar pattern ( ). This suggests that the overall density of active regulatory elements, rather than elements affected by SNPs, is lower near LOF intolerant genes. Genome-wide, we observed slightly lower minor allele frequencies (MAFs) for our raQTLs as compared to matched SNPs, but only for the K562 dataset and not for the HepG2 dataset ( ). This modest underrepresentation of raQTLs in the human population is consistent with recent computational predictions and may point to a slight negative selection pressure. Taken together, we found no evidence for strong negative selective pressure on raQTLs.

## Integration of SuRE with eQTL maps
Next, we integrated our SuRE data with eQTL mapping data from the GTEx Project . We compared SuRE data from K562 and HepG2 cells with eQTL data from the most closely related tissues, i.e. whole blood and liver, respectively. Strong similarity between the two data types should not be expected, because in the GTEx data each gene with significant associations (eGene) is linked to 101 eQTL SNPs on average, of which only one or a few may be causal. Rather, we regard the SuRE data as a filter to identify the most likely causal SNPs among the large number of eQTL candidates.
For each raQTL, the log2(ALT/REF) SuRE signal may be concordant with the eQTL signal (i.e., having the same sign as the slope of the eQTL analysis) or discordant (having the opposite sign). The simplest interpretation of concordance is that the SNP alters a regulatory element that positively regulates the eGene; if an allele reduces the activity of the element then it will also reduce the activity of the eGene. Discordance may point to more indirect mechanisms, e.g., when a SNP alters the promoter of an antisense transcript that in turn interferes with the sense expression of the eGene. In line with this interpretation, concordant raQTLs are enriched near the TSSs of the eGenes ( ). The slightly higher odds ratios for HepG2 vs. liver may be due to a stronger similarity of HepG2 to liver cells than of K562 to blood cells. Because discordant effects are more difficult to interpret, we further focused on SNPs with concordant effects.

## Candidate causal SNPs in eQTL maps and their putative mechanism
We highlight for several physiologically relevant eGenes the most likely causal SNPs based on our SuRE data, and we provide insights into the potential underlying mechanisms.
A first example is XPNPEP2, a gene associated with the risk of angioedema in patients treated with an ACE inhibitor . The GTEx project has linked the expression of this gene in liver to 33 eQTL SNPs, of which 30 are covered by SuRE ( ). Of these, a single SNP (rs3788853) located ~2 kb upstream of the TSS stands out by a strong (~5-fold difference between the two alleles) and concordant effect on SuRE activity in HepG2 cells ( ). This SNP has previously been demonstrated to alter the activity of an enhancer that controls XPNPEP2 . Our independent identification of this SNP indicates that SuRE can successfully pinpoint a functionally relevant SNP among a set of eQTL SNPs.
 A second example is the ABCC11 gene, which encodes a transmembrane transporter of bile acids, conjugated steroids, and cyclic nucleotides . GTEx data from liver identified 281 eQTL SNPs surrounding the ABCC11 TSS ( ). SuRE data covered 219 (77.9%) of these, and identified as most likely candidates a cluster of three SNPs within a ~200 bp region located in an intron of ABCC11 ( ). Of these, rs11866312 is a likely candidate because the C allele is predicted to disrupt a binding motif for FOXA1 ( ), a pioneer TF that is highly expressed in liver but not in blood . Indeed, virtually no SuRE effect of these SNPs is observed in K562 cells (data not shown).
A third example are the neighboring genes YEATS4 (encoding a transcription regulator) and LYZ (encoding lysozyme, an antibacterial protein). Overlapping sets of eQTL SNPs were identified for these genes in whole blood ( and ). Among these, SuRE in K562 cells identified two neighboring raQTLs (rs623853 and rs554591) located ~400 bp downstream of the YEATS4 TSS, which both show concordance with the eQTL data ( ).
To identify TFs that might be responsible for the differential SuRE activity at these two raQTLs, we conducted an in vitro binding proteomic analysis , . Briefly, we immobilized double-stranded oligonucleotides carrying each of the two alleles on beads, and incubated them with nuclear extract from K562 cells. After washing to remove unbound proteins, we used on-bead trypsin digestion followed by di-methyl stable isotope labeling and quantitative mass-spectrometry to identify proteins that preferentially associated with one of the two SNP alleles. In this assay, at rs623853 the weaker A allele caused strong loss of binding of Ets-like factors (ELF) ( ), consistent with a disruption of the cognate motif ( ). The A allele also showed moderately increased binding of several other proteins. At rs554591 the C allele caused strong loss of ZNF787 and gain of several other factors including KLF and SP proteins ( ). The variants of both SNPs may thus cause altered binding of TFs and their co-factors, leading to altered enhancer activity. K562 cells are heterozygous for both rs623853 and rs554591, but no significantly different DHS signal is detectable for either of the alleles ( ).
These examples illustrate that SuRE can prioritize SNPs as likely causal candidates from a set of tens to hundreds of eQTL SNP candidates. By integrating our data with the GTEx datasets, SuRE identified at least one raQTL among the eQTL SNPs for 20.0% of the 8,661 eGenes in whole blood, and for 11.1% of the 4,000 eGenes in liver.

## Integrating SuRE data with GWAS data
SuRE may also help to identify candidate causal SNPs in GWAS data. We focused on a large GWAS that identified 6,736 lead SNPs and more than 1 million linked significant SNPs associated with at least one of 36 blood-related traits . These SNPs occurred in LD clusters, each on average consisting of 158 SNPs and represented by a single statistically most significant (lead) SNP. The lead SNPs are not necessarily the causal SNPs, but are more likely to be the causal SNPs or in strong LD with the causal SNP(s). We therefore searched within a 100 kb window from each lead SNP for overlap between significant GWAS SNPs and raQTLs. For 1,238 out of 6,736 lead SNPs this yielded at least one linked raQTL. These raQTLs were preferentially located close to the lead SNPs, compared to a set of matching control SNPs ( ). Overall, the enrichment of SuRE raQTLs among the total set of GWAS SNPs did not significantly exceed that of the matching control set of SNPs (1188), but this was to be expected considering that only one or a few of the on average 158 significant SNPs may be true causal SNPs.
 One example where SuRE provided a clear candidate among the GWAS SNPs is rs4572196, which is within 100 kb of 11 lead SNPs associated with various mature red blood cell traits, such as ‘Hemoglobin concentration’ and ‘Hematocrit’ . In none of the 11 GWAS associations rs4572196 is the lead SNP, but in SuRE the G allele shows an ~8-fold higher activity than the A allele (P = 2.0 × 10-8), and it is the only SNP in the region with a P value below our cutoff ( ). By in vitro proteomics we identified several proteins with differential binding activity to the two rs4572196 alleles. JUN proteins showed stronger binding to the G allele ( ), as one might predict based on the JUN binding motif ( ). The GWAS demonstrated a positive association between the reference A allele and hemoglobin concentration and red blood cell counts . Interestingly, rs4572196 lies ~11 kb upstream of SH2B3/LNK, a gene that inhibits erythropoiesis in mouse . SuRE identifies the A allele as the weak allele, potentially reducing SH2B3 expression. We cannot rule out that other SNPs in the region, for example among those not included in our SuRE data, also play a causal role.
Another example is rs3748136, which, together with 66 other SNPs in this locus, was found to be linked to blood counts of reticulocytes. Amongst the 59 SNPs covered in our data, rs3748136 is the only significant SuRE hit, with the A allele showing an ~18-fold higher activity than the G allele (P = 7.5 × 10-20) ( ). K562 are heterozygous for this SNP and indeed show a strong allelic imbalance in DHS-seq, with the A allele being the more active allele ( ). In vitro binding proteomic analysis identified JUN and BACH1 proteins as more strongly bound to the A allele ( ), consistent with the G allele disrupting predicted binding motifs for both proteins ( ). Both BACH1 and JUN proteins are highly expressed in whole blood and in K562 cells , . Reanalysis of ChIP data for BACH1 showed a complete allelic imbalance for BACH1 binding and the same was found for JUND ( ). eQTL analysis of whole blood has linked the A allele of rs3748136 to elevated expression of the nearby non-coding RNA gene NR_125431 ( ). To further test this, we modified the G allele in K562 cells to an A allele by CRISPR/Cas9 editing . We found that expression of NR_125431 in K562 cells shows considerable clone to clone variation ( ). To account for this we performed G to A substitution in a stable K562 clone. This modification led to a 4-fold upregulation of NR_125431 ( ).
Finally, we overlaid the HepG2 SuRE data with a recent GWAS that linked SNPs to the risk of hepatitis B virus (HBV) related hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC), a type of cancer prevalent in Asia . This study identified 61 candidate SNPs in a ~200 kb region that includes the HLA class 1 locus. Of the 50 SNPs covered by our SuRE data, two are raQTLs in HepG2 ( ). These raQTLs are intergenic; both ALT alleles show reduced SuRE signals and are associated with higher HCC risk. Besides the HLA genes that are important for antigen presentation, other genes in this region could be affected by these raQTLs and play a role in HCC. For example, ZNRD1 and its antisense transcript have been implicated in expression of HBV mRNA and proliferation of HBV-infected HepG2 cells .
 

## Discussion
By surveying 5.9 million SNPs from four entire human genomes we identified about 30,000 SNPs that alter regulatory activity of enhancers or promoters. The data are available for download, and can be queried through a web application (https://sure.nki.nl).
Because 90% of these raQTLs were identified in only one of the two tested cell lines, it is likely that extension of this survey to other cell types will increase the number of raQTLs substantially. It is thus conceivable that several percent of all human SNPs may have impact on the activity of regulatory elements in at least one cell type.
While the redundant design of SuRE increases the odds that a robust and biologically representative measure of SNP effects is obtained, we note that SuRE signals arising from enhancers are generally weaker than those from promoters, and it cannot be ruled out that certain enhancers cannot be detected by SuRE at all. Thus, our approach may be better powered to detect effects of SNPs on promoters compared to enhancers. Furthermore, SuRE infers effects of SNPs on enhancer activity indirectly, by virtue of the ability of most enhancers to act as autonomous TSS. Although this feature generally correlates with the potency of enhancers to activate a cis-linked promoter, this correlation is not perfect and in some enhancers both activities may be differentially affected by particular SNPs.
Like most other MPRAs, SuRE queries all DNA elements in a plasmid context and in cultured cell lines, which may yield different results compared to a proper genomic context and tissue context. Integration with multiple orthogonal datasets can help provide confidence in the relevance of candidate SNPs. Epigenomic data, sequence motif analysis and in vitro binding mass-spectrometry , can serve this purpose, and in addition provide key insights into the mechanisms of action.
We foresee several additional applications of these SuRE data. First, there are many other eQTL studies and GWAS that may be overlaid with the SuRE maps. Second, in addition to SNPs, small insertions and deletions (indels) may be analyzed. While in human genomes such indels occur at a ~20 fold lower frequency than SNPs , their individual regulatory impact may be more potent, as they tend to disrupt TF binding motifs more dramatically. Third, our datasets may be useful for studying the regulatory grammar of TFs, as they cover natural genetic variation in thousands of regulatory elements. For example, the SuRE data may be used to refine computational predictions of SNP effects , , . Finally, it will be interesting to expand this type of analysis to individuals with a genetic disorder to capture additional disease-relevant variants that might not be found in the general population.

## Online Methods

## SuRE library preparation and barcode-to-fragment association
SuRE libraries were generated as described previously . DNA was isolated from lymphoblast cell lines HG02601, GM18983, HG01241 and HG03464 obtained from Coriell Institute, fragmented and gel-purified to obtain ~300-bp elements. For each genome, two SuRE libraries were generated, each of an approximate complexity of 300 million fragment-barcode pairs. This was done by transformation in CloneCatcher DH5G electrocompetent Escherichia coli cells (#C810111; Genlantis), or in E. cloni 10G (#60107-1; Lucigen). Barcode-to-fragment association was done as described previously , except that because of the smaller genomic insert size no digest with a frequent cutter was required. Thus, after I-CeuI digest and self-ligation we immediately proceeded to the I-SceI digest.

## Cell culture and transfection for SuRE
K562 cells were cultured and transfected as described . HepG2 (#HB 8065; ATCC) were cultured according to supplier's protocol and transiently transfected in the same manner as K562 cells except that program T-028 was used for nucleofection, 7.5 μg plasmid was used for each 5 million cells, and cells were harvested 48 hours after transfection. One hundred million cells were transfected for each replicate. Every 3 months all cells in culture were screened for mycoplasma using PCR (#6601; Takara).

## Illumina sequencing
Paired end sequencing (150 bp) of SuRE libraries was done by Novogene on the HiSeq-X platform, generating about 1 billion reads per library. Standard full genome sequencing and allele calling for the K562 cell line was done by Novogene on the HiSeq-X10 platform with PE 150-bp reads amounting to approximately 100 Gb or a ~30 fold coverage of the genome. Single-end sequencing on reverse transcribed, PCR-amplified barcodes was done by the NKI Genomics Core Facility on a HiSeq2500 machine.

## Sequencing data processing
Paired-end reads (PE reads) of the SuRE libraries (for associating genomic positions and barcodes for each SuRE-fragment), and single-end reads (SE reads) of the PCR amplified barcodes (representing raw SuRE expression data), were processed to remove adapter and vector backbone sequences, using cutadapt (V1.9.1) . PE and SE reads were discarded if the barcode sequence contained Ns or the sequence was not exactly 20 nucleotides. The remaining sequences in the PE reads are combinations of barcode sequences and genomic DNA (gDNA) sequences, whereas the SE reads only yield barcode sequences. The latter barcodes are simply recorded and counted. The gDNA sequences of the SuRE libraries were mapped to the reference genome sequence (hg19, including only chr1-22, chrX), using bowtie2 (V2.3.2, ), with a maximum insert length set to 1 kb. Read pairs with either the forward or the reverse gDNA sequence less than 6 nucleotides, and read pairs not aligned as 'proper pair', were discarded. To prevent allelic biases in alignment we used WASP and SNP annotations from the 1000-genome project (external data source #17) to discard all reads potentially resulting in biased alignments.
The resulting associations of barcode sequence-genomic position pairs were further processed as follows: 
Identical barcodes associated with multiple alignment positions were discarded except for the most abundant barcode-position pair.
Different barcodes associated with the exact same alignment position were merged; i.e. the barcode sequence associated with this position was set to the most frequent barcode sequence in the set, and the total number of PE reads in the set was used as count for this barcode-position pair.
Next, the barcodes identified in the SE reads were matched to the barcodes in the remaining barcode-position pairs, and ’SuRE-count' tables were generated associating barcode sequences, genomic positions, and counts for associated PE reads and matched SE reads for each of the biological replicates.

## SNP annotation
The fragments, specified in the SuRE-count tables were further annotated with SNP positions and base identities. For this annotation only SNPs were considered which were single-nucleotide, bi-allelic, and the alternative allele in at least 1 of all 4 considered genomes. SNPs homozygous for the reference allele in all 4 genomes were discarded. For each SNP in such a fragment we determined its base identity as observed in the actual sequence reads. Some fragments are too long to be entirely covered by the PE reads. In these cases the unidentified SNPs were assigned the IUPAC representation of both alleles; if the two alleles were known to be identical in the genome that was used to construct the particular library (based on annotation by the 1000 genome project, external data source #17), this inferred allele was used for annotation. At the time of finalizing this article we noticed that, due to a minor coding error, ~0.4% of the SuRE fragments was incorrectly annotated to carry both the REF and ALT allele of a SNP. This may cause a very slight underestimate of the total number of raQTLs, but it does not not alter any of the reported conclusions.

## SuRE data analysis and visualization
Data analysis and figure production was mostly done using various R (https://www.R-project.org) and BioConductor packages.

## Generating BigWigs of SuRE enrichment profiles
For each strand separately, we determined the cDNA barcode count for all SuRE fragments overlapping a given position. This total was divided by the total counts of the SuRE fragments measured in the SuRE library (iPCR barcode counts) to give the SuRE enrichment score. Within each transfection replicate the genome-wide normalized SuRE enrichment score was scaled to a mean of 1. Transfection replicates were then averaged to yield a genome-wide normalized SuRE enrichment profile per SuRE library. Then, the library replicates were also averaged to yield a genome-wide normalized SuRE enrichment profile per genome. Of these datasets BigWig files were generated. This analysis was done disregarding SNPs and is therefore independent of the identification of the raQTLs (see below).

## Identification of raQTLs
1.

## Equalization of cDNA barcode sequencing depth
To minimize biases that might be caused by excessive differences in sequencing depth, cDNA reads of some samples were sub-sampled. First, for each transfection replicate the relative sequencing depth of cDNA barcodes was determined as the total cDNA barcode counts divided by the corresponding library complexity (i.e. the number of unique fragments identified in the library). Then, samples with a relative cDNA sequencing depth that exceeded the mean of all samples by more than one standard deviation (i.e., all K562 and HepG2 transfection replicates for genome HG02601 library 1, and all HepG2 transfection replicates for genome HG02601 library 2) were down-sampled to the mean relative cDNA read depth.

2.

## SuRE signal normalization per fragment
For each fragment in each of the 8 SuRE libraries we normalized the iPCR barcode count by dividing it to the total iPCR sequencing depth of that library, expressed as reads per billion. Similarly, we normalized cDNA barcode counts per transfection replicate by dividing it by the total cDNA sequencing depth, again expressed as reads per billion. Next, for each fragment we calculated the SuRE signal (SSuRE), which is the mean of all transfection replicates of the ratio of the normalized cDNA barcode count over normalized iPCR barcode count. Since both values used to obtain this ratio are expressed as reads per billion, we interpret the resulting SSuRE values as an enrichment score.

3.

## Aggregation of SuRE signals by SNP allele and P value calculation
Using this SSuRE per fragment, a mean was calculated for each allele of each SNP as the mean SSuRE of all fragments containing that SNP allele. Also, for each SNP a two-sided Wilcoxon rank-sum test was performed comparing the set of SSuRE values of all fragments containing the REF allele with the set of SSuRE values of all fragments containing the ALT allele. The resulting vector of P values (one for each SNP) is referred to as Pt. In addition, to estimate the False Discovery Rate (FDR), the same two-sided Wilcoxon rank-sum test was applied once after random shuffling of the SSuRE of the fragments among the two alleles, yielding a vector of random P values referred to as Pr.

4.

## Criteria for raQTL definition
We then focused on those SNPs for which both alleles were covered by at least 10 fragments and no more than 999 fragments, and for which at least one of the alleles met the criterium (170,118 SNPs in K562; 395,756 SNPs in HepG2). For FDR = 5%, we then chose the lowest P value cutoff pcut for which the number of SNPs with Pt < pcut was at least 20 times larger than the number of SNPs with Pr < pcut. We refer to this set of SNPs as raQTLs. The same procedure was applied separately for data from K562 and HepG2 cells. For K562 pcut was 0.006192715 and for HepG2 pcut was 0.00173121.

## Enrichment of raQTLs in ENCODE classes
For we used the GenomicRanges package of BioConductor to determine the enrichment or depletion of raQTLs in ENCODE chromatin classes (external dataset #7) as compared to all 5.9 million SNPs we assessed.

## Comparison of SuRE to DNase-seq, H3K27ac and ATAC-seq allelic imbalance
In we plotted the DNase-seq signal around the raQTLs using external data source #4 and BioConductor package CoverageView (version 1.4.0) and 25-bp windows. was generated from the same data. For the analysis of allelic imbalance in the DNase-seq signal we combined three available experiments (external data source #1,#2,#3) and extracted from the bam-files the reads that overlapped a SNP that was found to be heterozygous in K562 in our own genome sequencing analysis (see ‘ ’ section). We focused on those raQTLs for which we found at least 20 DNase-seq reads and quantified the ratio of reads containing the REF allele over the reads containing the ALT allele, after adding for each allele a pseudocount of 1. Similarly, from our own genome sequencing of K562 we quantified the ratio of reads containing the REF allele over reads containing the ALT allele, after adding for each allele a pseudocount of 1. Finally, the DNase allelic imbalance was calculated as the DNase-seq allele-ratio over the genomic allele-ratio.
For the SuRE data, the allelic imbalance was calculated as the ratio of SSuRE for the REF allele over the SSuRE of the ALT allele (since both these values are already normalized for coverage in the libraries).
To obtain a matching set of control SNPs we intersected a DNase-peak annotation (external data source #7) with our SNPs, and we retrieved the DNase-seq allele counts for the 2,500 overlapping SNPs with the highest SuRE Pt values. We required at least DNase-seq 20 reads covering the SNP, and from the resulting set we randomly selected a subset of SNPs of the same size as the set of raQTLs ( ). To this control set we applied the same analysis of allelic imbalance as to the raQTLs. The comparison in with H3K27ac (external data source #20,21) and ATAC-seq (external data source #22,23) we did in the same manner as described for the DNase-seq data except that we required only 10 reads to cover the SNP, since these data are of approximately 5-10 times lower sequencing depth. We excluded a third ATAC-seq replicate (GSM2695562) since for this replicate we did not observe a similar pattern of enrichment as for the other ATAC-seq replicates. The mean enrichment profiles shown in were generate with BioConductor package CoverageView (version 1.4.0).

## Re-mapping of BACH1 and JUND ChIP-seq data
Fastq files were downloaded from the SRA repository (external dataset #13, #14) using fastq-dump from the SRA-tools package. For BACH1 we downloaded data from datasets SRR502556 and SRR502557, for JUND from datasets SRR502542 and SRR502543. Reads were aligned to the human reference sequence (hg19, including only chr1-22, chrX), using bowtie2 (V2.3.2) with default settings.

## Allele frequencies
MAFs of SNPs were obtained from the 1000 Genomes Project (external data source #17). Common SNPs were defined as SNPs with MAF > 0.05. Of the 5,919,293 SNPs in our SuRE dataset 4,569,323 classify as common. This is ~57% of the estimated ~8 million common SNPs according to the 1000 Genomes Project . The proportion of raQTLs for which the SuRE effect could be resolved to a single SNP was calculated as the fraction of raQTLs for which neither neighbor SNP was also a raQTL.

## TF motif analysis
We made use of SNP2TFBS (external data source #16) to identify all SNPs for which there was a difference in predicted affinity for a TF between the REF and ALT allele. For each SNP we only considered the TF listed first in SNP2TFBS (i.e., the TF with the biggest absolute difference in motif score). For the comparison of motif disruptions in K562 and HepG2 we identified all raQTLs of K562 and HepG2 that caused motif disruptions, we down-sampled the K562 disruptions to the same number as the HepG2 disruptions (since K562 has more raQTLs), and plotted the ratio of the counts (plus one pseudo-count) for the 7 most extreme ratios for each cell type. Sequence logos were obtained from external dataset #19.

## Compiling a set of control SNPs that are matched to the significant SNPs
For the analyses in we compared the set of raQTLs to a control set of matching SNPs that was selected as follows. We ranked all SNPs, first: by the SSuRE (rounded to whole numbers) of the strongest allele, second: by the number of fragments containing the least covered allele, and third: by the number of fragments containing the most covered allele. This is intended to rank them based on regulatory element activity (SSuRE) and our sensitivity to detect a significant difference (coverage of the alleles). Then we identified the raQTLs along this ranking and selected both direct neighbors, removed the raQTLs and down-sampled the resulting set to yield the same number of matched SNPs as raQTLs.

## raQTL density around loss-of-function tolerant and loss-off-function intolerant genes
For the definition of LOF-tolerant and LOF-intolerant genes, we used external dataset #11 and the same cut-offs as previously reported , classifying genes as having pLI scores of > 0.9 as intolerant and < 0.1 as tolerant. We then matched these genes to GENCODE version 19 annotation (external data source #12) to identify the corresponding TSSs. Using the GenomicRanges package of BioConductor we defined regions around these TSSs of ± 100 kb and subtracted all possible exons (as defined in GENCODE version 19). In the resulting regions we then determined the fraction of all SNPs that is a raQTL, and the fraction that belonged to the set of matched control SNPs. This analysis was done for both LOF-intolerant and LOF-tolerant genes.

## Integration with eQTL data
GTEx eQTL data (release v7; external data source #18) were downloaded on 27 January 2018. For whole blood we used the extracted file Whole_Blood.v7.signif_variant_gene_pairs.txt.gz and for liver we used Liver.v7.signif_variant_gene_pairs.txt.gz.
Gene annotation tracks in were generated by the Gviz package of BioConductor, function BiomartGeneRegionTrack(). ENCODE DNase-seq data used in this figure are from external data source #4, #15.

## Integration with GWAS data
Overlap between SNPs identified in the GWAS study by Astle et al. , was obtained by searching for significant SuRE SNPs within 100 kb of each of the 6,736 lead SNPs identifying 1,238 lead SNPs within 100 kb of at least one significant SuRE SNP (external data source #6). The window of 100 kb was chosen to be substantially larger than the typical size of an LD block. For these lead SNPs we calculated the distance to SNP with the lowest P value in our SuRE data ( ). As a control we did the same procedure for the set of matched SuRE SNPs. In only those SNPs with significant P values in the GWAS (cutoff: P < 8.31 × 10-9; ref. ) are shown. Note that what we refer to as ‘lead SNPs’ are called ‘conditionally independent index-variant associations’ in the original GWAS . Gene annotation tracks in were generated by the Gviz package of BioConductor, function BiomartGeneRegionTrack(). DNase-seq data used are from external data source #4.

## CRISPR/Cas9-mediated editing of rs3748136
We performed our CRISPR experiments on a K562 subclone in which NR_125431 was active (subclone BL_2) because initial experiments revealed that in the K562 pool, NR_125431 is expressed in only ~25% of the cells ( ). Five million of the BL_2 cells were nucleofected as described above with 2 μg of vector pX330-U6-Chimeric_BB-CBh-hSpCas9, a gift from Feng Zhang (Addgene plasmid # 42230 ) encoding Cas9 and the chimeric guide RNA; and 20 pmol repair template (see for nucleotide sequences of guide RNAs). Cells were then cultured for 3 days in the presence of 1 μM DNA-PK inhibitor (#NU7441; Cayman Chemical Company) and then expanded for another 5 days without this inhibitor. For genotyping we used a PCR amplicon that that included SNP rs453301, ~250 bp downstream of rs3748136 that was also heterozygous in K562. After confirming editing efficiency for the population of cells using Sanger sequencing and TIDE analysis , single cells were cloned out. After expansion, clones were genotyped on the single PCR amplicon, and classified as successfully edited when they were heterozygous (i.e. not edited) at rs453301 but homozygous for rs3748136, or they were classified as wild-type when both loci were still heterozygous. Of note, we identified many clones in which our CRISPR editing caused deletions around the targeted SNP; these were discarded. Successfully edited clones and wild-type clones were then analyzed for RNA expression by RT-qPCR. Since the chromosome that was edited at rs3748136 was the only chromosome showing expression of NR_125431 to begin with, we are looking at the increased expression from that chromosome after editing (see main text), even though the RT-qPCR is not allele specific. See for oligonucleotide sequences used.

## Targeted Locus Analysis
In order to determine the phasing of the K562 genome around rs1053036, TLA was performed essentially as described . Briefly, roughly 5 million K562 cells were cross-linked with 4% formaldehyde and cut with NlaIII. After ligation, the template was de-crosslinked and further digested with NspI. The second ligation yields circular DNA that is used as input for the inverse PCR reaction. We performed two PCR reactions: the first with primers adjacent to rs1053036, located in the last exon of the NR_125431 and the second with primers adjacent to rs3748136, located in the intergenic region ( ). The PCR amplicons were combined and we generated sequencing libraries using the KAPA High Throughput Library Preparation Kit (# 7961901001; Roche). We generated 2 × 150-bp PE sequences on an Illumina MiSeq. Sequence reads were mapped to hg19 using BWA-SW . The resulting bam files and the K562 vcf file (obtained from whole genome sequencing at Novogene) were used as input for HapCUT2 with the --hic option turned on to phase the alleles.

## RT-qPCR
RNA was isolated from 1-5 million cells using Trisure (#BOI-38033; Bioline). DNase digestion was performed on ~ 1.5 μg RNA with 10 units DNase I for 30 min (#04716728001; Roche) and DNase I was inactivated by addition of 1 μl 25 mM EDTA and incubation at 70 °C for 10 min. cDNA was produced by adding 1 μl 50 ng/μl random hexamers and 1 μl dNTPs (10 mM each) and incubated for 5 minutes at 65°C. Then 4 μl of first strand buffer, 20 units RNase inhibitor (#EO0381; ThermoFisher Scientific), 1 μl of Tetro reverse transcriptase (#BIO-65050; Bioline) and 2 μl water was added and the reaction mix was incubated for 10 minutes at 25°C followed by 45 minutes at 45°C and heat-inactivation at 85° for 5 minutes. qPCR was performed on the Roche LightCycler480 II using the Sensifast SYBR No-ROX mix (#BIO-98020; Bioline). All expression levels were calculated using the 2–ΔΔCt method and normalized to the internal control GAPDH. See for oligonucleotide sequences used for qPCR.

## DNA affinity purification and LC-MS analysis
Nuclear extracts were generated from K562 cells essentially as described . Briefly, cells were washed with PBS and then resuspended in 5× cell pellet volumes of hypotonic Buffer A (10 mM HEPES (pH 7.9), 1.5 mM MgCl2, 10 mM KCl). After incubation for 10 minutes at 4 °C, cells were collected by centrifugation and resuspended in two pellet volumes of buffer A supplemented with 0.15% NP40. Cells were then lysed by dounce homogenization using 35 strokes with a type B (tight) pestle on ice. Crude nuclei were collected by centrifugation and then lysed in two pellet volumes of Buffer C (420 mM NaCl, 20 mM HEPES (pH 7.9), 20% (v/v) glycerol, 2 mM MgCl2, 0.2 mM EDTA, 0.1% NP40, EDTA-free complete protease inhibitors (Roche), and 0.5 mM DTT) by rotation for 1 h at 4 °C. After centrifugation for 20 minutes at 21,000 g, nuclear extract was collected as the soluble fraction. This extract was then aliquoted, snap-frozen and stored at -80 °C until further usage.
Oligonucleotides for the DNA affinity purifications were ordered from Integrated DNA Technologies with the forward strand containing a 5’ biotin moiety; see ). DNA affinity purifications and on-bead trypsin digestion was performed on 96-well filter plates essentially as described . Tryptic peptides from SNP allele pull-downs were desalted using Stage (stop and go extraction) tips and then subjected to stable isotope di-methyl labeling on the Stage tips . Matching light and heavy peptides were then combined and samples were finally subjected to LC-MS and subsequent data analyses using MaxQuant and R essentially as described .

## Data availability statement
Raw SuRE sequencing data are available at GEO (https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/geo/) under accession GSE128325. SuRE count tables, BigWig files for visualization of SuRE data tracks in genome browsers, lists of raQTLs and a table with SuRE data for all 5.9 million SNPs are available from the Open Science Framework: https://osf.io/w5bzq/wiki/home/?view. SuRE data can also be queried and visualized at https://sure.nki.nl. URLs to external data sources are listed in .

## Statistics
For the identification of raQTLs we tested the difference in SuRE expression of fragments containing the reference allele and the fragments containing the alternative allele using a two-sided Wilcoxon rank-sum test (see also section ‘ ’). In addition, the same two-sided Wilcoxon rank-sum test was applied once after random shuffling of fragments among the two alleles. Using all obtained P values from the real comparisons and the shuffled comparisons, we estimated the False Discovery Rate (FDR). In , a two-sided Fisher exact test was performed, yielding P < 2.2 × 10-16 for each of the comparisons. The number of raQTLs overlapping with each of these states was CTCF: 667; enhancer: 1,052; promoter flanking: 74; repressed: 11,024; transcribed: 1,414; transcription start site: 2,189; weak enhancer: 576, while the number of all SNPs overlapping was CTCF: 79,437; enhancer: 44,296; promoter flanking: 2,178; repressed: 4,701,204; transcribed: 626,914; transcription start site: 46,631; weak enhancer: 17,665. For comparisons of alleles observed for DNA sequencing and DNase-seq, ChIP-seq or RNA-seq in , and , P values were obtained using a one-side Fisher exact test.
P values in were obtained using a two-sided Fisher exact test. For the comparison in , a two-sided Wilcoxon rank-sum test was done to compare the distances to the lead SNP for the raQTLs with the distances of the matched SNPs to the lead SNP.

## Code availability statement
Scripts are available on https://github.com/vansteensellab/SuRE-SNV-code.
Software used is described in the relevant section and in the Life Sciences Reporting Summary.

## Supplementary Material
Supplementary Table 1Supplementary Table 2Supplementary Table 3Supplementary Figures 1-5

## Acknowledgements
We thank the NKI Genomics Core Facility and Research IT team for technical support; the RHPC facility of the Netherlands Cancer Institute for providing computational resources; members of our laboratories for helpful discussions. Supported by ERC Advanced Grant 694466 (B.v.S.); ERC Starting Grant 637587 (E.d.W.); NIH grant R01HG003008 and Columbia University’s Vagelos Precision Medicine Pilot Program (H.J.B.). F.C. was supported by a Swiss National Science Foundation postdoctoral fellowship (P2EZP3_165206). J.v.A., L.P., M.d.H., M.P.B., F.C., R.v.d.W., H.T., E.d.W., M.V., and B.v.S. are part of the Oncode Institute, which is partly funded by the Dutch Cancer Society (KWF).

## Footnotes
Author contributions
J.v.A. designed and performed experiments, analyzed data and wrote the manuscript. L.P., V.D.F. and H.J.B. developed algorithms and analyzed data. M.d.H. M.B., M.V., R.H.v.W., H.T., F.C., U.V., E.d.W. and L.F. generated and/or analyzed data. F.C. developed the web application. B.v.S. designed experiments, analyzed data and wrote the manuscript.
Competing interest statement
J.v.A. is founder of Gen-X B.V. (http://www.gen-x.bio/). E.d.W. is co-founder and shareholder of Cergentis B.V.. F.C. is a co-founder of enGene Statistics GmbH.

## References
 

## Associated Data

## Supplementary Materials
Supplementary Table 1Supplementary Table 2Supplementary Table 3Supplementary Figures 1-5

## Data Availability Statement
Raw SuRE sequencing data are available at GEO (https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/geo/) under accession GSE128325. SuRE count tables, BigWig files for visualization of SuRE data tracks in genome browsers, lists of raQTLs and a table with SuRE data for all 5.9 million SNPs are available from the Open Science Framework: https://osf.io/w5bzq/wiki/home/?view. SuRE data can also be queried and visualized at https://sure.nki.nl. URLs to external data sources are listed in .