822acssdJournal of Medicinal ChemistryJ Med ChemPMC8015234801523480152343313588710.1021/acs.jmedchem.0c00766Synthetic Lethality
through the Lens of Medicinal
Chemistry
MyersSamuel
H OrtegaJose Antonio CavalliAndrea †Computational
& Chemical Biology, Istituto Italiano
di Tecnologia, 16163 Genova, Italy‡Department
of Pharmacy and Biotechnology, University
of Bologna, 40126 Bologna, Italy*Email: Andrea.Cavalli@iit.it.
211202063231415114151–14183242021© 2020 American Chemical SocietyPermits the broadest form of re-use including for commercial purposes, provided that author attribution and integrity are maintained (https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/).

## Abstract
 Personalized medicine and therapies
represent the goal of modern
medicine, as drug discovery strives to move away from one-cure-for-all
and makes use of the various targets and biomarkers within differing
disease areas. This approach, especially in oncology, is often undermined
when the cells make use of alternative survival pathways. As such,
acquired resistance is unfortunately common. In order to combat this
phenomenon, synthetic lethality is being investigated, making use
of existing genetic fragilities within the cancer cell. This Perspective
highlights exciting targets within synthetic lethality, (PARP, ATR,
ATM, DNA-PKcs, WEE1, CDK12, RAD51, RAD52, and PD-1) and discusses
the medicinal chemistry programs being used to interrogate them, the
challenges these programs face, and what the future holds for this
promising field.

statusreleaseddisplay-pdfyesis-in-collection-domainyesis-olfnois-manuscriptnois-preprintnois-journal-matternois-scannednois-retractednoReceived 2020 May 6; Issue date 2020 Dec 10.

1.

## Introduction
It is commonly known that cancer is a disease of the genome, wherein
errors in DNA replication and repair cause failures in cell function,
while the mechanisms that would normally deal with these faulty cells
are also compromised, resulting in cancer cell survival and ultimately
proliferation. Before the advent of the human genome project in 2003,
cancer treatments were mainly radiotherapy and nonspecific chemotherapy:
two treatment methods that are famed for their lack of specificity
and severe side effects. The human genome project has aided the route
toward personalized medicine, wherein unique biomarkers in individuals
can be detected and treated with tailor-made therapeutics for that
specific cancer. There have been numerous success stories, primarily
where “oncogene addiction” occurs, in which a particular
subtype of cancer is over-reliant for survival on a particular oncogene,
and therefore inhibition of this oncogene through small molecules
or antibodies causes selected cell death. Examples include imatinib,
which targets BCR-ABL that has extended the median survival of patients
with chronic myelogenous leukemia to greater than 10 years. Another success story can be seen in melanoma,
where treatment with the BRAF inhibitor vemurafenib has caused melanoma
to change from a mostly untreatable disease to one where over 50%
of patients show a meaningful clinical response. However, this trend toward precision-based personalized
medicine has fallen out of fashion in the cancer drug discovery community.
First, not all cancers show a simple oncogene addiction, and their
survival mechanisms are far more complex; also, certain oncogenes
have proved undruggable by small molecules and antibodies. Furthermore, even with initial success, issues
of resistance and poor mechanistic understanding have hampered efforts,
resulting in oncology still reliant on radiotherapy and nonspecific
chemotherapeutics. Attention has turned toward synthetic lethality,
exploiting hampered DNA repair mechanisms in cancer and allowing access
to previously undruggable targets by indirect inhibition. 
Synthetic lethality (SL) was first discovered
in the fruit fly
(Drosophila pseudoobscura) in 1946  and can be defined as the relationship that can
occur between two genes where either one functioning maintains viability
of the cell; however upon dysfunction of both genes, the cell becomes
unviable. In its simplest and most desirable
application, this would result in the selective killing of cells that
rely on the mechanisms driven by these two genes, i.e., cancer cells,
while leaving the healthy cells alive. One synthetically lethal pair,
PARP (poly (ADP-ribose) polymerases) and BRCA1/2, are now exploited
in standard of care treatments; however
this was 6 years ago, and still no other SL-based drugs have gained
regulatory approval.
Within the field of synthetic lethality
there are numerous examples
of synthetically lethal gene pairs; therefore in this Perspective
we select prominent and interesting examples to use as case studies
for the field. Within these sections the targets typical mode of function
is described, followed by the proposed mechanisms of synthetic lethality.
Subsequently, medicinal chemistry programs that have produced molecules
with potential to cause “small molecule-induced synthetic lethality”
are discussed, including compounds in early stage, preclinical, and
clinical studies. The review ultimately concludes with the challenges
facing such small molecules and the drugging of their targets.

2.

## PARP and BRCA2
PARP is a family of enzymes containing
17 members, of which 15 have been shown
to catalyze the transfer ADP-ribose
to target proteins. , PARP1 and PARP2 play important
roles in DNA repair, making them an attractive target for oncology.
PARP’s role in DNA repair was first discovered when it was
observed that there was a correlation between high amounts of DNA
lesions and increased PARP concentration. PARP is involved in the repair of single-stranded breaks (SSBs),
through base excision repair (BER) ( ), where it forms a part of the BER complex. In addition to this, PARP has been observed
to play a role in nucleotide excision repair (NER). This and BER are
both mechanisms for DNA repair. PARP
has been observed in cell-free systems to bind tightly to broken DNA,
and after auto-poly-ADP-ribosylation, it allows repair enzymes to
access the DNA in order to initiate repair. , 
 BRCA2 plays an important role in repairing double-stranded breaks
(DSBs), as part of the homologous recombination (HR) pathway, and
has been reported to be synthetically lethal when disrupted in combination
with PARP, which as stated previously
is involved in the repairing of SSB. This relationship was first discovered
in 2005, , and since this date, numerous papers have
been published discussing the mechanism behind this. − In the case of BRCA2 and PARP, in patients with defective BRCA2,
PARP inhibitors can be administered to induce synthetic lethality.
Numerous cancers have defects in HR: such tumors include ovarian
(50%) breast, prostate, and pancreatic cancers (all 10–20%). This is thought to aid cancer initiation and
progression, with the hypothesis being that this fault in HR will
cause more DNA breaks, resulting in more mutations. Due to cancer
cell survival mechanisms, these DNA breaks may not necessarily be
fatal to the cell and in fact may allow for more favorable conditions
for cell survival. Due to the high proportion
of cancers that express these HR defects, they are prime candidates
for treatment with PARPi. Three main mechanisms have been hypothesized
to exploit the synthetically lethal relationship between PARP and
BRCA2. The first begins with a PARP inhibitor (PARPi) blocking BER,
thus causing the conversion of an SSB to a DSB that BRCA2 would normally
fix. If the tumor is genetically deficient in BRCA2, it will not be
able to perform HR and therefore cause irreparable DNA damage, leading
to cell death. In the second mechanism,
the PARPi binds to the PARP1 enzyme on the chromatin, thus trapping
it in mechanism referred to as PARP trapping; this causes a lesion
that must be repaired which, due to compromised HR, is not possible
and causes cell death. In the third mechanism, DSBs are resected during
the S phase; however, since HR is defective, the alternative microhomology-mediated
end joining (MMEJ) pathway attempts to repair the break. Since PARP1
is inhibited by the PARPi, it can no longer recruit POLQ, therefore
blocking this pathway and triggering cell death; the same effect is thought to be achieved through POLQ
dysregulation. 
PARP inhibitors
demonstrate the first major success in the field
of synthetic lethality and became the first evidence of modulating
SL in the clinic when, in 2014, olaparib (1, ) became the first
PARPi approved by the FDA. This was approved for the treatment of
ovarian cancer, following a phase II trial in which 34% of patients
exhibiting BRCA1/2 mutations showed compelling response rates. The
patients had been given at least three rounds of chemotherapy previously
and were then treated with 1 as a single agent. It was seen in this trial and subsequent ones
that platinum-sensitive cancers showed a better overall response rate
to PARPi compared to platinum-resistant cancers. , Despite this, 1 has shown some success in platinum-resistant
cancers in patients with BRCA1/2 mutations. , This diversifies it from the other approved PARPi’s. 1 was approved in tablet and capsule form for the treatment
of advanced ovarian cancer, where the patient had received at least
three rounds of prior chemotherapy.
 The second PARPi to be approved was rucaparib (2, ) in 2016,
which
demonstrated similar effects to 1 in phase II trials; , however, the side effects between the two drugs are slightly different,
affecting treatment choice. 2 was approved for use in
patients with advanced ovarian cancer with deficient BRCA1/2 (either
germline or somatic), who had received at least two treatments of
chemotherapy in the past. The third FDA approved PARPi for the treatment
of advanced ovarian cancer is niraparib (3, ), and in 2017, it
was approved for patients with recurrent epithelial ovarian, fallopian
tube, or primary peritoneal cancer in platinum-sensitive tumors. 
PARPi’s have also been approved
for the treatment of breast
cancer. This was achieved through two phase III trials, studying 1( ) and talazoparib (4, ) in comparison to the clinicians’ choice
of chemotherapy in patients with human epidermal growth factor receptor
2 (HER-2) negative breast cancer who had received chemotherapy previously
and have seen no progression on the platinum-based therapy. PARP inhibition
showed an increase in progress-free survival in comparison to the
platinum therapies. The final PARPi to gain regulatory approval was 4 in 2018, which is orally administered to adults with deleterious/suspected
deleterious germline BRCA-mutated, (HER2)-negative, locally advanced,
or metastatic breast cancer; 1 was also approved for the same disease area. Furthermore, 1 was also approved for the treatment of pancreatic cancer
as a first line maintenance treatment in cancers with a loss of function
of BRCA2, following a double-blind placebo-controlled multicenter
trial on 154 patients. The median progress-free
survival of the participants increased from 3.8 months in the placebo
to 7.4 months with 1. Although this is a small increase,
any progress in this particularly challenging disease area should
be applauded.
Recently (May 2020), 2, followed
by 1, gained FDA approval for the treatment of germline
and/or somatic
BRCA-mutated metastatic castration-resistant prostate cancer. 2 was approved as a result of Triton 2, an ongoing multicenter,
single arm clinical trial in 115 patients with BRCA-mutated (germline
and/or somatic) mCRPC who had been treated with androgen receptor-directed
therapy and taxane-based chemotherapy. 2 showed an objective
response rate of 44% in 62 patients with measurable disease; 56% of
these showed a duration of response greater than 6 months. 1 was approved on the basis of
a 2019 phase III trial of 387 men, where 1 increased
progression-free survival from 3.6 months to 7.4 months. 1 also decreased the risk of disease progression or death to a median
of 5.8 months vs 3.5 months for standard of care treatment. 
The field of PARP inhibition has been
covered extensively by the
literature; last year, an excellent review summarized the field of
PARP inhibitors from a medicinal chemistry perspective, taking advantage
of the extensive knowledge of the PARP protein to highlight binding
motifs and structural similarities between the various generations
of PARP inhibitors. The majority of inhibitors
discussed in this review could theoretically be applied to inducing
the SL phenotype; the field is extensively covered in the review by
Jain et al., in which 37 different inhibitors are discussed with the
majority of these being discovered after the approval of 1.
PARPi resistance can develop in cancer cells showing the
BRCA2
mutation, occurring in one of two ways: the cell either finds a way
to re-establish HR repair or repairs the break through alternative
means, and both are covered in great detail in the review by D’Andrea. These mutations are relevant in a clinical setting,
as 46% of platinum-resistant serious grade ovarian cancers showed
a mutation that resulted in the restoration of the BRCA2 pathway.
This is achieved either through genetic events that cancel the loss
of function of the BRCA2 mutation or through genetic inversion of
the mutation, resulting in restoration of the wild-type (WT) BRCA2
protein. These resistance mechanisms demonstrate the continuous need
for evolution of understanding of PARP inhibition, and the BRCA1/2
pathway. Examples of how increased understanding of the PARP1/BRCA2
pathway could bypass resistance are shown later in this text, as these
resistance mechanisms rely on the restoration of BRCA2 function. Through
an increased understanding of the relationship between BRCA2 and RAD51,
it has been proposed that PARP1 inhibitor efficacy could be restored
through interruption of the BRCA2/RAD51 interaction. Therefore, given
the crossover between many DNA repair mechanism modulating targets,
it is possible that other key interactions for BRCA2 could be elucidated
as understanding of these pathways increases, providing new potential
SL-tools to restore PARPi activity.

3.

## ATR, ATM,
and DNA-PKcs Inhibitors
ATM and DNA-PKcs exhibit complementary functions in DNA damage
repair, notably HR and nonhomologous end joining (NHEJ). The co-dependent
nature of these two kinases is evident from the inactivation of these
two kinases, causing embryonic lethality. A loss of function through either genetic malfunction or chemical
modulation can cause synthetic lethality within cells. The inhibition
of both targets causes an accumulation of DSB, which in turn causes
an increase CTBP interacting protein (CtIP) mediated resection, thus
forming large single-stranded DNA (ssDNA) tracts, followed by the
triggering of apoptosis through the ATR/CHK1 pathway. This has been achieved with inhibition of DNA-PKcs as a
monotherapy in ATM-defective lymphomas. In addition to ATM, inhibition of DNA-PKcs has been shown to be
synthetically lethal in cells in a number of other targets that play
a key role in the HR process: BRCA1, BRCA2, CHK2, Rad50, PTIP, and
PAXIP. The inactivation of ATM and DNA-PKcs
has been seen to be more effective in BRCA1/2 deficient cells. The link between ATM and BRCA1/2 is not well
understood: it has been hypothesized that rather than being dependent
on BRCA1/2, ATM is dependent on certain genetic changes this genotype
causes. Additionally, it has been seen
that deficiency of either ATM or DNA-PKcs causes a sensitization to
DNA-damaging agents such as topoisomerase I and II poisons or DNA
alkylating agents. It has been proposed
that the observed SL mechanism is not due to a failing of the DNA
repair mechanism; this would differentiate this pathway somewhat from
other SL pathways. Lastly, ATM has been shown to be synthetically
lethal with the kinases MAPK and MEK1/2, with ATM playing a role in prosurvival pathways, noticeably the
AKT/mTOR pathway: when MAPK or MEK1/2 is inhibited, if ATM is also
impaired, this pathway is not open and therefore cell death occurs.
This is important, as MEK inhibitors have already gained regulatory
approval. 
As shown by its complementary
functions with ATM, DNA-PKcs plays
a key role in DNA repair in HR and NHEJ; the role of DNA-PKcs in DNA
repair has been reviewed comprehensively by Goodwin et al. In addition to these well documented DNA damage
repair pathways, DNA-PKcs is also involved with various processes
that are thought to be important for tumor progression, such as cell
cycle progression, transcription, and telomere maintenance, making DNA-PKcs an attractive target for cancer
therapy.
DNA-PKcs is dysregulated in numerous cancers such as
melanoma,
where it encourages angiogenesis and tumor migration, and it has been
discovered that the DNA-PKcs is associated with the secretion of prometastatic
proteins through modification of the tumor microenvironment. DNA-PKcs dysregulation has also been observed
in hepatocellular carcinoma and myeloma and is associated with radioresistance in cancers
including thyroid, oral cavity, and cervical cancer. 
ATR is not directly associated with the DNA damage response;
however
it is involved with protecting cells from replication stress. It does this through preventing the collapse
of the replication fork and inducing G2/M arrest by activating the
checkpoint kinase CHK1. Cancer cells rapidly proliferate and therefore
tend to undergo much replication stress and thus are particularly
dependent on ATR. ATR has been observed to show SL with ATM/CHK2/p53:
due to the amount of DSBs that are formed when ATR is inhibited, inhibiting
key players in the DSB pathway is likely to result in an SL relationship.
Of these SL relationships, ATR-ATM seems to be the most promising,
as ATM is involved in both DNA repair in addition to cell cycle checkpoint
activation. Furthermore, a deficiency in ATR has been shown to be
synthetically lethal with agents that cause DNA stress, such as nonspecific
chemotherapeutics. These SL relationships have been seen in various
cancer cells including leukemia, pancreatic, and gastric cancer; in some cases, the SL phenotype was only observed in combination
with DNA damaging agents.
ATR has also been shown to be synthetically
lethal with CHK1, where
small molecule-induced synthetic lethality has been reported, resulting
in the selective killing of cancer cells. It has been hypothesized that the mechanism for SL of these two
targets is that CHK1 inhibition increases replication stress through
the deregulation of origin firing. The
result of this is the stalling of DNA replication forks, increasing
the concentration of ssDNA that must be repaired by the ATR-dependent
replication protein A; however, due to ATR inhibition, this cannot
occur and therefore a large amount of DSB accumulates, thus causing
cell death.
ATR, ATM, and DNA-PKcs are promising targets for
impeding DNA damage
repair, as all are involved in the disruption of the cell cycle and
the initiation of the DNA damage repair process ( ). Currently multiple ATR inhibitors
are in clinical trials, the data for which can be seen in .
 VE-821 (5, A) (ATR IC50 = 26 nM) is an ATR
inhibitor
developed by Vertex pharmaceuticals in 2011. This compound is typical
of numerous inhibitors from this development program, all of which
contain a 2-aminopyrazine binding motif. While this compound was a useful tool in understanding the underlying
biology associated with ATR inhibition, it did not exhibit good solubility,
and its metabolic profile, specifically producing aniline-like metabolites,
was undesirable for a clinical candidate; thus Vertex began optimization
of 5. Initial optimization
of 5 involved the replacement of the anilide group with
various fused bi-cycles: while these were well-tolerated in terms
of ATR inhibition, they also demonstrated a loss in selectivity for
ATR against ATM. Through in silico modeling it was
theorized that this loss in selectivity was caused by the bulky fused
bi-cycles and the gatekeeper residue of the PIKK tyrosine kinase family,
causing rotation of the bound inhibitor. This in turn led to a further
steric clash between Pro2755 of ATM and the isopropylsulfone group
of the inhibitor that caused tighter ATM binding. With this information
in hand, Vertex theorized five-membered phenyl substituted heterocycles
would avoid these steric clashes and therefore would be able to maintain
selectivity, as they more closely resemble the anilide moiety present
in 5. Additionally, with substitution upon the phenyl
ring, a localized highly negatively charged area of the ATP binding
pocket could be exploited to further increase potency, selectivity,
and solubility. These SAR studies resulted in the eventual synthesis
of VX-970 (6, A), which shows picomolar ATR activity (IC50 = 0.17 nM) and >250 degree of selectivity over ATM. In cells,
it
was able to sensitize colorectal cancer cells to cisplatin, using
less than 50 nM 6. Furthermore, it demonstrated a good
pharmacokinetic profile (Cl = 26 mL min–1 kg–1; Vss = 21 L/kg; T1/2 = 11.6 h), in addition to good bioavailability,
making it ideal for further in vivo studies. 6 is a first-in-class inhibitor and has been tested both as
a monotherapy and with nonspecific chemotherapeutics such as topotecan,
carboplatin, gemcitabine, and cisplatin. − 6 presented promising
results as a monotherapy, showing a complete response in one patient
for greater than 19 months, with no associated toxicity. However,
in phase I trials with the nonspecific chemotherapeutics, bone marrow
toxicity was observed. The toxicity issues observed are somewhat common
for nonspecific chemotherapeutics, and in this instance the combinatorial
approach yielded no benefit over the monotherapeutic approach. Several
trials are still ongoing for 6 in numerous cancer subtypes. 6 has been acquired by Merck KGaA under the new name M6620;
additionally Merck has entered a second ATR inhibitor using a different
scaffold into clinical trials, M4344 (7, B) (ATR Ki ≤ 150 pM). The development
of 7 has yet to be published, with preclinical data only
being presented at a congress.
 BAY1895344 (8, C) was developed by Bayer AG as described in a patent
(8 is example 111 in patent WO 2016/020320), through a high-throughput screen HTS. 8 is a novel potent (7 nM) and selective ATR inhibitor (hitting
6 of 456 kinases tested in the kinome screen). Furthermore, 8 was able to selectively inhibit ATR mediated DNA repair
and inhibited proliferation in a range of cancer cell lines, being
most active in lymphoma cell lines showing an IC50 of 9
nM. It exhibits strong monotherapy efficacy
in cancers with impeded DNA damage repair. In addition to this, it
synergizes well with nonspecific chemotherapeutics (cisplatin and
carboplatin) and other DNA damaging agents (external beam radiotherapy).
It is currently under investigation in clinical trials in patients
with advanced solid tumors and lymphomas ( ). Lastly, 8 showed synergism
with 1 in BRCA1/2 deficient breast cancer cells, suggesting
a synthetically lethal interaction; these results were mirrored in vivo in breast cancer models.
AstraZeneca (AZ)
had previously developed a series of potent and
selective ATR inhibitors, of which the best performing was AZ20 (9, ) (ATR IC50 = 5 nM). However,
while this compound was able to prevent the growth of ATM-deficient
xenograph models in tolerated dosages, its aqueous solubility was
poor. Furthermore, it was found to hit cytochrome P450 3A4 (CYP3A4),
thereby increasing the chance of drug–drug interaction: given
the unlikeliness of ATR inhibitors being administered as a monotherapy,
this would stop it progressing through further studies. Therefore,
a drug-discovery program was initiated, looking to keep 9’s activity but with improved aqueous solubility and lessened
CYP3A4 activity. Initial SAR looked at
making modifications at the R1 and R2 positions ( ); alterations at the R1 position
did not reduce CYP3A4 activity and therefore were quickly abandoned.
Modifications at the R2 position began with simple ring substitutions;
while this did reduce CYP3A4 activity, it also decreased ATR activity,
suggesting that the indole group was the reason for CYP3A4 activity.
Ring switch to 6- or 7-azaindole and to 2-aminobenzimidazole showed
similar ATR activity in cell-based and biochemical assays to AZ20
while reducing CYP3A4 activity. The best of the series was 10 ( ) (ATR IC50 = 5 nM). Exploration of substitution of the benzimidazole
was attempted; however, none of the changes at this position proved
fruitful as all modifications in this position resulted in either
loss in ATR inhibition or physicochemical properties, such as aqueous
solubility.
 Subsequent modifications began at the sulfone group, looking to
expand upon 10. While initial replacement of the sulfone
with sulfoxide resulted in promising molecules, the metabolic risks
associated with sulfoxides were deemed too high, and therefore AZ
did not pursue this avenue of research. However, substitution with
various sulfoximines resulted in AZD6738 (11, ) (ATR IC50 = 4 nM), which achieved all goals of the lead-development program,
with decreased lipophillicity and improved aqueous solubility, in
addition to reduced CYP3A4 activity in comparison to 9.
Compound 11 was taken through to further screening
for its biological, physiochemical, and ADME properties. It was found
to be the lead compound from this series due to its excellent solubility,
permeability, and selectivity (only hitting ∼60% for PIK3C2G
and CLK4 out of the 409 kinases tested in the kinome screen) and demonstrated
profound antitumor activity. 11 has progressed in multiple
phase I/II trials, and while some are in combination with nonspecific
chemotherapeutics such as carboplatin (NCT02264678), it has also entered
trials with the PARP inhibitor 1, suggesting synthetic
lethality (NCT03462342, NCT03330847), with further preclinical studies
underway for other combinations with 1. Overall, the clinical candidate 11 has a favorable
pharmacokinetic profile for once or twice daily dosing, achieving
biological efficacy at moderate dosages. The selectivity of this compound
should be noted as it makes it an ideal tool for further exploration
of ATR’s synthetically lethal partners such as ATM and CHK1.
It has been discovered that homology exists between PI3K and ATR; therefore, it was hoped that it could be harnessed
for the discovery of novel ATR inhibitors. Ramachandran et al. had
previously been working on dual inhibitors of Bruton’s tyrosine
kinase (BTK) and PI3K: this was used
as a starting point for the design of ATR inhibitors. From the 299 selected compounds in the BTK series, 11 showed
inhibition of >50% at 5 μM while only 1 showed inhibition
of
>50% at 500 nM. Interestingly, despite the homology between the
two
kinases, there was poor overlap between the inhibition of both, suggesting
that the scaffold utilized in this series is differentiated somewhat
from other ATR inhibitors (8, 9–11), which were also developed from PI3K inhibitors. Of the
originally tested compounds, 12 ( A) stood out as the prime target for further
optimization not only because of it being the strongest inhibitor
of ATR from this series (IC50 = 0.220 μM) but also
because it showed relatively low activity against BRK and PI3K (BRK
inh = 24%, PI3Kd inh = 52% at 100 nM). 12 was tested
as a racemic mixture as there was less than a 2-fold difference in
ATR activity between the two enantiomers (IC50 = 0.304
μM vs 0.158 μM). This was tested with three other compounds
(13–15, ) that also showed good activity (in the
low micromolar range). All four of these compounds share the same
common 4-aminopyrazolopyrimidine scaffold functionalized at
N1 with a partially aromatic bicyclic system: it was discovered that
removal of the hydrogen bond donors/acceptors present in this core
scaffold was not well-tolerated, causing either a partial or complete
loss of activity against ATR. In addition to this, replacement of
the azaindolyl group with an aminopyridine group which displayed the
same hydrogen bond acceptors/donors was not tolerated, suggesting
the steric bulk present in the aminopyrazolopyrimidine group
is necessary for ATR inhibition. Follow-up SAR was conducted, introducing
new bulky groups at the C3 position, and yet none of these were able
to improve on the activity of 12. Therefore the focus
of the SAR studies turned to alkylation at the N1 position. While
the majority of modifications at this position did not yield a significant
improvement on the activity of 12, compound 16 ( B), which
takes influence from Vertex’s 5( ) featuring a phenylsulfonyl group, managed to yield the
most potent ATR inhibitor in this series to date with a 3-fold improvement
in activity (IC50 = 66 nM) over 12.
 16 was compared to
the clinical candidate ATR inhibitors 6 (IC50 = 15 nM) and 11 (IC50 = 86 nM) and in the
same testing conditions showed similar levels
of ATR inhibition. The lipophilic efficiency of 16 (5.8)
and oxidative stability were in the same region of the two literature
compounds. 16 was also tested for selectivity in a kinome
screen of 394 kinases: of these, 10 were inhibited at greater than
70% at 1 μM and 76 were inhibited at greater than 70% at the
10 μM, with only breast tumor kinase (BTK) being inhibited to
a greater degree than ATR. Lastly, 16 was tested in vivo in mice, where it showed good clearance but poor
bioavailability, suggesting further optimization is required. Given
ATR’s potential for small molecule-induced synthetic lethality,
any optimization of this compound should be monitored with interest.
In 2004, Hickson et al. developed the first selective ATM inhibitors,
as up to this date all molecules that had inhibited ATM were nonspecific
PIKK and PI3k inhibitors such as caffeine. Through a combinatorial
library approach based around the nonspecific PIKK and PI3k inhibitor
LY294002 (17, A), the group developed the ATP competitive inhibitor
KU-55933 (18, A), which demonstrated in biochemical assays an IC50 of 12.9 ± 0.1 nM, with at least a 100-fold degree of
selectivity over 60 other selected similar kinases. In these studies, interesting structural information was
gleaned when replacing the oxygen in the morpholine ring ( ). This resulted
in a significant drop in potency in KU-58050 (19, A) (2.96 ± 0.44
μM), a 200-fold drop in potency in comparison to 18, showing the importance of the oxygen at this position. Furthermore, 18 was able to sensitize cells to ionizing radiation and nonspecific
chemotherapeutics, thus increasing the amount of DSB.
 Following on from this
work, in 2009 Golding et al. developed KU-60019
(20, A) by expanding upon the thianthrene group with the aim of
improving 18’s bioavailability and pharmacokinetics. 20 was more water-soluble, was
able to double the potency with respect to 18 (6.3 nM),
and was more selective, showing a 240- and 1600-fold degree of selectivity
for DNA-PKcs and ATR, respectively. 20 is better at sensitizing
cells to ionizing radiation, showing an enhancement of 4.4 compared
to 1.6 from 18, when both compounds were administered
to glioma cells at 10 μM. In scratch assays, 20 was able to reduce invasion in vitro in U87 cells
and a greater than 70% drop in invasion was observed in a dose-dependent
manner. In the more invasive U1242 glioma cells, a greater than 50%
decrease in invasion was observed. It is thought that 20 showed this anti-invasive phenotype by acting on AKT and MEK/ERK
prosurvival pathways. 20 is currently undergoing a clinical
trial ( ) in
combination studies with CHK2 inhibitors; should this work, it could
indicate small molecule-induced synthetic lethality.
 In 2008 Rainey et al., through use
of an in vitro kinase screen of approximately 1500
small molecules, identified
CP466722 (21, B) (ATM IC50 = 12.9 nM). This was able to inhibit ATM activity in vitro but did not show activity against the closely related kinases in
the PI3k family. 21 showed a lack of toxicity and the
ability to inhibit ATM in human and mouse cells, the latter being
important as the group wished to test the compounds in vivo in murine models. Furthermore, 21 was able to sensitize
cancer cells to ionizing radiation. It was also demonstrated that 21 was a reversible binder, shown to bind quickly and effectively
for at least 8 h in tissue culture; however, upon 30 min of wash off,
ATM-dependent phosphorylation events were restored. This reversibility
is key due to the important role ATM plays in the cell cycle. This compound has yet to be used for further
studies.
AstraZeneca has acquired KuDOS pharmaceuticals and
has continued
building upon the progress made by 20. Through optimization
of an initial screening hit, 22 ( ) (ATR cell IC50 = 82 nM), AZ
was able to develop two further compounds: 23 ( ) (ATR cell IC50 = 46 nM) and 24 ( ) (ATR cell IC50 = 33 nM). 23 and 24 allowed exploration of the ATM inhibitors in vivo. At an oral dosage
of 100 mg/kg QD, 23 was able to increase sensitivity
to ionizing radiation in a HT29 xenograph mouse model. Both 23 and 24 were
able to enhance the efficacy of irinotecan in a SW620 mouse xenograft
models, with 24 able to contribute to tumor regression. , In line with other ATM inhibitors, 23 and 24 were ineffective without a DNA damaging agent to induce DSB. 24 showed a favorable reduction in activity against hERG relative
to 23 (IC50 of 22 and 4.5 μM, respectively)
and therefore had a lower chance of cardiovascular issues later on
in clinical development, suggesting that 24 would be
the better clinical candidate going forward. Through pharmacological modeling, it was found that 24 would have a low half-life (only 4 h) in humans, and therefore the
predicted dose would be 700 mg QD, with a maximum unbound concentration Cmax of 1.3 μM. In addition, other calculated
parameters such as predicted clinically efficacious dose and maximum
absorbable dose (Dabs) were unfavorable;
therefore AZ concluded that the probable chance of attrition was too
high. A further development program was initiated with an aim to produce
molecules with a reduced predicted clinical dose and an increased Dabs. AZ set about attempting to increase their
compounds’ volume of distribution (Vss), as pharmacokinetic half-life is calculated through Vss and clearance (CL). As 24 already showed
a low metabolic turnover, further reduction of CL would be challenging;
therefore, Vss was chosen as the parameter
to optimize. This began with the attempted inclusion of a basic substituent
with the molecule, as it has been shown previously that basic compounds
increase Vss with respect to acidic or
neutral compounds, with the idea of keeping
other parameters the same. While 25 (ATR cell IC50 = 8.6 nM) showed an increase in ATM inhibition with respect
to 24, a drop in permeability to unacceptable levels
occurred, meaning that basic substituents would be unlikely to be
tolerated going forward. In an effort to increase permeability by
reducing the number of hydrogen bond donors, a scaffold hop was attempted.
This was done using a pseudo-ring system and a tri-cycle system, imidazo[4,5-c]quinolin-2-one, which was selected from previous
AZ in-house data. This scaffold has also seen success in ATM inhibition
as an off-target in the dual PI3K/mTOR inhibitor, NVP-BEZ235, which
has entered clinical trials. , Of these compounds, 26 and 27 ( ) were the most potent (ATM IC50 = 0.95
and 0.36 μM, respectively), with 27 showing reduced
aqueous solubility. Given the promising results with this scaffold,
motifs from 23 and 24 were modeled upon
the imidazo[4,5-c]quinolin-2-one scaffold to
create a second series. Through in-depth SAR of the imidazo[4,5-c]quinolin-2-one scaffold, AZ eventually identified
AZD0156 (28, ) as the lead compound. 28 showed an excellent
affinity for ATM (IC50 = 0.04 nM in biochemical assays,
0.57 nM in cells) and an exceptional degree of selectivity, with only
2 of the 397 kinases tested in the kinome screening showing greater
than 70% inhibition (mTOR, 93%; LRRK2, 87%). 28 showed
desirable levels of unbound drug in human plus two other mammalian
species (rat and dog) and acceptable permeability, and it did not
target any of the main five isoforms of P450. In addition to this, the predicted pharmacokinetics of 28 were favorable, with low to moderate clearance in man (∼8
mL min–1 kg–1), moderate to high Vss (5.8 L/kg), and high oral bioavailability
(66%). In docking studies, 28 showed good complementarity
to ATM’s ATP binding site, displaying two interactions with
the kinase hinge region (Cys2770 and Lys2717) and one in the back
binding pocket (Tyr2755). In addition to this, the basic amine, present
in 28, is predicted to be surrounded by three acidic
residues (Asp2725, Asp2720, and Asp288). 28 demonstrated
the ability to increase the effectiveness of DSB-inducing agents such
as irinotecan. In combination studies, irinotecan (50 mg/kg ip Q7D)
and 28 (dosed orally at 20 mg/kg QD) were tolerated,
causing tumor regression in SW620 xenograph models in immunocompromised
mice. However, as expected, when 28 was administered
as a monotherapy, it showed no effect. All these results indicate
that 28 is a first-in-class selective ATM inhibitor with
promising potential applications for cancer therapy; it is currently
involved in a clinical trial highlighted in .
 With the 28 series showing success, further screens
were conducted on related hits to try and find other clinical candidates.
Given rates of attrition in drug development, having a second, backup
molecule in the pipeline provides a level of security. AZD1390 (29, ) was discovered in an in vitro screen, with a similar
structure as 28. It was designed to perform well in the
following parameters: ATM autophosphorylation activity (IC50 = 0.09 nM); selectivity against closely related PIKK family kinases
(ATR, DNA-PK, mTOR (all IC50 ≥ 1 μM)); general
selectivity across the kinome; lack of activity in novel dual-transfected
human MDR1 and BCRP efflux transporters assays. In terms of general selectivity, 29 was tested
against a panel of 121 kinases and showed ≥50% inhibition against
three targets (CSF1R, NUAK1, and SGK) at 1 μM, with none of
the 354 kinases tested showing ≥50% inhibition at 0.1 μM.
In a similar fashion to 28, 29 showed minimal
hERG activity (>33.3 and 6.55 μM, respectively). 29 demonstrated good blood–brain barrier (BBB) penetration and
has favorable physicochemical and PD/PK properties. Furthermore, it
was able to interrupt DNA damage repair in glioblastoma and lung cancer
cells. In line with previous studies on ATM inhibitors, 29 was more effective in p53-deficient cells. It was also demonstrated that treatment of animal orthotropic brain
models of glioblastoma and lung cancer brain metastasis (>3 h)
with 29 at a concentration above the IC50, in combination
with ionizing radiation, blocked tumor growth. It was also observed
that a combination of ionizing radiation and 29 caused
an increase in apoptosis in comparison to 29 as a monotherapy.
In brain cancer models using intracranially implanted xenografts, 29 was tested in combination with ionizing radiation and a
triplet combination of 29, ionizing radiation, and the
alkylating agent temozolomide.
While the triplet combination
showed more success than the doublet,
it appeared to be an additive effect, while ionizing radiation and 29’s combination were synergistic. In neither study,
any behavioral abnormalities were observed because of the administration
of 29, which is key for treatment of the brain. 29 was tested in human-derived glioblastoma models from patients
with either temozolomide resistance or sensitivity and either p53
WT or mutant, with the most sensitive to 29 and ionizing
radiation as expected being in the p53 mutant models, thus agreeing
with their previous data. On the basis of these data, 29 is being considered as a clinical candidate and entered a phase
I clinical trial in patients with brain cancer, the information of
which are reported in . These data, in particular the work in glioblastoma, are
of great importance to the field. Glioblastoma is the most aggressive
cancer of the brain, with poor patient prognosis, a seemingly inevitable
rate of recursion, and a median survival rate of 12–14 months
with current standard of care therapy. 29 shows the first example of potential SL-related
treatment of glioblastoma, one of the most urgent unmet medical needs
in oncology.
As highlighted earlier in the review, DNA-PKcs
is thought to be
synthetically lethal with a number of DNA repair modulating targets,
specifically ATM. In this section we highlight some of the DNA-PKcs
inhibitors currently in clinical and preclinical studies.
SU11752
(30, ) was the first selective DNA-PK inhibitor to be discovered
when it was identified from a library of 3-substituted indolin-2-ones. 30 showed a similar in vitro DNA-PK activity
to the known PI3K inhibitor wortmanin (31, ) (30 IC50 = 0.13 μM vs 31 IC50 = 0.1 μM).
The binding mode of 30 was then assessed: 31 has been shown previously to irreversibly bind to DNA-PK, a trait
that would be undesirable in a cell cycle modulator; however 30 was shown to be a reversible ATP
competitive inhibitor. Furthermore, 30 was much more
selective than 31, as 30 was 500 times less
active against 31’s primary target PI3Kγ.
Additionally 31 inhibits ATM, while in cells 31 was seen to be a poor inhibitor of ATM. 31 was able
to sensitize glioblastoma cells to ionizing radiation and disrupt
DNA repair.
 17 is a known PI3K
inhibitor (PI3Kα, -β,
-δ IC50 = 0.5, 0.97, 0.57 μM) that was used
as a starting point in the pursuit of novel selective DNA-PK inhibitors
in work conducted by Griffin et al. Initial optimization of 17 ( ) resulted in the synthesis of a series of DNA-PK inhibitors, which
displayed IC50’s in the low micromolar or nanomolar
range. The most potent of this series were pyrimidoisoquinolinone
(32, ) (DNA-PK IC50 = 0.28 μM) and NU7026 (33, ) (DNA-PK IC50 = 0.23 μM), which were able to sensitize tumor cell
lines to ionizing radiation and DNA damaging agents. 
 This work was continued through the use of a pharmacophore mapping
approach, replacing or substituting upon the 2-morpholinyl substituent.
This approach resulted in the discovery of KU-57788 (34, ) (formerly
NU7441). 34 was shown to
be a potent DNA-PK inhibitor (IC50 = 13 nM) with good selectivity
against ATM and ATR (no activity at 100 μM); however it also
hit mTOR and PI3K (IC50 = 1.7 and 5 nM, respectively).
In a similar manner to other DNA-PK inhibitors 34 was
able to enhance radiosensitization and the cytotoxicity of etoposide,
in Hela cells, while showing no cellular toxicity as a single agent.
AZ set out to discover a selective DNA-PK inhibitor. AZ had observed
that many of the current DNA-PK inhibitors showed poor selectivity
over related PI3Ks and PIKK family members such as ATM and mTOR. Through
use of an in-house screen searching for DNA-PK activity over PI3K,
the initial hit (35, A) (biochemical data not reported) was discovered. 35 was optimized, improving its potency, physiochemical, and
pharmacokinetic properties to give AZD7648 (36, A). 36 was a potent inhibitor of DNA-PK (IC50 = 0.6 nM) and showed good selectivity: in a panel of 397 kinases,
only 4 showed inhibition of >50% (PK, PI3Kα, PI3Kδ,
and
PI3Kγ), and of these 4 kinases 36 showed at least a > 60-fold
degree of selectivity for DNA-PKcs. In A549 cells 36 inhibits
DNA-PKcs autophosphorylation at Ser2056 (IC50 = 90 nM);
furthermore its selectively was also repeated in cells, with 36 showing a >90-fold selectivity for DNA-PKcs over ATM,
ATR,
mTOR, and three PI3K isoforms (α, β, and δ), with
a 10-fold selectivity increase over PI3Kγ. The selectivity of 36 was compared to other notable DNA-PKcs inhibitors (including 37) which all had at least one secondary target with <10-fold
selectivity. 36 was able to enhance DNA damaging therapies
such as radiotherapy, doxorubicin, and 1in vitro and in vivo. Due to its mechanism of acting through
inhibition of NHEJ, as opposed to HR, 36 is differentiated
from many of the current candidates for SL modulating drugs. This,
combined with its potency and selectivity, makes it an interesting
compound for further study.
 M3814 (also known as nedisertib) (37, B) is a potent selective DNA-PK
inhibitor (DNA-PK IC50 ≤ 3 nM). Information on the development of this inhibitor has not
been published, and 37 was first described in a patent
filed by Merck. 37 has been
shown to enhance the antitumor effect of ionizing radiation in solid
tumors and leukemia through inhibition of the NHEJ pathway, a common
feature of selective potent DNA-PK inhibitors. , , This effect is much more pronounced in cancer
cells that express WT-p53, thought to be due to overactivation of
p53/ATM which causes a much higher concentration of p53 in comparison
to radiation treatment administered alone, leading to premature cell
cycle arrest and senescence. This enhancement of radiotherapy has
also been observed in mice, where combination of 37 and
radiotherapy caused complete remission. Due to these promising results in vitro and in vivo, four clinical trials are currently underway using 37. These are listed in . To date, 37 is the only selective DNA-PK
inhibitor involved in clinical development.
 Mortensen et al. attempted to discover novel selective
mTOR inhibitors
through SAR studies of a series of 4,6- or 1,7-disubstituted-3,4-dihydropyrazino[2,3-b]pyrazine-2(1H)-ones, and in doing
so, they discovered the potent dual mTOR/DNA-PK inhibitor CC-115 (39, ). Previous studies had identified
CC214-1 (38, ) which displayed good on-target potency (mTOR IC50 = 2 nM); however it showed poor PK properties, showing negligible
oral bioavailability. A focused SAR approach featuring 2-methyl-6-(1H-1,2,4-triazol-3-yl)pyridin-3-yl substituted analogues
allowed the identification of small substituents in the N1/N4 position,
which kept the excellent potency of the early compounds of the series
while improving the PK profile. This culminated in the identification
of 39 (mTORIC50 = 21 nM) as a clinical candidate.
The DNA-PK activity of 39 was identified in separate
work conducted by Tsuji et al., where inhibition of autophosphorylation
of DNA-PK led to the blocking of DNA-PK facilitated NHEJ. In addition to 39’s activity
against mTOR and DNA-PK it was found to inhibit ATM, which as stated
earlier is thought to have an SL relationship with DNA-PK; this interaction
appears to have been confirmed as 39 is more active in
ATM deficient cells, suggesting synthetic lethality between DNA-PK
inhibition and ATM deficiency. This in combination with antitumor
activity seen in solid tumor and hematopoietic cell lines and apoptosis/antiproliferation
in various cell lines has lent support to 39 being explored
as a clinical candidate. To date, 39 is featured in two
clinical trials, which are reported in .
 
4.

## WEE1 Inhibitors
WEE1 is a kinase involved in cell cycle
progression, where it prevents
entry into mitosis in response to DNA damage. Furthermore, it has
been implicated in the scheduling of cell division and HR repair. WEE1 prevents entry into mitosis through regulation
of the G/M and S checkpoints through the phosphorylation of CDK1 and
CDK2. As stated in this review, in the
event of DNA damage, ATR or ATM pathways can be activated: ATR activation
( ) results
in the phosphorylation of CDK1, which leads to activation of checkpoint
regulators of which WEE1 is one, which phosphorylates and inactivates
the CDK1-cylin B complex on Tyr15, causing cell cycle arrest in G2. This halting of the cell cycle is preferential
for cancer cells, as DNA damage is not repaired before replication
in the S phase; therefore mutations can occur that favor proliferation,
encouraging cancer growth. As the cancer cells are reliant on disruption
of the apoptosis process, it is thought that the G2 checkpoint is
vital for their survival, thereby presenting WEE1 as a promising target
for cancer therapy. It is thought that healthy cells, containing fewer
DNA breaks, will not be as affected by the disruption of the G2 checkpoint,
and therefore this treatment would be considered somewhat selective
for cancer cells.
WEE1 is highly expressed in numerous cancer
types, including glioblastoma, breast
cancer, leukemia, and others. Additionally,
high levels of WEE1 expression have been observed in the event of
severe DNA stress in various cancer types correlating with a poor
prognosis. , The cancer types that highly
express WEE1 are thought to be extremely reliant on the G2 halting
of the cell cycle, making them an attractive target for WEE1 inhibition.
Synthetic lethality has reported between WEE1 and ATR inhibitors.
This was achieved through the combination of the WEE1 inhibitor AZD1775
(formally MK-1775) (40, A) and two ATR inhibitors 11 and ETP-46464 (41, B). In this
study synergistic killing of cancer cells from various tissues was
observed, but untransformed cell remained unaffected. Through mechanistic
studies using reversible inhibition of WEE1/ATR it was revealed that
inhibition occurred in the G2/M phase. Additionally, through live
cell imaging, it was seen that inhibition of WEE1 and ATR caused cells
to enter mitosis, and cells with overly damaged DNA underwent mitotic
catastrophe.
 SL has been observed between WEE1
and TP53 mutants. TP53 encodes
for the tumor suppressor p53 and is the most commonly mutated gene
within human cancer and generally is thought to be associated with
poor prognosis. As the mutations cause
a loss of function, TP53 mutations cannot be directly targeted; therefore
SL through WEE1 provides an opportunity to drug a previously undruggable
target. As cells with TP53 mutations lack an effective G1 checkpoint,
they become over-reliant on the G2 checkpoint; therefore inhibition
of WEE1, which acts in the G2 checkpoint, is thought to cause SL.
This has been demonstrated in TP53 mutant colorectal carcinoma where,
after exposure to radiation, inhibition of WEE1 with the preclinical
inhibitor PD0166285 (42, C) caused the cells to evade G2 arrest and
prematurely enter mitosis. Furthermore, 40 has shown substantial improvement in carboplatin treatment
of advanced solid tumors with p53 mutants in phase I and phase II
trials. , 
Additionally, in a screen for SL partners
for CHK1, WEE1 has been
identified as a possible SL partner. Combination studies of 40 and the CHK1 inhibitor PF-00477736 in brain, ovarian, colon,
and prostate cancer cells confirmed synergism between WEE1 and CHK1,
independent of p53 status. 
A number
of WEE1 inhibitors have been synthesized to date, with
some in clinical studies. Here we will touch upon some of the most
prominent inhibitors in the field.
The first WEE1 inhibitor
developed was 42 and was
identified through use of a HTS looking to find WEE1 inhibitors. 42 is a highly potent ATP competitive WEE1 inhibitor (IC50 = 24 nM) and was able to inhibit CDC2 at Tyr15 (a direct
substrate of WEE1) in cells at 0.5 μM. Furthermore, it was able to sensitize cells to radiation therapy,
with this effect being more pronounced in p53 deficient cells. However, 42 is not a selective inhibitor and shows IC50 <
100 nM for CDK1, MYT1, c-SRC, EGFR, FGFR-1, and PDGFR-β. 42 has been used as a tool compound for examining the effect
of WEE1 inhibition in numerous cancers such as colon, lung, and melanoma,
among others; however, its lack of selectivity
has meant its usefulness beyond this is quite limited.
40 was originally identified by Hirai et al. through
use of a HTS; initial hits were optimized through SAR to yield the
orally available selective potent small molecule 40 ( A) (WEE1 IC50 = 5.2 nM). A linear relationship
between IC50 and ATP concentration indicated that 40 acted in an ATP competitive manner. To evaluate selectivity, 40 was tested in a kinase screen, and only 8 of the 223 kinases
were inhibited >80% when treated with 1 μM of 41, demonstrating remarkable selectivity for an ATP competitive kinase
inhibitor. In cells WEE1 inhibition was observed through 40 inhibiting phosphorylation of CDC12 at Tyr15.
Furthermore, 40 abrogates the G2 DNA damage checkpoint
and in combination with the DNA damaging agents gemcitabine, carboplatin,
and cisplatin caused apoptosis in p53 deficient cells. 40 has also been observed to induce apoptosis and inhibit proliferation
as a monotherapy in numerous cell types (acute lymphoblastic leukemia
cells, lung cancer cells, and colorectal cancer cells among others). − Furthermore, in vivo it was seen to inhibit tumor
growth without perceived toxicity. As previous stated in the review, 40 has entered numerous phase I and II clinical trials and
is the most established WEE1 inhibitor in the field.
As little
SAR data exist for 40, Matheson et al. synthesized
a series of analogues to evaluate which structural features are necessary
for successful WEE1 inhibition. The
analogues that inhibited WEE1 in the same nM range had lessened cytotoxicity
when administered as a single therapy in comparison to 40, and synergism was observed in combination with cisplatin in medulloblastoma
cells. CJM061 (43, A) was the most active from this analogue
series (WEE1 IC50 = 2.8 nM) and its development can be
seen in ( A).
These promising compounds, especially 40,
show the
potential for WEE1 inhibitors, with at least three confirmed SL relationships.
Other than 40 no other WEE1 inhibitor is in clinical
development. Should it prove to be unsuccessful in these clinical
trials, more work is needed to fully make use of this attractive target
for cancer therapy.

5.

## CDK12 Inhibitors
CDK12 was first identified when investigating the cell cycle regulator
CDC2. While it has structural similarities
to other members of the CDK subfamily, which play a role in cell cycle
regulations, CDK12 is a transcription kinase involved in the transcription
of genes involved in DNA repair, regulating
specific genes that respond to stress, heat shock, and DNA damage. CDK12 presents a great opportunity to test
SL due to the high amount of genomic alterations seen in numerous
cancers including high-grade ovarian carcinoma, , HER-2 positive breast cancer, and
lung adenocarcinoma, resulting in loss
of function. To date, SL pairs for CDK12 have been identified as PARP, MYC, and EWS/FLI. 
CDK12 mutations have been shown to sensitize
cancers to traditional
DNA damaging agents; therefore CDK12
inhibitors have gained traction in recent years as a way of implementing
small molecule-induced synthetic lethality. A group within Takeda
has developed a series of potent and selective CDK12 inhibtors, which also hit CDK13, another potential modulator
of DNA repair. A modest initial CDK12 inhibitor (44, ) was identified
through a HTS (CDK12 IC50 = 0.36 μM). While it demonstrated
good selectivity over other related kinases within the CDK subfamily,
it also showed activity against CDK2, which is involved in healthy
regulation of the cell cycle; therefore, for 44 to be
useful, it would need to be optimized further. Through SAR studies,
they discovered that, first, the aminopyridyl moiety was binding in
the hinge region of CDK12 and could not be modified. This is a fairly
typical moiety for kinase inhibitors. Second, it was discovered through
the same SAR studies that at the 5-position of the pyridine ring it
is likely that an electron-withdrawing group is required. Through
later docking simulations of 44 in both CDK2 and CDK12,
it was proposed that the oxygen atom in the sulfonyl moiety interacted
with Lys89 in CDK2, which is not conserved in CDK12. This was therefore
changed, utilizing experimentally derived conformations from the Cambridge
Structural Database, to either a tert-amide or a tert-sulfonamide. Of these, the tert-amide
showed better selectivity for CDK12 over CDK2 (compound 45, ). Some
final modifications, such as the introduction of a benzyl group and
small modifications to improve physiochemical properties, resulted
in the highly selective inhibitor, with it only showing inhibition
of over 80% at 1 μM in 3 of the 441 kinases present in the kinome
screen. 46 ( ) (CDK12 IC50 = 0.052 μM) was shown
to inhibit CDK12 phosphorylation of SER2 in SKBR2 cells (pSer2 IC50 = 0.195 μM). This compound therefore presents a valuable
tool in probing SL or could serve as a starting point for further
drug discovery programs investigating SL.
 Other CDK12 and CDK13 inhibitors have emerged within the same period,
in work completed by Zhang et al. Previous
work conducted by the group yielded the CDK7 inhibitor THZ1 (47, A). 47, while being active
against CDK7 (IC50 = 3.2 nM), also showed activity against
CDK12 (IC50 = 864 nM) and CDK13 (IC50 = 225
nM) and was therefore a starting point for further drug discovery.
It was reasoned initially that alteration of the acrylamide moiety
would divert the binding toward Cys1039 of CDK12. Through SAR studies
that are yet to be reported, the compound THZ531 (48, A) was synthesized. 48 has shown IC50’s in biochemical assays
of 158 nM and 69 nM for CDK12 and CDK13, respectively, and has a more
than 50-fold level of selectivity over the other members of CDK family.
Interestingly, when the electrophilic acrylamide was replaced by a
moiety incapable of covalently binding, propylamide, the activity
of the compound dramatically reduced, suggesting that the ability
to covalently bind is necessary for preserving CDK12 and CDK13 activity.
Its selectivity over the wider kinome is good, with none of the other
211 kinases tested showing an activity of over 55%.
 48 has been cocrystallized with CDK12. This has presented
some useful binding information, which could serve others in the field,
in the pursuit of novel CDK12 inhibitors ( ). Two CDK12-cycklin K complexes were found,
each bound to 48 in a different rotamer. These crystallization
studies revealed that a labile αK helix can be displaced from
CDK12 allowing binding through the linker of 48 with
Cys1039. The aminopyrimidine of 48 was found to form
two hydrogen bonds to the backbone of M816, with the pendant 3-indolyl
and the piperidine groups involved in hydrophobic interactions. The
binding of the secondary amide was shown to have two different conformations
that caused the solvent exposed groups to pack either against the
N-lobe β strand or C-lobe αD helix. The resolution for
the exposed groups was too poor to be defined apart from the position
of Cys1039. Interestingly Cys312, the equivalent sulfhydryl to Cys1039
in CDK7, was further away from the binding region, suggesting poorer
binding for 49 against CDK7 in comparison to CDK12. 49 was able to induce apoptosis in Jurkat cancer cells, in
addition to being able to inhibit transcriptional regulation, reducing
DNA damage repair and superenhancer gene expression. 49 has been shown to demonstrate a synergistic effect with PARPi’s
in Ewing sarcoma in both cells and mouse models, as it was seen that
the Ewing sarcoma cell models were particularly sensitive to CHK12
inhibition. Furthermore, the expression of the tumor specific oncogene
EWS/FLI shows SL with CHK12 inhibition. The inhibition of CHK12 was
also seen to impair DNA damage repair in Ewing sarcoma cells. 
 A known CDK inhibitor, dinaciclib
(49, B), whose
primary targets are
CDK1, CDK2, CDK5, and CDK9, has shown a documented response in breast
cancer and in recent years has also
been shown to inhibit CDK12. While showing a higher level of promiscuity
and also hitting cell cycle kinases within the family, 49 is the most potent CDK12 inhibitor to date, with an IC50 of 40–60 nM in biochemical assays. In cell-based assays, 49 showed phenotypic responses
typical of CDK12 inhibition, including gene repression of multiple
genes involved in HR, whose expression is thought to correlate with
CDK12 expression. This was achieved
with minimal disruption to the cell cycle, indicating CDK12 inhibition
as the cause of this observation. Due to the dysregulation of HR influencing
genes, it was reasoned that 49 would be able to sensitize
triple-negative breast cancer cells to PARPi. This was observed through
the combination of 49 with the known PARP inhibitor veliparib,
which showed a 2.5- to 12.5-fold increase in its activity as a single-agent
treatment, demonstrating a synergistic SL effect. This impairment
of HR by 49 was mirrored through knockout of CDK12, showing
the same phenotype. Not only was 49 capable of showing
a synergistic effect with PARPi’s, it was also able to resensitize
triple-negative breast cancer cells that had become resistant to PARP
inhibition to 1. These results seem to indicate that
the use of 49 can cause an increase in the effectivity
of PARP inhibition even if a partial response is seen with the PARPi
being administered as a monotherapy.
CDK12’s
progress as a target has meant that the idea of
utilization of CDK12’s synthetic lethality has moved on to
clinical trials. While there is not a great abundance of trials directly
using CDK12 inhibitors, other potential SL partners are being modulated
in CDK12 deficient cancers, thus giving an SL effect. If these worked,
it opens the door for chemically induced small-molecule lethality.
The trials are summarized in . One CDK12 inhibitor has entered clinical trials,
and a number of selective CDK12 inhibitors are currently in preclinical
studies. CDK12 inhibitors have the potential to be useful in the application
of SL to cancer therapy.
 
6.

## PARP and RAD51
RAD51 is a member of
the RAD52 epistasis group, which is made up
of RAD50, RAD51, RAD52, RAD54, RAD55, RAD57, RAD59, MRE11, and XRS2. In vitro studies have shown
that RAD51 promotes homologous pairing and strand transfer reactions.
Following treatment by DNA-damaging agents, RAD51 was seen to be upregulated,
indicating its role in HR. Early on during HR, DSB or SSB results
in the formation of a length of ssDNA. This strand is then paired
with recombinases such as RAD51 and afterward is paired with a homologous
duplex to form a DNA joint which is termed the D loop. RAD51 then goes on to promote an ATP-mediated
strand exchange reaction by polymerizing on DNA, resulting in a helical
filament. The formation of this is completed in two steps, nucleation
and extension, promoting HR. RAD51 has also been shown to cause polymerization
of dsDNA; however the reason for this has yet to be elucidated. 
It has been hypothesized that interrupting
BRCA2 and RAD51’s
interaction would mirror the synthetically lethal effect seen in utilizing
PARPi in BRCA2 deficient tumors ( ). This would provide
a shortcut to modulating the activity of BRCA2 which, to date, has
been thought to be undruggable. While RAD51 inhibitors do exist, − they have not been seen to interfere with the BRCA2–RAD51
interaction. For instance, structural data have shown that BRC4 (the
fourth BRC repeat of BRCA2) binds to RAD51 in two hydrophobic binding
pockets: one of these is critical for RAD51 multimerization (FxxA).
Utilizing high-throughput docking, our group began to work developing
modulators for this interaction. From the initial hit compounds identified
from the HTS, 50 ( ) was the best performing (EC50 = 53 ± 3 μM), and as such, an SAR program was initiated,
at first investigating the optimal length of the alkyl chain between
the triazole and the phenyl ring. From these studies, 51 ( ) (EC50 = 25 ± 2 μM) which features a propyl phenyl ring
was selected for further biological evaluation. 51 was
tested in combination with 1 in two pancreatic cancer
cell lines: Capan-1 which lacks functional BRCA2; BxPC-3 which is
BRCA2-positive. Unsurprisingly as a monotherapy, 1 was
more effective in the Capan-1 cells, due to the lack of BRCA2. Upon
combination with 51, no effect was seen in the Capan-1
cells; however, in the BxPC-3 cells, a synergistic effect was seen
between 51 and 1, suggesting small molecule-induced
synthetic lethality. 51 was tested on the same cell lines
that had undergone prior treatment by cisplatin: it demonstrated no
effect in the BRCA2-negative cells, whereas in the BRCA2-positive
cell line, a small increase in a phenotypic indicator for DNA damage
was observed, confirmed by silencing of RAD51 which demonstrated a
similar effect to 51. This work could potentially provide
a way of inducing SL in patients who lack the BRCA1/2 mutation, increasing
the scope of PARPi’s.
 Further SAR optimization of 51 was undertaken. These focused around adjusting the chain length
of the N4 nitrogen and introducing substitutes on the phenyl ring.
Other modifications included changes at the C3 position of the triazole,
introducing a series of heterocycles, saturated and unsaturated rings
with differing links. Lastly, changes occurred at the C5 position
of the triazole, changing the heterocycle present at the position
or removing this substituent entirely, replacing it with either a
methyl group or a proton; these alterations are summarized in . Modifications
at the C5 and N4 positions were not well-tolerated, with a drop in
activity usually observed. A minor tweak, changing the cyclopentyl
group for a cyclohexyl group, resulted in the best compound from the
series, compound 52 ( ) (EC50 = 8 ± 2 μM).
52 inhibited the RAD51–BRCA2 interaction, preventing
RAD51 function in cells. Furthermore, it significantly improved the
function of 1 in BRCA2-positive cells and increased the
amount of DSBs when administered in combination with 1. However, due to its low potency or the presence of a mutant from
p53 that prevents apoptosis, true synthetic lethality could not be
observed, and showing further optimization was needed. In order to increase diversity within the field
of Rad51–BRCA2 inhibitors, our group ran a second binding screening
at the other binding site (LFDE). Mutations
in this binding pocket are associated with cellular lethality, in
addition to the failure of RAD51 assembly in nuclear foci at the point
of DNA breaks in vivo, suggesting a key role in RAD51’s
function. Of the compounds tested, the
dihydroquinolone pyrazoline derivative 53 ( ) (EC50 = 16 ± 4 μM) was the most active, and an SAR program
was initiated around this compound (this work will be published in
a subsequent paper), eventually yielding compound 54 ( ) (EC50 = 19 ± 1 μM). Like 52 from the previous
work, 54 was able to bind to RAD51 inhibiting its function,
but unlike 52, 54 was able to trigger SL
in a dose response manner by impeding HR in pancreatic cancer cells
that expressed BRCA2. However, due to 54’s poor
solubility, it is unlikely to be able to be tested it in vivo, and therefore further optimization is required before these class
of compounds can realize their potential. This work is ongoing and
demonstrates one of the first programs targeting small molecule-induced
synthetic lethality and a way to expand the use of PARPi’s
beyond BRCA1/2 deficient cancers, increasing their usefulness.
 A number of other RAD51 inhibitors have been reported in the literature, − , − the most noteworthy of which are shown in . Only IBR2 (55, ) (RAD51 IC50 not reported) and BO2 (56, ) (RAD51 IC50=
27.4 μM) have been directly linked to small molecule-induced
synthetic lethality. , 55 was observed
to synergize with multiple drugs (notably imatinib, regorafenib, EGFR
inhibitors (including erlotinib, gefitinib, afatinib, and osimertinib),
and vincristine) with differing molecular targets, which were not
involved in the RAD51 mediated HR pathway. However, the combination
of 55 with DNA-damaging agents such as cis-platin was
not synergistic. In the same study 55 was compared to 56, which was able to synergize
with imatinib and vincristine, thereby opening the door for these
two compounds to be explored for SL. At a recent conference, Maclay
et al. reported a novel RAD51 inhibitor: CYT01B. Neither the structure of this compound nor the data associated
with it have been published to date; however a patent has been released
by the parent company Cytier Therapeutics, which appears to be indicative
of the structure. CYT01B has been shown
to cause DNA stress through DNA replication fork damage. Therefore,
it was tested to see if CYT01B could sensitize cells to current therapeutics
for the treatment of solid tumors. This was done through combination
assays with CYT01B (concentration range of 20 nm to 5 μM) in
three cell lines with six targeted agents, the results of which are
summarized in . These studies, in particular the success seen with the platinum-based
chemotherapy carboplatin, in addition to PARPi’s, seem to indicate
a degree of synthetic lethality. Therefore, this compound should be
monitored as it progresses through in vivo models
and beyond. As little is known about the compound’s selectivity
panel, it is impossible to say whether the observed SL phenotype is
due to RAD51 inhibition; however, should this information come to
light, it would no doubt be of interest to the field of not only RAD51
inhibitors but also small molecule-induced synthetically lethality.
 
7.

## RAD52 Inhibitors
The RAD52 protein is able to bind to ssDNA and plays a key role
in repairing of single-strand and double-strand breaks. Within the HR response, it is essential in
more simple organisms such as bacteria or yeast, where it acts in
aiding RAD51 attachment to ssDNA. However, in more complex organisms
such as animals this is largely completed by other proteins such as
BRCA1/2. Indeed, knockout of RAD52 in mice does not cause a drop in
viability or fertility of the mouse. However, upregulation of RAD52
can have a protecting effect on DNA from ionizing radiation, suggesting
it is important to the HR process. Common synthetic lethality partners
are BRCA1/2, which play a vital role in annealing RAD51 to ssDNA;
however mutations in these proteins are quite common, and when this occurs, the cancer cell can compensate
by utilizing RAD52 to perform the task instead. This is represented
in . This
makes RAD52 an appealing target for cancer therapy, as it will only
have key function in HR when BRCA1/2 are inactive: this will therefore
have a selective effect on cancer cells, without influencing health
cells.
 One of the mechanisms of synthetic lethality proposed for
both
RAD52 and BRCA1/2 inhibition is that endonuclease/exonuclease/phosphatase
family domains containing protein 1 (EEPD1) mediate DNA cleavage in
the absence of BRCA1/2 and RAD52 and cause the production of toxic
intermediates that trigger cell death. This theory is supported by the fact that suppression of EEPD1 in
BRCA1/2- and RAD52-compromised cells causes a drop in the level of
synthetic lethality. With RAD52 appearing
to be a promising target for SL-based drugs, a few examples of small
molecule inhibitor discovery programs are discussed below.
The
first attempt to modulate RAD52 activity was not done through
use of small molecules but rather use of an aptamer. This was achieved through use of the F79 aptamer that demonstrated
activity in BRCA1/2 deficient cells but had no effect on HR in normal
cells. F79 demonstrated SL in leukemia but also breast, pancreatic,
and ovarian cells. In vivo tests in mice showed a
lengthening of lifespan in mice with BCR-ABL1-positive leukemia. Lastly,
RAD52 showed a synergistic effect with nonspecific chemotherapeutics,
suggesting that, utilized together, the dose of the chemotherapeutic
could be lowered, thereby reducing the risk of side effects. While
not being investigated further, aptamers could play a key role in
SL targets, specifically those in HR, as elsewhere aptamers have been
reported to inhibit the DNA strand exchange of RAD51. Again, this work has not been expanded upon
and could provide an untapped resource for the synthetic lethality.
6-OH-dopa (57, ) is a RAD52 inhibitor that was identified
from a HTS of 18 304 drug-like compounds combined with 1280
from the Sigma Lopac collection. These compounds were screened through
a high-throughput fluorescence polarization assay, and 10 compounds
were identified that prevented RAD52 binding to ssDNA at a greater
degree than 60%, at IC50 < 5 μM. Of these 10 compounds, only one was able to inhibit single-strand
annealing in cells: 57. It was later tested to see if
it could inhibit HR. Predictably, it did not, due to RAD52’s
weak role in healthy cells, therefore indicating some degree of selectivity
for RAD52 over other key HR proteins. Furthermore, in biochemical
assays, 57 was shown to have a significant degree of
selectivity for RAD52 (1.1 μM) over RAD51 (not determined). 57 was also observed to halt proliferation in two cell lines
deficient in BRCA1/2 (a Chinese hamster cell line and a pancreatic
cancer cell line). In addition, separate studies also showed an increased
level of apoptosis and DNA damage in BRCA1/2 cells. Despite being
a promising compound, 57 is a dopaminergic derivative,
which has been reported to heighten the chance of Parkinson’s
disease by degenerating mitral neurons. Therefore, within cancer therapy, this is highly unlikely to be
explored further. Huang et al. set out to develop small molecule inhibitors
of RAD52 through use of a HTS. The hit
compounds from this screen were tested for RAD52 selectivity, especially
over RAD51, and in BRCA1/2 positive and deficient pancreas, ovarian,
and triple negative breast cancer cells. Two hit compounds, D-G09
(58) and D-103 (59) ( ), showed the expected phenotype for RAD52
inhibition in these cell lines, while another three compounds D-105
(60), D-K17 (61), and D-G23 (62) ( ) showed
activity against two of the cells lines but were of a structurally
diverse scaffold, giving more opportunity for chemical space exploration.
The best-performing compound of these, 59 (inhibits RAD52
ssDNA annealing at IC50 = 5 μM), was also tested
in BRCA1/2-positive and -negative chronic myeloid leukemia cells,
showing preferential inhibition of growth of the BRCA1/2-negative
cells. Through SPR these compounds were confirmed to inhibit DNA,
annealing through direct binding with RAD52 as opposed to DNA substrates.
It was also demonstrated that 59 shows an absence of
a nonspecific effect on RAD-51 foci production in response to cisplatin,
reinforcing the selectivity of the compound.
 Hengel et al. embarked
on a discovery program for small molecule
inhibitors of RAD52, through use of a HTS of the MicroSource SPECTRUM
collection. Initial hits were tested
for RAD52 binding in FRET-based assays, giving five hits that showed
an IC50 in or near the nanomolar range. Of these hits,
two compounds, (−)-epigallocatechin (63, ) (RAD52 DNA binding
IC50 = 1.8 ± 0.1 μM) and epigallocatechin-3-monogallate
(64, ) (RAD52 DNA binding IC50 = 277 ± 22 nM),
were shown to physically bind to RAD52 by NMR and were shown to prevent
binding and annealing to RPA-coated ssDNA. Virtual screens of 63 and 64 within the RAD52 ssDNA binding groove
seem to indicate that these compounds show binding in this region.
Notable interactions include Arg55, Lys65, Arg153, and Arg156 in the
vicinity of 63 and 64, which when docked
have previously been shown to impact ssDNA binding. Additionally Lys141
and Lys144 have been shown to be important previously in RAD52 function
in yeast and are thought to be somewhat evolutionarily conserved;
some of these binding interactions are schematically reported in . 63 and 64 were shown to dysregulate DSB repair in BRCA1/2-depleted
and MUS81-depleted cells. Furthermore, both compounds showed activity
in killing BRCA1/2-depleted cells in addition to MUS81-depleted cells.
This phenomenon of lower cell viability in MUS81-deficient cells has
been reported previously. By use of 63 and 64’s predicted docking models,
an in silico screen was embarked upon, using the
AnalytiCon Discovery MEGx Natural Products Screen Library, which is
made up of natural products from plants, fungal, and antimicrobial
sources. From this library, NP-004255 (65, ) (RAD52 DNA binding
IC50 = 1.5 ± 0.2 μM) was identified, which had
the same binding mode as 63 and 64. 65 underwent the same binding analysis as 63 and 64, where it was shown to bind to RAD52 and RPA and to inhibit
the binding of RAD52 to ssDNA in addition to the ssDNA–RPA
complex. However, 65 did not affect RAD52’s binding
to dsDNA or affect DNA binding by RPA.
 Li et al. investigated new RAD52 inhibitors, beginning with
use
of a virtual screen, by docking the compounds inside the RAD52 monomer. This HTS consisted of 47 737 compounds,
with the 30 top-performing compounds being sorted into groups of 5
in relation to their chemotype. These 30 compounds were tested for
their ADMET properties, and 4 were selected due to their druglikeness
for further testing: F779-0434 (66), F848-0436 (67), G640-1014 (68), and D207-0130 (69) ( ), with 66 appearing to be the most promising RAD52 inhibitor. Similar
to the work conducted by Spies et al., all 4 compounds tested were
seen to bind in the ssDNA binding pocket. Key binding interactions
were observed between the 4 compounds and Arg 55, Lys 152, Arg 165,
and Tyr 65. Notably the interaction with Arg 55 is shared between 61 and 66, suggesting this is a key RAD52 interaction.
These binding interactions can be seen in more detail in . 66 was shown to be able to selectivity inhibit growth in a BRCA1/2-dependent
pancreas cancer cell to 50% at 10 μM, whereas in the same concentration
over 90% of cells from a healthy cell line survived. Furthermore,
it was shown to inhibit RAD52 ssDNA annulation beginning at 5 μM,
and at 20 μM complete inhibition of the process could be seen.
However, the other three compounds selected by the virtual screening
did not show as promising an effect in these assays.
 To date, no RAD52 inhibitors have entered clinical trials. However,
the numerous successes seen in this section, particularly in vitro, and the greater wealth of information known about
the binding pocket and binding modes suggest that the potential for
RAD52 inhibitors to work as SL agents is vast.

8.

## PD-1 and
Synthetic Lethality
Since the late 19th century, the application
of the immune response
in cancer therapy has been theorized; while it was quite controversial through much of this time, it is
now seen as a promising approach to anticancer therapy. One of the
targets that has gained interest is programmed cell death protein
1 (PD-1), which is responsible for fine-tuning T-cell function, the
maintenance of homeostasis within the immune response, acting as a
natural break, and initiating the checkpoint response usually associated
with periphery tolerance. However, in
cancer, tumor cells take advantage of this and use the mechanism to
suppress and evade the immune response. Therefore, the concept of
a checkpoint blockade has been proposed, where inhibition of PD-1
causes reactivation of the immune response toward the cancerous cell,
utilizing the body’s defenses to fight cancer. Several PD-1
monoclonal antibodies have been successful in clinical trials, leading
to FDA approval for several monoclonal antibodies, namely, nivolumab,
pembrolizumab, atezolizumab, avelumab, and durvalumab. In various
cancers, anti PD-1 agents are standard of care therapies for many
malignancies including melanoma, small-cell lung cancer, non-small-cell
lung cancer, colorectal cancer, and many more.
It is known that
blocking DNA repair mechanisms increases genetic
instability, which in turn increases epitope expression on the cancer
cell surface, which is usually immunodominant. It is therefore possible that this increased genetic instability
could make the cancer cells more susceptible to the immune response
if heightened, making PD-1’s combination with targets involved
in the DNA repair appealing as a potential source of synergism, perhaps
even to the extent of synthetic lethality. In fact, some DNA-damage
regulators such as PARP have been to seen to cause an increase in
PD-1 expression, suggesting a likelihood of synthetic lethality. Due
to this, PARP and PD-1 joint inhibition has been explored, with synergism
seen in preclinical trials in addition to early stage clinical trials,
of which there are more than 30 currently in progress in a wide of
range of malignancies. The potential
for PD-1 modulation in combination with other targets is evident throughout
this review, with numerous ATR inhibitor clinical trials and trials
featuring CDK12 loss of function mutants utilizing PD-1 antibodies.
While this approach is still new, with the first work being conducted
in 2017, it could be expanded to other
targets mentioned within this review such as RAD51. The theory is
that any target which, when modulated, causes a reduction in DNA repair
could potentially be more susceptible to T-cells involved in the immune
response, once the checkpoint response has been modulated.
In
this section, numerous SL targets and strategies have been highlighted.
With the rapidly expanding number of known SL partners, it would be
impossible to cover them all in one review. The majority of the highlighted
discovery programs focus on developing a selective potent modulator
of a specific target and work to optimize through a classical medicinal
chemistry approach. It is usually at a later stage of the screening
cascade where SL is investigated, initially though combination studies
in cells; thus, fewer compounds are screened for SL, which renders
it difficult to comment on whether or not the SAR approach is in fact
increasing SL. This is understandable as, despite being known for
many years, SL approaches are still in their infancy; however, the
number of promising compounds in late-stage clinical and preclinical
studies gives hope that one of these targets will eventually be employed
in an SL approach within the clinic.

9.

## Challenges
and Opportunity in Developing New
SL Drugs
To date, numerous potential synthetic lethal genes
have been identified
through statistical screening, genetic
screening, high-throughput phenotypic
screening, and combinational approaches.
However, this has yet to correlate with improved medicines in the
clinic, with only one SL pair being exploited to date and four drugs
acting through the same PARP1 SL mechanism (1, 2, 3, and 4). One of the largest
barriers to the development of more drugs acting on SL is the heterogeneity
of cancer, with many SL targets only
existing in a small number of cancer subtypes. This therefore means
sample sizes are dramatically lowered, be they statistical data points
or patient samples for in vitro/in vivo experiments crucial for validating the SL phenotype. Second, more
mechanistic detail must be obtained to evaluate how best to drug SL
targets. As shown in this review, the mechanistic understanding of
many SL relationships is poor, with PARP/BRCA2 being one of the only
synthetically lethal gene pairs to have received extensive study.
With mechanistic understanding of what drives SL still not fully understood,
creative approaches have been employed to investigate this vital piece
of the puzzle. Li et al. employed a machine learning approach to discover
what “characteristic functional features” are required
for a protein-coding gene to have the potential for synthetic lethality. The methodologies involved are outside the
scope of this review; however through this study Li et al. discovered
15 key characteristic functional features, 14 of which had previously
been reported to play a role in SL to some degree in the literature
(these were given a descriptor and can be seen in ). These descriptors are generated
using machine learning algorithms, which through an enrichment system
derived from gene ontology terms and the Kyoto encyclopedia of genes
and genome pathways represent functional features. It is hoped that
this study can be utilized in both computational and experimental
methods for selecting potential genes to investigate for SL. Other
big data approaches have been employed
to try to aid the “hypothesis driven” methods that have
been used to discover SL pairs previously, with a collated and curated
list of SL interactions available for free online via BioGrid. 
 The ability to generate compounds
capable of induced small-molecule
synthetic lethality can be hampered by the complexity and size of
the binding regions of the targets associated with SL. One such example
noted earlier in the text is the attempted induction of SL through
the blocking of RAD51–BRCA2 interaction; this is a protein–protein
interaction that has in the past been difficult to modulate with small
molecules, due to the size of the compound in comparison to the large
binding region between the proteins. Work performed earlier in the
decade by Hyvönen et al. attempted to modulate the RAD51–BRCA2
interaction through a fragment-based approach. Through protein engineering
of RADA, the RAD51 analogue present in archaea, a
monomeric form of RAD51 was able to be synthesized. A fragment-based approach in 2013 demonstrated, through
use of isothermal titration calorimetry (ITC), NMR, and X-ray crystallography,
the first small molecule binding at the FxxA site of BRC4, a key binding
region for the protein–protein interaction between RAD51 and
BRCA2. However, a low success rate of only 0.2% was seen in the ITC
assay in comparison to previous enzymatic assays. Two fragments were
identified from this screen with low mM affinity; while low, it was
a good starting point for further evaluation. This work was expanded
upon in 2015, resulting in a 500-fold increase in affinity from the
initial hits. Although the most promising hits from this series were
unable to be crystallized, they performed well in the ITC assay, which
seemed to indicate binding at the same site. Taken together, this fragment-based approach, utilizing biophysical
assays such as ITC, NMR, SPR, and X-ray crystallography, demonstrates
another possible tool in the pursuit of challenging SL targets. The
genetic screening approach to evaluate possible SL pairs has gained
new tools since the turn of the century. Previously, this was achieved
through use of RNA interference (RNAi), where small-interfering RNAs
(siRNAs) and/or short hairpin RNAs (shRNA) were employed to knockout
genes to investigate whether the simultaneous knockout of two genes
caused SL. This has been achieved in a high-throughput manner. An
example of such is Novartis’s DRIVE program, which screened 7837 genes in 398 cell types. Numerous potential
SL relationships were discovered in these studies, and these data
could serve as a valuable tool for future drug-discovery programs,
as all Novartis’s data on the DRIVE project is freely available
through an online portal (https://oncologynibr.shinyapps.io/drive/). However, RNAi-based studies tend to suffer from poor reproducibility
and comparison between studies, which can result in false positives
and an inability to distinguish between on-target and off-target effects.
Recent years have also seen the development of CRISPR-CAS9, which
is functionally similar to RNAi but offers a higher-degree of reproducibility.
This method involves a strand of single guided RNA (sgRNA) that allows
the CAS9 endonuclease to bind with a sequence specific to that strand
of sgRNA, thus enabling further modulation or regulation. Its advantages over RNAi are the following:
it depletes genes in a more consistent manner; it has a higher degree
of sensitivity with genes that have low levels of mRNA or short mRNA
half-lives; it reduced RNA interference from heterogeneity among different
cell lines. This technique has been
employed in studies investigating synthetic lethality. As an example,
Wang et al. performed CRISPR analysis
in 3 different cell lines that had been treated by the ATR inhibitor, 24, in order to discover more SL pairs for ATR. From these
studies, it was discovered that RNASEH2 was SL with ATR inhibition in vitro and in vivo. RNASEH2 is rarely
upregulated in cancer subtypes; however this was in fact observed
in prostate adenocarcinoma, suggesting a potential new biomarker that
could be explored in this disease area. The same CRISPR-CAS9 studies
reported that ATR inhibitors were SL with numerous other genes involved
in the ATR pathway, suggesting that the whole ATR pathway is critical
for cell survival; furthermore, members from the BRCA family were
observed to be synthetic lethal with ATR, showing potential SL between
ATR and HR-mediating targets. Overall, this demonstrates the potential
of the CRISPR-CAS9 technique to be employed in the discovery of previously
unknown targets for SL and guides further research. Furthermore, CRISPR-CAS9
in theory could be employed for treatment of cancers. This field is
quite controversial with many ethical dilemmas that need to be addressed;
however to date, a number of CRISPR-CAS9 based therapies have entered
clinical trials. Should these be successful,
it is possible in the future that CRISPR-CAS9 could be used in a therapeutic
way to trigger SL.
Testing SL using in vitro models can be difficult.
The biological models that are used for the development of such molecules
usually include pairs of isogenic cell-based models. These are not
an entirely accurate prediction of potential SL phenotypes, as it
has been shown that SL pairs can be dependent on context specificity,
with cancer presenting a vast array of genotypes. Small differences
in the genotype can mean that a pair of small molecules modulating
an SL interaction may be effective in one circumstance but not another.
Examples of this phenomenon can be seen in colorectal cancer, where
the presence of KRAS and NRAS mutations is a predictor for resistance
to anti-EGFR antibodies. This is already
being used in the clinic and demonstrates the importance of understanding
the impact of context specificity on the application of SL-dependent
treatments.
As it has been shown in the regulatory body approval
of the PARP
inhibitors, these drugs can be very effective in treating tumors with
“BRCAness”, i.e., a tumor where the patient shows impeded
function of one of the BRCA family genes involved in HR. Unfortunately, while a number of cancers (e.g.,
ovarian cancer) feature the BRCAness
trait, the ability to administer a single inhibitor to induce SL is
diminished in cancers that do not express BRCAness. To have these
compounds truly be effective and initiate small-molecule-induced synthetic
lethality, modulators must be administered in combination with one
another in order to see a synergistic effect. This has been demonstrated previously with use of the PARP1
inhibitor 2 and temozolomide, an orally bioavailable
monofunctional DNA-alkylating agent. The use of combinational therapy can be challenging, as the number
of therapeutics in combination increases the likelihood of unwanted
side effects, in addition to the potential for unknown drug–drug
interactions. In order to minimize these
issues, it is vitally important that the mechanism of action of the
compounds and their safety profiles be well understood. If this is
the case, the potential for combinational treatment is vast. Work
has been conducted into evaluating more potential drug combinations
that currently exist by Heinzel et al. Through a bioinformatics approach, they investigated 358 ovarian
cancer trials utilizing the clinicaltrials.gov Web site. The search
was refined further by use of keywords, eventually resulting in 68
trials that showed 61 unique drug interactions. These data allowed
them to identify numerous combinations that are not currently being
investigated in clinical trials but have the potential for SL and
merit further investigation. These data illustrate that while combination
treatments present challenges, the wealth of data on some of these
well-known compounds in several clinical trials can be used as an
asset, and there are great opportunities that can still be explored.
It is hypothesized by the authors that the use of small molecule-induced
synthetic lethality should be approached with caution. In traditional
SL approaches, where one of the genes lack function, i.e., through
mutation in certain cancers, use of an inhibitor for the other SL
gene targets the cancer cell and leaves the healthy cell employing
a somewhat selective therapy. However, if this approach is replicated
with small molecules, it is possible that the mechanisms these genes
perform in DNA repair are utilized throughout healthy cells in addition
to cancerous cells. Therefore, while cancer cells are more rapidly
dividing and therefore will be reliant on HR, noncancerous cells will
also use these mechanisms to some degree, resulting in unwanted side
effects. Indeed, cancer cells are less genetically stable than healthy
cells and therefore feature more DNA breaks, thus being more reliant
on HR. This likely confers to small molecule-induced synthetic lethality
a degree of selectivity for cancerous cells over healthy ones. The
implications for this approach to be employed safely are that the
underlying biology of the targets in healthy and cancer cells should
be fully understood so as to apply this innovative approach to suitable
target pairs.
Synthetic lethality, as shown throughout this
review, has been
primarily employed in oncology, attempting to disrupt the survival
pathways of cancerous cells; however, this is not the only potential
application of synthetically lethal therapies. The discovery of new
antibiotics is an urgent need, as strains of resistant bacteria such
as methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus (MRSA)
continue to be a major risk of infection in hospitals throughout the
world. Due to bacteria being relatively
simple organisms, they are reliant on HR for DNA damage repair; therefore SL has been looked at as a possible
way of developing antibacterials. Charusanti et al. utilized a systems
biology-guided approach to discover SL pairs for bacteria. The SL pairs identified from the virtual screens
employed in these studies were confirmed experimentally with a precision
rate of 25–43%. A virtual screen of compounds that were able
to dock with 4 pairs of targets was performed subsequently. Two pairs
of targets were found through their studies to be synthetically lethal
(hemF/hemN, lpdA/sucC), one pair where both genes were found to be
singularly essential (glyA/serA), and one pair where only one of the
genes was known to be singularly essential (mdh/ppc). These studies
did not yield compounds capable of inducing synthetic lethality; however
the ability to identify SL pairs in bacteria opens the door to focused
drug-discovery programs that may have more success.
Furthermore,
additional potential applications can be seen in antiparasitics
to treat diseases such as drug-resistant malaria. Due to the high
level of conservation of genome integrity and cell cycle genes between
species, it has been possible to conduct large screens in yeast and
then use the SL pairs discovered to apply to other organisms, using
the analogue genes in for example plasmodium. Using this approach, Lee et al. were able to
compare yeast SL genes to their analogues present in the malaria parasites Plasmodium falciparum and Plasmodium vivax for the potential SL treatment of malaria in humans. Genes were
selected that do not have an analogue in mammals, so as to minimize
the chance of cross-species promiscuity. Through these studies five
SL partners in the plasmodium were discovered. These
findings warranted further investigation. To aid this, the group identified
a number of commercially available compounds that already act upon
these targets, showing a potential application of SL in antiparasitics.
Many of the SL relationships discussed in this text have analogues
in bacteria and parasites that play key roles in HR due to a high
degree of evolutionary conservation. These examples, such as RAD51’s
analogue in bacteria RecA or TbRAD51 in T. brucei, perform similar roles in their associated organisms and are heavily
involved in HR and DNA repair. , Of course, selectivity
between species would be vitally important should any of these targets
be explored, which could be challenging due to the large degree of
homology between them; however, if this selectivity issue could be
resolved, it could expand the usefulness of drugs that function through
an SL mechanism greatly and warrants further exploration within the
field.

10.

## Future Prospects and Final Thoughts
It has clearly emerged that the field of SL has much potential
for oncology in a need that the personalized medicine from the previous
20 years has struggled to fill. SL offers a way to treat cancer that,
in theory, leaves healthy cells unaffected and therefore has reduced
side effects compared to nonspecific chemotherapy. However, the application
of SL modulators still has a long way to go, as not all cancer subtypes
have clearly defined deficiency, such as has been seen with the application
of PARP1 and BRCA1/2 inhibitors or the 29 clinical trials currently
involving ATR inhibitors. As the fields’ understanding of the
underlying cancer biology increases, in addition to the growing network
of tools to discover more SL pairs and, importantly, the mechanisms
involved in SL, the viability of SL related drugs will increase. For
this to occur, cross-disciplinary communication is vital, from target
selection to compound design and optimization and beyond into in vitro/in vivo and into the clinic, with
a willingness to risk and explore previously uninvestigated targets.
Furthermore, the way in which SL drugs are implemented will be key
to their success. For example, if full small molecule-induced synthetic
lethality is to be used, i.e., inhibiting two SL pairs selectively
at once, one must consider the greater potential for resistance as
the cancer cell survival pathways adapt. Either it must be accepted
that these compounds have a short window of effectiveness, or these
mechanisms of resistance must be studied and anticipated so that further
treatment can be administered to restore sensitivity, as is attempting
to be achieved with PARP1 resistance through the restoration of function
of BRCA1/2 using RAD51-BRCA2 inhibitors. Alternatively, if SL compounds can be implemented to impede HR in
cancers that have undergone DNA stress, such as alkylation agents,
nonspecific chemotherapeutics, or ionization, it is possible that
through this method SL could be employed to lessen the dosage and
therefore side effects of these treatments, with a reduced risk of
acquired resistance from the SL pathway. Additionally, it has been
theorized that SL drugs would be most effective in early stage cancers,
as it is hypothesized that premalignant cancers are less heterogenic,
and therefore this is where SL is likely to have the greatest impact. Obviously, for this to be viable, early detection
of cancers in the clinic has to be achievable, and this chemopreventive
approach is very much still in its infancy, existing primarily in
animal models. With these considerations
in place, it can be seen that the future for SL modulations could
be bright, and in years to come the number of projects shining light
on this interesting method of combating cancer will surely grow, and
hopefully this will be reflected in the clinic. We hope this work
inspires the medicinal chemistry community to develop novel compounds
that can be exploited to discover innovative SL pathways in a chemical
biology framework and, through utilization in drug discovery programs,
identify SL-based anticancer compounds.

## Glossary

## Abbreviations
Used
ATRiATR inhibitor
AZAstraZeneca
BERbase excision repair
BTKBruton’s
tyrosine
kinase
CLclearance
CtIPCTBP interacting
protein
CYP3A4cytochrome
P450 3A4
Dabsmaximum absorbable dose
DNA-PKiDNA-PK inhibitor
DSBdouble-stranded break
HER2human epidermal
growth factor 2
HRhomologous recombination
HTShigh-throughput screen
ITCisothermal titration calorimetry
MMEJmicrohomology-mediated end joining
MRSAmethicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus
NERnucleotide excision repair
NHEJnonhomologous end joining
PARPpoly (ADP-ribose) polymerase
PARPiPARP inhibitor
RAD52iRAD52 inhibitor
RNAiRNA interference
RPAiRPA inhibitor
sgRNAsingle-guided
RNA
shRNAshort
hairpin RNA
siRNAsmall-interfering RNA
SLsynthetic lethality
SSBsingle-stranded break
ssDNAsingle-stranded DNA
Vssvolume of distribution
WTwild-type

## Biographies
Samuel H. Myers received his Ph.D.
in Medicinal Chemistry
from the University of Edinburgh (U.K.) in 2016. After postdoctoral
work in medicinal chemistry and chemical biology at University College
London (UCL) (U.K.), in 2018 he joined the Italian Institute of Technology,
Genova (Italy), where he works as a postdoc in medicinal chemistry.

Jose Antonio Ortega got his
Ph.D. degree in Chemistry
from the University of Barcelona (UB) in 2006 in the field of nucleic
acids research. After working as a chemistry researcher in industrial
medicinal chemistry projects at the Scientific Park of Barcelona (PCB),
in 2012 he joined the Italian Institute of Technology (IIT) to participate
in drug discovery projects mainly focused on the design and synthesis
of small molecules for cancer treatment. Within the different strategies
applied for the design of new molecular entities, the development
of protein–protein interaction disruptors to chemically induce
synthetic lethality is the center of his most recent research activities
in the computational and chemical biology group at IIT.

Andrea Cavalli is Professor of Medicinal
Chemistry
at the University of Bologna and Director of Computational and Chemical
Biology at the Italian Institute of Technology, Genova, where he is
also Deputy Director for Computational Sciences. Prof. Cavalli’s
research has combined computational chemistry with drug discovery,
focusing on neurodegenerative diseases, cancer, and neglected tropical
diseases. In particular, he has been a pioneer in the use of molecular
dynamics approaches to drug discovery. These new methods have led
to the identification and characterization of lead candidates within
the framework of multitarget drug discovery and polypharmacology.
He is an author of more than 230 scientific papers and inventor in
several international patents. He has delivered more than 120 invited
lectures and seminars.

## Supporting Information Available
The Supporting
Information is
available free of charge at https://pubs.acs.org/doi/10.1021/acs.jmedchem.0c00766.
Molecular formula string
(CSV)

## Author Contributions
The manuscript
was written through contributions of all authors. All authors have
given approval to the final version of the manuscript.

This work was
supported in part by the Italian Association for Cancer Research (AIRC)
through Grant IG 2018 Id.21386 and the Istituto Italiano di Tecnologia
(IIT).

The authors
declare no competing financial interest.

## Supplementary Material
jm0c00766_si_001.csv

## References
 

## Associated Data

## Supplementary Materials
jm0c00766_si_001.csv