822acssdJournal of Medicinal ChemistryJ Med ChemPMC1000581510005815100415403685713310.1021/acs.jmedchem.2c01229Antitarget,
Anti-SARS-CoV-2 Leads, Drugs, and
the Drug Discovery–Genetics Alliance Perspective
PozziCecilia VanetAnne FrancesconiValeria TagliazucchiLorenzo TassoneGiusy VenturelliAlberto SpyrakisFrancesca MazzoranaMarco CostiMaria P TonelliMichele †Department
of Biotechnology, Chemistry and Pharmacy, University of Siena, via Aldo Moro 2, 53100 Siena, Italy‡Université
Paris Cité, CNRS, Institut Jacques Monod, F-75013 Paris, France§Department
of Pharmacy, University of Genoa, viale Benedetto XV n.3, 16132 Genoa, Italy∥Department
of Life Science, University of Modena and
Reggio Emilia, via Campi 103, 41125 Modena, Italy⊥Doctorate
School in Clinical and Experimental Medicine (CEM), University of Modena and Reggio Emilia, Via Campi 287, 41125 Modena, Italy#Department
of Drug Science and Technology, University
of Turin, Via Giuria
9, 10125 Turin, Italy∇Diamond
Light Source, Harwell Science and Innovation Campus, Didcot, Oxfordshire OX11 0DE, U.K.*Email: michele.tonelli@unige.it.
13202366636643664–37021032023© 2023 The Authors. Published by American Chemical SocietyPermits the broadest form of re-use including for commercial purposes, provided that author attribution and integrity are maintained (https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/).

## Abstract
 The most advanced antiviral molecules addressing major
SARS-CoV-2
targets (Main protease, Spike protein, and RNA polymerase), compared
with proteins of other human pathogenic coronaviruses, may have a
short-lasting clinical efficacy. Accumulating knowledge on the mechanisms
underlying the target structural basis, its mutational progression,
and the related biological significance to virus replication allows
envisaging the development of better-targeted therapies in the context
of COVID-19 epidemic and future coronavirus outbreaks. The identification
of evolutionary patterns based solely on sequence information analysis
for those targets can provide meaningful insights into the molecular
basis of host–pathogen interactions and adaptation, leading
to drug resistance phenomena. Herein, we will explore how the study
of observed and predicted mutations may offer valuable suggestions
for the application of the so-called “synthetic lethal”
strategy to SARS-CoV-2 Main protease and Spike protein. The synergy
between genetics evidence and drug discovery may prioritize the development
of novel long-lasting antiviral agents.

statusreleaseddisplay-pdfyesis-in-collection-domainyesis-olfnois-manuscriptnois-preprintnois-journal-matternois-scannednois-retractednoReceived 2022 Jul 29; Collection date 2023 Mar 23.

## Introduction
The evolution of SARS-CoV-2, the etiological
agent of COVID-19
disease, is characterized by the emergence of mutations that reprogram
its transmissibility and pathogenicity, making the antiviral molecules
thus far identified vulnerable to the strong drug resistance viral
response. To this purpose this review introduces an innovative strategy
based on the synergistic cross-talk between drug discovery and genetics
for interpreting and preventing drug resistance, thereby increasing
drug development success rates. Classical approaches to antiviral
therapy reveal some major weaknesses when the mutational characters
of the viral or host targets are considered. Known since the beginning
of antiviral therapy, drug resistance development should thus be avoided,
and new drugs should be conceived to smartly prevent and overcome
the unavoidable mutational events. The present review, by taking as
an extraordinary timely example the SARS-CoV-2 infection, introduces
the novel concept of synthetic lethality (SL) applied to a single
target protein (or a group of them) that should be integrated in the
discovery paths.
SARS-CoV-2 is an enveloped, positive-sense,
single-stranded RNA
β-coronavirus of the family Coronaviridae. Coronaviruses that infect humans historically include several
common cold viruses, such as HCoV-OC43, HKU, and 229E. However, over
the past two decades, highly pathogenic human coronaviruses have emerged,
namely SARS-CoV-1 in 2002, which is associated with 8000 cases worldwide
and a death rate of around 10%, and Middle East respiratory syndrome
coronavirus (MERS-CoV) in 2012, which caused 2500 confirmed cases
and had a death rate of 36%. Infection with these highly pathogenic
coronaviruses can result in acute respiratory distress syndrome, which
may lead to a long-term reduction of lung function, arrhythmia, or
death. In comparison with MERS-CoV or SARS-CoV-1, SARS-CoV-2 has a
lower fatality rate but spreads more efficiently, making it difficult
to contain. With ∼660 million cases worldwide and approximately
6.9 million deaths by January 12, 2023 (WHO Coronavirus (COVID-19) Dashboard
With Vaccination Data) and a death rate in the early pandemic
phase (i.e., prevaccine) peaking to 5–10% in many countries,
it is one of the largest, unexpected infections in this century and
the most concerning one since it found us unprepared. To devise therapeutic
strategies counteracting SARS-CoV-2 infection and the associated SARS-CoV-2
pathology, different strategies were proposed since the beginning
of the infection spreading, which posed some questions about the efficacy
of the drugs used. The countermeasures against this novel coronavirus
infection relied on existing antivirals and on repurposing drugs and
then on anti-inflammatory and antithrombotic therapies, in line with
the growing knowledge on the novel virus. After two years of cohabitation with SARS-CoV-2, many studies have
been conducted that focus on how this coronavirus hijacks the host
during infection, to inform the drug discovery and development process.
A deep understanding of the structure–function and inhibition
of the viral biomolecules and host proteins, triggered after the infection,
can suggest new targets and pathways to follow. Many efforts are underway
to fight the coronavirus pandemic. The general feeling is that huge
international projects will gather many research groups around the
world, increasing the chance of identifying a cure. In the years to follow, probably because of the endemic
nature of these viruses’ spread, research efforts will be limited
in time; thus the pressure of novel findings and first-in-class cures
in the drug discovery field will be uneven. The main projects are
related to the essential aspects of the drug discovery process: genetic
comparisons; structural biology studies; HTS technologies for rapid
antiviral screening; computational biology; repurposing or new chemical
entities or halfway discovery (see the FDA on repurposing approaches).
The state-of-the-art approach in the case of SARS-CoV-2 infection
drug discovery is not satisfactory because mutational events develop
drug resistance or intrinsic unresponsiveness by patients, ultimately
leading to therapeutic failure. The identification
of evolutionary patterns based on the analysis of sequence information
alone for those targets can provide meaningful insights into the molecular
basis of host–pathogen interactions and adaptation. The discovery
of potential routes of mutations that could lead to new SARS-CoV-2
variants adapting to human hosts and to the new drugs will improve
the understanding and monitoring of events critical to tackling pathogens
posing worldwide high concern to the public health. Therefore, while
thinking of new drugs, the early experimental design should aim to
anticipate future resistance response in a concerted effort combining
targets’ mutational propensities and the establishment of resilient
drug:target interactions.

## Targets and Drugs
The following sections focus on the
best-known SARS-CoV-2 targets,
namely the main protease (Mpro, also named 3CLpro and nsp5), the Spike (S) protein, and the RNA-dependent RNA polymerase
(RdRp), including the state of the art of the most promising antiviral
molecules thus far identified. A comparative analysis of SARS-CoV-2
enzymes/proteins with respect to other human pathogenic CoV homologues
and a detailed description of the main chemical features responsible
for an efficient target inhibition are proposed here, with the intent
to bridge the gap between earlier and current research findings and
draw the line of drug discovery strategies in the fight against coronavirus
infections.
Major progress was achieved by three COVID-19 antivirals,
capable
of targeting the Mpro (nirmatrelvir–ritonavir) or
the RdRp (molnupiravir), which obtained an emergency use authorization
or reached the last stage of clinical trials (PF-00835231), timely
trying to transform the pandemic context. The evolution of SARS-CoV-2
is characterized by the emergence of sets of mutations occurring in
the viral genome that impact virus transmissibility and antigenicity.
Therefore, we provide an overview of mutations of the Mpro, RdRp, and S proteins at the molecular level, in an attempt to help
understand how these variants may affect the structural and functional
behaviors of SARS-CoV-2 proteins and how they may hamper drug effectiveness.
In this review we explore how the study of the observed and predicted
mutations may provide valuable suggestions for the application of
the so-called “synthetic lethal” (SL) strategy. This
approach aims to develop innovative antiviral drugs able to cause
a double mutation by targeting pairs of genes (or pairs of residues)
leading to the inactivation of the affected protein and ultimately
to virus replicative failure. Within this landscape we have also harmonized
the drug target interaction and drug efficacy with the concept of
“genetic synthetic lethality” with the intent to offer
an instrumental perspective for future coronavirus outbreaks. Although
the concept was largely used in anticancer therapy, and more recently
in anti-HIV and anti-influenza virus applications, we have dedicated
a great focus to the suitability of SARS-CoV-2 Mpro and
S proteins, whose studies have, to the best of our knowledge, more
chances of succeeding.

## Main Protease
Until the first SARS outbreak, the 3C-like
protease (3CLpro) has emerged as the most druggable target.
3CLpro is
more commonly known as main protease (Mpro) because of
its dominant role in the post-translational processing of the ORF1ab
polyprotein.
In general, targeting proteases has proven successful
in several
antiretroviral design campaigns. In particular,
Mpro offers several advantages as a drug target:
(i)a highly specific cleavage site (Leu-Gln↓Ser-Ala-Gly),
which has never been reported in human hosts, minimizing the risk
of off-target effects
(ii)an essential role in the viral replication
cycle: Mpro cleaves most structural
and nonstructural viral proteins, hence its inhibition would greatly
hamper the production of virions, eventually leading to the relief
of COVID-19 symptoms
(iii)high structural similarity to SARS-CoV-1
and MERS Mpros, which possibly opens the door to the design
of pan-coronavirus drugs, also in the case of future outbreaks
(iv)a well-characterized
catalytic cycle
and large availability of crystallographic data, considerably enriching
the possibility of success in either ligand- or structure-based drug
design campaigns; indeed, more than 200 crystal structures are currently
available in the Protein Data Bank.
Mpro works as a homodimer, composed of two
molecules
designated as protomers A and B, each formed by 306 amino acids belonging
to three domains ( ). , Domains I (residues 8–101) and II
(residues 102–184) have an antiparallel β-barrel structure,
similar to other CoV proteases and reminiscent of trypsin-like serine-proteases
( ). , Domain III (residues 201–303) includes five α-helices
arranged into a largely antiparallel globular cluster, connected to
domain II by a long loop region (residues 185–200) ( ). The substrate-binding
site of SARS-CoV-2 Mpro lies in a cleft between domains
I and II and features the catalytic dyad Cys145 and His41 ( ). During the catalysis,
His41 acts as proton acceptor and Cys145, once deprotonated, is activated
for the nucleophilic attack on the carbonyl carbon of the substrate. , Thus, it is widely accepted that increased inhibitor potency can
be achieved by molecules covalently linking Cys145 and mimicking the
intermediate during substrate cleavage. The substrate-binding pocket is divided into the four main subsites
S1′, S1, S2, and S4 ( ), each accommodating the side chain of a single consecutive
amino acid of the substrate (generically peptidic (P) fragments P1′
and P1–P3). − The S1′ subsite contains the catalytic dyad
Cys145 and His41 , and is also lined by Thr25, Met49,
and the backbones of Thr26, Val42, and Thr45 ( ). The subsite S1 of CoV Mpro,
generated by His163, Phe140, and the main chain atoms of Met165, Glu166,
and His172, confers absolute specificity for the Gln-P1 residue of
the substrate, via two H-bonds. The backbone amides of Gly143 and
Cys145 participate in the oxyanion hole, stabilizing the tetrahedral
intermediate formed during the cleavage. The deep hydrophobic subsite
S2, lined by His41, Met49, Tyr54, Met165, and Asp187 (alkyl part of
its side chain), accommodates the hydrophobic residue P2 of the substrate,
typically a leucine or a phenylalanine. The substrate residue P3 is
usually solvent exposed, preventing the definition of a specific subsite
for it. On the other hand, the S4 subsite, accommodating the P4 moiety
of the substrate, is defined by the side chains of Met165, Leu166,
Phe185, and Gln191.
 Domain III of Mpro is responsible for
the dimeric assembly,
as the interface contacting area between the two protomers is mainly
localized in this domain. Nonetheless, the N-terminal residues 1–7,
known as the N-finger, play an important role in the dimerization
and in the formation of the active site of Mpro. , Structural evidence on CoV Mpros showed that Ser1 is
H-bonded to Glu166 carboxylate and Phe140 backbone carbonyl, both
belonging to the S1 subsite of the other protomer.
The expanding
knowledge on virus–host interaction opens
the way to host-targeting antivirals that should possess a markedly
higher barrier for selecting drug-resistant viruses and may provide
broad-spectrum antiviral activity when dealing with a cellular target
that is recruited by diverse viruses. The interaction of SARS-CoV-2
with host cell proteins is necessary for its successful replication,
and cleavage of cellular targets by the main viral protease also may
contribute to the disease pathogenesis. The interaction map between
SARS-CoV-2 and human proteins has recently been obtained, thus allowing the identification of some human
substrates that are processed by Mpro, such as histone
deacetylase 2 (HDAC2) that mediates the inflammation and interferon
response, and tRNA methyltransferase 1 (TRMT1) that catalyzes tRNA
modifications for appropriate cellular redox equilibrium. Reduced
levels of V-ATPase G1 and NF-kB proteins were previously reported as a consequence
of the proteolytic processing by SARS-CoV-1 Mpro. In vitro proteomic analyses have identified numerous host
target proteins, including those involved in the host innate immune
response, and proposed cleavage site preferences (for P1-Gln, P2-Leu,
and P1′-Gly/Ala/Ser residues) for Mpros from SARS-CoV-1,
SARS-CoV-2, and HCoV-NL63. These results
further legitimate interest in more in-depth studies to derive a better
insight of the molecular mechanisms behind the viral replication,
such as the interaction of Mpro with the host proteome
to evade the innate immune response.
Recent studies have revealed
that SARS-CoV-2 Mpro acquired
22 mutations in its human host; in the SARS-CoV-2 variants of concern
(VOCs), such as Alpha (α, B.1.1.7), Beta (β, B.1.351),
Gamma (γ, B1.1.1.28 or P.1), Lambda (λ, B.1.1.1.37/C37),
and Omicron (ο, B.1.1.529), the K90R (α, β, γ),
G15S (λ), and P132H (ο) Mpro mutations are
the most recurrent. These mutations are far from key residues responsible
for SARS-CoV-2 Mpro catalytic activity, substrate binding,
and dimerization, so they do not influence the protein functionality. This suggests that Mpro inhibitors
may still be exploited as therapeutics also against circulating SARS-CoV-2
variants, as reported for the drug nirmatrelvir in the following section. However, this scenario depicts the need for
further studies to establish the real impact of prevalent variants
on Mpro cleavage activity and the expected drug efficacy.
We advocate here for a stronger alliance between experts in the fields
of drug discovery and genetics to achieve better Mpro inhibitors.

## Peptidomimetic Inhibitors of Mpro Catalytic Site
Recent studies of new CoVs and the accumulation of structural data
on CoV Mpros from various viruses have shown that the most
variable regions are the helical domain III and the surface loops
( ). On the
other hand, the substrate-binding pockets are highly conserved among
CoV Mpro’s, suggesting that antiviral inhibitors
targeting these sites could have wide spectrum anti-CoV activity.
 Indeed, various inhibitors of SARS-CoV-1 and MERS-CoV
Mpros are also active against SARS-CoV-2 Mpro. , , This includes for example
the
Michael acceptor inhibitor N3 ( ). , , − The comparison between the structures of the SARS-CoV-1
and SARS-CoV-2 Mpro’s in complex with N3 (PDB IDs 2AMQ( ) and 6LU7, respectively) shows a conserved binding
mode within the cavity of both enzymes, supporting a possible pan-CoV
activity for this compound , ( A). After forming a covalent bond with the
catalytic Cys145 via Michael addition, N3 adopts an extended conformation
within the Mpro substrate-binding site covering all the
key subsites S1, S2, S4, and S1′. , Analogous
behavior is shown by the peptide TG-0205221 in both complexes ( B, ). Apart from covalent inhibitors,
SARS-CoV-2 Mpro has been cocrystallized with noncovalent
inhibitors and with a number of fragments bound to the orthosteric
and alternative sites. 
 In the following paragraphs we will describe the efforts
made in
the past decade to design inhibitors of Mpro for both SARS-CoV-1
and SARS-CoV-2 and, finally, we will discuss their repurposing for
the current and future outbreaks.
The Mpro inhibitor
TG-0205221 is here proposed as a
template molecule to guide the critical discussion of the main P elements
that have been investigated during the drug discovery process since
the SARS-CoV-1 outbreak. 
The first
Mpro inhibitors characteristically incorporated
in their structure a substrate-like peptide fragment and a warhead,
capable of establishing a covalent bond with the catalytic Cys145
( A). As the
primary substrate specificity in S1 was a glutamine (Gln) residue,
a surrogate was explored in the inhibitor P1 site and, especially,
the γ-lactam ring (2-pyrrolidinone ring) emerged as the most
suitable moiety. The P1-Gln specificity
is conserved in almost all known human coronavirus Mpro cleavage sites and is considered an
absolute requirement for the polyprotein cleavage and a specific property
of viral protease. Genome sequence analysis
of HCoV-NL63 and HCoV-HKU1 revealed that in 1 out of 11 Mpro cleavage sites histidine replaces glutamine at the P1 position. Accordingly, Goetz et al. demonstrated that
SARS-CoV-1 Mpro also recognized P1-His containing substrates
with an equivalent kcat/KM as the corresponding P1-Gln substrates; this further
P1-His motif, while preserving unaltered the specificity for Mpro over 30 host proteases, opened
the way for other types of P1 bioisosteric substitutions in the search
for novel Mpro inhibitors.
 Regarding the reactive warheads, aldehyde, Michael
acceptor, halo-methyl
ketone, aza-epoxide, aziridine, nitrile, and α-ketoamide functionalities
have widely been explored since the first coronavirus outbreak. − The enzyme’s inactivation process starts with a noncovalent
interaction with the inhibitor that arranges its warhead close to
the thiolate anion of the catalytic cysteine, leading to the formation
of a covalent adduct. Sometimes the inactivation is irreversible (epoxide,
aziridine, halo-methyl ketones, and Michael acceptor groups), whereas
compounds bearing an aldehyde or a ketone warhead are reported as
reversible inhibitors against SARS-CoV-1 Mpro. This is
due to the lower stability of the hemithio-acetal/ketal adducts which
may dissociate from and restore the free form of the enzyme. More
interestingly, the reversible warhead upon nucleophilic cysteine attack
may result in a different functional group (OH, NH) at the P1 site,
forming H-bonds with residues at the bottom of the S1 pocket directly
and/or through a water-bridged molecule. , Besides the covalent bond interaction, these inhibitors form a high
number of H-bonds (7–10) at the S1 site, while numerous hydrophobic
contacts are made at S2–S4 sites, altogether concurring to
an effective stabilization of the enzyme–inhibitor complex,
as exemplified by TG-0205221 ( B). 
At the P2 position
leucine is strongly preferred, even if considerable
diversity may be tolerated, as observed in the interactions with inhibitors
bearing phenylalanine, 4-fluorophenylalanine, methionine, or valine
moieties, at the expense of a decrease in the cleavage rate. Notably, the rigid and planar conformation of
the aromatic ring is less favorable to the binding of the S2 hydrophobic
pocket, while the more flexible cyclohexylmethyl framework (cyclohexyl-alanine
residue in TG-0205221) better fits in a stable chair conformation. TG-0205221 displayed nanomolar Ki values against SARS-CoV-1 and human coronavirus 229E
(HCoV-229E) Mpro enzymes and submicromolar potencies in in vitro assays against the respective viruses ( ). Such an antiviral
profile may also be significant in the context of the COVID-19 pandemic,
since SARS-CoV-1, MERS-CoV, and the nonsevere human coronavirus strains
229E, NL-63, and OC43 have consistently drawn attention as models
of SARS-CoV-2 for preclinical screening and designing of antivirals.
Those reported in summarize the knowledge accumulated so far also for other anti-coronaviruses.
The P3 site residue was reported not to be critical for a specific
binding and may orient toward the bulk solvent or shift to the P2
site. The most recurrent motif in this
position is a valine residue or its tert-butoxy analogue
(TG-0205221, ), although the cinnamoyl group is also used by a few peptide inhibitors
at the expense of a decrease of at least 1 order of magnitude in their
activity. Diverse series of small alkyls
or aryls and heteroaryls, even extended with small alkyl linkers,
were investigated as the P4 unit. The benzyloxy carbonyl group (CBZ)
proved to be the best group for this site (TG-0205221), being locked
in a unique folding conformation which allows the aromatic ring to
form strong lipophilic interactions with its environment. , 
The best examples of peptidomimetics discovered up to now
are reported
in including
their in vitro biological properties and selectivity
index (SI; as the ratio between CC50 and EC50), which is also depicted in for the purpose of a comparison. These Mpro inhibitors demonstrate favorable selectivity index values that,
in the best cases, reached 105 ( ). It is worth noting that each compound
exhibits a variable SI depending on the different sensitiveness (expressed
by the CC50 value) of the animal/human cell line used as
host to support the replication of coronaviruses. Finally, to integrate
the information framework on these compounds, in their binding modes to SARS-CoV-2
Mpro are proposed.
 A step-by-step analysis of the crystal structure
of SARS-CoV-1
Mpro in comparison with HCoV-NL63 Mpro and CVB3
3Cpro in complex with a tripeptide α-ketoamide inhibitor
allowed the generation of unprecedented broad spectrum anti-coronavirus
and anti-enterovirus inhibitors. As the
SARS-CoV-1 S2 subpocket is larger than those of the other two viruses,
it can accommodate molecules bearing P2 groups of variable steric
hindrance but endowed with flexibility for a more appropriate binding
mode ( ).
Therefore, the flexible and lipophilic cyclopentylmethyl or cyclohexylmethyl
groups were identified as the best performing P2 moieties, as experienced
by the cyclohexylmethyl α-ketoamide peptide 11r reaching an outstanding EC50 value of 0.4 nM against
MERS-CoV in Huh7 cells and SI = 1.1 × 105 ( , ). 
Hilgenfeld et al. further modified
the P3 cinnamoyl moiety of 11r by a two rounds step optimization,
first by incorporation of the P2–P3 amide bond into a pyridone
ring to improve the half-life in plasma, followed by the introduction
of a Boc group in place of a cinnamoyl moiety to increase the solubility
in plasma and to reduce the binding to plasma proteins. Lastly, the
P2 cyclohexylmethyl moiety was replaced by the smaller cyclopropylmethyl
one, leading to a distinctive pan-coronavirus profile for inhibitor 13b ( , A). This
optimized molecule is characterized by a pronounced lung tropism and
is suitable for inhalation therapy. 13b adopts an extended conformation within the SARS-CoV-2
Mpro substrate-binding site covering all the key subsites
S1–S4 ( A).
Fragment-based drug discovery (FBDD) strategies , were applied for the design of a novel library of peptidomimetic
aldehydes, cross-referencing key pharmacophore features extracted
from three known EV71 3Cpro lead inhibitors. In particular, the small dipeptidyl derivative 18p shown in proved to be a broad-spectrum anti-EV agent targeting 3Cpro by binding to the S1, S2, and S4 subsites ( B). Due to the structural similarity
between the 3Cpro of EV71 and that of SARS-CoV-2 Mpro, both of which have a crucial catalytic dyad composed of
a cysteine and a histidine, 18p was also found active
against Mpro, thus blocking the replication of SARS-CoV-2
with an SI of 2.8 × 103 toward Vero E6 cells ( , ) and good preliminary PK properties.
It is worth noting that the indole ring is frequently proposed as
an efficient P3 motif, in diverse examples of Mpro inhibitors
presented here. In particular, the presence
of the 4-methoxy group on the indole ring improved the antiviral potency
profile, as observed for 5h, whose Ki values fell in the submicromolar to nanomolar range
(5h, , C). 5h forms extensive contacts inside the Mpro catalytic
cavity, effectively targeting all the key subsites S1′–S4
( C). The COVID-19
outbreak has sparked new interest in the potential of compound 5h (also named YH-53) that has been confirmed to efficiently
block SARS-CoV-2 infection, alone and as a combination therapy with
remdesivir. Studies on its pharmacokinetic
profile in rats have highlighted issues of low bioavailability due
to the metabolic instability of the P1–P2 amide bond, which
is vulnerable to hydrolysis reaction. Due to a growing concern over future drug-resistant variants, an
artificial intelligence derived platform analyzed the drug–drug
and drug–dose interaction space of six promising experimental
or currently deployed therapies, predicting YH-53, nirmatrelvir, and
EIDD-1931 (active metabolite of molnupiravir) as the top three-drug
combination and the highly synergistic nirmatrelvir interaction with
YH-53. These findings were validated by in vitro tests
against the Omicron variant, suggesting the need for more in-depth
preclinical and clinical studies of these combinations of synergistic
drugs. Similarly, the ketone-based dipeptide PF-00835231 ( , D) was identified as a development
candidate for SARS-CoV-1 in 2003, but the success of virus containment
measures halted its clinical progress. Following the COVID-19 pandemic, PF-00835231 has been tested against
the novel coronavirus and was confirmed
a potent inhibitor ( ) of SARS-CoV-2 Mpro thanks to a hydroxymethylketone-driven
reversible interaction with the protease active site of which it occupies
the S1, S2, and S4 subsites ( D). This compound demonstrated high selectivity for
Mpro inhibition over a panel of proteases (IC50 proteases > 10 μM) and efficacy in cellular assays against
SARS-CoV-1, HCoV 229E, and two different clades of SARS-CoV-2 ( ) whose Mpro amino acid sequences are identical. Even better, its potency profile
against SARS-CoV-2 strains improved from 117- to 173-fold in the presence
of a P-gp (MDR1) inhibitor that is able to block the efflux transporter
P-gp, overexpressed in monkey Vero E6 cells. Conversely, in human
airway cell models the extremely low levels of P-gp do not negatively
impact PF-00835231’s performance. It is worth noting that Mpro is also 100% conserved in
the SARS-CoV-2 α and γ variants, while β variant
carries the amino acid substitution K90R, far from the Mpro active site and not expected to influence the substrate/inhibitor
specificity. PF-00835231 also exhibits
an additive/synergistic effect in combination with remdesivir against
SARS-CoV-2. PF-00835231, in the form
of its more soluble phosphate ester prodrug PF-07304814 (lufotrelvir)
for iv treatment, has recently completed a phase 1 trial to evaluate
its safety, tolerability, and pharmacokinetics (NCT04535167, results
not released yet). Meanwhile, Pfizer was also able to advance an oral
SARS-CoV-2 Mpro inhibitor (PF-07321332, nirmatrelvir) through
multiple rounds of chemical optimization of PF-00835231 for oral bioavailability.
The P1′ nitrile warhead, forming a reversible covalent thioimidate
adduct with Cys145, and the bicycloproline and 3-methyl-l-valine fragments of the HCV protease inhibitor boceprevir positively
contribute to the improvement of its pharmacodynamic and pharmacokinetic
profile. The structural characterization
of PF-07321332 in complex with SARS-CoV-2 Mpro shows its
ability to effectively target all the key subsites S1–S4 ( E), expanding the
binding properties of PF-00835231 ( D), which fails to occupy the S3 pocket.
PF-07321332 showed in vitro pan-human coronavirus
antiviral activity in different cellular systems ( , E ), irrespective
of their levels of P-gp expression. In the case of Vero cells (E6
and 81), in contrast to human lung carcinoma A549 and dNHBE (differentiated
normal human bronchial epithelial—EpiAirway) cell lines, the
codosing with a P-gp inhibitor was necessary to derive more reliable
data on its antiviral effectiveness ( , ). PF-07321332 also displayed excellent off-target
selectivity and in vivo safety profiles.
With
this background, PF-07321332 has entered clinical studies
as a combination therapy with the HIV drug ritonavir, able to slow
down the metabolism of the protease inhibitor. Their association (Paxlovid)
gave in phase II/III trials encouraging results by reducing hospitalization
or death by 89% when administered within 3 days of symptom onset. 
Comparative analysis of the whole genome
of circulating SARS-CoV-2
mutant strains revealed the G15S, K90R, P132H, D248E, T45I, L75F,
L89F, L220F, K236R, and A266V mutations are the most frequent ( ). , These mutations are not located near the active site of the Mpro and no difference in susceptibility for nirmatrelvir has
been observed against the Mpro of the prevalent VOCs, which
carry at varying frequencies the K90R (α, β, γ),
G15S (λ), and P132H (ο) mutations. 
 The X-ray crystal structures of nirmatrelvir bound
to K90R, G15S,
and P132H Mpro variants exhibit a binding mode equivalent
to that of the wild-type enzyme, whose conformation is not altered
by these mutations. The reciprocal adaptability
of the enzyme to nirmatrelvir may explain why the drug retains its in vitro antiviral activity against the Omicron variant
relative to wild-type virus. , Mpro domain
II is less prone to critical mutations ( ), strengthening the interest as a valid
drug target domain.
Acyloxymethylketone warhead peptidomimetics
have been recently
proposed as potent inhibitors of the SARS-CoV-2 Mpro. On the one hand, different α-acyloxy groups
were explored at P1′ with the aim to adjust the pKa value of the peptides and balance the excessive reactivity
of the warhead in the rapid irreversible adducts which might also
sequester glutathione or cause cytotoxicity. On the other, the Gln
mimetic γ-lactam P1 motif was enlarged to a six-membered lactam
ring, while holding constant the P2-Leu residue and the 4-methoxyindole
ring as a key P3 element. Compound 15l, reported in and F, ranked a top position for
the potent inhibition of SARS-CoV-2 Mpro and SARS-CoV-2
replication in vitro and excellent plasma stability,
despite containing an ester function. Like PF-00835231 ( D), it effectively targets
the S1, S2, and S4 pockets within the SARS-CoV-2 Mpro active
site ( F). Good
glutathione stability and selectivity for SARS-CoV-2 Mpro over cathepsin B and cathepsin S indicated the α-acyloxy warheads
as endowed with a discriminant reactivity. Compound 15l also displayed good antiviral potency against HCoV-229E and HCoV-OC43
viruses ( ).
However, the metabolic instability and efflux transporter recognition
of the compound were correlated to its high lipophilicity, thus suggesting
the need for further improvements to obtain more adequate ADME properties.
By analyzing the substrate-binding pocket of SARS-CoV-1 Mpro, Dai et al. designed the inhibitor 11a ( , G) characterized
by a reactive aldehyde warhead in P1, an (S)-γ-lactam
ring that occupies the S1 site of Mpro, a recurrent cyclohexyl
moiety into P2 inside the S2 pocket, and again the indole group into
P3 to form new hydrogen bonds with S4 and improve drug-like properties.
This compound showed a high SARS-CoV-2 Mpro inhibition
potency and a good antiviral activity in cell culture. In
vitro and in vivo studies revealed no obvious
toxicity and a good PK profile, suggesting 11a as a valuable
drug candidate for clinical evaluation. 
The analysis of the S4 site of SARS-CoV-2 Mpro allowed
Qiao et al. to develop covalent-bonding Mpro aldehyde dipeptidyl
inhibitors, incorporating hydrophobic subgroups of medium size to
intercept P3 and enhance their potency and PK properties. The rigid and hydrophobic bicycloproline ring,
derived from the antiviral drugs boceprevir and telaprevir, respectively, was successfully explored. In
particular, compounds MI-09 and MI-30 ( ; see also MI-23 analogue in H, targeting the S1, S2, and
S4 subsites within the SARS-CoV-2 Mpro catalytic cavity)
exhibited potent in vitro and in vivo antiviral activity, significantly reducing lung viral loads and
lung lesions in a transgenic mouse model of SARS-CoV-2 infection. Both also displayed good pharmacokinetic and
safety profiles in vitro ( ) and in vivo, thus representing
a valuable starting point toward the development of orally available
anti-SARS-CoV-2 drugs.

## Nonpeptidomimetic Inhibitors of Mpro Catalytic Site
The development of Mpro inhibitors also turned to nonpeptidic
small molecules expected to have more suitable pharmacokinetic profiles
(due to their lower molecular weights, higher membrane permeabilities,
longer half-lives) and, potentially, lower production costs. 
The serotonin antagonist cinanserin was
one of the first nonpeptide-based compounds identified by a virtual
screening program which displayed the capacity of irreversibly reacting
with Cys145 through the double bond of the cinnamyl amide warhead
(IC50 value of ∼5 μM). The antiviral assays
confirmed the inhibition of SARS-CoV-1 and HCoV-229E virus strains
with IC50 values of 34 and 19 μM, respectively. 
As a valuable option, warhead-based small
molecule inhibitors bearing
reactive esters and ketone moieties were previously reviewed. , The most notable chemical structures were the heteroaromatic esters
of 3-hydroxypyridine which drew the attention of different research
groups as Mpro inhibitors. , The mode of
action involves the irreversible acylation of the active site Cys145
by means of the ester bridge. While the
halopyridine moiety of 39 ( ) and analogues fits comfortably in the S1
substrate binding site, establishing prevalently van der Waals contacts,
the furan ring is located near the catalytic residue Cys145, forming
hydrophobic contacts. , 
 Wu et al. described a
new class of
benzotriazole ester based Mpro inhibitors where HOBt resembled
the previously described pyridine moiety and formed an ester linkage
to anthranilic acid and related structures, where the amino group
was shifted from the ortho to the para position or was incorporated into an indole or a benzimidazole ring.
Compound 8 ( ) was found to be the most potent Mpro inactivator.
This class of compounds shares a similar mechanism of action and interaction
pattern of halopyridine esters. Despite their very impressive SARS-CoV-1
Mpro inhibitory potency, their related antiviral activity
is poor or totally absent.
Mesecar et al. merged the key units
identified in previous studies as the 5-chloro-3-hydroxypyridine moiety
and the indole ring, by means of an ester function, whose position
on the indole ring was found to be critical to the potency profile,
as exemplified by the most effective 4-substituted derivative 10 ( ).
Since covalently bound inhibitors may be impaired by a high
risk
for off-target side effects and toxicity, researchers also focused on the design of noncovalent binders. Following
the first coronavirus outbreak, different main core structures were
proposed as noncovalent Mpro inhibitors, such as bifunctional
boronic acids, metal-conjugated compounds and pyrazolone derivatives,
and others. 
Worthy of note is the
class of furyl amides that were identified
from multiple rounds of screening
in HTS technology of a large NIH compounds library. Subsequent hit
optimization studies explored the chemical space around the P2, P1,
and P1′ moieties of the furan amide scaffold. The R-enantiomer ML188 resulted as the best performing inhibitor ( ), with a highly selective
profile for Mpro, with respect to papain-like protease
(PLpro), and 68 G protein coupled receptors (GPCRs), ion
channels, and transporters. As the PLpro tertiary structure
is remarkably similar to that of cellular ubiquitin specific proteases
(USPs), to reduce the chance of provoking off-target activity, it
is of the utmost importance that inhibitors be made more selective
for Mpro than for PLpro. ML188 accommodates
the substrate subpockets in the enzyme active site traditionally occupied
by peptidomimetics, while the furan ring oxygen and the amide carbonyl
oxygen make a bifurcated interaction with the backbone NH of Gly143
( A). On the
basis of this key contact, the authors prepared a chemical library manipulating exclusively the P1′
motif of ML188, without observing any improvement over the prototype,
which remained unsurpassed for potency. The same authors also investigated
benzotriazole derivatives as noncovalent inhibitors and observed a different binding mode with respect to ML188.
The lead molecule SID24808289 caused an induced-fit reorganization
of the Gln189 and Met49 side chain rotamers within S2–S4 and
S2–S1′ pockets, respectively, as imposed by its N-methyl pyrrole and the N-acetylanilide
moieties ( B).
 After the N-methyl pyrrole was
replaced with an
equipotent 3-thienyl moiety, as a second step, the acetamide group
in the P2–P1′ region was substituted with branched isopropyl
and cyclobutyl moieties, which led only to slight increases in potency.
The limited success from the above studies prompted a scaffold simplification
strategy, in which the lipophilic P3 motif, being unfavorably solvent
exposed in ML188, was removed. From this, ML300 ( ) emerged as the most promising
compound, by virtue of its valuable Mpro inhibitory activity
and the significant improvement of its lipophilic ligand efficiency
(LLE) value over those of the parent compounds. The attempt to further
ameliorate the PK and potency profiles contributed to the discovery
of the biaryl moiety as a more efficient P2–P1′ substitution
(17a, ). However, protein flexibility and induced fit strongly limited
the application of structure-based in silico simulations.
The concept of flexibility has frequently been pointed out also for
SARS-CoV-2 Mpro and could undermine the repurposing of
the aforementioned inhibitors toward other coronavirus Mpros. Despite these observations, several
virtual screening campaigns were conducted, with the aim of identifying
suitable new scaffolds to target Mpro. − Apart from the most used databases
in virtual screenings, such as ZINC, ChEMBL, and Pubchem, different
small molecule sources were considered, like the traditional Chinese
medicine database, Indian spices, phytochemical libraries, or marine natural products. Approved antivirals were also tested as possible Mpro inhibitors, with the aim of repurposing molecules that had already
undergone clinical trials. The combination of the anti-HIV drug lopinavir
in association with ritonavir (Kaletra) displayed in vitro anti-CoV activity and reduced adverse
effects when administered in association with ribavirin. To date, no positive outcome has been observed
with lopinavir–ritonavir treatment in adults hospitalized with
severe COVID-19. Further clinical trials,
started in 2020, may help to confirm or exclude the possibility of
a treatment benefit, either as a monotherapy [ClinicalTrials.gov: NCT04372628],
or as a combination regimen with hydroxychloroquine [ClinicalTrials.gov: NCT04376814]
or remdesivir [ClinicalTrials.gov: NCT04738045]. Similarly, different repurposing studies were carried
out in silico, since the first crystallographic structure
of SARS-CoV-2 Mpro was released. To mention only some of
them, Wang performed virtual screening, molecular dynamics simulations,
and MM-PBSA-WSAS energy calculations for approved drugs and drug candidates
toward Mpro, finding carfilzomib, eravacycline, valrubicin,
lopinavir, and elbasivir as promising candidates. Lopinavir, ritonavir, darunavir, and cobicistat were also
found by Pant et al. applying a similar procedure. In one of the first virtual screenings, Chen et al. identified,
among the Drugs-lib data set of purchasable drugs, ledipasvir and
velpatasvir (used to treat hepatitis C virus (HCV)) as possible therapeutic
agents with minimal side effects. Another
study identified talampicillin (a prodrug of ampicillin) and lurasidone
(an antipsychotic for schizophrenia treatment) as possible Mpro inhibitors; indeed, many other in silico studies have been performed. , 
In 2022, by applying a docking-based virtual screening of
an in-house
compound library using the crystal structures of the Mpro and ML188-like noncovalent small molecules (PDB ID 6W63( )), Unoh et al. reported the development of a nonpeptidic,
noncovalent orally active drug candidate, S-217622, targeting SARS-CoV-2
Mpro ( , C). This compound showed high selectivity for SARS-CoV-2
Mpro over a panel of host human proteases and a high metabolic
stability to CYP450 3A4, thus not requiring the coadministration of
ritonavir as is the case with its competitor, the peptidomimetic nirmatrelvir
(Paxlovid formulation). Thanks to its broad-spectrum anti-coronavirus
activity, including VOCs (EC50 = 0.29–0.50 μM, ) and favorable preclinical
profile, S-217622 rapidly progressed through clinical trials to phase
3 studies (clinical trial registration no. jRCT2031210350) as a once-daily
oral therapeutic agent for COVID-19. , Through molecular
dynamic simulations, Xiong et al. elucidated
its molecular mechanism of SARS-CoV-2 Mpro inhibition,
observing a difference in the movement modes between the S-217622–Mpro complex and apoenzyme. S-217622 was shown to inhibit the
motility intensity of Mpro stabilizing the binding with
the target, thanks to multiple hydrogen bonds and hydrophobic interactions
with a hot-spot signature lined by His41, Met165, Cys145, Glu166,
and His163. Interestingly, from the in silico analysis
of the resistance of S-217622 to VOCs, no significant differences
in the interaction pattern were observed; thus the drug candidate
was predicted to efficiently target mainstream variants as well as
wild-type Mpros, in agreement with the above-mentioned
experimental findings.
The recent emergence of the SARS-CoV-2
Omicron variants (B.1.1.529
lineage) exhibiting numerous mutations has raised concerns of limited
efficacy of current vaccines and therapeutics for COVID-19. Encouragingly, S-217622, nirmatrelvir, and molnupiravir
were verified in rodent models as valuable inhibitors of original
Omicron BA.1 and now prevailing BA.2 sublineages. While nirmatrelvir
and molnupiravir only reduced the lung virus titers, the treatment
with S-217622 (ensitrelvir) additionally decreased the virus titers
in the nasal turbinates. These remarkable
results advocate the nomination of ensitrelvir as a prospective oral
therapeutic option for COVID-19.

## Allosteric Inhibitors of Mpro
Through a
large-scale X-ray crystallographic screening of Mpro against
two repurposing libraries, some novel inhibitors were identified.
Worthy of note are calpeptin (EC50 = 72 nM, CC50 > 100 μM) occupying the S1–S3 subpockets of Mpro active site like the peptidomimetic inhibitors (N3 in A and 13b in A) , and pelitinib (EC50= 1.25 μM, CC50=
13.96 μM), targeting an allosteric binding site featured by
a hydrophobic pocket formed by Ile213, Leu253, Gln256, Val297, and
Cys300 within the C-terminal domain III. More interestingly, despite pelitinib being designed as a Michael
acceptor inhibitor for an anticancer purpose, no evidence of its covalent binding to Mpro Cys145 was
observed.
As mentioned earlier, one of the key points making
Mpro a druggable target is the fact that this enzyme shares
96% similarity with the same protease in SARS-CoV-1 and 100% identity
in the catalytic domain that carries out protein cleavage. 
In general, Mpro enzymes from
different human and animal
CoVs are known to display significant homology in both primary amino
acid sequence and 3D architecture, providing a strong structural basis
for the possible design of pan-coronavirus inhibitors. However, it has recently been pointed out that,
despite the high sequence similarity, SARS-CoV-1 and SARS-CoV-2 Mpros exhibit major differences in terms of binding site shape,
size, and flexibility, which could jeopardize the repurposing of available
drugs. Only 12 residues differ in SARS-CoV-2 Mpro with
respect to SARS-CoV-1, and only one, Ser46, is in the active site
( ). More specifically,
Bzówka et al. compared the dynamics and properties of the two
Mpro binding sites, by means of classical and mixed-solvent
molecular dynamics simulations as well as by evolutionary and stability
analysis. First, the maximal accessible
volume (MAW) is quite different: as both proteases significantly reduce
the site MAW upon ligand binding, that of SARS-CoV-1 Mpro is over 50% larger. Second, the movement of the loops lining the
binding site and regulating its accessibility is different. In particular,
the C44–P52 loop is more flexible in SARS-CoV-1 than in SARS-CoV-2
Mpro. Similar conclusions have also been drawn by Gossen
et al., who suggested that drug repurposing among SARS-CoV-1 and SARS-CoV-2
inhibitors may not be so straightforward. In general, the high flexibility of the binding site represents
an obstacle for virtual screening campaigns and could explain why many potential SARS-CoV-2 inhibitors did not
reach the clinical trial stage. Mutations occurring at flexible regions
could also significantly change the affinity of inhibitors toward
Mpro and reduce the potential use of this protein as a
target for coronavirus treatment. However, residues predicted as not
prone to mutation could also provide an anchor for the design of effective
drugs. Regions other than the binding
site, such as the space between domains II and III, which contribute
to the dimer formation, could also be targeted. In general, the enzymatic
activity of Mpro depends on the architecture of the active
site, which critically stems from the dimerization of the enzyme and
the appropriate orientation of each subdomain. This could allow ligands
that bind outside of the active site to dampen the enzyme activity, as experienced by the repurposed drug pelitinib,
described above.

## SL Strategies Applied to Mpro Inhibitors
In a first step, a strategy based on invariant amino acids can be
considered since the number of mutations per position for Mpro is still low. Mpro is subject to very strong global selection
pressure in human cells, and an in-depth study of its future mutational
landscape suggests that mutations will appear rapidly. On the other hand, other viral proteases have
acquired many mutations without losing their activity. The HIV protease
is a very good example. An increased number of selected mutations
is therefore a very likely hypothesis, and SL strategies will therefore
have to be considered rapidly.
As Mpro comes into
contact with other viral and host proteins, the three SL strategies
(intragenic, extended intragenic, and intergenic) can be applied to
this protein. The SL intragenic strategy (see the method in ) will determine whether the active site
is a target for little or no therapeutic escape. It will also determine
whether other targets outside the active site would control escape.
The extended intragenic SL strategy will allow searching for targets
at the interface between Mpro and its viral protein substrates
since it is responsible for cleaving most of structural and nonstructural
SARS-CoV-2 proteins.
Finally, regarding the intergenic SL strategy,
at least two avenues
are conceivable: Mpro interacts at least with two cellular
proteins, HDAC2 and TRMT1. Wild-type HDAC2 is translated into the
cytoplasm and must be transported to the nucleus to act on histones.
A Mpro cleavage site of HDAC2 predicted by Gordon et al. seems to be located between the HDAC2 domain
and the nuclear localization sequence. HDAC2 has been described to
be involved in inflammation and interferon response. , Mast et al. suggested that one can
block viral development by drug targeting their synthetic lethal partner.
The function of HDAC2 is redundant with the function of HDAC1, and the HDAC1 and HDAC2 double mutant seems
to have a very decreased cell proliferation. Thus, the intergenic
SL strategy could be applied. During viral infection, Mpro proteolyzes HDAC2 thus making it inoperative. In parallel, if another
drug blocks HDAC1, the infected cells could no longer multiply, since
the function of HDAC2 would be blocked by the virus and that of HDAC1
by the drug, while in uninfected cells the function of the HDACs would
be carried by HDAC2 and thus these cells could grow normally. The
same scenario can be applied to the Mpro–TRMT1 pair
since Gordon et al. also predicted that
Mpro, whose catalytic pocket is represented in , would cleave through
its catalytic His–Cys dyad the zinc finger of TRMT1, which
is necessary for its nuclear localization signal. Thus, a new drug
blocking a possible synthetic lethal partner of TRMT1 could stop the
SARS-CoV-2 progression. Interestingly, possible mutations in Mpro that would prevent HDAC2 or TRMT1 proteolysis, thus bypassing
this strategy, would affect its functionality rendering the virus
almost certainly nonreplicative.
 

## Spike Protein

## Membrane Fusion Inhibitors: Peptides That Bind to Six Helix
Bundle Domains
The spike protein of β-coronaviruses,
a large integral membrane glycoprotein (>1000 amino acids (aa)),
has
been studied as a possible drug target since the outcome of SARS-CoV-1
epidemics as a strategy to inhibit early phase entry process and membrane
fusion. Its sequence can be divided into two main subunits, the first
one of which (S1) encloses its N-terminal domain (NTD), mediating
the attachment of the virus to the host, the receptor-binding domain
(RBD) responsible for SARS-CoV-2 recognition of the target cell, and
two additional subdomains (S1/S2). This is separated from the second
subunit (S2) composed of a fusion peptide (FP), the N-terminal heptad
repeat (HR1), the C-terminal heptad repeat (HR2), a transmembrane
(TM) domain, and the cytoplasmic tail (CP), as represented in a–c. After ACE2 recognition and RBD attachment, a
massive conformational rearrangement is triggered in the FP, leading
to its insertion into the cell membrane by host–guest bilayer
fusion. S1 is cleaved from the entire glycoprotein (viral priming
process) on a polybasic motif between S1/S2 (furin cleavage site)
by the host proteases, and the penetration of S2 into the host cell
is enhanced by the rearrangement of the two heptad repeats (HR1 and
HR2).
 Since the six helix bundle (6-HB) domain in the
spike S2 subunit
is a highly conserved region situated between the HR1 and HR2 α-helices
( c), the
inhibition of HR1 through a synthetic HR2-mimetic peptide has been
the most surveyed and straightforward strategy to target the S protein
since the early outcome of SARS-CoV-1. The dimerization between synthetic peptides and the 6-HB domain
prevents it from switching to the active conformation needed for membrane
fusion, thus blocking the viral entry. Hereby, the choice of preferring
HR2-like peptides in place of HR1-like peptides for the protein inhibition
is based on the relative shortness of the former helices (about 4.5
turns versus 21 turns), and was highlighted in a study on their intrinsic
stability, α-helicity, and solubility. 
The strategy of using fusion-inhibiting peptides against β-coronaviruses
was first described at the end of SARS-CoV-1 pandemic, when 36–40
amino acid synthetic peptides (namely “NP” and “CP”
series) were designed to target their paralleling HR sequences. The
already existing enfuvirtide model peptide (T20), with SJ-2176, which
acts with the same mechanism against the 6-HB domain of HIV-1 gp41,
was the driving force toward this pharmaceutical approach. Circular dichroism (CD) and thermal stability
(Tm) were used as the main assays to assess
synthetic peptides’ α-helicity, their temperature-driven
conformational changes, and their ability to dock the viral S2 coiled-coil
region.
CP-1 (4.1 kDa, 37 aa) structure and folding was established
through
surface plasmon resonance (SPR) and CD as a promising model to design
fusion inhibitors on the kidney Vero E6 in vitro model
(EC50 = 19 μM). Moreover, when CP-1 and NP-1, its
respective homologue targeting HR2, are incubated in equimolar concentrations,
a six helix bundle heterocomplex is formed, which folds like the fusogenic
core structure of HIV-1 gp41, that could be adapted to the SARS-CoV-2
HR1 region. Besides the HIV studies,
within 2009 four more HR2-mimetic peptides, sHR2-1, sHR2-2, sHR2-8,
and sHR2-9, were tested, reaching an EC50 of 17 μM,
along with 20 other peptides already synthesized. This engagement supported the study of small peptides inhibiting
virus entry. Indeed, a library of 20 recombinant peptides derived
from the HR2 amino acid sequences, namely HR2-1 to HR2-20, were tested.
HR2-18 (sequence IQKEIDRLNEVAKNLNESLIDLQELGK, interacting with amino
acids 1161–1187 of the HR1 domain) showed an optimal length
to inhibit SARS-CoV-1 in vitro with an EC50 of 1.19 μM for the pseudotyped HIV-luc/SARS virus and 5.2
μM against wild-type SARS-CoV-1, which further became the models to template MERS and SARS-CoV-2
mimicking peptides. 
Lu et al. reassessed two series of
HR-mimetic peptides as an approach to coronaviruses. HR1P (MW 4.47
kDa, 42 aa) and HR2P (MW 4.14 kDa, 36 aa), spanning residues 998–1039
of the HR1 domain and 1251–1286 in the HR2 domain, were expressed
as recombinant proteins with the aim to target the amino acid residues
within the a and d positions inside
the inner core of the 6HB motif ( d–j), which are represented by nonpolar
residues of Ala, Leu, and Ile and polar residues of Glu, Asp, and
Ser; these residues contact one another and stabilize the inner core
of the HR1 complex in its active conformation. Indeed, MD showed that
the interaction between HR2 and the two neighboring HR1 α-helices
involves 15 H-bonds, a hydrophobic groove, and a few salt bridges.
Starting from the above-mentioned peptides, shorter (HRnS) and longer (HRnL) peptides containing
HR cores were tested to determine their inhibition levels by pairing
one to another. Results showed that, despite predicted α-helicity,
the highest score was gained by the complexes HR1L–HR2P (84.7%
α-helicity) and HR1L–HR2L, confirming that the longer
the chain, the more stable are the interactions. Both complexes showed a Tm of
>99 °C. HR2P has IC50 = 0.5 μM in cell–cell
fusion assay inhibition test and IC50 ∼ 0.6 μM
in inhibiting the infection of Vero E6 by MERS-CoV, but no inhibition
on SARS-CoV-1 infection was measured. On HR1 of MERS-CoV, the residues Q1020-D1024 form a hydrogen bond,
which does not occur in SARS-CoV-1 corresponding residues G928-D932.
Furthermore, binding between D1161-T1263 and E1276-K1172 on the HR2
domain of MERS-CoV is stronger than that between Q1161-N1159 and E1276-K1172
of SARS-CoV-1, and a hydrogen bond between Q1009 and Y1280 (HR2) in
MERS-CoV is formed, while SARS-CoV-1 lacks the H-acceptor. Those differences
are assumed to be responsible for HR2P’s activity on MERS-CoV
S protein rather than on that of SARS-CoV-1. Overall, the small homology in the amino acid ratio from SARS-CoV-1
to MERS-CoV between HR1 and HR2, 56.3 and 33%, respectively, has decreased
the interest in the development of a common peptide inhibitor candidate.
The insertion of Glu (E) and Lys (K) residues with a fixed pattern
of [n + 4 or 3n(K/E)] arrangements,
obtaining HR2P-M1 and HR2P-M2 (sequence SLTQINTTLLDLEYEMKKLEEVVKKLEESYIDLKEL)
peptides, increased the α-helicity from 18.7% to, respectively,
36.4 and 42.4%, the Tm value, solubility
up to 1.8-fold, and cell–cell fusion inhibition on MERS-CoV
up to 96% (IC50 ∼ 0.55 μM on infection assays
using Calu-3 and Vero E6 cells), due to more salt bridge formation
between coiled-coil motifs, as previously confirmed on the HIV-1 approach. Furthermore, intranasal administration of HR2P-M2
fully protected transgenic mice after MERS-CoV exposure, and combination
with interferon-β therapy reduced 1000-fold virus titer in lungs. 

## Entry Inhibitors: Stapled, Lipoylated, and PEG-Stabilized Peptides
To raise α-helicity and increase stability, also a stapling
strategy was adopted. Chemical stapling consists in introducing a
carbon chain based ligand covalently bound to two amino acid residues
of the synthetic α-helix. Synthetic olefin terminated amino
acids were introduced onto a and d side chains, so that interhelix interactions were not disrupted,
and made of (S)-2-(4-pentenyl)alanine at i and [i(aa) + 4] positions. Acquired CD
spectra confirmed that P21S8 (sequence LDLTYEMLSLQxVVKxLNESY; “x”
indicates stapling positions) and P21S10 (sequence LDLTYEMLSLQQVVKxLNExY)
displayed, respectively, 54 and 47% α-helicity, and EC50 values of 3.03 and 0.97 μM in inhibition of wild-type MERS-CoV
infection to Huh-7 and Calu-3 cells, respectively. They also revealed
longer half-lives in rats compared to nonstapled peptide HR2P-M2,
an AUC0–t 13–27-fold higher
in intranasal administration to mice. 
A few years ago, before the SARS-CoV-2 outbreak, the organic
chemistry of peptides approached the synthesis of lipopeptides, synthetic
peptides conjugated to long chain saturated fatty acids. A library
of 12 lipopeptides with a palmitoyl residue and an Ac-(XaEbEcXdZeKfKg)5-β-Ala-K(C16)-NH2 motif was tested on Huh-7
cells against MERS-CoV. The peptides LLS (sequence LEELSKKLEELSKKLEELSKKLEELSKKLEELSKK-βA-K
(C16) and IIS (sequence IEEISKKIEEISKKIEEISKKIEEISKKIEEISKK-βA-K
(C16) showed EC50 values of 0.24 and 0.1 μM, respectively. 
The rapid spread of SARS-CoV-2 led scientist
to develop a pan-coronavirus
peptide-like S protein inhibitor, based on the information derived
from the previous 15 years of research. The EK peptide library was
developed decorating OC43-HR2P, an HCoV-OC43 HR1 fusion inhibitor,
by adding K and E residues to gain more salt bridges. In fact, EK1
carries E and K modifications ( ) to increase solubility along with other
amino acid mutations away from the HR1 fusion core sequence. EK1 peptide
(MW 4.3 kDa, 36 aa) showed the best solubility profile and good anti
HCoV-OC43, HCoV229E and MERS-CoV activities in vivo, confirmed by prophylactic activity when administered to mice 30
min before virus exposition. The EK1
peptide organizes in a five-turn α-helix region, which interacts
with SARS-CoV-1 and SARS-CoV-2 fusion cores (6HB domain), and in a
shorter, linear, region at the C-terminus ( ), in which polar residues interact with
a HR1 charged pocket.
 EK1 ( )
was refined against SARS-CoV-2. SARS-CoV-1 and SARS-CoV-2 differ by
a few amino acid residues in the fusion core region, so as to not
affect EK1 binding activity to HR1 complementary coils ( i,j), but structural
enhancements gave better affinity results. Considering that 25-hydroxycholesterol
(25-HCh) plays a central role both in viral steroid synthesis and
in guest adaptive immunity, the strategy
of protein lipidation with cholesterol-like moieties was explored,
after HIV-1/2 LP series inhibition peptides were designed. 25-HCh can inhibit the infection of various
human and animal viruses, including vesicular stomatitis virus, as
well as SARS-CoV-2 itself. , A library of peptides
in which cholesterol or palmitic acid was covalently linked to the
C-terminus of EK1, either directly or with a spacer sequence (GSG
or GSGSG) and/or a poly-PEG linker between them, was synthesized. EK1C4 ( ) exhibited the lowest IC50 against S-mediated
SARS-CoV-2 cell–cell fusion, 1.2 nM, and SARS-CoV-2 PsV infection,
0.8 nM. EK1C4 potently inhibits SARS-CoV-2 replication, with EC50 = 36.5 nM, resulting 67-fold more potent than EK1 (EC50 = 2.47 μM) in the same assay. Also, the peptide administered
to mice by intranasal suspension (0.5 mg/kg) was enough to gain a
100% survival rate if virus exposition occurred within 4 h after the
peptide, in comparison to the 20 mg/kg needed for nonlipoylated EK1.
The structure–activity relationship suggests that cholesterol
improves pharmacokinetics parameters, and may also be involved in
anchoring one of the HR1 trimer grooves, and that the spacer optimal
length is 4 units of PEG monomer. The spacer and the linker are long
enough to connect the two active moieties. , 
In 2021, Kandeel et al. discovered that, in contrast to SARS-CoV-1,
SARS-CoV-2 S-mediated cell–cell fusion cannot be inhibited
with HR2 mimicking a minimal length 24-mer peptide. A 36-mer peptide library including the central helix and
residues on the extended N-terminal region sequence were synthesized
with one, two, or three mutations according to the improvement of
free energy of binding, as described by Dehouck et al. in 2013 (core sequence DISGINASVXNIQKEIDRLXEVAKNLXESLIXLQEL),
corroborating the evidence that a higher α-helicity of fusion
peptides leads to a higher antiviral efficacy. Also, as SARS-CoV-2 6HB is a highly conserved region poorly
prone to viral mutation, targeting its domain represents an efficient
strategy for viral entry blockage, despite the intrinsic instability
and short half-life of peptides.

## Pan-Coronavirus Entry Inhibitors: HR Mimicking Peptides against
SARS-CoV-2 Variants
Previously synthesized peptides were
also screened and optimized against the new SARS-CoV-2 most widespread
variants. In 2022, Yang et al. modeled
and synthesized two N-terminally extended HR2 peptides, namely longHR2_42
and longHR2_45, which resulted to be 100-fold more potent than previous
pan-coronavirus lipoylated peptide inhibitors. , The peptides were conceived so that their N-terminal added extension
of HR2 (namely, [KNHTSP]DVDLG-) could interact with HR1 in the HR1–HR2
bundle of postfusion protein, by assuming an extended conformation,
with a view to promoting hydrophobic interactions with V1164 and L1166
residues. The treatment with long HR2_42/45 of Caco2-hACE2 cells infected
by α and Delta (δ) variants resulted to be effective in
the nanomolar range. On the contrary, the IC50 against
SARS-CoV-2 Omicron increased up to 5-fold, probably due to three further
mutations (Q954H, N969K, and L981F), which are directly involved in
the interaction with HR1–HR2 bundle structures. 

## SL Strategy Applied to Viral Entry Inhibitors
Since
the outbreak of the COVID-19 pandemic, the evolution of the virus
genotype has been a main drug discovery focus due to the risk of emerging
mutations, which could lead to more infectious and lethal variants
and, above all, vaccination resistance. The many available crystal
structures of the S protein accessible from open access databases
such as the PDB combined with NGS of the novel viral strain provide
a complete snapshot of the amino acid mutations. , Dearlove et al. found more than 7500 polymorphic sites over 17 000
genomes analyzed, corresponding to over 8% of amino acid protein coverage. Every new main virus variant develops the ability
to bind more strongly to the hACE2 receptor. As a matter of fact,
the Omicron variant accounts for 30 mutations of the S protein with
respect to the wild-type strain, 15 of which localized in the RBD
region, and affecting the overall surface potential of the recognition
site and providing a tighter binding than the wild type (11.6 vs 22.6
nM). , This is caused by the high levels of genetic
polymorphisms, such as SNP variation, transcriptional modifications,
and post-transcriptional modifications that characterize the S proteins
of all the RNA-based viruses. 
The most relevant mutations on the RBD are H655Y and N679K common
to the α, Mu (μ), and γ variants and associated
with increased cell invasion rates, along with increased indirect
RBD interactions and enhanced S glycoprotein fusion efficiency. − 
This general viral feature hampers the development of RBD-directed
inhibitors against all the main viral variants able to maintain their
binding kinetics despite genetic variability, and this is why no ACE2-mimetic
peptide has entered the preclinical phase despite their stability
and high selectiveness toward their targets in preliminary investigations. Spike sequence variability determined the therapeutic
failure of several antibodies designed against the wild-type and past
SARS-CoV-2 viral strains, such as Sotrovimab (VIR-7831) and DXP-604,
which failed to recognize the inhibitors due to mutations at the level
of K417, L452, E484, and other solvent-exposed residue. , On the other hand, although mutations affecting the HR regions are
quite common, they do not seem to affect the activity of fusion-mimicking
peptides. Indeed, the most frequently mutated positions localize in
the noncoaxial helical helices composing the HR1 domain and affect
the polar amino acids pointing toward the solvent. Those residues,
which tend to be mutated into aromatic amino acids, thus enhancing
the entry process thanks to their nonpolar moieties without altering
their affinity for fusion peptides, indicate HR regions as favorable
druggable sites. 
Overall, some
of the amino acid substitutions in the Omicron variant
have already been associated with clinical outcomes. Mutations Q498R,
N501Y, and Y505H seem to increase the virus infectivity by enhancing
the binding free energy and are considered
the main determinants targeted by regdanvimab, bamlanivimab, and the
Eli Lilly mAb cocktail. , 
The rich mutational
landscape of spike (see ) discourages the use of invariant positions
to determine a new target that does not allow therapeutic escape.
The search for intragenic SLs becomes essential, and the genetic study
of the various spike variants will enable us to define them (see ). The SL pairs should be numerous because,
after ACE2 recognition and RBD attachment, a massive conformational
rearrangement is triggered in the FP along with a repositioning of
the HR1 and HR2 domains. These domains arrange in two different conformations,
imposing a very high selection pressure on this region and, ultimately,
on the residues that compose it. The conformation of the protein prior
to ACE2 binding and that of the ACE2-bound spike are achieved through
two distinctive and complex amino acid interaction networks. This
also imposes a double selection pressure on the residues involved.
Thus, even if this region is very variable, − an equilibrium between this mutational richness and this double
selection pressure cannot be overcome without loss of viral replicability.
In other words, whatever the mutations acquired, the virus will always
have to preserve both its fitness and its various functions. Thus,
therapeutic escape requiring the acquisition of mutations while retaining
the protein function is not without cost for the virus, which in most
cases loses fitness. Thus, mutations can be achieved and propagated
if viruses undergo a first round of mutations stabilizing the function
and still retain a degree of fitness, followed by a new set of mutations
improving fitness without losing the function (these are the primary
and secondary mutations described for HIV). This explains why complex
combinations of mutations are preferentially selected. Furthermore,
as invariance is achieved at multiple positions within the protein,
this indicates the way toward intragenic SLs (see ).
 A hierarchical organization of residue moieties
within the HR region
is required for a proper folding before and after viral fusion ( h). This was successfully
targeted with the strategy of mimicking peptides and small chemical
compounds, and/or peptides can be designed to disrupt the HR organization.
Therefore, an SL medicinal chemistry strategy requires the design
of inhibitors with moieties which induce the variation of single amino
acids of the fusion domain. This is possible by altering the hindrance
of critical residues essential for fusion core formation, causing
the virus to select viral mutants carrying amino acid substitution
able to escape the inhibitor but unfavorable to assemble properly
the HR core. However, due to the overall low druggability of the S
protein itself, and its lack of binding pockets, we suggest that SL
strategy should be more easily applied to other viral proteins, especially
its enzymes (e.g., soluble hydrolases and polymerases).
So far,
the antigenic comparison technique is preferably carried
out by immunobinding assays. However, the high mutation rate of the
S protein and the vaccine industry manufacturing prompted a strong
focus on learning platforms to predict the evolutionary epitope variations. The SARS-CoV-2 S glycoprotein is represented
in as a
heat map, indicating the more variable residues in the Lambda and
Omicron variants compared to the wild-type virus. Here one can visualize
immediately how the RBD, represented in dark red, carries half the
mutations (15) of the whole S protein in between the wild-type and
Omicron viruses. The heptad repeat (HR) region is the highest conserved.

## Entry Inhibitors Targeting the Transmembrane Serine Protease,
Type 2 (TMPRSS2)
One of the two entry-fusion paths of β-coronaviruses,
including SARS-CoV-2, is represented by the mutual recognition of
spike and ACE2 of TMPRSS2 (transmembrane serine protease, type 2)
mediated on the DPSKPSKR↓SFIED sequence. Such an entry pathway
does not involve endosomal uptake but allows the virion to fuse its
envelope to the host cell membrane and to release its genic and proteinaceous
material into the cytosol. This infection
strategy has been named “early pathway” at the plasma
membrane fusion. TMPRSS2 (492 aa) upregulated
expression is associated with epithelial cells of several tissues,
including gastrointestinal, respiratory, and urinary systems. − 
While MERS-CoV needs TMPRSS2 to cleave away S1 from the S2
subunit at the furin domain, SARS-CoVs do not strictly need a such
prefusion activation, although SARS-CoV-2 still contains a furin-like
cleavage site between subunits S1 and S2 (PRRA multibasic site). This
can be employed by the virion polyprotein convertase and enhances
human viral pathogenicity. − For these reasons, selective
protease inhibitors against TMPRSS2 have been studied since the SARS-CoV-1
outbreak.
Camostat mesylate, or FOY-305 ( A), a trypsin-like serine protease inhibitor,
initially developed to treat chronic fibrosis and approved in Japan
for the treatment of chronic pancreatitis, also showed a good tropism for the airway epithelial sodium channel
(ENaC), making it an ideal candidate
for SARS-CoV investigation.
 Although the proper molecular mechanism of action
for camostat
is still under investigation, it seems to act as a prodrug. After
the hydrolysis of the N,N′-dimethylamminoethylic
moiety to the active metabolite 4-(4-guanidinobenzoyloxy)phenylacetic
acid ( ),
a benzyl ester group is uncovered to be reversibly acylated by a serine
residue of the inhibited protease. From
the crystal structure of camostat complexed with the urokinase-type
plasminogen activator (uPA), Sun et al. identified the hydrolyzed portion GBPA covalently bound to a serine
residue, resulting in an IC50 for TMPRSS2 between 4 and
6 nM. In particular, the guanidine group points toward the bottom
of the S1 pocket, into the catalytic triad (Asp345, His296, and Ser441). A valine-rich lipid pocket accommodates the
dimethyl amide tail, and the guanidine moiety hydrogen binds to Asp435.
The active mechanism proposed through MD simulation involves Ser441
deprotonation of TMPRSS2 His296, which acts as a nucleophile toward
the camostat ester function, with subsequent nucleophilic acylation
and the cleavage of the hydrophobic tail. When the complex between
the cleaved camostat and TMPRSS2 is formed ( ), the enzyme active site is modified and
the protease activity is blocked. 
 TMPRSS2 specific inhibition was already observed
in MERS-CoV in vitro models, where it has been proven
that Vero-TMPRSS2
infected cells were protected by camostat, unlike Vero E6 cells, along
with a 270-fold reduction of MERS-CoV production in Calu-3 cells. In vivo inhibition assays
on mutated SARS-susceptible mice, which were administered camostat
mesylate for 9 days prior to viral exposition, registered an ∼60%
survival rate to SARS-CoV-1. This suggests SARS-CoV-1 depends on serine
protease activity for viral spread in vivo, although higher doses of camostat mesylate
(30–50 mg/kg) did not reduce lethality. Camostat mesylate is
currently in a phase II double-blind clinical trial for COVID-19 syndrome
involving 596 participants at the Hôpitaux de Paris (France)
with a dose of 600 mg/day per os (EudraCT No. 2020-003366-39)
and at Yale University with a dose of 200 mg, 3 times daily, for 7
days (ClinicalTrials.gov: NCT04353284).
Nafamostat mesylate ( A), studied as an immediate acting anticoagulant, displays shares the same molecular mechanism
of action as camostat, but has a higher logP and a lipophilic tail.
With a higher affinity for TMPRSS2 than camostat, MERS-CoV inhibition
properties of nafamostat were studied on in vitro fusion assay, and an IC50 of ∼1 nM on Calu-3 infected
cells was registered. Furthermore, nafamostat
blocks SARS-CoV-2 entry into host cells with roughly 15-fold higher
efficiency, with a 50% IC50 in the low-nanomolar range, probably due to the formation of a higher number
of hydrogen bonds (five) with the substrate. When nafamostat mesylate is administered to Vero E6/TMPRSS2 recombinant
lines infected with SARS-CoV-2, its displays an EC50 of
31.6 μM. The ongoing MD studies on these molecules suggest that
improved inhibitors should contain hydrogen bond donors and positively
charged moieties that could interact principally with Asp435, together
with a more hydrophobic moiety to accommodate a valine-rich loop.
Nafamostat is programmed to undergo a prospective clinical study (RACONA
Study) for the treatment of COVID-19 at Padua University Hospital
(Italy), in collaboration with Yokohama University and Yokohama City
University (Japan) and University of Zurich (Switzerland). The studies
are still in the recruitment phase (ClinicalTrials.gov: NCT04352400).
With the recent spreading of the new viral variants, several authors
have highlighted the atypical entry path of the Omicron virus, which
presents few mutations in the furin cleavage site (e.g., T716I and
N679K), thus seeming to prefer the endocytic entry to the S1/S2 cleavage. As in vitro models showed
Omicron to be more infectious even in the presence of TMPRSS2 inhibitors
and the large number of cationic residues favors the recruitment of
endocytic hydrolases like cathepsins involved in the endocytic pathway,
this seems to be the most likely entry mechanism. 

## Arylsulfonylated Amides
Another study on TMPRSS2, although
not related to SARS-CoV-2, showed in vitro catalytic
activity on porcine small intestinal epithelial (IPEC-J2) cells and
suggested that structures containing a 4-amidinobenzylamide as residue,
and several arylsulfonylated amides of 3-amidinophenylalanine, could
act as nanomolar TMPRSS2 inhibitors, too. Derivatives of 4-amidinobenzylamide containing a small, polar amino
acid like moiety substituting the sulfonamide nitrogen are well-known
inhibitors of HAT, matriptase, and thrombin, but they also gain a
TMPRSS2 inhibitory action when a 4-substituted piperazine or piperidine
derivative side chain is inserted. I-432
( A), with a Ki of 0.9 nM for TMPRSS2, was screened in vitro using a fluorescence-based method to define enzymatic
inhibition at different concentrations. Although β-coronaviruses were not the intended targets for
this molecule, TMPRSS2 inhibition properties should be investigated
in the search for compounds capable of preventing viral spread. It is worth noting that TMPRSS2 also proved
to be involved in proteolytic activation of some influenza A viruses,
promoting their infectivity, and that
the HA10 subtype of the avian influenza A virus (AIV) was unable to
infect the TMPRSS2 knockout mice, since the enzyme is indispensable
for the proteolytic cleavage of the viral hemagglutinin (HA). Although
only preliminary results have been obtained with SARS-CoV-2, human
TMPRSS2 genotypic variants (already present in some cancer tissues)
further enrich the knowledge of the role of this protease on viral
entry. , 

## Entry Inhibitors Targeting Cathepsin L
As the endosomal
pathway requires the intervention of cathepsin L (CTSL) for endolysosomal
escape, the inhibition of this cysteine exopeptidase implicated in
cell growth, matrix regulation, and neovascularization represents
a target for the development of antivirals targeting β-coronaviruses
and other viruses such as the Ebola one. Cathepsin L inhibition in vivo treatment decreased
entry of SARS-CoV-1 and SARS-CoV-2 pseudovirions into 293/hACE2 by
over 76%, suggesting cathepsin L, but not cathepsin B nor calpain,
is responsible for an endosomal S1/S2 spike cleavage. MDL28170 (or calpain inhibitor III, or Z-Val-Phe-CHO)
( B), was identified
as an efficient inhibitor of CTSL-mediated substrate cleavage, with
an IC50 of 2.5 nM in a high-throughput screening, together
with good inhibition toward SARS-CoV-1 infection. Calpain inhibitors were classified as candidates against
SARS-CoV-1, and MDL28170 was assayed along with analogous di- or tripeptide
aldehydes like Z-Leu-Nle-CHO and Z-Leu-Leu-Tyr-CH2F. MDL28170 displayed
the best result in a neutral red uptake assay, with an EC50 of 0.5 μM in African green monkey kidney cells (Vero 76). Docking results suggest that two hydrogen bonds
are involved in CTSL inhibition: one between the carbonyl oxygen of
MDL28170 and the side chain nitrogen of His163 of CTSL and another
between Cys25 catalytic thiol side chain residue and the other carbonyl
oxygen of ligand, while the end term aromatic ring is accommodated
in a large hydrophobic pocket of the enzyme. Unfortunately, when tested against SARS-CoV-1/2, no direct antiviral
effect emerged from viral titration studies. However, this compound
can be used as a driving core for further drug development. The compound E64D ( B), an irreversible, covalent, membrane-permeable
inhibitor of lysosomal and cytosolic cysteine proteases and specific
against cathepsin L, was initially tested in vitro on SARS-CoV-1 and MERS-CoV and showed a reduction in the entry of
of SARS-CoV-2 PsV by 92.5%. Its structure contains an epoxide ring
as a warhead that can undergo nucleophilic attack by the thiol of
the catalytic Cys residue to form with it a covalent bond. Due to
this nonspecific mechanism of action, it could target both catepsins
L and B. However, as its structure occupies the prime site at the
enzyme pocket of CTSL, this improves its specificity. , 
Teicoplanin, a semisynthetic glycopeptide antibiotic with
a broad spectrum of activity, exhibits good activity against SARS-CoV-2
pseudovirion entry with an IC50 of 1.6 μM, whereas the chemical probe and cysteine protease
inhibitor K11777 ( B) is able to inhibit pseudovirus entry with an IC50 value
of 0.68 nM. , The sulfonyl vinyl moiety of
the molecule acts as a Michael acceptor and reacts with Cys-SH in
the catalytic pocket of cathepsin L/B, and structure–activity
studies identify phenetyl groups as selectivity drivers toward cathepsin
L, while 2-naphthyl groups are more specific to cathepsin B, as CTSB
only tolerates aromatic residues in its lipophilic pocket. The hydrazide-derived peptidomimetic SID-26681509
( B) was demonstrated
to decrease SARS-CoV-2 pseudovirion entry by about 76% at 2 μM. 

## Entry Inhibitors Targeting PIKFYVE and Protein Kinase B (Akt)
PIKFYVE is a ubiquitous, highly conserved lipid kinase, responsible
for the phosphorylation of phosphatidylinositol-3-phosphate (PI3P) to phhosphatidylinositol-3,5-diphosphate (PI3,5P), involved in lysosome fusion to endosomes and vacuolation trafficking. Apilimod ( ), a small molecule that inhibits the phosphotransferase
activity of PIKFYVE with an IC50 of 14 nM and developed
as a suppressor of IL-12 and IL-23 production, was first tested against
Ebola. The compound was shown to prevent
EVD (Ebola virus disease) infection of several cell lines in the range
of 0.1 μM concentration, with a dose-dependent response. The general mechanism of action suggests that
apilimod activity on PIKFYVE results in a late endolysosome inhibited
microtubule mediated vesicular trafficking. MERS-CoV in vivo models also show that NAADP Ca2+ channels on endosomal membranes are under expressed when
the PIKFYVE pathway is inhibited, resulting in poor vesicular organization. As apilimod showed good properties against
murine hepatitis virus (MHV), SARS-CoV-1, and MERS-CoV PsVs, it was
tested on 293/hACE2 cells exposed to SARS-CoV-2, but the low blood
availability made it difficult to test its activity in vivo.
 Protein kinase B (also known as Akt) was considered
as a putative
target for SARS-CoV-2 fusion inhibitor, as part of the most important
kinase signaling of SARS-CoV-1 infection. In vivo luciferase activity on the PsV tested an IC50 of 2.33
μM for the anticancer drug capivasertib ( ), with a 50% cytotoxicity concentration
on Vero cells of 82 μM. , The low toxicity of
this compound makes it a good lead for further investigation for managing
COVID-19 positive patients in comorbidity with neoplastic formations.
Recently, a series of 2,4-disubstituted-5H-pyrrolo[3,2-d]pyrimidine derivatives were demonstrated to have higher
Akt inhibitory activity compared to apilimod. Among them, XMU-MP-7 ( ) achieved satisfying viral inhibition at 200 nM, demonstrated
good in vivo pharmacokinetics, and resulted in low
EC50’s against the most common SARS-CoV-2 variants
(EC50’s of 12.4 nM against β variant and below
6.9 nM against γ, δ, and o variants).
Overall, since
PIKFYVE and Akt inhibitors maintain their antiviral
activity across the entry and postentry stages of SARS-CoV-2 infection,
they represent highly promising leads in antiviral drug discovery. However, these compounds have recently been
reported to be poorly active in suppressing COVID-19 associated inflammation
in murine models, suggesting the need for further optimization.

## RNA-Dependent RNA Polymerase
SARS-CoV-2, as many positive-stranded RNA viruses, is
characterized
by a complex replication/transcription process governed by many factors
belonging both to the host cells and to the virus. The replication
process is completed and controlled in the cytoplasm of the host cell
by an RNA-dependent RNA polymerase complex. This multivalent enzyme
involves different subassembly units of nonstructural proteins (nsp’s),
encoded in the ORF1ab region of the virus genome open reading frame. , A key component of this complex scaffolding is the RNA-dependent
RNA polymerase (nsp12). , This enzyme alone
possesses minimal activity and requires association with the cofactors
nsp7 and nsp8 to improve template binding and processivity. Thus, the nsp12–nsp7–nsp8 complex
( ) represents
the catalytic machinery for nucleotide polymerization. , To date, no structural information is available on the isolated
nsp12, whose structure has been reported only in complex with its
cofactors, limiting the comprehension of its peculiar activation mechanism.
The RdRp function is pivotal among coronaviruses, its primary structure
being highly conserved in SARS and MERS CoVs. RdRp proteins of SARS-CoV-1 and -2 share 96% amino acid
identity with a high degree of similarity in the nucleoside binding
domain, and the antiviral drugs already developed to treat SARS-CoV-1
and MERS-CoV infections represent a resource to quickly identify effective
drugs against SARS-CoV-2. To date, structural information on this
target is available only for SARS-CoV-1 and -2. Nsp12 consists of
three domains: the nidovirus-unique N-terminal extension, the interface,
and the C-terminal RdRp domains. The role of the nidovirus-unique
N-terminal extension domain, adopting a nidovirus RdRp-associated
nucleotidyl transferase (NiRAN) architecture, remains to be fully
elucidated. On the other hand, the C-terminal RdRp domain is involved
in template binding, nucleoside triphosphate (NTP) entry, and polymerization.
This domain resembles a cupped right hand and comprises the fingers,
palm, and thumb subdomains ( ). Minor differences have been reported between the
nsp12–nsp7–nsp8 complexes of SARS-CoV-1 and -2. In SARS-CoV-2
the N-terminal β-hairpin is in the groove clamped by the NiRAN
and the RdRp palm subdomain, where it stabilizes the overall structure
through a set of close interactions ( ). , , , 
 The catalytic site of RdRp is characterized by
seven conserved
polymerase motifs, named A–G. Motifs A–E are in the
palm subdomain, whereas motifs G and F are part of the fingers’
subdomain. Motif A contains two binding sites for bivalent metal ions,
attributed to zinc ions and likely serving as structural components
to maintain the integrity of the RdRp architecture. , Two aspartate residues, Asp760 and Asp761 belonging to motif C,
are essential for the RNA synthesis. In RdRp, few channels are found
to connect the catalytic site to the exterior, lined by positively
charged residues that facilitate the entry of NTPs and the template
strand, on one side, and the exit of the nascent strand on the other.
The RdRp complexes reported so far include a variable number of nsp8
units. , , , The nsp7–nsp8 heterodimer binds to the nsp12
on the polymerase thumb domain facing the NTP entry channel. Binding
in this position sandwiches the index finger loop of nsp12 between
the nsp7–nsp8 heterodimer and the polymerase thumb domain.
The interaction of the nsp7–nsp8 heterodimer with this loop
has been proposed to facilitate the interaction of nsp12 with additional
components of the RNA synthesis machinery. A further nsp8 unit binds
to the nsp12 interface domain proximal to the fingers’ domain
and the RNA template-binding channel. Nsp12 and nsp8 have been proposed
to interact with a large set of other nsp’s, suggesting that
they form a protein–protein interaction hub within the viral
replication complex. The interfaces
among subunits could represent new promising targets for the development
of antiviral drugs. A recent structure of the SARS-CoV-2 RdRp (PDB
ID 6YYT( )) has shown that the two conserved N-terminal
regions of nsp8 are implicated in the enzyme consecutive reactions
without releasing its substrate (processivity). Indeed, in the complex
with RNA, these nsp8 extensions fold in α-helices that flank
the protruding RNA duplex exiting from the RdRp cleft. The key role played by the cofactors in the
polymerase activity suggests the interfaces among subunits as new
promising targets for the development of antiviral drugs. , Key contacts of RdRp with other viral proteins, such as nsp7 and
nsp8, in replication transcription complexes were pointed out, leading
the way to the development of protein–protein interaction inhibitors. Increasing knowledge of the mutational rate
and quality of the mentioned interfaces opens the way for exploring
the SL strategy, thus limiting the therapeutic escape. However, more
data are needed.
Very recently, Tian et al. reported
a comprehensive state of the art study on the RdRp inhibitors. Many
of them were effectively developed and are currently in use to cure
several diseases such as hepatitis C, hepatitis B, influenza A, and
influenza B, whereas others are in clinical or preclinical phase.
RdRp inhibitors can be subdivided in two main classes of compounds,
based on their chemical structures and protein-binding domains: nucleoside
analogue inhibitors (Nis) and non-nucleoside analogue inhibitors (Nnis).
The first class of compounds is responsible for the termination of
the RNA chain elongation during the virus replication process, through
their incorporation by the RdRp complex active site into the elongating
chain, while the second class acts by blocking the protein by binding
at allosteric sites. − 
The current need for efficient drugs
to cure COVID-19 prompted
researchers to consider RdRp inhibitors in view of repurposing strategy.
Currently among all nucleoside analogues developed over the years,
only a few have obtained approval for managing COVID-19 disease, as
in the case of remdesivir, which was approved by FDA on October 22,
2022. , − More recently molnupiravir (EIDD-2801) has
been authorized from the medicine regulator of the United Kingdom
as the first oral drug to treat adult patients with mild to moderate
COVID-19 infections and with risk factors for severe disease. The
drug is currently in clinical phase II/III and has been shown to significantly
decrease the risk of hospitalization or mortality. , The cryo-EM structure of SARS-CoV-2 full-length RdRp nsp12–nsp7–nsp8
at a resolution of 2.9 Å was solved by Gao et al. followed recently by that of the complex with
the active form of remdesivir by Yin et al. These structures helped to clarify the remdesivir mechanism of action
and provide the rational basis for the design and optimization of
other parent nucleotide drugs which have shown activity in blocking
SARS-CoV-2 in cell-based assays. , 

## Nucleoside Analogue Inhibitors (Nis)
Remdesivir (RDV,
GS-5734), a monophosphoramidate, is a prodrug of the active compound
GS-441524 ( and A) bearing a free 5′-hydroxy
group. It is a broad-spectrum inhibitor of the replication of viral
genome in several RNA viruses by interfering with the nsp12 RdRp. The resolution of the SARS-CoV-2 RdRp in complex
with remdesivir shows the enzyme incorporates the drug as triphosphate
into the RNA chain. Once entered, the inhibitor blocks RNA synthesis
due to the lack of incorporation to its monophosphate moiety of a
complementary uridine triphosphate (UDT). − In addition, remdesivir shows different interactions between the
cyano group and Ser861 present in the exit channel, thus preventing
RdRp translocation and delaying chain termination after its incorporation. , , Remdesivir was initially developed
to interfere with Ebola virus replication, and further studies demonstrated
that Ebola’s RdRp incorporated ATP and remdesivir-TP with the
same efficiencies. The selectivity of remdesivir-TP increases up to
500-fold, with respect to ATP alone, when the purified human mitochondrial
RNA polymerase (h-mtRNAP) is used. Recently
remdesivir has been proposed as a promising antiviral drug candidate
against a wide number of RNA viruses including SARS-CoV-1 and MERS-CoV. In fact, it inhibits both MERS-CoV (IC50 = 0.074 μM) and SARS-CoV-1 (IC50 = 0.069
μM) replication in human airway epithelial (HAE) cell models
with broad-spectrum activity against various bat coronaviruses. In Vero E6 cells experiments, remdesivir was
able to block SARS-CoV-2 infection at a concentration of 0.77 μM
of IC50 with low cytotoxicity (CC50 > 100
μM). Gottlieb et al. reported that treatment of COVID-19 patients
with remdesivir reduced
hospitalization by 87% compared to placebo.
 Although this proved the efficacy of the drug,
it has also been
reported that an immunocompromised patient developed drug resistance.
It is therefore necessary to start investigating and understanding
the pathways of resistance to remdesivir. Stevens et al. recently published a study exploring the potential
developmental pathways leading to remdesivir resistance, the molecular
mechanisms involved, and the viral determinants. They demonstrated that SARS-CoV-2 develops resistance to
GS-441524 in vitro, and in particular, after 13 passages
of the drug, the EC50 increased 2.7–10.4-fold. Sequence
analysis identified mutations in the active RdRp motif S759D, V166A,
N198S, S759A, and V792L ( ). Biochemical analysis showed that S759A is responsible
for the decreased preference for remdesivir-TP as a substrate by the
nsp12 RdRp, whereas nsp12 V792I diminishes the uridine triphosphate
concentration needed to overcome template-dependent inhibition associated
with RDV ( ). 
Molnupiravir (EIDD-2801) is
a 5′-isopropylester prodrug
of β-d-N4-hydroxycytidine
(EIDD-1931) ( A). This latter inhibits SARS-CoV-2, MERS-CoV, and SARS-CoV-1 replication
with EC50 in the nanomolar range. Upon in vivo conversion to EIDD-1931 5′-triphosphate, the activated form
is incorporated into the RNA chain by RdRp CoV causing nonobligate
RNA chain termination. Molnupiravir inhibits the SARS-CoV-2 replication
with 5–10-fold higher efficacy than remdesivir. The potency
improvement seems to depend on two additional hydrogen bonds established
by the drug in the central pocket of RdRp. In particular, the side
chain residue Lys545 forms a hydrogen bond with the N(4)-hydroxyl
group present in the drug structure and the guanine base in the template
strand can establish a hydrogen bond with the cytidine base. , , Recent trials (NCT04575597)
showed that molnupiravir, the first oral anti-SARS-CoV-2 drug available,
decreases both hospitalization and the risk of death in patient with
moderate COVID-19. Like remdesivir and
molnupiravir, other analogues such as favipiravir, ribavirin, and
galidesivir ( A) showed SARS-CoV-2 inhibition at the cellular level, and they have
been proposed as potential inhibitors of the viral RdRp through nonobligate
RNA chain termination upon conversion to the triphosphate derivative.
All these molecules carry the entire ribose group which is responsible
for stable hydrogen bonds with the central channel of the protein.
Favipiravir undergoes phosphoribosylation in vivo, it is recognized by the RdRp enzyme as a purine base, and it is
incorporated into the viral RNA causing replication to be interrupted. Multiple clinical trials including favipiravir
alone and in combination with other antiviral drugs are ongoing to
investigate and optimize the potentiality of this compound as an anti-SARS-CoV-2
drug. Ribavirin, a synthetic nucleoside analogue inhibitor that showed
a preclinical beneficial effect to treat SARS-CoV and MERS-CoV infections
when it was administered in combination with IFN-α, requires
further clinical investigations to assess previous observed side effects. , Galidesivir (BCX4430) is a broad-spectrum antiviral adenosine analogue
initially developed to treat hepatitis C virus (HCV) which proved
active toward several viruses such as Ebola, Marburg, yellow fever,
Zika, and SARS-CoV-2. Based on the replication mechanism similarity
between HCV and CoV, and on a structure–activity relationship
analysis of HCV inhibitors, Ju et al. proposed that the FDA-approved hepatitis C drug EPCLUSA (sofosbuvir/velpatasvir)
should inhibit coronaviruses, including SARS-CoV-2. Sofosbuvir ( A), a pyrimidine
nucleotide analogue able to inhibit the HCV RdRp NS5B, , is converted in vivo into the triphosphate (2′-F,
Me-UTP) which binds in the active site of the RdRp stopping the RNA
chain elongation, thus preventing the viral growth. , The repurposing approach proved useful as the drugs already approved
have a known toxicity profile and have greatly shortened the development
time. Along this line, recently Parvez et al. designed a pharmacophore
using remdesivir and, after having undertaken a molecular docking
analysis, they were able to select two compounds from the ZINC database,
namely ZINC09128258 and ZINC09883305, that effectively bound the RdRp
of SARS-CoV-2. 

## Non-Nucleoside Analogue Inhibitors (Nnis)
Unlike Nis
that bind the catalytic site of RdRp, Nnis bind to allosteric sites,
interfering with the functionality of the protein. The active site
of the RdRp has been shown to be more conserved among viral species,
which may facilitate the discovery of new inhibitors. On the downside,
Nis require in vivo activation, such as phosphorylation,
and must compete with high in vivo substrate concentrations.
However, since Nnis target less conserved areas of the protein, they
are more prone to the development of resistance. Some Nnis that can
interfere with the functionality of the RdRp protein are reported
below. Aurintricarboxylic acid (ATA, B) is a compound capable of interfering
with SARS-CoV-1 replication with an IC50 = 0.2 mg/mL by
direct interaction with the RdRp. ATA was previously known for its
ability to bind to several proteins including gp120 of HIV-1 and HIV-2
due to its anionic polymer characteristics. When applied to SARS-infected
cell cultures, it inhibits mRNA transcription by more than 1000-fold
with respect to control. The mechanism of action is associated with
the inhibition of RdRp by the interaction of ATA. Other examples of non-nucleoside analogue inhibitors of
RdRp protein have been reported by Dutta et al., who repurposed beclabuvir
( B) as a
SARS-CoV-2 RdRp inhibitor. Beclabuvir
is an inhibitor of HCV NSB polymerase , that was
only approved in Japan for the treatment of HCV infection as part
of a triple combination therapy designated as Xymency. The authors
of this study predicted a Ki of ∼50
nM for the binding of the compound to the protein active site. This result was achieved through docking studies
against the homology model of RdRp from SARS-CoV-2, though experimental
evidence of its effectiveness against SARS-CoV-2 still needs to be
provided. Traditional Chinese medicine may represent a source of active
compounds in the development and optimization of new active molecules
to treat SARS-CoV-1 and -2. Examples of exploitation of natural products
have been reported by Lung et al., who selected 83 molecules from
traditional Chinese medicinal compounds exhibiting antiviral activity
against SARS-CoV-1 and the corresponding compounds showing similar
chemical structures as the results of a molecular docking study targeting
RdRp of SARS-CoV-2, SARS-CoV-1, and MERS-CoV. Among these, theaflavin (ZINC3978446) ( B) can bind to the catalytic
pocket near the active site of RdRp in SARS-CoV-2, SARS-CoV-1, and
MERS-CoV. Theaflavin represents a starting point for an optimization
of medicinal chemistry program and the mechanism of action.

## Perspective and Foreseen Studies: Alliance between Drug Discovery
and Genetics
Genetics studies will improve our understanding
of the mechanisms of action of viral and host proteins and will suggest
the design of new drugs avoiding mutation-induced drug resistance
or targeting failure. While genetics is widely used for the study
of interspecies passage in coronaviruses, it is less employed for
the discovery of new therapeutic targets, , except for the invariant zone exploitation as proposed by Slanina
et al. and which are at risk of the
emergence of resistant variants. Several initiatives relied on other
genetic concepts more specifically based on synthetic lethality properties.
SLs represent pairs of gene or residues for which either mutation
is neutral, but when the double mutation occurs, the protein is inactivated
and the virus should be made unviable. Widely used to define cancer
targets, the aim is to find a gene Y
that is in a lethal synthetic relationship with gene X, whose mutation
is responsible for the disease. This gene Y is a very good target
because when it is inactivated by the attachment of a properly designed
drug molecule, in a cancer cell with a mutated gene X, the cell dies.
Inversely, its inactivation in a noncancer cell has no impact on this
cell, making it possible to target only cancer cells.
How could
we then extend these different concepts to the fight against coronaviruses?
Understanding the mutational occurrence requires knowledge about
the function of one core protein such as 3′–5′
exoribonuclease (nsp14-ExoN) allowing corrections of RNA replication
errors, so the frequency of mutation appearances per nucleotide is
reduced compared to other RNA viruses such as HIV or flu for example.
But this frequency is increased by 3-fold in the coronaviruses compared
to other viruses since their genome is on average 3 times larger than
others (27 000–32 000 nucleotides) and constitutes
the largest genome of RNA viruses. It is therefore necessary to solve
a three-variable problem which is composed of the genome size, replication
fidelity, and genome complexity. Indeed, RNA viruses must remain replicative
with a high error rate, because while some viruses reduce their genome
size (main RNA viruses), others such as coronaviruses reduce the appearance
of mutations per nucleotide to reach a similar rate of mutation occurrence
by genome. shows the mutational diversity (mutational
frequency at each amino acid position) of the SARS-CoV-2 genome as
of December 10, 2021.
 

## Targeting Invariant Areas
The appearance of mutations
thus seems to be an important advantage given to the virus, allowing
it to resist a treatment or to improve its fitness. However, the vast majority of mutations are either neutral
or deleterious: in the first case they
do not provide better fitness but are not detrimental either, while
in the latter the essential functions that make the virus nonreplicative
are hampered. The positions at which
mutations are so deleterious that the virus becomes nonreplicative
are called invariant positions. There is therefore a low percentage
of positive mutations. A balance has to be achieved between positive
and deleterious mutations since large numbers of deleterious mutations
would make the virus nonreplicative. The genetic study of these deleterious
mutations makes it possible to define new therapeutic targets that
will block an essential function, which will therefore be important
to drastically reduce fitness, while avoiding viral escape. A bioinformatic study on the SARS-CoV-2 genome
shows a particularly well conserved region, namely, KRSFIEDLLFNKV,
that is located around one of the known cleavage sites of the SARS
virus predictively required for virus activation for cell entry. This
sequence could be used to make a synthetic peptide to constitute a
future vaccine. Another region of the
S protein in MERS-CoV or SARS-CoV is also highly conserved and therefore
can constitute the sequence of a future synthetic peptide to produce
a vaccine. − Huber et al. were interested in the
viral RNA rather than the proteins encoded by it, as a target for
new therapeutic targets. The study identified a few conserved regions,
one of which has partial homology with the avian flu virus.
The barriers to using invariant regions in defining therapeutic targets
are of three types:
1.There are not enough invariant positions
to define a therapeutic
target, which must be close positions in space and on the surface
of the protein.
2.The position seems invariant but the whole
possible mutational
space of the virus has not been explored, so it may still mutate,
especially if a selection force is imposed.
3. It cannot be
mutated alone, but the function can be recovered
by mutating one or more other positions (case of compensatory mutations).
 shows
the accumulation of mutations which allows the construction of the
phylogenetic tree of the different variants. B shows the special case of the Omicron
variant. Here we see that the Omicron variant started to emerge after
accumulating mutations for 1 year (green box). Then we see that the
population grows by enriching itself with new mutations that should
improve its overall fitness (blue box). This accumulation of mutations
can exemplify the second case described above.
 

## Intragenic Synthetic Lethality
As discussed above,
the high mutability rate of RNA viruses makes it difficult to find
conserved regions, whether they consist of residues distributed sequentially
on the primary sequence (future synthetic peptide for a vaccine) or
close in space to define a new possible future therapeutic target
pocket. Previous studies on HIV used intragenic SL to enrich these
areas of invariance and show that they could constitute new therapeutic
targets avoiding escape. These zones
can be defined from a sequence alignment of the protein to be targeted
through a detailed study of the possible mutations (Vanet patent).
After determination of invariant positions and pairs of coevolved
residues, these can be classified either as the synthetic lethal (SL)
or as the compensatory mutation (CM). Although these two kinds of
position pairs appear as a result of coevolution, the causes of their
appearance are quite opposite. In fact, a compensatory mutation allows
the recovery of a function that disappeared due to a previous mutation.
The emergence of compensatory mutations increases the variability
of the genome. The cause of the appearance of SL pairs is of a completely
different order: the two mutations that make up a pair of SLs are
separately silent and only become lethal if they occur simultaneously.
In genetic terms, they could be assimilated to an invariant pair,
but mutating them individually does not result in a lethal phenotype.
It is therefore the SL pairs we are interested in, if we wish to describe
a target with increased global invariance. The invariant positions
added of SL pairs constituting potential targets can be visualized
on the protein 3D structure to identify those accessible on the surface.
Finally, using pocket definition software packages, one can restrict
the investigation to the solvent-exposed patches of residues most
prone to bind small molecules.
This method was applied to different
proteins of HIV-1, such as the protease, in which one of the two targets
detected is lining a pocket necessary for the opening of the enzyme
flaps. This mechanism is necessary for the peptide substrate to be
correctly positioned in the active site. If the movement of these
flaps is constrained by a small drug molecule, proteolysis is impaired,
and the virus is inactivated.
The same approach applied to influenza
allowed the discovery of
three new targets. , One of them is located in a
loop involved in the spring-loaded mechanism. When the virus enters
the endosome, the acidic pH induces a conformational change called
the “spring mechanism” which rearranges the main loop
into a linear α-helix allowing the fusion peptide to access
the endosome membrane. As this mechanism initiates membrane fusion,
allowing the integration of the viral genome into the host cell, blocking
it with a small molecule, prevents viral infection. These newly defined
targets may not be in the catalytic pocket of an enzyme, since allosteric
sites often exert essential functions for viral replication. For example,
the pocket described above, located under the flaps of the HIV protease,
is not part of the major catalytic site that allows proteolysis but
still blocks a function that is essential to the pathogenicity of
the virus. Once these targets have been identified, the main task
remains to design small molecules that could fit the pockets by molecular
dynamics methods. 

## Extended Intragenic SL Strategy
Since synthetic lethal
pair is defined by two positions whose simultaneous mutation only
becomes lethal, intragenic SL strategy restricts these mutations to
the same protein. Conversely, in the extended SL strategy, mutations
are in two different proteins of the genome. This strategy can be
used if two proteins carry a common function, as in the case of components
of a protein complex, or if one of them is a substrate for the other.
In either case, a drug located at the interface of both proteins could
block their shared function.
In the case of the SARS-CoV-2 virus,
Mpro is most closely linked to the other viral proteins
whose maturation requires proteolysis. Thus, we could prevent an essential
function, by blocking the link between Mpro and one of
these viral protein substrates. By defining
the SL pairs, one can design a small molecule targeting both proteins
at the same time, so this extended strategy reduces the chances for
the virus of escaping.

## Intergenic Synthetic Lethality
Viral proteins also
have multiple links to infected host proteins, so we can use intergenic SL to block viral development.
In fact, the virus can only replicate by infecting a cell by hijacking
a number of cellular mechanisms that are essential for its function.
The host genes encoding for the proteins involved in these processes
and known as host-dependent factors are good therapeutic targets and
have the main advantage of being insensitive to direct viral resistance
mutations. This is the case of some proteins in the immune system, which cannot be targeted directly as their
function is essential to the host and its loss would lead to strong
side effects. Basler et al. propose
to directly target the interfaces generated between these proteins
and those of the virus to prevent viral replication. To avoid depriving
the host of essential functions, one could target processes that are
only triggered in the infected cells. In eukaryotic cells, many functions
are redundant to avoid the catastrophic effect of a mutation affecting
an essential function carried out by a single protein. These redundancies,
when viral development depends on them, also keep the cell alive long
enough to produce new virions. They can thus be targeted because two
proteins share an SL relationship. In fact, if a virus blocks a host
protein function, purposely designed drug molecules can simultaneously
block the functionally redundant protein. This abolishes the function
guaranteed by the two related host proteins only in infected cells,
while the uninfected ones will still be able to use the redundant
protein not targeted by the drug. Mast proposed several avenues using this strategy such as trying to block
the virus-induced adaptive network states, the virus-mediated protein–protein
interactions, or communal pathways. A general study on the possible
host cell genes implicated in an SL intergenic relationship allowed
discovery of 26 possible targeted genes, the most promising of which are the following: VKORC1, an anticoagulant
that binds to ORF7a of SARS-CoV-2 , and targeted
by warfarin; MED8, a gene required for
the activation of transcription; translation
initiation factor 4G (EIF4G), known for its role in cell growth, proliferation,
and differentiation. 
Once one
of these three genes is knocked out in the infected cells, the cellular
multiplication rate decreases, whereas no change is observed in noninfected
cells. Drugs targeting one of these proteins would hence prevent the
viral development, since uninfected cells could still survive upon
drug administration. Interestingly, EIF4G, was pinpointed by Mast as a possible target for another pathogen, the
coxsackievirus, whose protease cleaves EIF4G and the poly-A binding
protein. 
The strength of the SL
strategy is to identify invariant regions/residues
of viral proteins that may constitute innovative target areas for
the design of new long-lasting inhibitors against coronaviruses (and
other RNA viruses) by limiting their potential for therapeutic escape
( ). Accordingly,
the proposed molecules have the potential to block viral replication,
binding the invariant zones of the target viral proteins. In addition,
they can counteract drug selective pressure by positively selecting
mutants of the target residues insensitive to the treatment, but losing
virus replicative capacity, ensuring the drug efficacy over time.
 

## Perspective
Although the development of vaccines and
efforts paid for global
vaccination campaigns have helped to contain SARS-CoV-2 spread and
limited the impact risk factors to the development of severe COVID-19
disease, the progress in small-molecule drug discovery may also contribute
to disease management. The initial identification of effective medications
was mainly focused on repurposing agents with demonstrated activity
against SARS-CoV-1, MERS-CoV, or correlated RNA viruses. Despite the
intense efforts made to support this primary initiative, a very limited
number of drugs were marketed.
Compounds targeting RdRp and
Mpro enzymes, the most
investigated targets since the first coronavirus outbreak in 2002,
led the way in antiviral research by virtue of their specific domains
and the lack of counterparts in human cells, which would ensure reduced
risks of off-target adverse events. Against these targets remdesivir,
molnupiravir, and nirmatrelvir–ritonavir have received Emergency
Use Authorizations (EUAs), demonstrating efficacy and safety in the
human challenge models.
As an antiviral drug may lose its effectiveness
owing to virus
resistance, improvement is still possible and the potential pan-coronavirus
activity of these first-in-class therapeutics in cellular and animal
models must be confirmed in humans.
The drug resistance phenomenon
globally causes great concern: WHO
and its international network of experts are monitoring changes to
SARS-CoV-2 to understand how they may impact its properties, such
as transmissibility and severity. The identification of amino acid
changes in resistant mutants is an acknowledged stage in the mechanistic
elucidation of any antiviral drugs. Despite the hundreds of mutations
naturally occurring or induced by vaccines identified so far, no crucial
key residues of antiviral drug targets seem to be involved, leaving
SARS-CoV-2 mutants still sensitive to promising experimental or currently
deployed therapies. Conceivably, the acute nature of SARS-CoV-2 infection
requiring a short time course of antiviral therapy (such as for remdesivir
compared to HCV and HIV infections) may undermine the role played
by resistance to therapy; that remains a matter of some debate.
Understanding the mechanism behind the target structural basis
(viral and host factors) and the related biological significance to
virus replication is essential for the development of better targeted
therapies, in the context of the ongoing epidemic of COVID-19 and/or
future outbreaks of other coronaviruses.
A strong support to
drug discovery may derive from genetics that
improves our knowledge on the mechanisms of action of the viral and
host proteins and provides a direction for the design of innovative
drugs. These new compounds can avoid mutation-induced drug resistance
or targeting failure, by preserving inhibitory activity against wild-type
as well as evolutionary mutated strains. To this aim the search for
intragenic synthetic lethality could be applied to SARS-CoV-2 proteins
which accumulated mutations such as Rpdp, Rpdp accessory proteins,
nsp5 main protease, and the S protein. All of them play crucial roles
in the replication cycle of this virus, and intragenic synthetic lethality
can be exploited against pockets carrying out essential functions.
To increase the impact on other circulating and possible future
coronaviruses, a comprehensive work could take into account similar
viruses such as SARS-CoV-1 and MERS-CoV. Several databases such as
ViPR and GISAID store tens of thousands of coronavirus sequences which
could be used for this work. Two different approaches should thus
be considered: SL strategies can be applied separately to proteins
of each single virus. Otherwise, sequences of all equivalent proteins
from different viruses could be aligned together to identify multivirus
SLs. Should the two strategies yield the same result, that will greatly
reinforce the fact that the identified targets are important for all
the viruses considered. Thus, a single drug molecule could be administered
regardless of the epidemic, SARS-CoV-1, MERS-CoV, or SARS-CoV-2, and
should be considered as the leading molecule if a new epidemic, arising
from the emergence of a new coronavirus, was to occur.
In addition,
novel strategies allowing work on the sequence/structure
alignment of several proteins could be considered. Intergenic SLs
have worked in the identification of new types of anticancer molecules.
The same can be applied to the discovery of new antiviral therapies
targeting pairs of proteins belonging to the host and the virus working
in conjunction. Functional or structural links between proteins are
indeed very good new therapeutic hot spots that can be identified
by computers.
Innovative drug discovery programs should envisage
antiviral screening
plans including highly pathogenic coronaviruses (SARS-CoV-1, MERS-CoV,
and SARS-CoV-2), endemic representative CoVs, and pre-emergent CoVs
isolated from intermediate reservoir hosts (BatCoVs) that may continue
to spill over into human populations, leaving global public health
vulnerable to future sanitary emergencies. In a One Health perspective
the genetic studies of multiple organisms should be applied and biologically
validated to translate a genetic isolated concept in a genetic alliance
with drug discovery approaches. Nonetheless, greater efforts should
be devoted to building up adequate animal models (small animal models
and nonhuman primate models) capable of recapitulating clinical signs
in humans that will benefit the progress of a drug discovery pipeline
toward the development of an effective and long-lasting therapy.

## Glossary

## Abbreviations Used
3CLpro3C-like protease
6-HBsix helix bundle
ADMEabsorption, distribution,
metabolism, and excretion
AIVavian influenza A virus
ATAaurintricarboxylic acid
CC5050% cytotoxic concentration
CDcircular dichroism
CHRC-terminal heptad
repeat
CMcompensatory
mutation
CoVcoronavirus
CTSBcathepsin B
CTSLcathepsin L
dNHBEdifferentiated
normal human bronchial epithelial cells—EpiAirway
EC5050% effective
concentration
EVenterovirus
FPfusion peptide
GBA4-guanidinobenzoic acid
GBPA4-(4-guanidinobenzoyloxy)phenylacetic acid
HAThistone acetyl transferase
HDAC2histone deacetylase
2
HRheptad repeat
HTShigh-throughput
screening
LLElipophilic
ligand efficiency
MDmolecular dynamics
Mpromain protease
NHRN-terminal heptad repeat
NiRANnidovirus RdRp-associated nucleotidyl
transferase
Nisnucleoside analogue inhibitors
NNisnon-nucleoside analogue inhibitors
nspnonstructural protein
NTPnucleoside triphosphate
ORFopen reading frame
PEGpolyethylene glycol
P-gpP-glycoprotein
PIKFYVEFYVE finger-containing
phosphoinositide kinase
PKpharmacokinetics
PsVpseudovirus
RBDreceptor binding domain
RdRpRNA-dependent RNA polymerase
RDVremdesivir
SLsynthetic lethal
SPRsurface plasmon resonance
TMtransmembrane
TMPRSS2transmembrane serine protease,
type 2
TRMT1tRNA
methyltransferase 1
USPubiquitin specific protease
VOCvariant of concern

## Biographies
Cecilia Pozzi got her Ph.D. in Chemical
Sciences at
the University of Siena (UniSI) in 2010. Afterward, she received research
and postdoc fellows at UniSI, where she became Assistant Professor
in 2016. Since 2019, Prof. Pozzi has held the position of Associate
Professor of General and Inorganic Chemistry in the Department of
Biotechnology, Chemistry and Pharmacy, UniSI. She has 15 years of
experience in the field of structural biology, and she has been part
of several national and international projects focused on various
topics including cancer, parasitic and bacterial diseases, and neurodegenerative
pathologies. Her efforts in the structural biology field are evidenced
by the significant number of crystal structures she has coauthored,
deposited in the Protein Data Bank (PDB).

Anne Vanet, Full Professor at Université Paris
Cité, is in charge of the Genoinformatics epole at the Institut
Jacques Monod. She has been working for more than 20 years on RNA
viruses, exploring both the fundamental genetics of their genome and
their great mutability. Thus, through work in computational biology,
genetics, and drug design, she has been able to describe new therapeutic
targets that make it possible to circumvent the therapeutic escape
phenomena of HIV-1 (protease and reverse transcriptase) and influenza
(hemagglutinin). Today, she and her team are trying to apply the same
methods to define targets against SARS-CoV-2.

Valeria Francesconi received her Ph.D. in pharmaceutical
chemistry and technology (curriculum medicinal chemistry) at the University
of Genoa in 2020, under the supervision of Prof. Michele Tonelli.
Her research activity focused on the development of novel antiviral
molecules directed toward different RNA viruses. During her Ph.D.,
she also spent a research period at the University of Barcelona, under
the supervision of Prof. Santiago Vázquez. Since 2019, she
has held a postdoctoral fellowship at the Department of Pharmacy,
University of Genoa, under the supervision of Prof. Silvia Schenone,
working on the synthesis of antitumor agents conjugated with nuclear
imaging probes for the treatment of glioblastoma.

Lorenzo Tagliazucchi got his M.S. degree
in medicinal
chemistry in 2019 with a thesis in toxicological chemistry at the
Minister of Agricultural, Food and Forestry Policies under the supervision
of Dr. M. Fidani. In 2019, he started working in the Drug Discovery
and Biotechnology Laboratory at the University of Modena and Reggio
Emilia, under the supervision of Prof. M. P. Costi. He is currently
a Ph.D. student in the Clinical and Experimental Medicine School at
the University of Modena and Reggio Emilia, where he is investigating
the activity of small protein inhibitors with anticancer and antiparasitic
properties in the Hippo pathway and the folate cycle. He is expert
in the fields of bioanalytical chemistry and biophysics applied to
the characterization of engineered macromolecules and protein–protein
interaction systems.

Giusy Tassone has been a junior researcher (tenure
track) in the Department of Biotechnology, Chemistry and Pharmacy,
UniSI, since November 2021. She received her Ph.D. in Chemical and
Pharmaceutical Sciences in 2019. Her research interests include the
production, purification, crystallization, and determination of the
crystallographic structures of biological macromolecules and their
modulation through the development of inhibitors and regulators. The
main biological targets, responsible for several harmful human diseases,
are metalloenzymes involved in neurodegenerative diseases, regulatory
proteins and enzymes implicated in cancer, and enzymes and metalloenzymes
that play a key role in drug resistance to antibiotics and rhodopsin-mimetic
photoactive systems.

Alberto Venturelli has been a tenure-track Assistant
Professor in Medicinal Chemistry, Department of Life Sciences, University
of Modena and Reggio Emilia, since 2020. He received his Ph.D. in
medicinal chemistry in 2004. His research interests include the interaction
between small ligands and macromolecules involved in cell hyperproliferation
processes associated with diseases such as tumors and bacterial and
parasitic infections. He has been working for more than 20 years with
aspects related to the chemical synthesis and chemical characterization
of small ligands within the hit-to-lead and lead-optimization drug
discovery programs. Being able to work within a highly qualified team
of multidisciplinary experts, he acquired knowledge concerning the
entire drug discovery process.

Francesca
Spyrakis is Full Professor of Medicinal
Chemistry in the Department of Drug Science and Technology of the
University of Turin. She works in the field of in silico drug design and discovery, applying and developing new methodologies
for the identification of biologically active small molecules. Her
research is mainly focused on the identification of new treatments
and strategies to counteract antimicrobial resistance and to inhibit
the neuroinflammation induced by COVID-19 in the long term. She is
the author of more than 100 contributions in international journals
and books.

Marco Mazzorana is a Beamline Scientist in the Macromolecular
Crystallography group at Diamond Light Source Ltd. (Didcot, U.K.).
Following his degree in chemistry and Ph.D. in biochemistry and biophyisics
at the University of Padua, he joined the National Spanish Cancer
Research Centre (CNIO, Madrid) and moved to Oxford in 2011. His research
interests are focused on the atomic resolution structural investigation
of biological systems. He has wide experience in structure-based drug
discovery and membrane proteins and uses a multitechnique approach
to investigate ligand binding, stability, folding, and complex formation.
He is actively developing methods to perform high-throughput crystallographic
data collection and time-resolved studies of reaction mechanisms in
medically and technologically relevant enzymes.

Maria P. Costi is Full Professor and the Leader of
the Drug Discovery and Biotechnology Lab at the University of Modena
and Reggio Emilia. Her expertise is in the field of medicinal chemistry
and chemical biology applications (proteomics, functional/structural
validation technologies). Topics of her international collaborative
research work are related to folate dependent enzymes in cancer and
parasitic diseases and the Hippo pathway. She has contributed to about
175 papers and book chapters in international publications and 18
patents. She is a member of the MITO oncology group, translational
science, and other networks and foundation (Paul Erlich Network, ESF).
She is the coordinator of several collaborative projects such as European
projects, AIRC funded projects, and COST Action, more recently.

Michele Tonelli is Associate
Professor of Medicinal
Chemistry at the Department of Pharmacy, University of Genoa. He received
his Ph.D. in medicinal chemistry in 2007. For over 15 years he has
gained experience in the synthesis of heterocyclic compounds endowed
with different biological activities. His main research interests
are in the field of antiviral (virus-directed and host-directed),
antiprotozoal, and anticancer agents. He is also working on the development
of TAAR1 ligands and on MTDLs for Alzheimer’s disease. He collaborates
with several national and international research groups.

## Author Contributions
C. Pozzi and
A. Vanet contributed equally. The manuscript was written through contributions
of all authors. All authors have given approval to the final version
of the manuscript.

The authors
declare no competing financial interest.

## References