pmcCell Mol Gastroenterol HepatolCell Mol Gastroenterol Hepatol3079cmghCellular and Molecular Gastroenterology and Hepatology2352-345XElsevierPMC13123614PMC13123614.113123614131236144172285410.1016/j.jcmgh.2026.101755S2352-345X(26)00033-01017551Original ResearchGlial Connexin-43 Is a Pathogenic Mechanism Promoting Gut Inflammation in Postoperative Ileus Induced by Gut Surgical Manipulation With Potential Relevance to Humans
ChaudhuriSamhita SchneiderReiner PavlovDmitrii AlarconAlix Zuleta MazzottaElvio McClainJonathon L. LevenPatrick FaddaPaolo SteffenManekeller DuYunpeng HarzmanAlan GulbransenBrian D. WehnerSven ChristofiFievos L.fedias.christofi@osumc.edu 1Department of Anesthesiology, Wexner Medical Center, The Ohio State University, Columbus, Ohio2Department of Surgery, University Clinics of Bonn, Bonn, Germany3Department of Physiology, Michigan State University, East Lansing, Michigan4Comprehensive Cancer Center, Genomics Shared Resource, The Ohio State University, Columbus, Ohio∗Correspondence Address correspondence to: Fievos L. Christofi, PhD, AGAF, Tenured Professor and Vice Chair of Research, Department of Anesthesiology, Adjunct Professor of Physiology and Cell Biology, The Ohio State University Wexner Medical Center (OSUWMC), 216 Tzagournis Medical Research Facility, 420 West 12th Avenue, Columbus, Ohio 43210. fedias.christofi@osumc.edu∗Authors share co-first authorship.
§Authors share co-senior authorship.
2026202202620751196910175520920241022026200220262904202617062026© 2026 The Authors2026https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/).Ungluing the Mystery of Postoperative Ileus: Enteric Glial Connexin 43 Promotes the Development of Inflammation
207232026101761Cellular and Molecular Gastroenterology and Hepatology10.1016/j.jcmgh.2026.101761PMC1327103241780881

## Background & Aims
Abdominal surgery often precipitates postoperative ileus (POI), a frequent and severe gastrointestinal (GI) motility disorder, through mechanisms that involve intestinal inflammation. Emerging data show that enteric glia acquire a reactive phenotype that aggravates POI, but how glia exert this effect remains unclear. Enteric glia express connexin-43 hemichannels (gCx43), which are implicated in neurological and inflammatory disorders. Thus, we aimed to decipher contributions of glial connexin-43 (Cx43) in the pathophysiology of POI.

## Methods
We induced POI in mice using in vivo intestinal manipulation and used glial Cx43cKO (Sox10CreERT2;Cx43fl/fl) or RiboTag (Sox10CreERT2/Rpl22HA/+) mice to evaluate Cx43-dependent signaling. Human enteric glial cultures (hEGC) and muscularis externa obtained during intestinal surgery translated findings to patients. Transcriptome analysis, immunofluorescence co-labeling, Western blots, and Cx43 hemichannel activation were used for quantitative analysis.

## Results
Cx43 is the highest expressed connexin in enteric glia in mice and humans. Up-regulation of Cx43 occurs in various disease models linked to POI, GI surgical trauma, inflammation, immune cell activation, and enteric gliosis. In the mouse POI model, glial Cx43-deletion reduces glial reactivity, pro-inflammatory signals, upregulates host protection genes, regulates immune cell activation, and prevents enteric neuropathy. In hEGCs, interleukin (IL)-1β induction opens Cx43 and stimulates release of IL-6 and C-C motif ligand 2 (CCL2). The Cx43 peptide inhibitor, 43Gap26, inhibits glial Cx43 activation, reduces IL-6 release, and blocks upregulation of macrophage activation factors and immune cell regulation factors. Surgical intestinal trauma in patients upregulates Cx43 during inflammation and enteric gliosis in mouse POI.

## Conclusions
Glial Cx43 signaling promotes enteric gliosis, immune cell activation, inflammation, and enteric neuropathy in mice with potential translatability to humans after intestinal surgical trauma and mechanical stress in POI. Interventions that block glial Cx43 activation may be protective against POI development.

## Graphical abstract
 

## Keywords
Cx43 HemichannelsCx43 Gap JunctionsHuman In Vitro StudiesIntestinal InflammationMechanical StressPostoperative IleusReactive Enteric GliaSurgical Traumapmc-status-qastatus0pmc-status-liveyespmc-status-embargonopmc-status-releasedyespmc-prop-open-accessyespmc-prop-olfnopmc-prop-manuscriptnopmc-prop-legally-suppressednopmc-prop-has-pdfyespmc-prop-has-supplementnopmc-prop-pdf-onlynopmc-prop-suppress-copyrightnopmc-prop-is-real-versionnopmc-prop-is-scanned-articlenopmc-prop-preprintnopmc-prop-in-epmcyespmc-license-refCC BY-NC-ND

## Abbreviations used in this paper
α7 nAChRα-nicotinic AChR
αSMAα-smooth muscle actin
AAALACAssociation for Assessment and Accreditation for Laboratory Care
ANOVAanalysis of variance
APE 1apurinic/apyrimidinic endonuclease 1
BSAbovine serum albumin
[Ca2+]iintracellular free Ca2+ levels
CBXcarbenoxolone
CCL2C-C motif ligand 2
cDNAcomplementary DNA
cKOconditional knockout
cRNAcomplementary RNA
CSF-1colony stimulating factor 1
Ctrlcontrol
Cx43connexin-43
DAPI4′,6-diamidino-2-phenylindole
DMEMDulbecco’s Modified Eagle’s Medium
dTTPdeoxythymidine triphosphate
dUTP2′-deoxyuridine, 5′-triphosphate
EGCenteric glial cell
ELISAenzyme-linked immunosorbent assay
ENSenteric nervous system
ERASenhanced recovery after surgery protocols
ETBRendothelin B receptors
FBSfetal bovine serum
FCfold change
FITCfluorescein isothiocyanate
GAPDHglyceraldehyde-3-phosphate dehydrogenase
gCx43KOCx43fl/fl::Sox10creERT2
GEOGene Expression Omnibus
GFAPglial fibrillary acidic protein
GFPgreen fluorescent protein
GIgastrointestinal
GJICgap junction ion channel
GOGene Ontology
HBSSHank’s Balanced Salt Solution
hEGChuman enteric glial cell
IACUCInstitutional Animal Care and Use Committee
IBDinflammatory bowel disease
ILinterleukin
IMintestinal manipulation
IVTin vitro transcription
KOknockout
LMlittermate control
LMMP-CMlongitudinal muscle myenteric plexus-circular muscle
LPSlipopolysaccharide
MEmuscularis externa
MPOmyeloperoxidase
mRNAmessenger RNA
MSmechanical stimulation
msPOImouse postoperative ileus model
MΦmacrophage
NDSnormal donkey serum
NKnatural killer
P1passage one
PANX1pannexin 1
PBSphosphate-buffered saline
PCAprincipal component analysis
PFAparaformaldehyde
PGE2prostaglandin E2
Plp1proteolipid protein 1
POIpostoperative ileus
PVDFpolyvinylidene fluoride
QCquality control
qPCRquantitative polymerase chain reaction
RCCReporter Code Count
RiboTagSox10CreERT2/Rpl22HA/+
RINRNA integrity number
RNA-seqRNA sequencing
ROIregion of interest
S100βS100 calcium-binding protein B
SACstretch-activated channel
SDSsodium dodecyl sulfate
SEMstandard error of the mean
SPFspecific pathogen-free
TBSTTris-buffered saline with Tween-20
TdTterminal deoxynucleotidyl transferase
TNFαtumor necrosis factor alpha
UDGuracil-DNA glycosylase
UMAPUniform Manifold Approximation and Projection
WBWestern blot
WTwild-type

## Summary
Results of this study show that enteric glia contribute to surgical stress-induced gut inflammation after in vivo mechanical stress/surgical trauma in mice and humans through signaling mediated by connexin-43. Therefore, targeting glial connexin-43 may be beneficial in treating postoperative ileus.

## What You Need to Know

## Background
Abdominal surgery often precipitates postoperative ileus (POI), a severe motility disorder involving pro-inflammatory mechanisms. Enteric glia acquire a reactive/proinflammatory phenotype that aggravates POI, but how glia exert this effect remains unclear.

## Impact
Glial connexin-43 (Cx-43) upregulation/activation is a critical mechanism in surgical trauma and mechanical stress-induced reactive gliosis, inflammation, and enteric neuropathy in POI. Glial Cx43 deficiency or pharmacologic inhibition with 43Gap26 confers protection.

## Future Directions
Findings suggest glial Cx43 is a potential therapeutic target in POI. Studies can further probe the pathogenic Cx43 mechanism, clinical relevance of glial Cx43 and Cx43-directed interventions in surgical patients.

This article has an accompanying editorial.

Abdominal surgery triggers acute intestinal inflammation within the muscularis externa (ME) that causes functional motility disturbances, clinically known as postoperative ileus (POI). Patients with POI exhibit nausea, vomiting, pain, abdominal tenderness and distention, bloating, constipation, increased inflammatory response, and a higher risk of anastomotic leakage after colorectal surgery. The absence of normal bowel sounds and/or delay in the passage of flatus and stool are some signs and symptoms associated with POI. Despite the implementation of enhanced recovery after surgery protocols (ERAS), POI remains a significant clinical problem. POI causes increased morbidity and health care costs due to extended hospitalizations and time to discharge, costing billions. , , In the United States, POI may increase hospital expenses by up to 15%, with an approximate annual cost of $1.46 billion. , 
Hallmarks of POI are ME inflammation and dysmotility. Potential pathogenic mechanisms described extensively in the literature include alterations in spinal-intestinal sympathetic neural reflexes, sympathetic hyperactivity, inflammatory mediators, opioid use, electrolyte abnormalities, and exacerbation by anesthetic or surgical techniques (eg, size of the surgical incision and gut manipulation). , , , , , More recent studies indicate that neuroinflammation involving cells of the enteric nervous system (ENS) and macrophages contributes to POI’s pathophysiology. , , , , , An emerging cellular target of considerable interest within the pool of ENS cells is enteric glial cells, which can convert to a reactive phenotype and induce enteric gliosis. Despite an increasing appreciation that a switch in glial phenotype is central to mechanisms that promote POI, , , , , , how reactive enteric glia exacerbate POI remains unclear.
Connexin hemichannels are involved in diverse cellular processes that control health and disease, including gastrointestinal (GI) inflammation. Hemichannels are formed by 6 connexin proteins that are assembled in the plasma membrane and provide a pathway for the passive flux of small and hydrophilic substances between a cell and its extracellular environment. Connexin-43 (Cx43) hemichannels are particularly notable and open in response to inflammation, mechanical stress, lipopolysaccharide (LPS), or other stressors to induce the release of mediators from cells (ATP, glutamate, prostaglandins, etc) that exacerbate inflammation, cell death, and dysfunction. , Therefore, Cx43 hemichannels are implicated in the pathogenic mechanism of multiple diseases. , , , , 
Enteric glia express Cx43 hemichannels and utilize Cx43 in mechanisms of intercellular communication that regulate gut motility. Glial Cx43 signaling also contributes to pathophysiological contexts and mediates neuron death in colitis by regulating glial ATP release and visceral hypersensitivity following chronic colitis through a mechanism involving macrophage activation and colony stimulating factor 1 (CSF-1). Inflammation also potentiates enteric glial Cx43 function and contributes to visceral hypersensitivity by regulating glial prostaglandin E2 (PGE2) release following inflammation. Although the role of Cx43-dependent and immune-modulatory mechanisms operating during acute inflammation associated with POI remains unknown, the perfect environment exists during abdominal surgical procedures to activate glial Cx43 hemichannels. Here, surgical trauma, acute ME inflammation, mechanical stress from gut in vivo manipulation during the surgical procedure, fluid edema, and high-pressure pneumoperitoneum in surgery are all potential triggers for glial Cx43 signaling.
Our goal was to investigate the effect of intestinal surgical manipulation on glial Cx43-dependent signaling in mice and humans. Specifically, we sought to determine the role, expression, and dysregulation of glial Cx43 in intestinal inflammation using a mouse POI model of acute inflammation induced by gut in vivo intestinal manipulation (“mechanical stress”). An in vitro model of primary human enteric glial cells (hEGCs) induced by interleukin (IL)-1β; a known pathogenic mechanism of POI) and ME samples obtained from human abdominal surgery (pancreatectomy), with early and late sample collections for in-patient controls were used to translate findings on Cx43 signaling to humans. Human samples were used to investigate whether intestinal surgical trauma/manipulation can alter the expression of connexins and Cx43 hemichannels in the context of inflammation. Glial Cx43-dependent signaling was studied using a Cx43 peptide inhibitor 43Gap26 in hEGC induced by IL-1β, glial conditional knockout (KO) mice for Cx43 (Sox10CreERT2;Cx43fl/fl) or glial RiboTag mice (Sox10CreERT2/Rpl22HA/+) for in vivo analysis of glial connexin gene expression profiles in mouse POI. Our findings point to a critical role of glial Cx43 in promoting enteric gliosis and immune cell activation in mouse POI, reactive human enteric glia, and surgical trauma in human GI surgical operations. Data suggest gCx43 activation is a pathogenic mechanism of enteric gliosis and glial reactivity induced by mechanical stress in mouse POI, with translatability to gut surgical trauma in humans and therapeutic implications for GI motility disorders.

## Results

## Glial Connexin Expression in Mouse RiboTag-glia, hEGC, and Glia in Intact Human Myenteric Ganglia
RiboTag mice (Sox10CreERT2/Rpl22HA/+) were used to analyze in vivo changes in glial mRNA expression profiles of connexins and pannexins after intestinal manipulation in a mouse POI model by immunoprecipitation of glial mRNA-tagged Rpl22-HA ( A, scheme of protocol used). A custom panel of 133 genes was used to analyze glial messenger RNA (mRNA) levels by nanostring as described previously. Box plots show that glial genes such as Gfap, Nes, Entpd2, s100β, Sox10, and Gdnf exhibit the highest relative mRNA expression in the custom panel ( B). Cx43 and Cx45 are the highest expressed connexins in glia ( C) (1-way analysis of variance [ANOVA]; P < .001; Tukey test, Cx45 or Cx43 vs others; P < .0001; n = 4 animals/group); and a similar profile is observed in samples of ME ( D) (1-way ANOVA; P < .0001; Cx43 vs others; P < .001). Cx43 is the highest expressed connexin in hEGC (P < .0001) ( E). However, other connexins (Cx43, Cx45) and pannexin 1 (Panx1) are also highly expressed in hEGC. Immunolabeling data show that Cx43 immunoreactivity is coexpressed exclusively in s100β+ enteric glial cells in intact samples of myenteric plexus in human jejunum surgical specimens ( F). 

## Cx43-Dependent Signaling in Mouse POI
Enteric gliosis, inflammation, and immune cell activation are hallmarks of mouse POI induced by in vivo intestinal manipulation and mechanical stress. , , Myeloperoxidase (MPO) levels show pronounced neutrophil infiltration in samples from mice at 24 hours after intestinal manipulation [IM] (littermate [LM] control [Ctrl] mice, 14.18 ± 7.98 cells/mm2 vs IM 24-hour, 608.12 ± 47.69 cells/mm2; P < .0001). Likewise, fluorescein isothiocyanate (FITC) dextran small intestinal transit demonstrates a significant reduction in GI transit from 11.3 ± 0.53 in Ctrl mice to 2.82 ± 0.17 after IM 24-hour; P < .0001; N = 8 mice/group).
Cx43 hemichannels open in response to inflammation and mechanical stress to exacerbate inflammation, dysfunction, and cell death. , Additionally, Cx43 hemichannels are implicated in the pathogenic mechanism of multiple diseases. , , , , To evaluate Cx43-dependent signaling in mouse POI, we began by examining the expression of Cx43 in the mouse POI model (msPOI). Cx43 expression was sensitive to in vivo intestinal manipulation, and was highly upregulated in POI (IM 24-hour; P < .0001) ( A and B), indicating it is sensitive to in vivo intestinal mechanical stress. 
Given a strong induction of Cx43 in POI, we next studied Cx43-dependent hemichannel signaling in the msPOI model induced by mechanical stress by using glial-specific Cx43 conditional knockout (cKO) mice (Sox10CreERT2/Cx43fl/fl). We compared glial-specific Cx43 cKO mice with their LM Ctrls for no surgery, sham, and IM 24 hours after surgery. It should be noted that the KO affects both Cx43 hemichannels and gap junctions and, therefore, effects cannot distinguish between each in this type of analysis.

## Enteric gliosis
Enteric glial reactivity was evaluated by determining the expression of specific markers for reactive glia and enteric gliosis, including the expression of glial fibrillary acidic protein (GFAP), , S100 calcium-binding protein B (s100β), and endothelin B receptors (ETBRs). Tamoxifen-induced deletion of the gene encoding glial Cx43 (Gja1) in gCx43c KO mice (Sox10CreERT2/Cx43fl/fl) (see C) protects against upregulation of GFAP-immunoreactivity in msPOI, quantified by pixel intensity in z-stacks generated by laser scanning microscopy. IM-induced upregulation of GFAP is prevented in gCx43 KO mice, as shown in D and E. Western blot analysis confirmed findings with immunofluorescence for GFAP, showing that deletion of the gene encoding gCx43 protects against upregulation of GFAP expression ( F and G). Glial Cx43 KO also prevents upregulation of glial s100β ( H) and ETBR ( I) in msPOI. In summary, IM induces a reactive enteric glial phenotype associated with the upregulation of proinflammatory signals, and the effect is blocked in gCx43 KO mice. In contrast, the smooth muscle protein α-smooth muscle actin (αSMA) is further upregulated by deletion of Cx43 ( J).

## Bulk RNAseq transcriptome analysis reveals that glial Cx43 knockout protects against inflammation in mouse POI induced by in vivo mechanical stress
Transcriptome analysis using bulk RNA sequencing in 6 groups of animals (LM Ctrl, LM Sham, LM IM, gCx43 KO Ctrl, gCx43KO Sham, gCx43 KO IM; N = 5 mice/group) was used to determine global changes in gene expression profiles in ME preparations after IM or glial Cx43 KO. As shown in A, IM provokes strong induction of canonical inflammatory cytokines (Il1b, Il6, Tnf, Il18, etc), upstream innate-immune sensors and signaling mediators (Ptgs2, Nfkb1), chemokines and chemokine receptors (Ccl3, Ccl4, Ccl5, Ccl7, Cxcl1, Cxcl2, Cxcl3, Cxcl10, Cxcr2), adhesion and leukocyte-recruitment markers (Selp), neutrophil-associated alarmins (S100a9), and damage-associated inflammatory mediators (Hmox1, Hmgb1, Cybb). Other changes include pattern-recognition receptors (Tlr2, Tlr6), intracellular signaling regulators (Stat3, Mapk8), lipid and complement-related innate pathways (Fpr2, C5ar1), and amplifiers of myeloid activation (Trem1, Tyrobp). Upregulation of effector caspases (Casp3, Casp6, Casp8, Casp9), immune-modulating metabolic genes (Nampt), complement component C1qa, and regulatory genes such as Hdac3 and Hdac7 further reflects a comprehensive inflammatory activation state after IM. Glial Cx43 KO prevents upregulation of proinflammatory signaling pathways activated by IM in mouse POI. 
KO effectively suppresses activation of resident macrophages and other immune cells in ME, as indicated by cell type-specific markers ( B). For example, neutrophils are identified by their expression profile, including Mpo, Fcgr3, Ceacam8, and Fut4. KO protects against neutrophil infiltration and activation. Similarly, monocytes, T cells, B cells, mast cells, and natural killer cells were also regulated, confirming the protective effect of gCx43 KO in POI.
Glial Cx43 prevents enteric neuropathy induced by IM KO ( C). IM produces transcriptional signatures of neuronal injury in control mice, including downregulation of related synaptic and neuropeptide-related genes. Neuronal remodeling shown by upregulation of genes such as Chrm2 and Cyt12 is nearly suppressed by KO. Upregulation of genes involved in synaptic transmission, such as Nrp1 and Gap43, is effectively suppressed by KO. Expression of neurotransmitter genes reveals that glial Cx43 KO protects against dysregulation of genes involved in excitatory cholinergic transmission, inhibitory nitrergic transmission, GABA-ergic transmission, somatostatin signaling, sensory signaling, and glutamatergic signaling. Overall, glial Cx43 KO is protective against enteric neuropathy.
IM causes enteric glial cell activation, as shown by upregulation of selected genes such as Gfap, S100b, Sox10, and Ednrb, etc. In gCx43 KO mice, this IM-evoked glial activation is abolished, demonstrating that glial Cx43 is required for the full transcriptional enteric glial cell (EGC)-reactive state during POI. Notably, proteolipid protein 1 (Plp1) is not altered by IM or KO, and this is to be expected because Plp1 is stably expressed in enteric glia in disease states. 
Glial Cx43 KO upregulates M2-protective genes after IM ( E). For example, the vagal anti-inflammatory pathway modulates intestinal ME resident macrophages expressing α-nicotinic AChR (α7 nAChR; Chrna7) to promote motility in POI. , Chrna7 is upregulated after glial Cx43 KO. IL-10 is secreted from macrophages during POI, and it plays an important role in the disease. IL-10 acts as a macrophage deactivator in gut inflammation and promotes faster recovery from ileus. , , Glial Cx43 KO dramatically upregulates IL-10 expression by ∼8 fold, consistent with its protective role in POI. IM downregulates Mrc1 (Cd206), and its expression is restored to normal levels by glial Cx43 KO. Decreased Mrc1 expression in macrophages leads to an increase in proinflammatory markers and a decrease in anti-inflammatory markers. A shift towards a proinflammatory state may contribute to the tissue trauma and enteric neuropathy that causes gut dysmotility and POI. IL-4 is an anti-inflammatory cytokine that contributes to the resolution of gut inflammation and restoration of gut motility after surgery. IL-4 is involved in the Th2-mediated response that may potentially resolve gut dysmotility and inflammation. Thus, gCx43 KO leads to enhanced induction of these M2-associated/tissue-repair pathways after IM, suggesting that glial Cx43 deletion skews the gut immune environment toward a more normal phenotype.

## ME inflammation and immune cell activation using nanostring analysis confirms findings with bulk RNAseq analysis
In the same study with gCx43c KO mice and Cre-negative LM Ctrls, ME inflammation and immune cell activation in msPOI were evaluated using a nanostring panel, detecting 248 genes related to inflammation ( ). Data revealed Cx43-dependent regulation of mRNA gene induction in the ME of msPOI. Sham surgery (anesthesia with incision without gut manipulation) caused differential gene expression in 2.5% of genes in LM Ctrl and 5.3% in gCx43 KO mice ( A and B). Gut manipulation (IM, ‘mechanical stress’) caused gene dysregulation in 27% of genes in LM Ctrl ( C), whereas CX43 deletion in enteric glia caused gene dysregulation in 47% of genes in animals induced by gut manipulation ( D). Strikingly, upregulation of proinflammatory genes (Il-1β, Tnfα, Cxcl1, Ccl11) by gut manipulation was completely prevented by deletion of the gene encoding for Cx43 in glia ( E), indicating the central role of glial Cx43 in promoting inflammation. 
In contrast, host protection genes (II10, Ccr1, Ccr2) ( F–H), innate immune response genes (Oas1a, lifnb1, lrf7) ( I–K), or proteins expressed on immune antigen-presenting cells (ie, T-cells, dendritic cells, B lymphocytes, monocytes) such as IL-18RAP, CD40, CCL17, and C3AR1 ( L–O) were upregulated in gCx43 KO mice but not LM Ctrl mice after gut mechanical stress. Collectively, our data suggest that deleting of the gene encoding for glial Cx43 strongly affects the immune-related transcriptional profile of the postoperative ME, which might have a direct impact on postoperative inflammation and bowel function. Further studies can delineate whether all these changes are indeed protective or beneficial to the host.
IL-1β induction of reactive hEGCs was used as a human in vitro model to study Cx43-dependent signaling in the context of inflammation relevant to msPOI. A recent study demonstrated that IL-1-dependent enteric gliosis guides inflammation, dysmotility, and immune function in msPOI induced by in vivo intestinal manipulation. hEGCs were isolated and purified from surgical specimens of the jejunum from patients undergoing oncological pancreas head resection and Roux-en-Y bypass surgery. Expression of Cx43, activation of Cx43 hemichannels, and IL-1-dependent regulation of Cx43-dependent signaling were evaluated by studying expression of Cx43, gene analysis of global gene expression profiles, release of proinflammatory cytokines, and activation of Cx43 hemichannels in human enteric glia.

## IL-1β regulation and Cx43-dependent signaling in human enteric glia
As shown in A, LPS induces IL-1β release from human enteric glia (ANOVA; P < .0001). LPS (1 μg/mL) stimulation induces a >25-fold upregulation of IL-1β mRNA expression in hEGCs ( B and C) and increases IL-1R1 immunoreactivity ( D). A separate analysis with a custom panel of 133 genes confirmed that a 16-fold increase in IL1β mRNA expression also occurs in glia from RiboTag mice after IM vs sham (P < .0001; N = 4 mice each, nanostring analysis). These findings provide direct evidence for glial IL-1β production by activated enteric glia in mice (msPOI) or humans (induced by a proinflammatory stimulus). 
IL-1β stimulation induces a concentration-dependent increase in C-C motif ligand 2 (CCL2) release (EC50 = 4.6 nM) ( E) and IL-6 release (EC50 = 3.2 nM) ( F). Both baseline and IL-1β-induced IL-6 release are sensitive to blockade with the gap junction ion channel (GJIC) inhibitor carbenoxolone (CBX; 100 μM) or Cx43 mimetic peptide 43Gap26 (200 μM) ( G). This demonstrates Cx43-dependent release of the proinflammatory cytokine IL-6 in response to IL-1β induction ( H).
Western blot (WB) analysis shows IL-1β caused upregulation of Cx43 hemichannel expression in hEGCs ( I and J); cultures were incubated with IL-1β or vehicle/control for 24 hours in a 5% CO2 humidified incubator, and WB was done on cell lysates (N = 5 cultures each).

## Activation of Cx43 hemichannels by IL-1β, LPS using 4′,6-diamidino-2-phenylindole dye uptake
Activation of Cx43 hemichannels was studied in hEGCs using 4′,6-diamidino-2-phenylindole (DAPI) dye uptake and several known activators of Cx43 hemichannels ( K–M). Opening hemichannels allows DAPI uptake into the cells. DAPI uptake is stimulated by Ca2+-free Krebs buffer (with 100 μM EGTA), UTP, the P2Y4 agonist MRS4062 (2 μM, 20 μM), the bacterial toxin LPS (1 μg/mL) or IL-1β (10 ng/mL) exposure for 2 hours in the humidified incubator. Analysis of DAPI uptake in each cell for the intensity of DAPI fluorescence expressed as ΔF/Fo or numbers of DAPI+ cells/field yielded similar results for each intervention. The Cx43 hemichannel blocker 43Gap26 (200 μM) significantly blocks inflammation-induced DAPI uptake caused by IL-1β (or LPS). In contrast, the Gap26-scrambled peptide (200 μM) does not inhibit LPS-induced DAPI uptake (ΔF/Fo for LPS = 3.6 ± 0.2 and LPS + Gap26scrambled peptide = 3.3 ± 0.2; P > .05); the numbers of DAPI+ cells/field for LPS were not significantly different from Gap26scrambled vs control (54.20 ± 7.039 vs 44.20 ± 4.05; P > .05). However, additional membrane channels beyond Cx43 likely contribute to hEGC activation since 43Gap26 only partially blocked hemichannel uptake.

## Cx43-dependent regulation of IL-1β induction of gene expression in reactive hEGC
IL-1β induces a reactive hEGC phenotype ( ) as reflected by transcriptome analysis. A volcano plot shows upregulated and downregulated genes by IL-1β in hEGCs ( A). A total of 3565 of 21,448 genes in the transcriptome (16.62% of genes) were upregulated or downregulated by IL-1β induction; 1559 of 3565 dysregulated genes (43.7%) were upregulated and 2006 of 3565 genes were downregulated (56.3%) (see B). A heatmap of the top 50 genes upregulated by IL-1β is shown in C, and fold changes (FCs) in D represents inflammatory and immune cell regulation genes. The quantitative data analyzed by Affymetrix software for FCs are provided in D and for each gene for upregulation. Examples of highly downregulated genes by IL-1β are shown in . Examples of upregulated genes are shown in . 
Cx43-dependent regulation of IL-1β induction of a reactive human enteric glial phenotype is summarized in . The Cx43 mimetic peptide 43Gap26 (200 μM) alone influenced gene expression in 0.08% of genes, but it significantly influenced (blocked or attenuated) the effect of IL-1β in 163 of 3565 genes, representing 4.6% of genes induced by IL-1β ( A–C). The peptide inhibitor had a significant effect in preventing or attenuating the impact of IL-1β in hEGCs ( D). A Clariom S Affymetrix gene chip analysis was done in 11 to 12 jejunum samples collected from 3 Roux-en-Y surgical patients for Ctrl (vehicle), 43Gap26 (200 μM), IL-1β (10 ng/mL) induction, IL-1β + 43Gap26 after a 24-hour incubation. Note that the histograms shown do not include the data for 43Gap26 alone because it did not have any effect ( A). 

## In human GI surgical patients, surgical stress induces upregulation of Cx43, other connexins and pannexins, inflammatory genes, and enteric gliosis
The translatability of findings on Cx43 signaling from mice to human patients is essential to address potential clinical implications of Cx43 in human GI disorders. In vitro studies in human enteric glia provide some proof, but these are cultured cells isolated from human GI surgical specimens that may not represent an ideal human model. Therefore, we further tested in human GI surgical patients whether surgical stress (mechanical stress and surgical trauma) regulates Cx43 and other connexins in the small bowel in the context of inflammation (estimated in each patient by collecting gut samples early and late during a pancreatectomy), which is linked to POI. Each patient serves as their own control, and the expectation was that samples taken late in the surgery would have higher expression of Cx43 (or other mediators), as in mouse POI (see , , , , ).
In this regard, we further characterized the role of connexins in intestinal inflammation and made use of patient samples from a pancreatectomy. This procedure allows us to collect 2 jejunal gut samples during the surgery at an early and late stage ( A). In this way, we are able to investigate the effect of surgical trauma during surgery on the intestine by validating all measured changes in the late samples, always with the early ones. Thus, all patient samples had their internal baseline control for the analyses. This human model can mimic similar molecular changes as seen in the previously discussed msPOI model. Immunohistochemical analyses of the collected samples confirmed a strong expression of CX43 in enteric ganglia and possible interaction with IBA1+ macrophages ( B), indicating neuro-immune communication after surgery in patients. By performing quantitative polymerase chain reaction (qPCR) and WB analysis, we further validated the glial activation and the regulation of connexins. qPCR measurements of glial factors (NES, GDNF, GFAP, SOX10) and S100 proteins (S100B, S100A4, S100A8, S100A9, S100A14) showed a significant upregulation of these genes ( C). WB of GFAP confirmed the strong glial activation after surgery ( D and E). Next, we quantified the expression of various connexins and found a clear dysregulation in their expression profile, with CX43, CX36, CX37, and CX40 being significantly upregulated ( F). WB of Cx43 confirmed its upregulation after surgery, also at the protein level ( G and H). 
To get a broader picture of the effects on the jejunum after surgery, we applied a transcriptomic approach with a bulk RNA sequencing (RNA-seq) analysis. The principal component analysis (PCA) showed a distinct clustering between early and late samples ( A), and a volcano plot visualized 392 upregulated and 464 downregulated genes after surgical trauma ( B). Taking all significantly regulated genes, we performed Gene Ontology (GO) analyses and found enriched gene clusters connected to POI hallmarks, like cell migration, cell death ( C), and inflammation, especially the IL-1 signaling pathway ( D). A corresponding heatmap visualized the expression changes between early and late samples of inflammatory and IL-1 response genes, being in line with the GO term data ( E). 
qPCR analysis confirmed the induction of certain inflammatory mediators (CCL2, CCL5, CCL7, CCL8, CXCL1, CXCL2, and IL6) ( B) and IL-1 family members (IL1B, IL1R1, IL1RAP, IL1RL1 and IL1RN) ( C). Looking deeper in gene clusters for functional differences in the gut of surgical patients, we detected enrichments for certain ENS functions connected to neurons and glia, including apoptotic processes, activation, and neurogenesis ( E). The glial activation was confirmed by a heatmap visualization of enteric gliosis genes showing a strong upregulation in late surgical samples ( F). A heatmap representing connexins showed the same gene expression pattern in the patient samples ( G). As we already discussed the impact of enteric glial activation and its role in immune regulation during gut inflammation, we further looked into changes in gene clusters connected to immune cell function. Interestingly, heatmaps for immune cell activation genes, including macrophage activation, showed the same strong upregulation in the late samples as for the gliosis and connexins ( E). Validating mainly genes known for their expression in certain immune cell populations, we could also detect a clear induction in genes related to macrophages/monocytes, T cells, and natural killer (NK) cells, all cell types that are often discussed in context to gut inflammation ( F). 
In summary, we were able to confirm our murine data from the POI model in patient samples collected during surgery, showing enteric glia activation during gut inflammation coinciding with the upregulation of the IL-1 pathway and prominent connexins. Data on Cx43 signaling is translatable to humans with GI surgical trauma/gut manipulation. Moreover, our data show that glial Cx43 signaling is a critical determinant in enteric gliosis and glial reactivity, intestinal inflammation, and immune cell regulation in mouse POI, reactive human enteric glia, and gut surgical trauma in humans.

## Discussion
We utilized a well-established murine disease model to study the role of Cx43 in the pathogenic mechanism of POI. The potential translatability of findings from animals to humans was tested using human enteric glial networks in culture and by evaluating the impact of surgical trauma in patients undergoing GI surgical operations. Our current study provides further insights into the pathogenic mechanisms operating in enteric glia that contribute to inflammation and immune cell activation and are known to contribute to intestinal dysmotility (eg, POI). Our target of investigation was Cx43, and important interactions were identified between Cx43 signaling and IL-1β signaling in POI. Cx43 is among mice and humans’ highest expressed connexins in enteric glia. Cx43 is highly upregulated in a mouse model of POI induced by ‘mechanical stress’ (ie, intestinal manipulation), in reactive human enteric glia induced by IL-1β (or LPS), and after surgical trauma in human GI surgical procedures (ie, pancreatectomy). Our data suggest that amplification of Cx43-dependent signaling in msPOI, human reactive glia, and surgical trauma in humans during surgery is likely to represent a critical pathogenic mechanism of POI, and pharmacological block of the channel or inhibition of its activation can lead to a protective effect. Glial Cx43-deletion in tamoxifen-inducible cKO mice undergoing POI or pharmacological blockade of Cx43 by 43Gap26 provided further proof of concept.
Our working hypothesis of the glial Cx43 pathogenic proinflammatory mechanism induced by gut mechanical stress and surgical trauma is illustrated in . Cx43 is a critical determinant of glial activation and ‘reactive glia,’ enteric gliosis, inflammation, and immune cell regulation, all features of msPOI induced by ‘mechanical stress’ of gut manipulation. , Enteric gliosis markers (GFAP, s100β, ETBR proteins) are upregulated in msPOI, , , , and tamoxifen-inducible cKO mice with a glial Cx43 (Gja1) cKO showed a blockage in the upregulation of gliosis markers after IM. Therefore, these mice did not develop enteric gliosis, suggesting that Cx43 contributes to the pathogenic mechanism of POI. , , For example, the upregulation of the glial s100β protein in enteric glia is linked to a proinflammatory pathway of s100β-RAGE/iNOS signaling. ETBR protein is expressed exclusively in EGCs in the ME, and its upregulation has been linked with dysmotility in POI because ETBR is a proinflammatory signaling pathway. ETBR upregulation in POI is also blocked by Cx43 deletion. Other proinflammatory signals suppressed by deletion of glial Cx43 are tumor necrosis factor alpha (TNFα), CCL1and IL-1β, which is specifically recognized as a pathogenic mechanism in POI, , indicating a connection between Cx43 activation and gut inflammation in POI. 
The terms of “reactive glia” and “enteric gliosis” are directly connected, but they describe 2 different situations. EGCs triggered by various molecules (IL-1β, LPS, ATP, etc.) become reactive glia. This glial activation induces the release of proinflammatory cytokines and chemokines leading to enteric gliosis as shown in our mouse and human studies, where not only the EGCs are reactive, but rather the whole tissue, comprising reactive glia, becomes reactive, including immune cells, as we discussed in our recent works, , where we compared the reaction of the whole ME and only EGCs in POI.
To further clarify the role of glial Cx43 on inflammation, we carried out bulk RNAseq analysis of changes in the transcriptome with IM or gCx43 knockout on ME samples. The analysis provides solid proof that glial Cx43-dependent inflammation in POI is a pathogenic mechanism. The comprehensive RNAseq analysis summarized in , together with the rest of the data in the study, provide unequivocal proof that conditional glial Cx43 KO is protective against inflammation, enteric neuropathy, macrophage activation, enteric gliosis, immune cell infiltration, and activation, all mechanisms deemed to contribute to POI. Analysis of proinflammatory genes or genes involved in enteric neuropathy, EGC activation, immune cell activation, and infiltration (neutrophils, macrophages, T-cells, B-cells, etc), as well as M2/protective mechanisms, , the data uniformly show that KO is protective. Examples of M2 mechanisms include the vagal anti-inflammatory pathway targeting α7nAChR on macrophages, , IL-10, , , , , (although IL-10 was shown to be elevated after major abdominal surgery), Mrc1 (CD206), and IL-4. Together with all other evidence obtained in this study, we feel that data unequivocally support the conclusion that glial Cx43 is a critical determinant in the pathogenic mechanism of POI. The 2 hallmarks of the disease are inflammation and impairment of motility. Inflammation leads to impaired motility by contributing to ENS/enteric neuropathy (due to neuronal remodeling, neuroplasticity, impaired neurotransmitter levels, and synaptic transmission) as shown in this study, that are expected to cause impaired neural circuit behavior. Our study focused on inflammation, and it should be emphasized that impairment of motility does not occur in the absence of inflammation. The implications of this work are that if we can effectively suppress inflammation as shown with gCx43 cKO using a pharmacological intervention, for example, by blocking inflammation, which leads to impaired motility in POI it could provide protection. The latter will be investigated in a future study focused on motility.
Nanostring analysis of a panel of 248 immune/inflammatory genes provided independent verification of bulk RNA-seq analysis of selected genes for deletion of glial Cx43, which resulted in the activation of additional genes linked to immune cell activation, such as protective mechanisms in POI. Ccr1, Ccr2, and IL-18rap are linked to host protection. IL-18rap is an accessory subunit of the IL-18 receptor; IL-18 is a cytokine that induces cell-mediated immunity, and mutations in the gene are associated with inflammatory bowel disease (IBD) and susceptibility to celiac disease. Other genes induced are cytokines involved in innate immune response, such as Oas1a, Ifnb1, and Irf7. CD40 is a type 1 transmembrane protein found on immune/antigen-presenting cells (T-H cells, B-cells, and dendritic cells), and it is required for cell activation. , CD86 is a T-lymphocyte activation antigen on dendritic cells, monocytes, T-lymphocytes, and B-lymphocytes. Ccl17 is expressed by macrophages and dendritic cells. C3ar1 is expressed in microglia or potentially gut macrophages. TNFsf14 is expressed on activated T-cells. Overall, nanostring data suggest that glial Cx43 signaling modulates immune cell activation and contributes to the pathogenic mechanisms leading to POI in response to in vivo gut manipulation and mechanical stress.
One of our recent publications proved IL-1β guides inflammation, leading to enteric gliosis, macrophage activation, and dysmotility in POI. We used IL-1β treatment to induce a reactive human enteric glial cell phenotype as an in vitro model to investigate Cx43-dependent signaling in human glia. In the current study, human glia reactivity triggered by IL-1β is inhibited by pharmacological blockade of Cx43 hemichannels by the mimetic peptide 43Gap26. Our study on surgical/mechanical stress in early/late human samples from GI surgery identified potential novel targets for Cx43-signaling in human enteric glia associated with cell proliferation, immune cell regulation, inflammation, neurodevelopment, neuroplasticity, GI diseases, and macrophage activation. By using fresh material from abdominal surgeries, we were able to understand the influence of surgical manipulation on gut homeostasis and the changes in gene expression in the muscularis externa. However, there are limitations to our translational studies. First, we collected only data from a short time interval during the surgery from a small cohort, and we are not yet able to monitor molecular changes at later stages of the patients’ recovery. Future studies of bigger cohorts need to combine transcriptional data with, for example, analysis of serum samples and information about the patients’ well-being. Second, and more importantly, we need a prospective study linking high levels of Cx43 in the context of inflammation to a higher incidence of postoperative ileus in GI surgical patients. Ultimately, a pilot interventional study with a Gap26 mimetic peptide (or other suitable pharmacological inhibitor or channel blocker) could investigate the therapeutic or prophylactic effect of Cx43 inhibition (or blockade of Cx43 activation) against POI in GI surgical patients.
In isolated purified human enteric glia from surgical specimens, IL-1β caused changes in the expression of 16.6% of all the genes in the human enteric glial cell transcriptome (ie, 3565 of 21,448 genes). A small subset of IL-1β-induced genes was suppressed by 43Gap26 (ie, representing 4.6% of the genes [163 of 3565 genes]). This includes a discrete set of genes sensitive to inflammation. A closer look at the top 20 upregulated genes sensitive to 43Gap26 inhibition (including CSF2, CSF3, NRG1, NR4A3, IL4, and TNFSF15, OAS-1,2,3, CMPK2, MMP8, HK2, POU2F2, NR4A1, etc) (refer to D) , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , revealed some common pathways and new insights into Cx43-dependent regulation of human enteric glial cell activation and immune cell regulation. The inflammation-induced activation (opening) of hemichannels is blocked by 43Gap26, indicating they are Cx43 hemichannels. The release of the proinflammatory cytokine IL-6 from human enteric glia is attenuated by 43Gap26, but the GJIC inhibitor CBX has a bigger effect than 43Gap26, indicating that other channels are likely involved as well (ie, Panx1, other connexins, and P2X channels ). Only further in vitro studies with more specific agonists and antagonists for distinct channels can clarify the most relevant targets in EGCs.
Activation and upregulation of Cx43 hemichannels in enteric glia in response to ME inflammation is a critical mechanism for amplifying the proinflammatory signaling pathways leading to POI. We identified several novel molecular targets for the Cx43 crosstalk and regulatory signaling. Cx43 signaling is crucial for glial IL-1β signaling regulation and changes in the transcriptome profile of key gene expression profiles, including cytokines, chemokines, etc. Additionally, Cx43 is involved in IL-6 release from enteric glia, s100β signaling known to be detrimental in inflamed states, ET-1/endothelin-B pro-inflammatory signaling in enteric glia, and complex changes in immune cell regulation in the ME. There, several different types of immune cells could be involved in the global ME inflammation/immune response, such as resident macrophages, dendritic cells, T-and B-lymphocytes, and mast cells. , Teasing out the interactions between glia and immune cells is an important target of future investigations. It should be noted that enteric glial cells are very sensitive to mechanical forces, , and the precise link between mechanical stimulation of enteric glia and inflammation still eludes us. There are several types of mechanosensitive channels, including Piezo 1 and 2, TRPV channels, and stretch-activated channels (SACs), but the identity of the mechanosensitive channel(s) that may trigger inflammation is unknown. It is very important to identify the channel responding to excessive mechanical forces involved in the in vivo surgical gut manipulation required to induce POI in mice and humans.
Activation of Cx43 hemichannels in disease is mediated by proinflammatory cytokines (Il-1β and IL-18), promoting the extracellular release of ATP to activate P2X7 and NLRP3 inflammasome activation. The opening of Cx43 hemichannels occurs in different types of cell death (ie, apoptosis, necrosis, necroptosis, and ferroptosis ). Therefore, we can prove it has detrimental effects on glia or neurons by evaluating cell death in glia or neurons. Reducing the calcium concentration at the extracellular side leads to activation. Voltage regulates connexin hemichannel activity. Phosphorylation is a major regulator of connexin hemichannel opening, and protein kinases play a role. Connexin hemichannels become predominantly active in pathological conditions and support inflammation and cell death. Open connexin hemichannels are involved in liver disease, liver damage, atherosclerosis, and damage to other organs. The link, however, between POI and cell death is not clear. Regulated cell death and inflammasome activation in gut injury following surgical trauma, leading to multiorgan dysfunction, may also have implications for POI development. Together with the upregulation of Cx43, it may be speculated that activation of the hemichannels contributes to inflammation and cell death in POI.
Our animal studies indicate that Cx43 signaling is a pathogenic mechanism in inflamed or disease conditions. In parallel with studies in human enteric glia, we were able to demonstrate that surgical trauma in human GI procedures (ie, pancreatectomy) causes Cx43 upregulation (among other connexins), and it triggers enteric gliosis, activation of the IL-1 signaling pathway, cell migration, apoptosis, cell death, and inflammation, as well as macrophage and other immune cell activation. All these pathways are or were the focus of studies that investigated the underlying mechanisms of POI development, underlining the advantage of these patient samples and the potential transferability of our mechanistic murine data to the human disease state. Interestingly, the blockade of connexin hemichannels virtually always leads to attenuated inflammation, reduced tissue injury, and improved organ function, , , , , , , , , making it a very lucrative target for pharmaceutical approaches. Unsurprisingly, pipelines of oral medication drugs are already being pursued by Theranexus for nervous system disorders, focusing on the role played by glial (astrocytic) connexins in response to psychotropic drugs. Pipeline drugs from the company OcuNexus could help define the role of Cx43 in wound healing. Theranexus is focused on developing therapeutic strategies to assess clinical benefits that may target connexin expression or function (ie, a drug targeting downregulation of Cx43) could potentially be useful to prevent or attenuate POI.
Cx43 is highly expressed in human enteric glia. Cx43 mimetic peptides were shown to reduce swelling, astrogliosis, and neuronal cell death after spinal cord injury. ATP and glutamate are released via astroglial Cx43 hemichannels, mediating neuronal death by activating PANX1 hemichannels. , Inhibition of Cx43 hemichannels improves postoperative cognitive function in aged mice, indicating a connection between gut inflammation and changes in the CNS. Mechanical stress also opens Cx43 hemichannels. , The blockade of Cx43 hemichannels leads to attenuated inflammation, reduced tissue injury, and improved organ function in human and animal models of about 30 inflammatory diseases and disorders. The findings of the current study would imply that Cx43 hemichannels are bad players in POI, and their blockade would be beneficial in animals and, perhaps, patients undergoing bowel surgery, to limit or prevent POI. These findings demonstrate that Cx43 hemichannels may contribute to the intensification of inflammation and potentially serve as a common target in the treatment of various inflammatory diseases. , , , , , , , , Hence, connexin hemichannels may be considered a common therapeutic target in treating these diseases or disorders. It has been suggested that a combined blockade of connexin and pannexin hemichannels may prove to be more effective in the treatment of some inflammatory diseases than targeting either type of hemichannels. , , Unanswered questions are whether Cx43 contributes to neuroinflammation and dysmotility.
Our findings, however, do not prove whether only Cx43 hemichannels are involved in the inflammatory response. DAPI is a well-known tracer for Cx43 hemichannel activity that we employed in hEGCs to investigate its activation. We relied on the specificity of this assay to study Cx43 hemichannels in hEGCs and explore the potential role of hemichannels in the inflammatory response. , In addition, 0.0 Ca2+ buffers electrically uncouple gap junctions whereas it activates Cx43 hemichannels as shown with DAPI uptake in hEGCs. For example, Ca2+uncaged by flash photolysis an skHep1 cell expressing Cx43, never spread to its neighbors, suggesting that increase in intracellular free Ca2+ levels ([Ca2+]i) rapidly closes gap junction channels to complete cell-cell uncoupling. The mechanisms involved in gap junction or hemichannel inhibition are not well understood. It is believed that 43Gap26 inhibits gap junctions by a mechanism by which, first the peptide may interact with hemichannels thereby preventing interactions and docking of 2 complementary hemichannels to form a new gap junction channel. In our study, the Cx43 mimetic peptide blocked DAPI uptake in response to proinflammatory mediators IL-1β and LPS in hEGCs, whereas the scrambled peptide was without effect. The data in hEGCs with DAPI uptake indicates Cx43 hemichannel activation in the inflammatory effect. However, the data with 43Gap26 inhibition of inflammatory gene upregulation in hEGCs cannot discriminate between Cx43 hemichannels and gap junctions, and both could be involved in the response. For IL-1β-induced release of the proinflammatory cytokine IL-6, 43Gap26 could reduce the response, and CBX had an additional effect. The additional effect likely occurs at channels other than Cx43 hemichannels. However, for DAPI uptake, 43Gap26 or CBX are acting at Cx43 hemichannels, because DAPI uptake is a readout for Cx43 hemichannels. In our msPOI model, it should be noted that the glial Cx43 KO is not exclusive to hemichannels or gap junctions. Therefore, with the KO mouse model, we cannot distinguish hemichannels from gap junctions, and KO deletes the gene that forms hemichannels and gap junctions. Therefore, we could not answer the question of hemichannel vs gap junction in the mouse study nor were we trying to do so, knowing this. Overall, Cx43 channels likely involved both hemichannels and gap junctions.

## Conclusion
It is concluded that the glial Cx43 is a critical determinant of inflammation, enteric gliosis, immune cell infiltration and activation, enteric neuropathy, smooth muscle dysregulation, and M2 dysregulationGlial Cx43 knockout is protective and represents a potential novel therapeutic target against POI. Our working hypothesis of the pathogenic role of enteric glial Cx43 in postoperative ileus is illustrated in . Our Cx43 are the highest expressed hemichannels in mouse and human enteric glia. Gut surgical manipulation induces a reactive glial phenotype linked to enteric gliosis, leading to dysmotility and POI. Cx43 is upregulated in enteric glia in a mouse gut mechanical stress model of POI, in reactive hEGCs, and in human intestinal ME tissues exposed to surgical trauma and coinciding gut mechanical stress. Pharmacologic blockade of Cx43 or deletion of glial Cx43 inhibits reactive glia, inhibits proinflammatory/immune pathways, stimulates M2/protective pathways, and protects against enteric neuropathy, macrophage induced neurodegeneration as described recently and intestinal smooth muscle gene dysregulation during POI. These effects are deemed beneficial in POI; therefore, the glial Cx43-dependent signaling pathway(s) will likely represent a key pathogenic mechanism in POI. The inflammation induced by mechanical stress and surgical trauma activates and upregulates glial Cx43 that likely contributes to POI development. Further studies are needed to establish whether functional neuroprotection occurs in the ENS to restore motility by blocking glial Cx43, and establish the clinical importance and therapeutic potential of glial Cx43 signaling, gap junctions, and hemichannels , , , in POI and translatability to humans.

## Materials and Methods
Mouse models, primary hEGC cultures, and human intestinal samples from surgical patients were used in our studies. The primary model of disease is the msPOI model. Studies were done in glial Cx43 cKO (Sox10CreERT2;Cx43fl/fl) mice or RiboTag mice (Sox10CreERT2/Rpl22HA/+) and LM Ctrls to evaluate Cx43-dependent signaling. Details of the animals and human subjects are described below.

## Mouse Postoperative Ileus Model
The method for surgical intestinal manipulation is similar to that described previously, , with a few in-house modifications. Briefly, mice received a subcutaneous injection of 30 mg/kg tramadol HCl 1 hour prior to surgery. The animal was placed on a heated pad (37°C) and was anesthetized by inhalation of isoflurane (induced at 3%, 3 L/min flow and maintained at 2%, 2 L/min flow). A 1-cm midline incision was made to open the skin and peritoneum. The entire small bowel was gently removed/exteriorized from the peritoneal cavity, placed on sterile cotton gauze, and lightly manipulated by using 2 sterile moist cotton swabs 2 times from the duodenum to the terminal ileum. After IM, the small bowel was placed back in the cavity, and the abdomen was closed with 2 layers of continuous sutures using 5.0 silk thread. The animal was awake and freely moving around the cage within 15 minutes. The operated mouse received a second dose injection of tramadol HCl (30 mg/kg) 2 hours after the surgery, and 1 mg/kg tramadol HCl in drinking water were provided until they were sacrificed 3 hours (3 h IM) or 24 hours later (24 h IM). Control mice (no surgery), gut surgical manipulation (IM), or sham-operated animals (incision + anesthesia) were studied. Intestinal inflammation in the ME was identified by neutrophil infiltration (MPO+ cells) or inflammatory markers by Nanostring analysis or bulk RNA-seq or glial activation markers (GFAP, ETBR, s100β).

## Glial cKO Model for Cx43
Transgenic mice with a tamoxifen-sensitive deletion of the gene encoding Cx43 (Gja1) in enteric glia (Sox10CreERT2/Cx43fl/fl) were bred in-house and generated as described previously , by crossing Sox10CreERT2 mice (MGI:5910373; gifted by Dr Vassilis Pachnis, The Francis Crick Institute ; with Gja1tm1Dlg mice [Cx43fl/fl (008039; RRID: IMSR_JAX:008039; Jackson Laboratory)]. Wild-type (WT) LMs were used as experimental controls. Animals were fed chow containing tamoxifen citrate (400 mg/kg, TD.14084; Envigo) for 2 weeks to induce CreERT2 activity and allowed to recover before experiments. Genotyping was performed by Transnetyx.
All protocols for the Sox10creERT2/Cx43fl/fl transgenic mice were approved by the Michigan State University Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee (IACUC), and mice were housed in specific pathogen-free (SPF) conditions in facilities accredited by the Association for Assessment and Accreditation for Laboratory Care (AAALAC) International. Mice of both sexes were provided by Dr Gulbransen’s laboratory at Michigan State University and used for experiments in a POI model under an approved IACUC protocol at Ohio State University. Mice were maintained in a temperature-controlled environment (Optimice cage system; Animal Care Systems Inc) on a 12-hour light: dark cycle with access to water and a minimal phytoestrogen diet (Diet Number 2919; Envigo) ad libitum.

## RiboTag Mice
Sox10CreERT/+(Tg(Sox10-icre/ERT2)388Wdr/Rpl22HA/+(B6N.129 Rpl22tm1.1Psam/J, abbreviated as RiboTag) mice were used for transcriptional analyses. Animals were housed under SPF conditions in the central and our satellite housing facility (University Hospital Bonn). Male mice (10–18 weeks) were used in the intestinal manipulation experiments, and mice of both sexes were used for the experiments, all carried out under German federal law (AZ.: 81-02.04.2016.A367+ AZ.: 81-02.04.2020.A361).

## RiboTag Approach
RiboTag immunoprecipitation was performed according to a previously established protocol. Briefly, the muscle layer of the whole small bowel tissue was mechanically separated from the mucosal layer and placed in RNAlater (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Muscle tissue was lysed on a Precellys homogenizer (Bertin Instruments) (3× 5000 rpm, 45 seconds; 5-minute intermediate incubation on ice) in pre-cooled homogenization buffer, centrifuged (10 minutes, 10,000 g, 4°C), and supernatants saved. “Input” controls were generated from 50 μL cleared lysate. Samples were incubated with anti-HA antibody (5 μL; 1 mg/mL; 4 hours, 4°C, 7 rpm). Lysate/antibody conjugates were added to 200 μL of washed A/G dynabeads (Thermo Fisher Scientific) and incubated (overnight, 4°C, 7 rpm). Beads were washed thrice with high salt buffer. Ribosomes containing specific mRNA were eluted from beads, and RNA was extracted with a Qiagen micro kit.

## Human Subjects
Surgical specimens from male and female subjects were included in the study. Institutional Review Board protocols for in vitro studies on human surgical tissues for immunohistochemistry, isolation of hEGCs, and studies on IL6 release experiments, DAPI uptake, Ca2+ imaging, etc, were approved by the Ethics Committee of Ohio State University. Informed consent was obtained to procure non-diseased tissue from patients undergoing GI surgery (Roux-en-Y bypass surgery for jejunum) or colectomy patients for polyp removal or cancer (IRB protocol 2020 H0273).
The collection of patient surgical specimens for early and late samples from pancreatectomy patients was approved by the ethics committee of North-Rhine-Westphalia, Germany (Accession number: 266_14). Informed consent was obtained to procure human surgical tissue from the small bowel (jejunum) of patients undergoing a pancreatectomy at an early and a late time point and had 2 jejunal biopsies taken during the surgical procedure ( ). Early and late specimens, with approximately 1.5 hours between collections, were taken and further processed by separating ME and other intestinal layers to analyze specifically the human ME. Human ME samples were used for RNA-seq and histology analysis. Early and late samples are collected 1.5 hours apart during the surgery, and during that time, there is ongoing surgical trauma/manipulation/stress on the gut and time to develop intestinal inflammation. Therefore, early and late samples provide an inpatient control for the gene activation pattern in the jejunal ME of patients in response to surgery-induced intestinal manipulation in patients to compare with studies in the mouse with in vivo surgery-induced intestinal manipulation that causes ME inflammation, immunomodulation, and a reactive enteric glial phenotype, and eventually leads to POI. To get a broader overview of the activation pattern in the jejunal ME of patients, we performed bulk RNA-seq analyses. 
 summarizes the demographics/characteristics of the human subjects and GI surgical specimens for RNA-seq global transcriptome analysis in response to surgery-induced IM.

## Protocol for Immunofluorescence Colabeling Studies in Murine Tissue
Immunohistochemistry was performed on longitudinally opened whole-mount specimens of mouse small bowel mounted on sylgard gel-covered Petri dishes with the mucosal side facing up. Micro-dissected longitudinal muscle myenteric plexus-circular muscle (LMMP-CM) tissues were fixed in 4% paraformaldehyde (PFA) overnight, and the remaining CM was removed the next day. Tissues were washed with 1× phosphate-buffered saline (PBS), 3 times, at 15-minute intervals, on a horizontal shaker at room temperature, then allowing permeabilization for 15 minutes at room temperature (1% Ecosurf/PBS or 0.5% Triton/PBS), and blocked with 10% normal donkey serum (NDS), 0.25% Ecosurf/PBS at room temperature for 1 hour before incubation with antibodies. The blocking solution was discarded, and primary antibodies were added (diluted in 1% NDS and 0.5% Triton). Tissue was incubated for 48 hours at 4°C. As was noted before, the excess primary antibody was washed off with 1× PBS 3 times at 15-minute intervals. Secondary antibodies were added (diluted in 1% NDS and 0.5% Triton) and incubated at room temperature for 2 hours in the dark. Tissues were washed as before and then incubated with DAPI for 10 minutes at room temperature in the dark, followed by a 1-minute wash in 1× PBS. The tissues were then mounted on slides and coverslips applied with Fluoromount (#0100-01, Southern Biotech) or Epredia Shando Immu Mount (Thermo Scientific) and imaged on Leica SP8 confocal imaging system, Nikon Eclipse 2000TE or Nikon Ti2 fluorescent microscope. summarizes the list of antibodies used.

## Quantitative Analysis of GFAP Immunoreactivity in Glial Cx43 Transgenic Mice
A Nikon A1R confocal imaging system was utilized for capturing z-stack images and generating 3D reconstructions of colabeled cells within intact LMMP preparations of mice. Cell imaging took place on the stage of a fully motorized Ti2e inverted microscope, equipped with a motorized XY stage, and viewed through a 60× oil immersion objective (1.2 n.a.), which had a working distance of 0.15 to 0.18 mm. The LU-NV series laser unit facilitated excitation/emission spectra for green fluorescent protein (GFP) (ex.487; em.500-550), Texas Red (ex. 561, em.570-620), Alexa 647 (ex.639, em.663-738), and DAPI (ex.402, em.425-475). Utilizing a Galvano scanner, images were scanned, and z-stack images were obtained at 0.3-μm intervals for an optical slice thickness of 15 μm. Image resolution was set at 1024 × 1024 pixels, images were averaged 2×, and the pinhole aperture was adjusted to 1.0. Subsequent image processing was conducted using NIS-Elements AR software. GFAP immunoreactivity was employed to monitor enteric gliosis through 3D imaging, with data quantification performed using Image J software. Maintaining consistency, the analysis employed the same slice thickness for valid comparisons. Intensity within each ganglion in the 3D images was quantified, with the intensity reported for each ganglion. Regions of interest for image analysis were randomly selected in the tissue from each animal, and the entire tissue was first surveyed for a similar distribution of staining in myenteric ganglia for a given condition (ie, LM IM, etc). Three ganglia per image were analyzed, and 4 to 5 images/1 cm2 mouse LMMP preparation. ‘Region of interest’ (ROI) was drawn around the edge of the ganglion and then analyzed by selecting area, minimum value, and maximum value. Histograms representing the distribution of pixel intensities in the image were generated with the ‘analyze tool.’ The ‘list’ option on the histogram gave the list of intensity values. The averaged pixel GFAP IF intensity/ganglion was recorded, and the average intensity in ∼12 to 15 ganglia/animal was calculated. Note that the optical slice thickness for mouse samples was ∼20 μm.
Cx43 signaling was studied using a Cx43 peptide inhibitor 43Gap26 (200 μM), Gap26Scrambled peptide, CBX, or gCx43 cKO mice. In a mouse gut surgical manipulation (IM) model of POI, we compared LM Ctrl, sham, or 24-hour IM mice (N = 7–9). Studies in the mouse POI model were used to evaluate GFAP immunoreactivity and quantification analysis using 3D z-stack LSM-Nikon imaging. GFAP protein expression was confirmed by WB analysis in lysates of the muscularis externa. Other glial proteins analyzed for expression and upregulation included s100β, ETBR, Cx43 hemichannels, and αSMA. Using nanostring analysis, a 248-gene inflammatory panel was used to evaluate ME inflammation. A custom nanostring panel of genes was used to evaluate hemichannel expression.

## Isolation of Glial Cells From Human Specimens, Purification, and Cultures of hEGCs
Methods were described in detail in our previous publications. , Tissue collection of the surgical specimens was performed by the surgeon, and the tissues were immersed immediately in ice-cold oxygenated Krebs and promptly transported to the research lab in coordination with the clinical pathology team. Viable tissue procured from the pathology department was used to isolate myenteric ganglia. The tissue was pinned to the lumina side facing up under a stereoscopic microscope, and the mucosa, submucosa, and most of the CM were dissected away using scissors and then flipped over to remove the longitudinal muscle by dissection. Myenteric plexus tissue was cut and enzymatically dissociated as described previously with in-house modifications: Tissue (0.3-0.5cm2 pieces) was dissociated in a mixture of protease/collagenase (1 mg/mL Hank’s Balanced Salt Solution [HBSS]) for 60 minutes at 37°C. Dissociated ganglia were removed from the enzymatic solution by spinning down (twice) and resuspended in HBSS (once) and a mixture of Dulbecco’s Modified Eagle’s Medium (DMEM)-F12, bovine serum albumin (BSA) 0.1%, and DNAse 50 μg/mL (once). Individual ganglia harvested under microscopic visualization (devoid of smooth muscle or other cellular attachments) were plated into wells of a 24-well culture plate and kept in DMEM-F12 (1:1) medium containing 10% fetal bovine serum (FBS) and a mixture of antibiotics (penicillin 100 U/mL, streptomycin 100 μg/mL, and amphotericin B 0.25 μg/mL) at 37°C in an atmosphere of 5% CO2 and 95% humidity. After cells reached confluency in 3 to 4 weeks (passage one [P1]), hEGC was enriched and purified by eliminating/separating fibroblasts, smooth muscle, and other cells. Glial cell enrichment and purification were achieved by labeling the isolated cells with magnetic microbeads linked to an anti-D7-Fib specific antigen and passing them through a magnetic bead separation column following the manufacturer’s instructions (Miltenyi Biotec Inc). The purification protocol was performed twice (P2 and P3) to reach a cell enrichment of up to 10,000-fold, and cells were plated (2 × 104) on glass coverslips precoated with Laminin/P-D-Lys 20 μg/mL or 50-mm bottom glass #0 culture dishes and were grown until confluent for Fluo-4 Ca2+ imaging experiments, IL-6 release, CCl2 release, DAPI uptake studies, colabeling studies, or studies with IL-1β induction for transcriptome analysis, WB, or qPCR on nanostring. At each passage, cells were split and seeded on plastic 25 mL flasks, which were used for studies in cultures from passages 3 to 6. The purity of the hEGC cultures was extensively studied in our collaborator’s laboratory, and we have used them in recent studies, , , yielding preparations with >95% purity, with strong immunoreactivity for the glial protein s100β and cells rarely labeled for α-SMA. In contrast, cells retained on the magnetic bead column by anti-D7-Fib microbeads were highly immunoreactive for αSMA.

## Protocols for Functional Studies in hEGCs

## Effect of IL-1β or LPS induction of hEGCs on DAPI uptake to test for hemichannel activity
Cells were allowed to reach confluence and incubated with IL-1β or LPS for 24 hours in a 95° CO2 incubator. The feeding medium was removed and rinsed twice with sterile HBSS (without Ca2+/Mg2+). Cells were pre-incubated for 15 minutes at 37°C ± drugs, including 100 μM CBX, 43Gap26, or GAP26 scrambled peptide (each at 200 μM) in HBSS. This solution was replaced with a solution containing 3 μM DAPI and incubated for 2 hours at 37°C in the continued presence of drugs. At the end of the incubation, cells were rinsed once and fixed in 4% PFA for 15 minutes at room temperature. Cells were visualized with a Nikon Eclipse TiS inverted microscope (Nikon), and photographs were randomly taken at 20× using the same parameters for all preparations with an ANDOR Zyla 5.5 sCMOS camera (Andor). Intensity of fluorescence was measured in all nuclei using Nikon NIS Elements Advanced Research software, setting a threshold of 350 from the background and allowing the software for measurements and counting by automated determination of ROIs.

## Cell viability assay check
Cell viability was tested in cell cultures using the Nuclear-ID blue-green cell viability reagent (ENZO) following the protocol for adherent cells. Cells were incubated with IL-1β (or other drugs), and viability was tested. There was no effect on viability (P > .60 for all drugs; data shown for IL-1β).

## Ca2+ imaging
Culture medium was removed, and cells (grown on a 50mm #0 glass-bottom dish) were incubated for 30 minutes at 37°C with 2 μM fluo-4/AM (Molecular Probes) in DMEM with no FBS. The solution was replaced with fresh DMEM/no FBS and incubated at 37°C for 30 minutes. Cells were transferred to the stage of an upright Nikon Eclipse FN1 microscope with a 20× (or 40×) Fluor objective. Fluo-4/Ca2+ signals were detected using an ANDOR iXon Ultra 897 EMCCD camera (Andor). A fura-4 filter cube/dichroic set is used to capture fluorescence Ca2+ signals. Cells were perfused with a peristaltic pump at 2 mL/min (unless otherwise indicated) with oxygenated Krebs solution (mM: NaCl 120, KCl 6.0, MgCl2 1.2, NaH2PO4 1.35, NaHCO3 14.4, CaCl2 2.5, glucose 12.7). A solution in-line heater (Warner Instruments Inc) was used to maintain the perfusion temperature at 36.5°C ± 0.5°C. Increase in peristaltic flow to 10 mL/min applied shear stress mechanical stimulation to activate glia. IL-1β treatment of cells lasted 3 hours or 24 hours in the incubator. Time-series analysis of [Ca2+]i was done at 10 frames/sec. Ca2+ imaging analysis was performed with Nikon NIS Elements Advanced Research software. Data was normalized to ΔF/Fo (peak intensity) and numbers of cells activated/field.IL-6 and CCL2 release was measured using enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. The Cx43 mimetic peptide 43Gap26 or CBX was used to block Cx43 hemichannels.

## IL-1β Activation and Transcriptome Analysis in hEGC
Affymetrix Human Clariom S microarray analysis of hEGC samples in response to IL-1β activation was performed according to the manufacturer’s instructions using the GeneChip WT Plus sample Reagent Kit (Thermo Fisher Scientific, PN 902280). In brief, 100 ng of total RNA was converted to single-stranded complementary DNA (cDNA) with T7 promoter sequence at the 5' end. The single-stranded cDNA was converted to double-stranded cDNA, converted to complementary RNA (cRNA), amplified by in vitro transcription (IVT) using T7 RNA polymerase and purified using purification binding beads. NanoDrop measured the eluted cRNA yield; 15 μg RNA was reverse transcripted in sense-strand cDNA containing 2′-deoxyuridine, 5′-triphosphate (dUTP) at a fixed ratio relative to deoxythymidine triphosphate (dTTP). The cRNA was removed using RNase H, and the second-cycle single-stranded cDNA was purified using purification binding beads. The eluted single-stranded cDNA yield was determined using the NanoDrop, and 5.5 μg was fragmented by uracil-DNA glycosylase (UDG) and apurinic/apyrimidinic endonuclease 1 (APE 1). The fragmented single-stranded cDNA was labeled by terminal deoxynucleotidyl transferase (TdT) and then used to prepare the hybridization cocktail, injected and hybridized in the array for 16 hours at 45°C in an oven with rotation at 60 rpm. After overnight hybridization, the hybridization cocktail mix was extracted from the array. Each array was washed and stained using Affymetrix GeneChip Fluidics Station 450 according to the user manual (P/N 08-0295), and the arrays were scanned using GeneChip Scanner 7G. Each array image was collected using the Gene Chip Command Console, QC, saved as .cel files, and saved for further analysis.

## RNA-seq Analysis for Human ME Samples
Libraries prepared with QuantSeq 3′ RNA-Seq Library Prep Kit (Lexogen) were sequenced (single-end 50 bp, 10 MB reads) on an Illumina Hiseq 2500. RNA-seq data was analyzed with Partek Flow software using Lexogen pipeline 12112017, which included 2 adapter trimming and a base-trimming step with subsequent quality controls (QCs). Reads were aligned with star2.5.3, followed by a post-alignment QC and quantification to an annotation model. Normalized counts were subjected to PCA and gene set analysis. Pipeline information can be found in our uploaded sequencing files, which are submitted to the Gene Expression Omnibus (GEO) database (GSE263125, GSE198889, GSE205610, GSE134943, and GSE149181).

## Software
The software tools used for this study include Partek Flow, available from https://www.partek.com/partek-flow/#features; Gene Set Enrichment Analysis, available from https://www.partek.com/partek-flow/#features and http://bioinformatics.sdstate.edu/go/; Prism 10 for preparation of bar graphs and corresponding statistical analysis for the generated data; Biorender for generating the schematic illustrations; and Adobe Illustrator and Photoshop for graphical adaption of the data for figure preparations.

## RNA Isolation
Cells were lysed in TRIZOL (Life Technologies) and frozen at −80°C. Total RNA isolation was done using the TRIZOL method, and after the separation of aqueous and organic phases, an RNA kit (NORGEN Biotek Corp) was used to purify and increase the concentration of the RNA. Gene expression analysis was done using the NanoString nCounter Analysis System (Nanostring Technologies), RNA-seq analysis, or Affymetrix Gene Chip analysis.

## For the RNA Isolation Method for Mouse ME Samples for NanoString
Samples were transferred to 5-mL polystyrene round-bottom tubes with 1 mL Trizol, and tissues were disrupted using a homogenizer mixer. This step was performed on ice to avoid tissue heating. To get a complete homogenization, the samples were forced to pass through a 26G needle using an insulin syringe. The homogenized product was incubated for 5 minutes at room temperature, and 0.2 mL of chloroform was added. The samples were mixed vigorously for 15 seconds, incubated for 3 minutes at room temperature, and centrifuged for 15 minutes at 12,000 × g at 4°C in a refrigerated centrifuge. The upper clear phase was recovered in a fresh tube. An equal volume of ethanol 70% was added to each sample, mixed vigorously for 10 seconds, and applied to the RNA Clean-up and Concentration column (Norgen Biotek Corp, product # 23600). According to the protocol, columns were spun for 1 minute at 3500 × g, followed by 1 minute at 14,000 × g. The columns were washed using 400 μL of Wash A solution (provided in the kit and previously diluted with ethanol 100% as required by the manufacturer), and 115 μL of DNAse mix (15 μL DNAse I + 100 μL enzyme incubation buffer) was applied to each column and spun 1 minute at 14,000 × g. The flow-through was pipetted back to the top of the column, and the samples were incubated for 30 minutes at 30°C. Four hundred μL of Wash A solution was added to the column and spun down at 14,000 × g. The flow-through was discarded, and a third wash step was performed according to the protocol. The columns were spun for 2 minutes at 14,000 × g to dry them down. Fifty μL of elution solution A was applied, and after 5 minutes of room temperature incubation, the columns were spun for 1 minute at 200 × g, followed by 2 minutes at 5800 × g and 30 seconds at 14,000 × g to collect total RNA samples. For maximum recovery, the eluted RNAs were transferred back to the column, incubated for 5 minutes at room temperature, and spun for 1 minute at 200 × g, followed by 2 minutes at 5800 × g and 30 seconds at 14,000 × g. RNA concentration was established using Qubit RNA High Sensitivity assay (Thermofisher Scientific catalog # Q32855), and the RNA integrity was determined using the Agilent 4200 TapeStation System.

## Bulk RNA-seq Using Low-input High Resolution LncRNAseq for msPOI in Control and gCx43 Knockout Mice
Total RNA from mouse LMMPs was isolated using the Cytiva Total RNA Extraction Kit following the manufacturer’s protocol, with modifications to improve purity. Each sample underwent 2 sequential extractions from the same lysate to maximize removal of residual proteins, lipids, and genomic DNA contaminants encountered in enteric preparations. Initial RNA concentration and purity were evaluated using a Nanodrop spectrophotometer, confirming expected A260/280 and A260/230 ratios. High-resolution integrity assessment was then performed at the Genomics Shared Resource – Comprehensive Cancer Center, The Ohio State University, using an Agilent TapeStation system. RNA integrity numbers (RINs; QC ranged >8) were used as primary quality metrics, and only samples meeting optimal thresholds for high-quality input RNA were advanced for sequencing. Qualified RNA samples were processed by Novogene for library preparation and bulk RNA sequencing using a low-input high-resolution LncRNAseq Ultra-low-NovaseqXPlus platform. Novogene performed poly(A)-selected library generation, sequencing on an Illumina platform, and initial bioinformatic processing. Gene-level count matrices and associated quality metrics were generated using the Novomagic online analytics suite and returned to our laboratory for further computational analyses. All downstream bioinformatic clustering of genes of interest were performed in-house using a combination of R- and Python-based workflows. Data normalization, variance stabilization, differential gene expression testing, and dimensionality reduction (PCA, Uniform Manifold Approximation and Projection [UMAP]) were conducted using Novomagic built-in software packages. Heatmaps represent relative gene expression normalized against absolute control (LM Ctrl); nested violin plots represent averaged fold expression levels per group for every gene cluster. Additional visualization and network construction were performed using the Python environment Spyder.

## NanoString nCounter Gene Expression Assay
The nCounter Mouse Inflammation Panel (catalog number: XT-CSO-MIN2-12) comprises 248 inflammation-related mouse genes and 6 internal reference genes. These represent a broad range of relevant pathways related to inflammation, including apoptosis, EGF, IL signaling, Ras, T-cell receptor, and Toll-like receptor signaling. The system utilizes a novel digital technology based on direct multiplexed measurement of gene expression and offers high levels of precision and sensitivity (<1 copy per cell). The technology uses molecular “barcodes” and single-molecule imaging to detect and count hundreds of unique transcripts in a single reaction.
NanoString nCounter technology is based on the direct detection of target molecules using color-coded molecular barcodes, providing a digital simultaneous quantification of the number of target molecules; 100 ng of total RNA is hybridized overnight with nCounter Reporter (10 μL) probes in a hybridization buffer and an excess of nCounter Capture probes (3 μL) at 65°C for 17.5 hours. After overnight hybridization, the probe excess is removed using a 2-step magnetic bead-based purification using an automated fluidic handling system (nCounter Prep Station). Biotinylated capture probe-bound samples are immobilized and recovered on a streptavidin-coated cartridge. The abundance of specific target molecules is then quantified using the nCounter digital analyzer. Individual fluorescent barcodes and target molecules in each sample are recorded with a CCD camera by performing a high-density scan (325 fields of view). Images are processed internally into a digital format and exported as Reporter Code Count (RCC).
Agilent RNA 6000 Nano chip was used to evaluate the RNA quality. NanoString nCounter technology is based on the direct detection of target molecules using color-coded molecular barcodes, providing a digital simultaneous quantification of the number of target molecules. Total RNA (200 ng) was hybridized overnight with nCounter reporter (20 μL) probes in hybridization buffer and in excess of nCounter Capture probes (5 μL) at 65°C for 16 to 20 hours. The hybridization mixture containing target/probe complexes was allowed to bind to magnetic beads containing complementary sequences on the capture probe. After each target found a probe pair, excess probes were washed, followed by a sequential binding to sequences on the reporter probe. Biotinylated capture probe-bond samples were immobilized and recovered on a streptavidin-coated cartridge. The abundance of specific target molecules was then quantified using the nCounter digital analyzer. Individual fluorescent barcodes and target molecules present in each sample were recorded with a CCD camera by performing a high-density scan (600 fields of view). Images were processed internally into a digital format and were normalized using the NanoString nSolver Software analysis tool. Counts were normalized for all target RNAs in all samples (technical normalization) based on positive controls spiked in the CodeSet at known concentrations, which was performed to adjust lane-by-lane variations due to differences in hybridization efficiency and post-hybridization processing, including magnetic bead purification, immobilization, complex-to-slide binding, and imaging. The biological or RNA content normalization was performed to remove differences in RNA input across the samples. The normalization factor was calculated using the geometric mean of the housekeeping genes NMNATI (CV21.8) and CTNNB1 (%CV21) using nSolver software (Nanostring Technologies).

## WB Protocol

## Sample lysis preparation
Samples were thawed on ice and then ground with a mortar and pestle, keeping the mortar on ice. A volume of 200 μL of RIPA buffer (catalog number, 89901; Thermo Scientific) plus protease inhibitor (catalog number, 78430; Thermo Scientific) (100:1) was added to the ground sample, and the whole homogenized mixture was transferred to an Eppendorf tube. The tube was kept on ice for 30 minutes. After the incubation period, the tube was centrifuged at 13,000 rpm for 20 minutes at 4°C. The supernatant was collected for further analysis or stored at −80°C.

## Sample Preparation and Loading on Sodium Dodecyl Sulfate Gel
The OD for each sample was taken with Perkin Elmer Victor 3 1420 Multilabel counter. All the samples were normalized to a specific OD (562) by keeping the same amount of protein consistent for all the samples. Samples were mixed with 4× Lemli Buffer (4:1) and then boiled in a water bath for 10 minutes. Then, they were kept on ice. Either 15-μL capacity wells (catalog number, 4561096; BIO-RAD) or 50-μL capacity wells (catalog number, 4561094; BIO-RAD) sodium dodecyl sulfate (SDS) gel was used to load the samples; 5 μL of protein marker/ladder (catalog number, 1610374; BIO-RAD) was loaded onto one lane. The gel was run at a constant voltage of 65V for 1.5 hours or until the dye front reached the gel end, at room temperature, in 1× Tris/glycine/SDS running buffer (catalog number, 1610732; BIO-RAD). Once the gel running was complete, the WB protein transfer apparatus was assembled. The polyvinylidene fluoride (PVDF) membrane was placed in 100% methanol for 5 minutes, then transferred to the 1× WB Tris/glycine running buffer (catalog number, 1610734; BIO-RAD) for 5 minutes. The apparatus was sandwiched: A sponge on the black (cathode) side, filter paper on top, SDS gel with the proteins, PVDF membrane, filter paper, and sponge. All the above are pre-wetted with the 1× WB Tris/glycine running buffer before stacking.

## Running the WB to Transfer Proteins Onto the Membrane
The stack was placed in the gel running apparatus, with the red side of the running cassette facing the anode and the black side facing the cathode, and filled with the running buffer. The protein transfer was done at a constant voltage of 20V overnight.

## Antibody Staining
The membrane was blocked for 1 hour at room temperature. It was then incubated with appropriate primary antibody dilutions overnight at 4°C. Five percent milk in Tris-buffered saline with Tween-20 (TBST) was used as the blocking reagent. The primary antibody was diluted in the blocking reagent. The next day, the membrane was washed with TBST 3 times, 5 minutes each. The membrane was then incubated with the appropriate dilution of the secondary antibody in a blocking buffer at room temperature for 2 hours. The membrane was washed with PBS-T 3 times, 10 minutes each. The image was acquired using the LI-COR Odyssey DLx imaging system. Densitometry was calculated using the blots compared with the glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate dehydrogenase (GAPDH) bands in the ImageJ (FIJI) software. For each lane, antibody blot intensity was measured, and its corresponding GAPDH band intensity value was also measured separately. This can be done by selecting each band using the rectangle selection tool, and then selecting the “analyze” tool and “gels,” selecting “first lane,” then selecting the “measure” tool to get the intensity value. Then, the percentage increase of the antibody band intensity number to the GAPDH intensity number was calculated and plotted as a histogram.

## Data Availability
Transcriptional data on hEGCs or glial Cx43cKO mice in muscularis externa samples will be included in the GEO and NCBI databases. For uploading the data: https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/geo/info/submission or https://submit.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov; other datasets are included in GSE198889, GSE205610, GSE134943, GSE149181.

## Statistical Analysis
A P value of < .05 was considered statistically significant; ‘N’ values (ie, ‘N’ refers to the number of animals, numbers of ganglia, numbers of human subject samples, or numbers of cultures analyzed in separate experiments) and statistical tests used are reported in the figure legends and results. Unpaired or paired t-tests were used to analyze data between 2 groups, depending on the experimental protocol. One-way ANOVA, followed by post-hoc tests (Tukey’s or Bonferroni’s multiple comparisons), was used to test for differences between treatment groups; 2-way ANOVA was used for comparing mice of different backgrounds for studies with glial Cx43 knockout mice, and LM Ctrls for Sox10CreERT2/Cx43fl/fl. All plots are mean ± standard error of the mean (SEM). For volumetric analysis of 3D reconstructed images of GFAP-immunoreactivity intensity data in LM Ctrl and glial Cx43 KO mice, analysis was done in N = 7 to 9 animals. As indicated in the figure legends, statistical analysis was performed with Prism 10.0 (GraphPad). For human surgical tissue figures, P values are indicated as ∗P < .05; ∗∗P < .01; and ∗∗∗P < .001 when compared with control or #P < .05; ##P < .01; and ###P < .001 when compared with indicated samples. Animals for experiments were age- and sex-matched and randomly assigned to the experimental groups. Partek Flow software was used for all analyses of all RNA-seq data shown, and Fisher’s exact test was applied, providing P values with multiple testing corrections. Statistical analysis is described in the figure legends.

 

## Acknowledgments
Our appreciation goes out to the entire clinical research team in Anesthesiology for supporting our human patient IRB(s), consenting patients, and surgical tissue procurement. Special thanks to Dr Alberto Uribe, our Clinical Research Manager, Dr Tristan Weaver, our director of Clinical Research, and Jeremy Reeves, our clinical research coordinator. Special thank you to Iveta Grants for her technical expertise and support for our immunochemical studies, cytokine release studies, and human enteric glia studies; she also performed the gut surgical manipulation for studies on mouse POI in littermate controls and glial Cx43cKO; Sox10creERT2/Cx43fl/fl mice.

## CRediT Authorship Contributions
Samhita Chaudhuri (Formal analysis: Equal; Investigation: Equal; Methodology: Equal; Software: Equal; Validation: Equal; Writing – review & editing: Equal)
Reiner Schneider (Investigation: Lead; Methodology: Lead; Resources: Lead; Software: Lead; Writing – original draft: Lead)
Dmitrii Pavlov (Formal analysis: Equal; Software: Equal; Writing – review & editing: Supporting)
Alix Zuleta Alarcon (Conceptualization: Supporting; Formal analysis: Supporting; Investigation: Equal; Methodology: Equal; Software: Equal; Validation: Equal; Visualization: Equal)
Elvio Mazzotta (Conceptualization: Supporting; Formal analysis: Equal; Investigation: Equal; Validation: Equal)
Jonathon L. McClain, MS (Methodology: Supporting; Resources: Supporting; Validation: Equal; Writing – original draft: Supporting)
Patrick Leven (Conceptualization: Supporting; Formal analysis: Equal; Methodology: Equal)
Paolo Fadda (Resources: Equal; Software: Equal; Writing – review & editing: Supporting)
Steffen Manekeller (Methodology: Equal; Software: Equal; Writing – review & editing: Equal)
Yunpeng Du (Data curation: Equal; Formal analysis: Supporting; Software: Equal)
Alan Harzman (Data curation: Supporting; Resources: Lead; Writing – review & editing: Lead)
Brian Gulbransen (Resources: Equal; Writing – review & editing: Lead)
Sven Wehner (Conceptualization: Lead; Writing – review & editing: Lead)
Fievos L Christofi, Ph.D. (Conceptualization: Lead; Supervision: Lead; Writing – original draft: Lead; Writing – review & editing: Lead)

Conflicts of interest This author discloses the following: Sven Wehner receives royalties from Wolters Kluwer for updating UpToDate articles related to the topic of postoperative ileus. The remaining authors disclose no conflicts.
Funding Fievos L. Christofi is the recipient of grants R01DK113943, R01DK125809, and R01DK141842 from the National Institutes of Diabetes, Digestive and Kidney Diseases (NIDDK). Brian D. Gulbransen is the recipient of R01DK120862 and R01DK103723. The Comprehensive Cancer Center genomics shared resource is supported by a 10.13039/100000002National Institutes of Health grant P30 CA16058; ImmunoSensation 2 Cluster of Excellence: EXC 2151–390873048 (Sven Wehner); German Research Council (DFG): WE4204/3-1 (Sven Wehner); Bonfor Postdoc Grant (Instrument 1B+2A): O-112.0060 and O-112.0066 (Reiner Schneider).
Data Availability The data in this study will be made available from the corresponding author upon reasonable request. Some data from human subjects may be protected under the privacy/HIPAA regulations. Transcriptional data on hEGCs or glial Cx43cKO mice in muscularis externa samples will be included in the the GEO and NCBI databases. For uploading the data: https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/geo/info/submission or https://submit.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov; other datasets are included in GSE198889, GSE205610, GSE134943, GSE149181.