pmcPLoS PathogPLoS Pathog349plospathplosPLOS Pathogens1553-73661553-7374PLOSPMC12863675PMC12863675.112863675128636754158722410.1371/journal.ppat.1013895PPATHOGENS-D-25-013771Research ArticleBiology and Life SciencesMolecular BiologyMolecular Biology TechniquesTransfectionResearch and Analysis MethodsMolecular Biology TechniquesTransfectionBiology and life sciencesMolecular biologyMolecular biology techniquesDNA constructionPlasmid ConstructionResearch and analysis methodsMolecular biology techniquesDNA constructionPlasmid ConstructionBiology and Life SciencesBiochemistryProteinsPost-Translational ModificationPhosphorylationBiology and Life SciencesGeneticsGene ExpressionGene RegulationTranscriptional ControlResearch and Analysis MethodsPrecipitation TechniquesImmunoprecipitationBiology and life sciencesGeneticsDNADNA replicationBiology and life sciencesBiochemistryNucleic acidsDNADNA replicationBiology and Life SciencesMicrobiologyVirologyViral ReplicationBiology and Life SciencesMolecular BiologyMolecular Biology TechniquesMolecular Probe TechniquesImmunoblot AnalysisResearch and Analysis MethodsMolecular Biology TechniquesMolecular Probe TechniquesImmunoblot AnalysisHCMV encoded UL84 hijacks FHL2 to suppress type I interferon production and enhance viral replication
HCMV encoded UL84 and cellular FHL2 interaction regulates the transcription of type I interferonLiRuilinConceptualizationData curationFormal analysisInvestigationMethodologyValidationWriting – original draft XiaSisiConceptualizationData curationFormal analysisInvestigationMethodologyValidationWriting – original draft LiXinConceptualizationData curationFormal analysisInvestigationMethodologyValidationWriting – original draft ZengYingInvestigationMethodology WangTianqiInvestigationMethodology XiaChuanConceptualizationFunding acquisitionProject administrationResourcesSupervisionWriting – review & editing LiHongjianConceptualizationFunding acquisitionProject administrationResourcesSupervisionWriting – review & editing https://orcid.org/0000-0003-2447-0544ChenJunConceptualizationData curationFormal analysisFunding acquisitionMethodologyProject administrationResourcesSupervisionWriting – review & editing 1
State Key Laboratory of Bioactive Molecules and Druggability Assessment, Guangdong Basic Research Center of Excellence for Natural Bioactive Molecules and Discovery of Innovative Drugs, Key Laboratory of Viral Pathogenesis & Infection Prevention and Control, College of Life Science and Technology, College of Pharmacy, Jinan University, Guangzhou, China2
Department of Biological Engineering, Wuhan Polytechnic University, Wuhan, China3
Department of Pathogen Biology and Microecology, College of Basic Medical Sciences, Dalian Medical University, Dalian, ChinaMocarskiEdward S.Editor , ]. The primary subsequent antiviral pipeline of innate immunity is the production of type I interferon (IFN-I, mainly IFN-β), which can stimulate the expression of more than 2,000 immune related genes [ , ]. During viral infection, a variety of transcription factors, including IRF-3/7 (interferon regulatory factor 3/7), ATF-2/ c-Jun, and NF-κB, are activated to regulate the expression of type I interferon independently or in cross-talking. Among these factors, the host IRF-3 plays a critical role in IFN-β transcription activation [ ].
IRF3 is phosphorylated by TBK-1/IKK-ε kinases in the virus-triggered innate immune signaling pathway, and then translocated to the nucleus as functional dimers [ – ]. ATF2/c-Jun is originally present in the nucleus and activated by phosphorylation of the C-terminal amino acid residue by MAP kinase [ ]. Following viral infection, the phosphorylation of IκB releases the binding of NF-κB, which is then translocated into the nucleus [ ]. These transcription factors bind to different regions of the IFN-β promoter, allowing interferon transcription to be regulated in multiple levels. Moreover, IRF3, ATF2/c-Jun, and NF-κB proteins can be induced to form a basic enhanceosome in the transcriptional regulatory region of IFN-β promoter [ ]. Specifically, the general architectural transcription factor HMG I (Y) bends DNA to recruit ATF2/c-Jun and NF-κB, which then assemble with IRF3 to form the enhanceosome complex [ , ]. Then, the enhanceosome complex successively recruits the CREB binding proteins (CBP/p300) and histone acetyltransferases (HATs) to catalyze +1 nucleosome acetylation and promotes the binding of chromatin remodeling complex SWI/SNF to induce TATA-box exposure [ , ]. It then assembles into the preinitiation complex (PIC) to facilitate the recruitment of TFIID to TATA-box, and rapidly promotes the transcription of IFN-β [ ]. However, no direct interaction between IRF3, ATF2/c-Jun, and NF-κB has been found in previous studies, and the specific mechanism of the formation of the basic transcriptional enhanceosome still needs further investigation.
In addition to the general transcription factors and co-factors mentioned above, a few of cellular factors have recently been reported to be involved in the transcriptional regulation of IFN-β under specific physiological conditions. For example, upon virus stimulation, TET3 (Ten-eleven translocation protein 3) interacts with HDAC1 and SIN3A, thus enhancing their binding to the IFN-β promoter, and negatively regulates type I IFN production independent of its DNA demethylation activity [ ]. When macrophages are infected with vesicular stomatitis virus (VSV), nuclear factor of activated T cells 5 (NFAT5) inhibits the recruitment of IRF3 to suppress IFN-β transcription [ ]. These studies indicate that the transcriptional regulation of IFN-β promoter activity is a dynamic process stimulated by specific extracellular physiological factors.
Four and a half LIM domains protein 2 (FHL2) is a highly conserved and widely distributed protein consisting of four and a half LIM domains, which refer to the cysteine-rich domain originally identified in transcription factors MEC-3 and LIN-11 of Caenorhabditis elegans, and in insulin gene enhancer binding protein-1(ISL1) of mouse, and named using the initials of these three proteins [ , ]. Although it lacks any obvious enzymatic activity, FHL2 is a multifunctional protein that shuttles between the nucleus and cytoplasm. The LIM domains, which contain double zinc finger motifs, endow FHL2 with a central function to interact with more than 50 different proteins [ , ]. Many of these interacting partners are cellular receptors and structural proteins. Therefore, FHL2 is considered a scaffold protein that participates in regulating cytoarchitecture, cell adhesion, and cell mobility. However, numerous studies have also suggested that FHL2 functions as a transcriptional regulator, enhancing the transcriptional activity of androgen receptor (AR), c-Jun, AP-1, Egf, Egfr, and TCF/LEF [ , ], as well as regulating the transcription of transforming growth factor β (TGF-β) and the promyelocytic leukemia zinc finger protein (PLZF)-mediated transcription [ , ]. More recently, studies have shown that FHL2 cooperates with IRF3 to upregulate interferon-β (IFN-β) expression, thereby inhibiting influenza virus replication [ ]. It can also activate the inflammatory response and reduce the apoptotic events caused by respiratory infection of influenza viruses [ ]. From these studies, we can find that the function of FHL2 is always closely associated with IRF3, ATF2/ C-Jun and p300, indicating FHL2 might be involved in the regulation of type I interferon mediated host innate immune response. However, the specific molecular mechanism by which FHL2 exerts its roles still needs to be explored.
Human cytomegalovirus (HCMV) belongs to the β-herpesvirus subfamily and is a widespread pathogen that can cause severe damage to people with low immunity [ ]. HCMV has the largest genome in the Herpesviridae family and encodes more than 150 viral proteins, the mechanisms and functions of many viral proteins have not been yet completely elucidated [ ]. The HCMV-encoded UL84 protein was originally identified as a non-core replication-related protein essential for the initiation of HCMV lytic DNA replication [ ]. Studies demonstrate that during the early phases of HCMV DNA replication, an interaction between UL84 and the origin of lytic replication (oriLyt) is observed [ ]. One mode of this binding involves UL84 specifically recognizing and associating with a complex RNA/DNA hybrid structure, which is a defined component of the lytic origin essential for the initiation of DNA replication [ ]. Another mode is that UL84 interacts with regions of oriLyt that contain CAAT enhancer-binding protein alpha (C/EBPα) binding sites, thereby promoting viral DNA replication [ ]. Additionally, UL84 interacts with the core viral replication proteins UL44 and other replication-related protein IE2, which are necessary for the start of efficient lytic DNA replication [ , ]. However, as one of the non-core proteins essential for DNA-dependent replication, the mRNA transcription of UL84 can be detected as early as 2.5 hours post-infection (hpi), which is considerably earlier than the onset of viral DNA replication [ ]. Analysis of the UL84 structure indicates the presence of amino acid motifs that are homologous to those identified in DExD/H family proteins [ ]. These motifs may endow UL84 with the capacity for nuclear-cytoplasmic shuttling [ ]. Furthermore, luciferase reporter assays demonstrated that the presence of UL84 significantly relieved IE2-mediated transcriptional repression [ ]. These findings indicate that UL84 may not only function as a protein related to replication initiation but also participate in the regulation of other viral life-cycle activities.
In this study, we first report UL84 can also inhibit the transcription of IFN-β. Further, we performed a high-throughput yeast two-hybrid screening and identified FHL2 as a binding partner for UL84, and the interaction is confirmed by co-immunoprecipitation, pull-down and confocal microscopy. The UL84-FHL2 interaction is further determined to be involved in the type I interferon transcriptional regulation. HCMV infection of the host activates the innate immune responses, and Type I interferon is a key limiting factor for viral replication and infection. Therefore, we further investigated the specific mechanism by which FHL2 participates in enhancing type I interferon transcription, and how UL84 facilitates the orilyt-dependent DNA synthesis by inhibiting IFN-β transcription.

## Results

## UL84 inhibits HCMV induced type I interferon response
The HCMV genome contains over 200 open reading frames (ORFs), encoding a large number of viral proteins [ ]. To identify HCMV proteins that relate to immune regulation, we constructed a series of viral protein expression vectors and screened them using reporter assays for their abilities to regulate IFN-β promoter activity in HCMV-stimulated HFF cells. It’s intriguing to find out that the viral protein UL84 markedly inhibits the HCMV-induced activation of IFN-β transcription, despite previous reports have considered UL84 as an origin-binding protein (OBP) for viral replication and an essential protein for this process [ ]. As shown in , the luciferase reporter assay showed that UL84 dramatically repressed the transcriptional activity of the IFN-β promoter in a dose-dependent manner. Meanwhile, the analysis of gene expression at different time points also demonstrated that the overexpression of UL84 could continuously inhibit the activity of the interferon-β promoter under the condition of viral infection ( ).
 It has been shown that significant upregulation of IFN-β mRNA is detectable in HCMV-infected HFFs at 4 hpi, while UL84 transcripts are detectable as early as 2.5 hpi post-infection [ , ]. To confirm the temporal expression profile of UL84, the expression levels of UL84 from 3 to 12 hours after HCMV infection were examined. The results indicated that at 3 hpi, a significant upregulation of UL84 transcripts was observed by RT-qPCR, which was consistent with the detection of UL84 protein levels via Western blotting ( ). HCMV infection of HFF cells could induce the production of various host antiviral interferon-stimulated genes (ISGs) [ ]. RT-qPCR analysis indicated that UL84 not only inhibits the transcription of IFNB1, but also that of the downstream typical representative genes IFIT1 and ISG15 in HFFs ( ). Next, we designed and screened two small interfering RNAs (siRNAs) that specifically target UL84 and verified their interference effects via Western blot analysis ( ). RT-qPCR analysis showed that knockdown of UL84 promoted HCMV induced transcription of IFNB1, ISG15, and IFIT1 genes in HFF ( and ).
Interestingly, we discovered that the antiviral genes induced by IAV, EV71, HSV, and ZIKV upon the infection of HFF cells could also be suppressed by UL84 ( – ). In particular, we performed additional experiments to investigate the effect in cells transfected with UL84 on the titer of IAV. In , the data indicate that cells overexpressing UL84 indeed show higher titers of IAV. Furthermore, to verify whether UL84 specifically inhibits interferon responses, we also tested the effect of UL84 on inflammatory-related factors. The results showed that overexpression of UL84 in HFF cells failed to suppress NF-κB promoter activity upon stimulation with HCMV, IAV, EV71, HSV, or ZIKV ( – ). Furthermore, subsequent RT-qPCR analysis showed that overexpression of UL84 also did not cause significant changes in TNF-α, IL-6 and IRF9 mRNA levels ( – ).
These results suggest that UL84 can generally inhibit the host IFN-β mediated-antiviral response against different viruses.

## UL84 specifically interacts with host factor FHL2 to subvert host immune defense
To investigate the specific mechanisms of UL84 in immune escape, we performed a high-throughput yeast two-hybrid (YTH) screening to identify cellular factors that potentially interact with UL84, and some of the positive results were further validated by Co-IP ( ). Among these candidate host factors, the most frequently screened one that attracted our attention was FHL2, whose fundamental function is involved in transcriptional regulation and signal transduction ( ). To validate the interaction between UL84 and FHL2 identified from YTH screening, co-immunoprecipitation (Co-IP) assays were first conducted to confirm this interaction in human cells. To rule out nonspecific interactions and consider the functional context of FHL2, we selected expression plasmids of the host transcriptional regulator EZH2 and the HCMV-encoded UL44 stored in our laboratory as negative controls [ , ]. Myc-UL84 was transiently co-transfected with Flag-FHL2 into 293T cells, while co-expression of Flag-EZH2 or Myc-UL44 was respectively set as a negative control. Subsequently, the cell lysates were incubated with immobilized anti-Myc or anti-Flag agarose beads to isolate the corresponding Myc/Flag-tagged protein complexes. Finally, these isolated protein complexes were analyzed by Western blot using anti-Myc and anti-Flag antibodies. The results indicate specific co-immunoprecipitation between Myc-UL84 and Flag-FHL2, but no significant binding was observed between Myc-UL84 and Flag-EZH2 or between Myc-UL44 and Flag-FHL2 in the control groups ( ). To further determine whether the interaction between UL84 and FHL2 is direct, namely independent of any involvement from other host cellular or HCMV-encoded proteins, we expressed and purified His-UL84, GST-FHL2, His-UL44 and GST-EZH2 in prokaryotic cells respectively, and analyzed their interaction by GST/His pull-down assay. Similarly, only His-UL84 could mutually co-precipitate with GST-FHL2 ( ).
 Next, the co-localization of UL84 and FHL2 within cellular compartments was visualized via confocal microscopy. First, pcDNA3.1-UL84 and/or pcDNA3.1-FHL2 were transfected into HFF cells for 48 h, followed by the observation of subcellular localization of overexpressed proteins using indirect immunofluorescence assay (IFA) via confocal microscopy. The results showed that UL84 exhibited a uniform distribution in both the cytoplasm and nucleus, whereas FHL2 was predominantly localized to the cytoplasm ( ). However, upon co-transfection with UL84, FHL2 was observed to colocalize with UL84 in both the cytoplasm and nucleus of cells. Further experiments were conducted to determine whether virus-expressed UL84 could specifically interact with endogenously expressed FHL2 in host cells during HCMV infection. The results indicate that UL84 is also capable of specifically interacting with FHL2 under conditions of cellular infection ( , Lanes 8 and 10).
To further investigate the essential binding regions between UL84 and FHL2, a series of truncated mutants of UL84 and FHL2 were constructed. As depicted in , FHL2 consists of four half LIM domains. According to previous reports, even the 1/2 LIM can participate in the interaction with splicing factors [ ]. Therefore, we designed the truncated expression vectors based on the division of LIM domains ( ). Subsequently, the truncations of FHL2 were co-expressed with UL84 in HEK293T cells, and the binding region of FHL2 with UL84 was determined by Co-IP. The results showed that the LIM2 domain (95–158 amino acids (aa)) played a pivotal role in mediating the interaction between FHL2 and UL84, as truncation or deletion of this domain significantly impaired their binding affinity ( , Lanes 6 and 7). In contrast, removal of other LIM domains did not appear to affect the interaction.
HCMV UL84 is a core protein that plays an essential role in HCMV replication and comprises 587 amino acid residues [ ]. The N-terminal domain of UL84 (1–400 aa) has been reported to interact with multiple host and viral proteins, and thus may be mainly related to the formation of oriLyt-dependent replication initiation complex [ , ]. Therefore, we proposed that the region of interaction between FHL2 and UL84 was most likely situated within the C-terminal domain (400–587 aa). Similarly, based on the structural information reported so far, a series of truncated mutants of UL84 were constructed ( ). Then, the truncations of UL84 were co-expressed with FHL2 in HEK293T cells, and the binding region of UL84 with FHL2 was determined by Co-IP. As we expected, there was no significant binding or co-precipitation between UL84 (1–399) and FHL2 ( , Lane 4). The results showed that the C-terminal domain of UL84 (400–460 aa) was indispensable for the interaction with FHL2 ( , Lane 7). Finally, molecular docking simulations were performed to provide supporting evidence of the binding sites or domains of UL84 and FHL2. The simulation results demonstrated that UL84 primarily interacts with residues 67–113 within the FHL2 protein, while FHL2 selectively targets residues 446–731 of the UL84 protein, which are consistent with the CO-IP results obtained from truncated mutants ( and ).
Subsequently, we investigated whether the regulatory effects of UL84 on interferon-β and the impact on viral titer in the context of HCMV infection were dependent on its interaction with FHL2. However, as previously reported, UL84 is an essential gene for HCMV replication, which renders the construction of UL84-deficient virus strains infeasible [ ]. We also attempted to generate one and complement its function using UL84-expressing cells, but without success. Therefore, we constructed an expression plasmid containing UL84 mutations by introducing synonymous mutations into the region of the UL84-RNAi-#1 target sequence (UL84-mut), which preserved the UL84 amino acid sequence while conferring resistance to UL84-RNAi-#1 ( ). As shown in , UL84 synonymous mutants (UL84-mut) can still significantly repress mRNA levels of IFN-β induced by HCMV infection in the presence of UL84-RNAi-#1. In contrast, UL84 (Δ400–460) mutants, which lack the interaction region with FHL2, fail to suppress IFN-β expression when co-expressed with UL84-RNAi-#1. Meanwhile, viral titer assays confirmed that the C-terminal domain of UL84 (400–460 aa) was also required for efficient viral replication ( ). Collectively, these data imply the important role of the interaction between UL84 and FHL2 in subverting host immune defenses and supporting virus reproduction.

## Virus infection triggers the phosphorylation and nuclear translocation of FHL2
It is noteworthy that the abundance of FHL2 in HFF cells exhibits but a transient increase following HCMV infection ( ). Furthermore, HFF cells infected with IAV, EV71, HSV and ZIKV also demonstrate an immediate upregulation of FHL2 expression ( – ). Next, we examined the distribution of FHL2 in uninfected HFF cells and assessed whether viral infection had any impact on its localization. Indirect immunofluorescence assays (IFA) showed that FHL2 was mainly distributed in the cytoplasm of uninfected cells ( ). However, after 6 hours of HCMV infection, FHL2 was predominantly translocated into the nucleus. Similarly, we observed that IAV, EV71, HSV, and ZIKV also exhibit the phenomenon of infection-induced translocation of FHL2 into the nucleus ( ).
 Phosphorylation has been widely reported to activate many cellular activators or co-activators, leading to their translocation into the nucleus and subsequent induction of IFN-I transcription [ ]. Research indicates that following the entry of the virus into the cell, IRF3 undergoes phosphorylation and is translocated to the nucleus, where it binds to the CBP/p300 co - activator complex and activates the transcription of the IFNB1 gene [ ]. However, the molecular mechanisms underlying FHL2 nuclear translocation remain incompletely elucidated. Notably, domain analysis failed to identify the classical nuclear localization signal (NLS) or nuclear export signal (NES) motifs, implying that its nuclear transport may be regulated by post-translational modification-mediated processes. Therefore, we conducted nuclear and cytoplasmic extraction and phosphate-affinity SDS-PAGE analysis to investigate whether the FHL2 nuclear translocation is triggered by virus-induced phosphorylation of FHL2. Phos-tag gel electrophoresis and Western blot analysis further confirmed that FHL2 was predominantly localized in the cytoplasm without viral induction, and remained unphosphorylated ( , Lanes 1 and 2). However, upon viral infection, FHL2 underwent phosphorylation and translocated into the nucleus ( , Lane 6). This phenomenon was also observed in HFF cells infected with IAV, EV71, HSV and ZIKV ( – ). These results indicate that virus infection induces the phosphorylation and nuclear translocation of FHL2, which may serve as part of a signaling cascade for detecting viral invasion.

## FHL2 enhances the virus-triggered IFN-β response
It has been reported that FHL2 can interact with ATF2/c-Jun and CBP/p300, which are general constituents of the IFN-β transcriptional enhanceosome [ , ]. Therefore, we proceeded to investigate the potential involvement of FHL2 in IFN-I transcription. As expected, exogenously expressed FHL2 could enhance the activation of IFN-β promoter induced by HCMV in a dose-dependent manner and time-dependent manner ( and ). In addition, FHL2 was found to enhance the transcription of IFN-β promoter induced by various viruses, such as IAV, EV71, HSV and ZIKV in a similar manner ( – ). In contrast, interferon-β promoter activity was significantly inhibited in FHL2-knockout cell lines ( ). Moreover, upon HCMV stimulation of FHL2-overexpressing cells, the transcriptional mRNA levels of IFN-B1 and downstream ISG15 and IFIT1 were significantly elevated compared to vector-transfected controls ( ). Whereas the expression of downstream interferon-stimulated genes was significantly decreased in FHL2-knockout cell lines, as indicated by RT-qPCR analysis ( ). This phenomenon was also observed in HFF cells infected with IAV, EV71, HSV, and ZIKV ( – ).
 Both the upregulation of mRNA levels for interferon-stimulated genes (ISGs) and phosphorylation of STAT1 are critical indicators for assessing type I interferon activation [ , ]. We also observed a significant increase in STAT1 phosphorylation in FHL2-overexpressing cell line following HCMV infection ( ). Meanwhile, in the FHL2-knockout cell line, the STAT1 phosphorylation was significantly inhibited compared with the control group ( ). Given that the phosphorylation of IRF3 represents the final step in the signaling pathway of the type I interferon response, we also assessed FHL2’s role in this signaling cascade by quantifying IRF3 phosphorylation dynamics in FHL2-overexpressing and FHL2-knockout cell lines [ , ]. The results indicated that neither overexpression nor knockout of FHL2 had an impact on the phosphorylation of IRF3 ( and ). These results indicate FHL2 may enhance IFN-β transcriptional activation rather than the cascade signaling activation of viral infection.

## FHL2 facilitates formation of IFN-β transcriptional enhanceosome complex

## FHL2 bridges TBP.
Next, we prompted to determine the mechanism for how FHL2 regulates IFN-I signaling. Given that FHL2 lacks nucleic acid binding capability and cannot directly recognize DNA, clarifying its mechanism for participating in interferon transcriptional activation requires an investigation of its relationship with both upstream cis-acting regulatory elements and the enhanceosome complex within the interferon promoter [ ] The schematic in depicts IFNB1 promoter region (-499 to +100) of the Homo sapiens, sourced from EPD (https://epd.expasy.org/epd/). It annotates key transcriptional factor binding motifs, including the IRF3 consensus sequence 5’-AANNGAAA-3’ recognized by IRF3 [ ], consensus sequence 5’-TGACATAG-3’ recognized by c-Jun [ ], and consensus sequence 5’-GGGRNNYCC-3’ recognized by NF-κB [ ]. To achieve this, we first designed three sets of specific q-PCR probes targeting distinct regions within the IFN-β promoter. Through Chromatin Immunoprecipitation (ChIP) assay using FHL2-specific antibody, we observed that FHL2 was predominantly enriched in the P2 region of the IFN-β promoter, indicating its direct involvement in transcriptional regulation of IFN-β ( ).
 According to previous reports, the formation of IFN-β transcriptional enhanceosome is a complicated regulatory process that involves core backbone components such as general transcription factors ATF-2/c-Jun and CBP/p300, as well as IFN-β promoter specific factor IRF3, followed by the recruitment of HATs, GCN5, and other multifaceted regulators [ , ]. Moreover, FHL2 has been reported to associate with c-Jun (1–100 aa) and p300 (1–670 aa) to form complexes, which synergistically stimulate the transactivating activities of AP-1 and β-catenin [ , ]. ChIP assay showed that IRF3 could be co-immunoprecipitated with FHL2 while specifically binding to IFN-β promoter under HCMV infection. Meanwhile, FHL2 could also specifically bind to the IFN-β promoter and be co-immunoprecipitated with IRF3, c-Jun, and p300 as part of complex formations ( ). Furthermore, we conducted Co-IP assays to further analyze the interaction between FHL2 and c-Jun as well as p300, especially IRF3, aiming to elucidate whether FHL2 interacts with these transcription factors to form complexes that promote IFN-β transcription. The results showed that FHL2 not only interacted with the general transcription factors c-Jun and p300 as previously reported, but also interacted with the promoter-specific transcription factor IRF3 upon ectopic co-expression of plasmids ( ). However, through Co-IP analysis, we could observe that FHL2 would lose its interaction with IRF3, c-Jun and p300 when the LIM2 domain of FHL2 was absent, indicating that this domain may play a key role in the formation of IFN-β transcriptional enhanceosome complex ( ).
It has been reported the phosphorylation of the Y93 residue in FHL2 by FAK is a critical factor for nuclear entry [ ]. Generally, phosphorylation modification plays a crucial role in the nuclear translocation and functional activation of interferon regulators [ ]. A typical example is IRF3, whose phosphorylation site is located in the form of a C-terminal phospho-acceptor cluster, which is essential not only for nuclear translocation but also for dimerization [ ]. Therefore, we hypothesize that phosphorylation clusters may exist around the amino acid residue 93. Based on the NetPhos-3.1-Services-DTU Health Tech analysis, we have predicted a potential phospho-acceptor cluster within the LIM2 domain, which includes possible phosphorylation motifs at the Y97, S98, S99, and T112 amino acid sites. As illustrated in , mutations at any of these four sites would abolish the interaction between FHL2 and IRF3, c-Jun, or p300. Additionally, to rule out the possibility that some or all of these sites are crucial for the correct folding of the FHL2 protein, we carried out molecular dynamics simulations between the wild-type and mutant proteins. Initially, we undertook structural preparation and modeling of the FHL2 protein ( ). The molecular dynamics simulations revealed the stability of both the wild-type and mutant forms of FHL2, as evidenced by Radius of gyration (Rg), root means square deviation (RMSD) and root means square fluctuation (RMSF) trajectories ( – ). These findings are further corroborated by a SASA plot, indicating that mutations at these four critical amino acid sites do not affect the protein’s structural characteristics or stability ( ).
Collectively, these findings indicate that all four predicted sites (Y97, S98, S99, and T112) within the LIM2 domain are essential for FHL2’s interaction with IRF3, c-Jun, or p300 during the assembly of the IFN-β enhanceosome complex.

## FHL2 bridges TBP recruitment to promote IFN-β transcriptional response.
We have demonstrated that the four residue sites (Y97, S98, S99, and T112) within the LIM2 domain are critical for the formation of IFN-β enhanceosome complex. Generally, the enhanceosome complex subsequently recruits TFIID to the TATA-box of the promoter, triggering the transcription of downstream genes [ ]. TFIID is a multi-subunit complex consisting of TATA-binding protein (TBP) and TBP-associated factors (TAF) [ , ], and the function of the general transcription factors TBP is to bind the TATA-box and bend DNA [ ]. Indeed, ChIP assay under HCMV infection showed that IRF3 could be co-immunoprecipitated with TBP while specifically binding to IFN-β promoter, while TBP could also be co-immunoprecipitated with FHL2 as part of enhanceosome complex formations ( ). However, Co-IP assays in HEK293T cells co-transfected with TBP and plasmids expressing IRF3, p300, and c-Jun showed that none of these proteins were directly co-precipitated with TBP, either individually or together ( ). Meanwhile, when we knocked out the endogenous FHL2, TBP levels are decreased in IRF3 enrichment, although it still recruited p300 and c-Jun to the IFN-β promoter ( ). Molecular docking simulation of the IRF3-FHL2-TBP complex indicates that IRF3 specifically recognizes the N-terminal LIM domain of FHL2, while TBP associates with the C-terminal region of FHL2 ( and ). Therefore, we speculated that the mechanism by which FHL2 regulates IFN-β transcription may involve the recruitment of TFIID to the TATA-box.
 Next, when FHL2 was introduced into the co-expressed cells, it was found that FHL2 could be co-immunoprecipitated with both TBP and the typical components of the IFN-β transcriptional enhanceosome complex ( ). However, when IRF3, p300, or c-Jun were co-transfected with TBP and the FHL2 LIM2 deletion mutant (ΔLIM2), the Co-IP results indicated that only TBP was able to bind to ΔLIM2, while IRF3, p300, and c-Jun were not detected in association with ΔLIM2 during co-immunoprecipitation ( ). Moreover, when we analyzed the interaction of TBP with FHL2 Y97G, FHL2 S98G, FHL2 S99G, or FHL2 T112G in HEK293T cells, the results showed that TBP protein was able to interact with all four point-mutated FHL2 proteins, indicating the binding site of TBP did not overlap with the complex of IRF3, p300, and c-Jun at the LIM2 domain of FHL2 ( ). Furthermore, molecular docking of the complex formation of IRF3-FHL2-TBP demonstrates that IRF3 specifically recognizes the N-terminal LIM domain of FHL2, while TBP binds to its C-terminal region ( and ). Together, these findings suggest that the LIM2 domain of FHL2 is not a dominant binding site for TBP and that TBP does not compete for binding at sites occupied by typical components of the IFN-β transcription enhancer complex. Therefore, we assumed that FHL2 may function as a bridge connecting the enhanceosome to the TFIID complex, providing an interface for protein-protein interaction (PPI).

## UL84 disrupts formation of the IRF3-c-Jun-p300 complex by interacting with FHL2
HCMV UL84 has been previously reported to be a replication essential protein [ ]. From the above, we have demonstrated that UL84 inhibits the host antiviral response. Here, we further investigate how the interplay between UL84 and FHL2 contributes to the viral immune evasion from innate immunity.
Firstly, we further verified in an in vitro system through luciferase reporter gene assays that the inhibitory effect of UL84 on HCMV-induced IFN-β depends on its interaction with FHL2. As shown in , compared with wild-type, UL84 (Δ400–460) mutants, which lack the interaction region with FHL2, fail to suppress the dose-dependent enhancement of IFN-β promoter activity by FHL2. Secondly, in UL84 overexpression and specific siRNA-knockdown cell lines, by detecting changes in the phosphorylation of STAT1 and IRF3, we confirmed that UL84 may inhibit IFN-β transcriptional activation rather than the cascade signaling activation induced by viral infection ( – ).
 We have shown that LIM2 domain of FHL2 is essential for virus-triggered IFN-β response. In addition, LIM2 domain is a key structure for UL84 to interact with FHL2. Therefore, it is necessary to investigate the interplay between HCMV UL84 and the IRF3-c-Jun-p300 complex. Our results indicated that UL84 but not its truncation mutant (Δ400–460) abolished the interactions between FHL2 and IRF3, c-Jun or p300, disrupting the formation of IFN-β enhanceosome complex ( – ). Moreover, we have determined that the amino acid residues Y97, S98, S99 and T112 within FHL2 are important for IRF3-c-Jun-p300 reciprocal recognition, so we are wondering if these sites are also essential for UL84 binding? To investigate this, we transient co-transfected UL84 with FHL2Y97G, FHL2S98G, FHL2S99G, or FHL2T112G in HEK293T cells, respectively. The results showed that UL84 protein was not able to interact with FHL2T112G ( ), indicating that UL84 competitively binds to FHL2 through T112 site, and therefore inhibits the interplay between FHL2 and the IRF3-c-Jun-p300 complex.
Considering FHL2 is proven to be a key regulator in the mechanism of IFN-β transcription, we speculated that the mechanism of HCMV evasion of innate immunity might be: UL84 entries the nucleus of host cell to hijack TBP, blocking its recruitment to the TATA-box of IFN-β. To verify our conjecture, plasmids encoding UL84, TBP were transiently co-transfected with FHL2 or FHL2T112G into HEK293T cells. Co-IP assays showed that UL84, as a prey protein, was co-immunoprecipitated with TBP in the presence of FHL2 ( , lane 1). In contrast, when co-transfected with FHL2T112G, UL84 could not enrich TBP, indicating an indirect protein interaction between UL84 and TBP ( , lane 2). Meanwhile, considering LIM2 is the structural domain recognized by UL84 interacting with FHL2, and TBP interacts with FHL2 does not depend on LIM2. Therefore, when HCMV UL84 enters the nucleus to regulate innate immunity, it occupies the LIM2 domain of FHL2, while TBP possibly occupies the LIM3 or LIM4 structural domain, and thereby hijacking TBP from being recruited to the TATA-box of IFN-β ( and ).

## Phosphorylation of the amino acid residue T112 is critical for FHL2-mediated antiviral response
Because the amino acid residue T112 of FHL2 is essential for both the IRF3-c-Jun-p300 assembling and for UL84 to interact with FHL2, we next examined the role of T112 in the type I interferon responses. The luciferase reporter assay results showed that overexpression of FHLT112G (as a dominant-negative control) repressed the activation of the IFN-β promoter in a dose-dependent manner ( ). Meanwhile, RT-qPCR analysis revealed that FHL2 (T112G) not only failed to enhance the expression of IFNB1 induced by HCMV infection, but instead exerted a certain inhibitory effect ( ). In addition, the phosphate affinity immunoblot analysis showed that there were two major phosphorylation bands of FHL2T112G appeared during HCMV infection ( ), which was one band less than that of the wild-type FHL2 ( – ). These results suggest that T112 is one of the amino acids residues that be phosphorylated. Previous studies suggest that Y93, Y97, Y176, Y217, Y236, and S238 of FHL2 can be phosphorylated upon certain conditions [ , , ], next we investigated the roles of Y97, S98, S99, and T112 of FHL2 in virus-triggered FHL2 nuclear translocation. The results indicated that almost all FHL2T112G was induced into the nucleus triggered by HCMV infection in HFFs ( ). In contrast, only half of FHL2 Y97G, S98G, S99G, T112G was induced into the nucleus ( ). Also, confocal microscopy showed that half of FHL2(ΔLIM2) was induced into the nucleus triggered by HCMV infection in HFFs ( ). These results suggest that Y97G, S98G, S99G, and T112G of FHL2 are essential for virus-triggered of IFN-β transcriptional response. However, phosphorylation of currently unknown sites, triggered by HCMV infection, could also cause the translocation of FHL2 into the nucleus.
 Since we have found that T112 of FHL2 is phosphorylated by virus infection, we next tried to identify the kinase which triggers the phosphorylation of FHL2 thus drives it into the nucleus. Focal adhesion kinase (FAK) is known to phosphorylate the tyrosine of FHL2 to affect cell proliferation, but not related to host innate immunity [ ]. According to NetPhos-3.1-Services-DTU Health Tech analysis, PKC may play an important influence on T112 phosphorylation. Therefore, we selected the PKC inhibitor LY333531 and specific targeted siRNA to investigate whether it has any effect on FHL2 nuclear translocation ( – ). The results showed that the amount of FHL2 translocated into nucleus was significantly reduced both in the inhibitor-treated and siRNA-knockdown groups after HCMV infection. These results suggest that PKC may be involved in phosphorylating FHL2. However, nuclear translocation of FHL2 was not fully inhibited, suggesting other yet-unknown phosphokinases may be involved.
Therefore, the phosphorylation of FHL2 at the T112 site catalyzed by PKC is crucial for FHL2 rapid translocation to the nucleus, and participation in immune response regulation.

## UL84 interacts with FHL2 to help HCMV evade the innate immune response and promotes viral oriLyt-dependent DNA replication
Next, we further confirmed the importance of FHL2 in activating the transcription of IFN-β and its corresponding biological effect on virus growth, as well as the role of UL84 in confrontation. We first examined the mRNA levels of IFNB1 by qPCR analysis during HCMV infection of HFFs ( ). The results indicated that overexpression of FHL2 or interference of UL84 by specific RNAi significantly increased the expression of IFNB1 at mRNA level after HCMV infection. In contrast, interference of FHL2 by RNAi or overexpression of UL84 dramatically decreased the level of interferon in HCMV-infected cells. Meanwhile, once FHL2 was down-regulated or mutated to FHLT112G, overexpression of UL84 did not further inhibit interferon levels, indicating that the regulation of UL84 on IFNB1 expression acted through its interaction with FHL2. Accordingly, we can see the opposite trend that overexpression of FHL2 greatly suppressed the virus titer, while cells with FHL2 knock-down or overexpressed with FHLT112G infected by HCMV showed a significant increase in viral titer compared to Con-RNAi transfected group ( ). Also, overexpression of UL84 could effectively counter the inhibitory effect of FHL2, and the enhancement was not further enhanced by the down-regulation of FHL2.
 It was reported that UL84 is required oriLyt-dependent DNA replication, but very little is known about the mechanism of UL84 in this process [ ]. To investigate whether the interaction between UL84 and FHL2 directly affects viral DNA replication, a transient transfection-replication reporter assay previously described by our group and others was adopted in this study [ , ]. Results indicated that ectopically overexpressing FHL2 dramatically inhibited the activation of the oriLyt-replication reporter, while down-regulating FHL2 by RNAi considerably activated the replication of oriLyt compared to minimal oriLyt-replication system (all rep + IE2 + UL84 + oriLyt group) ( ). The overexpression of FHL2T112G, which lost the interaction with UL84, however, did not inhibit oriLyt DNA synthesis.
These results indicate that UL84 is essential for evasion of innate antiviral response mediated by host endogenous FHL2, and the interaction is antagonistic in the process of HCMV DNA replication.

## Discussion
In this study, we demonstrated that phosphorylation of FHL2 serves as part of the interferon-activated cascade, and FHL2 recruits TBP to promote the initiation of IFN-β transcription. Meanwhile, HCMV UL84 antagonists the IFN-I responses by targeting FHL2 and disrupts the FHL2-mediated assembling of enhanceosome complex.
The role of FHL2 as an adapter protein in facilitating protein-protein interactions has been established. Through the examination of the LIM domain of the FHL2 protein, we discovered its critical function in activating IFN-β transcription and enhancing antiviral innate immunity. In the context of viral infection and the subsequent activation of innate immunity, it was observed that UL84, the HCMV replication initiation protein, exploits FHL2 to counteract its mediated innate antiviral response. During oriLyt-dependent DNA replication, the interaction between these two factors is antagonistic.
FHL2 is involved in various biological processes, including cell proliferation, apoptosis, cell differentiation, and tissue repair. Previous studies have indicated that FHL2 plays a role in the transcriptional regulation of genes associated with these processes. For instance, FHL2 has been shown to inhibit estrogen receptor (ER) activity by enhancing the interaction between estrogen receptor α (ERα) and the maternal anti-apoptotic protein Smad4. However, the specific mechanisms through which FHL2, with its multifaceted functions, participates in gene transcription regulation remain unclear. Our study demonstrated that the phosphorylation of FHL2 can act as part of a signaling cascade triggered by DNA viruses or RNA viruses. FHL2 predominantly resides in the cytoplasm; however, upon viral infection, immunofluorescence confocal experiments revealed that FHL2 translocated entirely to the nucleus. Given that FHL2 is associated with the transcriptional activation of c-Jun, AP-1, EGF, EGFR, TCF/LEF, and others, yet does not directly bind to nucleic acids, we speculate that FHL2 may function as an activator in the transcriptional activation of IFN-β. To verify this hypothesis, chromosomal co-immunoprecipitation experiments confirmed that FHL2 is indeed involved in the activation of the IFN-β promoter, consistent with previous findings. It is well established that a primary function of FHL2 is to enhance protein-protein interactions. Since FHL2 was previously reported to interact with c-Jun, we hypothesized that FHL2 facilitates the formation of enhanceosome complexes, thereby upregulating IFN-β transcription. The results of co-immunoprecipitation experiment further demonstrated that FHL2 exhibits a strong interaction with enhancer elements IRF3, p300, and c-Ju. Notably, we identified that the key domains recognized by FHL2 for its interactions with IRF3, p300, and c-Jun are all LIM2, with critical amino acid positions at 97Y, 98S, 99S, and 112T. Previous studies on FHL2 and transcription factors have primarily concentrated on the LIM2 or LIM3 domains; however, the mechanism by which these domains promote protein-protein interactions remains inadequately elucidated. Investigations into the upstream elements of the IFN-β promoter have revealed a spatial gap of more than ten base pairs between the enhancer complex and TFIID. Therefore, we hypothesize that the FHL2 protein may also act as an adapter protein, facilitating the recruitment of TFIID to initiate transcription. Our study demonstrates that FHL2 binds to enhancer complexes via LIM2 recognition in its N-terminal segment, while LIM3, LIM4, or the combination of LIM3-LIM4 recognition facilitates the recruitment of TBP to the TATA box, thereby activating transcription initiation. The LIM domain is characterized by a series of cysteine residues, and mutations at positions 97Y, 98S, 99S, and 112T do not appear to disrupt this interaction. Consequently, we speculate that TBP recognition and binding to the LIM domain may be mediated by a cysteine-rich sequence “CX2CX2C”. To validate this hypothesis, further experimental investigations are warranted.
Cellular proteins that contain LIM domains are widely found in eukaryotes. The human genome encodes 58 genes containing LIM domains [ ]. LIM-domain-only protein family members have no NLS (nuclear localization signal) or NES (nuclear export signal) domains, but usually have the function of PPI. NLS is usually regulated by phosphorylation, and the amino acid residues adjacent to the NLS peptide are modified by phosphorylation [ , ]. Phosphorylation induces a small change in protein structure to another activated status, promoting PPI [ ]. Therefore, the LIM-domain-only protein family members have the function that shuttles from the nucleus to the cytoplasm, which may be a key factor in the induction of post-translational phosphorylated modification. In addition, phosphorylation of amino acid residues at single or multiple sites can also confer the proteins with diverse functions. For example, the amino acids Y97, Y176, Y217, Y236, and S238 of FHL2 that undergo phosphorylation modifications are involved in the cell cycle regulation [ , , ]. To sum up, post-translational modifications can endow LIM-domain-only proteins with diverse functions such as transcriptional activation, signal transduction, and cell cycle regulation. Phosphatomics and proteomics linkage studies will further reveal the causes and mechanisms of functional diversity of LIM-domain-only proteins.
In addition, the IFN-β enhancer has a remarkable property that controls the transcription very precisely. TBP and TAFII250 (TFIID) were recruited to the promoter 6 h post infection (hpi) and the nucleosome II was remodeled at 9–19 hpi [ ]. We found that when HFFs were infected with HCMV, FHL2 had completely entered the nucleus at 6 hpi. The timing of FHL2 involvement in IFN-β transcription coincides with the recruitment of TBP to the TATA-box and nucleosome II remodeling. Therefore, we demonstrated that FHL2 provides a PPI interface as a bridge with histone acetyltransferase attached at the N-terminal and TBP recruited at the C-terminal, thus, to promote the initiation of IFN-β transcription. Interestingly, mutation of any amino acids in Y97, S98, S99, or T112 in FHL2 abolished the ability to interact with IRF3, c-Jun, and p300. T112 is also a key site for UL84 to recognize FHL2, and FHL2 T112G does not activate IFN-β transcription. We hypothesized that the amino acid cluster within FHL2 functions as a transcriptional synergist and has a potential to be a cellular target for drug design.
It was reported that UL84 is required oriLyt-dependent DNA replication in vitro of strains AD169 or Towne [ , ], but very little is known about the mechanism of UL84 in this process [ ]. To investigate whether the interaction between UL84 and FHL2 affects viral DNA replication, a transient transfection-replication reporter assay was adopted in this study. Results indicated that ectopically overexpressing FHL2 dramatically inhibited the activation of the oriLyt-replication reporter, while down-regulating FHL2 by RNAi considerably activated the replication of oriLyt compared to minimal oriLyt-replication system (all rep + IE2 + UL84 + oriLyt group). The overexpression of FHL2T112G, which lost the interaction with UL84, however, did not inhibit oriLyt-replication reporter synthesis.
Previously, it has been shown that the N-terminal functional domain of UL84 can interact with IE2 and UL44 [ , ]. However, little is known about the C-terminal of UL84. Here we found that UL84 is a multi-functional protein that contributes to viral replication and virus-mediated immune escape. We determined the mechanism by which UL84 enters the nucleus and help HCMV evade innate immune response. UL84 is phosphorylated and translocated into the nucleus. The C-terminus of UL84 competitively and reversibly binds to FHL2 through the T112 site, forming a UL84-FHL2 complex and disrupt the formation of the IRF3-c-Jun-p300 complex, thus prevent FHL2-mediated recruitment of TBP to TATA-box. Ectopic expression of UL84 had dramatic inhibitory effects on the expression of IFN-β stimulated genes induced by not only HCMV but also other DNA viruses such as HSV, as well as RNA viruses such as IAV, EV71 and ZIKV.
On the other hand, it was interesting that UL84 is an origin-binding protein (OBP) of viral replication involved in innate immune escape. It was shown that IE2 of HCMV interacts with TBP, SP1, c-Jun, and p300/CREB, but the function is yet unknown, which is possible through an indirect interaction [ ]. However, UL84 can modulate IE2-mediated repression of HCMV oriLytPM [ ]. The results indicated an indirect interaction between UL84 and TBP, and the function of UL84 during HCMV replication may be to recruit the transcription factor TFIID to the TATA-box. Nonstructural proteins (e.g., HCMV UL84) act as bridges to connect PIC-transactivators with GFTs to switch gene transcription from a repressed to an activated state. Interestingly, deletion of UL84, according to previously reported in the TB40 strain, does not seem essential for viral replication [ ], although it can still affect the viral replication efficiency to some extent. This observation strongly supports the viewpoint of this study that UL84 has functions beyond its traditional role as a protein considered essential for replication. In the subsequent study, we will conduct a more in-depth exploration of the mechanism by which UL84, beyond its function in inhibiting the transcription of IFN-β via interaction with FHL2, facilitates oriLyt-dependent DNA synthesis. This study lays a theoretical and practical foundation for developing specific antiviral drug candidates that target the dual biological functions of UL84.

## Materials and methods

## Cells and viruses
Human foreskin fibroblasts (HFF cells, passages 9–14), HEK293T and human lung epithelial lung cell line A549 were obtained from the American Type Culture Collection (ATCC) (Manassas, VA, USA). HCMV (Towne-BAC) were kindly provided by Prof. Fenyong Liu (University of California, Berkeley, CA, USA). A/WSN/34 H1N1 were provided by Dr. Wenjun Song (Guangzhou Medical University). HSV, EV71 (Xiangyang-Hubei-09) and ZIKV (z16006) strains were kindly provided by Dr. Zhen Luo (Jinan University, Institute of Medical Microbiology).

## Reagents and antibodies
Anti-Flag mouse monoclonal antibody (Cat. No. F1804; diluted 1:10,000) antibody and Monoclonal FHL2 mouse monoclonal antibody (Cat. No. WH0002274M1; diluted 1:10,000) was purchased from Sigma (Saint Louis, USA). The antibodies against human IRF3 rabbit monoclonal antibody (Cat. No. 11904; diluted 1:1,000), human pIRF3 rabbit monoclonal antibody (Cat. No. E6F7Q; diluted 1:1,000), c-Jun mouse monoclonal antibody (Cat. No. 2315; diluted 1:1,000), STAT1 rabbit monoclonal antibody (Cat. No. 9172S; diluted 1:1,000) and pSTAT1 rabbit monoclonal antibody (Cat. No. 9167S; diluted 1:1,000) were obtained from CST (Boston, USA). CMV UL84 mouse monoclonal antibody (Cat. No. sc-56977; diluted 1:1,000) was purchased from Santa Cruz Biotechnology (State of Texas, USA). Anti-c-Myc mouse monoclonal antibody (Cat. No. ab32072; diluted 1:1,000), anti-6X His tag mouse monoclonal antibody (Cat. No. ab5000; diluted 1:1,000), anti-GST rabbit monoclonal antibody (Cat. No. ab111947; diluted 1:1,000), Rabbit Recombinant Monoclonal FHL2 antibody (Cat. No. ab202584; diluted 1:1,000), anti-GAPDH rabbit monoclonal antibody (Cat. No. ab181602; diluted 1:10,000), anti-KMT6/EZH2 rabbit monoclonal antibody (Cat. No. ab307646; diluted 1:1,000), anti-Histone H3 rabbit polyclonal antibody (Cat. No. ab1791; diluted 1:5,000), anti-KAT3B/p300 rabbit polyclonal antibody (Cat. No. ab10485; diluted 1:5,000), anti-TATA binding protein TBP rabbit monoclonal antibody (Cat. No. ab220788; diluted 1:1,000), anti-Cytomegalovirus IE1 and IE2 mouse monoclonal antibody (Cat. No. ab53495; diluted 1:1,000), anti-Influenza A Virus Nucleoprotein mouse monoclonal antibody (Cat. No. ab128193; diluted 1:300), Goat Anti-Rabbit IgG H&L (Cat. No. ab150079; diluted 1:200), Goat Anti-Mouse IgG H&L (Alexa Fluor 568) (Cat. No. ab175473; diluted 1:200), and anti-HSV 1 ICP4 Immediate Early Protein (Cat. No. ab6514; diluted 1:800) were purchased from Abcam (Cambridge, UK). Zika virus NS1 mouse monoclonal antibody (Cat. No. EA88; diluted 1:50) was purchased from Invitrogen (California, USA). Enterovirus 71 VP1 rabbit polyclonal antibody (Cat. No. GTX132338; diluted 1:1,000) was obtained from GeneTex. DAPI (Shanghai, China; Cat. No. C1002) was purchased from Beyotime Biotechnology. LY333531 hydrochloride (Cat. No. HY-10195) was purchased from MedChemExpress (New Jersey, USA).

## Plasmids design and construction
Genes encoding UL84, IE2, UL44 were amplified from the HCMV Towne and subcloned into the expression vector, respectively. Plasmids encoding FHL2, EZH2, p300, IRF3, c-Jun and TBP were generated by PCR amplification using genomic DNA isolated from normal human HFF cells as the template. All plasmids including those previously constructed and preserved in our laboratory were verified by sequencing to confirm accuracy. The primer pairs used for plasmid construction are listed in .
Plasmid map sequence information of pCDNA3.1(GenBank: MN996867.1), a mammalian expression vector with a CMV promoter. Plasmid map sequence information of pCMV-N-myc (Addgene, Cat. No. 631604), a mammalian expression vector with a CMV promoter. Plasmid map sequence information of pRK11-Flag (Cat. No. P33800), a mammalian expression vector with a CMV promoter was purchased from MIAOLING PLASMID (Wuhan, China). Plasmid map sequence information of pGEX-6P-1-N-GST (Catalog Number: VT1258), a mammalian expression vector with a Tac promoter was purchased from YouBio (Changsha, China). Plasmid map sequence information of pET28A-N-His (Cat. No. P0023), a mammalian expression vector with a T7 promoter was purchased from MIAOLING PLASMID (Wuhan, China). Plasmids encoding FHL2 with site-specific mutations were constructed via the overlap extension PCR method listed in .
The pGL3-luci-IFN-beta and pGL3-luci-NF-κB plasmid provided by Prof. Yonggang Pei (Southern University of Science and Technology, Shenzhen, China). pGL3-luci-IFN-β contains two interferon-stimulated response element (IRSE) repeats, and each core element harbors conserved sequences recognized by c-Jun (consensus sequence: 5’-TGACATAG-3’), IRF3 (consensus sequence: 5’-AANNGAAA-3’), and p65 (consensus sequence: 5’-GGGRNNYCC-3’). Sequencing results of pGL3-luci-NF-κB revealed two 10 bp κB-responsive promoter consensus sequences (GGGACTTTCC) located 51 bp and 76 bp upstream of the TATA box.
UL84 synonymous mutations was performed using the mutation primers and the Fast Site-Directed Mutagenesis Kit (Transgen Biotech, Beijing, China; Cat. No. FM111-01) according to the manufacturer’s protocol. The mutation primers are as follows:
UL84-mut-F: TCGGGTGCACCGGGGCACCTACCACCTCATTCAGTTGCAC,
UL84-mut-R: GTGCAACTGAATGAGGTGGTAGGTGCCCCGGTGCACCCGA.

## HFF cell transfection
HFF cells were plated in 10 cm² dishes and achieved 90% confluency one day before electroporation [ , ]. Pre-electroporation, cells were detached with trypsin, resuspended in electroporation buffer (Bio-Rad, USA; catalog number 1652676) to a concentration of 2–5 × 10⁶ cells/mL. Two hundred microliters of cell suspension were combined with 1 μg plasmid in an electroporation cuvette, followed by electroporation using a Gene Pulser Xcell system set at square wave, 160 V, 15 ms [ , ]. Immediately after electroporation, the cell suspension was transferred to 6 cm culture dishes for incubation. The medium was aspirated and refreshed after 4 hours. Transient gene expression was assayed 24–48 hours post-electroporation.

## Transfection-Replication Assays
Construction of the replication reporter plasmid pGL3–14 and replication-related plasmids was described in our previous work [ ]. HFF cells were trypsinized, resuspended in electroporation buffer, mixed with 10 µg total DNA (HCMV core replication proteins/cofactors-encoding plasmids) and 1 µg pGL3–14 reporter plasmids, and electroporated [ , , ]. Immediately after electroporation, the cell suspension was transferred to culture dishes for incubation. The medium was aspirated and refreshed after 4 hours. After 24 hours, cells were harvested and oriLyt promoter-driven reporter activation levels were assayed. (Beyotime, Shanghai, China; catalog number RG029M).

## siRNA Transfection
Human foreskin fibroblast (HFF) cells were cultured in culture plates, and siRNA transfection was performed using StarvioPM siRNA/miRNA Transfection Reagent (Cat#: 11013, Baidai Biotechnology, Changzhou, China) in accordance with the manufacturer’s instructions. Transient gene expression was detected 24–48 hours post-transfection. siRNA targeting protein kinase C-δ (si-PKC-δ) and si-UL84 were purchased from Sangon Biotech (Shanghai, P.R. China). The sequences of siRNA used in this study are as follows:
UL84-siRNA-1-F: 5’-CGCGGAACUUACCAUCUAAUC-3’,
UL84-siRNA-1-R: 5’-UUAGAUGGUAAGUUCCGCGGU-3’;
UL84-siRNA-2-F: 5’-CGCGGAACUUACCAUCUAAUC-3’,
UL84-siRNA-2-R: 5’-UUAGAUGGUAAGUUCCGCGGU-3’;
PKC-siRNA-1-F: 5’-CAAGAAGUGUAUUGAUAAAGU-3’,
PKC-siRNA-1-R: 5’-UUUAUCAAUACACUUCUUGUG-3’;
PKC-siRNA-2-F: 5’-GAUUUAAAGUCUACAAUUACA-3’,
PKC-siRNA-2-R: 5’-UAAUUGUAGACUUUAAAUCUG-3’.

## Establishment of stable cell lines
Search and use the online website http://crispr-era.stanford.edu/index.jsp. Design the sgRNA according to the operation instructions, then construct it into the LentiCRISPR V2 vector. The primer sequences are as follows:
FHL2-1: ACUGAGCGCUUUGACUGCCACCAUU [ ],
FHL2-2: CGAAUCUCUCUUUGGCAAG [ ],
FHL2-3: UCUCUCUUUGGCAAGAAGU [ ];
Construction of knockout plasmids was performed by constructing and transforming the knockout plasmids into Stabl3 competent cells. Following plasmid extraction, lentivirus packaging and concentration were conducted. A mixture of 8 μg/mL polybrene and 50 μL concentrated lentivirus solution was incubated at room temperature for 30 minutes. After incubation, the mixture was added dropwise to a 6-well plate, which was then placed in an incubator for culture. After 48 hours, the medium supernatant was discarded, and puromycin was added to achieve a final concentration of 5 μg/mL. The plate was subsequently returned to the incubator for continued culture. Every two days, the medium was replaced with fresh complete medium containing 5 μg/mL puromycin for further selection, and the process lasted for two weeks. Selected cells were then cultured for expansion and identification before experiments.

## Yeast two-hybrid screening and assays
Saccharomyces cerevisiae strain AH109 control vectors pGADT7, pGADT7-T and pGBKT7-p53, and a human fetal brain cDNA library were purchased from was purchased from Clontech (Mountain View, CA, USA). Prior to library screening, pGBKT7-UL84 (GAL4 DNA-binding domain [GAL4-BD]-UL84 fusion plasmid) was transformed into AH109 to exclude UL84-mediated self-activation of yeast reporter genes. Subsequently, AH109/pGBKT7-UL84 was co-transformed with cDNA library plasmids. Transformants were plated on synthetic dropout medium lacking Trp, Leu, Ade, and His (SD/-Trp/-Leu/-Ade/-His) and incubated at 30°C for 3–5 days. Visible colonies were validated by β-galactosidase activity assays (5-bromo-4-chloro-3-indolyl-β-D-galactopyranoside [X-Gal] filter lift method). Plasmids from positive clones were extracted using the E.Z.N.A. Yeast Plasmid Kit (Omega Bio-Tek), rescued in Escherichia coli DH5α competent cells, and purified via standard miniprep. For the negative control, AH109 was co-transformed with empty pGBKT7 and the cDNA library, following the same procedures. Inserts of positive plasmids were sequenced with the GAL4AD-specific primer (5’-TAATACGACTCACTATAGGGC-3’), and homology was analyzed via BLAST on the NCBI database to identify target genes [ ].

## Luciferase reporter assays
A dual-luciferase reporter assay system was used to assess that whether FHL2, FHL2T112G, UL84 activate or repress the IFN-β promoter. The plasmids were co-transfected into HEK293T cells alongside pGL3-luci-IFN-beta and pRL-TK. After 24 hours, the cells were infected with HCMV (MOI = 1). Subsequently, at 6 hours post-infection (hpi), cells were harvested and promoter-driven reporter activation levels were assayed (Beyotime, Shanghai, China; catalog number RG029M).

## SDS-PAGE and immunoblot analysis
Cells were lysed by adding lysis solution (20 mM Tris-HCl pH7.4, 150 mM NaCl, 4% detergent, 2mM EDTA, 10% glycerol) for 30min at 4°C rotating, after then, were centrifuged and taken the supernatant removal. The supernatant was mixed with 6 × SDS-PAGE loading buffer (1.5M Tris-HCl pH7.4, 10% glycerol, 2% SDS, 15% β-mercaptoethanol, 0.0005% bromophenol blue) and boiled for 10 min. The protein samples were separated by SDS-PAGE and transferred to PVDF (Millipore, New Jersey, USA; catalog number IPFL00010) membrane. After immunoblotting, the PVDF membrane were incubated in the blocking buffer (3% nonfat dry milk and 0.05% Tween-20 in TBS) for 1h. After that, the membrane was transferred to the primary antibody dilution for 1h at room temperature, followed by 3 times washes with TBST. After the membrane were washed by TBST, the membrane is transferred to the secondary antibody dilution and incubated for 1h at room temperature, followed by 3 times washes with TBST. After the membrane were washed by TBST, the results are displayed using chemiluminescence.

## GST/His pull-down assay
Construction of fusion protein expression plasmids: pGEX-6P-1-FHL2, pGEX-6P-1-EZH2, pET28a-UL84, pET28a-UL44. And pGEX-6P-1-EZH2 and pET28a-UL44 vector served as negative controls. For GST/His-tag pull-down, GST/His--tagged recombinant proteins were mixed with glutathione or anti-His at 4°C and incubated with Protein A + G agarose (Beyotime, Shanghai, China; catalog number P2019) for 4 h. After washing the agarose three times with PBS, mixed 6 × SDS-PAGE loading buffer and boiled for 10 min. Then SDS-PAGE with immunoblot analysis assay pull-down results.

## Co-immunoprecipitation assay
After transfection of plasmid being into HEK293T cells for 48 h, cells were collected with 200 μl lysis solution and 2 μl protease inhibitor, then incubated for 30 min at 4°C, and then the supernatant was removed by centrifugation. The supernatant was added with 30 μl Protein A + G agarose, 2 μl protease inhibitor, 0.8 μl primary antibody and incubated for 2 h at 4°C. After incubation, the beads were washed 3 times with pre-cooled PBS and the supernatant was discarded. The beads were added with 25 μl of lysis solution and 5 μl loading buffer (6 × SDS-PAGE loading buffer) and boiled for 10 min. Immunoblot analysis of interaction results.

## Indirect immunofluorescence assay and confocal microscopy
First, the confocal dish is rinsed with phosphate-buffered saline (PBS), following which 4% paraformaldehyde is added and the dish is incubated at room temperature for 20 minutes to fix the samples. Upon completion of fixation, the confocal dish is washed three times with PBS to remove residual fixative, then PBS-T (PBS supplemented with 0.2% Triton X-100) is added and incubated for 10 minutes to permeabilize the cell membranes. After permeabilization, the dish is again washed three times with PBS to eliminate excess PBS-T, and subsequently PBS-B (PBS containing 4% bovine serum albumin, BSA) is added for incubation at 37°C for 10 minutes to block non-specific binding sites. Following the blocking step, primary antibody is added to the dish and incubated at room temperature for 2 hours to allow specific binding to the target antigen. Next, the dish is washed three times with PBS to remove unbound primary antibody, after which secondary antibody is added and incubated at room temperature for 1 hour to bind to the primary antibody. Once the secondary antibody incubation is finished, the dish is washed three times with PBS to discard unbound secondary antibody, and DAPI staining solution is then added for nuclear staining. Finally, the prepared confocal dishes are scanned and observed using a confocal laser scanning microscope to acquire imaging data.

## Phos-tag analysis
Detect FHL2 phosphorylation by in vitro Phos-tag gel, and there are two main concerns in sample preparation protocol: (1) Cytoplasmic samples: HFF cells were lysed in lysis buffer (10mM Tris-HCl [pH7.4], 150 mM NaCl, 1% NP-40, 0.25% sodium deoxycholate, 2mM EGTA) containing protease inhibitor and phosphatase inhibitor for 30 min at 4°C. The supernatant was then removed by centrifugation at 12000 g for 10 min at 4°C, and the supernatant was added to protein loading buffer (1.5M Tris-HCl [pH 7.4], 10% glycerol, 2% SDS, 15% β-mercaptoethanol, 0.0005% bromophenol blue) containing 2 μl 10 μM MnCl2 was boiled for 10 min. (2) Nucleus samples: centrifuged precipitates were added to lysis buffer (10 mM Tris-HCl [pH7.4], 150 mM NaCl, 1% NP-40, 0.25% sodium deoxycholate, 2 mM EGTA) containing protease inhibitor and phosphatase inhibitor and then sonicated for 2 min. Then the supernatant was removed by centrifugation at 12,000 g at 4°C for 10 min. The supernatant was removed for 10 min, and the supernatant was added to protein loading buffer (1.5M Tris-HCl, 10% glycerol, 2% SDS, 15% β-mercaptoethanol, 0.0005% bromophenol blue) containing 2 μl of 10 μM MnCl2 and boiled for 10 min.
Cytoplasmic or nucleus samples were separated by 8% SDS–PAGE gel containing 50 μM Phos-tag acrylamide (ApexBio, Houston, USA; catalog number F4002) and 100 µM MnCl2. The Phos-tag gel was then washed with transfer buffer containing 1 mM EDTA to remove the Mn2+ in three washes of 20 minutes each. And then Phos-tag gel transferred to PVDF membrane for immunoblotting.

## Molecular docking simulations
The FHL2, c-Jun, p300 and UL84 structure constructed by AlphaFold was used as a template. The FHL2, UL84 and p300 structure constructed by AlphaFold were used as a template. For IRF3, the 2O61 crystal at 2.80 Å resolution was selected. For TBP, the 4ROE crystal at 2.20 Å resolution was selected. The protein structure was prepared with “Protein Preparation Wizard” (Schrödinger, LLC, New York, NY2021). application using default settings, adding hydrogens, assigning disulfide bonds, removing surrounding waters, adjusting charges, capping termini, and adding missing side chains using Prime. The protein–protein docking experiments were performed using the Protein-Protein Docking component. All other parameters were kept default. The best pose was output on the basis of prime energy and the protein-protein interactions.
Molecular dynamics simulations of the near-native docked FHL2 structural and four mutants computationally constructed were executed to evaluate the stability and dynamic behavior of proteins. For the stability analysis following molecular dynamics simulations, six systematic analyses were conducted: (1) Radius of Gyration (Rg) was utilized to evaluate the overall structural compactness; (2) Root Mean Square Deviation (RMSD) was calculated to primarily assess the overall drift of protein and ligand structures relative to the reference structure; (3) Root Mean Square Fluctuation (RMSF) was employed to examine the flexibility of individual protein residues; (4) Solvent Accessible Surface Area (SASA) was measured to determine the exposure level of hydrophobic regions of the protein, which is pertinent to protein folding and interactions; (5) Free Energy Landscape (FEL) analysis was performed to characterize the energy barriers and stable states associated with protein conformational transitions; and (6) Hydrogen Bond Analysis (Hbond) was conducted to quantify the number and stability of hydrogen bonds either between the protein and ligand or within the protein itself.

## Chromatin immunoprecipitation assay (ChIP)
HFF cells were infected with HCMV (MOI = 1) for 6 h, and then cross-linked with 1% formaldehyde for 15 min. Then add 125 mM glycine and incubate for 5 min at room temperature. The cells were collected and centrifuged to discard the supernatant, and the lysate was added to sonicate to break the genome about 500 bp. The supernatant was collected by centrifugation and added to agarose (Beyotime, Shanghai, China; catalog number P2108). Anti-TBP/anti-FHL2 was set as the experimental group, no antibody control, rabbit IgG was the negative control, anti-RNA polymerase II was the positive control, and incubated at 4°C overnight. The agarose was washed with low-salt wash buffer, high-salt wash buffer, and LiCl wash buffer, TE Wash buffer, respectively. Wash buffer was then added to the agarose and the supernatant was collected by centrifugation. 5 M NaCl was added to the supernatant to de-crosslink, then RNase A was added, and the RNA was removed by incubating at 37°C for 1 h. The DNA fragments were then recovered, and the enrichment of IFN-β promoter was detected by Q-PCR. The sequence of IFN-β promoter used in this study are as follows:
P1:(F-5′-TCGTTTGCTTTCCTTTGCTT-3′,
R-5′-CCCACTTTCACTTCTCCCTTT-3′) [ [ ];
P2:(F-5′-AAAGGGAGAAGTGAAAGT-3′, R-5′-TACTACCTGTTGTGCCAGAGC-3′) [ , ];
P3:(F-5′-GCTCTGGCACAACAGGTAGTA-3′, R-5′-TGTAGTGGAGAAGCACAACAGG-3′) [ ].

## RT-qPCR analysis
Total RNA was extracted from cell beads using a total RNA kit (Yasen, Shanghai, China; Cat. No. 19221ES50). The extracted RNA samples had an OD260/OD280 optical density ratio of 1.9 to 2.0, and cDNA synthesis was performed using a reverse transcription kit (Vazyme, Nanjing, China; Cat. No. R223-01). For RT-qPCR, the CFX96 real-time system (Bio Rad, Hercules, CA, USA) and SYBR Green Master Mix kit (Yeasen, Shanghai, China; Cat. No. 11201ES08) were used to detect the mRNA expression levels. The RT-qPCR cycling program was as follows: an initial denaturation stage of 95°C for 3 min; an amplification stage of 95°C for 20 s, 60°C for 30 s, and 72°C for 30 s for 40 cycles; and a final extension stage of 72°C for 5 min. After each run, melt curve analysis was performed to check the specificity of the amplification reaction. Using GAPDH as the data standard, calculate the relative expression of the target gene as 2−ΔΔCt. The primers used in this study were as follows:
UL84-F: CTACGCCGCTGCAATTGG;
UL84-R: GCCGCCGTTTTTTTCTCTTTG [ ];
IFNB1-F: CTGGCTTCCATGAACAA;
IFNB1-F: AGAGGGCTGTGTGGAGAA [ ];
ISG15-F: AGTCGACCCAGTCTCTGACTCT;
ISG15-R: CCCCAGCATTCACCTTTA [ ];
IFIT1-F: GCCTAATTTACAGCAACCATGA;
IFIT1-R: TCATCAATGGATAACTCCCATGT [ ];
IL6-F: CAGCTATGAACTCCTTCTCCAC;
IL6-R: GAGATGCCGTCGAGGATGTAC [ ];
IRF9-F: CCACCGAAGTTCCAGGTAACAC;
IRF9-R: AGTCTGCTCCAGCAAGTATCGG [ ];
TNFα-F: CAGAGGGAAGAGTTCCCCAG;
TNFα-R: CCTTGGTCTGGTAGGAGACG [ ];
GAPDH-F: -TGACCTCAACTACATGGTTTACATGT;
GAPDH-R: AGGGATCTCGCTCCTGGAA [ ].

## Viral titer assays
Influenza virus titration was performed using A549 cells. First, A549 cells were transfected with the GFP-UL84 plasmid via transfection reagent, respectively, one day in advance. After 24 hours, the cells were incubated with the virus for 1 hour. At the end of incubation, the cells were washed again, followed by incubation for 48–72 hours. Subsequently, the cells were fixed with 4% paraformaldehyde for 1 hour and stained with a 0.1% crystal violet solution (Sigma-Aldrich). After plaque counting, viral titers were expressed as PFU/mL [ ].
HCMV titration was performed using HFF cells as previously described [ ]. Briefly, to obtain the total proliferating viral samples, the infected cells as well as medium were mixed with an equal volume of 10% (w/v) skimmed milk, followed by three repeated freeze-thaw cycles and removal of cell debris by centrifugation (3000 g for 30 min at 4°C) to collect the supernatant as viral stocks. Finally, standard virus plaque assays were performed in HFF cells to measure the titers of viral stocks based on the counted numbers of viral plaques after 14-day infection. Viral titers at each time point were measured in triplicate (n = 3), with the values representing the mean of three independent experiments.

## Statistical analysis
All experiments in this study were conducted independently in triplicate, and the data are presented as mean ± standard deviation (mean ± SD). Statistical analysis of the experimental data was performed using GraphPad Prism 7 software. For comparisons between groups, an independent sample t-test (Student’s t-test, p < 0.05) was employed for two-group comparisons, while One-way ANOVA followed by Bonferroni post hoc test was utilized for multigroup comparisons. p < 0.05 indicates that the difference between groups is statistically significant, * p < 0.05, ** p < 0.01, *** p < 0.001, **** p < 0.0001, ns has no significant difference.

## Supporting information
S1 Fig

## ULL84 temporal expression detection.
(A) HCMV (MOI = 1) for the indicated times before RT-qPCR analysis of the indicated UL84 genes in HFF cells. (B) HCMV (MOI = 1) for the indicated times before western blot analysis of the indicated UL84, IRF3 and pIRF3 in HFF cells. All experimental assays were conducted in triplicate with independent biological replicates. For all figures, statistical analyses were performed using two-tailed t-test. Differences were considered statistically significant when * denoted p < 0.05, ** denoted p < 0.01, *** denoted p < 0.001, and **** denoted p < 0.0001.
(TIF)
S2 Fig

## Confirmation that HCMV UL84 does not inhibit the NF-κB response.
(A) A549 cells were first transfected with the UL84-expressing plasmid. After 24 hours, cells were infected with IAV (MOI = 0.5). All experimental assays were conducted in triplicate with independent biological replicates. (B) (C) (D) (E) (F) HFF cells were transfected with pGL3-Luci-NF-κB and pRL-TK plasmids, along with increasing amounts of pcDNA3.1-UL84 expression vectors for 24 h. Then, HFFs infected with HCMV (MOI = 1), IAV (MOI = 0.5), EV71 (MOI = 1), HSV (MOI = 1), or ZIKV (MOI = 1) for an additional 24 h, after which dual-luciferase reporter assays were conducted. All experimental assays were conducted in triplicate with independent biological replicates. (G) (H) (I) (J) (K) HFF cells were transfected with the plasmid pcDNA3.1-UL84 or the empty vector for 24 h, and then respectively infected with HCMV (MOI = 1), IAV (MOI = 0.5), EV71 (MOI = 1), HSV (MOI = 1), or ZIKV (MOI = 1) for the indicated times before RT-qPCR analysis of the indicated TNFα genes. All experimental assays were conducted in triplicate with independent biological replicates. (L) (M) (N) (O) (P) HFF cells were transfected with the plasmid pcDNA3.1-UL84 or the empty vector for 24 h, then respectively infected with HCMV (MOI = 1), IAV (MOI = 0.5), EV71 (MOI = 1), HSV (MOI = 1), or ZIKV (MOI = 1) for the indicated times before RT-qPCR analysis of the indicated IL6 genes. (Q) (R) (S) (T) (U) HFF cells were transfected with the plasmid pcDNA3.1-UL84 or the empty vector for 24 h, then respectively infected with HCMV (MOI = 1), IAV (MOI = 0.5), EV71 (MOI = 1), HSV (MOI = 1), or ZIKV (MOI = 1) for the indicated times before RT-qPCR analysis of the indicated IRF9 genes. For all figures, statistical analyses were performed using two-tailed t-test. Differences were considered statistically significant when * denoted p < 0.05, ** denoted p < 0.01, *** denoted p < 0.001, and **** denoted p < 0.0001.
(TIF)
S3 Fig

## Western blot analysis of HFF and HEK293T cells following transfection with plasmid.
(A) UL84-RNAi-#1 or UL84-RNAi-#2 were transiently transfected in HFFs for 24 h, respectively. HFF cells were transiently transfected via electroporation, then infected with HCMV (MOI = 1) before Western blotting. (B) Expression plasmids of Flag-FHL2 were transiently transfected into HEK293T cells for 48 h, and then the total cell lysates were prepared and immunoprecipitated with anti-Flag antibody, followed by immunoblot analysis. (C) Immunoblotting analysis was performed using anti-FHL2 antibody on lysates from the FHL2-overexpressing cell line generated in HFF cells. (D) Immunoblotting analysis was performed using anti-FHL2 antibody on lysates from the FHL2-KO cell line generated in HFF cells. (E) (F) PKC-RNAi-#1 or PKC-RNAi-#2 were transiently transfected in HFFs for 24 h, respectively. HFF cells were transiently transfected via electroporation, then infected with HCMV (MOI = 1) before Western blotting. (G) Expression plasmids of Myc-UL84 were transiently transfected into HEK293T cells for 48 h, and then the total cell lysates were prepared and immunoprecipitated with anti-Myc antibody, followed by immunoblot analysis. (H) Immunoblotting analysis was performed using anti-UL84 antibody on lysates from the UL84-overexpressing cell line generated in HFF cells. The displayed images were representative ones from three independent experiments. (I) Expression plasmids of Flag-FHL2 and Myc-UL84 were transiently transfected into HEK293T cells for 48 h, and then the total cell lysates were prepared and immunoprecipitated with anti-Flag, anti-Myc antibodies, followed by immunoblot analysis. (J) HFF cells were transiently transfected vector via electroporation and Lipofectamine 3000 for 48 hours. Transfection results were observed under a fluorescence microscope 48 hours after transfection. The displayed images were representative ones from three independent experiments.
(TIF)
S4 Fig

## Yeast two-hybrid screen for target proteins.
(A) The pGBK-T7-UL84 plasmid was first introduced into the AH109 strain to exclude the self-activation of reporter genes. The AH109 strain was then co-transformed with the pGBK-T7-UL84 plasmid with pGACT7-FHL2, pGACT7-KPNA3, pGACT7-KPNA4, and pGACT7-ZNF143. The AH109 strain was then co-transformed with the pGBKT7-UL84 plasmid. As a negative control, the AH109 strain was co-transformed with the pGBKT7 empty vector and the cDNA library plasmids. (B) Co-IP assays between UL84 and target proteins KPNA3. HEK293T cells were transiently plasmids as indicated for 48 h before Co-IP and immunoblots analysis. The displayed images were representative ones from three independent experiments.
(TIF)
S5 Fig

## FHL2 enhances virus-triggered IFN-β promoter activity and downstream interferon-stimulated gene responses.
(A) (B) (C) (D) HFF cells were transfected with pGL3-luci-IFN-beta and pRL-TK plasmids, along with increasing amounts of pcDNA3.1-FHL2 expression vectors for 24 h. Then, HFFs infected with IAV (MOI = 0.5), EV71 (MOI = 1), HSV (MOI = 1), or ZIKV (MOI = 1) for an additional 6 h, after which dual-luciferase reporter assays were conducted. All experimental assays were conducted in triplicate with independent biological replicates. (E) (F) (G) (H) The pGL3-luci-IFN-beta and pcDNA3.1-FHL2 plasmids were transiently transfected into HFFs for 24 h. Dual-luciferase reporter assays were then conducted. All experimental assays were conducted in triplicate with independent biological replicates. (I) (J) (K) (L) FHL2 was transiently transfected into HFFs for 24 h. Then IAV (MOI = 0.5), EV71 (MOI = 1), HSV (MOI = 1), or ZIKV (MOI = 1) for different times as indicated. The expression of antiviral interferon-stimulated genes (IFIT1, ISG15 and IFNB1) was analyzed before RT-qPCR analysis, which was normalized to the mRNA level of GAPDH. All experimental assays were conducted in triplicate with independent biological replicates. For all figures, statistical analyses were performed using two-tailed t-test. Differences were considered statistically significant when * denoted p < 0.05, ** denoted p < 0.01, *** denoted p < 0.001, and **** denoted p < 0.0001.
(TIF)
S6 Fig

## Molecular Docking Simulation.
(A) Molecular docking of the UL84-FHL2 complex: 2D interaction diagram. (B) Molecular docking of the FHL2-IRF3 complex. Molecular docking simulation of protein FHL2 and IRF3. The structure of the IRF3, and FHL2 were downloaded from the Protein Data Bank, green refers to FHL2, purple refers to IRF3. (C) Molecular docking of the FHL2-c-Jun complex. The structure of the c-Jun, and FHL2 were downloaded from the Protein Data Bank, green refers to FHL2, wine red refers to c-Jun. (D) Molecular docking of the FHL2-p300 complex. The structure of the p300, and FHL2 were downloaded from the Protein Data Bank, green refers to FHL2, brown refers to p300. (E) Molecular docking of the IRF3-FHL2-TBP complex: 2D Interaction Diagram. (F) Molecular docking of the UL84-FHL2-TBP complex: 2D Interaction Diagram.
(TIF)
S7 Fig

## Co-IP analysis of FHL2 interactions with TBP, IRF3, c-Jun, or p300.
Expression plasmids of Flag-FHL2, TBP, IRF3, p300 and c-Jun were transiently transfected into HEK293T cells for 48 h, and then the total cell lysates were prepared and immunoprecipitated with anti-Flag, anti-TBP, anti-IRF3, anti-c-Jun or anti-p300 antibodies, followed by immunoblot analysis. The displayed images were representative ones from three independent experiments.
(TIF)
S1 Table

## Yeast two-hybrid system screened interactions of viral proteins UL84 and Co-IP analysis.
(DOCX)
S2 Table

## Plasmids used in this study.
(DOCX)

 10.1371/journal.ppat.1013895.r001Decision Letter 0
MocarskiEdwardAcademic Editor© 2026 Edward Mocarski2026Edward Mocarskihttps://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/This is an open access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License , which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original author and source are credited.Submission Version0
28 Jul 2025

HCMV encoded UL84 hijacks FHL2 to suppress type I Interferon production and enhance viral replication
PLOS Pathogens
Dear Dr. Chen,
Thank you for submitting your manuscript to PLOS Pathogens. After careful consideration, reviewers brought forward a considerable number of concerns, so we feel that it has merit but does not fully meet PLOS Pathogens's publication criteria as it currently stands. Therefore, we invite you to submit a carefully revised version of the manuscript with an itemized rebuttal that addresses all points raised in this initial review.
Please submit your revised manuscript within 60 days Sep 26 2025 11:59PM. If you will need more time than this to complete your revisions, please reply to this message or contact the journal office at plospathogens@plos.org. When you're ready to submit your revision, log on to https://www.editorialmanager.com/ppathogens/ and select the 'Submissions Needing Revision' folder to locate your manuscript file.
Please include the following items when submitting your revised manuscript:
* A rebuttal letter that responds to each point raised by the editor and reviewer(s). You should upload this letter as a separate file labeled 'Response to Reviewers'. This file does not need to include responses to any formatting updates and technical items listed in the 'Journal Requirements' section below.
* A marked-up copy of your manuscript that highlights changes made to the original version. You should upload this as a separate file labeled 'Revised Manuscript with Track Changes'.
* An unmarked version of your revised paper without tracked changes. You should upload this as a separate file labeled 'Manuscript'.
If you would like to make changes to your financial disclosure, competing interests statement, or data availability statement, please make these updates within the submission form at the time of resubmission. Guidelines for resubmitting your figure files are available below the reviewer comments at the end of this letter.
We look forward to receiving your revised manuscript.
Kind regards,
Edward S. Mocarski
Academic Editor
PLOS Pathogens
Robert Kalejta
Section Editor
PLOS Pathogens
Editor-in-Chief
PLOS Pathogens
orcid.org/0000-0003-2946-9497
Editor-in-Chief
PLOS Pathogens
orcid.org/0000-0002-7699-2064

Journal Requirements:

1) Please ensure that the CRediT author contributions listed for every co-author are completed accurately and in full.
At this stage, the following Authors/Authors require contributions: Ruilin Li, Sisi Xia, Xin Li, Ying Zeng, Tianqi Wang, Chuan Xia, Hongjian Li, and Jun Chen. Please ensure that the full contributions of each author are acknowledged in the "Add/Edit/Remove Authors" section of our submission form.
The list of CRediT author contributions may be found here: https://journals.plos.org/plospathogens/s/authorship#loc-author-contributions
2) We ask that a manuscript source file is provided at Revision. Please upload your manuscript file as a .doc, .docx, .rtf or .tex. If you are providing a .tex file, please upload it under the item type u2018LaTeX Source Fileu2019 and leave your .pdf version as the item type u2018Manuscriptu2019.
3) In the online submission form, you indicated that "All data in the document are available by contacting the corresponding authors.". All PLOS journals now require all data underlying the findings described in their manuscript to be freely available to other researchers, either
1. In a public repository
2. Within the manuscript itself
3. Uploaded as supplementary information.
This policy applies to all data except where public deposition would breach compliance with the protocol approved by your research ethics board. If your data cannot be made publicly available for ethical or legal reasons (e.g., public availability would compromise patient privacy), please explain your reasons by return email and your exemption request will be escalated to the editor for approval. Your exemption request will be handled independently and will not hold up the peer review process, but will need to be resolved should your manuscript be accepted for publication. One of the Editorial team will then be in touch if there are any issues.
4) Please amend your detailed Financial Disclosure statement. This is published with the article. It must therefore be completed in full sentences and contain the exact wording you wish to be published.
1) State what role the funders took in the study. If the funders had no role in your study, please state: "The funders had no role in study design, data collection and analysis, decision to publish, or preparation of the manuscript.".
If you did not receive any funding for this study, please simply state: u201cThe authors received no specific funding for this work.u201d

Reviewers' Comments:

Reviewer's Responses to Questions

Part I - Summary

Please use this section to discuss strengths/weaknesses of study, novelty/significance, general execution and scholarship.
Reviewer #1: Li et al provide a very nicely written, clear, interesting study of UL84 and FHL2 that is entirely suitable for publication in PLoS Pathogens. They show that FHL2 plays a novel architectural role in enhancing IFNb transcription upon infection with human cytomegalovirus or a number of other viruses, and provide detailed mechanistic analysis of how this occurs. Furthermore, they find that the HCMV UL84 protein interacts with FHL2 to help evade IFN signalling.
Reviewer #2: This manuscript by Ruilin et al. describes the role of HCMV-encoded UL84 as a negative modulator of the PRR-induced type I IFN response and identifies the FHL2 protein as a UL84 interacting protein, whose activity at the IFNbeta enhanceosome is hampered by UL84.
The interaction between UL84 and FHL2, identified in a Y2H assay, was confirmed with overexpression experiments via Co-IP in HEK293T and HFF cells, as well as confirmed by GST pulldown experiments, confirming a direct interaction. The authors further show that this interaction hampers assembly of the preinitiation complex at the Ifnb1 enhanceosome. They also show that FHL2 gets phosphorylated upon HCMV infection, which enhances Ifnb1 enhanceosome formation. While the authors present a lot of data characterising the interaction between UL84 and FHL2, mostly using overexpression studies, evidence showing the role of UL84-mediated FHL2 function during the IRF3-mediated type I IFN response in the HCMV infection context is missing. Most experiments are performed in presence of overexpressed (plasmid-derived) UL84, but reagents and methodologies do exist and are feasible to apply to show the relevance of this interaction in a more physiological context. in addition, several controls need to be included to show specificity for the observed phenotype.
Reviewer #3: I read with interest the manuscript by Li et al. “HCMV encoded UL84 hijacks 1 FHL2 to suppress type I Interferon production and enhance viral replication”. In this article, the authors performed an impressive series of co-immunoprecipitations to identify novel functions for the host gene FHL2 and the HCMV gene UL84 in the regulation of IFNbeta expression. The most notable results are that (i) the authors show that FHL2 allows the transcriptional activation of IFNbeta by bridging the TATA binding protein with the IRF3-cJun-p300 complex at the IFNbeta promoter and (ii) that they show that UL84 disrupts the FHL2 binding to the abovementioned complex by interfering with FHL2 phosphorylation at the position T112. The authors show that UL84 overexpression enhances IFNbeta in cells infected with HCMV and that it affects viral replication. They also show that UL84 binding to FHL2 occurs at nucleotide positions 95-158 on the UL84 side and 400-460 on the FHL2 side. Finally, the authors state that the
The study provides a plethora of highly convincing biochemical data on the molecular interactions of FHL2 with host target proteins and DNA sequences in the IFNbeta promoter, as well as on the interactions with UL84. Hence, these data are well worth of publishing in general. The authors are less convincing in the virological interpretation of their findings. While UL84 is encoded and expressed by HCMV, the authors typically used experimental settings where cells were transfected with UL84 and then infected. Since almost all evidence in this article depended on the extrinsic addition of UL84 prior to virus infection, which is not the natural condition, it is unclear if UL84 affects IFNbeta expression in the context of virus infection. In fact, the only assay where a more natural setting was used is shown in panels 9A+9B and they show that the RNAi against FHL2 decreased the IFN responses and increased virus titers, although UL84 was present in this system. However, the manuscript title states that UL84 interaction with FHL2 enhances virus replication by decreasing IFNbeta. In light of my concerns, the effect of UL84-FHL2 interaction on virus replication seems insufficiently supported by hard evidence.
**********

Part II – Major Issues: Key Experiments Required for Acceptance

Please use this section to detail the key new experiments or modifications of existing experiments that should be absolutely required to validate study conclusions.
Generally, there should be no more than 3 such required experiments or major modifications for a "Major Revision" recommendation. If more than 3 experiments are necessary to validate the study conclusions, then you are encouraged to recommend "Reject".
Reviewer #1: I have only relatively minor comments that need addressing prior to publication:
1. The authors say they ‘constructed a series of viral protein expression vectors and screened them using reporter assays for their abilities to regulate IFN-β promoter activity in HCMV-stimulated HFF cells’ – they should show this data
2. I’m not sure I agree with the statement UL84 regulated IFN in a time-dependent manner; was there a significant difference in the IFNb-luc between time points (or the fold change between HCMV+vector vs HCMV+UL84) in Fig 1b?
3. Initial experiments all use UL84 overexpression – one or two of these effects ought to be confirmed either using a UL84 deletion virus (if it is possible to generate one and complement it’s function using UL84-expressing cells) – OR using the efficient knockdown protocol they have in figure 7.
4. Authors should show the full data for the Y2H study, not just four ‘hits’. Also, where’s the confirmation of KPNA3 interaction with UL84 that is stated in Table S1. Should be shown.
5. Why was EZH2 chosen as a control for the co-IP? Should say why.
6. Quality of the IF images in 2C was too poor to assess properly. Should show more cells, and potentially quantify the co-expression. In general the image quality was grainy – I appreciate this was only an initial submission, however high quality images must be provided for publication.
7. How is the effect on IFIT1 mediated? It is known to be directly responsive to IRF3 (i.e. prior to expression of IFN) – is this regulated similarly to IFNb? How about ISG15?
8. “The results indicate that virus infection induces the phosphorylation and nuclear translocation of FHL2, which may serve as a cellular sensor-like role for detecting viral invasion” – or could it just be phosphorylated as part of a signalling cascade after sensing via known pathways? Similarly, the statement “function as a cellular sensor-like role in viral invasion” in line 427 and “we demonstrated that phosphorylation of FHL2 serves as a virus-triggered sensor-like role” (line 464) should be revised – they have not shown that FHL2 has a sensing role, more that it is involved in promoting IFNb transcription.
9. The two statements “These results indicate FHL2 is a crucial mediator for virus-induced transcriptional activation of type I interferon” and “Considering FHL2 is proven to be a key regulator in the mechanism of IFN-β transcription” use results almost all determined earlier in the paper by FHL2 overexpression, apart from Figure 4D-E where the effect of si knock-down of FHL2 on STAT1 phosphorylation is weak. To confirm importance, they should knock it down our out in other experiments. They do a nice FHL2 knock-down for Figure 6B (or knock-out – should be clarified?? I suspect this was a si knock-down – should be stated as such. If knockout, provide methods), so should use this strategy in earlier sections of the paper to look at interferon regulation.
10. They should quantify all blots, at least for the supplementary, and state the number of replicates of every experiment in the figure legend.
Reviewer #2: Major points:
1. a) Figure 1: The luciferase reporter assays are conducted in HFF cells that were transfected with reporter plasmids plus empty vector or UL84, and then infected with HCMV with an MOI of 1, meaning that every cell must have gotten infected. Expression of UL84 upon transfection was quite strong and I am surprised to see that transfection has worked so efficiently. Can the authors please explain how they reached such high transfection efficiency? While I see that only cells can respond with an IFN response that received the reporter plasmids plus UL84, and not untransfected cells, this is not the case for HFF cells that were transfected, infected (MOI 1) and analysed with RT-PCR experiments for Ifnb1 (panel C). Such a strong phenotype can only be reached if most cells would have been transfected with UL84 - and I doubt that this can be achieved in HFF.
b) While UL84 also seems to inhibit the PRR-mediated IFN response upon IAV, EV71, HSV and ZIKV infection, it would be nice to include a control such as TNFalpha or other pro-inflammatory cytokines, which should not be affected (NF-kB reporter assay, RT-PCR). What could also be tested would be IFNAR signaling - this should not be affected by UL84 if it acts via FHL2 (IFNbeta stimulation, RT-PCR for IRF9).
c) Panel A: Why can UL84 not be detected in HCMV infected cells (column 2)? According to the IP experiment in Figure 2 panel D, it should be expressed 24h post infection.
2. The IRF3-mediated IFN response is induced shortly after infection. I find no proof in the manuscript that UL84 is expressed at this time point. A kinetic experiment should be shown analysing UL84 expression at different time points post transfection, together with p-IRF3 IBs.
3. Figure 2: The IF shown in panel C should be conducted with endogenous FHL2 instead of overexpressed FHL2.
4. If UL84 indeed inhibits the IFN response, cells transfected with UL84 should show lower titers of IAV. This would be an experiment that would convincingly show that it has a biological effect.
5. Figure 4 A, lane 2: why is endogenous FHL2 expression not induced upon HCMV infection (24h p.i.)? I would suggest to do this assay at the time point when it was shown to be induced, 4-6 hpi (Figure 3). As shown in panel B of this figure, the IFN response is highest 6 h pi and declines afterwards. For panel B, it would be important to include an IB control showing endogenous UL84 expression and include an FHL2 and GAPDH IB.
6. Figure 4 D+E: siRNA transfection targeting FHL2 has no effect on p-STAT levels. This is not mentioned in the result section. The same is true for overexpression of FHL2 - no effect on p-STAT levels. However, here the authors claim that p-STAT levels are affected, with which I disagree with. While P-IRF3 levels should not be affected, p-STAT levels should be affected of FHL2 is important for type I IFN induction. This experiment weakens the study significantly and it is irritating that the data is interpreted entirely differently by the authors.
7. Figure 5 C: is not labeled comprehensively. Lacks an EV control (no FHL2 control).
8. ChIP assay: I do not think one can conclude that FHL2 binds to the region -84--+46 based on this experiment. This figure would benefit from a comprehensive scheme of the Ifnb1 promoter/enhancer, the IRF3 etc. binding sites and the primer binding sites.
9. Figure 7: Panel A should be labeld more clearly (are all lanes HCMV-infected?). The control FLH2 + EV is missing (as control for FHL2 + UL84).
10. Figure 7: Since the UL84 siRNAworks well, this experiment should be conducted with UL84 expressed in the virus context. Without UL84 plasmid-derived overexpression. As control, pIRF3 (should not change) and pSTAT (should be affected) IBs should be done.
11. The authors use HCMV strain TOWN throughout their study. Since UL84 is esssential for viral replication, a knockout virus could not be tested and experiments were conducted with overexpression of UL84 or siRNA targeting UL84. However, HCMV strain TB40 can replicate without UL84 and hence it would be possible to test whether HCMV lacking UL84 induces a stronger IFN response compared to WT virus.
12. Figure 8 panel A lacks the control HCMV + EV.
13. Figure 9 lacks IB controls which would be essential to validate the presented results.
14. Manuscript lacks information about the number of biological and technical replicates.
Reviewer #3: 1. Show effects of UL84 in the context of virus infection. A virus mutant with a full deletion of UL84 may is not easy to generate due to its essential requirement for viral DNA replication, but it may be grown o na complementing cell line. It may also be possible to generate a mutant virus where UL84 can still act with UL44 on virus DNA replication but is unable to bind to FHL2. The authors show in figure 2 that a deletion of nucleotide positions 95-158 abrogates its binding to FHL2. Hence, a mutant virus lacking only these nucleotides may be viable, which would allow the identification of UL84 effects on the FHL2-IFNbeta signaling axis.
2. It is also possible that UL84 expression during the lytic virus cycle occurs too late to affect IFNbeta responses. This would invalidate a major claim from the title of the manuscript. Hence, it may be interesting to explore the effects of UL84 in models of HCMV latency and reactivation, where UL84, if expressed early during reactivation, may affect IFNbeta responses and facilitate the full blown virus reactivation. At a minimum, these items need to be discussed as alternative scenarios, while the title is changed to reflect more accurately the available evidence provided in the manuscript.

Part III – Minor Issues: Editorial and Data Presentation Modifications

Please use this section for editorial suggestions as well as relatively minor modifications of existing data that would enhance clarity.
Reviewer #1: Minor comments
Line 270 ‘enhancersome’ spelled incorrectly
‘did not be co-immunoprecipitated with TBP’ -> ‘was not co-immunoprecipitated…’
Reviewer #2: Other comments:
1. The information provided in the M+M section is not sufficient to recapitulate the experiments in most sections:
a) The origin of the cell lines is not provided (HFF and 293-T). Ideally, also the passage number should be provided.
b) Details on the transfection of HFF cells are not provided. HFF are difficult to transfect and I do not know any lab that has schieved it to a level as high as shown here. It would be great to share the protocol with the scientific community. How many microgramms of DNA were transfected per well? This should also be stated for the titration experiments.
c) Information on the luciferase plasmid is not sufficient. Which sequence of the IFNb1 promoter/enhancer is inserted upstream of the luciferase gene?
d) Information on the UL84 plasmid is not sufficient. Is it UL84 derived from TOWN?
e) The reference ID of the TOWN BAC needs to be provided. Was the TOWN-BAC verified by sequencing?
f) Some IPs and subsequent immunoblots were performed with the same antibody and are impressively clean. It would be good to state in the M+M section which antibody was used for which application and also mention the species it was made in (IP, IB).
2. I was intrigued to see the molecular weigth difference of unphosphorylated FHL2 (32 kDa) and its phosphorylated version which runs as high as 95 kDa (Figure 3 panel G-K). Can the authors please explain this phenomenon?
3. Did the authors do an alphafold prediction with UL84 and FHL2 to analyse their interaction?
4. The depth of information about the Y2H assay are scarce and the Y2H assay results are currently only listed in a supplementary table. More detail (in the method section as well as the result section) should be shown. Ideally, results of the Y2H assay should be shown as figure 1 or 2.
5. In their introduction, the authors could elaborate more about UL84.
Minor comments (language related):
1. abstract: "...binds to the cellular receptor..." - to what are the authors refering to here?
2. Line 66 and onwards: The authors cite >20 year old papers regarding the IFNbeta enhanceosome. While it is important to cite original papers and give credit to those authors, a more recent review article on IRF3 could be cited as well (for example Schwanke et al 2020 doi: 10.3390/v12070733).
3. Line 60: ..."upon the viral binding of PRRs..." is phrased in a strange manner - the virus itself does not bind to PRRs, rather viral ligands or PAMPs.
4. Line 97: please write out for what LIM stands for
5. Line 118: " HCMV is the largest herpesvirus in the genome..." needs to be rephrased.
6. Line 582: typo (Reagents)
7. Line 665: strange phrasing ("there are six main concerns...")
8. Line 703-704: strange sentence
9. Figure 2 panel E and G should be labeled more clearly. Panel D: MW marker is missing.
10. Line 270: enhanceosome
Reviewer #3: 1. There is very little information provided about the plasmids pcDNA3.1-UL84 and pGL3-IFN-beta. Wat promoter is used in the former one? Is the latter one encoding the IFNbeta promoter? Which part of the promoter? Does it also express IFNbeta or just the luciferase? What is the evidence that it matches the patter of IFNbeta gene expression at the native site? If there is a previous publication about these plasmids, it needs to be more clearly cited. If they are new constructs, more details on their characterization need to be provided.
2. pGL3-IFN-beta is mentioned in some part of the text, but not in M&M, where the only plasmid with a similar name is the pGL3-luci-IFN-beta. Please adjust and standardize this nomenclature.
3. What MOI was used in figures 1D-1G?
4. 293T cells (HEK 293 T cells?) are used for cotransfections of UL84 and FHL2. It would be useful to state once they are introduced for the first time if these cells express FHL2 at low levels or not at all.
5. Please indicate molecular weights in figure 2D
6. Lines 301 state that indicate that “all four predicted sites (Y97, S98, S99, and T112) within the LIM2 domain are essential for FHL2’s interaction with IRF3, c-Jun, or p300 during the assembly of the IFN-β enhanceosome complex.” However, it may also be possible that some or all of these sites are important for correct FHL2 protein folding, rather than a direct interaction with the target proteins.
7. Figures S4 and S5 seem to be swapped in the text.
8. In figure 6B, there is still a band for TBP, though it is less pronounced. A similar reduction in signal is observed for Jun and p300. So, the text in lines 318-320 (“when we knocked out the endogenous FHL2, IRF3 failed to be co-immunoprecipitated with TBP, although it still recruited p300 and c-Jun to the IFN-β promoter”) does not accurately describe the figure 6B.
9. The text in lines 320-21 “Molecular docking of complex form the IRF3-FHL2-TBP demonstrates that IRF3 specifically recognizes the N-terminal LIM domain of FHL2,” is confusing, please rephrase.
10. In figure 7H, it appears that an IP was performed on UL84, but the text states that it was done on FHL2. If the IP was on FHL2, how comes the band for FHL is absent in the WB in the second row, second column?
11. How comes HCMV infection induces IFNbeta in the second column of figure 8A, even though HCMV encodes the UL84 gene?
12. While the PKC inhibitor LY33531 in figure 8F shows an effect on nuclear translocation of FHL2, this experiment would be corroborated had the authors used a PKC-specific siRNA.
13. The data in figure 9B should be shown as growth curves on a logarithmic scale, not using a linear scale. Virus growth is exponential so should be the scale that display it.
14. The figure 9C is confusing – they say that they measure OryLit replicative activity by using a luciferase reporter, which is indicative of transcription and gene expression, not of DNA replication. Please explain this better. This growth curve should be performed more ideally over a period of a week, not only for 4 days, because HCMV replicates slowly in cell culture.
15. Numerous mistakes in sentence structure were observed in lines 99, 103, 106, 109, 118 119-120, 317, 320, 359, 380, 381, …
PLOS authors have the option to publish the peer review history of their article (what does this mean? ). If published, this will include your full peer review and any attached files.
If you choose “no”, your identity will remain anonymous but your review may still be made public.
Do you want your identity to be public for this peer review? For information about this choice, including consent withdrawal, please see our Privacy Policy .
Reviewer #1: No
Reviewer #2: No
Reviewer #3: No
[NOTE: If reviewer comments were submitted as an attachment file, they will be attached to this email and accessible via the submission site. Please log into your account, locate the manuscript record, and check for the action link "View Attachments". If this link does not appear, there are no attachment files.]

Figure resubmission:

While revising your submission, please upload your figure files to the Preflight Analysis and Conversion Engine (PACE) digital diagnostic tool, https://pacev2.apexcovantage.com/. PACE helps ensure that figures meet PLOS requirements. To use PACE, you must first register as a user. Registration is free. Then, login and navigate to the UPLOAD tab, where you will find detailed instructions on how to use the tool. If you encounter any issues or have any questions when using PACE, please email PLOS at figures@plos.org. Please note that Supporting Information files do not need this step. If there are other versions of figure files still present in your submission file inventory at resubmission, please replace them with the PACE-processed versions.

Reproducibility:

?>
10.1371/journal.ppat.1013895.r002Author response to Decision Letter 1
Submission Version1
22 Dec 2025

AttachmentSubmitted filename: Response to Reviewers (submit).docx
10.1371/journal.ppat.1013895.r003Decision Letter 1
MocarskiEdwardAcademic Editor© 2026 Edward Mocarski2026Edward Mocarskihttps://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/This is an open access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License , which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original author and source are credited.Submission Version1
13 Jan 2026

Dear Dr. Chen,
We are pleased to inform you that your manuscript 'HCMV encoded UL84 hijacks FHL2 to suppress type I Interferon production and enhance viral replication' has been provisionally accepted for publication in PLOS Pathogens.
Before your manuscript can be formally accepted you will need to complete some formatting changes, which you will receive in a follow up email. A member of our team will be in touch with a set of requests.
Please note that your manuscript will not be scheduled for publication until you have made the required changes, so a swift response is appreciated.
IMPORTANT: The editorial review process is now complete. PLOS will only permit corrections to spelling, formatting or significant scientific errors from this point onwards. Requests for major changes, or any which affect the scientific understanding of your work, will cause delays to the publication date of your manuscript.
Should you, your institution's press office or the journal office choose to press release your paper, you will automatically be opted out of early publication. We ask that you notify us now if you or your institution is planning to press release the article. All press must be co-ordinated with PLOS.
Thank you again for supporting Open Access publishing; we are looking forward to publishing your work in PLOS Pathogens.
Best regards,
Edward S. Mocarski
Academic Editor
PLOS Pathogens
Robert Kalejta
Section Editor
PLOS Pathogens
Sumita Bhaduri-McIntosh
Editor-in-Chief
PLOS Pathogens
orcid.org/0000-0003-2946-9497
Michael Malim
Editor-in-Chief
PLOS Pathogens
orcid.org/0000-0002-7699-2064
***********************************************************
Your revised manuscript has been reviewed and found to address a majority of concerns raised by reviewers.
Reviewer Comments (if any, and for reference):
10.1371/journal.ppat.1013895.r004Acceptance letter
MocarskiEdwardAcademic Editor© 2026 Edward Mocarski2026Edward Mocarskihttps://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/This is an open access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License , which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original author and source are credited.Dear Dr. Chen,
We are delighted to inform you that your manuscript, "HCMV encoded UL84 hijacks FHL2 to suppress type I Interferon production and enhance viral replication," has been formally accepted for publication in PLOS Pathogens.
We have now passed your article onto the PLOS Production Department who will complete the rest of the pre-publication process. All authors will receive a confirmation email upon publication.
The corresponding author will soon be receiving a typeset proof for review, to ensure errors have not been introduced during production. Please review the PDF proof of your manuscript carefully, as this is the last chance to correct any scientific or type-setting errors. Please note that major changes, or those which affect the scientific understanding of the work, will likely cause delays to the publication date of your manuscript. Note: Proofs for Front Matter articles (Pearls, Reviews, Opinions, etc...) are generated on a different schedule and may not be made available as quickly.
Soon after your final files are uploaded, the early version of your manuscript, if you opted to have an early version of your article, will be published online. The date of the early version will be your article's publication date. The final article will be published to the same URL, and all versions of the paper will be accessible to readers.
For Research Articles, you will receive an invoice from PLOS for your publication fee after your manuscript has reached the completed accept phase. If you receive an email requesting payment before acceptance or for any other service, this may be a phishing scheme. Learn how to identify phishing emails and protect your accounts at https://explore.plos.org/phishing.
Thank you again for supporting open-access publishing; we are looking forward to publishing your work in PLOS Pathogens.
Best regards,
Sumita Bhaduri-McIntosh
Editor-in-Chief
PLOS Pathogens
orcid.org/0000-0003-2946-9497
Michael Malim
Editor-in-Chief
PLOS Pathogens
orcid.org/0000-0002-7699-2064