3686acsomegaACS OmegaACS OmegaAmerican Chemical SocietyPMC1035742810357428103574283748325110.1021/acsomega.3c02311CanB, a Druggable
Cellular Target in Mycobacterium tuberculosis
DegiacomiGiulia GianibbiBeatrice RecchiaDeborah StelitanoGiovanni TruglioGiuseppina Ivana MarraPaola StamillaAlessandro MakarovVadim ChiarelliLaurent Robert ManettiFabrizio PascaMaria Rosalia †Department
of Biology and Biotechnology “Lazzaro Spallanzani”, University of Pavia, Pavia 27100, Italy‡Department
of Biotechnology, Chemistry and Pharmacy, University of Siena, Siena 53100, Italy§Bakh
Institute of Biochemistry, Russian Academy
of Science, Moscow 119071, Russia∥Fondazione
IRCCS Policlinico San Matteo, Pavia 27100, Italy*Email: mariarosalia.pasca@unipv.it.
*Email: fabrizio.manetti@unisi.it.
3720238282520925209–252202172023© 2023 The Authors. Published by American Chemical SocietyPermits non-commercial access and re-use, provided that author attribution and integrity are maintained; but does not permit creation of adaptations or other derivative works (https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/).

## Abstract
 Treatment against tuberculosis can lead to the selection
of drug-resistant Mycobacterium tuberculosis strains. To tackle this
serious threat, new targets from M. tuberculosis are needed to develop novel effective drugs. In this work, we aimed
to provide a possible workflow to validate new targets and inhibitors
by combining genetic, in silico, and enzymological
approaches. CanB is one of the three M. tuberculosis β-carbonic anhydrases that catalyze the reversible reaction
of CO2 hydration to form HCO3– and H+. To this end, we precisely demonstrated that CanB
is essential for the survival of the pathogen in vitro by constructing conditional mutants. In addition, to search for
CanB inhibitors, conditional canB mutants were also
constructed using the Pip-ON system. By molecular docking and minimum
inhibitory concentration assays, we selected three molecules that
inhibit the growth in vitro of M.
tuberculosis wild-type strain and canB conditional mutants, thus implementing a target-to-drug approach.
The lead compound also showed a bactericidal activity by the time-killing
assay. We further studied the interactions of these molecules with
CanB using enzymatic assays and differential scanning fluorimetry
thermal shift analysis. In conclusion, the compounds identified by
the in silico screening proved to have a high affinity
as CanB ligands endowed with antitubercular activity.

statusreleaseddisplay-pdfyesis-olfnois-manuscriptnois-preprintnois-journal-matternois-scannednois-retractednoReceived 2023 Apr 6; Accepted 2023 Jun 5; Collection date 2023 Jul 18.

1.

## Introduction
The spread of strains
of Mycobacterium tuberculosis (Mtb) resistant to currently available antitubercular
drugs is a serious global public health problem and a major challenge
for researchers, clinicians, and governments involved in the fight
against this disease. The discovery of
novel antitubercular agents requires multidisciplinary efforts to
find compounds that can affect new cellular targets and consequently
that could be active against Mtb drug-resistant strains.
Thus, drug discovery can be performed following two different approaches:
drug-to-target and target-to-drug. The
new antitubercular drugs approved for tuberculosis (TB) therapy (bedaquiline,
pretomanid, and delamanid) were discovered by following the first
strategy. 
For target-based drug
discovery, the knowledge of the Mtb genome sequencing
has accelerated the discovery of new potential
drug targets. In this case, compounds
are screened against an Mtb cellular target enzyme.
This ensures target suitability, but the activity of these compounds
must be evaluated also against cell growth to test if the drugs are
able to enter the mycobacterial cells and then reach their target(s). Unfortunately, for the antitubercular drugs,
it is a challenging point due to the peculiar cell wall. For this
reason, this approach has not been very successful in TB drug discovery
so far, although the possibility of using inhibitors of a novel essential
cellular target remains an appealing option in the fight against TB.
Mtb carbonic anhydrases (CAs) have long been considered
as a possible target for antitubercular drug development. The CAs
are metalloenzymes present in all living organisms that catalyze the
essential reversible hydration of CO2 to form bicarbonate.
Mammalian enzymes are necessary for intermediary metabolism, facilitating
CO2 diffusion, pH homeostasis, and ion transport. CAs are
divided into five families (α, β, γ, δ, and
ε); mammals have α-CAs, while β-CAs are widespread
in eubacteria, archaea, algae, and plants. Mtb presents
three β-CAs (Rv1284, Rv3588c, and Rv3273) and one γ-CA
(Rv3525c). , These enzymes differ from the mammal enzymes. CanB, which is coded by Rv3588c, is the β-CA that shows greater catalytic activity for CO2 hydration than the other two mycobacterial ones. From previous genome-wide studies, the essentiality
of CanB has not been clearly determined, and indeed, CanB was classified as essential by Griffin and colleagues but non-essential by two other recent studies. , On the other hand, CAs are predicted to be required for Mtb virulence in mice. Therefore,
the possible essentiality of CanB needs to be demonstrated experimentally.
Because mycobacterial CAs are different from those of mammals and
could be essential for Mtb growth, they may have
the potential to be good drug targets. However, to our knowledge,
so far, while several compounds have been found to be highly active
against CanB/CanA enzymatic activity, only a few inhibitors are effective in vitro against Mtb growth. , , , Consequently, again, the drug-to-target strategy has not been very
successful for TB drug discovery.
In this work, we used a multidisciplinary
approach (microbiology,
genetics, biochemistry, medicinal chemistry, and bioinformatics) to
validate the target-based whole-cell phenotypic high-throughput screening
for looking for new CanB inhibitors active against Mtb growth. This provided the possibility of using a combined approach
for the validation of other possible new targets. Additionally, we
found two CanB inhibitors endowed with antitubercular activity, demonstrating
the validity of the approach used.

2.

## Results
2.1.

## canB Is Essential for In Vitro Mtb Growth
To prove the essentiality of Rv3588c (canB) for Mtb H37Rv growth and validate CanB as a possible cellular target against
TB, two conditional knockdown (cKD) mutants were constructed in which
the canB native promoter was substituted by the repressible
mutagenized promoters Pptr , by insertional duplication in a strain carrying the TetR-Pip-OFF
repressible system, TB61 (pFRA61). The repressible promoter Pptr was mutagenized by Boldrin et al. to obtain differentiated promoter strength;
the promoters used in this study are weaker than the wild-type Pptr. In particular, Pptr11 has 4.2% of the strength of the original Pptr, while Pptr12 has 25% of the strength. In the resulting strains, named TB169C and TB170A,
respectively, the transcription of canB was expected
to be repressed by the presence of the inducer, anhydrotetracycline
(ATc).
As shown in Figure S1, Mtb canB conditional mutants TB169C and TB170A did not grow
in the presence of ATc (500 ng/mL), unlike their parental strain TB61.
The growth of cKD strains in the presence of different concentrations
of ATc was then evaluated in a Middlebrook 7H9 liquid medium. In the
presence of ATc, an inhibition of the growth proportional to both
the concentration of ATc used and the strength of the Pptr promoter of each strain was observed (Figure S2). Both TB169C and TB170A growth were
inhibited at a concentration of 500 ng/mL ATc after 48 h, never reaching
an exponential phase of growth (Figure S2). Thus, a concentration of 500 ng/mL was chosen for all the following
experiments in the liquid medium. The growth of Mtb H37Rv cKD strains depends on the presence of the ATc inducer in
a dose-dependent manner, highlighting that the canB expression affects the growth and survival of Mtb H37Rv.
To correlate canB depletion with growth
arrest,
the two cKD mutants and their parental strain were grown in standing
liquid cultures in the presence of 500 ng/mL ATc; the number of culture
rejuvenation passages required for Mtb cKD strains
not to resume growth was evaluated. As a control, culture rejuvenation
was also performed in an ATc-free liquid medium. Every 96 h, cultures
of cKD mutants were diluted in a fresh liquid medium with/without
ATc (rejuvenation). The parental strain TB61 could start the growth
after each passage in the fresh medium regardless of the presence
of ATc ( C).
On the other hand, the growth of TB169C stopped after 96 h of exposure
to ATc, while that of TB170A was arrested after the culture was refreshed
twice ( A and B, respectively),
suggesting that the greater strength of the Pptr promoter influences the time required for titrating down the
protein. Both strains grew well in medium without ATc.
 Growth inhibition of canB-depleted
strains shows
a good correlation between growth arrest and the presence of ATc.
Overall, these results confirm the essentiality of Mtb canB
in vitro, under the conditions studied.

2.2.

## Virtual Screening to Find Possible CanB Inhibitors
In aqueous solution, CanB establishes a pH-dependent equilibrium
between tetrameric and dimeric forms that affect its enzymatic activity,
as demonstrated experimentally by Covarrubias et al. In particular, at physiological pH, the CanB structure
is predominantly folded into dimers (84% as the dimeric form and 16%
as the tetrameric form) and the enzyme is inactive. On the contrary,
at higher pH, the dimers assemble into a fully active tetrameric structure
(at pH 8.4, the dimer corresponds to 31% and the tetramer to 69%).
Moreover, the tetrameric form of CanB shows an open conformation of
each active site (one per monomer, a total of four), where a hydroxide
ion coordinates a zinc ion (the enzyme cofactor) by displacement of
a Cys side chain. The presence of the hydroxide ion and the carbon
dioxide is essential for triggering the enzymatic reaction.
This experimental evidence, combined with the fact that orthosteric
binders of CanB (such as ethoxzolamide) are non-selective inhibitors of both CanB and the human carbonic
anhydrase isoenzymes (i.e., hCAII), suggested
us the rationale to be applied for searching selective inhibitors
of CanB. We focused our attention on the identification of ligands
for CanB shallow binding sites (away from the conserved orthosteric
pocket) that are defined as superficial pockets where proteins are
supposed to bind for the establishment of intermolecular interactions.
Such ligands should be intended as a protein–protein interaction
inhibitor that could affect CanB dimer and tetramer formation, thus
reducing or abrogating CanB enzymatic activity that depends on the
presence of the tetrameric form.
Based on these premises, a
molecular docking-based virtual screening
approach was applied to the three-dimensional structure of CanB determined
by X-ray crystallography experiments (PDB entry 1YM3) with the aim of selecting possible CanB inhibitors. First,
the SiteMap routine of the Schrödinger suite was used to identify putative binding sites for small molecules
at the interface of CanB monomers. Next, compounds of the National
Cancer Institute (NCI) database (https://dtp.cancer.gov) were iteratively docked within two
of the binding sites identified in the previous step ( ).
 As a result, 53 compounds were prioritized as putative
CanB ligands
and were tested for their possible activity against the Mtb H37Rv strain. Unfortunately, all the 42 compounds predicted to bind
Site 4 were inactive or showed solubility issues (Table S1). On the other hand, among the 11 putative binders
of Site 2, three compounds (namely, NSC118741, NSC55150, and NSC637994)
were active with minimum inhibitory concentration (MIC) values comprised
between 1 and 16 μg/mL (in bold in Table S1, while their structure is shown in Figure S3). Based on the better activity of NSC55150 (22, MIC = 1 μg/mL) in comparison to the other two hit compounds
(MIC of 8 and 4 μg/mL, respectively) and on the availability
of several derivatives of 22 within the NCI database,
a small and focused library was compiled for this compound, while
both NSC118741 and NSC637994 were not further considered.
Small
molecules bearing amidino moieties as found for 22 are
known as versatile classes of biologically interesting compounds,
showing hydrogen bond ability and the possibility to undergo protonation
at physiological pH. Compound 22 and its analogues belong
to the class of N,N′-diphenylterephthalamide
derivatives. Interestingly, some active compounds are already known
for their antimicrobial activity. A representative example is constituted
by pentamidine, a bisbenzamidine with a seven-atom alkoxy bridge linking
the two aromatic molecular edges (Figure S3). Pentamidine is indicated in the case of Pneumocystis
carinii pneumonia in immunocompromised patients and
as a secondary agent in various forms of leishmaniasis and other pathogenic
protozoa. Moreover, pentamidine showed
micromolar activity toward whole-cell mycobacteria. , 
Antimycobacterial activity values of compounds belonging to
the
class of N,N′-diphenylterephthalamide
derivatives (analogues of 22) allowed us to derive several
SAR considerations. The most simple compound was represented by the N,N′-diphenylterephthalamide itself
(1; ) that showed a low activity (MIC about 40–20 μg/mL).
 Addition of halogens or small alkyl substituents with
different
substitution patterns at the terminal phenyl rings (2–8) completely abolished activity (MIC values
>40 μg/mL). In a similar way, the p-F sulfonyl
and the carbamimidoyl derivatives 9 and 10 (a bisbenzamidine derivative), respectively, were inactive too.
Addition of linear alkyl groups to the carbamimidoyl terminal moieties
led to seven additional bisbenzamidine derivatives 11–17 (Glide scores and the major interactions
of these compounds are reported in Figure S4). In general, they were characterized by a significant improvement
of activity, even if increasing the length and bulkiness of the substituent
was detrimental. In fact, the methyl derivative 11 showed
an MIC value of 0.31 μg/mL that increased to 0.62 μg/mL
in the case of the ethyl, propyl, and i-propyl analogues 12–14, respectively. The butyl and the
hexyl analogues 15 and 16 showed activities
further reduced to 1.25 and 5 μg/mL, respectively.
Further
decorations and chemical modifications of the structure
of 11 allowed deduction of additional SAR considerations.
As an example, double methylation at both carbamimidoyl moieties as
in 17 resulted in a 2-fold reduction of activity in comparison
to the parent compound 11 (0.62 vs 0.31 μg/mL).
Moreover, also, the presence of a hydrazineyl(imino)methyl terminal
group as in 18 or changing the amide spacer as in 19 (which gained a non-symmetrical structure) was detrimental
for activity (MIC values of 40 and 10 μg/mL, respectively).
On the contrary, the non-symmetrical insertion of a double bond to
transform the central benzamide moiety of 11 into the
cinnamamide spacer of 25 led to a 2-fold decrease in
activity, from 0.31 to 0.62 μg/mL.
On the other hand,
changing the substitution pattern at the terminal
or at the central phenyl rings of 10 (as in 20 and 21, respectively) did not improve activity.
Worth noting, linking the carbamimidoyl groups and the terminal
phenyl rings of 10 with a short bridge resulted in high
antimycobacterial activity. In particular, insertion of a methylene
spacer led to 22 with an MIC value of 1 μg/mL,
while transformation of the 2-amino-2-iminoethyl moiety of 22 into the guanidino group of 23 further increased activity
to 0.16 μg/mL, thus resulting in the most active compound of
this series. On the contrary, structural rigidification of the terminal
substituents of 22 into the tetrahydropyrimidinyl ring
of 24 caused a drop in activity (MIC of 2.5 μg/mL).
In summary, activity data on this class of compounds clearly showed
that halogens and small alkyl substituents added with various substitution
patterns to the terminal phenyl rings of the N,N′-diphenylterephthalamide 1 resulted
in inactive derivatives. Following this trend, the carbamimidoyl analogue 10 was also inactive, while its mono- and di-alkyl analogues
gained a significant activity. In particular, within the mono-alkyl
subseries, activity decreased with substituents longer than a propyl
chain. In fact, the butyl and hexyl analogues 15 and 16 showed a 4- and 60-fold reduction of activity, respectively,
in comparison to the methyl analogue 11.
Moreover,
increasing the length of the terminal carbamimidoyl groups
of the inactive parent compound 10 played a fundamental
role for activity. In fact, the insertion of a methylene spacer led
to an MIC of 1 μg/mL in 22, and the subsequent
transformation into the guanidino derivative 23 resulted
in the best compound of this series.
Finally, variations of
the chemical features of the N,N′-diphenylterephthalamide scaffold were
detrimental for activity, with the sole exception of 25 where the insertion of an unsaturated spacer maintained a significant
activity.
Molecular docking simulations showed that the terminal
carbamimidoyl
moieties of the ligands played a fundamental role in the stabilization
of the complex with the target. In fact, such substituents formed
hydrogen bonds with the terminal carboxyl group of Glu173 and the
side chain OH of Ser86 (or the carbonyl moiety of Ala82).
As
an example of the interaction pathway between the ligands and
CanB, the most active compound (23) formed a network
of hydrogen bonds with amino acids of Site 2 ( ).
 The terminal carbamimidoyl moieties were hydrogen
bond donors for
the interactions with the carboxylic moiety of Glu173 and the carbonyl
group of Ala82. A salt bridge between Glu173 and one of the carbamimidoyl
groups further stabilized the complex. An additional hydrogen bond
was formed between an amide nitrogen atom of 23 and the
carboxylic moiety of Glu88, which served as the acceptor. Several
hydrophobic interactions were also found between all aromatic rings
of the ligand and side chains of surrounding residues (Ala170, Thr92,
Val93, Tyr89, and Ala82) and the Ser86 backbone. On the other hand,
the higher conformational freedom of the ethanimidamide moiety of 22 (in comparison to the quasi-planar guanidino group of 23) resulted in slightly different interactions with CanB.
In fact, while the hydrogen bonds with the side chains of both Glu173
and Glu88 were maintained, the interaction of one of the guanidino
moieties of 23 with Ala82 was replaced by a hydrogen
bond between the terminal carbamimidoyl group of 22 and
the OH of the Ser86 side chain ( ).
 Moreover, hydrophobic interactions similar to those
found for 23 were established, especially between all
aromatic rings
of the ligand and side chains of surrounding residues, as well as
Ser86 and Gly85 backbones.
A comparison of the best docked pose
of 22 and 23 is shown in Figure S5.
In conclusion, new putative CanB ligands
belonging to the N,N′-diphenylterephthalamide
class
were identified and further characterized.

2.3.

## Construction of canB cKD
Mutants Using the Pip-ON System to Validate CanB Inhibitors
To validate CanB inhibitors, we developed a whole-cell screening
by means of cKD mutants. This simple tool has allowed us to identify
compounds that were active in both inhibiting the mycobacterial growth
and in affecting a specific target or pathway in which this enzyme
is involved. , 
To this aim, Pip-ON conditional
mutants in canB were constructed. Unlike the TetR-Pip-OFF mutants, the construction of the
recombinant vectors with the Pip-ON system allowed us to modulate
the canB transcription through the addition of the
pristinamycin (Pi) as an inducer; this means that if we do not add
Pi to the culture medium, then canB is not transcribed.
Compared to the ATc inducer, Pi has the advantage of remaining stable
over time, allowing longer experiments to be performed, thus rendering
Pip-ON mutants preferable for these experiments.
Mutants harboring
the Pip-ON system at the attB site were obtained
by a direct replacement technique that allows
plasmid switching to excise the integrated TetR-Pip-OFF system from
the Mtb H37Rv chromosome and to insert the Pip-ON
system (derived from pFRA71, an integrative plasmid with a different
marker). Two conditional Pip-ON canB mutants with different strengths of the Pptr promoter were obtained, namely, TB172 (TB71-canB/PPtr 25%, Pptr12) and TB173 (TB71-canB/PPtr 4%, Pptr11). The different canB expression in TB172 and TB173 mutants was also validated by real-time
PCR (Figure S6). The resulting strains
were Pi-dependent: the Pi-sensitive transcriptional repressor Pip,
which is constitutively expressed, inhibits transcription from Pptr, while the presence of Pi in the medium
allows canB transcription in a dose-dependent manner.
The mutant TB173 is less viable than TB172 (Figure S7).

2.4.

## Two Putative CanB Ligands Are Also Active
against Mtb canB cKD Mutants
NSC55150 (22, MIC = 1 μg/mL), which is the hit compound, and the
two best derivatives NSC53313 (11, MIC = 0.31 μg/mL)
and NSC55151 (23, MIC = 0.16 μg/mL) were chosen
for further characterization ( ). In particular, the compounds were assayed in a target-based
screening that exploits the canB Pip-ON conditional
mutant TB173, characterized by the weakest promoter (PPtr 4%, Pptr11), to validate
their cellular target. The rationale for this assay is that, if CanB
is the target, then a low Pi concentration should lead to a low canB transcript level; therefore, the Pip-ON TB173 mutant
should be hypersensitive to the selected compounds compared to the
H37Rv strain, resulting in a lower MIC value. We performed the resazurin
microtiter assay (REMA) to determine the activity of the lead compound 22 and its derivatives 11 and 23 against the conditional mutant TB173, at different Pi concentrations
to modulate canB transcription. Both Mtb H37Rv and TB71 parental strains were included as controls. An MIC
shift of the selected putative CanB inhibitors was observed; in particular,
the TB173 mutant was more sensitive to 22 and 23 in comparison with Mtb H37Rv and TB71, especially
in the presence of the lowest Pi concentration ( ). However, TB173 was slightly more resistant
to 11 ( ). These results suggest that CanB might be the cellular target
of 22 and 23, but not of 11.
 Based on these results and to confirm them, time-killing
assays
were performed using Mtb conditional strains TB172
and TB173 in the presence of different concentrations of hit compound 22 as well as different concentrations of Pi ( C and D, respectively). Mtb H37Rv
and parental TB71 strains were used as control ( A and B, respectively). In time-killing assays, multiple
colony-forming unit (CFU) determinations over time provide accurate
information on compound activity. In this specific case, in parallel,
strain growth kinetics also informed us about the vulnerability of
CanB as a target.
 In the time-killing assay, the TB173 mutant had
a marked decrease
in CFU counts at earlier time-points ( D) in comparison with the other strains harboring
different constructs (TB71 and TB172) and the wild-type strain, especially
using 22 at the highest concentration. The limit of detection
(2-log CFU/mL) was indeed reached at
day 7 at the highest concentration of 22. On the other
hand, this limit was only reached at day 21 with Mtb H37Rv and TB71 control strains ( A,B).
This result was probably affected
by the weakest promoter present
in the TB173 mutant. The TB172 mutant indeed exhibited a bacteriostatic
behavior in the presence of 22, probably due to its higher
promoter strength and consequent higher canB expression
( C). Furthermore,
TB173 already experienced an impairment in the growth at 1× and
10× MIC concentrations of 22 compared to the control
strains. The Pi inducer did not affect the growth of the control strains,
while it was effective in the titration of CanB for the conditional
mutants.
In conclusion, 22, which is the hit compound
belonging
to the N,N′-diphenylterephthalamide
class, has a bactericidal activity at the highest concentrations used
against both control strains and canB conditional
mutants, confirming CanB as its target.

2.5.

## Hit Compound 22 and Its Derivative 23 Are CanB Ligands and Inhibit Esterase Activity
To verify whether the selected compounds (the hit compound 22 and its derivative 23) are indeed able to
bind CanB, the recombinant enzyme was produced in Escherichia
coli and purified (Figure S8) and its affinity for the compounds was determined by the thermal
shift assay, using differential scanning fluorimetry (DSF) ( ).
 As a positive control, we used the acetazolamide
(ACZ), a known
potent inhibitor of the hydratase activity of CAs. As a negative control,
we used the compound 11, which does not target CanB.
As described in A, the presence of ACZ, 22, and 23 (100
μM) caused a significant shift of the melting temperature of
the enzyme, while no significant effects were found for 11, confirming the previous result ( ). Consequently, to determine whether 22, 23, and ACZ are able to bind CanB even at
lower concentrations, DSF assays were performed in the presence of
different compound concentrations (0.01–100 μM) ( B–D). Alike
for the control ACZ ( B), the thermal shift was concentration-dependent for both 22 ( C) and 23 ( D), which were able to induce a significant melting
temperature shift even at sub-micromolar concentrations.
To
confirm that the bindings of 22 and 23 to
CanB effectively lead to an inhibition of the biological activity
of this enzyme, we investigated their effects against the esterase
activity of CanB, using indoxyl acetate as a substrate. Since this
reaction is performed into the same active site of the hydratase reaction,
it is indicative of the CanB hydratase activity. Also in this case, we used 11 as the negative
control. We first performed a steady state kinetic analysis, which
confirmed a hyperbolic response toward the substrate concentration
with a Vmax value of 4.1 ± 0.2 s–1 and a Km of 4.5 ±
0.6 mM (Figure S9A). Then, to evaluate
the inhibitory potential of the compounds against CanB activity, their
effects were initially evaluated at 1 mM. At such a concentration, 11 did not show any effect; this result, which is in agreement
with those achieved with the conditional mutants, confirms the hypothesis
that this compound does not target CanB (data not shown). By contrast, 22 and 23 inhibited CanB activities at 42 and
47%, respectively. A similar value was found also for the positive
control ACZ, which at 1 mM was able to inhibit the esterase activity
of CanB to 31%. The IC50 values of the compounds were then
determined (Figure S9B); both 22 and 23 inhibited the enzyme activity in a concentration-dependent
manner, with IC50 (0.77 ± 0.05 and 0.84 ± 0.03
mM, respectively) in the same range of the value found for ACZ (0.46
± 0.03 mM). Notably, ACZ is known to inhibit the hydratase activity
in a low/sub-micromolar range of concentration, while for the esterase
activity assay, the IC50 is in the mM range. Likely, this
discrepancy reflects the differences in the two mechanisms of action.
Nonetheless, the fact that 22 and 23 showed
IC50 in the same range of ACZ strongly suggests that these
compounds act similarly.
These results effectively demonstrate
that 22 and 23 are high affinity ligands
of Mtb CanB
and are able to significantly interfere with its biological activity,
in a similar way to that of the positive control ACZ. These data confirm
the finding achieved by using canB Pip-ON conditional
mutants by validating the approach.

3.

## Discussion
Mtb CanB
was considered a potential pharmacological
target, although its predicted essentiality has never been definitively
proven, just as few CanB inhibitors have so far been active against Mtb growth. − Nevertheless, CanB is the β-CA that shows greater catalytic
activity for CO2 hydration than the other two mycobacterial
ones. 
In this work, we aimed to
demonstrate the canB in vitro essentiality and to
set up a multidisciplinary target-to-drug approach
to select inhibitors highly active against Mtb growth.
The possible in vitro essentiality of CanB was
demonstrated by the construction of two Mtb conditional
mutants using the TetR-Pip-OFF system. Interestingly, even if Mtb presents three β-Cas,
CanB was found to be highly essential for in vitro growth underlining the potential of this enzyme as a druggable target.
Therefore, due to the availability of the CanB crystal structure, a molecular docking-based virtual screening
was performed against the NCI database, finding 53 putative CanB ligands.
Three selected compounds were active against Mtb growth;
in particular, the MIC of 22, belonging to the N,N′-diphenylterephthalamide class,
was 1 μg/mL. Furthermore, we tested 24 derivatives of 22, finding seven out of them with an MIC <1 μg/mL.
This result confirms that some compounds belonging to N,N′-diphenylterephthalamide are possible
CanB ligands ( ).
It is worth noting that pentamidine, belonging to the N,N′-diphenylterephthalamide class,
is active
against several microorganisms, including P. carinii, mycobacteria, and some pathogenic protozoa. − Furthermore,
several of the compounds identified by virtual screening showed the
bisbenzamidine feature and were already reported for their biological
profile. As an example, 10, which is the simplest bisbenzamidine
derivative considered in this study, showed a single-digit micromolar
activity toward the D6 Sierra Leone strain of Plasmodium
falciparum growth. In
addition, similarly to pentamidine, some bisbenzamidines were active
against P. carinii; 21 showed submicromolar activity (IC50 = 0.6 μM) against P. carinii pneumonia in mice. Further, bisbenzamidine
derivatives were able to potentiate antibiotic activity against Gram-negative
bacteria and to inhibit the virulence
of Porphyromonas gingivalis.( , ) On the other hand, it was shown
that compounds bearing guanidino moieties, such as 23, had antimicrobial, antimycobacterial, antifungal, and antimalarial
properties. , , As an example, streptomycin is a di-guanidino compound. So, the
antimicrobial activity of this class of compounds was already shown,
confirming our achieved results.
Subsequently, we would like
to validate CanB as the target of this
class of compounds, which is already known including some antimicrobial
compounds, following different approaches. First, starting from the
TetR-Pip-OFF conditional canB mutants, two new ones
were constructed using the Pip-ON system; thus, canB transcription is allowed only in the presence of long-lasting inducer
Pi; this strategy allows us to develop a whole-cell target-based screening. 
The Pip-ON canB conditional
mutants are more sensitive
to 22 and 23 in the presence of different
Pi concentrations, revealing a lower MIC value with respect to wild-type
and parental strains; consequently, CanB might be their target. The
time-killing assays performed using conditional Pip-ON mutants grown
at different Pi concentrations specifically showed a decrease in CFU
counts for the TB173 mutant. These results suggest that the weakest
Pptr promoter, which replaces the native canB promoter, causes a reduction in canB transcription at low Pi concentrations, thus sensitizing cells to
the 22 inhibitor that likely acts on CanB.
Then,
by using a biophysical assay such as DSF, we demonstrated
that both 22 and 23 bind CanB, conceivably
with high affinity, as suggested by the significant thermal shift
that they induce in a sub-micromolar range of concentration. A similar
behavior was also found for the well-known CA inhibitor ACZ, used
as a positive control. Moreover, the compounds inhibited the CanB
esterase activity, with IC50 values in the same range of
ACZ. The esterase activity is indicative of the hydratase main activity
since it is performed in the same active site. It is worth noting that ACZ, which inhibits the hydratase
activity at a very low concentration, showed anyway an IC50 for the esterase activity in the same range of 22 and 23. This strongly suggests that 22 and 23 could behave as ACZ also for the main activity.
So,
these data definitively confirm that these compounds strongly
bind CanB, supporting the previous results achieved by using Pip-ON canB conditional mutants. Moreover, the fact that the conditional
mutants did not show a higher sensitivity to 11, which
was found to neither bind nor inhibit CanB, further confirms the selectivity
of our approach. On the other hand, since 11 has antitubercular
activity, it cannot be excluded that this class of compounds has multiple
targets.
Thus, following this target-to-drug modified approach,
we were
able to discover a new class of CanB inhibitors with bactericidal
activity against Mtb growth.
So far, a few
CanB inhibitors were found to be active against Mtb growth: the 9-sulfonylated/sulfenylated-6-mercaptopurines
(MIC = 0.39–3.39 mg/mL) and one C-cinnamoyl glycoside derivative [(E)-1-(2,3,4,6-tetra-O-acetyl-β-d-glucopyranosyl)-4-(3-hydroxyphenyl)but-3-en-2-one;
MIC = 3.125–6.25 mg/mL)]. Indeed,
most CanB inhibitors, although very effective against the enzymatic
activity, failed to kill Mtb cells.

4.

## Conclusions
In conclusion, the discovery
of compounds belonging to the N,N′-diphenylterephthalamide class
as active CanB inhibitors successfully validated the multidisciplinary
target-to-drug strategy used in this work. This approach could be
applied both for the validation of drug targets and for the identification
of potential inhibitors. Further preclinical studies are needed to
understand if these promising compounds can be new drug candidates
to fight tuberculosis disease.

5.

## Experimental Section
5.1.

## Bacterial Strains, Media, and Growth Conditions
Mtb H37Rv and its derivative strains (TB61, TB169C,
TB170A, TB71, TB172, and TB173) were cultured at 37 °C in either
Middlebrook 7H9 (liquid medium, Difco) or 7H10 (solid medium, Difco),
supplemented with 0.05% v/v Tween-80 (Sigma-Aldrich), 0.2% v/v glycerol
(Sigma-Aldrich), and 10% Middlebrook OADC (Difco). For cloning procedures, E. coli DH5α was grown in Luria–Bertani
(LB) broth and LB-agar.
When required, antibiotics were added
at the following concentrations: kanamycin (Sigma-Aldrich), 50 μg/mL
(E. coli); hygromycin (Sigma-Aldrich),
200 μg/mL (E. coli) or 50 μg/mL
(Mtb); and streptomycin (Sigma-Aldrich), 50 μg/mL
(E. coli) or 20 μg/mL (Mtb). Anhydrotetracycline (ATc, Sigma-Aldrich) was added
at a final concentration of 500 ng/mL, if required. Pristinamycin
IA (Pi, Molcan Corporation) was added, when required, at the concentrations
indicated in the text. NCI compounds were all dissolved in DMSO and
used for the experiments at concentrations indicated in the text.
Experiments performed with Mtb strains were conducted
in the BLS3 safety laboratory by authorized researchers.

5.2.

## Construction of Mtb H37Rv canB Conditional Mutants
The canB conditional mutants were constructed using the TetR/Pip OFF repressible
promoter system. Briefly, the 5′
portion (402 bp) of the canB gene was amplified,
using the primers in Table S2, and directionally
cloned in integrative plasmids (pFRA169-170), conferring resistance
to hygromycin, downstream two different Pptr-derived promoters (Pptr11–12)(at the level of restriction enzyme sites NsiI
and XhoI, present in the plasmid polylinker). The
promoters Pptr11–12 were constructed
by Boldrin et al., starting from Pptr, a Pip-dependent promoter from Streptomyces pristinaespiralis. Pptr11 has 4.2% of the strength of the original Pptr, while Pptr12 has 25% of the strength.
Two micrograms of each recombinant plasmid was used to transform
TB61 (recipient harboring the TetR/Pip-OFF system at the attB site of its genome, carrying a streptomycin-resistant determinant).
Several colonies were isolated on 7H10 plates containing streptomycin
and hygromycin, screened by colony PCR to check for the insertion
of suicide vectors, using an upper primer in the TetR-Pptr region
(GD18upperSEQf; Table S2) and a lower primer
external to the homology region used for recombination (GD3rev2NEW; Table S2) (data not shown). Then, the selected
colonies were tested for their responsiveness to ATc. Two strains
were saved for further studies and named TB169C (TB61-canB/Pptr11, 4%) and TB170A (TB61-canB/ Pptr12, 25%), in which
the canB native promoter was substituted by Pptr by insertional duplication.
To obtain
the Pip-ON conditional strains, the pFRA71 plasmid was
introduced into the cKD canB mutants, TB170A and
TB169C, by plasmid switching generating
TB172 (Pptr12) and TB173 (Pptr11) mutants, respectively.

5.3.

## Determination of Minimal Inhibitory Concentration
(MIC)
The drug susceptibility of Mtb strains
was determined by the resazurin microtiter assay (REMA), as previously
described. Positive and negative growth
controls were included in every plate. Serial 2-fold dilutions of
compounds were performed in a 96-well black plate (Fluoronuc, Thermo
Fisher Scientific), and then, bacterial cultures in the log phase
were diluted and added to the wells. After 7 days of incubation at
37 °C, 10 μL of resazurin (0.025% w/v) was added to the
wells and fluorescence was measured after a further overnight incubation
by a Fluoroskan Microplate Fluorometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific;
excitation = 544 nm; emission = 590 nm). Bacterial viability was calculated
as a percentage of resazurin turnover in the absence of compound (internal
negative control). Experiments were performed in duplicate at least
three times. MIC90 values were obtained.
In the case
of whole-cell target-based screening, the TB172 and TB173 strains
were grown in the presence of Pi (15–25 ng/mL).

5.4.

## Time Killing Assay (NSC55150, 22)
Bacterial cultures were inoculated at a final cell density
of about 106 cells/mL and a final volume of 2.5 mL of the
7H9 medium without Tween-80 in 10 mL tubes. Compound 22 was added at the following concentrations based on MIC values of
each strain: MIC, 10× MIC, and 40× MIC. Pi was added to
TB172 and TB173 at 15 and 25 ng/mL to allow the growth of the strains,
while it was added as the control to the Mtb H37Rv
and TB71 strain at 25 ng/mL to assure that it does not interact with 22. Cultures were then incubated at 37 °C for 21 days.
At every time point (0, 7, 14, and 21 days), bacterial suspensions
were thoroughly mixed and serially diluted 10-fold in PBS and 10 μL
aliquots plated in triplicates on 7H10 Pi (50 ng/mL) agar quad plates.
CFUs were enumerated after 14 and 21 days of incubation at 37 °C.
Moxifloxacin (0.6 μg/mL, corresponding to 10× MIC) was
included for the Mtb H37Rv strain as a control. Experiments
were performed in duplicate.

5.5.

## Computational Details
The crystal
structures of CanB, obtained by X-ray diffraction both in monomeric
(PDB: 1YM3,
1.7 Å resolution) and homotetrameric
(a dimer of dimers, PDB: 2A5V, 2.2 Å resolution) forms, were retrieved from the protein data bank and prepared according to the Protein Preparation Wizard
routine of the Schrödinger suite, version 2019-2. Bond orders were assigned, while hydrogens were
removed and then readded to fix potential problems in the original
crystallographic coordinates. Missing side chains were modeled, and
loops were refined with Prime software. After an optimization procedure
to avoid overlapping of atoms, both systems were minimized with the
most recent OPLS3e force field until heavy atoms converged to a root
mean square deviation of 0.30 Å. All water molecules were retained
up to the restrained minimization step, to avoid alterations of volume
of the binding sites, and were then removed prior to the receptor
grid generation protocol.
With the aim of identifying ligands
able to limit or prevent the formation of CanB dimers of dimers that
represent
the active form of the enzyme, shallow binding sites on the surface
of CanB were identified. Being shallow pockets, the portions of the
CanB monomer surface required for monomer–monomer interactions
and subsequent formation of CanB active tetramers, ligands able to
affect CanB protein–protein interactions are expected to reduce
or abrogate CanB enzymatic activity.
In this context, we decided
to identify the top five shallow binding
pockets on the CanB monomer surface by using the SiteMap routine implemented
within the Glide software of the Schrödinger suite. A standard
spacing grid was used for the spatial search (0.7 Å distance
between the lines), and more restrictive definition of hydrophobicity
was selected. All other options were set to default. Only two out
of the five potential binding sites were retained for the following
virtual screening, namely, Site 2 and Site 4 ( ). Their name was relative to their order
in the SiteMap ranking list, based on the software scoring function
of druggability (SiteScore was 0.67 for Site 2 and 0.60 for Site 4).
These binding sites were selected because they were located at the
interface between single chains of the CanB tetrameric structure.
As a consequence, compounds able to bind these pockets are expected
to interfere with the CanB polymerization process and to block CanB
enzymatic activity that is a prerogative of the tetrameric form. Indeed,
our purpose was to find small molecules able to bind within these
interfaces and therefore to potentially block the multimerization
process.
Site 2 has a total surface area and a volume of approximately
747
and 23,667 Å3, while the surface and volume of Site
4 are approximately 930 and 28,812 Å3, respectively.
Intriguingly, both selected binding sites included a few interesting
residues (Arg73, His104, and Leu164 for Site 2; Cys107 and Arg73 for
Site 4): Arg73 is a highly conserved residue among mycobacterial anhydrases,
and His104 and Cys107 lie at the center of the monomer where the catalytic
activity of the enzyme resides, while Leu164 is part of an extremely
conserved hydrophobic region (Suarez
Covarrubias et al.).
The Receptor Grid Generation tool was used
to build grids suitable
for molecular docking, using the corresponding SiteMap entry as reference.
The resulting boxes were 14 Å long each side. All rotatable OH
and SH side chains were allowed to vary during the simulation.
The NCI All Open database (updated to June 2016, as available from
the DTP section of the National Cancer Institute, comprising 284,176
compounds) was downloaded in sdf format.
The database was fully recompiled into a multi-conformational Phase
database, generating up to 100 minimized conformers for each entry
of the database. Ionization states were computed with Epik software
at pH 7.00 ± 1.00. All tautomers and up to 16 stereoisomers were
generated, retaining only the already specified chiral centers. Up
to four conformations were generated for five- and six-membered rings,
while larger rings were sampled with Macromodel software. All high-energy
conformers were discarded. For each compound, physico-chemical and
ADME-Tox properties were predicted with QikProp software.
Glide
software was used to perform the virtual screening. In the
first step, a high throughput virtual screening protocol was applied
to speed up computational time for calculations. Afterward, the poses
of the top 462 compounds were refined with a standard precision protocol.
Flexible molecular docking was performed, disabling the canonicalization
option. Conformation of amide bonds was allowed to vary. Ionization
penalties and strain correction terms were applied to the final list
of compounds generated by the scoring functions. All calculations
were performed on a 16-CPU x86_64 workstation running a Debian OS
release 4.9.303-1.
The final list of the top-ranked compounds
was based on the score
value (a cutoff of −6.00 kcal/mol for the Glide Score was arbitrarily
set) and on the availability for free at the NCI.
A general evaluation of physico-chemical and ADME-Tox properties of
the selected compounds was also carried out. Top ranking compounds
with known antimycobacterial activity were discarded. Finally, a Tanimoto
similarity index of 0.8 was applied to guarantee to cover the chemical
space as much as possible, thus leading to the final list of 53 compounds.
NSC compounds were provided as solid by the NCI. Since, in most
cases, such compounds have not been analyzed by DTP for accuracy of
the structure or for the purity of the sample, 1H NMR spectra
were recorded for 22 and 23 and are reported
in Figure S10 as illustrative examples
of the entire compound library.
SMILES notations of 1–25 are reported
in Table S3.

5.6.

## CanB Cloning Expression and Purification
To obtain the recombinant Mtb β-carbonic
anhydrase (CanB), the Rv3588c gene was inserted into
the pET-28a + expression vector, using an In-fusion HD Cloning Kit
(Takara). For this purpose, the gene was amplified by PCR, using the
primers CanB-For and CanB-Rev (Table S2), designed according to the In-fusion HD Cloning Kit protocol. The
forward primer carried the sequence encoding the TEV protease cleavage
site for the removal of the 6× His-tag. The purified PCR fragment
was recombined into the BamHI-HindIII digested pET-28a+ following the manufacturer’s instructions,
affording the pET28a-canB vector.
E. coli BL21(DE3) cells were then transformed with
the pET28a-canB vector and grown at 37 °C up
to OD600nm = 0.6, and then, CanB synthesis was induced
by the addition of 0.5 mM IPTG followed by overnight induction at
25 °C. Cells were harvested by centrifugation at 4000g for 15 min, resuspended in 50 mM potassium phosphate buffer
pH 8.0, 500 mM KCl (buffer A), supplemented with 1 mM phenylmethylsulfonyl
fluoride, and lysed by sonication. The cell-free extract, obtained
by centrifuging the lysate at 50,000g for 20 min
at 4 °C, was loaded on a His-Trap column (1 mL, GE Healthcare)
equilibrated in buffer A, the column was washed with 20 mM imidazole
in buffer A, and CanB eluted with 500 mM imidazole in buffer A.
The enzyme solution was dialyzed in 50 mM potassium phosphate pH
8.0, 150 mM KCl (buffer B), in the presence of 50 μg of TEV
protease, to remove the 6× His-Tag. The digested protein was
further purified by a second His-Trap chromatography. Sample purity
was checked by SDS-PAGE and protein concentration evaluated by absorbance
at 280 nm (ε: 10095 M–1 cm–1).

5.7.

## Thermal Shift Assay
Differential
scanning fluorimetry (DSF) is a cost-effective and parallelizable
technique widely used to track protein thermal stability. Since complex
formation with even weakly binding ligands affects protein thermal
stability, DSF has become a widespread high-throughput screening tool,
known for being very powerful and rapid in early drug discovery efforts,
including the studies of CA inhibitors. 
To investigate the interactions between CanB and its possible
inhibitors, we performed a label-free thermal shift assay using a
Tycho NT.6 instrument (NanoTemper Technologies) and intrinsic fluorescence
of tryptophan and tyrosine.
Protein samples (1.0 mg/mL in buffer
B) were loaded into Tycho
NT.6 capillaries (TY-C001, NanoTemper Technologies) and subjected
to unfolding using a thermal ramp rate of 30 °C min–1 monitoring the ratio of the intrinsic fluorescence at 350 and 330
nm (emission at 350 nm/emission at 330 nm, upon excitation at 280
nm) that was recorded as the protein unfolding probe.

5.8.

## CanB Enzymatic Assay
The CanB esterase
activity was determined spectrophotometrically using indoxyl acetate
as the substrate and measuring the production of indoxyl at 375 nm
(ε: 2.54 mM–1 cm–1), as
previously described. Briefly, assays
were performed at 37 °C in a final volume of 100 μL of
17.5 mM Hepes and 17.5 mM imidazole pH 7.2, containing 20 μg
of purified CanB, and the reaction was started by adding indoxyl acetate
(stock solution of 100 mM in 97% ethanol). Steady-state kinetic analysis
was performed by assaying the activity at different indoxyl acetate
concentrations and the kinetic constants Vmax and Km were determined by fitting the
data to the Michaelis–Menten equation, using the GraphPad Prism
software (GraphPad software. Inc).
Inhibition assays were initially
performed in the presence of the compounds at a final concentration
of 500 μM (stock solution of 10 mM in DMSO) and at a final concentration
of the indoxyl acetate substrate of 4 mM.
For active compounds,
IC50 values were evaluated measuring
the enzyme activity in the presence of different compound concentrations
and fitting the values with the following equation ( ):
1 where A[I] is the enzyme activity in the presence
of a given concentration of inhibitor [I] and A[0] is the enzyme activity in the absence of
inhibitors.
The known carbonic anhydrase inhibitor acetazolamide
(ACZ) was
used as a positive control. All experiments were performed in triplicate.

## Acknowledgments
This
research was partially supported by EU funding
within the NextGenerationEU-MUR PNRR Extended Partnership initiative
on Emerging Infectious Diseases (project no. PE00000007, INF-ACT)
(MRP) and One Health Basic and Translational Research Actions addressing
Unmet Needs on Emerging Infectious Diseases (CUP B63C22001400007)
(FM). G.D. was the recipient of a fellowship earned from the University
of Pavia (FRG – Fondo Ricerca e Giovani: “Assegno di
ricerca di tipo A”). We thank Prof. R. Manganelli (University
of Padova, Italy) for providing us with the pFRA61, pFRA71, pFRA169,
and pFRA170 plasmids. We also thank Dr. F. Boldrin (University of
Padova, Italy) for fruitful discussion about the construction of conditional
mutants. National Cancer Institute (NCI), Division of Cancer Treatment
and Diagnosis (DCTD), Developmental Therapeutics Program (DTP) (http://dtp.cancer.gov) is acknowledged
as the source of the NSC compounds.

## Supporting Information Available
The Supporting Information is
available free of charge at https://pubs.acs.org/doi/10.1021/acsomega.3c02311.
Essentiality of canB for Mtb growth on a solid medium; growth curves of conditional mutants in
the presence of different ATc concentrations; molecular structure
of the three hit compounds identified by virtual screening on the
NCI database and pentamidine; Glide scores of 11–17 and their interactions with Site 2 of CanB; comparison
of the binding mode of 22 and 23; changes
in canB mRNA levels of TB71, TB172, and TB173 strains;
pristinamycin induction of canB expression in cKD Mtb mutant strains; SDS-PAGE of CanB purification; enzymatic
studies of CanB esterase activity; 1H NMR spectra for 22 and 23; MIC values of the hit compounds from
the NCI library utilized in this study; list of oligonucleotides used;
SMILES notations of the 25 N,N′-diphenylterephthalamide
derivatives 1–25 (PDF)

## Author Contributions
Conceptualization:
M.R.P., G.D., F.M., and V.M.; methodology: G.D., B.G., D.R., G.S.,
G.I.T., and L.R.C.; formal analysis, data curation, and writing: M.R.P.,
F.M., G.D., and L.R.C.; project administration: M.R.P. and F.M. All
authors reviewed and approved the final version of the manuscript.

The authors declare no
competing financial interest.

## Supplementary Material
ao3c02311_si_001.pdf

## References
 

## Associated Data

## Supplementary Materials
ao3c02311_si_001.pdf