2172molmetMolecular MetabolismMol MetabElsevierPMC1205000012050000120500004022092910.1016/j.molmet.2025.102153Acyl CoA-binding protein in brown adipose tissue acts as a negative regulator of adaptive thermogenesis
Blasco-RosetAlbert Quesada-LópezTania Mestres-ArenasAlberto VillarroyaJoan Godoy-NietoFrancisco J CereijoRubén RupérezCelia NeessDitte FærgemanNils J GiraltMarta PlanavilaAnna VillarroyaFrancesc 1Departament de Bioquímica i Biomedicina Molecular, Facultat de Biologia, Universitat de Barcelona, Institut de Biomedicina de la Universitat de Barcelona (IBUB), Barcelona, Spain2Institut de Recerca de Sant Joan de Déu, 08028 Barcelona, Spain3CIBER Fisiopatología de la Obesidad y Nutrición, 28029 Madrid, Spain4Institut d'Investigació Biomèdica Sant Pau (IIB-SANT PAU), Barcelona, Spain5Department of Infectious Diseases, Hospital de la Santa Creu i Sant Pau, 08041 Barcelona, Spain6Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, University of South Denmark, DK-5230, Odense, Denmark⁎Corresponding author. Departament de Bioquimica i Biomedicina Molecular, Facultat de Biologia, Universitat de Barcelona Avda Diagonal 643. 08028 Barcelona Spain. fvillarroya@ub.edu
114202596102153102153452025© 2025 The Author(s)This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/).

## Abstract

## Objective
Defective activity of brown adipose tissue (BAT) is linked to obesity and cardiometabolic diseases. While much is known regarding the biological signals that trigger BAT thermogenesis, relatively little is known about the repressors that may impair BAT function in physiological and pathological settings. Acyl CoA-binding protein (ACBP; also known as diazepam binding inhibitor, DBI) has intracellular functions related to lipid metabolism and can be secreted to act as a circulating regulatory factor that affects multiple organs. Our objective was to determine the role of ACBP in BAT function.

## Methods
Experimental models based on the targeted inactivation of the Acbp gene in brown adipocytes, both in vitro and in vivo, as well as brown adipocytes treated with recombinant ACBP, were developed and analyzed for transcriptomic and metabolic changes.

## Results
ACBP expression and release in BAT are suppressed by noradrenergic cAMP-dependent signals that stimulate thermogenesis. This regulation occurs through gene expression modulation and autophagy-related processes. Mice with targeted ablation of Acbp in brown adipocytes exhibit enhanced BAT thermogenic activity and protection against high-fat diet-induced obesity and glucose intolerance; this is associated with BAT transcriptome changes, including upregulation of BAT thermogenesis-related genes. Treatment of brown adipocytes with exogenous ACBP suppresses oxidative activity, lipolysis, and thermogenesis-related gene expression. ACBP treatment inhibits the noradrenergic-induced phosphorylation of p38 MAP-kinase and CREB, which are major intracellular mediators of brown adipocyte thermogenesis.

## Conclusions
The ACBP system acts as a crucial auto regulatory repressor of BAT thermogenesis that responds reciprocally to the noradrenergic induction of BAT activity.

Keywords: Brown adipose tissue, Adipocyte, Thermogenesis, Acyl CoA-binding protein, Autophagy, Obesity

## Graphical abstract
 

## Highlights
•ACBP expression and release in BAT are suppressed by thermogenic stimuli.
•Genetic ablation of Acbp in BAT protects against obesity and glucose intolerance.
•ACBP impairs thermogenesis-related metabolism and gene expression in brown adipocytes.
•ACBP system is an auto-regulatory repressor of BAT thermogenesis.

statusreleaseddisplay-pdfyesis-olfnois-manuscriptnois-preprintnois-journal-matternois-scannednois-retractednoReceived 2025 Mar 13; Revised 2025 Apr 4; Accepted 2025 Apr 8; Collection date 2025 Jun.

1.

## Introduction
BAT activity is known to help protect against obesity and promote cardiometabolic health in both experimental models and humans [ , ]. Traditionally, this association has been attributed to BAT's ability to oxidize metabolic fuels via the unique capacity of brown adipocytes to undergo heat-producing uncoupled mitochondrial oxidation [ ] to support non-shivering thermogenesis. Within the body, BAT is a major site at which glucose and lipids are used for oxidation. Consequently, active BAT not only helps prevent obesity by increasing energy expenditure [ ] it also helps prevent hyperglycemia and hyperlipidemia [ , ]. Recent work has further shown that BAT releases signaling molecules into the circulation; these so-called brown adipokines affect multiple tissues and organs dependent on the degree of thermogenic activity in BAT [ ]. Although high BAT activity is generally associated with a healthy metabolic status, over-activation of BAT may be pathological in certain situations; this is seen in some cancers [ ] but not in others [ ] as well as in severe burn patients [ ]. When BAT over-activation is pathological, it may lead to life-threatening cachectic and hypermetabolic conditions.
Extensive research has focused on determining the physiological and molecular mechanisms governing the induction of BAT thermogenesis. Studies have shown that BAT activation is mainly triggered by sympathetic signals acting on brown adipocytes [ ] while some non-sympathetic signals contribute to controlling BAT activity [ ]. Although it is generally assumed that impaired BAT activity can lead to metabolic and cardiovascular health problems, as seen in obesity and aging [ , ], relatively little research has explored the factors that may negatively regulate BAT activity and/or thermogenesis in response to physiological or pathological stimuli. Moreover, given the revelation that BAT impacts systemic metabolism not only via its intrinsic ability to consume fuel and sustain thermogenesis, but also through secretion of brown adipokines, it would be particularly interesting to identify the BAT-secreted molecular actors that could systemically signal low BAT activity.
Acyl CoA-binding protein (ACBP; also called diazepam binding inhibitor, DBI) is a multi-functional protein that acts both extracellularly and intracellularly to regulate multiple tissue processes including lipid metabolism and brain [ ]. In skin, ACBP is required to maintain the epidermal barrier function and systemic metabolic and thermoregulatory homeostasis [ ]. ACBP appears to be secreted systemically in response to autophagy activation [ ]. Whole-body genetic invalidation of Acbp protects against obesity likely due to altered epidermal barrier that leads to increased cold sensation and energy expenditure in mice [ ]. Other studies attribute obesity protection in mice with genetic invalidation of Acbp or antibody mediated blockage of systemic ACBP to reduced food intake and induction of anti-obesogenic metabolic pathways [ ]. Recent data indicate that antibody-mediated blockage of systemic ACPB elicits pleiotropic improvements in health status acting on multiple tissues and organs [ ]. However, the role of ACBP in BAT was unknown. Here, we show for the first time that the Acbp gene is strongly repressed by the thermogenic activation of BAT and we identify ACBP as a powerful negative regulator of BAT activity, contributing to the regulation the energy balance and metabolism.

2.

## Methods
2.1.

## Mouse studies
C57BL/6J mice were obtained from Harlan Laboratories (Indianapolis, IN, USA). The targeted brown adipocyte-ACBP knockout (Acbp BAd-KO) model was generated by crossing floxed Acbp mice (Acbpfl/fl, also used as controls) [ ] and transgenic Ucp1-Cre mice (B6.FVB-Tg(Ucp1-cre)1Evdr/J) obtained from Jackson Laboratory (Bar Harbor, ME, USA). Only single-copy transgenic Ucp1-Cre mice were used. Mice were housed at 21 °C under a 12-h light cycle (lights on from 08:00 am; lights off at 08:00 pm) with 50% ± 5% relative humidity and free access to water and a standard diet. For experiments determining the responsiveness to environmental temperatures, male mice were exposed to 30 °C for 1 week (thermoneutrality), exposed to 4 °C for 24 h or 1 week; when indicated, the mice were returned to 21 °C after the 1-week acclimation to 4 °C. When indicated, mice were treated with daily intraperitoneal (i.p.) injections of hydroxychloroquine (50 mg/kg body weight; to inhibit autophagy) or PBS (control) at the start of deacclimation and daily thereafter for 1 week, according to previously established procedures [ ]. Mice were either fed a standard rodent diet (2018, Teklad Diet, Envigo, VA, USA) or, where indicated, fed a high-fat diet (HFD; #D12451, 45% Kcal fat, Envigo, VA, USA). For the HFD feeding setting, male mice were switched to HFD when 3 month-old.VO2 consumption and VCO2 production by individual mice were measured in Labmaster metabolic cages (TSE, Bad Homburg, Germany) after 2 days of adaptation. The surface temperature at the site of iBAT and in eye weredetermined by infrared thermography as previously described [ ] using a T335 infrared digital thermal imaging camera (FLIR Systems, Wilsonville, OR, USA) and analyzed using the FLIR Quick Report 1.2 software (FLIR Systems). For tissue analysis, mice were sacrificed by decapitation and tissues were dissected and immediately snap-frozen in liquid nitrogen. Blood was also collected for plasma separation and further analysis.

2.2.

## Rat studies
Male Wistar rats (Janvier Labs, Le Genest-Saint-Isle, France) were assessed for ACBP levels in Sulzer's vein, as previously described [ ]. Briefly, 8-week-old rats were exposed to 4 °C for 24 h under a 12-h light/dark cycle and feeding of a standard rodent diet (2018, Teklad Diet, Envigo). Rats were anesthetized by i.p. injection of sodium pentobarbital (50 mg·kg−1 BW). Sulzer's vein, which drains blood flowing through iBAT, was exposed. A small incision was made, a heparinized capillary was placed on the incision, and blood was allowed to flow directly into the capillary. Blood samples were centrifuged to obtain plasma, and iBAT was excised and snap-frozen in liquid nitrogen.
All experiments involving mice and rats were conducted in accordance with European Community Council Directive 86/609/EEC and the National Institutes of Health guidelines for the care and use of laboratory animals. All experimental procedures were approved by the Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee of the University of Barcelona, Spain.

2.3.

## Measurements of metabolites, hormonal factors, and cytokines
Blood glucose and triglyceride levels were quantified using an Accutrend System (Roche Diagnostics GmbH, Mannheim, Germany). Plasma levels of lactate and glycerol were measured using commercially available kits (#MAK329 and #F6428, respectively; Sigma–Aldrich, St. Louis, MO, USA). Insulin and cytokines were measured in plasma samples and cell culture media using a Multiplex system (MADKMAG-HK, Merck Millipore, Rahway, NJ, USA). ACBP levels were quantified using commercially available kits applied to cell culture media from human cells cell lines (#KA0532; Abnova, Taipei, Taiwan) and mouse samples (#MBS2025156; MyBioSource, San Diego, CA, USA). For glucose tolerance tests, glucose in aqueous solution was administered i.p. (2.5 g glucose/kg) to mice that had been fasted for 6 h.

2.4.

## Separation of iBAT to brown adipocyte and stromal vascular fractions
Tissue was digested at 37 °C with type II collagenase at 15 mg per gram of tissue for 30 min in oxygenated Krebs solution (pH 7.4) containing 20 mM HEPES, 3 mM glucose, and 3.5% fatty acid-free BSA, under maximal agitation. Tissue digests were filtered, floating mature brown adipocytes were collected, and the subnatant was taken as the stromal vascular fraction (SVF) containing all non-adipocyte cells. The cell fractions were pelleted by centrifugation (20 min, 500×g, 4 °C) and total RNA was extracted separately from the brown adipocyte fraction and SVF.

2.5.

## Cell culture experiments
For primary brown adipocyte differentiation, stromal vascular cells were obtained from iBAT of 3-week-old Swiss mice (Charles River, MA, USA). Differentiation of confluent precursor cells was induced using Dulbecco's modified Eagle's medium (DMEM)/F12 medium containing 10% fetal bovine serum (FBS), 20 nM insulin, 2 nM triiodothyronine (T3), and 0.1 mM ascorbic acid, according to previously established procedures [ ]. Experiments were performed on day 10 of culture, when more than 90% of cells were differentiated.
Immortalized brown adipocytes from C57BL/6 J mice [ ] were collected at passage 12, seeded in 6-well plates in DMEM containing 10% FBS, 20 mM HEPES, 1 nM T3, and 20 nM insulin, and grown at 37 °C in a humidified 95% air/5% CO2 incubator. When cultures reached 70–80% confluence, 500 nM dexamethasone, 1 μM rosiglitazone, 125 μM indomethacin, and 500 μM 3-isobutyl-1-methylxanthine were added. The cells were incubated for 2 days, changed to medium containing T3 and insulin, and incubated until they were fully differentiated (day 7).
Human SGBS pre-adipocytes at passage 10 (PCS-210–010; ATCC, VA, USA) were differentiated into mature brown/beige adipocytes using established procedures [ ]. Briefly, SGBS preadipocytes were grown to confluence in DMEM/F12 medium containing 10% FBS, and differentiation was induced by incubation for 7 days in FBS-free DMEM/F12 medium containing 20 nM insulin, 0.2 nM T3, 100 nM cortisol, 25 nM dexamethasone, 500 μM 3-isobutyl-1-methyl-xanthine, and 2 μM rosiglitazone. The cells were then switched to DMEM/F12 medium plus 20 nM insulin, 0.2 nM T3, and 100 nM cortisol, and maintained for up to 14 days; during this time more than 90% of the cells acquired a fully differentiated multilocular adipocyte morphology.
Where indicated, differentiated brown adipocytes and/or SGBS adipocytes were treated with 0.5 μM norepinephrine (NE; #A0937, Sigma–Aldrich), 1 mM dibutyryl-cAMP (D0627, Sigma–Aldrich), ACBP recombinant protein (#OCPD02664, Aviva Systems Biology, San Diego, CA, USA), 1.30 μg/mL anti-ACBP antibody (#ab231910, Abcam, Waltham, MA, USA), and/or 1.30 μg/mL IgG isotype antibody (#ab171870, Abcam).
For ATG7 depletion, immortalized brown pre-adipocytes were infected with a lentiviral vector encoding an shRNA against Atg7 (siAtg7) or scrambled shRNA (Ctrl-siRNA), as previously described by Singh et al. (2009) [ ].

2.6.

## RNA extraction and quantitative real-time PCR
Total RNA was extracted using a NucleoSpin RNA kit (Macherey–Nagel, Dueren, Germany), and 0.5 μg of total RNA was reverse transcribed using a High Capacity RNA-to-cDNA Kit (Applied Biosystems, Foster City, CA, USA). Samples were systematically checked to confirm that there was no amplification in the absence of reverse transcriptase. Quantitative real-time PCR was performed using a TaqMan system, with each reaction containing 10 μL Platinum qPCR SuperMix-UDG with ROX (Thermo Fisher Scientific), 8 μL milli-Q water, 1 μL TaqMan probe, and 1 μL cDNA. The utilized assay probes are listed in the . cDNA levels for the gene of interest were normalized to that of the reference control (Ppia) using the comparative CT(2−ΔΔCT) method. A transcript was considered non-detectable when the CT value greater than or equal to 40.

2.7.

## Mitochondrial respiration-related parameters
Oxygen consumption rate (OCR) and extracellular acidification rate (ECAR, a surrogate measure of glycolytic activity toward lactate) were determined using the Agilent Seahorse XFe24 system (Agilent, Santa Clara, CA, USA). Briefly, ∼20,000 immortalized mouse brown adipocytes/well were plated in gelatin precoated Seahorse XFe24 Cell Culture Microplates. After 24 h, the medium was switched to Agilent Seahorse XF Base Medium supplemented with 2 % BSA fatty acid-free (A8806, Sigma–Aldrich), 5 mM glucose, 0.5 mM pyruvate, and 2 mM glutamine. For determination of OCR parameters, the following were sequentially added to cells: 5 μM oligomycin (O4876), as an ATP-synthase inhibitor; 2 μM carbonyl cyanide p-(trifluoromethoxy) phenylhydrazone (FCCP; C2920) as a mitochondrial uncoupler; 5 μM rotenone (R8875), as a respiratory complex I inhibitor; and 15 μM antimycin A (A8674) (all from Sigma–Aldrich), as a respiratory complex III inhibitor. When indicated, the effects of 0.5 μM isoproterenol in the presence of 2% fatty acid-free BSA were determined, according to Li et al. [ ].

2.8.

## RNAseq
Twelve week old-mice were used for RNAseq analysis of iBAT. RNA sample integrity was determined using a Qubit RNA IQ Assay (Invitrogen). Purified mRNA (2 μg) was processed using a TruSeq RNA sample prep kit v2 (Illumina). Adaptor ligation, 100 basepair (bp) cDNA fragment purification, fragment amplification, and library preparation were performed according to the manufacturer's instructions, and the generated library was sequenced using an Illumina NovaSeq 6000 platform at Centro Nacional de Análisis Genómico (Barcelona, Spain). The sequenced 100-bp paired-end reads were quality checked using FastQC and quality control alignment. The obtained reads were aligned to the mouse reference genome (GRCm39) using STAR (2.7.8a) and the numbers of exon reads for all RefSeq genes were counted using RSEM (1.3.0). Raw-count datasets for the expression of each gene and individual transcript are available at the Gene Expression Omnibus (GEO accession: GSE285403). Data for Elmod2 and Tbcd2 transcripts were excluded from the analysis on the basis of their presence in the B6.FVB-Tg(Ucp1-cre)1Evdr/J transgene [ ]. Data analysis of the resulting count matrix was performed in R studio (4.3.1), and differentially expressed genes were identified using the DESeq application (V1.42.0). Under this R package, the log2 fold change (log2FC) was calculated, and the Wald test was used to determine significance (P < 0.05, Benjamini-Hochberg correction). Functional enrichment analysis was performed with ClusterProfiler (V4.10.0), gene ontology analysis was performed using GO, and functional protein association networks were determined using STRING [ ].
For analysis of snRNA-seq of interscapular brown adipocytes from mice at room temperature (21 °C) and under cold exposure (8 °C, 2 days), available data at ArrayExpress, accession code E-MTAB-856219 were used and analyzed following the code deposited in GitHub (https://github.com/IRCGP-Lab/Macrophage-heterogeneity-after-MI), with minor modifications. Bioinformatics processing of the snRNA-sequencing data was performed with the R package Seurat (v.3.2.0) [ ]. To exclude low quality cells in snRNA-sequencing, we filtered cells with an expressed gene count and total RNA molecules count fewer than 2% or greater than 98%. Additionally, cells in which more than 5% of reads corresponded to mitochondrial genes were removed. Data was log-normalized, and highly variable features were identified based on a variance stabilizing transformation (VST) method. All datasets (Room Temperature – RT and Cold Exposure - CE) were then integrated using the canonical correlation analysis (CCA) method, “Find Integration Anchors” and “Integrate Data” functions in Seurat. Principal components analysis (PCA) was performed on the integrated datasets. Based on the top 50 principal components (PCs), graph-based clustering was performed using the shared nearest neighbor (SNN) modularity optimization with resolution set to 1.1, and all cells were classified into 10 clusters. Clustering data was then applied followed by uniform manifold approximation and projection (UMAP) allowing the visualization of identified clusters in UMAP plots [ ]. Average log e fold-change was used for comparison of Ucp1 and Acbp expression levels between all the Acbp-expressor brown adipocytes from room temperature and cold exposure condition, and was then plotted into Violin Plot and Feature Plot using GraphPad Prism Software and FeaturePlot function split by condition in R, respectively. Wald test was used for comparision of statistical significance of the cold versus room temperature condition.

2.9.

## Western blot and multiplex analysis of phosphorylated proteins
Cells were lysed in ice-cold lysis buffer (Milliplex MAP buffer for Multiplexing, Merck Millipore) supplemented with 1 mM phenylmethylsulfonyl fluoride (PMSF). Equal amounts of protein were separated by sodium dodecyl sulfate-polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis (SDS-PAGE) on 15% gradient gels and blotted onto PVDF (polyvinylidenedifluoride) Immobilon-P membranes (Merck Millipore). The membranes were probed with specific primary antibodies ACBP (1/2000 in-house [ ] and 1/1000 #ab231910, Abcam), p62 (1/1000 #5114, Cell Signaling, MA, USA) UCP1 (1/10,000 #ab10983, Abcam), ATP5A + UQCRC2 (1/1000 #ab6721, Abcam) p-p38 (1/1000 #9211, Cell Signaling), total p-38 (1/1000, #9212, Cell Signaling), Atg7 (1/1000, #2631, Cell Signaling). Results were detected using an HRP-conjugated secondary goat anti-rabbit antibody (1/3000 #ab6721, Abcam) in conjunction with a chemiluminescence detection substrate (#WBKLS0500, Merck Millipore). Loading controls were established using Ponceau staining (PS). Quantification was performed using the iBright Analysis Software (Thermo Fisher Scientific) and the Multi Gauge V3.0 Software (Fujifilm, Tokyo, Japan). For multiplex analysis of total and phosphorylated proteins, cells were lysed and processed using MADKMAG-HK (Merk Millipore) according to the manufacturer instructions. Results were visualized using a Luminex system (Thermo Fisher Scientific).

2.10.

## Histological analysis
Tissues were fixed overnight in 4% paraformaldehyde, sectioned at 5-μm thick, and stained with hematoxylin and eosin (H&E) for further morphological investigation. Samples were processed by the HCB-IDIBAPS Biobank (B.0000575) within the ISCIII Biobanks platform, and with Biomodels. The lipid surface area was quantified with Image J 2.0 (NIH) using the panel Image > Adjust > Threshold, as described in Domingo et al. (2022) [ ].

2.11.

## Statistical analysis
The data are expressed as means ± s.e.m. Results were analyzed by Student's t-test, one- or two-way analysis of variance (ANOVA) followed by Tukey's multiple-comparisons test or Dunnet's post-hoc test (for more than two groups or multiple time points, respectively), using the GraphPad 8 statistical software (GraphPad Software Inc., San Diego, CA, USA). Regression-based analysis with ANCOVA utilizing body weight as covariate was performed for energy expenditure analysis. P-values <0.05 were considered significant. P-value ranges and utilized statistical analyses are indicated in the figure legends. When indicated, Pearson's linear correlation analysis was performed and R and P-values are shown in the figure.

3.

## Results
3.1.

## Thermogenic activation represses Acbp gene expression and release in BAT
We first examined Acbp mRNA levels in mice exposed to conditions designed to trigger cold-related thermogenic activation. As shown in A (left), mice given short-term (1 day, acute cold, AC) or long-term (21 day, chronic cold, CC) exposures to an environmental temperature of 4 °C exhibited repression of Acbp gene expression in BAT, whereas re-acclimation of these cold-exposed mice to thermoneutrality (TN) was associated with rescue of Acbp gene expression. Reciprocally to Acbp, Ucp1 gene expression was induced in response to cold and repressed after cold deacclimation, as expected. Concordant with the changes in Acbp gene expression, the plasma levels of ACBP were down-regulated upon cold exposure and restored by the return to thermoneutrality ( A, right). Similar results were obtained when we fed mice a high-fat diet (HFD), which is known to induce BAT activation and Ucp1 gene expression [ ]. In HFD-fed mice, Acbp gene expression was reduced and, additionally, the expression of Ucp1, the marker gene of BAT thermogenic activation, was increased ( B). To examine whether changes in Acbp gene expression in BAT were associated with changes in ACBP secretion, we exposed rats to an environmental temperature of 4 °C for 24 h and determined the ACBP levels in blood samples obtained from Sulzer's vein, which drains most of the blood flow from interscapular BAT (iBAT), using previously reported procedures [ ]. Indeed, the ACBP levels in blood samples obtained from Sulzer's vein were negatively correlated with the Ucp1 mRNA expression level in iBAT (used to indicate the extent of thermogenic activation in the tissue) ( C). As seen in mice, Acbp expression in rats was down-regulated in iBAT upon cold exposure ( D). These data confirmed that thermogenic activation of BAT decreases Acbp expression and ACBP secretion by BAT. Given that, in mammals, Acbp is widely expressed in various cell types we checked whether brown adipocytes and/or other cells within BAT exhibit down-regulation of Acbp expression in response to thermogenic activation. Separate analyses of brown adipocytes and the stromal vascular fraction (SVF) from BAT revealed that cold exposure repressed Acbp mRNA expression predominantly in brown adipocytes ( E). To confirm this, we analyzed Acbp expression using available snRNA-seq data from BAT adipocytes isolated from mice maintained at room temperature or exposed to cold [ ]. The data revealed a significant reduction in the number of brown adipocyte nuclei with high levels of Acbp expression in mice exposed to cold. In contrast, the number of Ucp1-expressing nuclei increased, as expected, in response to cold exposure ( F).
 
3.2.

## Noradrenergic cAMP-mediated signaling represses Acbp expression and ACBP release in thermogenically activated mouse and human brown adipocytes in vitro
To explore the cell-autonomous regulation of Acbp expression and release, primary-culture mouse brown adipocytes were treated with norepinephrine (NE), which mimics the sympathetic mechanisms of thermogenic activation [ ]. Our results indicated that NE treatment strongly down-regulated Acbp mRNA levels in brown adipocytes and reduced the release of ACBP to the cell culture medium; moreover, this inversely mirrored the induction of Ucp1 mRNA expression, which is indicative of thermogenic activation ( A). Similar results ( B) were obtained using an immortalized cell line of murine brown adipocytes (pBAT cells) [ ]. Brown adipocytes treated with cAMP, which is the main intracellular mediator of noradrenergic stimuli, also showed significant repression of Acbp mRNA expression and ACBP release to the medium ( C). In SGBS adipocytes, which phenotypically resemble human brown adipocytes [ ], cAMP treatment strongly induced Ucp1 mRNA expression, strongly repressed Acbp mRNA expression, and reduced the release of ACBP to the cell culture medium ( D). Collectively, these data indicate that noradrenergic cAMP-mediated thermogenic activation of brown adipocytes can dramatically repress Acbp mRNA expression and ACBP protein release.
 
3.3.

## Repression of autophagy contributes to decreasing Acbp gene expression and ACBP release by thermogenically activated BAT
Previous studies have proposed that ACBP release occurs via secretory autophagy, and is thus believed to be associated with autophagic activity [ ]. Considering that thermogenic activation represses autophagy in BAT [ ] we explored whether autophagy might be involved in the thermogenesis-related repression of ACBP secretion. We used brown adipocytes with invalidation of the key protein for autophagy initiation and autophagosome formation ATG7 ( ), an established model of autophagy blockage in brown adipocytes [ ] and exposed these cells to NE. Our data indicated that the NE-induced down-regulation of ACBP release was blunted in cells lacking ATG7 ( A, right). Similarly, the NE-induced down-regulation of Acbp mRNA expression was also suppressed in cells lacking ATG7. These data suggest that blockage of autophagy not only suppressed the post-transcriptional processes that enable secretion of ACBP, but also blunted the noradrenergic regulation of Acbp gene expression.
 To assess whether similar changes are observed in vivo, we used as study model mice that were chronically exposed to cold and then returned to thermoneutrality, which results in strong up-regulation of autophagy [ ] and Acbp expression (see ) in BAT. A group of mice was treated with chloroquine to inhibit autophagy [ ]. As expected, cold-deacclimation down-regulated Ucp1 mRNA expression and UCP1 protein levels in BAT ( B). Deacclimation caused an up-regulation of Acbp mRNA expression in BAT but a dramatic reduction in intracellular ACBP protein expression. This may reflect that ACBP secretion is increased due to enhanced autophagy in BAT of cold-deacclimated mice, as evidenced by reduced p62 [ ] ( B, bottom). The chloroquine-induced inhibition of autophagy in cold-deacclimated mice significantly reduced the circulating levels of ACBP ( B), which is consistent with a previous report that blockade of autophagy leads to repression of ACBP secretion in tissues [ ]. Our results also show that, at least in BAT, the chloroquine-induced reduction in systemic ACBP levels was associated with increased intracellular ACBP levels (likely due to accumulation caused by reduced autophagy-mediated secretion) but also reduced Acbp mRNA expression. Overall, these findings indicate that conditions of enhanced autophagy in BAT, such as a warm environment, are associated with enhanced secretion of ACBP concomitant with increased Acbp gene expression.

3.4.

## Targeted ablation of Acbp in brown adipocytes results in thermogenic over-activation of BAT
To further explore the role of ACBP in BAT, we generated a brown adipocyte-specific Acbp gene invalidation mouse model (Acbp BAd-KO mice) by mating mice bearing Ucp1 promoter-driven CRE with those bearing a floxed endogenous Acbp gene (see methods). The resulting Acbp BAd-KO mice showed 90% invalidation of Acbp transcript expression in iBAT ( A, left). Other adipose depots with a BAT-like phenotype (i.e., those with high-level expression of UCP1), such as thoracic perivascular adipose tissue (tPVAT), also showed strong invalidation of Acbp expression whereas the abdominal perivascular adipose tissue (aPVAT), which exhibits lower-level UCP1 expression (see D), showed less marked invalidation of Acbp in our model mice ( A, left). In epididymal and inguinal white adipose tissues (WAT), the extent of invalidation was negligible. This likely reflects that, although some UCP1-expressing beige cells are present in inguinal WAT from mice, UCP1 expression is very low in mice maintained at room temperature [ ]. Non-adipose tissues, such as liver, heart, and hypothalamus, did not show any invalidation of Acbp expression in our brown adipocyte-specific model ( A). As expected, Acbp BAd-KO mice showed practically undetectable levels of ACBP protein in BAT ( A). Notably, the systemic circulating ACBP levels were not affected by Acbp invalidation in BAT ( A, right).
 Body weight was not significantly altered in Acbp BAd-KO mice although trended lower ( ). The inguinal and epididymal WAT depots as well as iBAT were significantly smaller in Acbp BAd-KO mice ( B). No significant size difference was found for other tissues and organs, including the liver ( ). Food intake was not significantly affected in Acbp BAd-KO mice ( ). Glycemia and insulinemia were significantly lower in Acbp BAd-KO mice, thus resulting in a lower HOMA-IR ( C), indicating that the lack of ACBP in BAT improved systemic insulin sensitivity. Triglyceridemia was unaltered, as were the circulating levels of the cytokines, interleukin-6 (IL6) and chemokine (C–C motif) ligand 2 (CCL2) ( ). Local infrared thermography-based assessment revealed that heat production at the iBAT region was increased in Acbp BAd-KO mice ( D) whereas eye temperature, a surrogate of core body temperature [ ] was unaltered (not shown). Histological analysis revealed that the lipid droplets in BAT were smaller in Acbp BAd-KO mice, providing evidence of less fat accumulation ( E). This explained why iBAT was smaller in Acbp BAd-KO mice, even though the total protein content was unaltered in Acbp BAd-KO mice compared to control Acbpfl/fl mice ( F). These data are consistent with enhanced thermogenic activity in iBAT from Acbp BAd-KO mice.

3.5.

## Targeted ablation of Acbp in brown adipocytes induces an adaptive thermogenic and cold-responsive transcriptome pattern in BAT
To examine the global effects of invalidating ACBP in BAT, we used RNAseq to analyze whole-transcriptome changes of BAT from Acbp BAd-KO mice relative to Acbpfl/fl control mice. Using P < 0.05 as the cutoff, we identified relatively small sets of transcripts that were up-regulated (261) or down-regulated (205) in BAT under local invalidation of Acbp ( A,C). As expected, Acbp was the most highly down-regulated gene (not shown in volcano plot, for scale representation). GO-term annotation-based analysis of the up-regulated genes indicated that Acbp invalidation in brown adipocytes led to some induction of global pathways related to protein and lipid metabolism, including “triglyceride metabolic processes”, “glycerolipid metabolic processes,” and “lipid localization”, as well as repression of “macroautophagy” ( ). GO-term annotation-based analysis of the down-regulated genes revealed inhibition of metabolic processes related to monocarboxylic acids, carbohydrates, and lipids, which is overall consistent with the ability of ACBP to function in lipid metabolism via its acyl-CoA binding properties ( ). STRING-based analysis of the up-regulated genes, which was used to predict alterations in protein-association networks, revealed that Acbp invalidation in brown adipocytes led to positive regulation of cold-induced thermogenic genes and pathways related to lipid metabolism, adipocyte differentiation, autophagy, and the complement system ( B). These findings provide evidence that, in addition to the known role of ACBP in lipid metabolism, its expression is negatively associated with BAT thermogenesis-related pathways. This is consistent with our functional results indicating that ACBP-depleted BAT exhibits increased thermogenic activity. Our STRING-based analysis of the down-regulated genes indicated that Acbp invalidation in brown adipocytes altered WNT signaling, which is a key pathway in adipocyte differentiation processes [ ] and negatively regulated the inflammatory response, which is a crucial mediator of brown adipocyte thermogenesis [ ].
The genes found to be overexpressed in BAT from Acbp BAd-KO mice included Ppargc1a (PGC1α), Dio2, Nr4a3 (NOR1), Ffar4, Noct, and Nrg4 ( A), which are known actors in BAT thermogenic activity [ , , , , , ]. Ehhadh, which is a target gene of PPARα [ ], a key mediator in coupling lipid oxidation with thermogenesis in brown fat [ ] was also up-regulated. Additional up-regulated transcripts, such as Gsta3 and Dhrs9, corresponded to genes that have not previously been associated with BAT thermogenesis, and are not annotated as being related to thermogenesis in the GO and STRING tools. Since our STRING-based results indicated that transcripts up-regulated under Acbp invalidation in brown adipocytes could be related to thermogenic activation, we compared the genes significantly up-regulated in BAT from Acbp BAd-KO mice with the cold-responsive genes in mouse BAT, according to our previously reported transcriptomics data set [ ] (GSE77534). Of the 261 gene transcripts that were significantly up-regulated in Acbp BAd-KO mice, 190 (73%) were significantly up-regulated in BAT in response to cold (see C). This is particularly notable given that the cold-induced transcripts comprise only 7% of the whole transcriptome of mouse BAT [ ]. Among the 205 genes down-regulated in Acbp BAd-KO mice, 90 (44%) were down-regulated in cold-exposed mice. Interestingly, the transcript encoding leptin, a key marker of the white-versus-brown adipose phenotype, was dramatically down-regulated ( A). However, the top-repressed genes in Acbp BAd-KO corresponded to genes that are either unresponsive (Ptgds, Alas1) or down-regulated (Grpin3, Ndn, Cry2, Amer1) in response to cold according to our database comparisons (GSE77534).
We validated our RNAseq data in Acbp BAd-KO mice by examining transcript levels in iBAT and perivascular adipose depots showing BAT-like features and significant Acbp invalidation ( D). Genes with known positive involvement in BAT thermogenic function, such as Ppargc1a, Dio2, Noct, and Nr4a3, were consistently up-regulated in iBAT, tPVAT, and aPVAT of Acbp BAd-KO mice. Ucp1 expression was significantly up-regulated in the aPVAT depot. Similarly, Gsta3, and Dhrs9, which were strongly up-regulated in iBAT from Acbp BAd-KO mice according to our RNAseq data, were also up-regulated in the BAT-like perivascular adipose depots of these mice. In fact, the expression of Noct and Dhrs9 was strongly up-regulated by NE in brown adipocytes, in a response similar to that of Ucp1 ( E).
Overall, these data support a scenario in which ACBP knockdown in BAT, in addition to altering lipid metabolism and other cellular processes, induces a transcript profile associated with BAT thermogenic activation and reciprocally down-regulates that associated with thermogenically inactive BAT. This transcriptomics-based information is consistent with the above-described functional data, and these findings together indicate that BAT is over-activated in Acbp BAd-KO mice.

3.6.

## Lack of ACBP at BAT protects against mice against the effects of an obesogenic high-fat diet
To assess the relevance of BAT-expressed ACBP in controlling metabolism, we analyzed the effects of an obesogenic high-fat diet (HFD) on Acbp BAd-KO mice. We found that mice lacking ACBP expression in BAT had significantly reduced body weight gain when given HFD during the 12 weeks of treatment ( A). That happened without significant changes in food intake (3.11 ± 0.11 g/day in Acbp BAd-KO mice versus 3.10 ± 0.14 in Acbpfl/fl controls). In comparison with HFD-fed Acbpfl/fl controls, HFD-fed Acbp BAd-KO mice showed significantly higher energy expenditure, measured as the rate of oxygen consumption, especially during the night period ( B) which was confirmed by ANCOVA analysis using body weight as covariate ( ). The metabolic status of Acbp BAd-KO mice under HFD was healthier than that of HFD-fed Acbpfl/fl mice, as shown by reduced basal glycemia, insulinemia, and HOMA-IR ( C), and improved glucose tolerance ( D). Histological analysis of BAT revealed that Acbp BAd-KO mice had a decreased lipid droplet size ( E) associated with reduced lipid content. Comparison of the BAT transcriptomes from HFD-fed Acbp BAd-KO mice versus HFD-treated Acbpfl/fl controls identified 293 up-regulated and 329 down-regulated transcripts ( F). GO annotation-based analysis of these gene sets indicated that HFD-fed Acbp BAd-KO mice exhibited increases in terms related to “adaptive thermogenesis”, “fat cell differentiation,” “fatty acid metabolism”, and some general cellular processes ( G). STRING-based analysis of the up-regulated genes identified predominant impacts on the functions of “response to heat” and “lipid metabolic processes” ( ), whereas the corresponding analysis of down-regulated genes identified impacts on the lipid response, signaling networks involving FGFs and intracellular kinases (ERK, MAPK), the extracellular matrix, and cell adhesion ( ). Among the main up-regulated genes in Acbp BAd-KO mice under standard diet feeding, the marker genes of BAT activity (Ppargc1a, Ehhadh, Dio2, Nrg4, Nr4a3, Noct) and Gsta3 clustered as up-regulated genes in HFD-fed Acbp BAd-KO, but this induction was statistically significant only for Nr4a3 and Gsta3.
 
3.7.

## ACBP represses mitochondrial oxidation, lipolysis, and thermogenic gene expression whereas it induces inflammatory cytokine expression and secretion in brown adipocytes
Once established that Acbp expression in BAT is reciprocally associated with thermogenic activity in BAT, we addressed whether extracellular ACBP may contribute to regulating brown adipocyte activity. For this purpose, we treated mouse brown adipocytes with recombinant ACBP for 24 h. Our data indicated that extracellular ACBP significantly reduced oxidative parameters (basal and maximal respiration) and proton leakage in brown adipocytes ( A). This was accompanied by a reduction in extracellular acidification (ECAR), which is a surrogate for glycolytic activity. These results indicate that ACBP-treated brown adipocytes exhibit an overall impairment in metabolic activity. Moreover, we found that ACBP repressed significantly isoproterenol-induced oxygen consumption ( B), an indicator of thermogenic uncoupled respiration [ ].
 When we assessed components of mitochondrial oxidative (OXPHOS) and thermogenic activities, we found that brown adipocytes treated with ACBP exhibited significant reductions in the levels of ATP5A (a component of ATP synthase in OXPHOS complex V) and UCP1 (the key mitochondrial protein for thermogenesis), but not UQCRC2 (a component of OXPHOS complex III) ( C). This was associated with reduced transcript levels for Atp5g3 (a component of OXPHOS complex V) and Uqcrc1 (a component of OXPHOS complex III) ( D).
We then examined transcript levels for genes that mark brown adipocyte thermogenic activity and are sensitive to thermogenic stimuli, including those found to be up-regulated in BAT from Acbp BAd-KO mice. We observed that ACBP treatment of brown adipocytes led to the following: down-regulation of the marker genes of BAT activation Ucp1, Ppargc1, Bmp8b, and Ehhadh ( A); no alteration of some the cold-sensitive gene transcripts up-regulated in BAT from Acbp BAd-KO mice, namely Gsta3, and Dhrs9; and up-regulation of Il6 ( B). Regarding protein secretion, we found that ACBP increased the releases of IL-6 and CCL2 ( C), ACBP also caused a significant decrease in the release of glycerol by brown adipocytes, indicating impaired lipolysis ( D).
 We also determined whether extracellular ACBP affected the NE-mediated induction of thermogenic genes. Indeed, we found that treatment of brown adipocytes with ACBP decreased the ability of NE to up-regulate Ucp1, Noct, and Dhrs9 ( E).
Given the above findings obtained upon 24 h treatment of differentiated brown adipocytes with ACBP, we further examined the impact of adding ACBP to the cell culture medium during the whole differentiation process, from the preadipocyte (day 1 of culture) to differentiated (day 8) stages. This treatment did not modify the differentiation of brown adipocytes, as assessed by monitoring the acquisition of brown adipocyte cell morphology ( ). However, similarly to the effects of ACBP in differentiated brown adipocytes, the presence of ACBP in the culture medium during differentiation was associated with down-regulation of Ucp1, Ppargc1a and Bmp8b and up-regulation of Il6 ( ).

3.8.

## Blockage of endogenous ACBP secreted to the brown adipocyte culture medium promotes thermogenic gene expression
To assess whether the above-described effects could be directly related to the ACBP secreted by brown adipocytes, we blocked the endogenously secreted ACBP by adding a specific antibody to the brown adipocyte culture medium. Our results indicated that neutralization of endogenous secreted ACBP significantly increased the transcript levels of Ucp1 and several genes that are involved in thermogenic activation of BAT and were found to be up-regulated in Acbp BAd-KO mice, including Nr4a3 and Ehhadh ( ). This blockade also decreased the expression of Ccl2 ( ), although it did not result in altered secretion ( ). Glycerol release was dramatically induced by neutralization of ACBP in the medium, indicating enhanced lipolysis ( ). Overall, these results indicate that blockage of endogenously secreted ACBP induces several parameters indicative of increased thermogenic activity, partially mirroring the results found in brown adipocytes exposed to high levels of recombinant ACBP in the cell culture medium.

3.9.

## Effects of ACBP on intracellular pathways that control brown adipocyte activity
We also determined how extracellular ACBP affected phosphorylation-dependent intracellular signaling pathways of brown adipocytes in response to the thermogenic activators, NE and cAMP. Our results indicated that ACBP treatment significantly repressed the capacities of NE and cAMP to activate p38 MAP-kinase ( F), which is a major intracellular pathway known to mediate thermogenic activation [ ]. The other tested intracellular mediators did not exhibit any alteration of phosphorylation status under ACBP treatment, except for the p-Akt/Akt ratio, which showed a decreasing tendency ( ). Among the other tested intracellular regulators, the NE-induced phosphorylation of CREB, which is a key transcription factor in the noradrenergic regulation of thermogenic gene expression [ ], was found to be down-regulated by ACBP ( ). These data show that extracellular ACBP interferes strongly with key intracellular pathways that contribute to the induction of thermogenesis, mainly the p38 MAP kinase pathway.

4.

## Discussion
In the present study, we show that the expression and release of ACBP in brown adipocytes is strongly inhibited by thermogenic noradrenergic-mediated stimuli, and that ACBP contributes to controlling BAT activity by inhibiting its thermogenic function.
We found that BAT activation is associated with strong repression of Acbp gene expression associated within reduced secretion and release of ACBP by brown adipocytes. The ability of thermogenically active BAT to impair autophagy appears to contribute to the reduced secretion of ACBP, as do noradrenergic mechanisms that transcriptionally repress Acbp. In fact, accumulation of intracellular ACBP protein in BAT in response to cold [ ] and reduction after deacclimation (see Results) are likely to be due the reciprocal effect of cold on autophagy and subsequent autophagy-associated release of ACBP.
Targeted invalidation of Acbp in brown adipocytes resulted in BAT transcriptome remodeling and histological alterations consistent with enhanced thermogenic activity, which was also evidenced by increased local heat production at the iBAT region. This was associated with an improved systemic metabolic status under both basal and obesogenic conditions, especially in relation to glucose homeostasis, and even protection against obesogenesis in the absence of altered food intake and in association with enhanced energy expenditure. These findings in mice with BAT-specific invalidation of Acbp are compatible with previous data showing that constitutive invalidation of Acbp expression in all adipose tissues (WAT and BAT) protects against obesity in mice [ ] and highlights the importance of BAT as a site where ACBP expression affects whole-body homeostasis and metabolism. It should be noted that, as expected, the UCP1 promoter-directed invalidation of Acbp affected BAT-like adipose depots other than iBAT, such as perivascular adipose tissues. This indicates that changes in ACBP expression and release in these adipose depots may have systemic consequences via a local action of secreted ACBP at the vascular level occurring either directly (local effects of decreased ACBP secretion by brown adipocytes), or indirectly (overactivation of BAT due to the lack of ACBP in these anatomical locations).
Interestingly, our analysis of the BAT transcriptome in mice with Acbp gene invalidation identified, in addition to well-characterized marker genes of thermogenesis (e.g. Ppargc1a, Dio2 …), up-regulation of transcripts that show strong inducibility in BAT when stimulated by cold and in brown adipocytes in response to noradrenergic stimulus. Among them, Gsta3 (α-class glutathione S-transferase) and Dhrs9 (dehydrogenase/reductase SDR family member 9), have not been previously related to brown adipose tissue biology. Further research will be needed to ascertain the role of these novel actors in BAT activity and in relation to ACBP functions.
The effects of Acbp invalidation in BAT were not associated with any alteration in the circulating levels of ACBP, which may reflect that BAT contributes relatively little to systemic ACBP, and/or it may indicate that there is homeostatic compensation via increased secretion by other tissues. In any case, these findings suggest that the systemic impact of ACBP invalidation in BAT occurs through the local actions of ACBP in the tissue, which may involve intracellular and autocrine effects.
Our in vitro studies suggest that extracellular ACBP can strongly repress brown adipocyte thermogenic and metabolic activity and induce pro-inflammatory signaling, and that neutralization of brown adipocyte-secreted ACBP elicits some of these effects. In fact, extracellular ACBP represses the capacity of noradrenergic signals to activate intracellular p38 MAP kinase signaling and CREB phosphorylation, which are known to elicit transcriptional activation of the thermogenic program in brown adipocytes [ , ]. Although the cellular receptor responsible for mediating the action of ACBP is not fully known, published reports indicate that GABA-A receptor mediates ACBP action in the brain [ ] and, more recently, that GABA-A receptor subunit gamma-2 is also involved in mediating the effects of ACBP in peripheral tissues [ ]. According to our previously reported RNAseq database (GSE77534), the transcript expression levels of Gabra2 receptors subunits are high in BAT, and the genes encoding GABA-A recepto subunits are generally down-regulated under cold-induced BAT activation ( ). This supports the notion that ACBP/GABA-A receptor signaling may contribute to BAT thermogenic regulation. Further research is warranted to address this possibility. Moreover, consistent with previous results obtained using antibody-mediated systemic neutralization of ACBP [ ] antibody-mediated blockage of ACBP in the brown adipocyte culture medium mirrors some of the effects of exogenous ACBP treatment, especially the inhibition lipolysis induction.
In summary, we herein show that the thermogenic activation of BAT suppresses ACBP expression and release, while ACBP itself strongly inhibits BAT activity, creating a self-inhibitory loop in regulating BAT function. Reciprocally, warm conditions lead to increased Acbp gene expression and ACBP secretion in BAT due to enhanced Acbp transcription and autophagy-mediated ACBP secretion, which contribute to repressed thermogenic activity. While much is known about adrenergic and non-adrenergic activators of BAT, we know less about the relevant repressors. Some, such as kininogen and sLR11 [ , ] function as local autocrine factors. These factors are paradoxically induced by noradrenergic stimuli and seem to provide rheostatic regulation of BAT to prevent excessive energy dissipation. We identify ACBP as the first BAT-secreted protein that acts as a repressor in a unique way: it directly inhibits BAT activity and shows reduced expression and release under noradrenergic stimulation. This process mediates the reciprocal coupling of thermogenic activation and ACBP-mediated repression of BAT activity. High ACBP levels are associated with obesity, diabetes, inflammation, cardiometabolic disorders, and aging [ ] all of which are linked to abnormally low BAT activity [ , , ]. Increasing evidence indicates that blockade of circulating ACBP could benefit multiple organs [ ]. Although our data suggest that ACBP-mediated repression of BAT activity primarily results from local up-regulation of ACBP expression and release by BAT, it is likely that elevated systemic levels of ACBP also exert repressive effects on BAT activity. Given the strong link between high BAT activity and cardiometabolic health, our findings imply that ACBP's inhibitory effects on BAT may contribute to the ability of elevated ACBP levels to negatively impact systemic metabolic conditions. Moreover, the action of ACBP may be envisioned as a tool to prevent pathogenic conditions associated with BAT hyperactivity, such as cachexia in some types of cancer and hypermetabolism of severe burn patients [ ].

## CRediT authorship contribution statement
Albert Blasco-Roset: Writing – original draft, Investigation, Formal analysis, Data curation, Conceptualization. Tania Quesada-López: Investigation, Formal analysis, Data curation. Alberto Mestres-Arenas: Methodology, Investigation. Joan Villarroya: Investigation, Formal analysis. Francisco J. Godoy-Nieto: Formal analysis, Data curation. Rubén Cereijo: Formal analysis, Data curation. Celia Rupérez: Methodology, Investigation. Ditte Neess: Methodology, Investigation. Nils J. Færgeman: Writing – review & editing, Investigation. Marta Giralt: Writing – review & editing, Investigation. Anna Planavila: Writing – review & editing, Conceptualization. Francesc Villarroya: Writing – review & editing, Writing – original draft, Funding acquisition, Conceptualization.

## Funding sources
We thank the State Agency of Research (AEI) of the Spanish Ministry of Science (MCIN) for funding. This research was supported by grants PID2020-114112RB-I00, CNS2022-135516 and PID2023-1467810-I00 funded by MICIN/AEI/10.13039/50110 0011033 and FEDER, UE. A.B-R. was supported by a FI-SDUR Ph. D. scholarship (grant 2021 FISDU 00256), and A.M-A by a PhD scholarship (grant FPU20/03364) funded by MICIN/AEI/10.13039/50110 0011033 and FSE+. T.Q-L. is a “Juan de la Cierva-Incorporación” researcher (grant IJC2020-043380-I funded by the MCIN/AEI/10.13039/501100011033 and by the European Union Next Generation EU/PRTR).

## Declaration of competing interest
The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper.

## Acknowledgements
We thank C. Wolfrum for facilitating access to snRNAseq databases and M. Morales for technical support.

## Footnotes
Appendix ASupplementary data to this article can be found online at https://doi.org/10.1016/j.molmet.2025.102153.

Appendix A.

## Supplementary data
The following is the Supplementary data to this article:

## Multimedia component 1
Multimedia component 1

## Data availability
Data will be made available on request.

## References
 

## Associated Data

## Supplementary Materials

## Multimedia component 1
Multimedia component 1

## Data Availability Statement
Data will be made available on request.