pmcJ Adv ResJ Adv Res2546jareJournal of Advanced Research2090-12322090-1224ElsevierPMC12627398PMC12627398.112627398126273983976532610.1016/j.jare.2025.01.008S2090-1232(25)00027-X1MedicineRNA methylation modifications in neurodegenerative diseases: Focus on their enzyme system
LiuLuZhaoYu-jiaZhangFengzhangfengzmc@163.com Key Laboratory of Basic Pharmacology of Ministry of Education and Joint International Research Laboratory of Ethnomedicine of Ministry of Education and Key Laboratory of Basic Pharmacology of Guizhou Province and Laboratory Animal Centre, Zunyi Medical University, Zunyi, Guizhou, China⁎Corresponding author. zhangfengzmc@163.com1120250512025775008525355491210202418122024312025050120252011202522112025© 2025 Published by Elsevier B.V. on behalf of Cairo University.2025https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/).

## Graphical abstract
The enzyme system related to RNA methylation, including the writer, reader, and eraser proteins, plays a critical role in the development and function of the central nervous system. Abnormalities in this process may lead to brain damage and NDs, including Alzheimer’s disease (AD), Parkinson’s disease (PD), multiple sclerosis (MS), and amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS).
 

## Highlights:
•Enzymes of RNA methylation can function as the potential therapeutic targets for neurodegenerative diseases.
•Association of RNA methylation with the central nervous system is reviewed.
•Function of RNA methylation in neurodegenerative diseases is summarized.

## Background
Neurodegenerative diseases (NDs) constitute a significant public health challenge, as they are increasingly contributing to global mortality and morbidity, particularly among the elderly population. Pathogenesis of NDs is intricate and multifactorial. Recently, post-transcriptional modifications (PTMs) of RNA, with a particular focus on mRNA methylation, have been gaining increasing attention. At present, several regulatory genes associated with mRNA methylation have been identified and closely associated with neurodegenerative disorders.

## Aim of review
This review aimed to summarize the RNA methylation enzymes system, including the writer, reader, and eraser proteins and delve into their functions in the central nervous system (CNS), hoping to open new avenues for exploring the mechanisms and therapeutic strategies for NDs.

## Key scientific concepts of review
Recently, studies have highlighted the critical role of RNA methylation in the development and function of the CNS, and abnormalities in this process may contribute to brain damage and NDs, aberrant expression of enzymes involved in RNA methylation has been implicated in the onset and development of NDs.

## Keywords
Neurodegenerative diseasesPost-transcriptional modificationRNA methylationEnzymepmc-status-qastatus0pmc-status-liveyespmc-status-embargonopmc-status-releasedyespmc-prop-open-accessyespmc-prop-olfnopmc-prop-manuscriptnopmc-prop-legally-suppressednopmc-prop-has-pdfyespmc-prop-has-supplementnopmc-prop-pdf-onlynopmc-prop-suppress-copyrightnopmc-prop-is-real-versionnopmc-prop-is-scanned-articlenopmc-prop-preprintnopmc-prop-in-epmcyespmc-license-refCC BY-NC-ND

## Introduction
Epitranscriptomic modifications are a relatively unexplored mechanism that plays a crucial role in regulating gene expression , . To date, more than 170 different types of epitranscriptomic modifications have been discovered in various cellular RNA molecules, such as messenger RNA (mRNA), transfer RNA (tRNA), ribosomal RNA (rRNA), small/long non-coding RNA (ncRNA), with distinct properties and functions . Among these modifications, RNA methylation is the most extensively studied and well-understood modification . Currently, multiple distinct RNA methylations have been well characterized, including N1-methyladenosine (m1A), N5-methylcytosine (m5C), N6-methyladenosine (m6A), and N7-methylguanosine (m7G) . RNA modification is reversibly regulated by RNA-modification proteins, including the writers, readers, and erasers . Among them, the writer and eraser enzymes are involved in the addition and removal of methyl groups on RNA, respectively, while the reader proteins are responsible for binding to methylated RNA modification, and participate in subsequent RNA processes such as translation, degradation, export, and splicing , .
Epitranscriptomic modifications are crucial regulators in the development of brain , . In addition, numerous studies mapping the epitranscriptome had indicated that brain tissues possessed a relatively higher abundance of RNA modifications compared to other organs. For instance, the m6A modification exhibited tissue-specific regulation and significantly increased during brain development . Similarly, analysis of the m6A and m6Am methylome across 43 human and 16 mouse tissues had also demonstrated the strongest tissue specificity in brain tissues . Moreover, m1A, m5C, m6A, and m7G exhibited significant differences in zebrafish brain tissue under hypoxic conditions, with a notable decrease in m1A potentially impacting RNA splicing . Collectively, accumulating evidence indicated that epitranscriptomic modifications contribute to the onset and progression of diseases in the central nervous system (CNS).
Neurodegenerative diseases (NDs) are a heterogeneous group of complex diseases characterized by neuronal loss and progressive degeneration in various regions of the nervous system . Recently, studies have highlighted the critical role of RNA modification in the development and function of the CNS, and abnormalities in this process may contribute to brain damage and NDs, including Alzheimer's disease (AD), Parkinson's disease (PD), Multiple sclerosis (MS), and Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) , . For instance, TAR DNA-binding protein-43 (TDP-43), the pathogenically protein of ALS, could bind strongly and directly to m1A in the RNA, stimulating cytoplasmic mislocalization and the aggregation of TDP-43 . Additionally, the absence of m6A had been shown to exacerbate Tau toxicity . A comparative analysis revealed the presence of 8,264 and 7,490 m6A peaks in wild-type and 5XFAD mouse model of AD, respectively, with a notable enrichment of m6A in wild-type 3′-untranslated regions (UTR) compared to AD model .
Aberrant expression of enzymes involved in RNA methylation has been implicated in the onset and development of NDs. Specifically, methyltransferase-like 3 (METTL3) was downregulated in the hippocampus of the human AD brain . Conversely, another study illustrated an increase in METTL3 expression in AD mice . METTL1 level was found to be decreased in excitatory neurons, astrocytes, and microglia in the cortex and hippocampus of AD mice . However, demethylases, fat mass and obesity-associated protein (FTO), exhibited an increase in both the mRNA and protein levels . In transgenic C. elegans models expressing tau and TDP-43, the loss of aly/ALYREF was found to mitigate tau- and TDP-43-induced locomotor deficits and significantly reduce their accumulation, particularly that of Tau protein . In the PD mice model, proteins such as alkane monooxygenase homolog H5 (ALKBH5) and insulin-like growth factor-2 (IGF2) mRNA-binding protein 2 (IGF2BP2) exhibited up-regulation in the substantia nigra, whereas YTH N6-methyladenosine RNA binding protein 1 (YTHDF1) and fragile X Messenger Ribonucleoprotein 1 (FMR1) were down-regulated. In the striatum, FMR1 and casitas B-lineage lymphoma-transforming sequence-like protein 1 were up-regulated, while IGF2BP3, METTL3, and RNA binding motif protein 15 (RBM15) were down-regulated .
Here, we have summarized the RNA methylation enzyme system, including the writer, reader, and eraser proteins, and delved into their functions in the CNS. Moreover, the mechanisms underlying RNA methylation in NDs were descripted.

## RNA methylation enzymes system

## m6A
m6A is a highly prevalent RNA modifications found in various species, including mammals, and mainly located in the 3′-UTR, coding region, and stop codon in mRNA ( ) , . Moreover, m6A also occurs in tRNA and rRNA . This modification is catalyzed by a stable heterodimeric core complex consisting of METTL3 and METTL14 . METTL3 possesses catalytic ability, and could independently bind to methyl groups to catalyze m6A formation, while also facilitating protein translation in the cytoplasm . In contrast, METTL14 lacks the ability to catalyze m6A methyl modification on its own, and necessitates form a heterodimer with METTL3 for this enzymatic process to occur . Additionally, the methylation activity of this complex surpasses that of METTL3 alone . Wilms’ tumor 1-associating protein (WTAP) is essential for the function, localization, and RNA targeting of the m6A-methyltransferase complex . It engages in interactions with multiple proteins to facilitate nucleus speckles localization, and promote RNA degradation, and thus regulate cellular translation . KIAA1429, also referred to vir-like m6A methyltransferase associated-protein (VIRMA), a constituent of the RNA m6A methyltransferase complex, plays a crucial role in regulating mRNA m6A levels by recruiting the methyltransferases METTL3/METTL14/WTAP at its N-terminus , . Upon recruitment by KIAA1429, METTL3 and METTL14 combine to form a heterodimer, which is then further stabilized by WTAP to establish the m6A methyltransferase complex within the nucleus . METTL16 functions as an m6A methyltransferase within the nucleus, depositing m6A modifications on hundreds of mRNA targets. In the cytosol, it enhances the translation of thousands of mRNA transcripts by recruiting eIF3a/b and rRNAs, thereby facilitating the assembly of the 43S pre-initiation complex and the 80S translation initiation complex . In addition, zinc finger CCCH-type containing 13 (ZC3H13), RBM15, and RBM15B, were involved in anchoring the multicomponent m6A methyltransferase complex in nuclear speckles and U-rich regions adjacent to m6A sites in mRNAs . m6A methyltransferase complex catalyzes the transfer of methyl groups from the donor substrate S-adenosyl-L-methionine (SAM) to the nitrogenous base 6 of adenylate, resulting in the formation of m6A , . 
The m6A demethylases, exemplified by FTO and ALKBH5, are essential for maintaining a dynamic and reversible process of m6A modification . Both FTO and ALKBH5 are the members of the alkane monooxygenase (AlkB) family, characterized by their dependence on ferrous iron and 2-oxoglutarate for catalyzing the demethylation of nucleotides . Despite their shared function as demethylases, these enzymes exhibit distinct substrate preferences and differential expression patterns across various mammalian organs. ALKBH5 is highly expressed in the testis, where it is indispensable for spermatogenesis . While, FTO is predominantly enriched in the brain, especially in neurons, and plays an important regulatory role in the CNS . Under specific conditions, demethylases have the ability to remove m6A modifications from RNAs . The human AlkB family members, FTO and ALKBH5, are both oxidative demethylases of m6A, but they yield different major products, N6-hydroxymethyladenosine (hm6A) and primitive adenylate, respectively . ALKBH5 catalyzes efficiently the direct conversion of m6A to primitive adenylate, whereas the FTO-mediated oxidative demethylation process proceeds in a stepwise manner, involving the conversion of m6A to N6-hydroxymethyladenosine (hm6A), and then to N6-formyladenosine (f6A), and ultimately to primary adenosine . The distinct metabolic mechanisms employed by FTO and ALKBH5 lead to divergent biochemical outcomes, and consequently, different biological functions .
Reader genes, such as m6A methylation binding proteins, play a critical role in recognizing specific m6A methylation sites in RNA . Among these proteins, YT521-B homology domain (YTH)-containing proteins have been identified as significant m6A methylation-binding proteins that interact with m6A and thus influence the destiny of m6A-containing RNAs . The YTH proteins consist mainly of YTHDFs and YTHDCs isoforms . YTHDFs isoforms are located in the cytoplasm, where YTHDF1 facilitates mRNA translation, and YTHDF2 promotes RNA degradation, and YTHDF3 assists in the role of YTHDF1/2 . On the other hand, YTHDCs isoforms are situated in the nucleus, where YTHDC1 affects RNA splicing, nucleation, and gene silencing, while YTHDC2 reduces RNA stability and enhances RNA translation . Furthermore, IGF2BPs, also referred to as m6A readers, consist of six canonical RNA-binding domains, specifically two RRM domains and four KH domains, and are integral to the regulation of RNA processing , . Notably, IGF2BPs are expressed in most tissues during embryogenesis, with only IGF2BP2 being ubiquitously expressed in adult tissues , . Heterogeneous nuclear ribonucleoprotein C (HNRNPC) and HNRNPA2B1 are predominantly localized in the nucleus, where they influence the alternative splicing of transcripts by binding to m6A-modified mRNA , . Additionally, proline-rich convoluted helix 2A (PRRC2A) was demonstrated as an m6A reader and regulates RNA stability .
Overall, m6A methylation exert significant effects on myriad biological processes by regulating RNA export, stability, and translation, which is catalyzed by methyltransferase complexes including METTL3, METTL14, WTAP, KIAA1429, ZC3H13, RBM15, and RBM15B, demethylases such as FTO, and ALKBH5, and reader proteins such as YTHDFs, IGF2BPs, PRRC2A, HNRNPC, and HNRNPA2B1 ( ). 

## m5C
Similar to m6A modifications, the methylation of m5C is a dynamic and reversible process facilitated by SAM as a methyl donor, leading to the formation of m5C via the enzymatic activity of methyltransferases . The m5C-methylated RNAs generate their biological functions by binding to the ALYREF protein, while ten eleven translocation 3 (TET3) is proposed as a potential demethylase for RNA m5C modification . The well-characterized RNA m5C-specific methyltransferases encompass the NSUN (NOL1/NOP2/SUN) family of proteins and DNMT2, which are members of the Rossmann-fold containing enzymes superfamily . These enzymes are distinguished by conserved cysteine residues and the ability to catalyze methyl transfer to cytosine residues on various substrate RNAs utilizing SAM as a methyl donor . Among these methyltransferases, the most intensively studied RNA m5C methyltransferases in recent years are the NSUN family of proteins. Of the nine members of this family, NSUN2 (also known as Trm4) is the most well-defined, with both catalytic and release sites for methyltransferases . NSUN2, encoded by the NSUN2 gene on chromosome 10, is a nucleolar RNA methyltransferase responsible for catalyzing m5C methylation in various RNAs, including tRNA, mRNA and ncRNA , .
NSUN2 utilizes two cysteine residues to facilitate its methyltransferase activity, with C321 catalyzing the methylation of cytosine by binding to the pyrimidine ring of cytosine to form a covalent bond, and C271 facilitating the release of methylated RNA . Additionally, NSUN1 (also known as NOP2) and NSUN3-7 have been identified as RNA-binding proteins capable of catalyzing the methylation of various RNA molecules. Specifically, NSUN1, a nucleolin protein, is responsible for methylating yeast 25S rRNA, 60S ribosomal subunit, and 26S rRNA . Furthermore, DNA methyl transferase 2 (DNMT2) acts as an RNA m5C methyltransferase in various species. It was first thought to be a DNA methyltransferase, but recent studies have shown that human DNMT2 is not involved in DNA methylation, but rather in the methylation of miRNA and C38 of tRNA aspartic proteases . In contrast, the TET family of DNA methylation enzymes proteins participate in catalyzing the demethylation of DNA m5C with the assistance of ferrous iron and 2-ketoglutarate, further generating the intermediates 5-hmdC, 5-fodC, and 5-cadC from 5-mdC, which ultimately removes the methylation modification . Current evidence have indicated that TET3 protein could increase 5-hmrC levels in RNA, suggesting that it might possess RNA demethylase activity . However, oxidation efficiency of 5-mrC in RNA was notably lower than that of 5-mdC in double-stranded DNA. In addition, the structure of the TET protein-RNA complex remains unresolved . Consequently, further studies are necessary to fully understand the m5C demethylation capabilities of TET proteins.
RNA-binding protein, Aly/REF export factor (ALYREF), is currently identified as m5C RNA methylation binding protein . It has been reported that suppression of ALYREF led to an increase in nuclear mRNA staining, whereas overexpression of wild-type ALYREF resulted in decreased nuclear mRNA staining . Conversely, overexpression of m5C-binding-deficient ALYREF failed to achieve this effect, suggesting that a potential role for ALYREF in facilitating mRNA nucleation by its interaction with m5C site on mRNA . In addition, Y-box-binding protein 1 (YBX1), a member of the RNA binding protein family, was also been recognized as a reader of m5C modifications, contributing to RNA splicing, stability, and translation .

## m1A
m1A has been documented in various types of RNA molecules, including mRNA, tRNA, rRNA, and mitochondrial RNA transcripts, and most of the m1A is enriched in the 5′-UTR region of mRNAs . Notably, m1A is less prevalent on mRNA than m6A , and can affect RNA structure, stability and mRNA translation, thereby regulating gene expression . TRMT6 and TRMT61A have been identified as tRNA methyltransferases, while TRMT61B as a mitochondrial tRNA methyltransferase, and TRMT10C as a mitochondrial mRNA methyltransferase . In addition, m1A has been observed on 28S rRNA, which is catalyzed by RRP8 . The m1A readers, including YTHDC1, YTHDF1, YTHDF2, and YTHDF3, play significant roles in the post-transcriptional stages of mRNAs and ncRNAs . Members of the tRNA methyltransferase family serve as m1A writers, whereas the demethylation enzymes ALKBH1, ALKBH3, and FTO function as m1A erasers .
The m1A modifications are intricately involved in the regulation of gene expression and cellular behavior by affecting various aspects of mRNA metabolism, including structure, stability, and translation . These modifications can induce spatial alterations in RNAs secondary structure through the introduction of additional methyl groups . Moreover, the effect of m1A modifications on mRNA stability is mainly mediated by the m1A reader . For instance, knockdown of YTHDF2 has been shown to increase the levels of mRNAs containing m1A modifications . Furthermore, m1A modification sites are typically situated in close proximity to the translation initiation site and the first cleavage site of mRNAs, playing a crucial role in the translation of the encoded transcripts . The m1A modification on mRNA could also block its ability to form Watson-Crick base pairs with uracil on tRNA, and thus inhibit the translation process .

## m7G
The m7G modification-associated proteins in yeast, specifically the Trm8p/Trm82p heterodimeric complex and Bud23/Trm112, are analogous to their mammalian counterparts METTL1/WDR4 and WBSCR22/TRMT112 . Moreover, mammalian m7G-modification-associated proteins include RNMT and RAM, with particular emphasis on METTL1 due to its interaction with the cofactor WD repeat structural domain 4 (WDR4) and role in mediating m7G modification of tRNAs, miRNAs, and mRNAs . In addition, METTL1 acts as an m7G methyltransferase responsible for the modification of target mRNAs, while WDR4 promotes the binding of the heterodimer complex to the mRNA . This METTL1/WDR4-mediated m7G modification is associated with variations in translational efficiency . In HeLa cells, knockdown of METTL1 reduced the translation efficiency of mRNAs undergoing METTL1-mediated m7G modification .
WBSCR22/TRMT112 complex has been identified as an m7G methyltransferase complex involved in the m7G modification of 18S rRNA. TRMT112 functions as a cofactor for WBSCR22, facilitating rRNA m7G modifications. It is essential for the stability of WBSCR22, and these proteins form a heterodimeric methyltransferase complex that facilitates pre-rRNA processing, thereby aiding in the synthesis of 18S rRNA and the installation of the m7G modification at the G1639 position of 18S rRNA . The RNMT/RAM methyltransferase complex catalyzes the m7G cap modification during early eukaryotic transcription . Besides, RAM is responsible for stabilizing the RNMT structure and recruiting target RNAs, facilitating the subsequent m7G modification to produce 5′m7 GpppX . This modification not only shields the RNA from cleavage by nucleic acid exonucleases, but also affects RNA processing, export, and translation .
QKI, belonging to the signal transduction and activation of RNA metabolism family, encodes three major isoforms: QKI5, QKI6, and QKI7 , . Of these, QKI6 and QKI7 are primarily localized in the cytoplasm, while QKI5 is predominantly found in the nucleus . Study indicated that QKI depletion inhibited the recruitment of m7G-modified mRNAs into stress granules in a manner on m7G modification. Furthermore, QKI7 was found to enhance the sensitivity of cancer cells to chemotherapeutic agents by inhibiting the Hippo signaling pathway via an m7G-dependent mechanism . Protein from the IGF2BPs family, specially IGF2BP1, IGF2BP2, IGF2BP3, exhibit a preferential binding affinity for internal mRNA m7G . Eukaryotic translation initiation factor 4E (EIF4E) specifically binds directly to the m7G-cap, influencing the output and translation efficiency of the target RNA . Additionally, proteins such as AGO2, CYFIP1, DCP2, DCPS, NCBP1/2/3, NSUN2, LSM1, IFIT5, LARP1, among others, had also been identified as the regulators of m7G modification , .

## RNA methylation in CNS
Nervous system initiates development early in embryogenesis and undergoes a prolonged maturation process . Neurogenesis commences during the early embryonic stage as ectoderm cells within the blastocyst differentiates into neuroepithelial cells, the precursors of the nervous system . Subsequent cellular differentiation leads to the formation of radial glial cells, which then migrate to various regions of the cerebral cortex in accordance with the “inside out first” principle. Neuroglia, predominantly oligodendrocytes and astrocytes, originate also from radial glial cells, albeit their development occurs slightly later than that of neurons . Several studies have shown that m6A modifications are involved in the development of neurons and glial cells.

## m6A modifications in neurons
METTL14 exhibit high expression in radial glial cells during embryonic neuronal development . Knockdown of METTL14 in mouse embryos resulted in decreased m6 A levels, leading to a prolonged cell cycle of radial glial cells and delayed cortical neuronal development . Similar effects were observed with knockdown of METTL3, suggesting the involvement of m6A in neurogenesis regulation in the brain . METTL3 deletion not only hindered neuronal development, but also influenced the morphological maturation of newborn neurons in the adult brain by making bone marrow mesenchymal stem cells more inclined to glial cell differentiation . METTL14 plays an important role in regulating histone modifications by destabilizing the transcription of histone-modifying enzymes . Knockdown METTL14 could reduce m6A levels, causing genome-wide alterations in histone modifications, which interfere with gene expression and diminish neural stem cells (NSCs) proliferation and induce premature differentiation . Enhancer of zeste homolog 2 (Ezh2), a histone methyltransferase, participates in regulating DNA methylation . Studies have shown that knockdown of METTL3 led to reduced Ezh2 expression and maternal trimethylation of H3 on lysine 27, further resulting in neuronal dysplasia . This phenotype was rescued by Ezh2 overexpression, suggesting that METTL3 could regulate the expression of Ezh2 at the mRNA level, which was involved in regulating neuronal development.
FTO is abundantly expressed in the human brain and shows dynamic expression during postnatal neural development . FTO deficiency could impair the brain-derived neurotrophic factor (BDNF) signaling pathway, diminish anti-apoptosis genes expression, increase neuronal apoptosis, reduce neuronal number in the brain, and decrease brain size . In addition, FTO regulates the proliferation and differentiation of NSCs by mediating the m6A methylation modification of key regulators in the signal transduction and activator of transcription 3 (STAT3) signaling pathway . Conditional knockdown of FTO in lipids had been found to reduce lipid levels in the mouse brain and promote adenosine secretion from adipocytes, which in turn led to the apoptosis of newborn neurons and impaired learning and memory . Furthermore, demethylase ALKBH5 expression was discerned to be higher in olfactory bulb and grey matter neurons during mouse development, followed by a decline over time, indicating a potential crucial role of m6A modification in early brain development .
The m6A reader protein, YTHDF2, caused a reduction in the proliferation of neural precursor cells, resulting in their differentiation into neurons rather than glial cells, with the differentiated neurons exhibiting impaired synapse formation . YTHDF2 exhibits dynamic changes during brain development, characterized by a decrease in YTHDF2 levels at the onset of the developmental period , . Conversely, an increase in YTHDF2 level at later stages of the developmental promotes the normal proliferation and differentiation of neural precursor cells.

## m6A modifications in glial cells
Neuroglial cells, predominantly oligodendrocytes and astrocytes, originate from radial glial cells in CNS . The abundance of m6A dynamically labelled transcripts, particularly those associated with histone modifiers, in oligodendrocyte progenitor cells (OPCs) and oligodendrocytes, indicated that m6A methylation served as a pivotal regulator of oligodendrocyte maturation and myelin formation in CNS . METTL14 deficiency led to significant alterations in the splicing of several key mRNAs involved in oligodendrocyte development and myelinogenesis, thereby preventing OPCs from differentiating into mature myelin-producing cells . This deficiency resulted in pathological structural changes in Langfelder's node . In addition, PRRC2A was identified as a key regulator in the proliferation and differentiation of OPCs. PRRC2A knockdown led to diminished body and brain weight, reduced myelin thickness in CNS, and cognitive and behavioral dysfunctions in mice . FTO and PRRC2A are integral to the synthesis of the oligodendrocyte lineage transcription factor 2 (Olig2) protein, and they collaboratively regulate oligodendrocyte differentiation . Additionally, during NSCs differentiation, METTL3 regulated the tendency of NSCs towards neuronal differentiation, with the presence of the m6A modification led to a decrease in the number of newborn astrocytes . Also, METTL3 expression in the cerebellum was associated with cerebellar astrocyte morphology . The aforementioned studies indicated that m6A modification was integral to neural development. Currently, a detailed and complete regulatory network of m6A methylation modifications in neural development and degeneration is lacking. There is a need to identify specific targets of m6A methylation within the nervous system, as well as to delineate specific m6A regulatory mechanisms.

## RNA methylation and NDs
RNA methylation represents the most extensively studied and well-understood modification in human diseases. Currently, several regulatory genes associated with RNA methylation had been identified in NDs, including AD, PD, ALS, and MS ( ). Here, we summarized and discussed the roles of these genes in the onset and progression of NDs ( ). 

## RNA methylation and AD

## m6A
Altered levels of m6A modifications on mRNAs have significant implications for the differentiation of NSCs and the regulation of synaptic function, glutamate receptor signaling, and axon guidance . The m6A methyltransferases, METTL3, regulated neural differentiation and synaptic plasticity by altering m6A levels . Inactivation of METTL3 in both mouse and human embryonic stem cells led to decreased m6A levels, which severely impeded the progression of neurons from self-renewal to differentiation . METTL14 mediated the m6A modification of lncRNA taurine upregulated gene 1 to reduce its stability, which further repressed ferroptosis in AD via the ubiquitination and degradation of growth differentiation factor 15 . Another m6A demethylase, FTO, dynamically regulated nervous system development and neurotransmitter transmission, and participated in insulin regulation, and induced AD . Mutations in intron 1, exon 2, and intron 2 of FTO could be detected in patients with AD, especially for intron 2, suggesting that FTO was associated with the pathogenesis of AD . Mammalian target of rapamycin (mTOR) is a protein kinase that plays a key role in the insulin signaling pathway and has been implicated in insulin deficiency-induced AD . Increased expression of FTO repressed tuberous sclerosis complex 1 (TSC1) expression, which in turn further inhibited mTOR activity, thereby promoting Tau protein phosphorylation. However, this did not alter amyloid-beta (Aβ) function . Conversely, downregulation of FTO expression increased m6A levels, which enhanced memory performance .
Aβ is produced through the sequential cleavage of amyloid precursor protein (APP) by β-secretase and γ-secretase. Study demonstrated that fragile X mental retardation protein (FMRP) and hnRNPC possessed opposing regulatory effects on the translation of APP. Specifically, FMRP inhibited APP translation by recruiting APP mRNA to processing bodies, whereas hnRNPC facilitated APP translation by displacing FMRP . In addition, the splicing of BACE1 mRNA, which encodes β-secretase, was regulated by hnRNPA2B1 . Notably, hnRNPA2B1 was decreased in the cerebral cortex of both AD patients and cholinergic-impaired mice . Given that FMRP, hnRNPC, and hnRNPA2B1 have been identified as m6A reader proteins, it is plausible to hypothesize that their regulatory effects on the aforementioned RNAs may be mediated through an m6A-dependent mechanism.
YTH structural domain family proteins can augment synaptic signaling efficiency and synaptic protein synthesis, thus improving learning and memory capabilities in mice . Several studies demonstrated that knockdown YTHDF1 or YTHDF3 resulted in abnormal neuronal morphology, reduced spontaneous excitatory synaptic transmission, and inhibition of synaptic protein translation . YTHDF1, an m6A reader, played a crucial role in regulating nervous system development . Its reduced expression levels were associated with the development of AD . Additionally, elevated m6A levels had been observed following axonal injury, where YTHDF1 promoted the synthesis of proteins involved in axonal regeneration and recovery . Robo3, encompassing its isoforms Robo3.1 and Robo3.2, functions as a receptor for axon guidance factors, and plays an important role in the regulation of axon guidance . Notably, Robo3.1 mRNA undergone m6A modification and interacted with YTHDF1, which in turn regulated Robo3.1 translation and influenced axon guidance in cross-linked neurons . Moreover, study indicated that IGF2BP2 was abnormally highly expressed in AD patients . Therefore, the modulation of m6A levels by targeting METTL3, METTL4, FTO, YTHDF1, and YTHDF3 might ameliorate neuronal apoptosis and synaptic loss in AD, thereby potentially improving memory dysfunction.

## m5C
m5C RNA methylation has been verified in several tissues, with a particularly high abundance in mRNA of brain . It is catalyzed primarily by the RNA methyltransferase NSUN2, and in vitro and in vivo studies had shown that m5C was specifically recognized by the mRNA export adapter ALYREF . Moreover, NSUN2 regulates nucleocytoplasmic shuttling, RNA binding affinity, and mRNA export of ALYREF . NSUN6, another methyltransferase, collaborates with NSUN2 to determine the m5C site within the transcriptional range of most mRNAs . Notably, in several regions of the human brain, a circular RNA transcript was predicted to be encoded in the NSUN6 coding region . Besides, circular RNAs could regulate mRNAs through interactions with RNA-binding proteins and were observed to be aberrantly expressed in the brain of individuals with AD, demonstrating the more intricate transcriptional regulatory system mediated by NSUN6 in AD pathology , . Also, in AD individuals, NSUN6 expression significantly reduced in the superior temporal gyrus and white matter tissues, whereas NSUN7 exhibited increased abundance in the hippocampus .
Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor γ coactivator 1α (PPARGC1A), also known as PGC-1α, is a well-established regulator of mitochondrial and energy metabolism that is associated with neuronal survival and synaptic maintenance . It was thought to be involved in the pathogenesis of NDs . NSUN7 is believed to regulate the stability of enhancer RNA, which is a target gene of the transcriptional co-activator PGC-1α . However, its specific function requires further investigation. The m5C reader ALYREF had been described as a component of the TRanscription-EXport (TREX) protein complex which played a crucial role in regulating mRNA transcription and processing, as well as facilitating the export of mRNA from the nucleus . In addition, mutations in THOC2 and THOC6 that are protein binding partners of the TREX mRNA-export complex, had been reported to cause X-Linked intellectual disability and rare autosomal recessive syndromic intellectual disability , .

## m7G
METTL1/WDR4 are primarily responsible for m7G modification . Studies had identified mutations in WDR4 as significant contributors to neurodevelopmental disorders . Given the critical role of mutations in the METTL1/WDR4 genes, the impact of these mutations and the consequent dysregulation of m7G methylation on nervous system was investigated . A study on human induced pluripotent stem cells showed that silencing METTL1 could affect neural rectoderm formation, leading to neurodevelopmental deficits . Based on information obtained from a single-cell RNA-seq database of AD, it was discovered that in excitatory neurons, astrocytes, and microglia within the cortex and hippocampus of AD model, the neurodevelopmental defects mediated by METTL1/WDR4 mutations might involve multiple mechanisms . Consequently, the function and regulation of METTL1/WDR4-mediated m7G modification has emerged as a novel perspective for understanding the pathogenesis of AD. In addition, 15 enzymes associated with m7G exhibited differentially expression in brain tissues, with six of them (CYFIP1, LSM1, NCBP2, NUDT16, NUDT3, and QKI) being upregulated and nine of them (DCPS, LARP1, METTL1, NUDT10, EIF4E, EIF4E2, EIF4E3, NUDT11, and SNUPN) were downregulated in patients with AD. Notably, NUDT10 and NUDT11 could act synergistically in AD progression .
CD47, a receptor of the immunoglobulin superfamily, is ubiquitously expressed on cell membranes and regulates a variety of cellular functions, including adhesion, proliferation, apoptosis, migration, homeostasis, and immune responses . Numerous studies have shown that mast cells were involved in AD . Notably, activated microglia released various mast cell mediators, culminating in chronic inflammation and neurotoxicity . In addition, CD47 had been implicated in amyloid β (Aβ)-induced mast cell activation and cytokine release from microglia, thereby stimulating an inflammatory response by brain immune cells during the onset and progression of AD . A recent study reported that CD47 could interact with exportin-1 to regulate the packaging of m7G-modified miRNA and mRNA, such as let-7, in extracellular vesicles , . The let-7 family served as a ligand for Toll-like receptor 7 (TLR7) on microglia and neurons, triggering intracellular signaling that led to neuroinflammation in CNS and neurodegeneration . Concurrently, increased levels of various let-7 family members, particularly let-7b, had been detected in the cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) of AD patients, and the extracellular introduction of let-7b into the CSF of wild-type mice via intrathecal injection led to neurodegeneration .

## m1A
Mitochondrial dysfunction is a characteristic feature of Aβ-induced neuronal toxicity in AD, predominantly affecting the functionality of respiratory chain complexes I and IV . Complex I serves as a major source of mitochondria-derived reactive oxygen species (ROS), which are required for cellular energy production and provide 40 % of the proton motive force for ATP synthesis . ND5 subunit, part of respiratory chain complex I, is believed to be crucial for the coupling of oxidation and proton transport . Clinical studies had documented that impaired complex I activity and reduced protein and mRNA levels of its nuclear-encoded subunits, such as NDUFA2 or NDUFB3/7, were observed in several regions of the postmortem AD brain, as well as in hematopoietic cells including lymphocytes or platelets . Currently, elevated levels of ND5 mRNA m1A methylation in AD cell models and AD patients were found . Moreover, m1A methylation was catalyzed by increased levels of the TRMT10C protein, the catalytic subunit of mitochondrial methyltransferase, responsible for m1A biosynthesis . Overexpression of TRMT10C protein led to compromised mitochondrial function, evidenced by diminished mitochondrial respiration and membrane potential . This impairment subsequently resulted in translational inhibition of ND5, culminating in mitochondrial dysfunction. Furthermore, m1A levels in mitochondrial and cytoplasmic tRNA were regulated in the context of AD . In AD, the proteins responsible for the methylation of m1A on mitochondrial and cytoplasmic tRNA were expressed at lower levels, which correlated with the hypomethylation of specific m1A sites in both mitochondrial and cytoplasmic tRNA, as observed in the 5XFAD AD mouse model . Additionally, in the Drosophila tau model, deletion of m1A methyltransferases led to a more deleterious phenotype, suggesting that dynamic modifications of m1A might influence AD progression . Finally, hypomethylation in AD model was associated with reduced expression of mature mitochondrial tRNA, which might subsequently impact mRNA translation and contribute to the well-documented mitochondrial dysfunction in AD.

## RNA methylation and PD
METTL14 is an important component of the methyltransferase complex, facilitating METTL3 binding to target mRNA and significantly enhancing the catalytic efficiency of the complex . Studies had demonstrated that METTL14 was indispensable for m6A modification in the adult mammalian brain, and m6A deletion seriously affected gene expression and striatal function in adult mice . These founding suggested that m6A was required for the maintenance of striatal function and learning ability in adult mice. Interestingly, deletion of METTL14 resulted in a reduction of m6A levels in the mouse striatum without affecting cell number or morphology . Subsequently, whole transcriptome sequencing of m6A-modified mRNAs revealed that mRNAs encoding neuron- and synapse-specific proteins were downregulated, while those encoding non-neuron-specific proteins were upregulated . These molecular alterations caused increased neuronal excitability and significantly impaired striatal-mediated behavior. In addition, the absence of METTL14 in the striatum further increased the response to dopamine, subsequently increasing sensitivity to dopamine drugs, such as the dopamine receptor type 1 agonist, SKF81297 . Deletion of METTL14 in the nigral region deletion resulted in impaired motor function and a reduction in overall m6A levels in mice . Further studies indicated that METTL14 deletion might downregulate tyrosine hydroxylase expression through the regulation of nuclear receptor-associated factor (Nurr1), pituitary homology cassette family factor (Pitx3), and transcription factor (En1), and the mRNA 3′ non-coding regions of Nurr1, Pitx3, and En1 were rich in m6A binding sites .
FTO is a demethylating enzyme that can reverse the methylation of m6A, thereby reducing m6A levels . Comparative analysis of m6A distribution in the cerebral cortex, striatum, hippocampus, and midbrain in patients with PD revealed a significant reduction in m6A levels and an increase in FTO demethylase levels, specifically in the striatum . Moreover, the overall m6A levels of mRNA were found to decrease in rats injected with 6-OHDA-induced PD animal model and in 6-OHDA-induced PC12 cells . Overexpression of FTO or using m6A inhibitors could decrease m6A levels in dopaminergic cells . Interestingly, the reduced m6A levels induced the expression of N-methyl-D-aspartic acid receptor 1 (NMDA1), which subsequently elicited apoptosis in dopaminergic neurons . This apoptotic effect was attributed to elevated oxidative stress and Ca2+ influx . In addition, increased FTO was shown to augment the production of ROS in mitochondrial respiratory complex II, which could exacerbate mitochondrial damage and dopaminergic neuronal damage, ultimately resulting in dopaminergic neuronal apoptosis .
Dopaminergic circuits play a crucial role in the pathogenesis of PD . FTO, in moderately spiny neurons expressing dopamine D2 receptors, modulates neuronal excitability and controls their striatal-pallidal projections. Deletion of FTO led to an increase in autonomic activity in response to novel without impairing behavioral control or reward-driven and conditioned behaviors in mice . Furthermore, FTO antagonized the manganese-induced downregulation of the synaptic guidance molecule erythropoietin-producing hepatocyte ligand B2 via YTHDF2, thereby providing protection against manganese-induced dopaminergic neurotoxicity and motor dysfunction in PD . Recent studies indicated that cocaine might regulate synaptic maturation and localization by decreasing the expression of FTO . Arsenite could alter dopamine levels in the brain and increase m6A methyltransferase activity . Moreover, FTO might alleviate symptoms associated with dopaminergic neurotransmission defects induced by arsenite and could potentially be employed in the prevention or intervention of arsenite-related NDs , . A recently study indicated that FTO impaired the nuclear factor erythroid 2-related factor-2 mRNA stability via m6A-dependent pathway, and FTO knockdown alleviated the ferroptosis in MPP+ treated SH-SY5Y cells . These studies corroborated that abnormality in m6A methylation resulted in the impairment of the dopaminergic signaling pathway, which subsequently influenced the normal function of striatum and induced the occurrence of motor dysfunction in PD. By targeting dysregulated m6A regulatory molecules in the dopaminergic signaling pathway, it might be possible to ameliorate motor symptoms and enhance the quality of life for patients with PD. Besides, leveraging the relationship between m6A modifications and dopaminergic receptors could facilitate the development of pharmacological agents aimed at increasing receptor density and improving dopamine diffusion in the brain, thereby offering a novel therapeutic avenue for PD.
Additionally, large-scale genome-wide association studies in PD patients hold significant promise for investigating the potential functional variations of m6A-single nucleotide polymorphisms (m6A-SNPs) . Potential m6A-SNPs were further screened through expression quantitative trait locus and differential gene expression analysis, and ALKBH5, a demethylase, was found to be a potential risk gene for PD . Knockdown of ALKBH5 increased the level of m6A and accelerated the export of mRNA from the nucleus to cytoplasm . However, the precise mechanism of role of ALKBH5 in the pathogenesis of PD remains elusive. The specific role of m6A modification in PD is also not well understood at present. In-depth study on the relationship between ALKBH5 and m6A modification can enhance our understanding of PD and potentially uncover novel therapeutic strategies for this disease.

## RNA methylation and MS

## m6A
MS patients often exhibit a relapse-remission pattern (RRMS), characterized by relapse episodes lasting at least 24 h, approximately 50 % of individuals with RRMS transition to secondary progressive MS within a decade . CNS myelin originates from the developmental differentiation of oligodendrocytes . Recent analysis revealed that the maturation of oligodendrocyte lineage cells was accompanied by dynamic alterations in the m6A transcriptome . Knockdown of METTL14 in oligodendrocytes led to a decrease in oligodendrocytes populations and subsequent CNS demyelination . In vitro studies further demonstrated that specific knockdown of METTL14 impeded the differentiation of OPCs into mature oligodendrocytes and caused aberrant transcriptomic expression in oligodendrocyte precursors and oligodendrocytes . METTL14 deficiency also decreased oligodendrocyte-specific neurofascin splice isoforms, which could result in the production of abnormal nodules with Ranvier morphology that further aggravated MS , .
PRRC2A gene has been identified as a potential risk gene for several autoimmune diseases, including MS . Knockdown of PRRC2A in mice, specifically in NSCs or oligodendrocyte lineage cells, caused a significant reduction in myelin sheaths formation, shortened lifespan, motor deficits, and cognitive deficits , suggesting that PRRC2A was involved in the proliferation of OPCs and determining oligodendrocyte cell fate. Moreover, FTO could demethylate and inhibit PRRC2A-dependent stabilization of Olig2, while PRRC2A competed with YTHDF2 for binding and stabilizing m6A-methylated Olig2 mRNA in oligodendrocyte lineage cells , . Also, mice deficient in PRRC2A exhibited impaired development of mature oligodendrocytes, leading to inadequate myelin formation.

## m7G
METTL1 had been reported to be mutated in MS, and previous studies showed that METTL1/WDR4 mutations and misexpression, along with the consequent dysregulation of m7G methylation, were prevalent in the pathogenesis of various NDs . Functional variants at the KIF5A-CYP27B1-METTL1-FAM119B locus were associated with MS, as identified through whole exome sequencing and Tag-single nucleotide polymorphism analyses . Variant in KIF5A and CYP27B1 genes demonstrated associations with MS , . Furthermore, the FAM119B gene was identified as the causative gene at this locus, with significantly lower expression observed in leukocytes from MS patients carrying the MS risk allele . This locus enhanced cytotoxic T-lymphocyte antigen-4 expression in effector and regulatory CD4+ T cells, leading to a complex syndrome of immune dysregulation in MS model . The intronic regions of METTL1 and METTL21B gene could act as enhancers for the CYP27B1 gene, thereby promoting its expression. Deletion of the CYP27B1 enhancer resulted in an extremely low expression of CYP24A1 and thus, very low vitamin D metabolic products , .

## RNA methylation and ALS

## m6A
Current studies revealed that over 95 % of ALS cases exhibited cytoplasmic inclusions of the RNA-binding protein TDP43, and that mutations in TARDBP, the gene encoding TDP43, accounted for familial disease in 2–5 % of individuals , , . These observations suggested that therapeutic strategies targeting TDP43 could be applicable for the majority of ALS patients. In the ALS model, RNA destabilization was linked to accumulation of TDP43, translocation, translation, and stability . Correspondingly, the cytoplasmic mislocalization and nuclear clearance of TDP43 in ALS were strongly correlated with RNA mis-splicing, impaired translation, and extensive RNA instability , . TDP43 deposition predominantly destabilized mRNAs encoding ribosomal proteins and oxidative phosphorylases . Notably, the expressions of these mRNAs were upregulated in neurons lacking METTL14, and TDP43 also physically interacted with writers and readers , . Altogether, these findings suggested that TDP43 might recognize m6A-modified RNAs, which could raise the possibility that mislocalization and aggregation of TDP43 in ALS.
The m6A reader protein YTHDF2 was found to exacerbate TDP43-associated toxicity in rodent and human ALS neuronal models . To emphasize the significance of m6A in TDP43 binding and function, single-cell CRISPR/ Cas9 technology was employed to identify m6A factors in primary neurons that enhanced or inhibited TDP43-mediated toxicity . Among these, the canonical m6A reader, YTHDF2, emerged as a particularly promising modifier, showing accumulation in ALS spinal cord neurons. Knockdown of YTHDF2 extended the survival of human neurons harboring ALS-associated mutations . Furthermore, extensive RNA hypermethylation was observed in postmortem spinal cord tissues of sporadic ALS patients, and these founding highlighted a fundamental link between m6A modification and ALS pathogenesis, potentially mediated by misprocessing of TDP43-dependent m6A-modified RNA.
In addition, it had been indicated that the pathogenesis of ALS might be associated with dysregulated expression of the m6A-interacting proteins, hnRNPA2/B1 and hnRNP . Under normal conditions, the interactions of m6A with hnRNPA2/B1 and hnRNPC played crucial roles in the regulation of splicing of pre-mRNAs or ncRNAs within the nucleus . ALS-associated mutations in the prion-like structural domain of hnRNPA promoted protein fibrosis in cells, and m6A could bind the mutated hnRNPA mutation region , . This interaction might underlie the mechanism by which m6A-mediated regulation was disrupted, thereby contributing to disease development.

## m1A
Studies have identified nucleotide repeat amplification as being linked to many neurological disorders , . For instance, amplification of the GGGGCC hexanucleotide repeat sequence in the C9ORF72 gene was a major genetic cause of ALS . Recent evidence had proposed that adenosine in CAG repeat RNA could undergo methylation to m1A by TRMT61A, and that m1A was subsequently demethylated by ALKBH3 . Amplification of CAG repeats resulted in an increased amount of m1A, which attributed to a reduction in ALKBH3 expression induced by the repeat RNA . Furthermore, m1A could interact with TDP-43, facilitating its cytoplasmic mislocalisation and the formation of aggregates . TDP-43 translocated from the nucleus to the cytoplasm, and intranuclear TDP-43 deficiency disrupted mRNA splicing within cells . Pathological inclusion bodies formed by aberrant aggregation of TDP-43 in the cytoplasm, exhibited cytotoxic properties . Abnormal expression and mislocalization of pathological TDP-43 in motor neuron constituted a distinct pathological hallmark of ALS and might be related to its pathogenesis , .

## Conclusion
NDs, such as AD, PD, MS, and ALS, currently pose a substantial threat to human health and lack effective treatments, largely due to their intricate pathogenesis. Increasing evidence suggests that disruptions in epigenetic modifications could play a pivotal role in the progression of NDs and serve as potential therapeutic targets. Nevertheless, epigenetic modifications are inherently complex and influenced by metabolic, environmental, and other factors. Consequently, their role in NDs must be interpreted with caution. For instance, current studies demonstrated that RNA methylation modifications exhibited opposite trends in two animal models of AD and PD. Whether these findings accurately reflect the underlying biological reality or are attributable to experimental errors requires further investigation. Meanwhile, additional studies are required to explore epigenetic markers as potential targets for NDs, and the application of efficient and specific gene editing technologies for the treatment of NDs continues to encounter significant challenges.
RNA methylation represents a relatively nascent area. Key areas of ongoing research include the identification of novel enzymes and proteins involved in RNA methylation, the development and integration of advanced sequencing technologies, and the pursuit of more efficient and rapid detection methods for RNA methylation. Simultaneously, increasing attention has been directed towards the correlation between RNA methylation and clinical diseases. The identification of potential therapeutic targets to enhance the efficacy of targeted therapies is a focal point of current studies. Furthermore, the ongoing development and refinement of inhibitors or antagonist targeting relevant enzymes and proteins for clinical applications remains a critical area for future investigation.

## Authors’ contributions
All authors contributed to the writing of the manuscript and the design of the figures and tables.

## Compliance with ethics requirements
This article does not contain any studies with human or animal subjects.

## Funding
This study was supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China (No. 82460711) and Science and Technology Foundation of Guizhou Province (No. ZK[2021]-014).

## Declaration of competing interest

The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper.

 Lu Liu is a master's student at the Key Laboratory of Basic Pharmacology of Ministry of Education and joint International Research Laboratory of Ethnomedicine of Ministry of Education and Key Laboratory of Basic Pharmacology of Guizhou Province, Zunyi Medical University. Her work focused on the pathological mechanism of Parkinson's disease. She contributed to Writing – original draft & drawing figures for this review for this review.
 Yu-jia Zhao is a doctoral at the department of the Key Laboratory of Basic Pharmacology of Ministry of Education and Joint International Research Laboratory of Ethnomedicine of Ministry of Education and Key Laboratory of Basic Pharmacology of Guizhou Province and Laboratory Animal Centre, Zunyi Medical University. Her work focus on the pharmacological intervention in Parkinson's disease. She contributed to Writing – review & editing for this review.
 Feng Zhang is a professor at the department of the Key Laboratory of Basic Pharmacology of Ministry of Education and Joint International Research Laboratory of Ethnomedicine of Ministry of Education and Key Laboratory of Basic Pharmacology of Guizhou Province and Laboratory Animal Centre, Zunyi Medical University. He is permanently engaged in research on the pathogenesis and pharmacological intervention effects of Parkinson's disease. He has published more than 40 papers in journals such as Ageing Research Reviews, and his papers have been cited over 800 times by Nature Reviews Drug Discovery and others. He contributed to conceptualization and validation for this review.

## Data availability
Data will be made available on request.

## Acknowledgments
Authors acknowledged Smartdraw that was applied to create schematic figures.