253envhperEnvironmental Health PerspectivesEnviron Health PerspectAmerican Chemical SocietyPMC1106815611068156110681563870111210.1289/EHP13214Development of an Automated Morphometric Approach to Assess Vascular Outcomes following Exposure to Environmental Chemicals in Zebrafish
ZhongXiali ChenJunzhou ZhangZhuyi ZhuQicheng JiDi KeWeijian NiuCongying WangCan ZhaoNan ChenWenquan JiaKunkun LiuQian SongMaoyong LiuChunqiao WeiYanhong 
1Guangdong Provincial Key Laboratory of Food, Nutrition and Health, Department of Toxicology, School of Public Health, Sun Yat-sen University, Guangzhou, China
2School of Intelligent Systems Engineering, Shenzhen Campus of Sun Yat-sen University, Shenzhen, China
3Department of Chemical and Environmental Engineering, University of California, Riverside, Riverside, California, USA
4State Key Laboratory of Environmental Chemistry and Ecotoxicology, Research Center for Eco-Environmental Sciences, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China
5State Key Laboratory of Ophthalmology, Zhongshan Ophthalmic Center, Sun Yat-sen University, Guangzhou, China✉Address correspondence to Yanhong Wei. Email: weiyh9@mail.sysu.edu.cn
✉Corresponding author.
3520241325057001057001452024EHP is an open-access journal published with support from the National Institute of Environmental Health Sciences, National Institutes of Health. All content is public domain unless otherwise noted.

## Abstract

## Background:
Disruptions in vascular formation attributable to chemical insults is a pivotal risk factor or potential etiology of developmental defects and various disease settings. Among the thousands of chemicals threatening human health, the highly concerning groups prevalent in the environment and detected in biological monitoring in the general population ought to be prioritized because of their high exposure risks. However, the impacts of a large number of environmental chemicals on vasculature are far from understood. The angioarchitecture complexity and technical limitations make it challenging to analyze the entire vasculature efficiently and identify subtle changes through a high-throughput in vivo assay.

## Objectives:
We aimed to develop an automated morphometric approach for the vascular profile and assess the vascular morphology of health-concerning environmental chemicals.

## Methods:
High-resolution images of the entire vasculature in Tg(fli1a:eGFP) zebrafish were collected using a high-content imaging platform. We established a deep learning-based quantitative framework, ECA-ResXUnet, combined with MATLAB to segment the vascular networks and extract features. Vessel scores based on the rates of morphological changes were calculated to rank vascular toxicity. Potential biomarkers were identified by vessel–endothelium–gene–disease integrative analysis.

## Results:
Whole-trunk blood vessels and the cerebral vasculature in larvae exposed to 150 representative chemicals were automatically segmented as comparable to human-level accuracy, with sensitivity and specificity of 95.56% and 95.81%, respectively. Chemical treatments led to heterogeneous vascular patterns manifested by 31 architecture indexes, and the common cardinal vein (CCV) was the most affected vessel. The antipsychotic medicine haloperidol, flame retardant 2,2-bis(chloromethyl)trimethylenebis[bis(2-chloroethyl) phosphate], and tert-butylphenyl diphenyl phosphate ranked as the top three in vessel scores. Pesticides accounted for the largest group, with a vessel score of , characterized by a remarkable inhibition of subintestinal venous plexus and delayed development of CCV. Multiple-concentration evaluation of nine per- and polyfluoroalkyl substances (PFAS) indicated a low-concentration effect on vascular impairment and a positive association between carbon chain length and benchmark concentration. Target vessel-directed single-cell RNA sequencing of cells from larvae treated with , perfluorohexanesulfonic acid, or benzylbutyl phthalate, along with vessel–endothelium–gene–disease integrative analysis, uncovered potential associations with vascular disorders and identified biomarker candidates.

## Discussion:
This study provides a novel paradigm for phenotype-driven screenings of vascular-disrupting chemicals by converging morphological and transcriptomic profiles at a high-resolution level, serving as a powerful tool for large-scale toxicity tests. Our approach and the high-quality morphometric data facilitate the precise evaluation of vascular effects caused by environmental chemicals. https://doi.org/10.1289/EHP13214

statusreleaseddisplay-pdfyesis-olfnois-manuscriptnois-preprintnois-journal-matternois-scannednois-retractednoSupplemental Material is available online (https://doi.org/10.1289/EHP13214).
*These authors contributed equally to this work.
The authors declare no conflict of interests.
Note to readers with disabilities:
EHP strives to ensure that all journal content is accessible to all readers. However, some figures and Supplemental Material published in EHP articles may not conform to 508 standards due to the complexity of the information being presented. If you need assistance accessing journal content, please contact ehpsubmissions@niehs.nih.gov. Our staff will work with you to assess and meet your accessibility needs within 3 working days.

Received 2023 Apr 24; Revised 2024 Jan 17; Accepted 2024 Mar 18; Collection date 2024 May.

## Introduction
Vascular formation is one of the earliest essential steps during embryogenesis, and intact vasculature plays a crucial role in tissue homeostasis and disease throughout life. Disturbance of vascular formation attributable to chemical insults not only underlies developmental defects and cardiovascular diseases (CVDs) but also sets the basis for the therapeutic strategy for solid cancers. – According to the World Health Organization (WHO), the losses of lives and disability-adjusted life-years (DALYs) have continuously increased during the past decade as a result of chemical exposure. Nearly half of the CVDs burden (in DALYs) is attributable to environmental factors, particularly chemicals. Evidence suggests that xenobiotic compounds, notably primarily organic pollutants, heavy metals, , and pharmaceutical agents, are intricately linked to the detriment of embryonic growth and actively exacerbate the progression of CVDs. However, the impacts of a large number of chemicals on vasculature are far from understood.
Large-scale screening for vascular-disrupting effects rapidly provides information relevant to developmental toxicity, pathology, and targets of xenobiotic compounds. The majority of previous high-throughput screening assays are based on in vitro data, leaving significant information gaps and deficits regarding in vivo vasculature, including the absence of interorganizational interactions and natural blood flow dynamics. Although profiling analysis at genomic, transcriptional, and translational levels has thrived in recent decades, phenotypic profiles, such as the morphology of the whole vasculature, are lagging owing to organ complexity and technical limitations. An apparent technical challenge is capturing the entire vascular network across tissues in vivo and delineating the features in detail in a high-resolution mode. Moreover, the requirement for high-throughput analysis of vascular morphological profile in the phenotype-driven screening of chemicals/drugs makes such advanced readouts impractical in rodent-based models.
Over the past decade, zebrafish have become a powerful vertebrate model for cardiovascular biology and diseases owing to their small size, the similarity of vascular growth compared with mammals (a unique feature amenable to the live visualization of vessel formation), and a broader range of vascular morphological phenotypes easily assessed as a whole-animal model. Given that of disease proteins are conserved between humans and zebrafish, the etiology and progression of CVDs, such as cardiomyopathy and arrhythmic disorders, have been modeled in zebrafish. , The merits of zebrafish vasculature facilitate its application in high-throughput analysis, including the screening of antiangiogenic compounds for cancer therapy, drug discovery for human vascular diseases, , and the identification of chemical vascular toxicity. , 
Screening using zebrafish enables high-throughput in vivo phenotype-based tests in large-scale assessments of cardiovascular effects, which is cost effective and informative. This advantage is usually restricted to in vitro studies. , However, the drawbacks existing in zebrafish vascular analysis methods restrain their application in screening vascular disruption and frequently fail to yield reliable results. The limitations include that a) the available vascular imaging approaches are unable to consider both high-throughput screening and high-quality (resolution and sharpness) images in an experiment; b) vascular assessment often focuses on one or two local vessels, such as the intersegmental vessel (ISV) and caudal vein plexus (CVP), , whereas the larger view of the whole vascular network and the profound feature characterization are not studied; and c) screens typically rely on manual or bespoke imaging solutions and manual analysis. As such, it is imperative to intensify endeavors to acquire comprehensive information about vascular architecture with precision and speed.
The artificial intelligence (AI)–based approach provides a promising opportunity to delineate the vascular features in mouse and human tissues (such as the brain , and retina ) and solid tumors. However, it is much less appreciated in the zebrafish model. The angioarchitecture in the transgenic zebrafish model Tg(fli1a:eGFP) is characterized by single fluorescence, redundant channels, and variable intensities. Together with the background noise caused by nonspecific signals and uneven fluorescence, the unique feature and intrinsic disadvantages of zebrafish vascular image make it challenging to yield a satisfying autosegmental performance with a small training dataset by using traditional deep learning models for the medical images, including the convolutional neural networks—AlexNet, VGG, GoogLeNet, U-Net, and ResNet. 
Here, we present a high-throughput screening approach that applies a deep learning-based quantitative framework to characterize vascular profiling using high-resolution images in zebrafish under various chemical stress conditions. In this framework, we developed ECA-ResXUnet, an optimized segmentation structure for vascular fluorescence images from high-content screening, to automatically outline the blood vessels throughout the zebrafish larvae. Aside from auto-segmentation, the pipeline includes automated feature extraction, vascular profiling analysis, and target vessel-directing endothelial single-cell RNA sequencing (scRNA-seq). Using the novel pipeline, we characterized the morphological features of seven types of blood vessels and scored vascular lesions caused by 150 chemicals of health concern.

## Materials and Methods

## Chemicals
We selected 150 chemicals according to the human and environmental exposure levels, derived from US Centers for Disease Control and Prevention biological monitoring data, contaminants of emerging concern listed by the US Environmental Protection Agency (EPA), and chemicals identified as public health concerns by the WHO. These chemicals belong to eight categories, including drugs, flame retardants, personal care products, plasticizers, pesticides, metals, polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons, and per- and polyfluoroalkyl substances (PFAS). In addition, we also considered the epidemiological evidence regarding the association between chemical exposure and CVDs and emerging pollutants from the literature. As for the zebrafish eggs/larvae exposure experiment, the commercially available chemicals with water solubility in and bioavailability were included. The detailed chemical information and citations are listed in Excel Table S1. All chemicals were dissolved in dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO), and stored at prior to testing. Calcium chloride ( ) and phenylthiourea (PTU) were purchased from Sigma. Trypsin, Dulbecco’s phosphate-buffered saline, and fetal bovine serum were obtained from Thermo Fisher Scientific.

## Zebrafish and Embryo Maintenance and Administration
Tg(fli1a:eGFP) transgenic zebrafish embryos, which display enhanced fluorescence allowing visualization of the complete vascular structures, and the wild-type AB strain were obtained from the Zebrafish Facility of the Laboratory Animal Center at Sun Yat-sen University. Zebrafish husbandry was performed under standard conditions approved by the Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee at Sun Yat-sen University. Adult fish were maintained on a 14-h light/10-h dark cycle on a recirculating water system at . Mating tanks were set up the day before embryo collection using basic breeding protocols specific to each facility. The male was transferred into the tank with the female at a ratio of 1:1. The paired zebrafish were separated with a glass board. The breeding was initiated the next day. Zebrafish embryos were collected and distributed randomly into three replicated dishes for each group (25 embryos in diameter dishes, containing a final volume of of embryo medium). During the critical period for circulatory system development, the embryos with intact chorion were treated with chemicals from 2 h postfertilization (hpf) to 72 hpf. Various concentrations with gradient (Excel Table S2) of each chemical were designed to determine the 50% lethal concentration ( ), and the cumulative deaths were counted until 72 hpf. was estimated with a linear probability model in SPSS (version 22.0; IBM) ( dishes, each dish containing 25 embryos). The values are shown in Excel Table S2. A concentration of 1/6 was applied because treatment of this concentration allowed for the heterogeneous vascular effects (examined by vision) and the high relative survival rates ( ) in a preliminary experiment using 16 chemicals randomly selected from the list of 150 chemicals. The relative survival rates are shown in Table S1. For the multi-concentrations experiment, the zebrafish were exposed to 1/640 
 (Table S2) of perfluorobutane sulfonic acid (PFBS; 4-carbon), perfluorohexanesulfonic acid (PFHxS; 6-carbon), perfluoro-2-propoxypropanoic acid (GenX; 6-carbon), perfluoroheptanoic acid (PFHpA; 7-carbon), perfluorooctane sulfonic acid (PFOS; 8-carbon), 6,2 chlorinated polyfluorinated ether sulfonate (F-53B; 8-carbon), perfluorooctanoic acid (PFOA; 8-carbon), perfluorononanoic acid (PFNA; 9-carbon), and perfluorodecanoic acid (PFDA; 10-carbon), and vascular profiles were analyzed at 72 hpf. DMSO (0.01%) was used as the negative control. The vascular endothelial growth factor receptor 2 (VEGFR2) inhibitor PTK787 ( ; Selleck) was used as the positive control. PTU (0.003%) was added to the fish water at 24 hpf to suppress melanin production.

## Image Acquisition Based on the High-Content Imaging Platform
Tg(fli1a:eGFP) larvae were harvested and anesthetized with 0.03% tricaine (Sigma) at 72 hpf after chemical treatments. The larvae were then transferred to a glass-bottom 96-well plate (P96-1.5H-N; Cellvis) coated with agarose pretreated with a three-dimensional (3D) printing mold (Lite600; Liantai) to guide the mounting in the lateral position by fitting the zebrafish yolk sac. The agarose-coated microtiter plates were prepared according to a previous study, with minor modifications. Seventy-five microliters of hot regular 2.5% agarose in fish water was added to each well of a 96-well plate and precooled at room temperature for 1 min. The 3D printing orientation molds were inserted and attached to the microtiter plate using the guidance clips at the base plate. After solidification of the agarose, the molds are carefully removed. Embryos were manually transferred in a volume of using a cut tip, then arrayed and oriented under a stereomicroscope using a bent injection needle. Green fluorescence images of vasculatures were acquired using an automated high-content imaging (HCI) platform with confocal z-stacks mode (Operetta CLS; PerkinElmer). First, a prescanning program was set to localize the zebrafish larvae in the wells to minimize scanning time in the acquisition steps. The scanning height was from the bottom in the prescanning interface. The fluorescent area and intensity were pixels and 400 arbitrary units, respectively. The prescanning of the entire plate was launched in nonconfocal mode using 50% laser power at excitation wavelength, 20 ms of exposure time, and a . Following prescanning, we launched a program for high-resolution image acquisition. In the image acquisition interface, with a , excitation wavelength, 100% laser power, and 300 ms exposure time were set. The HCI platform with confocal z-stack mode, 17–20 slides, and a interval was chosen, with the bottom height set to . The scanning duration of HCI for a vascular image of each larva was 1 min. The image was saved in RGB format.

## Image Acquisition with Confocal Microscope
Tg(fli1a:eGFP) larvae were harvested and anesthetized with 0.03% tricaine (Sigma) at 72 hpf after chemical treatments. The larvae were embedded in a lateral position in a glass-bottom petri dish coated with 1.0% low-melting point agarose. Images were captured under a confocal microscope (Zeiss 900) with a at . The interval was set to .

## Vasculature Segmentation
We proposed a novel network called ECA-ResXUnet, an encoder–decoder-based model, to segment seven vascularized regions in zebrafish. The neural network was constructed and optimized for vascular images of Tg(fli1a:eGFP) characterized by single fluorescence, redundant channels, and variable intensities.

## Augmentation.
The 24-bit depth of zebrafish vascular images contained black (background) and unevenly dispersed fluorescence (vessels). The images were in three-channel RGB format with channel redundancy, compromising the feature extraction efficiency during the segmentation model training. We developed an adaptive augmentation method, including a plug-and-play module using convolution and an efficient channel attention (ECA) attention mechanism, to convert the three-channel RGB fluorescence into one channel to enhance the adaptive image.

## ECA-ResXUnet.
To segment the regional vasculature, we propose the ECA-Res XUnet network structure. The ECA attention mechanism is designed to optimize channel-wise feature recalibration in convolutional neural networks. ResXUnet is an architecture that combines elements of both the ResNeXt and U-Net models to improve performance and efficiency. , We used the ResNeXt ( ) network structure for the encoder, employing the ResNet duplicate layer strategy and a split-transform–merge strategy. The first two layers of the encoder consisted of a convolution and a maximum pooling operation for downsampling. The two layers were followed by stages that were stacked with a ResNeXt bottleneck, including convolution, batch normalization, group convolution (grouped convolutions with 32 groups, each with dimension 4), batch normalization, convolution, and the parametric rectified linear unit (PReLU) activation function. There were 3, 4, 6, and 3 ResNeXt bottleneck stacks for each stage, respectively. We then added the ECA channel attention mechanism, which obtained the importance of each feature channel. In the decoder layer, output from the encoder was up-sampled to recover the image’s spatial resolution. To minimize the loss of image spatial information, we used a skip connection to fuse the decoder’s higher-level features with the encoder’s lower-level features. The decoder consisted of five decoding blocks. Each decoding block contained bilinear interpolation operation, skip connection, and a repeated two-convolution block with an ECA attention mechanism. Each convolution block comprised a convolution, batch normalization, and PReLU activation function. The last decoding block had no skip connection, and the decoder’s output passed through a segmentation head, consisting of a convolution with sigmoid activation.

## Loss function.
Owing to the small area of the target vascular region in zebrafish vasculature, the learning process could be easily trapped in the local minima of the loss function ( ). This biased the prediction network against the background and resulted in partial detection (i.e., with sections missing) of the foreground regions. Thus, we developed a loss function based on the soft-Dice and soft-clDice functions to obtain accurate segmentation results.

ℒc=(1−α)×(1−soft-Dice)+α×(1−soft-clDice),(1)α∈[0,0.5].

## Training the deep learning network.
We applied multiple doses of 14 chemicals (Tables S3 and S4) to induce diverse vascular malformation phenotypes (determined by visual examination) for deep learning model establishment. Each chemical treatment group included 10–15 larvae, and the negative control group consisted of 20–30 larvae. A total of unique images for each blood vessel were subjected to train an algorithm to create the model, and images were assigned to a testing set to evaluate the model (Tables S3 and S4). Two technicians with similar expertise ( of vascular research experience) annotated seven vascular regions [CCV/CVP/dorsal artery (DA)/posterior cardinal vein (PCV)/ISV/subintestinal venous plexus (SIVP)/cerebral vasculature (CBV)] using an annotation web (https://www.robots.ox.ac.uk/∼vgg/software/via/via.html). To reduce the number of parameters in the model and the memory cost during training, the original images were adjusted to as the input. The model was performed by the PyTorch open-source deep learning library based on Python (version 3.8). We used two graphics processing units (GPUs) (NVIDIA Geforce RTX3090) to accelerate the network training process. During training, the parameters of the feature encoder were initialized by pretrained weights on ImageNet. A module for 150 epochs per vascular region with a batch size of 12 was trained via the Adam optimizer. We set the initial learning rate at and used an exponential decay learning rate strategy. The numbers of the training sets and test sets in our datasets are shown in Table S4.
The most common metrics for evaluating a binary classification method are the Dice coefficient, Jaccard coefficient, Recall, Precision, and F1 score. The metric formulas are defined as follows:

(2)Dice=2TPFP+2TP+FN,(3)Jaccard=TPFP+TP+FN,(4)Recall=TPTP+FN,(5)Precision=TPTP+FP,(6)F1=2×Recall×PrecisionRecall+Precision,Where TP represents true positives; FP represents false positives; and FN represents false negatives. The Dice score measures how similar the ground truth region is in the image and the automated algorithm to do it. It is the size of the overlap of the two segmentations divided by the total size of the two objects. The Jaccard coefficient is a measure of similarity for the two sets of data, with a range from 0% to 100%. Recall is the ratio of true positives to total (actual) positives in the data. Precision refers to the amount of information that is conveyed by a number in terms of its digits. F1 score is the harmonic mean of precision and recall, which means that the F1 score will tell you the model’s balanced ability to capture positive cases (recall) and be accurate with the cases it does capture (precision). The segmentation code can be found on GitHub (https://github.com/chenjunzhou/Zebrafish-AI).
We further conducted a comparison between the predictions of ECA-ResXUnet and six alternative computational methods, namely, U-Net, ResUNet, PSPNet(ResNet-34 or ResNet-50), and DeepLabv3 (ResNet-34 or ResNet-50). The approaches and the codes are available on GitHub at the following links: UNet (https://github.com/milesial/Pytorch-UNet); ResUNet (https://github.com/nikhilroxtomar/Deep-Residual-Unet); and PSPNet, DeepLabv3 (https://github.com/qubvel/segmentation_models.pytorch).

## Feature Extraction and Quantification
To characterize the morphological features of zebrafish vasculature, we collected 31 unique descriptive metrics (features) for seven segmented vascularized regions in zebrafish (Table S5) according to the literature related to zebrafish vasculature and a guidebook for feature extraction. The feature values’ coefficient of variations (CVs) in the control larvae ( batches, including 304 larvae total) were calculated by the formula: , where SD is standard deviation. We used MATLAB 9.11 to extract the vascular features and automatically transform the images into quantitative information. The MATLAB code can be found on GitHub (https://github.com/chenjunzhou/Zebrafish-AI).

## Data Quality Control
We performed an array of data assessments, processing, and transformation to improve the feature data quality for downstream analysis. The investigators were blinded to the chemical set (exposure operators, image capturer, and data analyst) were blinded. The images in which the zebrafish were not in the correct position or had weak fluorescence were removed. The distributions of values were analyzed using the Kolmogorov–Smirnov test. A was considered a normal distribution. The nonnormal distribution data were processed by logarithmic transformation. Outliers were identified with a univariate statistical tool and removed based on the 2.5-SD rule in R software. We evaluated the plate-layout effects, batch effects, and biological and technical variations in our method with the control larvae. The intraplate-layout effects in a plate and the interplate-layout effects among different plates in a batch of experiments were measured by comparing column or row means of the fold changes for all 31 features using a one-way analysis of variance. A indicated no intra- or interplate effects. Batch effects across the project were calculated with -distributed stochastic neighbor embedding (t-SNE). A was considered as having no significant batch effects. We randomly selected two batches (including a negative control and 14 chemicals) to assess the screening validity for the chemicals’ vascular-disrupting effects. The vascular analysis by the conventional method with manual segmentation was set as the gold standard reference. The larva sample was defined as positive if its Total Vessel Score(N) exceeded the mean of the Total Vessel Score(N) for the negative control group plus 1.96 SD (unilateral 95% interval). The sensitivity and specificity were calculated using the following formulas, respectively: and . Please see Table S6 for the explanation of a, b, c, and d.

## Data Analysis of Image-Based Vascular Phenotypic Profiling
The alteration of the vascular feature was expressed as the rate of change (RC) as compared with the control. The formula is as follows:

(7)RC=X−MEAN(NC)MEAN(NC),where X is a feature value of a larva; MEAN is the average of all values; and NC represents feature values in the negative control group.
We then normalized the RC using the following formula:

(8)RCN=ABS(RCx)−MIN(ABS(RC))MAX(ABS(RC)),where is the normalized RC; is the rate of change of a feature from a larva; MIN is the minimum value for the corresponding feature; MAX is the maximum value for the corresponding feature; and ABS is the absolute value.
The score of a blood vessel for a chemical treatment (Vessel Score) was calculated as follows:

(9)Vessel Score=∑i=1n(MEAN(RCNi)×weighti),where is total number of features of the target vessel; i is the ith feature of the vessel; MEAN() is the average of all larvae in a chemical treatment group; and is the normalized RC of a feature in a larva for a chemical treatment. For , if the -value in the statistical analysis was when compared the of a feature for the corresponding chemical treatment with the control group, the was set to 1; if , the was set to 0.
The normalized vessel score (Vessel ) was calculated using the following formula:

(10)Vessel Score(N)=Vessel Scorex−MIN(Vessel Score)MAX(Vessel Score),where Vessel
 is the score of a blood vessel for a chemical treatment; MIN(Vessel Score) is the minimum score of the target vessel for all chemical treatments; and MAX(Vessel Score) is the maximum score of the target vessel for all chemical treatments.
The normalized total vessel score for a chemical (Total Vessel ) was calculated by adding up the Vessel
 of seven segmented blood vessels as follows:

(11)Total Vessel Score(N)=∑i=17Vessel Score(N)i,where Vessel
 is the normalized vessel score of a blood vessel for a chemical treatment, and i is the ith segmented blood vessel.

## Single-Cell Sorting
The control and treated Tg(fli1a:eGFP) larva ( larvae from 3 replicates) at 72 hpf were collected and washed by phosphate-buffered saline (PBS) in a 24-well plate. The larvae were incubated with 0.25% trypsin and DNase I (Sigma) in PBS for 15 min, gently pipetted a few times, and stopped by 10% fetal bovine serum containing 
 . The cells were transferred into a new tube, centrifuged for 6 min at , and washed with calcium and magnesium-free Dulbecco’s PBS (DPBS) twice. The single-cell suspensions for fluorescence activated cell sorting (FACS; FACSAria Fusion; BD) were filtered through a cell strainer. The green fluorescent protein (GFP)–positive cells were sorted by FACS at . Cells from AB wild-type zebrafish larvae were used as the negative control.

## scRNA-Seq
The sorted single cells for the scRNA-seq were prepared using the Chromium Next GEM Single Cell 3′ Reagent Kits v3.1 ( ) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. The isolated cells were loaded on a Chromium Single Cell Controller ( ) to generate single-cell gel beads in emulsion (GEMs). Next, the primers [including an Illumina TruSeq Read1, , unique molecular identifier (UMI), and poly(dT) sequence] were mixed and incubated with the cell lysate and a Master Mix containing reverse transcription (RT) reagents to produce barcoded full-length complementary DNA (cDNA). The cDNA was amplified via polymerase chain reaction to generate sufficient mass for library construction. The 3′ gene expression library was then constructed. Finally, sequencing was performed on an Illumina NovaSeq platform (CapitalBio Technology Inc.).
All data analysis was performed in RStudio (version 1.4.1103). The raw data was collected, and the quality was evaluated with UMI tools. The data quality control analysis and graph-based clustering approach were performed with the Seurat4.1.1 package. Gene numbers of or and mitochondrial read fractions of were set as the criteria for cell removal. The available genes were input into Seurat for dimension reduction by principal component analysis. Graph-based clustering was performed to group cells according to their gene expression profile and uniform manifold approximation and projection (UMAP) analysis. Differentially expressed genes (DEGs) for each group were identified by Seurat as any with a false discovery rate (FDR) and a fold change . Pseudotime analysis was plotted in the monocle2 package, and a trajectory model was used to delineate the cell population lineage relationship. Enrichment signaling pathway plots of DEGs for different vascular malformations induced by chemicals were analyzed by ggplot2 3.3.5.

## Benchmark Dose Analysis
The benchmark dose (BMD) was estimated using the Bayesian Benchmark Dose (BBMD) system. The procedures were performed according to the user manual and technical guidance. The concentration–response model was chosen as the “standard model.” The benchmark response value was set at 0.05 ( ), and the lower confidence limit of BMD (BMDL) was set at 5% ( ), which was applied for the point of departure concentration.

## Results

## Deep Learning-Based Architecture of Vessel Segmentation for the High-Throughput and High-Resolution Image of the Entire Zebrafish Vasculature
To facilitate the rapid loading of zebrafish larvae in a 96-well plate for image acquisition of the whole vasculature following large-scale chemical treatment, we applied a 3D-printing orientation tool fitting the yolk sac to obtain a consistent lateral position ( ; Figure S1A). The scanning duration of HCI for a vascular image of each larva was 1 min, which was much faster than that required with a confocal microscope ( ). However, the resolution was comparable between them ( ). The replicates of zebrafish larvae for each group were loaded in rows, and the scanning order followed columns to reduce the plate-layout effects and the time effects (Figure S1B,C).
 To segment the regional vasculature of zebrafish in the fluorescence images, we developed a network ECA-ResXUnet based on the deep learning approach. The ECA-ResXUnet comprised enhancement, encoder, decoder, and segmentation head ( ; Figure S2). The enhancement part was first applied in the image segmentation field to reduce channel redundancy and improve feature representation in the targeted vascular region adaptively ( ). This significantly improved the segmentation function, compared with without the enhancement block or RGB2Gray model (Table S7). The encoder architecture transformed the input image into a high-level abstract representation of crucial features to find the target segmentation of vascular region layer by layer (e.g., ISV; ). The decoder modules were responsible for generating a nuanced, fine-grained segmentation output via restoring the spatial resolution and maintaining spatial accuracy ( ). Skip connections acted as bridges between the encoder and decoder layers. They retained the finer details lost during the encoding process by passing the feature maps from encoder layers to corresponding decoder layers ( ). This combination of high-level abstract information and fine-grained details allowed the model to produce highly accurate and detailed segmentations ( ). Seven vascularized regions—ISVs, CCVs, SIVP, PCV, DA, CVP, and CBV—were segmented by the ECA-ResXUnet approach ( ).
 We compared the ECA-ResXUnet predictions to manually labeled ground truth to evaluate the segmentation quality. The ground truth images were labeled by two technicians with equivalent levels of expertise. We compared the scoring results and did not find any significant difference between the two technicians (Figure S3). Our model showed good performance in segmenting zebrafish vessels, achieving an average Dice coefficient of 89%, Jaccard coefficient of 81%, Recall of 90%, Precision of 89%, and F1 score of 89% ( ). In addition, we compared the ECA-ResXUnet predictions to six alternative computational approaches (Table S8). In contrast to the original segmentation architecture, U-Net, our network was 2%–17% higher in the Dice coefficient, Jaccard coefficient, and F1 score and 2%–11% lower in Recall score. For a 96-well plate of larvae images, it took an experienced technician to segment manually without rest. However, it could be finished in 37.44 s using the ECA-ResXUnet automated process (Table S9). Collectively, the proposed ECA-ResXUnet network could automatically segment the zebrafish vasculature consistent with human-level accuracy at high speed, advancing the large-scale vascular image analysis.
 

## Identification of the Vascular Morphological Feature Atlas Induced by Health-Concerning Chemicals
To overcome the challenge of quantifying the irregular vascular anatomy of zebrafish blood vessels, we next extracted 31 descriptive features comprising not only common features of angioarchitecture (area, diameter, perimeter, length, density, leading bud number, and vessel loop number) but also unconventional features (solidity, aspect ratio, rectangularity, roundness, irregularity, and compactness) ( ; Table S5). Each blood vessel has its own features due to its unique morphology and tissue residing.
 To assess the accuracy of our method, we evaluated the intra- and interplate-layout effects. We found that there was no statistically significant difference among either the columns or the rows ( ; Tables S10 and S11). In addition, the CVs of all vascular features in the negative control group were , except for the CVP loop number (11.37%) and the SIVP region area (16.7%), indicating the mild biological and technical variations in our experiments ( ; Table S12). There were no significant batch effects ( ). The vascular effects (represented by all features) of PTK787 (positive control) and the negative control can be significantly separated based on the t-SNE algorithm ( ). By comparing with manual segmentation, the sensitivity and specificity of ECA-ResXUnet approach for segmentation were respectively 95.56% and 95.81% (Table S13), indicating a sound validity of our deep learning-based method for the chemicals’ vascular-disrupting effects.
We used the deep learning-based imaging analysis approach to investigate the vascular-disrupting effects of 150 chemicals of health concern. Of the 150 compounds, 147 chemicals induced a measurable response in the vasculature as determined by the ECA-ResXUnet model (Excel Table S3). The heatmap profiling showed heterogeneity of morphological changes after chemical treatments ( ; Excel Table S4). These findings demonstrated that our deep learning-based methods could efficiently describe chemical-induced intricate vascular patterns. The results also indicated the necessity of automated vascular analysis regarding large amounts of morphological outcomes in screening experiments.
 We then characterized the responsiveness of vascular features to chemical insults and identified sensitive vessels and parameters. Chemical treatments induced extensive alterations over the distance of the positive and negative controls ( ). The vessel area of SIVP, the roundness of CCV, and the branch number of CBV exhibited a wide range of alterations, whereas the rectangularity of ISV displayed the slightest change ( ). To compare the disturbance degree, we set an unbiased weight for all vessels. For each chemical, a responsive vessel with the highest score was regarded as a target vessel for the chemical. We counted the total chemical numbers for each target vessel. The results showed that CCV was a target vessel for the largest number of chemicals ( ; Table S14). As for the morphological feature of each vessel, CCV vessel area, SIVP region area, CVP perimeter, total ISV interval length, CBV area, DA diameter, and PCV diameter were affected by more chemicals than other features in the corresponding regional vasculature ( ; Table S15). These results suggested that the developing vasculature in zebrafish responds to chemical insults at distinctive sensitivities, degrees, and features among vascular types and residing regions.
 

## Characterization of Heterogeneous Vascular-Disrupting Effects Caused by Chemical Treatments Based on the Integrated Score of Multiparameters
To delineate the characteristics of vascular changes in the architecture induced by chemicals, we performed graph-based clustering to group chemicals according to their changes in the rate of vascular features in morphological profiles. t-SNE plots showed that eight categories of the 150 chemicals were graphed into six clusters ( ; Excel Tables S5 and S6). Pesticides accounted for the largest portion of chemicals (7/13) in cluster 1, characterized by a remarkable inhibition of SIVP (including the increased vessel density, aspect ratio, and compactness and decreased region area, vessel area, and loop number in SIVP) and the delayed development of CCV (represented by increased CCV area, perimeter, etc.), as well as the perturbation of CBV, ISV, CVP, DA, and PCV ( ). Half of the chemicals in cluster 2 were plasticizers, and cluster 3 primarily gathered flame retardants (6/29) and pesticides (6/29) ( ). The presented phenotypic alteration of cluster 3 was similar to that of cluster 2, but the effects were slighter. A perturbation of SIVP, CCV, and PCV was predominantly presented in the clusters 2 and 3. In cluster 4, the agglomerated chemicals were flame retardants (15/43), and the effects resembled those of cluster 3. The characteristics with an increase of vessel area, region area, and vessel density of SIVP and a decrease in CCV area in cluster 5 were contrary to those of clusters 3 and 4. Pesticides (8/29) and plasticizers (8/29) occupied cluster 6, showing the lowest morphological effects ( ). These results suggested the similarity and the heterogeneity of chemicals from different categories.
 To evaluate the damage to the whole vascular system, we established a scoring method based on multiparameters. The normalized total vessel score (Total Vessel ) ranged from 0 to 5.4, and 49 chemicals scored . Haloperidol, an antipsychotic medicine, had the highest score. Pesticides accounted for the largest group among chemicals with the Total Vessel ( ; Excel Table S3). Regarding the top 10 chemicals, diisobutyl phthalate (DiBP), benzophenone-3 (BP-3), and acetyl triethyl citrate (ATEC) mainly targeted SIVP; triclocarban (TCC) and haloperidol (HAL) disrupted CCV; (LCT) and tert-butyl peroxybenzoate (tBDP) mainly activated the CVP phenotype; benzylbutyl phthalate (BzBP) affected CBV; deltamethrin (DLM) mainly disrupted ISV; and 2,2-Bis(chloromethyl)trimethylene bis[bis(2-chloroethyl)phosphate] (V6) affected DA ( ; Table S16). A volcano plot of the vascular features showed that the RC of 240 vascular features increased ( -fold), whereas the RC for 209 vascular features decreased ( -fold) ( ). These features may serve as prioritized indexes for the assessment of vascular effects of those chemicals. In addition, we scored and ranked the top 5–10 vascular-disrupting compounds of each chemical category ( ; Excel Table S3).

## Multiple-Concentration Evaluation and BBMD Analysis of Vascular Responses to the Representative PFAS
To further demonstrate the efficiency and capacity of our method for vascular risk evaluation, we selected PFAS, a class of chemicals that exhibited relatively mild effects on vascular morphology in the single-concentration screening assay, to precisely characterize the vascular alterations using multiple-concentration experiments including the environmental exposure levels. Among 31 vascular parameters, only the CCV vessel area and CVP loop number yielded values for all nine PFAS ( ; Figure S4). The result indicated that the two features may serve as the sensitive indexes for PFAS vascular toxicity. Eight of the nine PFAS compounds caused concentration-dependent effects on vascular development ( ; Table S17, Excel Table S7). PFBS and PFDA exhibited low-concentration effects ( ). For carboxylic PFAS, the order of calculated for vascular morphological effects was as follows: PFDA ( ; ; ) >PFNA ( ; ; ) > PFOA ( ; ; ) > PFHpA ( ; ; ) >GenX ( ; ; and ) ( ; Table S17). For the sulfonic acid PFAS, the order of calculated for vascular morphological effects was as follows: F-53B ( ; ; ) >PFOS ( ; ; ) >PFHxS ( ; ; ) >PFBS ( ; ; and ) ( ; Table S17). Strikingly, there was a negative correlation between fluorinated carbon chain length values of total vessel score for both sulfonic acid and carboxylic PFAS ( ). Moreover, the of PFOS (8-carbon) and F-53B (8-carbon) were lower than that of PFOA (8-carbon), indicating that the sulfonic acid PFAS seemed to exhibit more potent vascular effects than carboxylic PFAS with a similar number of carbon atoms.
 

## A Single-Cell Resolution Atlas of Cells from Zebrafish Larvae Treated with PFHxS, LCT, and BzBP
According to the vascular morphological diversity induced by chemical insults, we selected three representative chemicals (i.e., PFHxS, LCT, and BzBP), which induced robust and distinct vascular-disrupting effects to further investigate the molecular fingerprints of different vascular phenotypes. PFHxS exposure caused detrimental vascular effects targeting ISV, DA, and SIVP, and the proportions of Vessel were 22.56%, 19.66%, and 18.59%, respectively ( ; Table S18). We also observed an increase in the DA diameter and aspect ratio of SIVP. The other feature values of the three vessels were decreased compared with the control ( ; Figure S5, Table S18). The CVP had the highest score (26.36%) of the relative fraction of Vessel compared with other vessels in the LCT-exposed larvae. The CVP loop number increased, but the feature values of perimeter, aspect ratio, compactness, and rectangularity decreased ( ; Figure S5, Table S19). The predominant effect of BzBP treatment was vascular hyperplasia with increased branch number and vessel area of CBV, accounting for 40.71% of total effects ( ; Figure S5, Table S20).
 Endothelial cell (EC) heterogeneity is correlated with the disparity of vascular morphology and function. 
 (a pan-endothelial marker) cells were collected from Tg(fli1a:eGFP) larvae treated with PFHxS, LCT, or BzBP and controls at 72 hpf and subjected to scRNA-seq. Ten cell clusters were identified ( ). As we expected, cells presented ECs and proliferative ECs , ( ; Table S21). In addition, we also identified hematopoietic stem and progenitor cells (HSPCs), mesenchymal, neural cells, mesodermal cells, notochord cells, primitive hemangioblasts, and three transitioning EC types featured by their corresponding marker genes ( ).
We then focused on ECs and EC-like cell subclusters for deeper analysis. ECs were further grouped into three subtypes—arteries, veins, and capillaries/microvessels—and the largest population were putatively termed capillary/microvessel ECs ( ; Table S22), given that they co-expressed capillary marker plvapb, arterial EC marker edn1, and venous EC feature gene dab2. The number of DEGs for the three compounds was positively correlated with their total vessel score. The order of the total vessel score was LCT 
 ; similarly, the DEG number order of the compounds was LCT 
 ( ). In line with the similar proportions of the top three damaged vessel types, ISV/SIVP (capillaries/microvessels), DA (artery) in PFHxS-treated larvae ( ), the DEGs numbers of the arterial ECs and capillary/microvessel EC-like cells showed the largest number of DEGs ( ; Excel Table S8). LCT treatment elicited a similar DEG number in the three EC subtypes. This finding aligns with the severity of damage observed in the top three vessels ( ; Excel Table S9). As for DEG counts in BzBP-treated larvae, the total number of DEGs from the capillary/microvessel EC and EC-like cells exhibited the largest number of DEGs ( ; Excel Table S10), consistent with the two severe damage vessel targets CBV (microvessels) and SIVP (capillaries) ( ). These results suggest that chemical treatment induces heterogeneous responses in EC populations. The number of DEGs was associated with the vascular damage degree induced by chemicals.

## Identification of Potential Molecular Events and Biomarkers for Vascular-Disrupting Effects through the Integration of Transcriptional and Morphological Analysis
To gain insight into the molecular events underlying vascular structural phenotypes, we performed a Gene Ontology (GO) analysis of DEGs by chemical treatments (Figure S6, Excel Table S11). Given the chemical treatments or exposures known to be etiologic factors for a range of vascular pathologies, we performed a vessel–EC–gene–disease strategy to integrate the morphological patterns and single-cell transcriptional data. According to the vessel scores, the target EC subtypes were selected from the top three disrupting vessel types. As for PFHxS, DEGs in ISV, SIVP [capillary/microvessel ECs, and EC-like cells (egr1, flt4, sele, apln, bmp2, hdac4, vdac1, sema3a, etc.)] and DA [arterial ECs and arterial EC-like cells (cox8a, mecp2, vdac1, nrp2, sparc, id1, hspa4, etc.)] were associated with vascular diseases, including ischemia, retinal diseases, accelerated atherosclerosis, myocardial ischemia, anemia cardiomyopathy, and tumor initiation. DEGs in LCT and BzBP treatments overlapped with the functional genes related to cerebral infarction, vascular tortuosity, vascular calcification, myocardial ischemia, and diabetic retinopathy ( ). These results suggest that the vessel–EC–gene–disease integrative analysis workflow could be a practical and efficient approach for hinting the vascular risk correlated with chemical exposure.
 

## Discussion
In this work, we developed an experimental and computational pipeline to automatically analyze the whole zebrafish vasculature with exceptional efficiency and precision, followed by a phenotype-directing EC biomarker identification for chemical screening. Our method used high-throughput screening, high-resolution imaging, and systematic vascular phenotypic profiling in an experiment. This study reveals novel insights into various aspects of exploring a zebrafish model. First, we optimized the embryos mounting and confocal scanning on a high-content platform to yield high-resolution imagery of the zebrafish vasculature at high speeds in a high-throughput assay. Second, we annotated chemical-induced vascular patterns to create the algorithm structure, facilitating the accurate image segmentation outcomes under stress conditions. Third, our results manifested the heterogeneous responses to chemical insults among various vessel types in zebrafish. This allowed the identification of target vessels and facilitated rapid screening applications based on the susceptible blood vessels. Fourth, we devised scoring criteria for evaluating the morphological changes in the vascular network, enabling the quantification of vessel lesions and contributing to vascular morphological profiling. Fifth, we proposed a target vessel-specific EC single-cell transcriptome analysis strategy that aids in identifying functional pathways and potential biomarkers.
Over recent decades, HCI has been widely used for cellular imaging analysis in high-throughput screening. For instance, Grafton et al. conducted an evaluation on the impact of 1,280 bioactive compounds on the cellular phenotypes of iPSC-derived cardiomyocytes to assess their potential cardiotoxic effects using HCI. Another study by Nyffeler et al. investigated the biological activity of 462 ToxCast chemicals by characterizing a total of 1,300 cellular features obtained from a HCI platform. However, regarding in vivo screening purposes, HCI has been underdeveloped because of technical limitations. In this study, we optimized the imaging method so that the HCI could capture the whole zebrafish larvae vasculature at high speeds with high resolution comparable to confocal image quality. This improvement facilitates the vascular profiling of zebrafish in high-throughput research. Although convolutional neural networks are widely used in medical image segmentation, they are limited in their ability to segment and classify distinct yet similar structures within fluorescence images. Compared with previous deep learning-based Dual ResUnet for segmentation of ISV in zebrafish, the indexes of our model, including Dice, Jaccard, Precision, and F1, outperformed Dual ResUnet. Meanwhile, we also compared other typical network structures, including U-Net, ResUnet, PSPNet (ResNet-34), PSPNet (ResNet-50), Deeplabv3(ResNet-34), and DeepLabv3 (ResNet-50). Owing to an enhancement block incorporated into the network, ECA-ResXUnet exhibited exceptional segmentation ability. This enhancement procedure preserved maximum raw image data and minimized the channel-redundant information, thereby improving feature representation in the region of interest. This evidence suggests that our ECA-ResUnet is a superior approach for monochromatic fluorescent image segmentation. Moreover, the vascular segmentation capability of the ECA-ResXUnet approach is comparable to that of a professional technician, whereas the ECA-ResXUnet approach provides more precise features and achieves a speed that is times faster. The high efficiency of this method is amenable to the thousands of relative chemicals found in commerce and the environment in a large-scale toxicity test.
The majority of previous studies have employed several regional blood vessels, but not the entire vasculature in zebrafish, as phenotypic readouts to evaluate the vascular disruption effect. , , Without the entire vasculature, deducing an underestimated conclusion to the vascular impairments or failing to identify the sensitive (target) vessels is likely inevitable. Aside from the limited number of vessels, the lack of feature characterization compromised the accuracy of the morphological alterations of the vascular network as a highly complex, irregular, and heterogeneous architecture throughout the body. We extracted as many as 31 features, including unconventional features, such as solidity, compactness, aspect ratio, and irregularity, from seven major vascular regions. These features, which are not easily differentiated by human vision, have been overlooked in previous studies concerning vascular characterization. Indeed, under stress conditions, the sensitive responding vessel types and vascular indexes in zebrafish vary from chemical to chemical and are not always in the traditional descriptive metrics. Of the 150 chemicals tested in this study, 147 chemicals induced various degrees of vascular-disrupting effects at concentrations of 1/6 . Given the biological and technical variations (the variable coefficient of our method was ), chemicals with effects (score ) of the normal embryo population may be considered slightly effective. In contrast, chemicals causing effects (score ) of the positive control population (PKT787) may be identified as extremely potent vascular disruptors. By comparing with previous data, of 49 compounds with a vessel score of , 16 chemicals had evidence of vascular-disrupting effects based on in vivo and in vitro studies (Excel Table S12), thus strengthening the reliability of our findings. Our method facilitated a prioritized vascular–index scheme in large-scale screenings of drugs, chemicals, and functional genetic targets using a zebrafish embryo model. Sensitive vessels and parameters can be prioritized for application in the large-scale screening of chemicals to yield a quick answer.
In addition to screening potential vascular toxic compounds, we also expanded the application scheme of our method to characterize the vascular effects of less toxic chemicals. A multiple-concentration experiment was applied to enhance the precision of the evaluation. Notably, we found that PFDA and PFBS exhibited low-concentration effects among the nine PFAS tested. The underlying mechanism for this low-concentration influence on vasculature remains elusive. Endocrine-disrupting chemicals (EDCs), such as bisphenol A (BPA), exhibit a similar action, where EDCs mimic endogenous hormones to partake in receptor-mediated responses, frequently triggering biological effects at low concentrations. Given that PFAS have been shown to exert an endocrine-disrupting effect, low-concentration PFAS might impact vascular development by disrupting hormone function. In addition, PFAS are likely to interfere with the ligand–receptor interaction of critical angiogenesis-related proteins (e.g., vascular endothelial growth factor). Our recent epidemiological study demonstrated that subchorionic PFAS were negatively associated with placental vascular biomarkers, and the decrease of vascular growth-related factors played a mediating role in associations of adverse birth outcomes with intraplacental PFAS. Further investigation is required to demonstrate the hypotheses. In our multi-concentration testing system, the estimated BMDLs of some PFAS (PFOA, PFOS, PFDA, and F-53B) were comparable with environmental water concentrations and the human serum levels of PFAS around the world (Table S23), – indicating a relatively higher risk for vascular effects of these four PFAS congeners.
Our study provides morphometric data for the vascular toxicity of aliphatic PFAS. We found that the length of the fluorinated carbon chain of a PFAS is directly proportional to its potency on vascular effects. The order of the vascular toxicity regarding was PFDA > F-53B > PFNA > PFOS > PFOA > PFHxS > PFHpA > PFBS > GenX. This observation reinforces the notion that the fluorinated carbon chain length maybe a determining factor in PFAS’ toxicity in zebrafish. In addition, the sulfonic acid PFAS seemed to exhibit a greater effect on vascular morphology than carboxylic PFAS with a similar number of carbon atoms in the present study. These results imply that the carbon chain length plays an essential role in PFAS-induced vascular toxicity but is not the only determinant factor. The functional radical groups should also be considered. These findings conform to the positive associations between carbon chain length and developmental toxicity or behavioral effects. , Because of the vascular system is one of the first organs to form during organogenesis, , it is a sensitive early target for screening and predicting developmental toxicity and other relevant outcomes, such as neurodevelopmental injury. 
Precise assessment of vascular disruption and the vessel scores derived from morphological profiling can facilitate the mechanistic study. EC heterogeneity plays a crucial role in the disparity of vascular morphology and function. Given the lack of quantitative and unbiased analysis of transcriptional heterogeneity in zebrafish ECs, we performed scRNA-seq in cells from Tg(fli1a:eGFP) zebrafish and elucidated the cellular events and molecular pathways following the respective target vessel types. Clarifying cells’ identities and characterizing transcriptional background and the transcripts upon chemical insults facilitated further exploration of the Tg(fli1a:eGFP) zebrafish model to a broader field. Given the conserved genes between humans and zebrafish, the target vessel–conserved gene–disease strategy was presumably applicable for the prediction of relevant human diseases to chemical exposure. In epidemiological studies, some of these chemicals (PFAS, plasticizers, and pesticides) are associated with the progression of CVDs, specifically diseases related to vascular impairments. – For example, epidemiological evidence showed that exposure to PFHxS was positively associated with cardiometabolic risk, total cholesterol, high-density lipoprotein cholesterol levels, and systolic blood pressure. This is in alignment with our predictions of links between PFHxS and cardiomyopathy, myocardial ischemia, and accelerated atherosclerosis using the conserved genes among species. Although these links need to be further solidified, our data not only implicates the human health risk, but it also provides a practical and efficient strategy to investigate the adverse outcome pathways for vascular disruption.
Collectively, our study provides a deep learning-based quantitative framework ECA-ResXUnet to efficiently and precisely characterize vascular morphological profiles in developing zebrafish. This method allowed us to identify vascular-disrupting effects of the representative health-concerning chemicals. In combination with target vessel-directed analysis of endothelial transcriptional fingerprints at the single-cell level, our study pioneers the integration of transcriptional and morphological profiling at a high resolution. The high-throughput analysis in the phenotype-guided screening paradigm based on the zebrafish model paves a novel way for the large-scale screening of chemicals/drugs, targets, and genetic factors related to vascular disruption. Despite our substantial efforts dedicated to method development and optimization, there are still areas that require further refinement. These include achieving higher resolution for finer vascular structures in 3D images and streamlining the one-step pipeline procedure.

## Supplementary Material

## Acknowledgments
Author contributions: conceptualization: X.Z., J.C., and Y.W.; methodology: X.Z., J.C., Z.Z., W.K., D.J., N.Z., and C.L.; investigation: X.Z., J.C., Z.Z., Q.Z., D.J., C.N., C.W., N.Z., W.C., and K.J.; visualization: Z.Z., Q.L., and C.L.; supervision: Y.W.; writing—original draft: X.Z., J.C., and Y.W.; writing—reviewing and revising and editing: X.Z., J.C., Q.L., M.S., and Y.W.
We thank Drs. Jiaying Dai (Shanghai Jiaotong University), Wen Chen (Sun Yat-sen University), and Qiang Zhang (Emory University) for helpful discussions. We thank Dr. Shulan Yang (Sun Yat-sen University) for her technical advice. We thank Jinwei Wu, Yuejin Yu, Jinkun Xu, Xuan Wen, and Jiajing Huang (Sun Yat-sen University) for their technical assistance.
This study was supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China [21976216 and 22176229 (both to Yanhong Wei) and 21906186 (to Xiali Zhong)], Guangdong Basic and Applied Basic Research Foundation [2019B151502019 (to Yanhong Wei) and 2022A1515011600 (to Xiali Zhong)], and the project of the China Postdoctoral Science Foundation [2020T130733 (to Xiali Zhong)].
All data are available in the main text or the Supplemental Material.

Conclusions and opinions are those of the individual authors and do not necessarily reflect the policies or views of EHP Publishing or the National Institute of Environmental Health Sciences.

## References
 

## Associated Data

## Supplementary Materials