822acssdJournal of Chemical Theory and ComputationJ Chem Theory ComputPMC1104427111044271110442713856374610.1021/acs.jctc.3c01318SWISH-X, an Expanded
Approach to Detect Cryptic Pockets
in Proteins and at Protein–Protein Interfaces
BorsattoAlberto GianquintoEleonora RizziValerio GervasioFrancesco Luigi †School
of Pharmaceutical Sciences, University of
Geneva, 1205 Geneva, Switzerland‡Institute
of Pharmaceutical Sciences of Western Switzerland, University of Geneva, 1205 Geneva, Switzerland¶Swiss
Institute of Bioinformatics, 1015 Lausanne, Switzerland§Department
of Drug Science and Technology, University
of Turin, 10125 Turin, Italy∥Department
of Chemistry, University College London, WC1 H0AJ London, United Kingdom⊥Institute
of Structural and Molecular Biology, University
College London, WC1E7JE London, United Kingdom*E-mail: francesco.gervasio@unige.ch.
24202420833353335–33482642024© 2024 The Authors. Published by American Chemical SocietyPermits the broadest form of re-use including for commercial purposes, provided that author attribution and integrity are maintained (https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/).

## Abstract
 Protein–protein interactions mediate most molecular
processes
in the cell, offering a significant opportunity to expand the set
of known druggable targets. Unfortunately, targeting these interactions
can be challenging due to their typically flat and featureless interaction
surfaces, which often change as the complex forms. Such surface changes
may reveal hidden (cryptic) druggable pockets. Here, we analyze a
set of well-characterized protein–protein interactions harboring
cryptic pockets and investigate the predictive power of current computational
methods. Based on our observations, we developed a new computational
strategy, SWISH-X (SWISH Expanded), which combines the established
cryptic pocket identification capabilities of SWISH with the rapid
temperature range exploration of OPES MultiThermal. SWISH-X is able
to reliably identify cryptic pockets at protein–protein interfaces
while retaining its predictive power for revealing cryptic pockets
in isolated proteins, such as TEM-1 β-lactamase.

statusreleaseddisplay-pdfyesis-in-collection-domainyesis-olfnois-manuscriptnois-preprintnois-journal-matternois-scannednois-retractednoReceived 2023 Dec 1; Accepted 2024 Mar 23; Revised 2024 Mar 22; Collection date 2024 Apr 23.

1.

## Introduction
Protein–protein
interactions (PPIs) mediate a variety of
biological processes from signal transduction to enzymatic regulation,
forming an intricate network of interactions known as the “interactome”.
The human interactome is estimated in the hundreds of thousands of
different protein–protein interactions, each mediating a specific
biological process. These interactions,
when disrupted, can lead to a variety of human diseases, making them
highly promising targets for drug development. Over the past few decades, considerable effort has been devoted
to investigating the druggability of PPIs, which has proven to be
a challenging research endeavor. 
There are several examples of PPI modulators, including peptides,
antibodies, and small molecules, each with certain advantages and
limitations. Peptide modulators promise
greater specificity, can be designed to mimic one of the partner proteins,
and have reduced toxicity. However, the interacting amino acids of
a PPI are often not contiguous in the protein sequence, making these
interactions difficult to replicate with synthetic peptides. In addition,
peptides are limited by their short half-life, potential immunogenicity,
and low membrane permeability. Antibodies,
due to their unique characteristics, are particularly promising as
modulators of protein–protein interactions. However, they are
expensive to produce and mostly limited to targeting proteins that
are secreted or located on the cell membrane. 
Small molecules offer significant opportunities for PPIs’
targeting. In recent years, a number of small molecules have been
approved or entered clinical trials, illustrating
the feasibility of targeting PPIs with this approach. However, significant
challenges remain in the development of small molecule drugs that
target PPIs, mainly due to the difficulty of finding suitable binding
sites on the typically flat and featureless protein–protein
interaction surfaces. Despite the typical large interaction surface
(1500–3000 Å2), not all interface residues
equally contribute to the free energy of binding. It has been shown
that the interaction of a subset of hot-spot amino acids accounts
for most of the binding free energy. , Most of the
hot-spots in a PPI are typically located at or near the interface,
and various computational methods have been developed to identify
druggable hot-spots. Therefore, small
drug-like molecules that selectively bind to these hot-spots might
effectively modulate a target PPI interface. , However, finding a suitable pocket to accommodate such molecules
can be challenging as conventional, stable cavities are often lacking
in the structures of the individual partner proteins. Alternatively,
cryptic pockets that form at the PPI interface may provide novel small-molecule-mediated
targeting opportunities.
Cryptic binding sites are dynamic protein
cavities that are undetectable
in the ligand-free state and become apparent only upon ligand binding.
The mechanisms governing the formation of cryptic pockets are often
unclear and depend on the system under consideration. The free energy
cost associated with the opening of these hidden sites varies according
to the structural rearrangement required to expose the pocket. Typical
structural changes associated with cryptic pocket formation are lateral
chain rotations, loop motions, secondary structure changes, and interdomain
motions. Due to their highly dynamic
and elusive nature, the identification of cryptic pockets in single
proteins and at PPI interfaces has proved challenging, often resulting
from serendipitous discovery in experimentally determined protein
structures. Despite the challenges in
detecting cryptic pockets, several examples of small molecules targeting
cryptic binding sites have been reported, showing that cryptic pockets
are valuable candidates for expanding the set of known druggable targets. , 
In recent years, a number of computational approaches have
been
developed with the aim of detecting cryptic binding sites, including
machine learning-based methods, , mixed-solvent molecular
dynamics (MD) simulations, − Markov state models, , and Hamiltonian
replica exchange techniques like SWISH (Sampling Water Interfaces
through Scaled Hamiltonians). , The latter, developed
by our group, has proven to be effective in sampling the opening of
cryptic pockets in various targets when combined with organic probes.
Notable examples of combining both experiments and simulations to
validate cryptic pockets have also been proposed, showing the promise
of multifaceted approaches. , However, even with
SWISH and mixed-solvents, sampling of some cryptic sites associated
with complex structural rearrangements remains challenging.
Here, we show that neither the original SWISH nor mixed-solvent
MD is always effective in sampling the known cavities forming at a
number of PPI interfaces. Thus, to overcome the limitations of current
strategies, we combine SWISH with a recently developed On-the-fly
Probability Enhanced Sampling (OPES) variant, OPES MultiThermal, to
further enhance the sampling of the slow degrees of freedom linked
to the formation of such cavities. − We test the new method,
which we named SWISH-X (SWISH Expanded), on a relevant and diverse
set of PPIs known to harbor cryptic pockets for which liganded structures
are available. We find that the performance of SWISH-X is significantly
better than those of both the original SWISH and mixed-solvent simulations
for complex systems. We also test the approach on TEM-1 beta-lactamase
(β-lactamase), an established model system for studying cryptic
pockets, and show how it retains the ability to sample the opening
of the nontrivial cryptic cavity of the enzyme. Finally, we propose
a clustering-based protocol for analyzing the resulting trajectories,
which can be applied to study the conformational ensemble of any pocket
structure.

2.

## Methods
In this study, we examined
specific protein–protein interactions
that are regulated by inhibitors. These inhibitors bind to one participant
in the PPI (the target protein), effectively mimicking the role of
the other participant. When selecting target proteins involved in
PPIs, we considered targets for which structural information was available
for the protein in both its unbound and its inhibitor-bound states.
Next, we evaluated the crypticity of the binding site by comparing
the structures of the unbound (apo) and bound (holo) states of the
targets. Overall, four target proteins harboring cryptic pockets at
the protein–protein interface were selected, namely Bcl-XL, IL-2, MDM2, and HPV-11 E2 ( and Supplementary Section 1.1). The opening of these cryptic sites requires different
types of conformational changes, including an increasing number of
lateral chain rotations in the case of IL-2, MDM2, and HPV-11 E2 and
substantial secondary structure changes in the case of Bcl-XL. We also included TEM-1 β-lactamase in our
test set as an additional example of cryptic pocket opening associated
with a well-characterized secondary structure rearrangement. This
enzyme is not involved in any known protein–protein interactions;
therefore, its inclusion increases the diversity of our test set to
both individual proteins and PPIs.
 We investigated the dynamics of the cryptic pocket
harbored by
each selected target protein using different simulation methods ( ). First, we evaluated
the stability of the open configuration of the cryptic pocket by running
three independent unbiased MD simulations in water, each for 500 ns.
The evaluation was performed after removing the ligand from the holo
structure of the target protein, which is hereafter referred to as
the holo-like or open-like state. We then performed three 500 ns long
unbiased MD simulations starting from the apo structure of the protein
- a closed pocket state - in water to test whether unbiased MD is
sufficient to capture the conformational change associated with the
opening of the cryptic site. Finally, we ran mixed-solvent, SWISH
and SWISH-X simulations to assess their capability to retrieve the
open conformation of the cryptic pocket from its closed configuration
and to compare their performance. The details of the different simulation
protocols are outlined in and .
 Additionally, we generated cluster maps to assess
the diverse conformations
of the pockets sampled during the various simulations starting from
the apo structures. The cluster maps were obtained by using a clustering
protocol that comprises three steps: Principal Component Analysis
(PCA), , t-Distributed Stochastic Neighbor Embedding
(t-SNE), and Hierarchical Density-Based
Spatial Clustering of Applications with Noise (HDBSCAN). By clustering the t-SNE space projections with
HDBSCAN, we obtained separate clusters corresponding to different
configurations of the cryptic pocket. We highlighted the region of
t-SNE space sampled by the holo-like simulations with contour kernel
density lines. Cluster points close to or within the contour of the
holo-like configurations generally resembled open configurations of
the cryptic pocket. Distant clusters, on the other hand, corresponded
to different conformations of the pocket, predominantly closed configurations.
Analyzing the resulting cluster maps, in combination with information
on pocket volume, provided insights into how effectively the different
simulations captured physically meaningful conformations of the open
state of the cryptic pocket in each presented protein system. Further
details on system preparation, equilibration strategies, and pocket
analyses presented in this work can be found in Supplementary Section 1.
2.1.

## SWISH Expanded
In previous work,
unbiased simulations captured the opening of known cryptic sites in
several protein targets. When the free
energy associated with cryptic pocket formation is not too high, the
pocket’s opening can be successfully sampled by unbiased simulations
of the unliganded target. However, identifying cryptic binding pockets
can be frustrated by the short time scales accessible through unbiased
MD simulations. The time-scale problem hinders the sampling of conformational
rearrangements with significant activation energy barriers such as
secondary structure changes and interdomain motions.
Enhanced
sampling methods, like SWISH, have proven effective at overcoming
the time-scale limitations of unbiased simulations, and they have
indeed been successful in exposing nontrivial cryptic pockets.
SWISH is a Hamiltonian replica-exchange method that accelerates
the sampling of cryptic pockets. , In a SWISH
simulation, the nonbonded interactions between water molecules and
apolar atoms of the protein are modified by a scaling factor λ.
The corresponding nonbonded component of the potential energy (Unonb) reads
1 where the ww term indicates
water–water interactions, the ws term indicates water–solute
interactions, the ss term indicates solute–solute interactions,
and R represents the system’s coordinates.
For increasing values of λ, water’s properties are
shifted toward higher affinity values for apolar protein atoms. In
doing so, SWISH induces the opening of hydrophobic cavities that can
be later stabilized by organic fragments, if included in the simulation.
Typically, the first replica is not scaled, and increasing lambda
factors are selected for higher replicas. Striking a balance in the
choice of the scaling factor range is crucial, as the highest replica
should display significant fluctuations while preserving the structural
integrity of the protein.
SWISH simulations provide the best
results when they are combined
with a mixed-solvent approach. Organic cosolvent molecules, also due
to their larger molecular size, act to stabilize the pockets induced
by the scaled water–protein interactions at higher λ
factors. Specifically, at higher λ scaling, the water molecules
display a higher affinity for the apolar protein atoms. This increased
affinity facilitates the opening of the cryptic sites. When these
structures are exchanged back to replicas characterized by intermediate
λ factors, the organic probes can now exploit the opening to
bind and further stabilize the cavity. However, even with SWISH simulations in the presence of cosolvent
molecules, the opening of cryptic pockets associated with higher energy
barriers remains challenging. This is primarily because, when the
conformational change is substantial and the associated free energy
cost is high, a slight increase in the interactions between water
molecules and the site is insufficient to sample the formation of
the cryptic cavity within the time scale accessible by MD simulations.
To help overcome the free energy barriers associated with cryptic
pocket formation, we have combined SWISH with OPES MultiThermal and
named this approach SWISH Expanded (SWISH-X). OPES MultiThermal is in a way similar to simulated tempering techniques, − allowing the system to effectively sample a selected temperature
range. By enhancing the system’s potential energy (U) fluctuations, OPES MultiThermal enables the exploration
of a multicanonical ensemble spanning temperatures denoted as Tj, where j spans the defined temperature range [Tmin, Tmax]. The free energy differences
ΔF(Tj) at each temperature point and the bias potential VnMT(U) are iteratively updated.
At step n, they read
2 3 where T indicates
the temperature of the simulation thermostat, and NT indicates the number of intermediate temperatures within
the chosen temperature range. The values of the intermediate temperatures
and NT can be either automatically determined
by OPES MultiThermal or explicitly set by the user. 
The presence of OPES MultiThermal in the SWISH-X
strategy is particularly
useful for accelerating the sampling of those cryptic pockets whose
complex dynamics is associated with relatively high free energy barriers
and cannot be fully captured by regular SWISH simulations. Furthermore,
SWISH-X has no additional computational cost when compared to SWISH.
Determining the optimal temperature range is a crucial parameter to
fine-tune the SWISH-X strategy. It is important to ensure that the
range is broad enough to allow significant sampling without triggering
transitions to higher-energy unfolded states.

2.2.

## Simulation Protocols

## Unbiased MD
All atomistic unbiased molecular dynamics
simulations were performed using the GROMACS 2021.3 software package with the DES-Amber force field in combination with the TIP4P-D water model. The systems were equilibrated in three steps;
refer to Supplementary Section 1.4 for
further details. The final structure obtained from the equilibration
process served as the initial configuration for the MD simulations.
All systems were simulated in the NPT ensemble with periodic boundary
conditions, using the same parameters as in the last equilibration
step. The particle mesh Ewald method was used to account for long-range
electrostatics, with a cutoff of 12 Å. A time step of 2 fs was used for all simulations after constraining
the hydrogen stretching modes using the LINCS algorithm. The simulation times for each system are given
in Table S1. The cumulative simulation
time for all of the systems presented in this work is 36.5 μs.

## Mixed-Solvent MD
All mixed-solvent simulations were
run with GROMACS 2022.3 patched with Plumed 2.9.0. , DES-Amber and TIP4P-D were selected as force field and water model, respectively.
Benzene was used as probe molecule, and the same concentration (1
M) was used for all the presented systems. The choice of benzene was
guided both by the mainly hydrophobic character of the PPI interfaces
and by our previous tests of the performance of various mixed solvents
in revealing different cryptic pockets. The benzene molecules used in the mixed-solvent simulations were
parametrized using Gaussian 16 with the
Amber GAFF-2 force field and RESP charges.
An interprobe repulsive potential was also applied to prevent phase
separation. A link to the benzene parameter
files used is available on GitHub; refer to the . To avoid potential protein unfolding
due to the high concentration of probes, a contact map-based restraint
was applied during the simulation. The optimal upper wall value for
the contact map was determined by examining the fluctuations of the
chosen contacts observed during unbiased simulations. The simulation
parameters and equilibration protocol were consistent with those
used in the unbiased MD simulations. The benzene molecules and the
protein system were assigned to the same temperature coupling group.
The simulation time for each system is given in Table S1.

## SWISH
In this study, all SWISH simulations followed
a standardized protocol. Specifically, we ran six parallel replicas
for each system, with each replica having a different value of the
scaling factor (λ). The scaling factors were uniformly distributed
and ranged from 1.00 (nonscaled replica) to 1.35. Benzene was included
in the simulations as a cosolvent at a concentration of 1 M. The benzene
molecules and the protein system were assigned to the same temperature
coupling group. The simulation parameters, with the exception of 
scaling factors, were consistent with those used in the unbiased MD
simulations. Prior to each production run, six independent equilibration
runs were performed, one for each λ value. We used the same
equilibration protocol as that described for the unbiased MD simulations.
Following the same approach used in the mixed-solvent simulations,
we included a contact map-based restraint to prevent potential unfolding
of the protein in replicas with high scaling factors. The optimal
upper wall value for the contact map was determined by analyzing the
fluctuations in the selected contacts observed during the unbiased
simulations. We used the same benzene parameters as those used in
the mixed solvent MD simulations. A link to a detailed guide on how
to set up a SWISH simulation is available in the . All SWISH simulations were run
with GROMACS 2021.3 patched with Plumed 2.8.0, , the DES-Amber force field, and TIP4P-D
water model. Additional information about
the parameters of the various SWISH simulations presented can be found
in Table S2.

## SWISH-X
The SWISH-X simulations in this paper follow
the same setup as that of the SWISH simulations presented above. Specifically,
we employed the same number of replicas, scaling factors, contact
map upper wall, benzene concentration, and MD setup for each system
here presented. However, in contrast to SWISH, our SWISH-X protocol
includes an OPES MultiThermal component in all six replicas. The selected
temperature range went from the chosen thermostat temperature, 300
K, to 350 K for all systems except for HPV-11 E2, where the highest
temperature was set to 330 K. We followed the same equilibration protocol
as the one used for the SWISH simulations, allowing each replica to
equilibrate at the corresponding λ-biased ensemble. All SWISH-X
simulations were run with GROMACS 2022.3 patched with Plumed 2.9.0. , A link to a detailed guide on how to set up a SWISH-X simulation
is available in the . Additional information about the parameters of the various SWISH-X
simulations presented can be found in Table S2. We provide an example of a successful potential energy exploration
using SWISH-X (via the OPES MultiThermal bias) in Figure S1.

2.3.

## Dimensionality Reduction and Clustering
We devised a clustering protocol based on Principal Component Analysis
(PCA), , t-Distributed Stochastic Neighbor Embedding
(t-SNE), and Hierarchical Density-Based
Spatial Clustering of Applications with Noise (HDBSCAN). We defined all contacts between the center of
mass of each residue within 7 Å of the center of the cryptic
pocket in the corresponding protein reference structure and tracked
their values in each Frame of a given simulation. Contacts were normalized
using a sigmoid function (S) as follows
4 where r denotes
the distance between the center of mass of two residues, r0 was set to 0.8 nm, while n and m were set to 4 and 8, respectively.
Thus, for a given
simulation of m frames, we obtained a matrix of size m × n, where each element represents
a normalized value between 0 and 1 corresponding to the n-th contact. We performed a PCA on this matrix, keeping the first
50 components (obtaining an m × 50 matrix) before
generating the t-SNE embedding. Since t-SNE is sensitive to the local
environment and the data points on which it is trained, we applied
both the PCA and t-SNE transformations to the structures obtained
from open-like and either apo-unbiased, mixed-solvent MD, SWISH-X
or SWISH simulations in order to have a reference for the open state
in t-SNE space.
Specifically, we applied t-SNE in such a way
that it models each
high-dimensional (50 PCA dimensions) data point by a two-dimensional
point so that similar structures are modeled by nearby points and
dissimilar structures are modeled by distant points with high probability.
The holo-like structures of the cryptic site were obtained from the
unbiased MD runs starting from the holo structure of the main cryptic
pocket of the protein under study. The ligands occupying the cryptic
sites in the holo structures were removed before the simulations.
The rationale for this choice is that it should capture not only the
initial fully open conformation of the pockets but also possible semiopen
conformations sampled during the simulation. We have verified that
rerunning the analysis on the ligand-bound structures leads to a similar
description (Supplementary Section 2 and Figure S2).
The structures resulting from the open-like simulations
should
resemble more open-like configurations of the cryptic site, provided
that the pocket remains stable and does not close during the simulation.
We verified this assumption for each system by monitoring the pocket
volume during the unbiased holo-like simulations and selected only
trajectories sampling open-like configurations of the cryptic pocket.
This was not possible for IL-2, but we still included it in the analysis.
The various t-SNE embeddings were obtained with the TNSE package from
scikit-learn version 1.2.2. We used the
default scikit-learn parameters for all of the embeddings.
We
then clustered the various t-SNE projections with HDBSCAN, obtaining
separate clusters that generally correspond to different configurations
of the cryptic pocket. The HDBSCAN algorithm interprets clusters as
regions of increased data density separated by regions of lower density
or noise. In the HDBSCAN framework, a cluster consists of core samples
that are in close proximity to each other and noncore samples that
are in the vicinity of a core sample located at the edge of the cluster.
HDBSCAN’s clustering relies on the interpretation of data
density. Specifically, density is defined primarily by two parameters:
epsilon, a metric for measuring neighborhood distances, and the minimum
number of neighboring data points, within an epsilon distance, required
to designate a point as a core sample. HDBSCAN performs a series of
DBSCAN runs using different epsilons
and consolidates the results to identify a clustering configuration
that optimizes stability across epsilon values. This approach allows
HDBSCAN to detect clusters of different densities, distinguishing
it from DBSCAN and making it more robust to parameter selection.
We tuned the minimum samples parameter to capture high-density
areas in the t-SNE space by testing different values of this parameter.
The minimum number of points in a neighborhood for that area to be
considered a cluster, namely, the minimum cluster size, ranges from
200 to 75 for the systems analyzed. In the clustering procedure, we
only considered data points from either apo-unbiased, mixed-solvent,
SWISH-X or SWISH simulations, excluding data points from the holo-like
unbiased simulations. Ten sample structures from every cluster in
each obtained cluster map can be accessed as a PyMOL session via a
link in the .

3.

## Results
3.1.

## TEM-1 β-Lactamase
TEM-1 β-lactamase
harbors two distinct cryptic pockets, one sandwiched between two alpha
helices and a second one linked to the dynamics of the enzyme’s
Ω-loop ( ). To date, no experimental holo structure
is available for the Ω-loop cryptic site. Therefore, we focused
our analysis solely on the main cryptic cavity of the enzyme.
 We have previously shown that SWISH, in combination
with a 1 M
concentration of benzene cosolvent molecules, successfully samples
the opening of the largest cryptic cavity of TEM-1 β-lactamase. In this study, we ran a new SWISH simulation
and three independent mixed-solvent MD runs starting from a closed
configuration of the cryptic pocket (PDB ID: 1JWP) and compared the
results obtained with the SWISH-X simulations. To evaluate the stability
of the main cryptic cavity of TEM-1 beta-lactamase, we performed three
unbiased simulations of the open-like state of the cryptic site. The
open conformation was obtained by removing the ligand structures from
the holo crystal structure of TEM-1 (PDB ID: 1PZO).
The change
in the volume of the main cryptic site is shown in g. Only one of the
three unbiased simulations starting from the open-like configuration
(unliganded PDB ID: 1PZO) predominantly explored open configurations of the cryptic site,
with a median pocket exposure of 64%. In contrast, the other two unbiased
simulations mostly sampled semiopen or closed states of the cryptic
site (Figure S3). The control unbiased
simulation of the apo state (PDB ID: 1JWP) in water confirmed the stability of
the closed state, as also indicated by the time profile of the pocket’s
exposure (Figure S3).
Similarly,
our mixed-solvent MD simulations predominantly sampled
closed-like and semiopen configurations of the pocket during most
of the simulations (median exposure of 37.6%), with holo-like configurations
becoming more prevalent at longer simulation times. The sampling obtained
with SWISH indicates a limited exploration of the pocket’s
open state, with a median site exposure of 25.5%. The shorter sampling
times explain, at least in part, the more limited cavity opening observed
compared to our previous study. In contrast,
the SWISH-X simulation is characterized by a higher median exposure
(52.7%), which is similar to the value obtained from the holo-like
unbiased simulation that mostly explored open configurations of the
cryptic site (64%, Figure S3).
When
comparing the individual SWISH and SWISH-X replicas ( h), the SWISH-X simulation
consistently displays a significantly higher volume of the cryptic
pocket in all but one replica, suggesting a better sampling of its
open conformation. This further indicates how a single SWISH-X simulation,
with 250 ns per replica, is sufficient to capture the significant
conformational changes associated with the opening of the cryptic
site.
The significant difference in the sampling efficiency
between SWISH
and SWISH-X prompted us to further investigate the role of the temperature
in aiding the opening of TEM-1’s main cryptic site. We therefore
tested two additional OPES MultiThermal tempering schemes (Supplementary Section 3). The results show that
allowing each replica to sample the same temperature range of 300–350
K gives the best results. Instead, if the temperature range sampled
by each replica is either incrementally increased, forcing lower replicas
to sample a lower temperature range, or globally broadened toward
lower temperature values (from 300 to 350 K to 280–350 K),
the median pocket exposure decreases to 33% and 38%, respectively
(Figure S4).
To better investigate
the different conformations sampled during
the various simulations, we performed a cluster map analysis on all
of the resulting trajectories. We identified several clusters corresponding
to different configurations of the cryptic pocket’s opening
state. The results of the apo unbiased, mixed-solvent MD, SWISH-X,
and SWISH simulations are shown in and Figure S5a.
 In the SWISH-X simulation, clusters near the contour
of the open-like
configurations typically resemble open configurations of the cryptic
pocket. This observation is further supported by the average percentage
of exposure of the cryptic site for the structures in these clusters
( a). Additionally,
when the t-SNE cluster map is colored by RMSD values with respect
to the holo crystal, multiple clusters characterized by both high
pocket exposure values and low RMSD values can be identified (clusters
10, 14, 18, 19, and 22 in a and Figure S6c). These
clusters correspond to crystal-like configurations sampled during
the SWISH-X simulation.
In contrast, distant clusters generally
correspond to different
configurations of the pocket, mostly closed ones, thus being associated
with higher RMSD values. Similarly, the mixed-solvent simulations
successfully sampled the open configuration of the enzyme’s
cryptic pocket ( b and Figure S6b). Although the cluster
map of the SWISH simulation allowed us to identify open configurations
of the cryptic site, these configurations were less populated than
those obtained from the mixed-solvent and SWISH-X simulations ( ).
Finally,
we investigated how long the different simulation strategies
take to sample an open crystal-like configuration of the cryptic pocket
(Supplementary Section 4 and Table S4).
Remarkably, SWISH-X sampled a crystal-like configuration of the enzyme’s
cryptic site in less than 25 ns, whereas both our mixed-solvent and
SWISH simulations achieved this much later, at 180 and 95 ns, respectively.

3.2.

## Bcl-XL
We prepared and simulated two different structures of Bcl-XL, an apo (PDB ID: 1R2D) and a holo-like conformation obtained
from the inhibitor-bound crystal (PDB ID: 4C52). The superposition of the two states
clearly shows how the binding of the small molecule exposes a cryptic
pocket that is not detectable in the ligand-free state ( a-f). The exposure of the cryptic
pocket requires distinct structural rearrangements within the binding
region. These rearrangements include the movement and partial unfolding
of a two-turn α-helix, along with the reorientation of residues
Tyr45, Phe49, and Phe90 that together effectively reveal a deeper
cavity.
 We began by assessing the stability of the holo-like
(PDB ID: 4C52) state of the cryptic
pocket in its ligand-free configuration. The resulting pocket’s
exposure profiles clearly indicate a metastable conformation of the
cryptic site with a median exposure of 29% ( g and Figure S7). A careful examination of these trajectories revealed that the
larger groove of the pocket remained stable and retained a configuration
similar to that of the holo crystal, suggesting a high energy barrier
associated with the movement of the α helix. In contrast, the
deeper cavity of the pocket rapidly closed in all simulations due
to the unfavorable, solvent-exposed conformation of Phe90 in the absence
of the inhibitor.
To confirm that the closed conformation of
the pocket is the most
stable in the absence of the ligand, we conducted three independent
unbiased simulations, each lasting 500 ns, starting from the apo conformation
(PDB ID: 1R2D). As expected, none of the two conformational changes required to
expose the cryptic pocket were sampled in these simulations, confirming
the presence of a high energy barrier associated with the formation
of the cavity ( g and Figure S7). Similarly, our three
independent mixed-solvent MD runs, with a total cumulative simulation
time of 1.5 μs, were unsuccessful in sampling the opening of
the cryptic site. The obtained pocket exposure profiles are in line
with those of the apo configuration in water, with the exception of
one of the replicas (Figure S7). This specific
replica, namely replica 1, partially sampled the movement of the α-helix
necessary to reveal the cavity within 300 ns. However, we did not
observe the flip of Phe90 required to expose the deeper subpocket.
Subsequently, we ran a SWISH simulation (6 replicas, 250 ns each)
to attempt to recover the open state starting from a closed pocket
conformation. The SWISH simulation only partially revealed Bcl-XL’s hidden cavity, as indicated by
the obtained exposure profiles (Figure S7). Notably, scaling the protein–water interactions yielded
significantly better results when compared with the unscaled mixed-solvent
MD simulations. This can also be observed in the violin plots of the
individual SWISH replicas ( h), which show how higher scaling factors aided the
sampling of open-like configurations of the cryptic site.
We
therefore tried to recover the open conformation of Bcl-XL’s cryptic pocket by running a SWISH-X
simulation (1.5 μs of cumulative sampling time). The results
showed a significant improvement in the sampling of the cryptic cavity,
with a median site exposure of 35.4%. The comparison of the volume
profiles of each individual replica of both the SWISH and SWISH-X
simulations highlights how SWISH-X effectively samples the opening
of the cryptic site, whereas SWISH fails to do so ( h).
The cluster map analysis
of all resulting trajectories confirms
that only SWISH-X effectively samples holo-like states of the cryptic
cavity ( and Figure S5e). One cluster, in particular, explores
a region of the conformational space similar to the one explored by
the open-like simulations ( a). The median pocket exposure of this cluster, namely,
cluster 11, is 69.6%. Moreover, when visualizing the same t-SNE cluster
map by RMSD values, calculated with respect to the holo crystal, cluster
11 displays a median RMSD of 1.6 Å (Figure S6g). These observations indicate that cluster 11 is populated
with structures that closely resemble the holo crystal structure.
 A similar analysis of the configurations obtained
from the mixed-solvent
MD simulations confirms that the pocket’s opening is not sampled
( b). This is
further supported by visualizing the RMSD values for each pocket configuration
in the different cluster maps (Figure S6f). All clusters from our mixed-solvent simulations are characterized
by high RMSD values and low pocket exposure values, consistent with
the sampling of predominately apo-like configurations of the cryptic
site. Similarly, the SWISH simulation mainly sampled closed configurations
of Bcl-XL’s cryptic pocket ( c and Figure S6h). Nevertheless, it was possible to
identify two clusters, namely, clusters 1 and 2, that have a median
pocket exposure of 69.7% and 93.3% and a median RMSD value of 2.5
and 2.4 Å, respectively. While the structures belonging to these
clusters can be considered similar to the holo crystal, their number
is significantly lower compared to the ones in cluster 11 from our
SWISH-X simulation.
The analysis of the opening times confirmed
that SWISH-X and SWISH
are the only two sampling strategies that successfully sample the
full opening of Bcl-XL’s cryptic
site (Supplementary Section 4 and Table S4). SWISH-X sampled holo-like states (with
RMSD < 2 Å) with pocket exposure values of at least 60% and
80%, within 57 ns of simulation. To explore similar configurations
of the pocket, SWISH required 227 ns of simulation. On the contrary,
our mixed solvent simulations reach a crystal-like state with a pocket
exposure of at least 60% in 214 ns but fail to sample a structure
with an exposure of 80% and an RMSD < 2 Å.

3.3.

## Other PPI Sytems

## IL-2
IL-2 is a well-characterized model system harboring
a cryptic binding pocket at its PPi interface. The opening of the
cryptic site reveals a binding groove that is not detectable in the
apo IL-2 crystal (Figure S8a-e). In our
MD simulations of apo IL-2, we mainly sampled closed conformations
of the cryptic pocket ( a and Figure S9). Furthermore,
simulations starting from unliganded open conformations obtained from
the holo IL-2 crystal (PDB ID: 1PY2) also predominantly explored apo-like
conformations, with the pocket promptly closing in all replicas ( a and Figure S9).
 On the other hand, our mixed-solvent MD runs successfully
captured
the open conformation of the cryptic cavity with a median exposure
of 74.3% ( a
and Figure S9). These results are consistent
with previous studies , and confirm how mixed-solvent
MD is effective in sampling superficial cryptic sites that do not
require major conformational rearrangements to expose the cavity.
As previously reported, SWISH can successfully sample the opening
of the cryptic pocket of IL-2. This was
further confirmed by our new SWISH simulation, resulting in a median
pocket exposure of 69% ( a and Figure S9). The results are
comparable to those obtained with the mixed-solvent MD simulations.
We ran a SWISH-X simulation to determine whether the temperature
fluctuations could accelerate the sampling of this cryptic pocket
or access different open-like states. Interestingly, SWISH-X sampled
lower volume configurations of the cryptic site with a median exposure
of 61% ( a and Figure S9). This is due to the fact that scaling
the temperature not only favors open configurations of the pocket
but also increases the transition rate between open and closed configurations.
This effect is especially pronounced at lower scaling factors, where
unscaled water molecules do not stabilize open cavity configurations,
whereas higher scaling factors tend to favor and stabilize open configurations
of the cryptic site.
We plotted the sampled configurations from
the apo unbiased, mixed-solvent
MD, SWISH and SWISH-X simulations in their respective t-SNE spaces
(Figures S5–S6i-l). Both the apo-
and holo-like unbiased simulations sampled the same region of configurational
space, indicating a predominantly closed conformation of the pocket.
The clusters obtained from the mixed-solvent MD, SWISH and SWISH-X
trajectories are similar in all cases, with the majority of the structures
corresponding to open-like configurations of the cryptic site. The
characteristic cryptic site opening time was comparable in all the
simulations we ran, with complete crystal like openings happening
within 5 ns of each simulation (Supplementary Section 4 and Table S4).

## MDM2
We assessed the stability of the open state of
the cryptic pocket using unbiased MD simulations of the holo-like
structure (Figure S8f-j) in water, revealing
a stable pocket with median exposure of 74% ( b). However, despite three 500 ns MD simulations
starting from the closed conformation of the cryptic cavity (Figure S10), we did not observe a consistent
opening of the cryptic pocket ( b and Figure S10).
We then performed mixed-solvent MD, SWISH and SWISH-X simulations
to attempt to recover the open conformation of the cryptic pocket
from its closed configuration. The results of the mixed-solvent simulations
are consistent with a good sampling of MDM2’s cryptic site
(median exposure of 81.3%, b and Figure S10). These
results are in good agreement with previous studies that also managed
to expose this pocket with different probe molecules. , In the case of SWISH and SWISH-X simulations, the structure of the
protein unfolded at the highest lambda value (1.35). We therefore
excluded this replica from the analyses. In the remaining five replicas
of both SWISH and SWISH-X simulations, we observed a good sampling
of the open conformation of the cryptic site, with exposure values
of 85% and 85.1%, respectively ( b and Figure S10).
The results of the cluster map analysis confirmed our previous
observations. The clusters obtained from the apo simulations mostly
corresponded to closed conformations of the pocket (Figure S5m). In contrast, in the cluster maps obtained from
mixed-solvent SWISH-X and SWISH simulations, we observed clusters
primarily containing open-like configurations of the cryptic site
(Figure S5n-p).
Notably, different
open conformations of the original pocket were
sampled during the SWISH-X simulation, as indicated by the RMSD values
in the corresponding t-SNE space (Figures S5–S6o). We observed a number of states in which the protein displayed
new cavities and exposed larger sites and tunnels originating from
the original location of the cryptic site (Figure S11). This was also observed, to a lesser extent, in the SWISH
simulation. Sampling higher temperatures plays an important role in
accessing these states, although only experiment can verify whether
they are an artifact of the simulations or actually physical and accessible
states in the presence of the right ligand.
When comparing the
opening times of MDM2’s cryptic site,
SWISH-X was able to sample open, crystal-like conformations of the
pocket within 2 ns of simulation (Supplementary Section 4 and Table S4). In contrast,
mixed-solvent MD and SWISH sampled configurations similar to the holo
crystal in 22 and 8 ns, respectively.

## HPV-11 E2
The opening of HPV-11 E2’s cryptic
pocket is associated with the motion of the side chains of three residues,
namely, Tyr19, His32, and Leu94, in the protein’s interdomain
hinge region (Figure S8k-o). As the exposure
of the pocket requires minor side chain rearrangements, the open state
was extensively sampled also during all the unbiased simulations starting
from the apo state ( c and Figure S12). Similar results
were obtained for the holo-like simulations, indicating that the residues
lining the cryptic pocket can sample both open and closed conformations
during unbiased MD simulations, independently of the initial pocket
state. These results suggest that the opening of this pocket is associated
with a low energetic barrier and indicate how, in some cases, unbiased
simulations in water are sufficient to reveal targetable cryptic cavities.
This is consistent with previous findings suggesting that short MD
simulations can reveal hidden binding sites. 
We ran exploratory mixed-solvent MD, SWISH and SWISH-X simulations
to determine if we could sample different open conformations other
than the crystallographic one. The resulting pocket exposure profiles
showed a slightly higher median exposure along the mixed-solvent,
SWISH and SWISH-X simulations compared to the apo- and holo-like simulations
( c and Figure S12). By analyzing the cluster maps, colored
by RMSD and pocket exposure values, of the mixed-solvent MD, SWISH
and SWISH-X simulations, we identified structures with larger pocket
volume (Figures S5–S6r-t). This
is likely due to the presence of stabilizing benzene cosolvent molecules
during these simulations.
To a lesser extent, similarly large
pocket volume values for the
cryptic site were obtained in both holo-like and apo simulations.
This indicates that unbiased MD is sufficient to successfully sample
the full dynamics of HPV-11 E2’s cryptic site. Interestingly,
for this relatively easy case, SWISH-X and mixed-solvent MD provided
comparable sampling times of holo-like configurations of HPV-11 E2’s
cryptic site, achieving site exposure in 4 and 5.2 ns, respectively
(Supplementary Section 4 and Figure S4).

4.

## Discussion
We investigated the dynamics
associated with the opening of druggable
cryptic cavities at protein–protein interfaces in four challenging
systems as well as in the single protein TEM-1 β-lactamase.
Our results show that SWISH-X effectively exposes the cryptic pockets
of all systems presented and offers a significant speedup compared
to the other methods tested, especially for more challenging cases
such as TEM-1 β-lactamase and Bcl-XL.
In agreement with previous studies, , , mixed-solvent simulations proved to be effective
in revealing superficial cryptic cavities, where the opening is primarily
characterized by loop movements and side chain motions. On the other
hand, in complex systems such as TEM-1 β-lactamase, mixed-solvent
MD simulations only partially succeed in sampling the structural rearrangements
associated with the opening of the cryptic cavity. SWISH, used in
combination with probe molecules, requires longer sampling times to
effectively explore the helix displacement necessary to reveal the
cryptic site of the enzyme.
Moreover, in systems characterized
by complex conformational changes
and higher energy barriers, both mixed-solvent MD and SWISH fail to
fully sample the opening of the cryptic cavity. In the case of Bcl-XL, only the SWISH-X simulation accurately
captures the opening of the cryptic site, successfully sampling the
backbone motion and side chain reorientation required to expose the
cavity. Additionally, the results obtained for TEM-1 β-lactamase
show that SWISH-X not only successfully exposes the enzyme’s
cryptic pocket but does so in significantly less simulation time compared
to SWISH and mixed-solvent MD.
In general, mixed-solvent MD
simulations should be effective in
revealing cryptic sites for systems where the opening of the cavity
is primarily governed by an induced-fit mechanism or a conformational
selection mechanism associated with a low energy barrier. However,
mixed-solvent MD is not expected to work as well in systems where
the formation of the cryptic site follows a conformational selection
mechanism characterized by a substantial energy barrier. In these
cases, the conformational change becomes the time-limiting step that
dictates the opening of the pocket. Simulation methods that do not
accelerate the crossing of such kinetic barriers fail to successfully
sample the transitions needed to open the cryptic pocket within
a reasonable simulation time. On the other hand, methods such as SWISH-X,
which lower kinetic barriers independently of the underlying mechanism,
successfully accelerate the sampling of such conformational changes.
Interestingly, in the context of PPIs, conformational selection
appears to play an important role in revealing interface binding sites. This further supports the use of SWISH-X as
an effective tool for discovering novel cryptic sites at the PPI interfaces.
Additionally, when searching for cryptic sites at PPI interfaces,
SWISH-X is completely interface-agnostic. This means that our approach
can be easily applied to individual partner proteins, eliminating
the need for a structure of the PPI complex. However, if the interaction
interface is known, then this additional information can be used to
enhance the conformational sampling of the interface region by specifically
scaling the water interactions with the residues at the PPI interface
or by enhancing the sampling of specific degrees of freedom.
Furthermore, in the case of cryptic pockets, where both induced-fit
and conformational selection mechanisms play a role in their formation,
the combination of SWISH-X with various mixed solvents should provide
a powerful strategy for revealing the cavities.
As mentioned
above, the exploratory capacity of SWISH-X must be
controlled to avoid partial or complete unfolding of the target protein.
In this respect, the choice of molecular probes, their concentration,
the temperature range, and the λ window play an important role.
Regarding the temperature range, our tests indicate that 300–350
K should work in most systems. In terms of probes, benzene tends to
expose most of the hydrophobic cavities. For other pockets, different
probes will be more efficient, as has been shown extensively in the
mixed solvent simulation literature. , Finally, it
is advisible to use a restraint (upper wall) on the contact map of
the protein.
We conclude that for the detection of novel cryptic
pockets, both
on single proteins and at PPI interfaces, especially when little is
known about their structure and energetics, the use of a combined
and generally applicable method such as SWISH-X might be very beneficial.
Finally, we provide analysis tools to generate structure-based
cluster maps from the simulations. The cluster maps capture different
pocket configurations and identify holo-like structures along trajectories
that start from an apo state of the target protein. The insights gained
from these cluster maps should facilitate the use of the simulation
data in subsequent virtual screening pipelines for drug discovery.

## Acknowledgments
We acknowledge PRACE and the
Swiss National Supercomputing
Centre (CSCS) for large supercomputer time allocations on Piz Daint,
project IDs: s1169, s1228. We acknowledge the Swiss National Science
Foundation and Bridge for financial support (projects number: 200021_204795,
CRSII5_216587, and 40B2-0_203628). We thank Ioannis Galdadas for carefully
reading the manuscript and helpful discussions. We also thank Prof.
Francesca Spyrakis for her valuable support throughout this project.

## Data Availability Statement
SWISH-X is implemented
in PLUMED, from version 2.8 onward, in
combination with GROMACS. The input files
to replicate all the simulations are available on PLUMED NEST. SWISH-X tutorial: https://github.com/Gervasiolab/Gervasio-Protein-Dynamics/tree/master/swishX_bootcamp. The benzene parameters can be found at: https://github.com/Gervasiolab/Gervasio-Protein-Dynamics/tree/master/swishX_bootcamp/fragments/. SWISH tutorial: https://github.com/Gervasiolab/Gervasio-Protein-Dynamics/tree/master/swish_bootcamp. The presented cryptic pockets are available at: https://github.com/Gervasiolab/Gervasio-Protein-Dynamics/tree/master/swish_expanded/cryptic_pockets. Example structures from each t-SNE cluster map are available at: https://github.com/Gervasiolab/Gervasio-Protein-Dynamics/tree/master/swish_expanded/cluster_maps_structures. All data supporting the findings of this study are available on
request. Example Jupyter Notebooks employed for the analysis of the
presented data are available at: https://github.com/Gervasiolab/Gervasio-Protein-Dynamics/tree/master/swish_expanded/.

## Supporting Information Available
The Supporting
Information is
available free of charge at https://pubs.acs.org/doi/10.1021/acs.jctc.3c01318.
Example of potential energy fluctuations during a SWISH-X
simulation; details on system selection, preparation and pocket detection;
further details on the simulation protocol; impact of the initial
data on t-SNE embeddings; additional information on cumulative simulation
times for each system; some enhanced sampling parameters used in the
simulations; exposure profiles of the various cryptic pockets along
different simulations; effect of different tempering schemes on SWISH-X
simulations; t-SNE RMSD and volume maps of the different cryptic pockets;
opening times of cryptic sites under various simulation strategies;
additional structural information on some of the cryptic pockets presented
(PDF)

The
authors
declare no competing financial interest.

## Supplementary Material
ct3c01318_si_001.pdf

## References
 

## Associated Data

## Supplementary Materials
ct3c01318_si_001.pdf

## Data Availability Statement
SWISH-X is implemented
in PLUMED, from version 2.8 onward, in
combination with GROMACS. The input files
to replicate all the simulations are available on PLUMED NEST. SWISH-X tutorial: https://github.com/Gervasiolab/Gervasio-Protein-Dynamics/tree/master/swishX_bootcamp. The benzene parameters can be found at: https://github.com/Gervasiolab/Gervasio-Protein-Dynamics/tree/master/swishX_bootcamp/fragments/. SWISH tutorial: https://github.com/Gervasiolab/Gervasio-Protein-Dynamics/tree/master/swish_bootcamp. The presented cryptic pockets are available at: https://github.com/Gervasiolab/Gervasio-Protein-Dynamics/tree/master/swish_expanded/cryptic_pockets. Example structures from each t-SNE cluster map are available at: https://github.com/Gervasiolab/Gervasio-Protein-Dynamics/tree/master/swish_expanded/cluster_maps_structures. All data supporting the findings of this study are available on
request. Example Jupyter Notebooks employed for the analysis of the
presented data are available at: https://github.com/Gervasiolab/Gervasio-Protein-Dynamics/tree/master/swish_expanded/.