pmcToxicol RepToxicol Rep3294toxrepsToxicology Reports2214-7500ElsevierPMC12063143PMC12063143.112063143120631434035324610.1016/j.toxrep.2025.102033S2214-7500(25)00151-91020331ArticleImmune checkpoint inhibitors: From friend to foe
RajakPremprem.rjk@gmail.comprem.rajak@knu.ac.inToxicology Research Laboratory, Department of Animal Science, Kazi Nazrul University, Asansol, West Bengal, India620252442025144783711020333011202418420252042025240420250905202512052025© 2025 The Authors2025https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/).Immune checkpoints are crucial in regulating the activation of cell-mediated and humoral immune responses. However, cancer cells hijack this mechanism to evade the immune surveillance and anti-cancer response. Typically, receptors like PD-1 and CTLA4, expressed on immune cells, prevent the activation and differentiation of T cells. They also inhibit the development of autoimmune reactions. However, ligands such as PD-L1 for the receptor PD-1 are also expressed on the surface of cancer cells that help prevent the activation of anti-cancer immune responses by blocking the signalling pathways mediated by PD-1 and CTLA4. Immune checkpoint inhibitors (ICIs) have promising therapeutic efficacy for treating several cancers by activating T cells and their differentiation into effector cells against tumours. Nonetheless, hyperactivated immune cells usually contribute to detrimental issues, also known as immune-related adverse effects (IrAE). IrAEs have been observed in multiple organs, leading to neurological issues, colitis, endocrine dysfunction, renal issues, hepatitis, pneumonitis, and dermatitis. The interplay between hyperactivated T cells and Treg cells helps in orchestrating the development of autoimmunity. Moreover, the crosstalk between proinflammatory interleukins and the development of autoantibodies also mediates the multiorgan effects of ICIs in cancer patients. IrAEs are generally managed by terminating the ICI therapy, reducing the ICI dose, and by using corticosteroids to subvert inflammation. Therefore, the present review aims to delineate the impacts of ICIs on the development of autoimmune diseases and inflammatory outcomes in cancer patients. In addition, mechanistic insight involving immune cells, cytokines, and autoantibodies for ICI-mediated IrAEs will also be discussed with updated findings in this field.

## Graphical Abstract
 

## Highlights
Immune checkpoint inhibitors (ICIs) suppress PD-1,l/PD-L1 and CTLA-4 signalling to induce anti-cancer response.
An exacerbated immune response may ignite immune-related adverse effects (IrAEs), injuring the organs.
Elevated cytokine levels, development of autoantibodies, and cytotoxicity lead to organ damage.
Termination of ICI therapy and treatment with corticosteroids could help minimise IrAEs.
Search for comparatively safe ICIs is warranted for better treatment against cancer.

## Keywords
Immune checkpoint inhibitorsAuto-immunityInflammationRheumatoid arthritisImmune-related adverse effectspmc-status-qastatus0pmc-status-liveyespmc-status-embargonopmc-status-releasedyespmc-prop-open-accessyespmc-prop-olfnopmc-prop-manuscriptnopmc-prop-legally-suppressednopmc-prop-has-pdfyespmc-prop-has-supplementnopmc-prop-pdf-onlynopmc-prop-suppress-copyrightnopmc-prop-is-real-versionnopmc-prop-is-scanned-articlenopmc-prop-preprintnopmc-prop-in-epmcyespmc-license-refCC BY-NC-NDHandling Editor: Prof. L.H. Lash
1

## Introduction
Immune checkpoints are critical regulatory mediators that control the activation of immune cells and autoimmunity to block detrimental impacts on their own cells and organs. However, cancer cells exploit this mechanism to block anti-cancer effects and favour their growth and metastasis. Programmed cell death-1 (PD-1) is an important receptor and a key component of the immune checkpoint expressed in the immune cells, particularly in the T cells. The receptor suppresses the inactivation of T cells and, therefore, regulates the entire immune homeostasis. Structurally, the PD-1 is a transmembrane receptor composed of an extracellular IgV-like domain, a transmembrane domain, and an intracellular immunoreceptor tyrosine-based inhibitory motif. Programmed cell death-Ligand 1 (PD-L1) is a protein ligand expressed on the surface of antigen-presenting cells such as dendritic cells and macrophages. However, cancer cells can also express PD-L1 to control the activation of immune cells. Interaction of PD-L1 with PD-1 results in the inhibition of T cell activation and prevention of autoimmune disease by maintaining self-tolerance. Cancer cells also take advantage of this system by expressing the PD-L1 on their surface and suppressing the activation of immune response against them. Thus, this outcome favours immune suppression for the progression of the tumor environment. Deletion of PD or PD-L1 results in several health effects at later stages of life. These adverse effects range from cardiomyopathy to arthritis .
Similar to PD-1, cytotoxic T-lymphocyte-associated protein 4 (CTLA-4) is a crucial component of the immune checkpoint that governs the activation of T cells. CTLA-4 is a transmembrane receptor with an extracellular, transmembrane and intracellular domain. This receptor is specifically expressed on immune cells like regulatory T cells (Treg), activator T cells, dendritic cells, and macrophages. Ligands for CTLA-4 include B7–1 (CD80) and B7–2 (CD86). Interaction between the ligand and protein triggers a signalling cascade that results to the inactivation of T cells and immune response. Cancer cells also hijack this pathway to suppress anti-cancer immune activation to favour cancer progression and metastasis.
Therefore, targeting the immune checkpoints offers a promising therapeutic strategy to control tumour development and progression. In light of this, several immune checkpoint blockers (ICB) have been developed to target cancer progression. ICBs such as nivolumab and pembrolizumab have been synthesized to target PD-1, while other ICBs such as atezolizumab and durvalumab have been designed to target PD-L1. All of these ICBs block the interactions between PD-1 and PD-L1 to activate T cells and an effective anti-cancer immune response. ICBs like ipilimumab target CTLA-4 and prevent T cell inactivation. By triggering the activation of T cells, ICBs have shown promising results as therapeutic agents to treat various types of cancers, such as melanoma, lung cancer, renal cancer, and lymphoma. Clinical trials have improved overall survival and response rates compared to conventional chemotherapy. The efficiency of ICBs may be enhanced when combined with other traditional therapeutic strategies.
Despite several therapeutic benefits, ICBs can induce immune-related adverse effects (IrAEs), such as the onset of inflammation and autoimmune diseases. More specifically, ICBs may promote dermatitis, colitis, hepatitis, lung inflammation, and nephritis. Other toxicity, such as inflammation in the nervous system, endocrine glands, and the gastrointestinal system, can also be promoted by hyperactivated immune response following treatment with ICBs. Of note, fetal toxicity can be associated with 0.4–1.2 % of cases . Blocking PD-1 or PD-L1 by different agents in clinically relevant doses can produce high-grade toxicity in 10–15 % of patients. However, the figure may exceed 38.6 and 57.9 % in cancer patients, when CTLA-4 is blocked by ipilimumab at doses of 3 mg/kg or 10 mg/kg, respectively . ICB-mediated IrAE usually occurs during the first three months of treatment. However, the adverse immune effects may also occur several months after the therapy ends . Organs more severely impacted include the liver, skin, kidney, and gastrointestinal tract. Pre-existing autoimmunity in joints and the thyroid also worsens the effects of IrAE. Therefore, careful observation and management of ICB-mediated IrAEs are inevitable for effective treatment of cancer. In addition, research focusing on identifying biomarkers of ICB-induced toxicity and developing strategies for effective management is currently warranted. Exploring new targets such as TIGIT, TIM-3, and LAG-3 can overcome the resistance and help minimize existing toxicities. The development of ICI-mediated IrAEs can result in the termination of immunotherapy in patients. In some cases, overstimulated immune responses can be treated with a suppressant or corticosteroid. However, the application of immunosuppressants can interfere with the anti-tumour responses of the immune system. However, in some cases, patients may become unresponsive to the steroid treatment, resulting in chronic disease. In these patients, lifelong therapy with immunosuppressants and hormones may be required as treatment measures .
Hence, the present review aims to discuss the latest advancements in ICIs and their application in cancer treatment. The present study also delineates the IrAEs and their biomarkers following treatment with ICIs in cancer patients. Moreover, an underlying mechanism for the onset of IrAEs following ICI-administration in cancer patients will also be illuminated.

2

## Literature search strategy
Scientific databases such as Scopus and PubChem were employed to search the relevant literature for qualitative synthesis of the present review. Search terms like “immune checkpoint inhibitors and immune-related adverse effects”, “immune checkpoint inhibitors and cutaneous toxicity”, “immune checkpoint inhibitors and colitis”, “immune checkpoint inhibitors and neurotoxicity”, “immune checkpoint inhibitors and endocrine dysfunction”, “immune checkpoint inhibitors and myocarditis”, “immune checkpoint inhibitors and rheumatological issues”, “immune checkpoint inhibitors and pulmonary toxicity”, “immune checkpoint inhibitors and autoantibody and cytokines”, “immune checkpoint inhibitors and immune-related adverse effects and biomarkers” were used. Relevant articles were screened based on title and abstract. Only relevant articles were accessed and used for the qualitative synthesis of the review. Articles like encyclopaedia, editorials, letter to the editor, and viewpoints were not considered for inclusion. Only the articles published in English were taken into the consideration.

3

## Interplay between ICIs and IrAEs
Monoclonal antibodies like nivolumab, dostarlimab, cemiplimab, and pembrolizumab are the ICIs for the PD-1, expressed on the T cells. Other monoclonal antibodies, such as avelumab, durvalumab, and atezolizumab, function as inhibitors for the PD-L1 expressed on the cell surface of the antigen-presenting cells as well as cancer cells. Ipilimumab acts as the ICI of the CTLA-4. Interactions between immune checkpoint mediators are essential to regulate T cell activation and prevent autoimmunity. However, binding of ICI with the receptors and their ligands could break the interactions and signalling pathways, leading to the activation of T cells and the immune response. This immune response also plays a critical role in blocking cancer progression and metastasis. However, ICI-mediated hyperactivation of the immune response and hyperinflammation could be detrimental to the self-organisms, causing the IrAEs. Studies have suggested a positive correlation between the therapeutic responses and the incidence of IrAEs. Sometimes, the ICI-mediated antitumor activities and onset of autoimmune response can be mechanistically linked to each other. For instance, the occurrence of an autoimmune reaction against the melanocytes can be a reliable indicator of antitumor activity in patients with melanoma . Targeting certain proinflammatory cytokines, such as IL6, implicated in ICI-mediated autoimmune response, can be effective to minimize anti-host responses of the hyperactivated immune system .
It is worth mentioning that IrAE can be influenced by both tumor-related and tumor-independent factors. In a patient suffering from hepatocellular carcinoma, treatment with nivolumab resulted in the onset of insulin-dependent diabetes and ketoacidosis. However, the patient did not have any earlier history of diabetes . Similar onset of autoimmune diabetes mellitus in patients with lung cancer has also been found after treatment with nivolumab. The development of islet autoantibodies might have a critical role in such immune-linked adverse outcomes . Generally, the ICI for CTLA-4 is also associated with the development of skin rashes, colitis, and hypophysitis. However, in the case of inhibitors for PD-1 and PD- L1, the most common adverse outcomes have been reported to be thyroid issues and pneumonia. Therefore, the combined adverse effects of CTLA-4 and PD-1/PD-L1 are commonly attributed to the endocrine and cutaneous issues . Studies have suggested that the development of IrAE can be governed by several factors, such as age, gender, existing autoimmune diseases, and the type of ICI used .
Due to the possibilities of adverse outcomes, only 20–40 % of the patients benefit from the treatment employing various ICIs. In comparison, around 40 % of these patients suffer from auto-immune related side effects, mainly associated with rheumatological, hepatic, cardiac, and gastrointestinal ailments , , . Therefore, PD-1 and CTLA-4 play a critical role in maintaining peripheral tolerance and suppression of autoimmunity and exacerbated inflammatory responses. However, implications of various ICIs either in suppression of the PD-1-mediated signaling or blockage of the CTLA-4 functions could propagate to the manifestation of IrAEs. Therefore, in cancer patients, the development of adverse effects in multiple organs is suggestive of a strong correlation between the use of ICI and the IrAEs ( ). 

4

## ICIs and their targets
PD-1 is a major protein in the immune checkpoint that belongs to the type I transmembrane glycoprotein. It contains a single extracellular domain, a transmembrane domain, and a cytoplasmic domain. The cytoplasmic domain of PD-1 has an immunoreceptor tyrosine-based switch motif (ITSM) and an immunoreceptor tyrosine-based inhibitory motif (ITIM) . PD-1 is generally expressed on activated T cells. However, they can also be found in myeloid cells, neutrophils, dendritic cells, and natural killer cells. The predominant ligand for PD-1 is PD-L1 and is found in T cells, mast cells, macrophages, B cells, and dendritic cells. When PD-L1 binds to its receptor PD-1, the ITSM and ITIM get phosphorylated at their tyrosine residues, leading to the recruitment of Src homology 2 domain-containing tyrosine phosphatase 2 (SHP2). The activated PD-1 forms clusters with the T cells receptor and triggers dephosphorylation of the T cells receptor leading to suppression in T cells activation. SHP-2 dephosphorylates the downstream signalling molecules such as ZAP70, PI3K, and Ras, resulting in the downregulation of AP-1, NFAT, and NF-κB, which are involved in the activation of T cell receptors, proliferation, and functions of effector cells. This pathway can be hijacked by tumour cells expressing PD-L1 to evade immune surveillance.
Monoclonal antibodies have been developed to block the PD-1/PD-L1 pathway to induce an anti-cancer immune response. Nivolumab was the first anti-PD-1 monoclonal antibody that was approved by FDA against metastatic melanoma due to high survival rates . Later, another monoclonal antibody, such as pembrolizumab, was developed as an anti-PD-1 agent to treat advanced melanoma due to its manageable IrAE. Other anti-PD-1 antibodies include toripalimab, dostarlimab, and cemiplimab that are effective in targeting various tumours , . Monoclonal antibodies targeting PDL1 include durvalumab, atezolizumab, and avelumab that targets local metastatic cancers . Antibodies such as durvalumab, envafolimab, and sugemalimab have shown improvement in treating non-small-cell lung cancer ( ). 
CD28 is the receptor found in APCs and binds with the ligands CD80 and CD86 to induce T cell activation and proliferation. However, CTLA-4, a transmembrane receptor, has higher binding affinity for CD80 and CD86 than CD28. Therefore, the binding of CTLA-4 with the CD80/86 prevents CD28 from interacting with the ligands, leading to the suppression of T cell activation. Targeting CTLA-4 with monoclonal antibodies is also a promising therapeutic strategy against carcinomas. Ipilimumab and tremelimumab are the major monoclonal antibodies used to target CTLA-4b , . Tremelimumab is a humanized IgG2 monoclonal immunoglobulin that has been used to increase the response of T cells against tumours. The activation of effector T cells is orchestrated by complex interactions. Interaction between CD28 of T cells and CD80/CD86 of APC triggers signalling employed in the activation of effector T cells. CTLA-4 has a greater affinity for CD80/CD86 and therefore blocks the T cell differentiation by decreasing IL2 expression and promoting the expression of IL-2Rα (CD25) on activated T cells. The multiplication of effector T cells occurs through clonal proliferation ( ). Tregs orchestrate the down-regulation of anti-tumour immunity by expressing CTLA-4 on their surface. CTLA-4 of Tregs interacts with the CD80/CD86 to impair the antigen presentation by APCs. This, in turn, enables the tumour cells to escape anti-tumor immunity. Through PKC signalling, Tregs decline the expression of CD80/CD86. Moreover, the population of Tregs increases through CD28 co-stimulatory signals to reduce CD80 and CD86 expression. Therefore, ICIs aid in Treg population reduction and preservation of effector T cell activities to augment anti-tumour immunity ( ). 
Other important immune checkpoint proteins include LAG-3 (CD223) and TIM-3 (CD366), which can be blocked by monoclonal antibodies to treat metastatic carcinoma. Relatlimab is a monoclonal antibody used against LAG-3 to restore T cell function. Sabatolimab is a humanized IgG4 antibody used against the TIM-3 to manage myeloid cell neoplasms . Another antibody used against the TIM-3 is cobolimab that helps activate T cells function ( ). 

5

## ICI-mediated adverse effects
5.1

## ICI-mediated cutaneous toxicity
ICI-mediated adverse effects on skin-related issues following treatment with ICI are common in patients. Approximately 30–50 % of patients face inflammatory and blistering dermal issues. However, these skin-related issues are generally mild and do not require the termination of ICI-based treatment. Notably, the onset of dermal issues can occur within four weeks of treatment with ICIs. Nonetheless, the period may vary from 2 to 150 weeks , . Further, the skin-associated complications can be much higher (up to 60 %) in the case of treatment with anti-CTLA-4 compared to the treatments with anti-PD-L1 or anti-PD-1 inhibitors. With the use of ICIs for PD-1 and PD-L1, skin-related adverse effects may be found in 20 % of the patients . The higher dermal issues (59–72 %) are frequently detected in cases of combination therapy with the anti-CTLA-4 and anti-PD-L1 or anti-PD-1 inhibitors .
The extract mechanism of ICI-mediated dermatologic toxicity is not clear. However, some studies suggest the differential distribution of lymphocytes in the dermal tissues of patients recovered through biopsies. In a study, patients with melanoma who underwent treatment with ICI for PD-1 suffered from detrimental cutaneous reactions. Biopsies of samples have revealed excessive accumulation of CD8+ T cells at the dermo-epidermal junctions. Results were suggestive of the fact that CD8+ T-cells might have released cytotoxic factors through exocytosis that resulted in the lysis of keratinocytes. Moreover, the expression of genes such as CCL27, NURR1, GLY, FASLG, and PRF1 associated with cutaneous inflammation was upregulated in patients who underwent anti-PD-1 therapy. Moreover, genes such as PI3, SPRR2B, GZMB, CXCL9, CXCL10, and CXCL11, involved in cellular toxicity, have been over-expressed in the cutaneous tissue of the patient compared to the healthy subjects . In another investigation, immune cells, such as CD3+ lymphocytes and Foxp3 Treg cells, were invariably present in the skin tissues of patients with melanoma . These immune infiltrates might be linked to adverse effects on the skin. Patients treated with ICI have suffered from lichenoid dermatitis characterized by the upregulation of various genes, including TLR2 and TLR4. Moreover, elevated numbers of CD14 + and CD16 + monocytes were apparent compared to the control samples of benign lichenoid keratosis. These changes were suggestive of TLR-mediated cascades that might have contributed to lichenoid dermatitis in patients who underwent ICI therapy . Studies have also correlated cutaneous toxicity with cytokine levels. In a study, patients undergoing ICI therapy developed skin rashes along with increased levels of serum angiopoietin-1 (Ang-1) and CD40L, indicating their potential contribution to skin-related toxicities . Moreover, in another study, elevated levels of cytokines such as serum IL-6 and IL-10 were also associated with cutaneous toxicities. In these patients undergoing ICI therapy, comparatively higher numbers of allergenic eosinophils and Ig E were also evident to cause severe skin-related issues . Studies have also suggested the involvement of a complement system in skin tissue damage. Patients treated with anti-PD-1 and anti-PD-L1 have developed an autoimmune disease called bollous skin disorders. In these subjects, IgG and complement protein 3 were much higher than the basal levels, suggesting the potential implications of the complement system and membrane attack complex in skin damage . These studies suggest that both the mediators of innate and adaptive immunity are involved in cutaneous toxicity in cancer patients undergoing ICI therapy.

5.2

## ICI-mediated colitis
ICIs, particularly those targeting CTLA-4 and PD-1/PD-L1, have been associated with an increased risk of developing colitis, a type of inflammatory bowel disease. Immune-mediated colitis mainly occurs when the exacerbated immune response triggered by anti-CTLA-4 and anti-PD-1/anti-PD-L1-based therapies mistakenly targets the healthy tissues of the gastrointestinal tract. Approximately 8–27 % of cases suffer from ICI-mediated colitis, while up to 54 % of cases have been reported with ICI-associated diarrhea . However, the type of ICI regimens is the crucial factor for such toxicities. The exact mechanisms underlying ICI-induced colitis are yet to be delineated. However, it may involve the disruption of immune homeostasis in the gut, leading to an imbalance between effector T cells and regulatory T cells. This imbalance triggers an inflammatory cascade characterized by increased cytokine production, activation of immune cells, and tissue injuries.
Excessive infiltration of CD8+ has been detected in the lamina propria of the colon in ICI-mediated colitis . The increase in the number of CD8+ lymphocytes has been corrected with the severity of the colitis. In particular, tissue-resident memory (CD69+CD103+; TRM) cells can be the contributing factor for the elevated numbers of T cells in the colon . Moreover, the differentiation of Trm cells into cytotoxic T cells results in their abundance and exacerbated cytotoxicity in the colon . Higher proportions of CD8+ in ICI-mediated colon have been associated with the increased expression of genes such as LAG-3, TIM-3, TIGIT, CTLA-4, and PDCD1 implicated in the immune checkpoints. Moreover, other genes, such as PRF1, GZMB, and HLA-DR, were also activated in subjects with ICI-mediated colitis . IFN-γ also has implications in ICI-mediated colitis, as these inflammatory mediators contribute to the apoptosis of colonic cells along with the disruption of colonic vasculature.
In patients with ICI colitis, mucosal Treg cells can have higher numbers as a protective measure against inflammation. These cells can produce anti-inflammatory cytokines such as IL-10 and TGFβ to counteract the tissue damage . Moreover, Treg cells have Th1-like characteristics and express CXCR3, IL12RB2, and STAT1, which may suppress effector cells producing IFN-γ. However, these counteracting measures might not be sufficient to curb the inflammatory and cytotoxic toxicities caused by ICI therapy. Therefore, the interplay between Treg and T cells (CD8+) provides the underlying mechanistic route to develop ICI-mediated colitis in patients.
Major symptoms of ICI-induced colitis typically include diarrhea (92–100 %), abdominal discomfort (55–82 %), and haematochezia (55–64 %,) , . In severe cases, colitis might also lead to life-threatening health complications, such as bowel perforation and sepsis. Endoscopic examination has revealed the inflammation predominantly in the left colon, however it can also be found in other parts of the colon . ICI-induced inflammation in the colon can result in loss of vascular pattern, edema, erythema, erosion, friability, and ulcerations. In case of chronic colitis, histopathological symptoms include crypt distortion and basal lymphocytic infiltration while in case of acute colitis, histopathology is characterized by abscesses, cryptitis, and neutrophilic infiltration . In a study involving 1478 patients with ICI-treated cancer, the incidence rate of colitis was 3.5 % in patients treated with nivolumab and ipilimumab. However, in such cases, the mild symptoms of colitis were improved with supportive care . Some common histopathologic manifestations are associated with ICI-mediated colitis. These include ischemic colitis, microscopic colitis (collagenous or lymphocytic), acute active colitis, and chronic active colitis. The mechanism for pathological manifestation encompasses autoimmune-type dysregulation and alteration of gut microbiome .
The incidence of ICI-induced colitis varies depending on the specific ICI used for the therapy. Generally, CTLA-4 inhibitors (e.g., ipilimumab) have a greater chance to induce colitis compared to PD-1/PD-L1 inhibitors . Management of ICI-mediated colitis typically encompasses the application of corticosteroids and immunosuppressive agents, and, in some cases, discontinuation of ICI treatment may be required. Early recognition and therapeutic intervention are crucial to prevent long-term gastrointestinal damage caused by ICI-mediated colitis. Studies are needed to identify biomarkers of ICI-induced colitis and to develop strategies for mitigating this toxicity and associated IrAEs.

5.3

## ICI-mediated neurotoxicity
ICIs have been documented to cause neurotoxicities in patients undergoing anti-PD-1/anti-PD-L1 and anti-CTLA-4 monoclonal antibodies. Such neurotoxicity is rare and found only in 1–6 % of patients treated with ICIs. Nonetheless, ICI-mediated neurotoxicity can be comparatively more fatal and accounts for up to 15 % of total ICI-related fatalities , . ICI-mediated neurotoxicity includes meningitis, encephalitis, Guillain-Barré syndrome, myasthenia gravis, and neuropathy. The underlying mechanism of neurotoxicity might involve ICI-induced disruption of immune homeostasis in the central nervous system (CNS) and the activation of auto-reactive T cells along with inflammatory mediators. PD-1/PD-L1 inhibitors (6.1 %), more commonly associated with neurotoxicity than CTLA-4 inhibitors (3.8 %). Nevertheless, the incidence percentage of neurotoxicity with the combined treatment of ipilimumab and nivolumab has been reported in 12–14 % of patients. Of note, neurotoxicity usually occurs in 4 weeks. However, the symptoms may occur from 1 to 68 weeks . In a study, 18 patients treated with ICIs such as nivolumab, pembrolizumab, atezolizumab, or ipilimumab for various malignancies have suffered from neurotoxicity. In these patients, a wide spectrum of neurologic effects such as myasthenia gravis (MG) (17 %) with concurrent myositis (6 %), aseptic meningitis (6 %), sensorimotor polyneuropathy (11 %), central demyelinating disorder (28 %), and hypophysitis (17 %) have been detected .
General symptoms of ICI-induced neurotoxicity include headache, confusion, seizures, weakness, and sensory dysfunctions. In severe cases, neurotoxicity can be associated with severe health issues, such as cerebral edema and status epilepticus in patients. The underlying immunological mechanism of ICI-induced neurotoxicity is vague. However, both the humoral and cell-mediated immunity can be associated with neurological issues. Patients treated with two cycles of pembrolizumab have been reported to develop transverse myelitis. Specifically, elevated levels of B cell chemoattractant, CXCL13, IgG, and CD8+ plasma cells have been detected in samples of cerebrospinal fluid. Moreover, the formation of autoreactive antibodies was also apparent. These findings were suggestive of humoral immunity-mediated development of transverse myelitis in pembrolizumab-treated patients . Notably, in a cohort study, approximately 63 % of patients with ICI-induced neurotoxicity were found to have auto-antibodies for neuromuscular tissues . Moreover, the formation of auto-antibodies targeting the intracellular and surface antigens has been detected in around 45 % of the patients with ICI-induced toxicity . In an in vivo study, mice treated with anti-PD-1 exhibited increased CD3+, CD4+, CD4+CD69+, and CD4+CD154+ T cells in their brain. Moreover, the microglial activation was also apparent, suggesting their active role in ICI-mediated neurotoxicity .
The severity of ICI-mediated neurotoxicity can be governed by several risk factors, such as the presence of pre-existing autoimmune disorders, brain metastases, and agents used for ICI-based therapy. Management typically involves the suppression of inflammation and tissue injuries using corticosteroids and immunosuppressive drugs. Early detection of ICI-induced neurotoxicity can be helpful in effective management without terminating the ICI therapy. Therefore, identifying potential biomarkers for ICI-induced neurotoxicity could be the major research need to enhance the safety of ICIs for individual or combinational therapy in cancer patients.

5.4

## ICI-mediated endocrine dysfunction
ICI agents can potentially target the endocrine glands. In the majority of cases, the thyroid gland is vulnerable to ICI-mediated toxicities. Around 10 % of patients receiving anti-PD-1 and anti-PD-L1 antibodies suffer from hypothyroidism. However, the percentage of incidence can reach up to 20 % in patients undergoing combined therapy with ipilimumab and nivolumab. In some cases, thyrotoxicosis, characterized by hypersecretion of thyroid hormone, can also be an outcome following ICI therapy. Moreover, thyrotoxicosis can be asymptomatic . The onset of thyrotoxicosis is temporary. Nonetheless, the proceeding hypersecretion of thyroid hormone can become a life-long condition , .
The immunological basis of ICI-mediated thyroiditis is still unclear. However, certain studies indicate the involvement of inflammatory cytokines in the adverse effect outcome. In anti-PD-1 and anti-CTLA-4 treated mice, higher levels of IL17A were detected in the thyroid tissue of the mice. Moreover, Th17 and Tc17 cell cytokines were also elevated in mice treated with ICIs. Interestingly, the application of anti-IL17A antibodies helped reduce ICI-induced thyroid toxicity . In another study, ICI treatment resulted in the accumulation of CD8+ T cells, CD4+ T cells, and macrophages in the tissues of thyroid glands. Moreover, infiltration of RORγ+ T cells in thyroid tissues was also apparently visible, suggesting the importance of these cells in proinflammatory cytokine production and tissue damage in thyroid glands .
Hypophysitis is a type of IrAE that occur commonly in ipilimumab-based therapy compared to treatment with anti-PD-1 and anti-PD-L1 antibodies, with a median onset of approximately 26 weeks . Patients developing hypophysitis generally suffer from pituitary inflammation and symptoms of secondary adrenal insufficiency. Though the inflammatory outcome is transient, hypopituitarism can be long-lasting and often requires hormonal treatment . Generally, the major manifestations of hypophysitis in patients include nausea, fatigue, asthenia, headache, nausea, weakness, and lethargy . In some cases, visual disturbance may be seen. However, this outcome is not common, as in the majority of cases, swelling in the pituitary gland does not interfere with the optic chiasma .
In a study, anti-GNAL and anti-ITM2B antibodies have been detected in patients after treatment with ICI and were found 1.7–2.5 folds much higher compared to pretreated samples. Moreover, the anti-GNAL antibodies were comparatively higher in patients with hypophysitis than the individuals without hypophysitis. Therefore, it can be suggested that individuals with higher levels of anti-GAL antibodies can be at higher risk of developing hypophysitis after treatment with single or combinational ICIs .
Other endocrine toxicities can also be associated with the pancreas and the adrenal glands. In a study involving 76 patients, pancreatic autoantibodies were detected. Autoantibodies were found in varying percentages. For instance, anti-insulinoma-associated protein-2 (anti-IA2) antibodies were prevalent in 12 % of patients, and 19 % of patients had anti-insulin antibodies. Moreover, anti-ZnT8 antibodies were noted in 10 % of patients, while anti-glutamic acid decarboxylase 65 (anti-GAD65) antibodies were detected in 58 % of patients . Notably, CD4+ and CD8+ T cells have been reported to be present in peri-islet regions of the pancreas. However, higher numbers of CD45+ have been detected in the pancreatic exocrine region. Expression of inflammatory cytokines such as IFN-γ and TNF-α has also been found in pancreatic tissues, suggesting their potential role in inflammatory outcomes in the pancreas following ICI therapy. Interestingly, treatment with anti–IFN–γ and anti–TNF–α were effective in blocking the ICI-mediated diabetes mellitus in mice . Therefore, pancreatic dysfunction could be attributed to the apoptotic changes in the Islet of Langerhans, thereby adversely impacting insulin secretion, leading to the manifestation of diabetes mellitus . Development of autoantibodies and inflammation against the adrenal cortical tissues can result in adrenal insufficiency with hyposecretion of adrenal hormones.

5.5

## Myocarditis induced by ICIs
ICIs have been associated with myocarditis, which is rare, affecting 1 % of patients, but potentially life-threatening inflammatory conditions affecting the cardiac muscle with a fatality rate of 39.7 % . Patients treated with ICIs can suffer from myocarditis depending upon several factors, such as underlying inflammatory conditions, cardiovascular diseases, and the dose and type of ICIs being used in therapy. In a study involving 709 patients with lung cancer, around 5.5 % of patients treated with durvalumab suffered from cardiac adverse effects . Of note, cardiac adverse effects have a higher incidence rate in cases of combined therapy (such as ipilimumab and nivolumab), in old-age patients (above 75 years old), and in female patients.
ICIs usually destroy the cardiac muscles via autoimmune reactions that can be triggered following the occurrence of an imbalance between effector T cells and regulatory T cells. Moreover, exacerbated synthesis of proinflammatory cytokines can also result in myocardial tissue injuries through apoptotic-cascade activation. Clinical presentation of ICI-mediated mycarditis includes chest pain, shortness of breath, fatigue, electrocardiogram changes, elevated troponin, natriuretic peptides, and creatine kinase levels , . Moreover, patients with fulminant disease may manifest with cardiac shock, arrhythmias, and even cardiac arrest . Histological investigation has revealed that ICI treatment favours myocardial necrosis and lymphocyte infiltration. More specifically, CD8+ cell infiltration is comparatively higher in inflammatory tissues of the myocardium. Depletion of CD8+ T cells has been associated with reduced cardiac adverse effects caused by ICI treatment. Therefore, it is apparent that CD8+ T cells act as the major driver in the development of myocarditis . In a study, patients who developed ICI-induced myocarditis had higher CD45RA re-expressing CD8+ T cells. These cells are highly cytotoxic and express different chemokines, such as CCL4 and CCL5 .
Treatment of patients with engineered T cells targeting the immune checkpoint protein, MAGEA3, have been reported to inflict carditis, cardiac shock, and ultimately death. The findings suggested that the engineered T cells had an off-target cross-reactivity with titin, which is a cardiac myofilament protein . This cross-reactivity might be the reason for inflammatory outcomes in the heart. In a study, PD-1-deficient mice have been found to develop dilated cardiomyopathy and premature death. In these mice, cardiomyopathy was found to be promoted by IgG antibodies . These IgG immunoglobulins can recognize cardiac troponin I. Therefore, studies suggest that ICI-mediated myocarditis is typically governed by CD8+ T cells, IgG antibodies for cardiac troponin I, and macrophages.
Therefore, inhibitors blocking the activity of CTLA-4, PD-1, or PD-L1 can activate autoimmunity against the cardiac tissue by triggering inflammatory cascades and necrotic changes. These autoimmune and inflammatory outcomes together contribute to the development of ventricular arrhythmias, myocarditis, acute myocardial infarction, and conduction disease. Moreover, inhibition of PD-L1 has the potential to exacerbate the pre-existing cardiac diseases, which can further escalate the cardiac toxicity.
Mostly, the myocarditis is associated with the early stage of ICI therapy. However, it can be fulminant . As per a recent multivariate investigation, there is a 3-fold increased chance of cardiovascular events after starting ICI therapy. In this study, it has been demonstrated that around 2.32 % of patients were reported with cardiovascular issues before the commencement of ICI therapy. However, it was increased to 4.2 % after the initiation of ICI treatment . Notably, ICI therapy was linked to higher rates of atherosclerosis and aortic plaque progression. Takotsubo (stress-induced) cardiomyopathy has been reported in patients treated with ICIs. In a cohort study involving 30 patients with cardiac issues, around 14 % of patients had clinical signs of stress-induced cardiomyopathy . Moreover, the incidence of Takotsubo cardiomyopathy was much higher in patients receiving combination therapy involving ICI and chemotherapy .
Management involves discontinuing ICI therapy, administering corticosteroids, immunosuppressive therapy, and cardiac supportive care, with regular monitoring of ECGs, troponin levels, and cardiac imaging. Multidisciplinary care could be more effective.

5.6

## Rheumatological adverse effects
Inflammatory arthritis is one of the most common outcomes in patients undergoing ICI-based therapy. However, this adverse effect is more common in patients treated with anti-PD-1/PD-L1 antibodies than those receiving anti-CTLA-4 monoclonal antibody therapy. Nonetheless, treatment with more than one type of antibody can be more detrimental compared to monotherapy . Studies have suggested that the incidence rate of inflammatory arthritis could vary from 2 % to 7 % . Moreover, the median time for the onset of inflammatory arthritis could be 38 weeks from its first infusion. Notably, the onset of inflammatory arthritis could be more disturbing with the occurrence of joint swelling and stiffness followed by joint damage and erosion of bones . Other complications include polymyositis, polymyalgia rheumatica, and Sjögren syndrome in patients treated with ICIs. Rheumatoid arthritis can persist even 6–12 months after cessation of the ICI treatment. The application of non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs and disease-modifying anti-rheumatic drugs could help minimize the inflammatory symptoms in such patients suffering from rheumatoid arthritis. However, some patients may suffer from severe health issues, and in such cases adoption of biologic therapy employing TNF inhibitors and IL-6 receptor inhibitors may be required to minimize the inflammatory issues .
In a study, it was found that patients with pre-existing rheumatoid arthritis can have similar risks for morbidity and severe IrAEs compared to patients without pre-existing rheumatoid arthritis. However, patients may suffer from mild immune-related issues having pre-existing rheumatoid arthritis . Application of Nivolumab (anti-PD-1 antagonist) can be associated with increased PD-1 expression in early and established rheumatoid arthritis synovial tissue. Moreover, infiltration of CD4+ and CD8+ T cells has been detected in synovial tissue. Notably, serum PD-1 levels were upregulated in auto-antibody-positive patients with rheumatoid arthritis. Therefore, therapeutic intervention with agonistic PD-1 antibodies can effectively manage rheumatoid arthritis . TNF inhibitors also have potential scopes for reducing inflammation and treating ICI-mediated inflammatory rheumatoid arthritis. Moreover, c-reactive proteins can also be prevalent in patients undergoing combined ICI therapy. Most of the patients with knee arthritis and reactive arthritis-like symptoms can be treated with corticosteroids. However, in some cases, treatment with TNF inhibitors and/or methotrexate may be required. Notably, the application of TNF inhibitors is not associated with further tumour progression . Side effects of ICI therapy include musculoskeletal issues, but these issues can be resolved after the termination of the therapy. In some cases, HQ, MTX, anti-TNF-alpha, and anti-IL-6 drugs can be more effective in replacement to steroid-based conventional medications. Certain immune markers have been investigated that play a crucial role in the development of ICI-mediated rheumatoid arthritis. In a study, samples of blood and synovial fluid have been investigated to explore the major immune hallmarks of IrAE-associated arthritis. Results revealed an apparent Th1-CD8+ T cell axis in blood and joints with inflammatory changes. CXCR3hi CD8+ T cells and CX3CR1hi CD8+ T cells sharing TCR repertoires were detected in synovial fluid and blood, respectively. The study further indicated that CXCL9/10/11/16 expressed on myeloid cells helped migrate blood CX3CR1hi CD8+ T cells into the joints. Moreover, Th17 and transient Th1/Th17 cell signatures are also enhanced in the case of combined therapy with PD-1 and CTLA-4, suggesting their possible contribution to rheumatoid arthritis progression .
However, further investigations are warranted to explore the efficient early detection and management to curb rheumatoid arthritis in patients treated with ICIs.

5.7

## ICI-mediated pulmonary toxicity
ICI therapy has been associated with pulmonary toxicity. Having a pre-existing history of pulmonary diseases and combined ICI therapy are the risk factors that trigger pulmotoxicity. Clinical presentation of pulmotoxicity includes cough, pneumonitis, interstitial lung disease, and acute respiratory distress syndrome. Major symptoms may include dyspnoea, chest pain, fatigue, and fever. Typically, the immune disruption in lung tissue caused by inflammatory cytokines and activated T cells plays a critical role in ICI-mediated pulmonary toxicity. Studies have documented that treatment with anti-PD antibodies could reduce the pulmonary fibrosis caused by the ICI treatment . Treatment with anti-PD-1 can fuel the development of immune-mediated alveolar interstitial lung diseases, which can occur in 3 % of patients undergoing anti-PD-1 therapy. Such immune reactions in pulmonary tissues can exacerbate the existing alveolar-interstitial lung disease . In a retrospective study involving 2826 cancer patients receiving PD-1 inhibitors, approximately 3.5 % of patients were identified with interstitial lung disease. Notably, interstitial lung disease was found mainly in males with a median age of 59. Moreover, smokers were more susceptible to the disease. This immune-related adverse effect was predominantly characterized by the occurrence of ground-glass opacities (81.3 %). In addition, hypersensitivity pneumonitis and organizing pneumonia were also frequent . In a cohort study involving 199 advanced non-lung cancer patients, it was noted that patients with pre-existing interstitial lung issues and undergoing anti-PD-1 antibody-mediated monotherapy have an increased chance of acquiring ICI-mediated interstitial lung disease .
In another study, patients undergoing treatment with pembrolizumab or nivolumab have been identified with interstitial lung disease. Some patients suffered from hypoxemic respiratory failure caused by interstitial lung disease or ICI-mediated pneumonitis. However, cancer patients having interstitial lung disease and undergoing ICI-therapy are mostly more likely to die from cancer-related problems than from interstitial lung disease . Studies have suggested some of the soluble immunological biomarkers of ICI-mediated interstitial lung disease. These biomarkers include CXCL9, MMP-1, IL-6, and IL-19. Among them, IL-19 may be considered a causal and prognostic factor for ICI-mediated interstitial lung disease . In another investigation, patients treated with ICIs such as pembrolizumab, ipilimumab, or both, and durvalumab who developed pneumonitis served as the case group. The bronchoalveolar lavage fluid (BALF) examination has revealed a higher number of lymphocytes than the control group. Moreover, elevated levels of IL-6 in BALF further indicated its potential role in the pathophysiology of ICI-mediated pneumonitis .
TIM-3, TIGIT, and LAG-3 are negative regulators of anti-tumour responses. TIM3+PD-1+ Tumour-infiltrating lymphocytes (TILs) are the dysfunctional lymphocytes that cannot produce IL-2, TNF, and IFN-γ. Moreover, TIM-3 is also associated with the cell death of CD8+ TILs. Therefore, the expression of TIM-3 is increased in the case of cancer cells. Several clinical trials are underway to investigate the efficacy of anti-TIM3 antibodies. In a study, the expression profiles of immune checkpoint proteins such as PD-1, TIM-3, TIGIT, LAG-3, and PD-L1 in T cells were examined in BALF of patients with ICI-mediated interstitial lung disease. Notably, BALF of patients with ICI-mediated interstitial lung disease contained higher proportions of CD8+ T cells expressing immune checkpoint proteins such as PD-1 and TIM-3 or TIGIT. Moreover, an increased presence of PD-1+PD-L1+ cells among CD8+ T cells in BALF of fatal cases of the ICI-mediated interstitial lung disease was also apparent, which might have implications in the development of fatal outcomes . In another study, the BALF of patients suffering from ICI-mediated pneumonitis had exacerbated levels of CD4+ T cells, increased expression of IL1β, and higher levels of T cell chemoattractant. Moreover, evidence of type I polarization and decreased expression of PD-1 and CTLA-4 in Treg was also detected. These findings were suggestive of an activated inflammatory cascade that contributed to the disease progression . Therefore, a complex interplay between the T cells and interleukins and T cell attractants plays a critical role in the development of ICI-mediated lung disease ( ; ). 

6

## TIM3, LAG3, and TIGIT as promising immunotherapy targets
TIM3, LAG3, and TIGIT are emerging immunotherapy targets, offering potential for combination therapy with existing checkpoint inhibitors to enhance anti-tumour immunity. TIM3, expressed on exhausted T cells, binds to galectin-9 and suppresses T cell function. It has been suggested that the co-blockade of TIM3 and PD-1 may lead to tumour regression and enhance the anticancer effects of T cells in individuals with advanced cancers . LAG3, a receptor, inhibits T cell expansion and function, and is often co-expressed with PD-1 on exhausted T cells. Signalling through LAG3 is mediated by a disintegrin and metalloprotease domain-containing protein-10 (ADAM10)- and ADAM17-mediated cell surface shedding. A study has shown that LAG3 mutants are resistant to PD-1 blockage and fail to mount anti-tumour effects. LAG3 mutants limit the capacity of CD4+ T conventional cells (Tconvs) to provide CD8+ T cell help . TIGIT suppresses T-cell function and promotes immune tolerance. Targeting these receptors with monoclonal antibodies or small molecules has shown promising results in preclinical and early clinical studies.
Several anti-TIM3 antibodies are under various phases of clinical trials. In a study, the safety, tolerability, and efficacy of anti-TIM3 antibody TSR-022 have been examined (arm 1 A). This study also included combination therapy, such as combining anti-PD-1 antibodies nivolumab (arm 1B) or dostarlimab (arm 1 C). Patients of arm 1 A exhibited 4.3 % of treatment-related adverse effects (TRAE) of grade 3. 28.6 % of patients in arm 1B, and 14.5 % of patients in arm 1 C demonstrated grade 3 or worse TRAE. Combination therapy, including TSR-022 and dostarlimab was better tolerated and found with anti-tumour activity . In a phase 1 clinical trial, another anti-TIM3 antibody LY3321367 (Eli Lilly) has been evaluated alone or in combination with the anti-PD-L1 antibody. Preliminary investigation has suggested that LY3321367 is well tolerated as monotherapy . MBG453 (Novartis), another anti-TIM3 antibody is being investigated under phase 1–3 clinical trials alone and in combination with anti-PD-1 agents or chemotherapy drugs. MBG453 with decitabine is safe, durable, and well-tolerated in acute myeloid leukaemia patients. TRAE included neutropenia, febrile neutropenia, anaemia, and thrombocytopenia , . A soluble LAG3 protein, IMP321 has been investigated for its benefits in metastatic breast cancer patients. IMP321 was used in combination with chemotherapy agent paclitaxel and the majority of breast cancer patients were clinically benefited . In another clinical trial, combination therapy involving IMP321 and gemcitabine, a chemotherapy drug, showed no adverse effects in the case of pancreatic cancer . There are anti-TIGIT antibodies such as AB154, IBI939, MK-7684, tiragolumab, COM902, etc., that have been evaluated through clinical trials. AB154 can block the TIGIT at sub-nanomolar concentrations. AB154 is under phase 2 clinical trial and exhibits a favorable safety profile for NSCLC . MK-7684 monotherapy or combination therapy using KEYTRUDA is well tolerated. In an investigation, around 56 % of patients receiving MK-7684 monotherapy and 62 % of patients receiving combination therapy exhibited TRAE. Monotherapy was found to be safer . IrAEs have been detected in case of patients treated with OMP-313M32 or etigilimab. However, in the case of patients with stable disease, early signs of efficacy have been detected ( ). 

7

## Mechanistic insights on ICI-mediated toxicity
The application of ICIs in cancer patients is associated with IrAEs on several organs, ranging from the GI tract to neurological issues. A complex interplay between immune cells, autoantibodies, and cytokines constitutes the mechanism for ICI-mediated adverse effects.
7.1

## Role of immune cells in IrAEs
The autoimmune cascades are predominantly orchestrated by several T cells, such as cytotoxic T cells, Th cells, and Treg cells. Th cells differentiate into Th1, Th2, and Treg cells. All of these cells are characterized by specific cytokines driving the specific autoimmune responses. Th1 cells typically secrete IFNγ, TNFα, IL-1β, and IL12, which play a critical role in the activation of macrophages. However, Th2 subsets secrete several interleukins such as IL-4, IL-5, IL-10, and IL-13 that help in the maturation of B cells . The Th1/Th2 paradigm helps regulate autoimmunity by counteracting their functions. For instance, the cytokines released from Th1 and Th17 subsets help enhance the antigen-presenting capacity of macrophages. Moreover, cytokines released from these two cells help promote inflammatory responses, leading to a number of inflammatory diseases, including rheumatoid arthritis following ICI treatment. Th1 and Th17 cell functions regulate the production and functions of Treg. In contrast, Treg releases immunosuppressive cytokines such as TGFβ and IL10 that facilitate tissue repair following autoimmune reactions in the body. Regulatory B cells also secrete IL-10 that prevents the release of inflammatory cytokines from the dendritic cells and also impairs the development of Th1 and Th17 cells, ultimately contributing to the suppression of autoimmunity. Cytokines released from the Th2 cells help downregulate the proinflammatory function of macrophages. The imbalance in these cytokines regulates the outcome of autoimmune reactions.
Studies have suggested the crosslinks between the CD8+ T cells and a number of health issues associated with the IrAEs. Moreover, ICIs can affect the expansion of T cell and B cell repertoire. However, Treg expressing IL-2 receptor γ-chain are typically involved in suppressing the autoimmune cascades. In a study involving 6 patients treated with ICI and who developed hypophysitis, it was observed that patients treated with ICI alone had predominant infiltration of T cells, whereas patients receiving additional therapy had increased T cell and B cell populations. Notably, type 2 macrophages were predominant in the inflammatory cell population in these patients, suggesting that these macrophages play a critical role in the development of inflammatory outcomes in ICI-treated patients . Moreover, low levels of Treg cells further contribute to the intense inflammatory responses. The major drivers of autoimmunity are B cells and T cells. Specifically, T cells can directly harm the healthy self-tissues or act as helper cells for B cells to secrete soluble autoantibodies. Moreover, the innate immune system can also regulate the autoimmune responses by triggering the autoreactive T cells through the dendritic cells. Tissue damage is primarily mediated by the Th cells that work via the induction of transcription factors, T-bet and Signal Transducer and Activator of Transcription 4 (STAT4). The expression of IFNγ by Th cells mainly triggers the cytotoxic responses in autoimmune diseases. Moreover, CXCL10 also promotes dendritic cells to secrete IFNγ.

7.2

## Implication of autoantibodies
Autoantibodies are produced by the leakage of peripheral and central tolerance mechanisms. This allowed the maturation of autoantibody-secreting plasma cells from B cells. Application of anti-PD-1/anti-PD-L1 or CTLA-4, individually or in combined form, can activate the T cells and their proliferation in various subsets. This activation is required for a better immune response against the cancer cells. However, hyperactivated immune responses can fuel the production of autoantibodies that harm the healthy cells of multiple organs. The effects of exacerbated immune response can lead to a number of IrAEs associated with acute and chronic diseases. In a cohort study, the development of autoantibodies was examined in 133 ipilimumab-treated melanoma patients. Results demonstrated that, sera of some patients were detected with the autoantibodies for the thyroid gland, leading to thyroid dysfunction. These autoantibodies could also be used as markers for ICI-mediated toxicities .
Autoantibodies have been reported in patients with ICI-mediated endocrinopathies. Anti-BP180 is seen in cases of skin-related adverse effects. Patients with myositis/myasthenia/myocarditis are also reported with autoantibodies. Moreover, patients suffering from ICI-mediated arthritis are shown to have circulating rheumatoid factors or cyclic citrullinated peptide antibodies. However, autoantibodies such as antinuclear antibodies in hepatitis patients and perinuclear antineutrophil cytoplasmic antibodies in colitis patients have also been detected, suggesting their potential implications in adverse effects induced by ICIs . Fold change increase in autoantibodies such as anti-cyclic citrullinated peptide, rheumatoid factor, and antinuclear antibody have been noted over 6 weeks of developing organ-specific IrAEs. This suggests the implications of humoral and cellular immunity in the development and pathogenesis of IrAE . In a cohort study containing serum samples from 29 cancer patients, neuromuscular autoantibodies were detected in 63 % of patients with IrAE. Moreover, 45 % of patients with IrAE have been detected with the brain-reactive autoantibodies targeting intracellular (anti-GFAP, -Zic4, -septin complex), surface (anti-GABABR, -NMDAR, -myelin), or unknown antigens. These results suggest that neuromuscular autoantibodies can be used as a marker to predict the life-threatening neuromuscular diseases caused by ICI administration.
ICI-induced autoimmune encephalitis in patients has been associated with the anti-Ma2 antibodies targeting the intracellular proteins. Antibodies for acetylcholine receptors are also linked to the development of myasthenia gravis as IrAE .
Therefore, autoantibodies have a strong association with the development of ICI-mediated adverse effects and pathogenesis of diseases in cancer patients, suggesting the interplay between cellular and humoral immunity ( ). 

7.3

## Impacts of cytokines
Cytokines are small, soluble molecules that are released from the immune cells upon activation. They have both proinflammatory and anti-inflammatory functions. A wide range of cytokines have been characterized that orchestrate the immune functions against microbes and cancer cells. Moreover, cytokines play a pivotal role in the onset and pathogenesis of autoimmune responses. Typically, the IL-2, TNF, and IFN catalyse the autoimmune orchestra essential for the proinflammatory outcome. IL-12 is expressed on the APCs and are critical for differentiation and expansion of Th1 cells, responsible for organ specific autoimmunity. Studies involving animal models have documented that the development of autoimmune reactions is attributed to the aberrant IL-12 production by the APCs. However, IFN typically control the proinflammatory reactions. Specifically, type I IFN has been implicated in the suppression of autoimmune diseases associated with Th1-mediated pathogenesis. Nonetheless, type 2 IFN (IFN-γ) promotes the Suppressors Of Cytokine Signaling (SOCS) that counteract the proinflammatory signaling. IL-12 also favours the differentiation of cytotoxic T cells, effectors from CD8+ T lymphocytes that further promote the autoimmune reactions.
In a study involving 45 patients with metastatic melanoma and suffering from ICI-mediated IrAE, it was found that the levels of serum C-reactive proteins and IL-6 were apparently upregulated, suggesting their correlation with the onset of IrAE .
In another study involving 98 patients who are undergoing single or combined therapy with anti-PD-1 and/or CTLA-4 inhibitors, the expression of 65 cytokines was assessed to understand the implications of cytokines in ICI-mediated IrAE. These patients were treated with nivolumab or pembrolizumab (anti-PD-1) and/ ipilimumab (anti-CTLA-4). Notably, 11 cytokines were found upregulated in these patients with severe IrAEs. These cytokines included fractalkine, Fibroblast Growth Factor-2 (FGF-2), IFN-α2, IL-12p70, IL-1a, IL-1B, IL-1RA, IL-2, and IL-13, Granulocyte Colony-Stimulating Factor (G-CSF), and Granulocyte-Macrophage Colony-Stimulating Factor (GM-CSF) . However, disruption in the expression of these cytokines is not linked to the anti-tumor efficiency of the anti-PD-1 or anti-CTLA-4 inhibitors.
IL-1β and IL-2 are important cytokines that have potent inflammatory activities. These molecules are involved in cell proliferation, differentiation, and apoptosis. In addition, they also contribute to the development of autoimmune reactions in the body , . Studies involving 223 lung cancer patients have revealed that, in peripheral blood, the baseline IL-1β and IL-2 levels were linked to the development of IrAE in lung cancer patients. Moreover, during the treatment with ICI, levels of IL-5, IFN-α and IFN-γ had a strong correlation with the immune adverse effects. However, cytokines such as IL-6, IL-8, IL-10, and IL-17 contributed to the immunotherapy efficacy for the lung cancer patients . These findings suggest that the interplay between a number of cytokines helps promote the development of IrAE during the treatment.
C–X–C motif chemokine 10 (CXCL10) is a cytokine belonging to the CXC chemokine family. These molecules bind to their CXCR3 receptor to mediate chemotaxis, angiotaxis, cellular differentiation l, and apoptosis. Moreover, they have been associated with inflammatory diseases . In a study involving a cohort of patients suffering from renal cell carcinoma, the plasma levels of CXCL10 were higher. More specifically, the CXCL10 level was greater in patients with renal cell carcinoma with grade 2 or higher IrAE .

8

## Mechanism of resistance to ICIs
Resistance to ICIs can occur through various mechanisms, including primary and acquired resistance. Primary resistance refers to the inherent inability of ICIs to elicit a response in certain patients, often due to a lack of tumour antigenicity, impaired antigen presentation, or an immunosuppressive tumour microenvironment. Acquired resistance, on the other hand, develops over time in patients who initially respond to ICIs, but eventually experience disease progression. Mechanisms of acquired resistance include genetic alterations in the tumour, such as mutations in the IFN-γ pathway or the antigen presentation machinery, as well as epigenetic changes that suppress anti-tumour immunity. Additionally, the upregulation of alternative immune checkpoints, such as TIM-3 or LAG-3, can also contribute to acquired resistance to ICIs. Therefore, the molecular interactions between the cancer cells and the immune system are continuous. Primary, adaptive, and acquired resistance may contribute to evasion of cancer immunotherapy . Further understanding the various sub-classes of the immune microenvironment can help gain better clinical outcomes .
Immune exhaustion triggered by immunometabolism plays a crucial role in cancer. Exhausted T cells express immune checkpoints that determine cancer prognosis. ICIs can hinder immune exhaustion and hence reinvigorate immune cells to enhance the anti-tumour microenvironment . Tumour cells can modulate the tumour microenvironment to evade the anti-tumour response. In addition, loss of MHC and hindrance in IFN-γ signaling can lead to resistance to ICI therapy. T cell activation is crucial to impart anti-tumour response. Loss of MHC is associated with the T cell inactivation leading to the failure of antigen presentation. Resistance to ICI is also induced by a noninflamed tumour microenvironment following reduced chemokines. Neoantigens play a crucial role in the activation of anti-tumour responses. Neoantigens are essential for the activation of T cell-mediated responses. However, the loss of neoantigens in cancer cells results in resistance to ICIs , . Cancer cells can also hinder antigen presentation by APCs through the secretion of Vascular Endothelial Growth Factor (VEGF) or prostaglandin E2 (PGE2) or activation of WNT/β-catenin signaling pathway , . Another factor that contributes to the ICI resistance is the loss of MHC molecules on cancer cells. It has been suggested that loss of heterozygosity in MHC-I genes results in immune escape of cancer cells, which can further contribute to the resistance to ICI therapy . Several chemokines such as CXCL9, CXCL10, CXCL11, and CCL5 are the essential mediators that govern the migration and infiltration of T cells into the tumour microenvironment, leading to anti-tumour activity. WNT/β-catenin, PTEN, LKB1, and EGFR pathways are associated with disruption in the production of these chemokines and hence contribute to the ICI resistance , , . SNF2-family DNA translocase SMARCAL1 acts as a factor that favours immune evasion by cancer cells. It limits DNA damage to surpass cGAS-STING-dependent signalling during the growth of cancer cells. Moreover, this factor cooperates with the AP-1 family member JUN to maintain chromatin accessibility at a PD-L1 transcriptional regulatory element, thereby promoting PD-L1 expression in cancer cells. These mechanisms are favoured by SMARCAL1 to evade anti-cancer effects of the immune system . Metabolic programming of tumour cells can promote immune evasion. Metabolic immune suppression of effector cells and induction of regulatory cells are mediated by altered nutrients and signals in the tumour microenvironment, leading to weak anti-cancer effects of immune cells .
Various immune suppressive myeloid-derived suppressor cells (MDSCs), tumour-associated macrophages (TAMs), Treg cells, and CAFs are also associated with ICI resistance, as these cells interfere with the T cell effector functions. Treg cells, through IL-2 and binding CD80/CD86 suppress T cell effector functions. Anti-PD-1 mAbs have been associated with the activation of PD-1+ Treg cells and PD-1+CD8+ T cells, which contribute to the ICI resistance . Therefore, unveiling the mechanism of ICI resistance is essential to curb the resistance to ICI therapy in cancer patients.

9

## Recent advances in ICI therapy and combination strategies
Tumour-infiltrating lymphocytes (TILs) play a crucial role in cancer immunotherapy, and their presence and characteristics have been linked to the efficacy of ICIs. TILs are the immune cells that enter the tumour microenvironment, where they can recognize and target cancer cells. High levels of TILs, particularly CD8+ T cells, in the tumour microenvironment are associated with improved responses to ICIs, such as PD-1/PD-L1 inhibitors. ICIs help activate and proliferate TILs, leading to enhanced anti-tumour immunity.
In a study, lifileucel, a one-time autologous TIL cell therapy, has been investigated for its efficacy against advanced melanoma in patients. Lifileucel demonstrated high efficacy in patients with advanced tumour burden and melanoma. Lifileucel reported to have durable responses and a favorable safety profile . Further, in a phase 2 multicenter study, lifileucel was found effective in metastatic non–small cell lung cancer refractory to prior therapy . In metastasized malignant melanomas, TIL has been associated with improved survival. Interestingly, in the case of BRAF V600E/K mutated metastasized malignant melanomas, TILs result in improved survival . Japanese patients who underwent TIL-adoptive cell therapy (ACT) exhibited variable responses against melanoma. Several factors like MAPK signalling, Wnt/β-catenin, VEGF, TGF-β, and epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition might have influenced the efficiency of TIL-ACT .
The combination of metabolic checkpoint inhibitors, such as IDO and ARG1 inhibitors, with ICIs has emerged as a promising therapeutic strategy in cancer treatment. Metabolic checkpoint inhibitors target enzymes involved in the metabolism of essential amino acids, thereby reversing immune suppression and enhancing anti-tumour immunity. When combined with ICIs, such as PD-1/PD-L1 and CTLA-4 inhibitors, this dual approach has shown improved treatment outcomes and increased patient response rates. Abrine, an inhibitor of IDO1, has shown promising response against hepatocellular carcinoma. Abrine and anti-PD-1 antibody and abrine can synergistically suppress tumour growth by down-regulating the Foxp3+ Treg cells, up-regulating the CD4+ or CD8+ T cells, and inhibiting the expression of PD-L1, CD47, and IDO1 . Similarly, ARG1/2 plays a crucial role in immune suppression against tumours. A novel ARG1/2 inhibitor - OAT-1746 improves the anti-tumour effects of PD-1 against gliomas by changing the immunosuppressive microenvironment . Suppression of ARG1 activity significantly reduces the migration and metastatic colonization of colon cancer cells .
ICI-mediated therapy in cancer patients has raised serious concerns due to exacerbated inflammation that further complicates the issue. Therefore, combination therapy employing agents that target interleukins is under consideration. Inhibitors of inflammatory cytokines could help to reduce further health complications . However, certain interleukins, such as IL-2 have been suggested to improve the anti-tumour effects of CD8+ T cells. Moreover, IL-2 can also enhance ICI therapy against cancer . High-dose IL-2 treatment can be used for renal cell carcinoma and melanoma . Therefore, combination therapy including IL-2 can promote the anti-tumour microenvironment in patients ( ). 

10

## Biomarkers linked to ICI therapy
In recent years, the role of biomarkers in predicting response to ICI therapy is increasingly investigated. Several important biomarkers, such as tumour mutational burden (TMB), microsatellite instability (MSI), gene expression profiling (GEP), PD-L1 expression, and the gut microbiome, are promising in predicting response to ICI in cancer patients. Studies have reported the positive correlation between high TMB and the response to ICI in cancer patients. In a study, high median TMB were detected in respondents treated with nivolumab. Moreover, further results have suggested that TMB may be used as imperfect biomarkers for overall survival and progression-free survival in cancer patients. Andrews et al. have used a deidentified nationwide (US-based) melanoma clinicogenomic database to examine the reliability on TMB to predict ICI response. Results have suggested that high TMB is associated with real-world progression-free survival and overall survival in patients treated with mono and dual ICIs. The overall response rate in MSI-H and TMB-H patients has been assessed. There have been 50.0 % and 64.1 % overall response rates in MSI-H and TMB-H patients, respectively, who received only immunotherapy. In addition, for patients with both TMB-H and MSI-H, the overall response rate was found to be 50 %, with the disease control rate as 75 % . In another cohort study involving 674 patients, there was a significant relationship between TMB-H and higher survival rates in ICI-treated patients . Tissue TMB-high status has been associated with the robust responses to pembrolizumab monotherapy. Therefore, tissue TMB can be used as a biomarker of response to pembrolizumab monotherapy in patients with previously treated recurrent or metastatic advanced solid tumours . Therefore, these studies suggest the promising scopes of TMB and MSI in predicting responses to ICI therapy.
Mismatch repair-deficient (dMMR) tumours displaying microsatellite instability have been suggested to predict progression-free survival in patients with metastatic colorectal cancer following anti-PD-1 therapy . GEP is becoming increasingly popular to predict the outcome of ICI therapy. Two important GEPs, such as IFN-γ signatures and TIS (tumour inflammation signature) have promising scopes in selecting NSCLC patients who would benefit from the ICI therapies .
Differential gene expression is mainly linked to antigen processing and presentation. In another investigation, gene expression profile was analysed to detect a differential set of genes that were linked to ICI therapy in metastatic renal cell carcinoma patients. Interestingly, a set of 14 genes was found to be associated with the responder patients treated with ipilimumab and/or nivolumab. In the case of patients with advanced NSCLC, six gene signatures (Lung Tumour Score – LungTS have been suggested that discriminated patients with low and high risk of death. The study involved a cohort of 66 Brazilian patients and a validation cohort composed of 54 Spanish patients . The majority of these patients were treated with nivolumab. Therefore, gene expression profiling is a promising approach to screen patients who can respond better to ICI therapy.
Accumulating evidence suggests that, in addition to cellular, genetic, and molecular markers, gut microbiomes could act as potential biomarkers for ICI therapy. Various bacterial species can be used as potential markers for anti-PD-1 or anti-CTLA-4 therapy efficacy in patients with melanoma . In a study, Phascolarctobacterium was abundant in patients with clinical benefit from the immune checkpoint blockade and was also positively associated with the prolonged progression-free survival. However, the abundance of Dialister was associated with reduced progression-free survival and progressive disease . In another investigation, it was addressed that a reduced number of Bacteroidetes is associated with colitis . Moreover, patients with anti-PD-1 refractory metastatic melanoma showed improved response rates when fecal microbiota transplant (FMT) from patients with anti-PD-1 responsive disease was performed. Another study has shown that the status of gut microbiome can vary in ICI responders and non-responders. Bacterial species Coprococcus comes and Faecalibacterium prausnitzii were abundant in responders of ≥ 2 cancer types or from ≥ 3 cohorts. The gut microbiome may modulate the CD8+ T cell activity to influence the efficacy of ICI therapy . The gut microbiome can influence the response to PD-1-based therapy. In a study, oral supplementation with Akkermansia muciniphila after fecal microbiota transplantation using nonresponder faeces restored the efficacy of PD-1 blockade. Increased efficacy was achieved in an IL-12-dependent manner by promoting the recruitment of CCR9 +CXCR3 +CD4 + T lymphocytes into the mouse tumour beds .

11

## Strategies for the mitigation of IrAEs
Strategies to mitigate IrAEs caused by ICIs include careful patient selection, baseline assessments, and regular monitoring during treatment. Identifying high-risk patients and implementing prophylactic measures, such as corticosteroids, can help prevent severe irAEs. Additionally, establishing standardized grading systems and management guidelines for IrAEs can facilitate timely and effective interventions. Diagnosis of organ-specific toxicity is essential as the management of IrAEs varies from organ to organ. Schneider et al. have discussed strategies to control IrAEs. According to them, ICI therapy can be continued in case of grade-1 toxicity. However, the therapy may be discontinued in the majority of grade-2 toxicities. Corticosteroid treatment may be initiated to revert grade-2 toxicity to grade-1. In case of grade-3 toxicity, ICI therapy should be terminated, followed by high-dose administration of corticosteroids (initial dose 0.5–1 mg/kg/day prednisone or equivalent) and should be tapered over 4–6 weeks. In patients diagnosed with grade-4 toxicity, ICI therapy should be permanently discontinued except for endocrinopathies that have been treated through hormonal replacement. Early detection of IrAEs can help reverse the detrimental outcome. Biomarkers can aid in early detection and suitable intervention. An increase in the levels of CD177 and CEACAM1 has been considered as the biomarkers of colitis after treatment with ipilimumab . FDI has approved biomarkers like PD-L1, microsatellite instability (MSI), and tumour mutational burden (TMB), which are currently used in the selection of patients for ICI therapy in clinical settings , . Gene signature biomarkers such as melanocytic plasticity signature (MPS), T cell dysfunction and exclusion gene signature (TIDE), T cell inflamed gene expression profile (GEP), and B cell focused gene signature have been compared and MPS gene signature is found better and superior to the PD-L1 and TMB . Blood count monitoring can also be used as an effective biomarker of early IrAEs. For instance, neutrophil-to-lymphocyte ratio > 2.3 and platelet-to-lymphocyte ratio > 165 have been associated with the increased risk of IrAEs in patients treated with pembrolizumab . Changes in non-cardiac biomarkers such as aspartate aminotransferase, alanine aminotransferase, and creatine phosphokinase also help diagnose ICI-mediated myocarditis in patients . Treatment using corticosteroids can produce severe adverse effects. In such cases, the administration of corticosteroids is usually terminated. IL-6 receptor inhibitor tocilizumab, CD20 inhibitor rituximab, and TNF-α inhibitor infliximab are preferred biological agents . Infliximab antibodies target TNF-α and can reduce inflammation by modulation of cytokine pathways. However, administration of infliximab can be associated with heart failure and hence should be used with caution in patients diagnosed with ICI-mediated myocarditis . In clinical settings, patients treated with rituximab had reduced neurological issues , . Moreover, rituximab had inhibitory effects on the reactivation of primary membranous nephropathy induced by ICI therapy . Rituximab has been used in combination with the PD-1 inhibitors to improve the conditions of follicular lymphoma, as the effectiveness of the drug has been confirmed in several clinical trials. Tocilizumab has inhibitory effects on IL-6, and it helps mitigate the IrAEs associated with the digestive and respiratory systems , . Studies have reported that therapy using tocilizumab notably alleviates clinical symptoms of steroid-refractory IrAEs . The drug has therapeutic effects on cancer-associated cachexia and can be synergistically used along with ICI therapy .
Therefore, combining ICIs with other immunomodulatory agents or using alternative dosing schedules may help minimize IrAEs. Furthermore, developing personalized treatment strategies based on individual patient profiles is a promising area of investigation. Future research should focus on elucidating the underlying mechanisms of IrAEs, identifying novel biomarkers, and developing more targeted and effective therapies to mitigate these adverse effects. Moreover, studies examining the impact of ICIs on the gut microbiome and their potential role in IrAEs are warranted. Ultimately, a multidisciplinary approach involving oncologists, immunologists, and other healthcare professionals is essential to optimize ICI therapy and minimize IrAEs.

12

## ICI cost and accessibility
ICI therapy is available for the treatment of several cancers. However, their adoption is limited due to financial burdens on patients. Generally, ICIs like cabozantinib plus atezolizumab, pembrolizumab plus lenvatinib, tislelizumab, durvalumab, camrelizumab plus rivoceranib, and atezolizumab plus bevacizumab are costly compared to tyrosine kinase inhibitors or other ICIs.
The cost-effectiveness of the therapy may vary depending on the type of ICI used and the country. For instance, in a study, the adoption of nivolumab for ICI-based therapy was considered costly in the US for the treatment of hepatocellular carcinoma. Nevertheless, the combination therapy involving atezolizumab plus bevacizumab has been considered cost-effective in the US , . Notably, atezolizumab and bevacizumab are not considered cost-effective in Thailand and France. In China, several regimens, such as sintilimab plus bevacizumab/bevacizumab biosimilar, are considered cost-effective , . Nonetheless, some regimens like cabozantinib plus atezolizumab are not cost-effective in China . Studies have demonstrated that combination therapy involving ICIs and chemotherapy is more cost-effective compared to subsequent ICI therapy after chemotherapy in patients with metastatic urothelial carcinoma . Studies have also reviewed the cost-effectiveness of ICI therapies and concluded that ICI therapy may not be cost-effective compared to conventional chemotherapy approaches . However, several factors such as overall survival, long-term outcome, and combination therapy might be influential factors for the choice of drugs for particular patients. Another investigation compared the incremental cost-effectiveness ratio of ICI with that of sorafenib. Analysis of five studies has revealed that ICI has a higher incremental cost-effectiveness ratio compared to sorafenib in patients with hepatocellular carcinoma. The outcome of the study suggested that ICI was not a cost-effective option when compared to the drug, sorafenib, for the treatment of patients with hepatocellular carcinoma . In another study, sequential and combination ICI therapy were analysed for their cost-effectiveness in patients with melanoma. Combination therapy employing PD-1/PD-L1 and anti-CTLA was costly and also toxic to patients. Nonetheless, sequential therapy commencing with the PD-1/PD-L1 was comparatively more cost-effective . Healthcare disparities in ICI therapy persist, limiting access to these life-saving treatments for certain populations. Communities, particularly in rural and low-income areas, face barriers to adopting ICI therapy due to limited access to specialized cancer centres, inadequate healthcare infrastructure, and disparities in insurance coverage and reimbursement policies. Sometimes, systemic inequalities and biases within the healthcare system further reduce access to ICI therapy. As a result, some populations often receive delayed or inadequate treatment, ultimately affecting disease outcomes and survival rates. In a study, it has been demonstrated that non-Hispanic (NH)-Black patients receive ICI therapy 15 % less compared with their NH-White counterparts . This study suggests racial/ethnic disparities in the utilisation of ICI therapy. Such disparity requires further interventions so that access to ICI therapy can be optimized.

13

## Conclusion
In essence, cancer cells employ a complex array of strategies to hijack the PD-1/PD-L1 and CTLA-4-mediated signalling to mask the anti-cancer immune response. It helps in tumour progression. Recent advances in immune checkpoint inhibition have shown promising clinical outcomes. However, the development of autoimmune diseases and inflammatory reactions poses significant challenges to their safe application in cancer patients. Elucidating the mechanism of immune response modulation by emerging ICIs and identifying promising biomarkers for ICI-mediated immunotoxicity can help better manage the IrAEs, associated with this immunotherapy. Implementation of combination therapy along with the use of anti-inflammatory drugs with fewer side effects can also help mitigate the adverse effects of ICIs in patients. Moreover, searching for novel ICIs and in-depth understanding of tumour microenvironment are crucial for the effective management of IrAEs in cancer patients.

## CRediT authorship contribution statement
Prem Rajak: Writing – review & editing, Writing – original draft, Conceptualization.

## Declaration of Competing Interest
The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper.

 

## Data Availability
No data was used for the research described in the article.

## Acknowledgements
The author is thankful to BioRender.com, which was used to prepare illustrations for this work.