2182stemcrStem Cell ReportsStem Cell ReportsElsevierPMC1244734412447344124473444081627210.1016/j.stemcr.2025.102600Adult hippocampal neurogenesis: New avenues for treatment of brain disorders
ChenLiying LiZhongxia WangWenqi ZhouYiting LiWenlu WangYi 1Department of Pharmacy, Sir Run Run Shaw Hospital, School of Medicine, Zhejiang University, Hangzhou, Zhejiang, China2Zhejiang Collaborative Innovation Center for the Brain Diseases with Integrative Medicine, Zhejiang Key Laboratory of Neuropsychopharmacology, School of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Zhejiang Chinese Medical University, Hangzhou, Zhejiang, China∗Corresponding author 3320057@zju.edu.cn
∗∗Corresponding author wang-yi@zju.edu.cn
3These authors contributed equally
14820252091026001026002092025© 2025 The AuthorsThis is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/).

## Summary
Neurogenesis, the biological process of forming new neurons, was traditionally believed to occur only during embryonic stages in the mammalian central nervous system for a long time. Over the past few decades, due to the development of new techniques and the accumulation of supportive evidence, adult neurogenesis is now accepted as the one of the most robust forms of plasticity in the adult brain, which contributes to physiological function as well as a range of neurological or psychiatric disorders. In this review, we mainly concentrate on adult neurogenesis in the hippocampus, the most likely neurogenic niche with significant roles in various brain functions. We begin by summarizing the current fundamental knowledge of adult hippocampal neurogenesis including proliferation, differentiation, maturation, and synapse formation of neural stem cells. We then focus on the potential roles of these adult-born neurons and their contribution to learning and memory behaviors and their relevance to various diseases. Furthermore, we review regulatory mechanisms governing adult hippocampal neurogenesis, including local environmental cues, multiple molecular signaling pathways, and neural network activities. We also discuss possible therapeutic strategies and targets that can be leveraged for future clinical translations. Finally, given the substantial progress in the field of regenerative medicine aimed at harnessing the multipotent resident cells for brain repair, we address remaining challenges and propose our perspectives on future directions for treating central nervous system disorders.
Keywords: adult hippocampal neurogenesis, adult-born neurons, neural stem cell, regenerative medicine, stem cell therapy

In this review, Yi Wang and colleagues begin by summarizing the current knowledge of adult hippocampal neurogenesis. They then focus on the potential roles of adult-born neurons and their contribution to behaviors and diseases. Further, they examine the regulatory mechanisms and discuss possible therapeutic strategies for future clinical translations. Finally, the authors address remaining challenges and propose their perspectives on regenerative medicine.

statusreleaseddisplay-pdfyesis-olfnois-manuscriptnois-preprintnois-journal-matternois-scannednois-retractednoCollection date 2025 Sep 9.

## Introduction
Neurogenesis, the biological process of forming new neurons, was long believed to occur only during embryonic stages in the mammalian central nervous system (CNS). However, in the late 1950s, a new technique was developed to label dividing cells with [3H]-thymidine, which incorporates into the DNA of dividing cells during the S-phase of cell cycle. Then, with the introduction of [3H]-thymidine autoradiography, Joseph Altman and colleagues ( ; ) provided the first evidence of [3H]-thymidine-labeled cells in various brain regions of adult rats, including the dentate gyrus (DG) of the hippocampus, neocortex, and olfactory bulb. These findings on rats were then extended to several species of mammals, where neurogenesis was detected in the postnatal period. Unfortunately, these early findings were given little attention due to technical limitations, including the lack of specific neuronal markers, which impeded further studies. Further support came from in vitro studies that successfully isolated neural stem cells (NSCs) from adult brain tissues ( , ). Subsequently, the field of adult neurogenesis was revolutionized with the emergence of bromodeoxyuridine (BrdU) (another S-phase marker of the cell cycle) and retroviral-based lineage tracing, associated with immunohistochemistry and electrophysiology. These techniques contributed to the first in vivo convincing evidence of adult neurogenesis ( ; ; ) and confirmed that adult-born neurons (ABNs) are indeed functionally and synaptically integrated ( ). However, adult neurogenesis is not wide-spread throughout the brain; instead, it is restricted to two main neurogenic niches: the subventricular zone (SVZ) of the lateral ventricles and the subgranular zone (SGZ) of the hippocampal DG ( ; ; ; ). Altogether, over the past decades, our understanding of adult neurogenesis has progressed significantly with development of new techniques. Today, adult neurogenesis is accepted as one of the most robust forms of plasticity in the adult brain, which contributes to learning and memory as well as various neurological and psychiatric disorders ( ; ; ; ).
In this review, we mainly concentrate on the adult neurogenesis in the SGZ, as the hippocampus remains the most likely neurogenic niche to play a significant role in various brain functions. We will summarize current knowledge about adult hippocampal neurogenesis (AHN), including insights into adult human neurogenesis, a topic under heated discussion in recent years. Then, we will focus on potential functions of these ABNs, including their contribution to behaviors and their relevance to diseases. Furthermore, we will review regulatory mechanisms of AHN, discussing possible therapeutic strategies that may facilitate clinical translations. Finally, we will evaluate the therapeutic potential of regenerative medicine, which is aimed at harnessing the multipotent resident cells for brain repair. The Search strategy is listed in the .
Box 1

## Search strategy
Studies cited in this narrative review, published from 1963 to 2025, were obtained from searching the Pubmed database by using keywords including “adult hippocampal neurogenesis,” “adult-born dentate granule cells,” “adult-born neurons,” “cell proliferation,” “neural stem cell,” “neural progenitor cell,” “regenerative medicine,” “stem cell therapy,” “induced pluripotent stem cell,” “glia to neuron,” and “in vivo reprogramming.” Search results were further filtered by titles and abstracts. All the literature search was conducted between November, 2023 and June, 2025.

## Neurogenesis in the intact adult mammalian DG: Proliferation, differentiation, maturation, and synapse formation of NSCs
In general, the proliferation, differentiation, and eventual survival to maturity of newborn ABNs takes 2–4 weeks in mice and rats, but this process is longer in primates and humans ( ; ). Most knowledge about the specific development and afferent/input of new ABNs comes from studies on laboratory animals. In the hippocampus, SGZ—a thin band between the granule cell layer (GCL) and the hilus—provides a unique microenvironment for adult NSCs. NSCs reside in SGZ and give rise to dentate granule cells (DGCs) through a multistep process: proliferation, differentiation, migration, axon/dendrite targeting, and synaptic integration.
The generation of new neurons starts from relatively quiescent NSCs, generally known as type 1 radial glia-like cells (RGLs). These cells extend a radial process through the GCL into the molecular layer (ML) and are characterized by markers such as GFAP, nestin, and Sox2. Upon activation, they produce proliferating non-radial intermediate progenitor cells, known as type 2 cells, which exhibit transient amplifying characteristics and subsequently give rise to neuroblasts (type 3 cells). Type 3 cells, characterized by the expression of doublecortin (DCX) and polysialylated neural cell adhesion (PSA-NCAM) continue to proliferate but exit the cell cycle prior to full maturation into DGCs. They migrate only a short distance into the inner GCL, projecting out a large dendritic arbor into the ML and an axon into the hilus that terminates on target cells in both the hilus and the CA3 region ( ; ; ; ). As reported by Zhao et al., GFP-expressing axons of newborn ABNs were found in the hilus as early as 7 days after retroviral infection and reached the CA3 at 10–11 days ( ). Once mature, these newborn ABNs develop into glutamatergic DGCs that share many characteristics with embryonic-generated DGCs ( ; ).
Identifying the development of connections of ABNs is essential for understanding their integration into existing circuitry and how AHN refines these pre-existing networks. Early studies indicated that newborn ABNs initially receive GABAergic synaptic inputs during their first weeks, presumably from ambient GABA, and only later do they become targets for glutamatergic synapses as well ( ). More recent studies, utilizing rabies-virus-based monosynaptic retrograde tracing techniques, have confirmed this notion and revealed that ABNs received first GABAergic input from multiple local interneurons (∼10 days), followed by modulatory cholinergic from the septal nuclei and glutamatergic synaptic input (∼2 weeks) from local glutamatergic inputs, and finally integrating into the classic hippocampal tri-synaptic circuits (∼3 weeks) ( ) ( ; ). Initially, GABA currents are excitatory and tonic; then, phasic GABA post-synaptic currents emerge, and immature ABNs are activated by them due to a higher concentration of intracellular chloride ions ( ). The first glutamatergic inputs come from local mature DGCs and glutamatergic mossy fibers, which develop during the second week. Then, the newborn ABNs start to express NMDA receptors containing NR2B subunit that lowers the threshold for induction of long-term potentiation (LTP) and enhanced plasticity ( ). However, these inputs diminish as the newborn ABNs mature ( ; ). This finding suggests that immature ABNs, compared with embryonically generated mature DGCs, are “young and excitable,” highlighting a unique phase of heightened responsiveness in their early development.
 By the end of the first month, immature ABNs differentiate into functional neurons, acquiring passive membrane properties, forming synaptic connections, and gaining the ability to generate action potentials (APs), with most of their morphological growth also completed. However, their electrophysiological properties at this age (4 and 6 weeks post-mitosis) remain distinct from those of neighboring mature DGCs. Specifically, these immature ABNs are more excitable, exhibiting higher input resistance, lower threshold voltage, and a slower membrane time constant. Additionally, they are more prone to LTP as well as long-term depression (LTD), indicating enhanced synaptic plasticity ( ; ; ). These characteristics suggest a “critical period” during which immature ABNs and mature DGCs display differences in excitability and plasticity. During this time, ABNs are also likely to function differently from mature DGCs ( ; ), a topic that will be further explored in the section on the “ .” However, as these ABNs mature, they tend to be under stronger inhibitory control and the range of stimuli that elicit firing narrows, resulting from sparser activity, which is typical of mature DGCs ( ; ).

## Adult hippocampal neurogenesis in humans
The discovery of adult mammalian neurogenesis sparked interest in exploring the existence of adult human neurogenesis ( ; ). The first study demonstrating the existence of AHN in humans was published by Eriksson and colleagues in 1998 ( ). Taking advantage of the administration of BrdU, they demonstrated the presence of a restricted population of ABNs in human DG, aligning with prior findings in rodents. Subsequent studies have quantified ABNs using immunohistochemistry with neuronal precursor markers such as nestin, Ki67, and DCX ( ; ; ). Meanwhile, they have revealed the dynamics of AHN, showing that a substantial number of neuroblasts decrease sharply during the first postnatal year and then decline more moderately through childhood and into adulthood. This conclusion was further supported by Spalding et al., who employed an innovative approach, using nuclear-bomb-test-derived 14C dating to retrospectively birthdating cells from the human hippocampus. They found that 1/3 of human hippocampal neurons are subject to exchange, with an annual turnover rate of 1.75% within the renewing fraction, accompanied by a modest decline during aging ( ). Despite the evidence presented above, several studies have reported scarce or even absent staining for markers of ABNs in the adult human DG, starting as early as the early 20s ( ; ; ), thereby challenging the existence of human AHN. Notably, Sorrells et al. reported that, distinct from other mammalian species, neurogenesis in human DG dropped to undetectable levels as early as childhood. Interestingly, in another study published just a few weeks after Sorrells and colleagues, Boldrini et al. came to the opposite conclusion, reporting evidence of lifelong neurogenesis in humans ( ). There are also other contemporary publications in support of persistent presence of ABN markers in the adult human DG throughout life ( ; ).
The conflicting findings are particularly intriguing given that these studies used similar detection methods. Both Sorrells et al. and Boldrini et al. calculated the number of cells expressing DCX or PSA-NCAM, two established markers for immature neurons in the adult brain, raising important technical concerns in the field. One major limitation in the field of human AHN research is the postmortem nature of the samples used, where discrepancies may arise from variations in tissue processing techniques. Seemingly trivial factors can critically affect the quantitative detection of ABN markers, such as tissue fixation procedures, postmortem delay (PTD, the interval between death and sample’s immersion in fixative), and the stereological method used for cell counting ( ; ). Specifically, different fixation periods (1–48 h) in freshly prepared 4% PFA has been reported to result in different immunohistochemistry outcomes. A controlled time course study on PTD reported that DCX staining weakened significantly within just a few hours after death, indicating that relatively long PTD would mask the DCX antigen. However, fixation with commercial formalin for several months has been a routine method used at most brain banks ( ).Therefore, due to the special nature of human brain studies, the poor performance of immunohistochemistry on postmortem samples remains a major obstacle.
Instead of immunohistochemistry on postmortem samples, more recently, single-cell/single-nucleus RNA sequencing (sc/snRNA-seq) was utilized, aided by a validated machine-learning-based analytic approach to identify immature DGCs and quantify them in the human hippocampus at different developmental stages across the lifespan (child, adolescence, adulthood, and aging). Their findings revealed a substantial presence of immature DGCs in the adult human hippocampus via low-frequency de novo generation and protracted maturation ( ; ; ). However, while Franjic et al. revealed robust transcriptomic and histologic signatures of neurogenesis in the adult mouse, pig, and macaque, they failed to identify any neurogenic populations in humans ( ). The scarcity of high-quality postmortem brain tissue, discrepancies in sample processing, experimental design, and computational analysis may also impact the reliable identification of neurogenic cell types in humans using sequencing technologies ( ). Using spatial genomics to examine adult neurogenesis will also add more important data to this field. Further, as sc/snRNA-seq approaches start shedding light on the cellular and molecular complexities of the adult human DG, coordinated efforts are needed to reconcile findings across studies to create a unified taxonomy of cell types and specify signatures of human neural progenitor populations and their lineage trajectories, rather than relying on rodent-derived gene lists.
Overall, currently, each of the experimental strategies used to identify and visualize neural progenitors and progeny in human brains has its own limitations and potential methodological confounders, which must be carefully considered. To resolve ongoing controversies surrounding human AHN, the field must progress beyond isolated efforts and adopt a more collaborative, interdisciplinary approach. First, establishing international guidelines and standardized protocols for tissue processing, marker selection, cell clustering, and annotation is essential to reduce methodological variability and enhance comparability across studies. In addition, expanding access to large-scale, well-annotated postmortem human brain banks will ensure more consistent and high-quality tissue samples, thereby improving the reliability of findings. Meanwhile, sharing raw data from transcriptomic, imaging, and histological studies on public platforms will facilitate replication, re-analysis, and larger-scale meta-studies that can further clarify the existence and extent of adult human neurogenesis. On the other hand, definitive evidence for AHN in living human subjects will require the development of non-invasive monitoring techniques. The development of non-invasive imaging techniques (e.g., PET tracers specific to neurogenesis-related markers) or circulating biomarkers (e.g., in CSF or blood) would allow for longitudinal tracking of neurogenesis dynamics. These tools would significantly advance our ability to investigate AHN in both health and disease and may ultimately open new therapeutic avenues for neurological diseases.

## Functional significance of adult hippocampal neurogenesis
Studies on neurogenesis have shifted from merely questioning the existence of AHN to exploring the functional contributions that ABNs make in both healthy and diseased brains. In this section, we will briefly review the contributions of AHN to learning and memory and discuss the effects of certain pathological conditions on AHN as well as the consequences of modulating AHN levels or ABN activity, to shed light on the functional significance of ABNs.

## Learning and memory
Accumulating evidence has suggested that AHN plays significant roles in cognition, learning, and memory ( ; ; ). Behavioral tests such as the Morris water maze (MWM), eight-arm radial maze (RAM), and Barnes maze as well as working memory tests using the delayed matching-to-sample (DMS) or delayed nonmatching-to-sample (DNMS) protocols have been used to assess learning and memory. Strategies to enhance or ablate ABNs have often resulted in cognitive improvement or deficits, respectively, nonetheless conflicting.
Both voluntary exercise and enriched environment (EE) increase AHN; meanwhile, they have also been reported to improve performance in spatial learning ( ; ) and recognition ( ) while reversing the negative effects of aging and stress. In contrast, abolishing AHN using anti-mitotics, irradiation, or genetic manipulations has led to deficits in contextual fear conditioning, spatial learning and memory in various models, while negating the positive effects of EE and exercise ( ; ; ; ; ). However, other studies have shown that reduced AHN has little impact on spatial learning ( ) but may severely impair contextual memory ( ; ). In addition, reducing AHN was also reported not to affect neither contextual fear conditioning nor spatial navigation learning ( ). Surprisingly, experiments with GFAP-TK transgenic mice demonstrated that ablating AHN led to improved working memory in the RAM task concurrently with impaired contextual fear conditioning ( ). Taken together, the findings from different studies are quite contradictory, possibly owing to the use of different behavioral tests, animal species, and strategies to modulate AHN, as well as variations in the duration, intensity, and efficiency of these interventions.
Several studies have associated AHN with pattern separation, a computational process by which overlapping or similar inputs (representations) are transformed into less similar, non-overlapping outputs, including spatial inputs and contextual inputs ( ; ; ). Clelland et al. were the first to demonstrate the effect of ablating AHN on spatial pattern separation ( ). Using a spatial discrimination task and a delayed nonmatching-to-place RAM task, they found that hippocampal x-irradiation effectively inhibited AHN, impairing the animal’s ability to make fine (but not large) spatial discriminations. In contrast, Tronel et al., using Nestin-rtTA/Tet-Bax bigenic mice to selectively deplete AHN, found that the animal’s ability to discriminate between a shock-associated training context and a no-shock context was comparable to controls, as indicated by similar levels of freezing behavior in both contexts ( ). These findings indicate that AHN is essential for pattern separation across various behavioral paradigms. In a subsequent study, Sahay and colleagues not only confirmed that hippocampal x-irradiation impaired the animals’ ability to discriminate between two similar contexts but also developed a genetic strategy to selectively increase AHN. They demonstrated that mice with more functionally integrated ABNs performed better in contextual discrimination tasks ( ). Overall, these results indicate that AHN is both sufficient and necessary for pattern separation.
Although the general pattern of afferent and efferent connectivity of newborn ABNs in the SGZ recapitulates that of developmentally generated DGCs, newborn ABNs exhibit heightened excitability and synaptic plasticity during a specific time window of their maturation (4–6 weeks post-mitosis) compared to mature DGCs ( ; ). This unique feature suggests a distinct contribution for immature ABNs in hippocampal-dependent behaviors such as contextual encoding and pattern separation ( ; ; ; ; ; ). Initially, it may seem quite paradoxical: the “sparse coding” of DG is essential for pattern separation as it minimizes overlap in neuronal responses, allowing similar inputs to be represented distinctly; however, immature ABNs are highly excitable and thus respond to a broader range of stimuli. Indeed, while immature ABNs are excitable themselves, they contribute to feedback inhibition in the DG, which ultimately reduces DG activity and supports sparse coding ( ; ; ; ). Meanwhile, due to their lower activation threshold, immature ABNs preferentially respond to subtle changes in context and decrease the firing probability of mature DGCs through feedback inhibition ( ). However, ablation or inhibition of ABNs does not always alter the overall firing rate of the DG ( ). Alternatively, immature ABNs may contribute to the formation of distinct engrams by modulating the activity of hippocampal network through multiple mechanisms. For example, Luna et al. reported that the inhibitory or excitatory effects on mature DGCs depend on the excitation levels of immature DGCs ( ).
Furthermore, ABNs may retain some unique properties even after reaching maturity, both morphologically ( ) and functionally, including increased learning-induced plasticity ( ; ).

## Brain disorders
Brain disorders may arise from a variety of causes, including injuries, genetic factors, and degenerative processes. They can lead to a wide range of symptoms affecting cognitive, motor, sensory, and emotional functions. Generally, these disorders are broadly categorized into neurodegenerative disorders, seizure disorders, mental and psychiatric disorders, cerebrovascular disorders, and more. In the following section, we will discuss the roles of AHN in relation to these aforementioned major types of brain disorders.

## Neuropsychiatric disorders
There is much evidence in both animal and human studies that neuropsychiatric disorders (including major depression, anxiety, schizophrenia, etc.) are linked to alterations in AHN.
Stress is a major risk factor for several neuropsychiatric disorders. Enhanced stress responses can exacerbate depression and anxiety-like behaviors with dysregulation of glucocorticoids, which not only directly affect NSCs but also influence the expression of pro-inflammatory genes and downregulate the expression of brain-derived neurotrophic factor (BDNF), a key regulator of neuronal growth, survival, and plasticity ( ; ; ). Both acute and chronic stress have been shown to decrease AHN ( ; ; ; ; ), whereas experimentally increasing AHN may increase resilience to chronic stress ( ; ) ( ). For instance, Anacker et al. found that chemogenetic inhibition of ABNs promoted susceptibility to social defeat stress, whereas increasing AHN conferred resilience to stress possibly through modulation of the activity of mature DGCs, indicating that AHN was both sufficient and necessary for stress resilience ( ).
 Depression, the most common psychiatric disorder, is characterized by low mood, anxiety, anhedonia, and reduced ability to concentrate ( ; ). A number of clinically used classic antidepressants such as fluoxetine were reported to strongly enhance AHN both in animal studies and in postmortem human brains ( ) ( ). A recent meta-analysis has also confirmed that chronic treatments involving most commonly used antidepressants significantly increase AHN ( ). In turn, although neurogenesis-independent effects of fluoxetine were also reported in some behavioral paradigms ( ), the ablation of AHN was always reported to reverse the therapeutic effects of antidepressants ( ; ; ) ( ). For example, using irradiation to inhibit neurogenesis, Santarelli et al. found that the ability of fluoxetine to affect mood-related behavior in rodents was substantially reduced ( ). However, the precise mechanisms through which ABNs might influence the antidepressant response remain elusive. Further studies not only confirmed the necessary role of AHN for the antidepressant effects of fluoxetine but also found that intact AHN was required for the ability of fluoxetine to restore hippocampal regulation of the HPA axis under chronic stress conditions ( ). More recently, chemogenetic silencing of ABNs, without altering the level of AHN, was also found to abolish the antidepressant effects of fluoxetine ( ). These observations may also help explain why classic antidepressants always take several weeks to become effective since antidepressants-induced neurogenesis would take several weeks to become functionally integrated. However, a new antidepressant, ketamine, known for its rapid and sustained antidepressant properties ( ; ), has also been found to rapidly increase BDNF expression in the hippocampus, stimulating AHN, and accelerate the maturation of immature ABNs ( ; ). Indeed, the influence of ketamine on AHN could be mostly associated with its sustained antidepressant activation; whereas synaptogenesis and neural plasticity, especially in the medial prefrontal cortex, appear to have a prominent role in the early phases of ketamine’s actions ( , ; ; , ).
 On the other hand, decreased neurogenesis has been implicated in depression and anxiety disorders in a large number of animal and human studies ( ; ; ; ) ( ). Various animal models, including acute psychosocial stress, unpredicted chronic mild stress (UCMS), and predator intruder stress paradigms, have been widely employed to evaluate the level of AHN in the context of depression, consistently showing its suppression ( ; ; ). In human studies, multiple studies using magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) have reported decreased hippocampal volume associated with depression ( ; ; ), which may indirectly reflect altered AHN. Additional evidence from postmortem human studies using immunohistochemistry has provided further support for the alteration of AHN in depression ( ; ). Emerging techniques, particularly sc/snRNA-seq, hold great promise for dissecting the cellular diversity and gene expression dynamics within the human DG, thus providing a comprehensive understanding of human AHN in depression/anxiety in the near future.
However, it remains unclear whether these changes are a cause or consequence of the disorder. Ablating neurogenesis in healthy experimental animals often failed to induce depressive phenotypes ( ; ; ); only a few studies in mice following acute and chronic stress have shown that abolition of AHN can induce depressive-like symptoms ( ; ) ( ). Using transgenic and radiation methods to decrease adult neurogenesis, Synder et al. found that neurogenesis-deficient mice showed more severe depressive behaviors after acute stress, and their glucocorticoid levels were slower to recover after moderate stress compared with mice with intact neurogenesis ( ). Selectively activating newborn ABNs was reported to mimic the effects of fluoxetine, reversing the adverse effects of UCMS, indicating a direct protective role of ABNs in depression ( ). Thus, impairment of AHN may not be sufficient to induce a depression phenotype but could act as a risk factor, contributing to depression when concomitant with stressful experiences.
 

## Epilepsy
Epilepsy is a multifarious and deliberating disease, characterized by hypersynchronous or excessive spontaneous recurrent seizures (SRSs), affecting ∼1% of the population ( ; ; ). Epileptogenesis is usually triggered by an initial epileptogenic insult, such as status epilepticus (SE), stroke, or head trauma. This is followed by a prolonged latent period, lasting for months to years before the onset of SRS. During this latency, a variety of cellular changes including neurogenesis often occur in the hippocampus. It has been found that even a single injection of pilocarpine or kainic acid (KA) can cause a robust increase in the proliferation of neural progenitors in the DG ( ; ; ). However, this increased AHN after acute seizures decreases sharply following the initial seizure episode as reported in both animal and human studies ( ; ; ; ). These findings indicate a transient increase of AHN after seizures. According to Sierra et al., the long-term decline in neurogenesis may be explained by the “exhaustion” of the NSC pool or alterations in the neurogenic niche ( ). In addition, AHN is differently regulated by the severity of seizures, including the frequency of convulsive seizures and the extent of seizures as well as the developmental state of the brain at the time of initial seizure induction ( ; ; ).
Apart from the quantitative changes in neurogenesis after acute SE, significant qualitative alterations have also been reported ( ). Retroviral fluorescent protein labeling of proliferating neuroblasts and their progeny has been used as a successful strategy to enable detailed morphological analysis. Different from ABNs born under physiological conditions, which typically extend a single dendrite arising from the apical portion of the cell body branching into the outer GCL or inner ML, seizure-generated ABNs tend to develop additional basal dendrites extending toward the hilus (known as hilar basal dendrites, HBDs) ( ; ). The morphological features of these newborn ABNs (varying degrees of HBD formation) depend on their stage of neuronal maturation, especially their specific age relative to SE induction ( ; ; ). Moreover, ABNs with HBDs were reported to have reduced dendritic spine density and received significant recurrent inputs from neighboring DGCs, as evidenced by both anatomical and electrophysiological studies ( ; ; ; ). These findings suggest that ABNs may contribute to epileptogenesis.
Another notable qualitative alteration is the generation of ectopic ABNs. They are born after SE and migrate to the hilus after maturation instead of the GCL, which is a normal position for the newborn ABNs ( ; ; ). Similar ectopically located ABNs have also been observed in the epileptic human hippocampus ( ). Accompanying with their aberrant location, these hilar ectopic ABNs exhibit distinct electrophysiological properties compared to their normotopic counterparts. For example, intracellular recordings from pilocarpine-treated rats showed that hilar “granule-like” neurons burst synchronously with CA3 pyramidal cells, a phenomenon not observed between normal DGCs and CA3 pyramidal cells in non-epileptic animals ( ). Additionally, electrophysiological studies demonstrated that these hilar ectopic ABNs showed higher ratios of excitatory to inhibitory inputs than normal DGCs ( ; ). Although the appearance of hilar ectopic newborn ABNs varies depending on the seizure model used ( ), indicating that they may not be necessary for epileptogenesis, they are generally considered to play a pro-epileptic role ( ). While intriguing, current findings are based solely on correlation studies, and direct evidence for their functional significance remains lacking due to the absence of selective methods to manipulate hilar ectopic ABNs ( ; ).
With the development of technologies to manipulate the level of AHN and modulate the activity of ABNs, accumulating evidence from both animal models and human studies supports a critical role for AHN in epilepsy ( ). Initially, unselective antimitotic agents and X-irradiation were commonly used, yielding conflicting results. Suppressing AHN was found to accelerate epileptogenesis in a kindling model ( ), reduce SRSs in a pilocarpine-induced TLE model ( , ), and show no effects sometimes ( ; ; ). Negative results could potentially be attributed to factors including off-target effects, toxic effects of antimitotic drugs, and insufficient reduction of neurogenesis; however, they may also be attributed to the heterogeneity of ABNs. Indeed, due to the heterogeneous and dynamic nature of ABNs, the reported conflicts of their effects are not unexpected. The use of non-selective techniques to manipulate may further obscure the precise functional roles of ABNs, highlighting the need for more refined and selective approaches.
 Recently, advances in transgenic mouse models have provided more selective methods to manipulate and investigate the role of ABNs in epilepsy. For instance, Cho et al. used a transgenic mouse model to block neurogenesis 1 month prior to SE induction and observed a significant reduction in SRS, along with improved cognitive function ( ). Subsequently, Varma et al. performed continuous and concurrent ablation of seizure-induced neurogenesis for over 4 weeks following SE, which is a clinically relevant time period, and also found a reduction in SRS ( ). Interestingly, Jain et al. also reported a reduction in chronic seizures after selectively increasing nestin-expressing progenitors 6 weeks prior to the pilocarpine-induced SE ( ). These findings further indicated the need for a more comprehensive view of the heterogeneous roles of ABNs generated at different time points relative to epileptogenesis. Meanwhile, similar to antimitotics, using these approaches to ablate ABNs may also disrupt the formation of their native neural circuits during development of epilepsy.
In contrast, optogenetic and chemogenetic methods provide inducible, reversible, and spatially/temporally precise interventions to modulate the activity of ABNs, making them more suitable for dissecting functional roles without permanently altering the neurogenic niche. Zhou et al. found that chemogenetic silencing of newborn ABNs generated acutely post-SE induction reduced both epileptic spikes and SRSs, revealing an essential role for newborn ABNs in the production of epileptic spikes and SRSs ( ). Moreover, our recently published work supported the role of newborn ABNs in seizure maintenance and provided direct evidence for the downstream circuit mechanism underlying pro-epileptic role of newborn ABNs generated acutely after seizures ( ). In contrast, our subsequent work demonstrated a protective role for ABNs generated under enriched environment (EE), highlighting the heterogeneity of ABNs ( ). Further studies are still in need to precisely distinguish the detrimental and protective ABNs, assisted by advances in neuro-technologies.

## Alzheimer disease
Alzheimer disease (AD), a leading cause of dementia, is characterized by progressive neuronal cell death, atrophy of specific brain areas, and histopathological hallmarks. These include the extracellular senile plaques containing β-amyloid peptide (Aβ), derived from amyloid precursor protein (APP), and intracellular neurofibrillary tangles composed of hyperphosphorylated Tau protein ( ; ; ). These pathological alterations lead to progressive neuronal dysfunction and degeneration, resulting in severe cognitive deficits.
In human brains, the number of DCX-positive cells was found to decrease with age ( ; ). Thus, in neurodegenerative diseases like AD, AHN has been speculated to decline earlier and more rapidly in AD patients. However, findings from both human and animal studies have been contradictory ( ; ). In human studies, early studies of AHN reported an increase in AHN in AD patients ( ; ), indicating a compensatory mechanism. However, more recent studies have suggested a predominant decrease in AHN in AD patients ( ; ; ). For instance, using high-quality, short PTD samples, Tobin et al. reported a significant decrease in the number of DCX/PCNA-colabeled neuroblasts in individuals with both mild cognitive impairment and AD ( ). Additionally, the decrease was also confirmed by employing single-cell transcriptomics in the AD human postmortem DG ( ). Indeed, the controversy can at least partly be blamed on different staining methodologies and inconsistency in postmortem human samples as we have discussed in the above part “ .”
On the other hand, a number of animal models recapitulating AD have been generated based on human mutations and phenotypes, investigating the impact of AD on AHN. There are also contradictory results among animal studies. The majority of animal studies using transgenic mouse lines include familial Alzheimer disease (FAD)-associated mutations in amyloid precursor protein (APP) and/or presenilin-1 (PS1), as well as in the microtubule-associated protein Tau (MAPT) and have reported decreases in AHN, consistent with initial hypotheses ( ; ; ). However, several studies have found increased AHN ( ; ; ), whereas others have reported no change in similar AD models ( ). Triple transgenic (3×Tg) and 5×FAD mouse models are among the most widely used AD models ( ; ; ). In both models, the extent of AHN increases at an early age, prior to amyloid deposition, but decreases significantly in the elder ( ; ; ). However, the precise timing of these changes is highly variable. Taken together, discrepancies in transgenic mouse lines, technical issues such as mouse handling, experimental paradigms, especially the timing to detect AHN, and the types of markers used may help explain the observed controversies.
In addition, the morphology and functional integration of newborn ABNs in AD mouse models have been reported to be abnormal. For instance, in hAPP transgenic mice, newborn ABNs exhibited increasing dendritic length, spine density, and functional responses compared with controls early in development. However, during later maturation, these ABNs exhibited both morphological and functional impairments ( ).
Accumulating studies suggest that in AD mouse models, the dysregulation of AHN occurs before the onset of classical AD pathology (e.g., Aβ deposition), implying a causative role of AHN in the cognitive decline ( ). However, the direct evidence supporting a role for AHN in AD has remained inconclusive. Hollands et al. reported that selective ablation of AHN in an AD mouse model exacerbated cognitive deficits ( ). Subsequently, Choi et al. demonstrated that genetically and pharmacologically stimulating AHN, in combination with elevating BDNF levels, ameliorated cognitive deficits in 5×FAD mice without reducing Aβ burden. Conversely, suppressing AHN at very early stages of life worsened cognitive performance and led to the loss of pre-existing DGCs later in life ( ). In contrast, a more recent study by Zhang et al. reported that ablating AHN in the APP/PS1 transgenic mice restored the cognitive and synaptic deficits to normal levels ( ). In addition, enhancing maturation and functional integration of ABNs into the existing network, without increasing their number, has also been shown to improve cognitive function in AD ( ). More recently, using reversible and selective optogenetic/chemogenetic stimulation, Li et al. found that activation of supramammillary nucleus (SuM)-enhanced ABNs rescues memory and emotion deficits in 3×Tg and 5×FAD AD mice ( ).

## Stroke
Stroke is one of the leading causes of mortality and disability worldwide ( ; ; ). Approximately 5.5 million people die from stoke annually, and most of the stroke survivors are left with permanent neurological disabilities, leading to heavy social and economic burdens ( ; ). Stroke is caused by the disruption of blood supply to the brain and is classified into two main types: ischemic stroke and hemorrhagic stroke. Ischemic stroke is the most common form of stroke ( ).
Stroke induces changes not only in the brain regions directly affected by the disrupted blood vessel but also in brain areas that are distant from the infarct core, such as the hippocampus ( ). Previous studies indicated that both global and focal brain ischemia induced a transient increase in AHN bilaterally ( ; ; ). Generally, the elevated division rate of neural progenitors peaks within the first week, declines during the second week, and falls back to the baseline level within a few weeks ( ; ). The exact dynamics of this neurogenic response is possibly dependent on the specific stroke model used ( ; ). Moreover, the increase in neurogenesis tends to be higher in cases of larger infarcts (e.g., those induced by temporary occlusion of the middle cerebral artery) compared to small, narrowly circumscribed infarcts (e.g., those induced by photothrombosis) ( ).
Further, morphological maturation, migration, and functional integration of retrovirally labeled newborn ABNs were also studied. Using two well-established models, photothrombosis (PT) and middle cerebral artery occlusion (MCAO), Niv et al. found that most neurons displayed normal migration, with an increased total dendritic length and a higher number of apical dendrites in MCAO animals. However, approximately 5%–10% of newborn ABNs displayed significant morphological abnormalities including the formation of additional HBDs in both models, whereas ectopic ABNs were exclusively found in animals with larger territorial infarcts, such as those induced by MCAO ( ). On the other hand, a more recent study by Cuartero et al. demonstrated that ipsilateral ABNs displayed reduced branching and dendritic length, whereas contralateral ABNs showed enhanced branching and increased dendritic length ( ). Both morphologically normal and aberrant ABNs displayed dendritic spines, suggesting network integration and functional recruitment. In addition, Geibig et al. demonstrated the c-fos expression in newborn ABNs (without distinguishing aberrant and normotopic ABNs) 8 weeks after stroke, indicating functional recruitment. Their activation was context-specific, being greater in “spatiotemporal” tasks compared with “sensorimotor” tasks ( ). More recently, Ceanga et al., demonstrated that stroke accelerated the maturation of the intrinsic electrophysiological properties of DCX+ ABNs, although this was not coupled with development of glutamatergic inputs ( ).
Therapies to enhance neurogenesis following stroke have been tried to improve neurological functions, including stem cell therapy, rehabilitation, and pharmacotherapy ( ). For instance, experiments using neural progenitors in animal ischemic models have provided support for the use of cell transplantation to treat stroke ( ; ; ). Further, short-term and long-term clinical follow-up studies have shown that the infusion of autologous mesenchymal stem cells (MSCs, which will be further discussed in the section “ ”) is feasible and safe with regard to improving functional recovery and survival in patients with ischemic stroke ( ; ), damage of capillary, and increased AHN, while improving functional performance in the MWM ( ). Additionally, EE was also shown to improve functional recovery and exert a small but significant reduction on lesion size in aged stroke rats by promoting neurogenesis and reducing post-stroke inflammation ( ). High-frequency repetitive transcranial magnetic stimulation, a widely used post-stroke rehabilitation method for ischemic stroke, was also reported to promote neurogenesis and improve functional recovery ( ; ). Additionally, medical treatments enhancing neurogenesis have also shown neuroprotective effects in stroke ( ; ; ; ). For instance, treatment with sildenafil, a phosphodiesterase type 5 inhibitor, increased neurogenesis in both SVZ and DG, as well as reduced neurological deficits, although no significant difference of infarct volume was observed in MCAO animals ( ).
Altogether, these findings suggest that neurogenesis may represent a promising target for developing new treatments for ischemic stroke. Nevertheless, there seems not yet evidence solid enough to demonstrate the relationship of increase in neurogenesis and functional recovery of stroke, owing to the lack of results produced by more selective and more precise interventions to modulate neurogenesis. Employing approaches such as targeted radiation or transgenic mouse models may stand out as powerful tools to help address this question and clarify the role of neurogenesis in stroke recovery.

## Factors regulating adult hippocampal neurogenesis
As mentioned above, AHN possesses functional significance under both physiological and pathological conditions, indicating a promising target for clinical translation. However, adult neurogenesis is naturally restricted, with overall efficiency remaining relatively low. Therefore, finding out practical and effective approaches to regulate AHN may provide alternative options for clinical treatment in the future.

## Molecular signaling pathways
NSCs are maintained in a quiescent state in the SGZ, with a fraction dividing symmetrically to expand the neurogenic pool ( ). However, once activated, quiescent NSCs become active and enter the cell cycle (as we have discussed in the section “ ”). The equilibrium between quiescence and activation is tightly regulated by intrinsic and extrinsic factors within the DG ( ; ; ).
Over the past decades, numerous studies have identified several key factors and signaling mechanisms that regulate adult neurogenesis, including the processes of proliferation, differentiation, migration, and synaptic integration. These findings are summarized in . Recently, using birthdating and snRNA-seq, Rasetto et al. delineated a continuous transcriptional trajectory from RGLs through postmitotic immature neurons to fully mature ABNs. They defined four discrete developmental stages—quiescent RGLs, proliferative progenitors, immature ABNs, and mature ABNs—and uncovered the molecular programs orchestrating neuronal differentiation and integration in the adult hippocampus ( ).
 

## Morphogens

## Notch signaling
The mammalian genome contains four Notch receptors (Notch1-4) and five ligands. Notch receptors have been reported to express throughout the DG, with canonical Notch signaling being particularly prominent in both radial and horizontal NSCs (type 1 cells) but absent from type 2 cells and immature neuroblasts (type 3 cells) ( ; ; ). Notch signaling is activated by interactions between Notch receptors and their ligands, leading to sequential proteolytic cleavages in the receptor that release the active Notch intracellular domain (NICD). The NICD is then translocated into the cytoplasm, traversing into the nucleus, where it interacts with the DNA-binding CSL protein (Rbpj in mice). This interaction forms the Notch/RBPJk transcriptional regulator complex, which activates the expression of target genes, including members of the hairy and enhancer of split (Hes) and hairy and enhancer of split-related with YRPW motif (Hey) families.
Numerous studies have reported that Notch signaling is critical for the maintenance of NSCs and the control of their fate in the embryonic CNS ( ; ; ). Similarly, in the adult brain, Notch signaling is also found to be required for self-renewal and maintenance of NSCs ( ; ; ). Previous studies have demonstrated a significant reduction in NSC proliferation within the DG in aged mice, with the quiescence of Notch-dependent NSCs contributing to the age-related decline in neurogenesis ( ). Moreover, ischemia stroke has been reported to upregulate the expression of Hes genes, leading to an expansion of neurogenic pool and increased neuronal differentiation ( ; ).
Gain- and loss-of-function experiments have further provided more direct evidence for the role played by Notch signaling in AHN. Overexpression of the NICD maintained the GFAP-expressing, undifferentiated states of NSCs in vivo; conversely, genetic ablation of Notch1 or Rbpj promoted cell-cycle exit, contributing to a transition from NSCs to transient amplifying cells or neurons ( ; ; ). Downregulation of Hes1, a downstream target of Notch signaling, also significantly increased neuronal production and differentiation in the adult DG, while improving the spatial learning and memory capacity following traumatic brain injury ( ). Although previous studies investigated the role of Notch1 and its transcriptional effector RBPJk, a more recent study has highlighted the role of Notch2 signaling in the DG. Notch2 signaling was found to maintain NSC quiescence by blocking cell-cycle entry, with Id4 identified as its major effector ( ). Moreover, in a pilocarpine-induced epilepsy model in adolescent SD rats, Yuan et al. observed that administrating DAPT, a Notch γ-secretase inhibitor, into the lateral ventricles, suppressed abnormal neurogenesis during the acute phase following SE ( ).

## Wnt signaling
Wnts are secreted signaling molecules that activate signaling cascades involved in different aspects of embryonic development ( ; ; ). The Wnt signaling pathway is activated by Wnt ligands to activate different signaling cascades: the canonical Wnt/β-Catenin signaling pathway and the non-canonical β-Catenin-independent signaling cascades ( ; ).
Recently, Wnt pathway has also been suggested to play a critical role in the adult brain with regard to neurogenesis ( ). For example, Wnt3, which is produced by local hippocampal astrocytes and hilar cells, has been shown to stimulate Wnt/β-Catenin signaling and thereby plays a crucial role in promoting proliferation, differentiation, and survival of neural progenitors as well as rescuing impaired neurogenesis in aged animals ( ; ). Additionally, Wnt7a has been shown to promote self-renewal of NSCs, cell-cycle progression of neural progenitors, and neuronal differentiation, possibly through separate activation of the β-Catenin-cyclin D1 pathway and β-Catenin-neurogenin2 pathway ( ). Conversely, inhibition of Wnt signaling in the SGZ has been associated with reduced proliferation and neuronal differentiation ( ; ; ). Zhou et al. found that chronic restraint stress (CRS) significantly reduced the expression of both Wnt2 and Wnt3 selectively in the ventral hippocampus, rather than the dorsal hippocampus. Further, knocking down Wnt2 or Wnt3 in the ventral hippocampus led to impaired Wnt/β-Catenin signaling pathway, neurogenesis deficits, and depression-like behaviors, whereas overexpression of them reversed the depression-like behaviors ( ). In addition, Qiu et al. reported that Wip1 gene knockout inactivated the Wnt/β-Catenin signaling pathway, impairing neurological functional recovery and reducing DCX expression in animals with MCAO. Meanwhile, pharmacological activation of the Wnt/β-Catenin signaling pathway compensated for the Wip1-knockout-induced deficit in neuroblast formation ( ).
On the other hand, non-canonical β-Catenin-independent Wnt signaling has also been implicated in controlling the differentiation and development of ABNs ( , ; ). Specifically, Schafer et al. revealed a remarkable transition in Wnt signaling responsiveness (from the canonical branch to the non-canonical branch) in the course of neuronal differentiation; while canonical Wnt signaling progressively faded, the emerging non-canonical (PCP pathway) became essential for late stages of maturation, such as dendrite initiation and patterning.
In addition, Wnt antagonists such as sFRP3 and Dkk1 have demonstrated to regulate neurogenesis in the adult hippocampus ( ; ). More recently, Dkk3 was found to increase with aging in the adult hippocampus, and Dkk3 deletion from DGCs was found sufficient to restore AHN in old or AD model mice, while counteracting the cognitive decline ( ). This important finding further supports the well-established notion that dysregulation of Wnt signaling is associated with the decline of neurogenesis in both aging and AD hippocampus ( ; ), making Wnt signaling an attractive therapeutic target for AD.

## Hedgehog signaling
Sonic hedgehog (Shh) is the primary activating ligand that initiates Hedgehog signaling in the brain. The Shh receptor Patched (Ptch) and the transmembrane protein Smoothened (Smo), key components of the Shh pathway, are expressed in the neurogenic niches, including the adult SVZ and SGZ, by NSCs and transient amplifying cells. This pathway is best recognized for its diverse roles during embryonic and early postnatal development, including the formation and maintenance of NSCs in the SGZ ( ; ; ; ). Early studies demonstrated that exogenous Shh directly promoted progenitor proliferation in vitro. Overexpression of Shh within the DG resulted in a marked increase in adult hippocampal progenitor cell proliferation in vivo, whereas pharmacological inhibitor of Shh signaling reversed its proliferative effects ( ). In addition, administration of an Smo agonist was found to promote neurogenesis in stroke mice and improve post-stroke behavioral recovery ( ).
Adult NSCs in the DG appear to originate from Shh-responsive embryonic neural progenitors in the ventral hippocampus, which subsequently relocate into the dorsal hippocampus ( ; ). Studies have demonstrated that embryonic ablation of Smo or ciliary genes in postnatal NSCs and neural progenitors prevents their expansion and development, underscoring the essential role of Shh signaling—mediated via the primary cilia—in establishing and maintaining the postnatal hippocampal NSC pool as well as promoting proliferation of progenitors ( ; ; ; ). In addition, by conditionally knocking out Shh signaling receptor Smo in NSCs, Wang et al. reported a decrease in AHN and an acceleration of age-related depletion of NSC pool. Meanwhile, they also found that stroke-induced neurogenesis was abolished, leading to delayed motor function recovery and increased anxiety levels following stroke ( ).
On the other hand, the Shh molecular pathway was also shown to be expressed in calretinin positive (CR+) neurons in the early postnatal brain (dorsal hippocampus), and ablation of it from CR+ neurons can significantly lead to decrease in proliferation and the number of NSCs ( ). Further, a recent study demonstrated that Shh was expressed by hilar mossy cells (MCs), which constitutes a major population of CR+ neurons, in the adult DG. However, genetic ablation of Shh from hilar MCs decreased numbers of MCs but increased neural progenitor proliferation and migration of immature neuronal precursors into the GCL ( ). More recently, Noguchi et al. found that deletion of Shh from MCs attenuated seizure-induced neurogenesis while reducing self-renewal of NSCs, resulting in a premature depletion of NSC pool after seizure-induced neurogenesis. Meanwhile, Shh from MCs also accelerated age-related decline of the NSC pool ( ).

## Bone morphogenetic protein signaling
Bone morphogenetic protein (BMP) signaling is also implicated in the regulation of adult neurogenesis. BMPs are a subgroup of the transforming growth factor β (TGF-β) superfamily of cytokines, which are chronically secreted by DGCs, NSCs, and other neurogenic niche cells.
In SGZ, BMPs act as short-range morphogens, playing a crucial role in regulating the balance between proliferation and quiescence of NSCs. This regulation is mediated possibly through BMP receptors such as BMPR-Ⅰa and downstream signaling components like Smad4. In addition, BMPs influence the amplification and maturation of intermediate progenitor cell pool through BMPRⅡ ( ; ; ). Negative regulation of BMP activity can be achieved through BMP inhibitors, such as Chordin and Noggin, which are present in the hippocampal niche and are thought to locally adjust the levels of BMP signaling. Bond et al. found that virally mediated BMP4 overexpression caused neural progenitors to exit the cell cycle and slowed their normal maturation, resulting in a long-term reduction in neurogenesis. Conversely, overexpression of Noggin produced the opposite effects, indicating that inhibition of BMP signaling is a mechanism for rapidly expanding the hippocampal neurogenic pool ( ). Similarly, attenuation of BMP signaling with transgenic perturbations in aged mice increased the proliferation of neural progenitors, highlighting its inhibitory effect on neurogenesis during aging ( ). This study also identified an age-related increase in BMP signaling, indicating that alongside with Wnt, BMP signaling is another contributor to the decline in neurogenesis with aging. Moreover, in addition to impairing neurogenesis, increased BMP signaling was found to contribute significantly to age-related cognitive decline ( ). More recently, Frazer et al. found that knocking out Gremlin 2 (Grem2), which is the most potent natural inhibitor of BMP signaling expressed in the adult brain, decreased AHN and contributed to development and progression of anxiety and epilepsy ( ).

## Neurotrophic factors, growth factors, and inflammatory cytokines
Neurotrophic factors are extracellular signaling proteins that interact with tyrosine kinases receptors (Trk receptors) and their co-receptors to regulate various cellular functions. They are one of the key mediators of neural plasticity and functional recovery ( ), including BDNF, nerve grown factor (NGF), and neurotrophin-3 (NT-3).
Among the identified neurotrophic factors, brain-derived neurotrophic factor (BDNF) has been mostly extensively studied and is recognized as a critical regulator of adult neurogenesis ( ; ; ). Firstly, BDNF was reported to be required for the survival of the continuously regenerating neural populations in the adult DG ( ; ) and play a key role in promoting neurogenesis ( ), including the enriched environment (EE)-related neurogenesis ( ). Additionally, studies have demonstrated that increasing hippocampal BDNF levels, either by using riluzole ( ; ) or through chronic infusion of BDNF directly into the adult DG, significantly enhances the proliferation of ABNs ( ). Moreover, deletion and overexpression of BDNF in ABNs separately resulted in the reduction and elevation of dendrite growth ( ; ). Deletion of TrkB, the receptor of BDNF, in adult neural progenitors also impaired neurogenesis and reduced the dendrite and spine growth in ABNs while increasing anxiety-like behaviors ( ; ). More recently, through intrahippocampal injection of AAV-shRNA-BDNF to inhibit the BDNF/TrkB pathway, Chen et al. found that the advantageous effects of dexmedetomidine on AHN, neuronal survival, and cognitive improvement in hypoxic-ischemic neonatal rats were counteracted ( ).
Growth factors are a diverse group of extracellular proteins that regulate cell growth and maintenance, with several of which identified as key regulators of AHN, including fibroblast growth factor (FGF), vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF), insulin-like growth factor-1 (IGF-1), platelet-derived growth factor (PDGF), and NGF. For instance, intracerebroventricular infusion of FGF has been shown to stimulate AHN in both 3-month-old and 20-month-old mice, indicating that the aged brain retains the capacity to respond to exogenous growth factors ( ). Similarly, Kang et al. demonstrated that conditionally expressing an activated form of an FGF receptor in neural precursors increased the neural proliferation and rescued the age-related decline in neurogenesis in older mice. Conversely, by deleting the FGF receptors, they found that FGF receptors were required for NSC maintenance ( ). VEGF is another potent modulator of AHN, known for its ability to enhance neurogenesis in the DG under both physiological and pathological conditions ( ; ; ; ). In addition, emerging evidence has shown that IGF-1 is critical for neural proliferation and neuronal differentiation in the hippocampus ( ; ). More recently, PDGF-mediated signaling has also been shown to regulate AHN. Li et al. found that overexpression or exogenous administration of PDGF-BB in DG rescues the effect of chronic stress on NSC proliferation and dendritic growth of ABNs. Conversely, knockdown of PDGF-BB facilitates CSDS-induced deficit of AHN and promotes the susceptibility to chronic stress in mice ( ).
Although being less explored, a few studies that focus on the actions of NGF and NT-3 also strongly suggest an important role these neurotrophic factors play in modulating AHN ( ). NGF is highly expressed in the adult hippocampus; however, its role in AHN remains controversial. For example, chronic intracerebroventricular infusion of NGF for 6 weeks has been reported to enhance cell proliferation in the DG, upregulate the expression of TrkA, and improve recognition memory ( ). In contrast, shorter NGF treatments (6 or 20 days) in adult and aged male rats intracerebroventrically improved survival of newborn neurons in the GCL of adult but not aged rats, without significantly affecting the proliferation of progenitor cells ( ). Similar to NGF, NT-3 expression is largely confined to the hippocampal DG. Conditional deletion of NT-3 in the brain significantly impaired the differentiation of neural progenitor cells in the DG, whereas proliferation remained unaffected ( ). However, Kasakura et al. demonstrated that overexpression of NT-3 in the hippocampus suppressed the early phase of neurogenic processes ( ).
Inflammation has also been known to be closely associated with AHN ( ; ; ). Studies using lipopolysaccharide (LPS), a method commonly used to stimulate the innate inflammatory responses, have shown that LPS disrupts progenitor proliferation, reduces neuronal differentiation, and decreases the survival of neuroblasts ( ; ; ; ). Conversely, inflammatory blockade has been reported to restore neurogenesis by decreasing the survival of newborn ABNs ( ; ). The influence of inflammation is possibly exerted through release of various inflammatory cytokines ( ), including pro-inflammatory cytokines released by activated microglia, such as interleukin-1 (IL-1), IL-6, interferons (IFNs), and tumor necrosis factor alpha (TNF-α). For example, using transgenic mice to overexpress IL-6 in astroglia, Vallieres et al. found that overall AHN was decreased by 63%, suggesting an inhibitory role of IL-6 in AHN ( ). Conversely, adult IL-6 knockout mice exhibited compromised neurogenesis ( ). In addition, Iosif et al. found that TNF-α acted as a negative regulator of neural progenitor proliferation through TNF-R1 ( ). A subsequent study confirmed these findings by revealing that elevated baseline AHN was detected in TNF-R1 (−/−) and TNF-α (−/−) mice, whereas absence of TNF-R2 decreased AHN ( ). However, for neurogenesis following radiation injury they found that immunomodulatory signaling of TNF-α mediated by TNF-R2 is more significant than through TNF-R1, indicating the differential roles of TNF-R1 and TNF-R2 under different contexts. Indeed, inflammation is the common underlying mechanism shared by the brain disorders mentioned above. Given the close relationship between inflammation and AHN, modulating them could be crucial for the treatment of these disorders and further investigations are still required.

## Cellular components of the SGZ
The neurogenic niche, SGZ, is a specialized and dynamic microenvironment composed of both complex cellular and non-cellular components of the DG. The cellular components provide a complex regulatory architecture that allow the proper development of NSCs, promoting their integration into the pre-existing hippocampal circuits. The process of AHN consists of sequential steps that are tightly controlled by both cell-autonomous mechanisms and the interaction with the molecular and cellular niche components ( ; ; ).

## Neuronal cells and neurotransmitters
First, NSCs act as key regulators of their own niche through distinct autocrine and paracrine mechanisms, influencing the development of their progeny across different neurogenic stages ( ; ; ). For instance, conditional ablation of VEGF in Nestin+ cells led to a transient increase in NSC proliferation, followed by partial depletion of the NSC pool ( ). Many NSC-derived ligands, including VEGF, have receptors that are expressed not only in NSCs themselves but also in their progeny, neuroblasts, and immature ABNs and other niche components like microglia. This suggests that NSCs may regulate multiple stages of maturation of ABNs either directly through their secreted factors or indirectly through modulation of niche factors ( ).
Meanwhile, accumulating evidence has suggested that neurotransmitters released by DG local neurons, including interneurons, hilar mossy cells, and mature DGCs, or by axons arising from long-range projecting neurons may modulate different aspects of AHN ( ; ). For example, direct GABAergic inputs were reported to promote neuronal differentiation by enhancing dendritic development and synaptic integration of immature neurons ( ; ). Although NSCs appear to lack functional GABAergic synapses, local parvalbumin (PV)-positive interneurons help maintain NSC quiescence by tonic inhibition mediated by GABA spillover from PV-DGC synapses ( ). In contrast to NSCs, neural progenitors received immature GABAergic synaptic inputs from local PV+ interneurons, and the activation of PV+ interneurons was found to promote their survival ( ). Hilar mossy cells provide the first glutamatergic synaptic inputs onto newborn ABNs as well as disynaptic GABAergic inputs via interneurons ( ; ; ). However, their role in regulating AHN was not examined until 2018, when Yeh et al. demonstrated that mossy cells regulate the quiescence and maintenance of adult NSCs through a dynamic balance of direct glutamatergic and indirect GABAergic signaling onto NSCs ( ). In addition, mature DGCs have also been reported to accelerate the functional integration of newborn ABNs through recruiting dentate PV interneurons ( ).
In addition to local neuronal cells that have been shown to coordinate neurogenesis and network activity, AHN can also be influenced by distal circuitry. EC provides the primary long-range excitatory input to the DG through the medial and lateral performant path ( ; ). Newborn ABNs compete with mature DGCs to receive glutamatergic synaptic inputs from the EC to integrate into the circuit ( ). This integration relies on NMDA-receptor-mediated responses to glutamate, which are essential for the survival of immature neurons in a time-dependent manner ( ). Moreover, the induction of LTP has been shown to promote the proliferation of adult neural progenitors and enhance the survival of newborn neurons ( ; ). In addition, DG also receives dense serotonergic projections originating from brainstem raphe, especially in the SGZ, where synapses are preferentially formed on interneurons ( ; ; ). Given the diversity of serotonin (5-HT) receptor families ( ; ; ), previous studies have produced inconsistent results regarding the effects of 5-HT on AHN, indicating a region-dependent and receptor-type specific roles of 5-HT mechanisms in AHN ( ; ; ; ). Furthermore, DG also receives cholinergic and GABAergic inputs from the septum, which target different cell types: GABAergic inputs terminate preferentially on GABAergic interneurons, whereas cholinergic inputs primarily target glutamatergic DGCs. Bao et al. demonstrated that long-range GABAergic inputs from the septum, mediated by dentate PV interneurons, were both sufficient and necessary for maintaining NSC quiescence; ablating them depleted NSC pool and finally impaired AHN ( ). Previous studies have indicated that adult neural progenitors and their progeny are stimulated by cholinergic activation ( ; ; ). Furthermore, Chen et al. found that stimulation of the cholinergic circuits projected from the septum to the DG promoted proliferation and morphological development of NSCs, providing direct evidence for how cholinergic inputs from the septum regulate AHN ( ).On the other hand, SuM of the hypothalamus has also been reported to send dense axonal projections to the DG, modulating various hippocampal-dependent behaviors ( ; ; ) while regulating AHN. Recent work by Li and colleagues demonstrated that chronic patterned optogenetic stimulation of SuM-DG projections robustly increased production of NSCs and behaviorally relevant ABNs with enhanced maturity, possibly via interactions with DGCs ( ).

## Non-neuronal cells
Astrocytes, a type of glial cell, are abundant in the hippocampal neurogenic niche that provide both structural and functional support for NSCs and maturing ABNs. Astrocytes were first reported to regulate the proliferation and neuronal fate specification of adult neural progenitors in an in vitro co-culture study ( ). They are now recognized as key regulators of cell proliferation, migration, differentiation, and synaptic integration of newborn ABNs, acting through membrane-associated molecules and by secreting various soluble signals such as FGF-2, Wnt ligands, and cytokines ( ; ; ; ; ). Additionally, astrocytes help control the availability of neurotransmitters in the synaptic cleft and play a critical role in synaptic integration of ABNs. Using transgenic approaches to block vesicular release from astrocytes, Sultan et al. found that ABNs, but not mature neurons, showed reduced glutamatergic synaptic input and dendritic spine density, along with lower functional integration and decreased cell survival ( ). Subsequently, in another study, genetic ablation of the cholinergic receptor CHRM1 in astrocytes was reported to result in defects in NSC survival, neuronal differentiation, and integration of newborn ABNs, along with impaired contextual fear memory ( ). This highlighted a critical role of astrocytes in mediating cholinergic regulation of AHN and memory. Moreover, astrocytes may play a role in synchronizing network activity, either through the spread of gliotransmitters or through gap junction coupling with hundreds of other astrocytes to regulate AHN distally ( ; ; ).
Microglia have also been shown to play a crucial role in AHN in several studies. As professional phagocytes in the adult hippocampal neurogenic niche, microglia remove newborn cells that are naturally undergoing apoptosis ( ). However, recent studies have highlighted an active role of microglia in maintaining AHN ( ). Intracerebroventricular infusion of CX3CR1-blocking antibodies into adult rats increased hippocampal IL-1β levels while decreasing neural progenitor proliferation ( ). Similarly, mice lacking CX3CR1 exhibited reduced proliferation and a decreased number of ABNs ( ). Further studies have shown that ablation of microglia in the adult DG results in decreased survival of neuroblasts ( ). Generally, microglia act as sensors of local cell death, dynamically modulating the balance between cell proliferation and survival in the SGZ through their phagocytosis secretome ( ). Additionally, in response to chronic stress, IL-4-driven microglia in the hippocampus trigger BDNF-dependent neurogenesis, helping protect against depressive-like symptoms ( ). More recently, using 5×FAD transgenic mice, Wang et al. found that microglial replenishment restored AHN, reversing the cognitive and synaptic deficits, by restoring the BDNF neurotrophic signaling pathway ( ). Furthermore, microglia secrete inflammatory cytokines, which regulate multiple steps of AHN, as we have mentioned above in the section of “ .”
Accumulating studies have indicated that blood vessels are also critical components of hippocampal neurogenic niche. Vascular cells can impact neurogenesis ( ) directly by producing neurogenic factors themselves or indirectly, transporting neurogenic substances produced by other cells. Several studies indicate that endothelial cells affect NSC proliferation and maturation of ABNs by secreting different trophic factors including BDNF, VEGF, and chemokines. For example, a recent study by Wang and colleagues demonstrated that endothelial cells contributed to the maintenance of lactate homeostasis while promoting neurogenesis and cognitive functions ( ).

## Non-pharmacological treatments
Intriguingly, one of the fundamental features of AHN is its dynamic regulation by an individual’s behavior, experience, and emotional/biological status. Thus, in addition to pharmacological treatments, alternative non-pharmacological approaches such as physical activity and EE have also been demonstrated to enhance neurogenesis.
EE refers to housing conditions that facilitate enhanced sensory, cognitive, and motor stimulation, compared to standard housing conditions. Although the exact protocols for EE vary widely among laboratories, there is a general consensus that EE significantly increases AHN ( ; ; ; ). As early as the 1990s, Kempermann et al. found that EE exposure significantly increased the number of newborn cells and the volume of GCL, while improving the ability of spatial learning ( ; ). Subsequent studies revealed that EE also promoted the survival of newborn cells ( ; ), however, with its effects on the survival and integration of ABNs restricted to the first 3 weeks after their birth ( ). Moreover, EE has been found to exert beneficial effects in animal models of a range of CNS disorders, including cognitive deficits ( ; ), depression ( ), epilepsy ( ; , ; ; ), and stroke ( ; ; ), possibly through regulating multiple aspects of AHN. Importantly, with its non-invasive nature, the effects of EE have also been evaluated in several clinical studies ( ; ; ). These findings suggest that EE may serve as a promising therapeutic alternative for both neuro-protection and brain repair.
Attempts have been made to assess the individual effects of different components of EE, with physical exercise being the most extensively studied ( ). Physical exercise is known to contribute to many of the major effects of EE, including the enhancement of AHN ( ). Most early researches focused on aerobic exercise ( ; ; , ), with voluntary physical exercise (usually wheel running) being the most widely adopted model, consistently demonstrating its ability to enhance AHN. For example, van Praag et al. found that neither maze training nor yoked swimming had any effect on the number of BrdU-positive cells, whereas voluntary wheel running doubled the number of surviving newborn cells, achieving levels comparable to those induced by EE ( ). Subsequently, they also reported that voluntary wheel running partially reversed age-related declines in neurogenesis and improved their learning abilities ( ). However, anaerobic resistance training was reported to exert no effect on the proliferation, maturation, or survival of new ABNs in the DG, whereas high-intensity interval training (HIIT), a combination of aerobic and anaerobic exercise, was reported to have only modest benefits. These findings underscore the importance of sustained aerobic exercise in promoting AHN ( ). Noteworthy, forced exercise, which relies on a reward or punishment to motivate animals to perform, may induce stress, thus potentially confounding the experimental findings ( ; ). In addition, physical exercise is widely regarded as a non-pharmacological and holistic therapy, known to prevent and mitigate numerous neurological conditions as well as alleviate aging-related cognitive decline. Its benefits are partly attributed to its ability to stimulate neurotrophin levels (e.g., BDNF), alongside its impact on AHN ( ; ; ). Intriguingly, combining genetic enhancement of AHN with pharmacological elevation of BDNF levels has been demonstrated to improve cognition in AD mouse model, mimicking the beneficial effects of exercise ( ). Moreover, the positive effects of exercise on cognitive function and health-related quality of life have been validated in a number of clinical trials ( ; ; ; ).

## Advances in regenerative medicine
Recently, regenerative medicine—a field focused on repairing, regenerating, or reconstructing damaged tissues and/or organs, with the ultimate goal of promoting functional recovery and adaptation—has garnered significant interest ( ; ). Stem-cell-based therapy, a key branch of regenerative medicine, leverages the unique properties of stem cells, including their abilities for self-renewal and differentiation, to regenerate damaged cells and tissues in the human body. Alternatively, it aims to replace damaged cells with new, healthy and functional ones by delivering exogenous cells to patients ( ; ; ). Although stem-cell-based therapies for neurological diseases remain controversial and face numerous challenges before reaching clinical application, recent preclinical and clinical studies demonstrated promising treatment effects.

## Cell transplantation
By definition, NSCs are considered the most logical and promising option for stem cell therapy in treating neurological disorders, as they represent the prototype of regenerative cells for the CNS. However, endogenous AHN is temporally and spatially restricted and is generally insufficient for functional neural repair. To address this gap, cell transplantation has emerged as a viable strategy, which can be either autologous, using the patient’s own cells, or allogeneic, using cells from a healthy donor. Various types of stem cells have been explored for transplantation, including pluripotent stem cells (PSCs) and multipotent MSCs, both of which have recently emerged as key players in regenerative medicine due to their remarkable ability to differentiate into diverse cell types ( ; ; ; ; ).
The discovery of PSCs, including embryonic stem cells (hESCs) and induced pluripotent stem cells (iPSCs), has revolutionized stem cell research and cell-based therapies. Numerous studies using ESCs in animal models have shown their therapeutic potential. For example, undifferentiated ESCs have been shown to differentiate into dopaminergic (DA) neurons and restore motor function in Parkinson disease (PD) models after transplantation ( ; ; ; ). ESCs have also demonstrated effectiveness in promoting functional recovery after cerebral ischemia ( ) and in spinal-cord-injured mice ( ). Additionally, in different animal epilepsy models, it has been shown that grafted medial ganglionic eminence (MGE) progenitors exhibit normal migratory activity, differentiate into GABAergic inhibitory neurons, and integrate into the neural circuitry to help suppress seizures ( ; ; ; ; ; ; ). However, since hESCs are derived from the inner cell mass of the developing blastocyst, and their use is limited due to the ethical concerns and the potential risk of tumor growth. To address these issues, hiPSCs were generated, offering molecular and biological properties similar to hESCs ( ; ; ), thus opening new avenues for cell replacement therapy. hiPSCs have since been widely applied in brain repair across different disease models. For example, hiPSCs, derived from human fibroblasts, have demonstrated therapeutic potential in models of stroke ( ; ) and PD ( ; ). Additionally, long-term survival and functional efficacy of hiPSCs-derived dopamine cells have also been observed in non-human primate PD models ( ). GABAergic interneurons/MGE-like interneuron precursors derived from hiPSCs have also been shown to attenuate chronic epilepsy and its associated comorbidities ( ; ).
MSCs possess the ability to self-renew and differentiate into mesenchymal lineages ( ; ; ). They have been widely reported to exhibit therapeutic effects in various neurological diseases, including stroke ( ; ; ; ) and neurodegenerative diseases ( ; ; ; ). They can be easily acquired from the host to avoid the transplant rejection ( ) and are capable of crossing the blood-brain barrier (BBB) without disrupting its structure ( ; ). Moreover, MSCs have displayed the ability to migrate to the injured area ( ; ), differentiate into neurons ( ), and rebuild neurological functions through the secretion of various neurotrophic factors ( ; ).
A relatively limited number of small-scale clinical trials have investigated the safety and feasibility of stem cell therapies ( ; ; ; ). A meta-analysis of early-phase clinical trials using MSCs in ischemic stroke patients reported a favorable safety profile alongside functional improvement ( ). However, more recently, a phase 2/3 trial investigating intravenous administration of umbilical cord blood-derived MSCs in acute ischemic stroke patients failed to demonstrate a significant functional improvement at 90 days ( ). These results underscore the need for further optimization of stem cell therapies for stroke, including the selection of patients most likely to benefit, the timing, and route of administration. Additionally, clinical trials have also evaluated the safety and feasibility of stem cell therapies for other neurological diseases, such as spinal cord injury (SCI) ( ; ; ; ) and autism spectrum disorder ( ).
In conclusion, cell transplantation holds great therapeutic potential for treating neurological diseases. However, it remains in its infancy as several challenges persist, including ethical concerns, immune rejection, complications, adverse reactions, and the risk of tumorigenicity. Current support primarily comes from early-stage clinical trials, which have limitations such as small sample sizes, lack of placebo controls, and short follow-up periods, making it difficult to draw definitive conclusions. In addition, a deeper understanding of the underlying mechanisms is still needed, along with solutions to control the proliferation and differentiation properties of transplanted cells, to optimize the stem-cell-based therapeutic strategies. Future directions may involve the development of personalized stem cell therapies tailored to each patient’s specific needs, the use of gene editing technologies to enhance the therapeutic properties of stem cells, and the exploration of combinational approaches to enhance the efficacy of stem cell transplantation. Meanwhile, well-designed clinical trials with larger sample sizes and more extended follow-up periods will be essential.
On the other hand, while regenerating diseased tissue/organs to restore function remains the ultimate goal of cell transplantation, a more immediate and practical application for cellular models lies in preclinical drug discovery. Cellular disease models can offer many advantages over traditional methods; for example, they can provide a renewable source of human cells with genetic background sensitive to disease pathology ( ; ; ; ).

## In vitro/in vivo reprogramming
Recent advances in direct reprogramming of mature differentiated cells into alternative fates have provided new insights into mechanisms that define and maintain cell identities ( ; ; ). More than 20 years ago, retroviral-mediated expression of the transcription factor (TF) Pax6 was found to instruct neurogenesis in astrocytes in vitro, highlighting the role of Pax6 as an intrinsic fate determinant of the neurogenic potential of glial cells and marking the first evidence of in vitro reprogramming ( ). Subsequently, direct astroglia reprogramming toward a glutamatergic (Neurog2 or NeuroD1) or GABAergic (Ascl1 or Dlx2) neuron fate was achieved using single TFs ( , ). Beyond astroglial cells, fibroblasts and other cell types have also been successfully reprogrammed into neurons in vitro. Furthermore, combinations of TFs, microRNAs, and small molecules and other factors have significantly enhanced the efficiency and functional maturity of induced neurons (iNs), representing a huge boost to the field of in vitro reprogramming field ( ; ; ; ; ; ).
Inspired by iPSCs and trans-differentiation technologies that were initially developed in in vitro cultures, the concept of in vivo reprogramming have recently pioneered as a new strategy for regenerative medicine, aiming at converting endogenous non-neuronal cells into functional neurons to restore lost functions and correct neurological deficits ( ; ; ). Compared with in vitro reprogramming followed by cell transplantation, in vivo reprogramming avoids the complications of cell culture conditions and the serious concerns such as immune rejection associated with transplantation.
While neurons are frequently lost in response to pathological conditions, glial cells typically react to injury by becoming proliferative and hypertrophic, which is a common pathological hallmark of many neurological disorders. Although these cells may initially play beneficial roles, their persistent activation and scar formation are generally believed to hinder neural regeneration and may contribute to secondary tissue damage ( ). Therefore, glial cells, which are the most abundant and ubiquitously distributed non-neuronal cells in the adult CNS, provide the predominant cell source for in vivo reprogramming. Initial studies have demonstrated that astroglial cells can be successfully transdifferentiated into neurons in vivo in an intact brain ( ; ; ). These reprogramming strategies have since been successfully applied to diverse disease models and other types of glia cells. For example, Guo et al. reported that reactive glia cells in the cortex of stab-injured or AD model mice can be directly reprogrammed into functional iNs in vivo by forced expression of NeuroD1 ( ). Similarly, Heinrich et al. reported the Sox2-mediated conversion of NG2 glia into iNs in the injured adult brain cortex ( ). Matsuda et al. demonstrated that overexpressing NeuroD1 directly converted mouse microglia into neurons both in vitro and in vivo, indicating the potency of NeuroD1 in cross-lineage reprogramming. Furthermore, such trans-differentiation strategies have been applied to brain repair and found of great potential. For instance, reactive glia in TLE models have also been reported to be reprogrammed into GABAergic interneurons and help reduce chronic seizure activity ( ; ; ). More advances in the field of in vivo reprogramming have been summarized and presented below in .
 Although in vivo reprograming holds considerable promise, there still remain significant controversies in the field. For instance, Rao et al. critically reevaluated the potential of NeuroD1 to convert microglia into neurons. Contrary to earlier findings suggesting successful conversion, their findings indicated that NeuroD1 overexpression did not induce microglia-to-neuron conversion but instead induced microglial apoptosis ( ). Similarly, Wang et al. employed rigorous lineage-tracing techniques to reevaluate the astrocyte-to-neuron conversion in the adult mouse brain ( ). They found that neurons presumed to be derived from astrocytes via NeuroD1 overexpression ( ) or PTBP1 knockdown ( ) could not be traced retrospectively to quiescent or reactive astrocytes, thus challenging the specificity and validity of these reprogramming strategies. Collectively, these findings highlight that the field is evolving from initial enthusiasm to a more nuanced understanding of the challenges involved, particularly regarding cell identity, reprogramming fidelity, and experimental reproducibility. These controversies emphasized the necessity for rigorous experimental design and validation, including the use of stringent genetic lineage tracing, appropriate controls, and reproducibility across models, to accurately assess the true potential of in vivo reprogramming.

## Conclusions and perspectives
Since the discovery of AHN, remarkable progress has been made in understanding its characteristics, functional contributions, and regulatory mechanisms. Additionally, several key directions are emerging that may shape the future of regenerative medicine.

## Direction 1: Targeting endogenous adult hippocampal neurogenesis as alternatives to treat neurological diseases
Currently, therapeutic approaches primarily focus on managing symptoms and slowing disease progression, rather than targeting the underlying pathology. For example, dopaminergic medications for PD, cholinesterase inhibitors for AD, and ASMs for epilepsy, all offer limited relief. Given these limitations, there is a pressing need for innovative approaches, such as regenerative medicine, to develop disease-modifying therapies. As mentioned above, different signaling pathways, environmental conditions (EE, physical exercise, etc.), and pharmacological treatments are being studied for their potential to modulate endogenous neurogenesis—possibly through regulating NSCs—to promote neuroprotection, neuro-repair, and immunomodulation in various CNS diseases.
The signaling pathways outlined in offer valuable insights into potential druggable targets that could modulate AHN and facilitate drug development. Additionally, many current pharmacological medications, as discussed, also hold the potential to regulate AHN, although researches are required to unravel their novel therapeutic effects in CNS diseases. However, there still remain challenges that may discourage the supposed clinical translations. First, AHN is quite a complex and dynamic process, with ABNs being highly heterogeneous, consisting of both “helpful” and “harmful” subpopulations. For instance, aberrant ABNs with HBDs and hilar ectopic ABNs are generally considered to be “harmful” ( ; ; ). In addition, ABNS generated at different time points with regard to seizure onset are also possibly heterogeneous, with conflicting results produced when modulating them ( ; ; ; ). Unfortunately, current technologies are insufficient to precisely distinguish between the heterogeneous ABNs and selectively manipulate these diverse ABN populations, making targeted interventions challenging.
On the other hand, small molecules are often reported with limited bioavailability and poor ability to cross the BBB. These issues complicate efforts to effectively deliver drugs to neurogenic niches in the hippocampus. To address these limitations, advanced drug delivery systems, such as micro/nano-particulate delivery vehicles, are being developed. These systems can be engineered for spatiotemporal control, enabling the release of multiple biomolecules at specific time points to modulate signaling pathways within the neurogenic niche more precisely. Such innovations hold promise for overcoming these barriers and enhancing the clinical utility of AHN-targeting therapies.
EE and physical exercise may offer promising non-invasive strategies with significant therapeutic potential for patients. However, the exact underlying mechanisms remain elusive. Gaining a deeper understanding of these mechanisms may help optimize the paradigms of EE/exercise and identify patients that are mostly likely to benefit. While these approaches are generally considered safe, additional clinical trials are required to assess their efficacy in patients with various neurological diseases.
Last but not least, all of the above-mentioned strategies targeting AHN can also be combined with conventional medical therapy, helping to reduce the required dosages, potentially minimizing their side effects, and accelerate patients’ recovery, serving as complementary treatments.

## Direction 2: Targeting adult hippocampal neurogenesis may be potential in dealing with neurological comorbidities
In clinic practice, patients often present with complex clinical conditions, where cognitive and emotional symptoms coexist with the primary disease. Such presence of comorbidities can significantly influence the severity of symptoms, treatment efficacy, and the overall prognosis. Therefore, addressing comorbidities is crucial when developing effective treatment strategies. Considering the above-mentioned universal benefits of AHN across various neurological diseases, as well as its crucial role in learning and memory, targeting AHN emerges as a promising approach to manage neurological comorbidities.
Cognitive deficits are among the most common and significant neurological comorbidities. Patients with TLE frequently experience cognitive decline alongside seizures ( ; ; ). Similarly, post-stroke cognitive impairment often arises during the chronic phase of ischemic stroke ( ; ). In animal studies, modulating AHN has proven to be an effective strategy to alleviate cognitive comorbidities. For instance, Cho et al. used a transgenic mouse model to selectively ablate AHN and found a reduction in SRSs along with a restoration of cognitive deficits associated with epilepsy ( ). Additionally, enhancing AHN through strategies like EE has been shown to improve learning and memory, while simultaneously helping to manage epilepsy ( ). Although it is hard to manipulate the levels of adult neurogenesis in the human brain, recent research has shown that the decline in verbal learning during epilepsy progression coincides with an exponential loss of immature neurons, indicating a correlation between AHN and epilepsy-associated cognitive deficits ( ; ). This finding highlights an opportunity to advance regenerative medicine for patients with TLE and cognitive deficits. On the other hand, AHN modulation, for instance through EE, has been reported to facilitate functional recovery after stroke and help improve learning and memory ( ; ; ). HIIT has also demonstrated a preventive role on stroke severity while promoting neurogenesis, neuroplasticity, and cognitive recovery after stroke ( ).
In addition to cognitive deficits, targeting AHN may also be promising in treating comorbidities such as depression and anxiety, which also often accompany conditions like epilepsy and stroke. EE, a well-established method to promote AHN, has been shown to reduce SRSs in a chronic epilepsy model while alleviating accompanying depression ( ). Selective IL-17a deletion was found to reduce anxiety levels in a pilocarpine-induced SE model, through hippocampal neuroprotection and the reduction of hilar ectopic ABNs, providing a novel target for TLE-associated anxiety ( ). In contrast, a more recent study demonstrated that mice lacking BMP antagonist Gremlin2 showed decreased AHN, displayed a higher susceptibility to, and increased severity of seizures, together with increased anxiety levels ( ). Similarly, by conditionally knocking out Shh signaling receptor Smo in NSCs, Wang et al. found a decrease of intact AHN and stroke-induced neurogenesis, with mice displaying delayed motor function recovery and increased anxiety level after stroke ( ). On the one hand, these findings further support the idea that targeting AHN via manipulating related signaling pathways may be of great potential to address comorbidities in neurological diseases. On the other hand, their conflicting results also re-emphasize the challenges of clinic translation provided by the heterogeneity of ABNs.
By targeting AHN, regenerative medicine offers a promising approach to treat not only the primary neurological conditions but also the associated cognitive and emotional comorbidities, making it a valuable therapeutic avenue for improving the overall quality of life in patients with complex neurological disorders. However, the causal relationship between AHN and comorbidities remains to be further explored, understanding of which may help clarify the underlying mechanisms of comorbidities.

## Direction 3: Sequencing technologies may be used to distinguish the heterogeneous neurogenic cell populations and identify targets for precise regenerative manipulation
Sequencing technologies, particularly scRNA-seq, are a powerful genomic technology that allows researchers to analyze the transcriptome (gene expression profile) of individual cells ( ; ). They offer groundbreaking potential to distinguish the heterogeneous neurogenic cell populations. Additionally, these technologies provide an unprecedented level of detail in understanding the cellular and molecular diversity within the neurogenic niches of the adult brain, such as the hippocampus and SVZ ( ; ; ). Importantly, enhancing the “fitness” of these neurogenic niches in individuals at elevated risk for certain neurological diseases may also emerge as a promising preventative or disease-modifying strategy.
Previous studies have highlighted the heterogeneity of ABNs in seizures at multiple levels: (1) in contrast to normotopic ABNs, those with aberrant morphologies or locations tend to be pro-epileptic; (2) ABNs generated at different time points relative to seizure onset may function differently in seizures due to variations in their input and output neural circuits. Thus, conflicting findings regarding the roles played by ABNs in seizures can likely be attributed to this heterogeneity (pro-epileptic, anti-epileptic, and non-functional ABNs co-exist). Using sequencing technologies, it may be possible to identify molecular signatures for these heterogeneous ABNs, paving the way for selective manipulation of AHN in future epilepsy research and treatment. In addition, by analyzing the DG transcriptome from drug-resistant epilepsy patients, as well as from epilepsy patients and non-epileptic individuals, we may find more both cellular and molecular potential targets to further elucidate the pathological mechanisms underlying epileptogenesis.
As highlighted by Salter et al., key mechanistic questions as to what renders an individual more susceptible or resilient against developing neurological diseases, such as AD, may be addressed by utilizing sequencing technologies in the brains of a unique group of elderly individuals who maintain cognitive function despite substantial AD pathology. Sequencing technologies may facilitate the understanding of the specific characteristics of neurogenic cell populations, distinguish heterogeneous subpopulations, and reveal how they contribute to brain functions. Moreover, single-cell and spatial transcriptomic approaches can uncover how the transcriptional profiles of these cells are altered during the progression of AD disease and whether they are involved in cognitive reserve ( ). For example, a recent study employing single-cell transcriptomics in the postmortem DG of AD patients not only confirmed a decrease in a neuronal population with immature transcriptional profile but also identified 14 downregulated genes in AD associated with synaptic plasticity and signaling ( ). Gaining such insights could greatly facilitate biomarker discovery and guide the development of precision medications aimed at restoring neurogenesis, promoting neuronal repair, or even reversing the decline in neurogenic potential associated with AD and other diseases ( ; ; ).
Sequencing technologies may also help revolutionize the field of stem-cell therapy. By profiling gene expression at the single-cell level, scRNA-seq allows researchers to identify distinct NSC subtypes based on their activation states, differentiation potential, and regional identities ( ; ; ). This precision facilitates the selection of the NSCs with proliferative potential and identification of key molecular signatures that define neurogenic capacity, which can be further exploited for regenerative medicine. Furthermore, scRNA-seq may be used to identify subpopulations within cell sources that exhibit different differentiation potentials. By identifying and characterizing these subpopulations, researchers can select the most suitable cell source based on specific therapeutic goals. For instance, subpopulations with a propensity to differentiate into GABAergic interneurons can be selected to treat conditions like epilepsy. Moreover, scRNA-seq contributes to the understanding of differentiation processes, revealing the gene expression dynamics and identifying key transcription factors that regulate the transition to a neural lineage. This information not only improves our understanding of differentiation but also may provide insights into how culture conditions can be optimized to control the fate of stem cells during cell transplantation or in vivo reprogramming. Last but not least, sequencing technologies allow for the identification of specific genetic mutations responsible for various diseases. This capability enables the creation of personalized gene-edited iPSCs or autologous stem cell therapies, where the patient’s own cells are reprogrammed and corrected for specific mutations, offering a precise and tailored approach to treatment.
Taken together, sequencing technologies are transforming stem cell therapy by providing deep insights into stem cell biology, enhancing precision, and enabling personalized treatments. These innovations allow for a more targeted approach to stem-cell-based therapies, paving the way for more effective, safe, and sustainable regenerative treatments for a wide range of diseases.

## Acknowledgments
This project was supported by grants from the National Natural Science Foundation of China (U23A20533, 82204350) and the Natural Science Foundation of Zhejiang Province (LD24H310001).

## Author contributions
L.Y.C. complied literature research, conceptualized, and wrote the manuscript. Z.X.L. complied literature research and produced the figures. W.Q.W., Y.T.Z., and W.L.L. reviewed and edited the manuscript. Y.W. conceptualized, reviewed, and edited the manuscript. All authors read and approved the final manuscript as submitted.

## Declaration of interests
The authors declare no conflict of interests.

## Contributor Information
Liying Chen, Email: 3320057@zju.edu.cn.
Yi Wang, Email: wang-yi@zju.edu.cn.

## References