pmcGastroenterol Rep (Oxf)Gastroenterol Rep (Oxf)2332gastrogastroGastroenterology Report2052-0034Oxford University PressPMC12199912PMC12199912.112199912121999124057503410.1093/gastro/goaf046goaf0461Original ArticleAcademicSubjects/MED00260Single-cell transcriptomic landscape indicates the potential role of immunotherapy in metastatic pancreatic angiosarcoma
YangYizhen
Department of Gastroenterology, The First Affiliated Hospital, Sun Yat-sen University, Guangzhou, Guangdong, China ], comprising <1% of all sarcomas [ ]. With an annual incidence rate of two to three per million [ ], angiosarcoma occurs at any age (most frequently in adults and the elderly), presenting no significant difference in incidence between males and females [ ]. Angiosarcoma consists of a clinically and genetically heterogeneous subgroup of sarcomas that can appear in any location of body, mostly in cutaneous tissues (∼60% of cases), especially head and neck, but also in soft tissues, parenchymatous organs, bone, and retroperitoneal areas [ ]. As a rare form of angiosarcoma that occurs in the pancreas, pancreatic angiosarcoma accounts for only 0.1% of all primary pancreatic tumors, with only ∼11 cases reported by investigators to date [ ]. Angiosarcoma is prone to metastasis and recrudescence, which leads to a very poor prognosis, with an overall survival ranging from 6 to 16 months [ ].
The diagnosis of pancreatic angiosarcoma remains a big challenge. Physicians have trouble in quickly distinguishing angiosarcoma from other tumors such as hemangiomas and neuroendocrine tumors due to its non-specific morphology and clinical manifestations [ ]. Ultrasound, computed tomography (CT), and magnetic resonance imaging have limitations and ultimately histopathology would be required for the final diagnosis, which shows spindle, polygonal, epithelioid, and undifferentiated round cells, and immunohistochemistry reveals the expression of both vascular and endothelial antigens, including Factor-VIII-related antigen (Factor-VIIIRA), cluster of differentiation 34 (CD34), platelet and endothelial-cell adhesion molecule 1 (PECAM1/CD31), and vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF) [ ].
The rarity of pancreatic angiosarcoma cases and the delay in diagnosis have led to a dilemma in its treatment and prognostic assessment. Currently, there are no standardized guidelines for the management of patients with pancreatic angiosarcoma, and radical surgery and adjuvant radiotherapy are currently the mainstay treatment modalities [ , , , ]. Cytotoxic chemotherapy is also put into use in the face of inoperable tumors. However, these treatments are also controversial because of the difficulty in obtaining negative margins in surgery and the high recurrence rate after surgery or the severe side effects of drugs [ , ]. With the advent of gene-sequencing technology in recent years, targeted therapy and immunotherapy have also been studied but all gain only mild effects [ ]. In terms of prognosis, current gene sequencing in angiosarcomas has reflected several upregulated cancer-driver genes such as ATM serine (ATM), tumor protein p53 (TP53), B-Raf proto-oncogene (BRAF), patched 1 (PTCH1), and APC regulator of wingless-type mouse mammary tumor virus (MMTV) integration site (WNT) signaling pathway (APC) in some patients [ ], but characteristic markers for pancreatic angiosarcoma remain unidentified. Histological grading is also difficult for accurately predicting patient prognosis due to the heterogeneity in histologic behavior among the lesions and the presence of tiny, undetectable satellite lesions.
In this study, we analysed the gene-expression landscape of pancreatic angiosarcoma liver metastasis based on single-cell RNA-sequencing (scRNA-seq) data from a rare case of the disease. By comparing tumor tissues with adjacent normal counterparts and analysing the tumor-immune microenvironment, we investigated the mechanisms underlying the limited efficacy of current targeted therapies in pancreatic angiosarcoma, identified drivers of immune evasion and metastasis, and explored potential immunotherapeutic targets.

## Materials and methods

## Human-specimen sampling
A schematic diagram of the overall tissue-sample-collection and processing workflow is shown in . One patient diagnosed with pancreatic angiosarcoma liver metastasis was included in this study. The patient presented a clear history of constant pain in the left upper abdomen for 7 days, with CT imaging demonstrating multiple tumor lesions involving both the pancreas and the liver. In order to clarify the diagnosis, the patient underwent a fine-needle biopsy within the tumor site. A tumor tissue sample within the liver (T) and its paired adjacent normal liver tissue sample (N) were obtained during the biopsy under the supervision of a pathologist. Pathological findings revealed a patchy distribution of malignant cells in the liver tissue, some of which exhibited enlarged hyperchromatic nuclei with marked cytologic atypia, accompanied by lumen formation of varying sizes. Immunohistochemistry presented erythroblast transformation-specific transcription factor ERG (ERG) (+), CD31 (+), CD34 (+), Kiel 67 antigen (Ki-67) (30%+), chromogranin A (CgA) (−), somatostatin receptor 2 (SSTR2) (−), synaptophysin (Syn) (−), hepatocyte (−), and glypican-3 (−), as shown in , and the final diagnosis was considered to be pancreatic angiosarcoma liver metastasis. Prior to needle biopsy of the tumor, the patient did not receive any form of chemotherapy, radiation, or drug treatment. Adjacent non-malignant liver tissues were procured at a distance of ≥5 cm from the tumor. All clinical samples were obtained from The First Affiliated Hospital, Sun Yat-sen University (Guangzhou, China) and the study has received ethical approval from the Ethics Committee of The First Affiliated Hospital, Sun Yat-sen University (Approval No. [2023]701). Written informed consent was obtained from the patient for both sample collection and data analyses.
 

## Single-cell-suspension preparation
Tumor tissues and adjacent normal liver tissues were snap-frozen in liquid nitrogen within 15 min after sampling for subsequent single-cell RNA-sequencing procedures [ ]. A total of 2.5 mL of tumor digestive enzyme mix (#130–095-929, Tumor Dissociation Kit; Miltenyi Biotech, Germany) was added before digestion for 10 min in a 37°C water bath. The single-cell suspension of dissociated tissues was then filtered through 70- and 30-μm magnetic-activated cell-sorting strainers (#130–098-462/130–098-458; Miltenyi Biotech) to remove the cell mass. Next, dissociated cells were pelleted (4°C, 400 g, 6 min) and resuspended by using a modest red blood cell (RBC) lysis buffer (#00430054; eBioscience, USA) for 5–10 min. Two or three times volume of phosphate buffer saline (PBS; #C10010500CP; Gibco, USA) was added to terminate the RBC lysis. The single-cell suspension was then pelleted again and washed once with cold PBS, after which the cells were resuspended with RPMI1640 (#01–103-1A; BI, Israel) or cryopreserved in 90% Fetal Bovine Serum (#FND500; ExCell Bio, China) with 10% dimethyl sulfoxide (#D8371; Solarbio, China) for long-term preservation. The whole process of tissue dissociation was carried out on ice [ ].

## Single-cell RNA-seq library preparation
Single cells were processed with the 10x Chromium Controller (10x Genomics, USA) based on the 10x gel bead-in-emulsion code (GEMCode) proprietary technology. An appropriate volume of single-cell suspension with a cell concentration of 700–1,200 cells/µL was loaded into each channel. About 8,000 cells were captured per sample, which were further mixed with barcoded beads. After reverse transcription reaction and complementary DNA (cDNA) amplification, libraries were constructed following the standard 10x Genomics protocol (Single Cell 5′ Reagent Kits v5.2 User Guide) and sequenced on Novaseq™ 6000 (Ilumina, USA) [ ].

## Single-cell RNA-seq data preprocessing and cell-type annotation
The CellRanger software pipeline (Version 7.0.1, 10x Genomics) was used to demultiplex cellular barcodes and map reads to the human genome (build hg38), and quantify the gene expression in single cells, generating a digital gene-expression matrix [unique molecular identifier (UMI) counts per gene per cell] for each sample. Expression matrices for all samples were then processed by using the R Seurat package (version 4.3.0) [ ]. As a quality-control (QC) step, we filtered out cells with: (i) the number of detected genes <200 or >6,000; (ii) the proportion of mitochondrial gene expression of >15%; and removed genes detected in fewer than three cells. After that, we obtained a total of 16,841 high-quality single-cell transcriptomes from all samples. To mitigate the impact of data sources on the analysis, we normalized the data by using canonical correlation analysis. Subsequently, the “ScaleData” function was employed to perform linear regression against the normalized expression levels, total UMI counts, and mitochondrial RNA content per cell for each gene. Principal component analysis was then performed by using “RunPCA”. The gene-expression and clustering outcomes were visualized on a Uniform Manifold Approximation and Projection (UMAP) plot by using the top 10 principal components, obtained through “RunUMAP”. To further cluster the cells, we employed the functions “FindNeighbors” and “FindClusters”. Cell types were determined by analysing the gene expression of established markers. T cells and natural killer (NK) cells were identified by using protein tyrosine phosphatase receptor type C (PTPRC), CD3D, CD3E, CD8A, and CD4; myeloid cells were identified by using CD68, S100 calcium binding protein A8 (S100A8), S100A9, complement C1q A chain (C1QA), and B chain (C1QB); B cells were identified by using CD19, CD79A, CD79B, and membrane spanning 4-domains A1 (MS4A1); endothelial cells were identified by using PECAM1, von Willebrand factor (VWF), and selectin E (SELE); fibroblasts were identified by using integrin subunit alpha 8 (ITGA8), periostin (POSTN), and collagen type I alpha chain 2 (COL1A2); and hepatic cells were identified by using albumin (ALB), apolipoprotein A2 (APOA2), epithelial cell adhesion molecule (EPCAM), and Keratin 19 (KRT19).

## Gene-set signature scores
In order to probe the status and distribution of immune cells within the tumor-immune microenvironment, we assessed the expression levels of the several gene sets for naive, cell killing, exhausted, co-stimulate, and antigen presentation of immune cells in tumor tissues and adjacent normal liver tissues [ ]. In addition, tip-like gene-set scores were evaluated among endothelial cells [ ]. The R package AUCell (version 1.24.0) was utilized to assess the average expression of our target gene set at the single-cell level [ ].

## Copy-number variation analysis
Endothelial-cell copy-number variation (CNV) evaluation was performed by using the infercnv R package (version 1.18.1) [ ]. Amplifications and deletions at the single-cell level were predicted base on the scRNA-seq data. The gene-expression matrix of tumor cells was extracted from the Seurat object to calculate its CNVs and fibroblasts, T/NK cells, and myeloid cells were selected as normal references. The inferCNV analysis was conducted with parameters including “denoise” = False, “hidden Markov model (HMM)” = False. Endothelial cells were assigned scores by comparing their gene copies to the reference, with CNV scores of >0.00138 classified as malignant cells, wheras those with CNV scores of <0.00138 were considered normal cells.

## Signaling-pathway-enrichment analysis
To explore potential biological processes and pathways across different subtypes, functional enrichment analyses of upregulated and downregulated genes were performed by using the clusterProfiler (v4.11.0) package in R, including gene ontology (GO) and Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG) [ ]. Gene Set Enrichment Analysis (GSEA; v4.3.3) was also carried out by using GSEA desktop software [ ]. Terms with a P-value of <0.05 were significantly enriched.

## Cell–cell interaction analysis
The normalized expression matrix and cell-type annotations generated from Seurat were utilized for ligand–receptor cell–cell communication analysis by using Cell-PhoneDB (v2.1.1) software [ ] along with the CellChat (v1.6.1) R package [ ]. We aimed to identify and visualize aberrantly expressed receptor and ligand interactions between different cell types in tumor tissues, and interactions with a P-value of <0.05 were considered significant. We only considered ligand–receptor interactions based on the annotation from the database, for which only and at least one partner of the interacting pair was a receptor, thus discarding receptor–receptor interactions and other interactions not involving a receptor.

## Immunohistochemistry staining
Formalin-fixed, paraffin-embedded angiosarcoma specimens were obtained from The First Affiliated Hospital, Sun Yat-sen University for immunohistochemistry staining of ERG, CD31, CD34, Ki-67, cytokeratin, CgA, SSTR2, Syn, hepatocyte, and glypican-3 protein. All the specimens were pathologically validated as angiosarcoma.
Slides of the tumors were deparaffinized, blocked, and incubated at 4°C overnight with primary antibodies, followed by secondary antibodies at room temperature for 1 h. ERG, CD31, CD34, Ki-67, cytokeratin, CgA, SSTR2, Syn, hepatocyte, and glypican-3 antibodies were used [ ].

## Results

## Single-cell transcriptomic profiling of the tumor ecosystem of angiosarcoma liver metastasis
To construct the atlas of the tumor microenvironment, we conducted scRNA-seq on the pancreatic angiosarcoma liver metastasis tissue and its adjacent normal liver tissue acquired from one treatment-naive angiosarcoma patient ( ). Histopathological evaluation revealed focally distributed malignant cells within liver tissue, demonstrating enlarged hyperchromatic nuclei and irregular cellular morphology ranging from round to spindled shapes. Immunohistochemical staining revealed positivity for vascular and endothelial markers CD31 and CD34 ( ), while being negative for other lineage-specific markers including CgA, SSTR2, Syn, cytokeratin, hepatocyte antigen, and glypican-3. Following multiple QC steps, we acquired single-cell transcriptomes in a total of 16,841 cells from all samples for downstream analysis. Next, cell classification and marker-gene identification were performed and a total of 20 clusters were identified and visualized by using the UMAP method of R package Seurat ( ). On the basis of the reported markers, we annotated and categorized the cells into six broad clusters, namely T/NK cells, myeloid cells, and B cells belonging to the immune cells, along with endothelial cells, fibroblasts, and hepatic cells belonging to the non-immune cells ( ). All of the cell clusters highly expressed housekeeping genes including actin beta (ACTB), glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate dehydrogenase (GAPDH), and beta-2-microglobulin (B2M), whereas immune-cell clusters highly expressed PTPRC, indicating the accuracy of our data ( ). Major cell populations were defined by canonical markers: T/NK cells (PTPRC, CD3D, CD3E, CD8A, CD4), myeloid cells (CD68, S100A8, S100A9, C1QA, C1QB), B cells (CD19, CD79A, CD79B, MS4A1), endothelial cells (PECAM1, VWF, SELE), fibroblasts (ITGA8, POSTN, COL1A2), and hepatocytes (ALB, APOA2, EPCAM, KRT19). Signature marker distributions and cluster-specific top five differentially expressed genes are shown in .
To confirm the robustness and accuracy of data integration across different tissues, we inspected the number and distribution of cell clusters in the tumor tissues and adjacent normal liver tissue, respectively. We observed that both tumor and adjacent normal liver tissues shared the same cell types, but the proportions of each cell type were not evenly distributed across the samples. Notably, the tumor tissues contained a greater percentage of endothelial cells, B cells, and fibroblasts than the adjacent normal liver tissues, while the adjacent normal liver tissues contained a much greater percentage of hepatocytes than the tumor tissues ( ). Collectively, our data reflected a basic feature of the tumor microenvironment of pancreatic angiosarcoma liver metastasis, which contained a high percentage of T/NK cells but a low concentration of B cells and fibroblasts.

## Angiosarcoma cells tend to upregulate a few targeted therapy-related genes but many cell-proliferation-related pathways
Particularly, the R package inferCNV was used to differentiate between angiosarcoma cells and normal endothelial cells because there were no characteristic markers for angiosarcoma and the currently reported markers for diagnosis (e.g. CD31, CD34, and ERG) are widely expressed in both angiosarcoma cells and normal endothelial cells. We took fibroblasts, T/NK cells, and myeloid cells as reference groups with normal copy numbers, and normal epithelial cells were distinguished from angiosarcoma cells by comparing their gene copies and CNV scores to the reference. Detailed information has been previously described in methods. A total of 794 endothelial cells were identified in our data, including 590 and 204 cells from the tumor sample and adjacent normal tissue, respectively. After defining malignant cells by using inferCNV, the endothelial cells were subdivided into angiosarcoma cells (T_angiosarcoma), normal endothelial cells in the tumor sample (T_endothelial), and normal endothelial cells in the adjacent normal tissue sample (N_endothelial), as shown in . Each subcluster exhibited unique upregulated marker genes ( ). UMAP analysis revealed malignant cells localized to tumor (T) specimens and normal endothelial cells to adjacent normal tissues (N), demonstrating biological coherence between computational clustering and histopathological sampling ( ).
 In order to explore the possible mechanisms of rapid progression and metastasis of pancreatic angiosarcoma, we inspected the upregulated and downregulated genes in tumor cells compared with normal endothelial cells in the adjacent normal tissues ( ) and performed enrichment analyses of genes upregulated in tumor cells. Notably, we observed an upregulation of pathways associated with cytoplasmic translation and telomere maintenance, as well as an upregulation of pathways related to the viral process and response to ultraviolet ( ). We also noticed an upregulation of the nuclear factor kappa-B (NF-κB), hypoxia-inducible factor 1 (HIF-1), and MYC proto-oncogene (MYC) signaling pathways; enrichment of pathways related to cytoskeletal remodeling and inflammatory mediators were also detected ( ).
Our results revealed a significant upregulation of cyclin-dependent kinase 4 (CDK4), HRas proto-oncogene (HRAS), MDM2 proto-oncogene (MDM2), MYC proto-oncogene (MYC), transglutaminase 2 (TGM2), and tropomyosin 3 (TPM3) among oncogenes in angiosarcoma cells ( ). In addition, APC, neurofibromin 1 (NF1), phosphatase and tensin homolog (PTEN), RB transcriptional corepressor 1 (RB1), SMAD family member 2 (SMAD2), and transforming growth factor beta receptor 2 (TGFBR2) among the tumor-suppressor genes showed a significant downregulation in angiosarcoma cells compared with normal endothelial cells ( ). However, we did not observe a significant difference in the expression levels of other genes such as tumor protein p53 (TP53) and BRAF between angiosarcoma cells and normal endothelial cells.
We next inspected the expression levels of several mainstream target genes of tyrosine kinase inhibitors (TKIs), mammalian target of rapamycin (mTOR) inhibitors, cyclin-dependent kinase (CDK) inhibitors, and Poly (ADP-ribose) polymerase (PARP) inhibitors in angiosarcoma cells and normal endothelial cells, in order to search for possible effective targeted agents against pancreatic angiosarcoma. The results demonstrated significant upregulation of CDK4 and epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) in angiosarcoma cells, but no upregulation was observed in other target genes ( ). Besides, we observed the downregulation of kinase insert domain receptor (KDR/VEGFR2), ABL proto-oncogene 1 (ABL1), fms-related receptor tyrosine kinase 1 (FLT1/VEGFR1), and fms-related receptor tyrosine kinase 4 (FLT4/VEGFR3) in angiosarcoma cells relative to normal endothelial cells ( ).
Overall, we observed an upregulation of a few cancer-driver genes and targeted therapeutic drug targets except CDK4, EGFR, MYC, and MDM2 in angiosarcoma cells compared with normal endothelial cells. Moreover, tumor cells showed upregulation and enrichment of cell-proliferation pathways, cell metabolic pathways, and inflammatory mediator pathways, indicating the potentially close interactions between tumor cells and immune cells within the tumor region.

## T/NK cells tend to present a state of exhaustion rather than activation
Unsupervised cluster analysis of T/NK cells was performed based on reported markers. We identified four major cell types, including CD4+ T, CD8+ T, NK, and mucosal-associated invariant T (MAIT) cells ( ). Further subclustering analyses revealed a total of 13 stable clusters, including 1 cluster for MAIT cells (MAIT–SLC4A10), 2 clusters for NK cells (NK–CD160, NK–GNLY), 3 clusters for CD4+ T cells (CD4–CCR7, Treg–FOXP3, and Tfh–CXCL13), and 7 clusters for CD8+ T cells (CD8–IFNG, CD8–JUN, CD8–IL7R, CD8–IKZF2, CD8–cyc–MKI67, CD8–ZNF683, and CD8–Tex–CTLA4). All these subclusters were shared among tumor tissues and adjacent normal tissues. Notably, we observed an enrichment of CD4+ T cells within the tumor region, along with CD8–Tex–CTLA4 and CD8–cyc–MKI67 subclusters ( ). Conversely, the NK–CD160, MAIT, and CD8–IKZF2 subclusters were found to be more abundant in adjacent normal tissues than in tumor tissues ( ).
 Next, we investigated the gene-expression patterns and functional profiles of T/NK-cell subclusters ( ). Each subcluster presented its unique signature genes ( and ). Among the CD4+ T cells, we identified the Treg–FOXP3 subcluster with high expression of regulatory T cell (Treg)-related genes including IKAROS family zinc finger 2 (IKZF2), forkhead box P3 (FOXP3), and interleukin 2 receptor subunit alpha (IL2RA), and a CD4–CCR7 subcluster expressing more of the naive-related genes such as C–C motif chemokine receptor 7 (CCR7), transcription factor 7 (TCF7), and selectin L (SELL), as shown in . The CD8–Tex–CTLA4 subcluster was more enriched in tumor tissues than in adjacent normal tissues, with high expression of exhaustion-associated genes, including lymphocyte-activating gene 3 (LAG3) and hepatitis A virus cellular receptor 2 (HAVCR2), as well as cytotoxic gene granzyme A (GZMA) ( ). NK cells were more enriched in adjacent normal tissues, in which the NK–GNLY subcluster highly expressed cytotoxicity-related genes, including granulysin (GNLY), granzyme B (GZMB), cystatin F (CST7), perforin 1 (PRF1), and some exhaustion-related genes (LAG3, HAVCR2), whereas the NK–CD160 subcluster tend to express eomesodermin (EOMES) related to transcription factor rather than cytotoxicity and exhaustion ( ). Four subclusters of CD8+ T cells were more enriched in adjacent normal tissues, namely CD8–JUN, CD8–IL7R, CD8–IKZF2, and CD8–ZNF683 ( ), of which the CD8–JUN and CD8–IKZF2 subclusters highly expressed residency-associated genes such as nuclear receptor subfamily 4 group A member 1 (NR4A1), CD69, runt-related transcription factor 3 (RUNX3), and NR4A3, but the CD8–IKZF2 subcluster presented a lower expression level of genes related to cytotoxicity and transcription factor than CD8–JUN ( ).
Further exploration of the differences in CD4+ T- and CD8+ T-cell functions between tumor and adjacent normal tissues was performed. A total of six gene-set scores for T-cell exhaustion, cytotoxicity, naive, co-stimulation, immune checkpoint, and Treg were performed by using the AUCell R package. Notably, CD4+ T cells in tumor tissues displayed significantly lower cytotoxicity and naive scores but higher immune checkpoint, exhaustion, and Treg scores compared with those in adjacent normal tissues ( ). Moreover, CD8+ T cells in tumor tissues had significantly higher cytotoxicity, naive, immune checkpoint, exhaustion, and co-stimulation scores than those in adjacent normal tissues ( ).
Gene-enrichment analysis was performed among genes with significant differences in expression levels between tumor tissues and adjacent normal tissues. The GO analysis revealed that tjCD4+ T cells within the tumor region had significant upregulation in pathways such as the negative regulation of T-cell activation and immunity, Treg-cell differentiation, and T-cell apoptosis, whereas downregulated genes were found to be significantly enriched in pathways related to cytoplasmic translation, leukocyte migration, and interleukin-1 (IL-1) response ( ). In addition, CD8+ T cells in the tumor region exhibited significant upregulation in pathways related to cell killing, T-cell apoptosis, and pyroptosis, while downregulated genes showed enrichment in pathways associated with cytoplasmic translation, leukocyte immune activation, T-cell differentiation, and T-cell receptor signaling ( ). KEGG analysis revealed significant upregulation of the nucleotide oligomerization domain-like (NOD-like) receptor pathway, retinoic acid-inducible gene-I-like (RIG-1-like) receptor pathway, tumor necrosis factor (TNF) signaling pathway, and apoptosis-related pathway among CD4+ T cells within the tumor region, while CD8+ T cells showed upregulation in the HIF-1 signaling pathway, programmed death-ligand 1 (PD-L1) checkpoint pathway, and NF-κB signaling pathway along with upregulation of the NOD-like receptor pathway ( ).
Furthermore, we sought to identify potential immunotherapy target genes in pancreatic angiosarcoma liver metastasis. Expression levels of target genes of some mainstream immunotherapeutic agents were compared between T/NK cells in the tumor-infiltrating region and those in the adjacent normal tissues. Box plots revealed a significantly higher expression level of some immunotherapeutic target genes in T/NK-cell clusters within the tumor region, e.g. programmed cell death protein 1 (PDCD1), cytotoxic T-lymphocyte-associated protein 4 (CTLA4), LAG3, T-cell immunoreceptor with Ig and ITIM domains (TIGIT), CD40, TNF receptor superfamily member 18 (TNFRSF18), and TNF superfamily member 9 (TNFSF9), as shown in .
In conclusion, our results indicate a significant upregulation of immunosuppression-related genes and immunosuppressive pathways in T/NK cells in pancreatic angiosarcoma liver metastasis, which reflected the existence of an immunosuppressive tumor microenvironment. Of note, tumor tissues showed upregulated expression of specific immunotherapeutic targets in T/NK cells, pointing to immunotherapy as a viable strategy for future studies.

## Macrophage and dendritic cells dominant in tumor site present upregulation in functions of angiogenesis and immune suppression
We then profiled myeloid-cell subsets in the tumor and adjacent normal liver tissue of pancreatic angiosarcoma liver metastasis. A total of eight subclusters were distinguished, including three clusters for dendritic cells (DCs), i.e. DC–CLEC9A, DC–CLEC10A, and pDC–JCHAIN; three clusters for tumor-associated macrophages (TAMs), i.e. macrophage–MRC1, macrophage–IFI27, and Kupffer–MARCO; one cluster for monocytes (monocyte-FCN1); and one cluster for neutrophils (neutrophil–S100A8), as shown in . All the subclusters were predominantly presented in tumor tissues and adjacent normal tissues. Notably, macrophages, monocytes, DC–CLEC10A, and pDC–JCHAIN subpopulations were enriched in tumor regions compared with adjacent normal tissues, while neutrophils and DC–CLEC9A were more prevalent in normal tissues ( ). These cell subclusters exhibited elevated expression of characteristic genetic markers ( ).
 The functional and gene-expression characteristics of myeloid-cell subclusters were examined. Overall, DC clusters showed a high expression level of several genes related to angiogenesis, including CD44, C–X–C motif chemokine receptor 4 (CXCR4), FYN proto-oncogene (FYN), and protein tyrosine kinase 2 (PTK2). In terms of macrophages, we found that macrophage–MRC1 and Kupffer–MARCO displayed a higher expression level of angiogenesis, M1-like signature, M2-like gene signature, and phagocytosis genes than the macrophage–IFI27 subcluster ( ). To enable robust comparison of DC and macrophage functional profiles between tumor and adjacent normal tissues, we performed functional gene-set scoring on these subpopulations by using the AUCell R package. The scoring results presented significantly higher angiogenesis and M1 polarization scores and significantly lower phagocytosis scores in macrophages within tumor tissues compared with macrophages in adjacent normal tissues ( ). Notably, all macrophage subpopulations (macrophage–MRC1, macrophage–IFI27, Kupffer–MARCO) in the tumor region displayed significantly higher angiogenesis scores than those in the adjacent normal tissues. In addition, the phagocytosis score of the Kupffer–MARCO subcluster within the tumor tissues was significantly lower than that in the adjacent normal tissues, but there was no such difference observed in the other two macrophage subclusters ( ). DCs in the tumor region revealed a significantly higher score in antigen presentation and DCs differentiation compared with the DCs in the adjacent normal tissues. Notably, the DC–CLEC10A and DC–CLEC9A subclusters in tumor tissues showed significantly higher antigen presentation scores than those in adjacent normal tissues, while the co-stimulatory scores only showed a significant increase in DC–CLEC10A.
We analysed the expression levels of specific immune checkpoint genes in myeloid cells within tumor tissues and adjacent normal tissues. The heat map showed that the immune checkpoint expression varied between cell subpopulations, but we also noted the presence of several significantly upregulated immune checkpoint genes in myeloid-cell subpopulations in the tumor-infiltrating regions, including CD226, CD276, CD40, CD86, LAG3, nectin cell adhesion molecule 2 (NECTIN2), programmed cell death 1 ligand 2 (PDCD1LG2/PD-L2), and TNFSF9 ( ). We further performed gene-function enrichment of genes upregulated in DCs, macrophages, and monocytes in the tumor region and found that DCs showed enrichment of Janus kinase-signal transducer and activators of the transcription (JAK–STAT) pathway, NOD-like receptor pathway, and apoptotic pathway, while macrophages were enriched in the angiogenesis pathway, pathway response to hypoxia, intracellular apoptotic pathway, and HIF-1 and TNF pathways. Moreover, monocytes displayed enrichment in the angiogenic pathways, HIF-1 pathway, and apoptotic pathways ( ).
Overall, our findings reveal characteristic functional alterations in tumor-infiltrating macrophages, featuring decreased phagocytosis scores and enhanced expression of angiogenic genes and pathways, suggesting their potential role in promoting pancreatic angiosarcoma invasion and metastasis.

## PD-L1 and CD86 pathways presented upregulation in tumor regions while macrophage–MRC1 may mainly promoted angiogenesis
Given the observed immunosuppressive phenotype and enhanced angiogenic activity within the tumor-infiltrating immune-cell populations, we systematically examined intercellular communication networks to delineate the pathogenic pathways driving this aberrant microenvironment and discover possible therapeutic targets.
Calculation of cellular interactions between cell subpopulations in the tumor region by using Cell-PhoneDB revealed a significant increase in the level of interactions between T cells and other cell subpopulations in terms of PDCD1-, CD86-, and CTLA4-associated ligand–receptor interactions ( ). Further computational analysis by using CellChat demonstrated pronounced activation of the T-cell clusters, as well as an upregulation of immune checkpoint pathways (PD-L1, PD-L2, CD86) in the cellular crosstalk between tumor-infiltrating macrophages, MAIT cells, and T-cell subsets (CD4+ and CD8+), as shown in . In addition, we also noticed a significant enhancement of the angiopoietin like protein (ANGPTL) pathway of angiosarcoma cells acting on monocytes, macrophages, and DCs ( ).
 In order to further investigate the possible pathogenesis for tumor angiogenesis, we evaluated the functional status of endothelial cells and macrophages in the tumor region, and analysed the intercellular interactions between macrophages, endothelial cells, and angiosarcoma cells. Gene-set scores calculated by using AUCell demonstrated significantly higher tip-like scores in endothelial cells compared with angiosarcoma cells ( ), while comparative assessment of angiogenic potential across macrophage subclusters revealed markedly elevated angiogenesis scores in macrophage–MRC1 relative to the other two subclusters ( ). Comparative CellChat analysis between tumor and adjacent normal tissue identified upregulated angiogenic molecules and ligand–receptor pairs, including transforming growth factor beta 1 (TGFB1), midkine (MDK), and ANGPTL4 in tumor-infiltrating macrophages, endothelial cells, and angiosarcoma cells ( ), consistently with their roles in tumor vascularization. Whereas no significant upregulation of the above ligand–receptor pairs was seen in adjacent normal tissue, only the role of the TGFB1-associated ligand–receptor pairs was seen between macrophages ( ). Further analysis of the signaling pathways revealed a highest weighting of macrophage–MRC1 interactions in the tumor region, which actively receives signals from angiosarcoma cells and other macrophage subclusters through the transforming growth factor beta (TGF-β), ANGPTL, growth differentiation factor (GDF), and MDK pathways, as well as exerting an influence on endothelial cells ( ).
In conclusion, our findings suggested that T cells in pancreatic angiosarcoma liver metastasis upregulate immunosuppressive pathways such as PD-L1 and CD86 pathways. The macrophage–MRC1 subpopulation displayed increased angiogenic activity following interaction with angiosarcoma cells through ANGPTL, TGF-β, GDF, and MDK signaling pathways.

## Discussion
There are no therapeutic strategies that can significantly improve the survival of patients with angiosarcoma so far. Because pharmacologic therapies demonstrate limited efficacy in angiosarcomas, radical surgical resection remains the preferred therapeutic approach [ , , ]. However, it has shown limited improvement in patient survival, even after resection [ ]. It is difficult to achieve effective treatment for angiosarcoma, not only because of its highly malignant case characteristics, but also because of the few cases on which conduct meaningful studies. Angiosarcomas occurring in the pancreas are even rarer, with only ∼11 cases reported by investigators to date [ ]. Although novel targeted therapies have demonstrated promising efficacy and improved survival outcomes in multiple malignancies [ , ], their therapeutic benefits in angiosarcomas remain unsatisfactory [ ], representing an urgent unmet clinical need. In this study, we performed single-cell RNA-sequencing and bioinformatics analysis on a sample of pancreatic angiosarcoma liver metastasis and its adjacent normal tissues, in order to outline the characteristics of its tumor ecosystem. We uncovered a unique immunosuppressive and angiogenesis-promoting tumor-immune microenvironment in pancreatic angiosarcoma liver metastasis, which was characterized by a much greater overall proportion of T/NK cells than myeloid cells ( ), with an enhanced Treg function in CD4+ T cells, as well as an increased number of exhausted CD8+ T cells ( ). Analysis in myeloid cells revealed macrophages showing attenuated phagocytosis but upregulation of angiogenic genes and pathways. Both T/NK cells and myeloid cells expressed a number of immune checkpoints, such as PDCD1, LAG3, CD40, and CD86, and there was a significant upregulation of the PD-L1 pathway between macrophages, CD4+ T cells, CD8+ T cells, and MAIT subclusters. Meanwhile, the angiosarcoma cells presented a significant upregulated influence on monocytes, macrophages, and DCs through the ANGPTL pathways. The macorphage–MRC1 subcluster in the tumor region scored significantly higher in angiogenic function than the remaining macrophage subclusters, and macorphage–MRC1 may act on endothelial cells to promote angiogenesis through the TGF-β, ANGPTL, GDF, and MDK pathways. Our single-cell transcriptomic study provides new insights into the tumor niche ecosystem and immune microenvironment of pancreatic angiosarcoma liver metastasis. These findings not only reveal mechanisms underlying the poor response to targeted therapies, but also identify potential immunotherapeutic targets, offering valuable directions for future research and clinical management.
Angiosarcoma cells demonstrated significantly elevated expression of CDK4, HRAS, MDM2, MYC, TGM2, and TPM3 compared with normal endothelial cells ( ), suggesting that these genes may play a potential role in pancreatic angiosarcoma oncogenesis. For example, MYC gene dysregulation may cause imbalance in cell-cycle control mechanisms, resulting in growth factor-independent cell-cycle progression and spontaneous S-phase entry. This aberrant proliferation capacity may ultimately promote uncontrolled cellular expansion and tumorigenesis [ ]. In addition, CDK4 and EGFR were also significantly upregulated in angiosarcoma cells, suggesting that some CDK inhibitors and EGFR–TKIs (e.g. poziotinib and tarloxotinib) may be therapeutically effective for pancreatic angiosarcoma ( ). However, due to a low fold upregulation of EGFR expression in angiosarcoma cells, EGFR may not be an effective target, which requires further studies. The remaining therapeutic target genes were found to display no significance or were even downregulated in angiosarcoma cells compared with normal endothelium ( ). Given that angiosarcoma has been reported to harbor mutations in a number of genes [ ], we hypothesize that the sequences of these genes may be altered in pancreatic angiosarcoma, pending subsequent analysis. The reduced expression of these target genes in malignant cells may be a possible explanation for the poor response to targeted agents observed in angiosarcoma treatment. In addition, we found that VEGFR1 (FLT1) and VEGFR3 (FLT4) were downregulated in tumor cells compared with normal endothelial cells ( ). As major growth factors for endothelial cells, abnormal expression of VEGFR genes (VEGFR1 [FLT1], VEGFR2 [KDR], VEGFR3 [FLT4]) may be one of the factors contributing to the pathogenesis of pancreatic angiosarcoma. Moreover, mutations in VEGFR3 (FLT4) may lead to hereditary lymphedema-type IA, while chronic lymphedema is one of the risk factors for the development of angiosarcoma [ ]. Enrichment analysis revealed the upregulation of some specific pathways in angiosarcoma cells compared with normal endothelial cells, such as canonical NF-κB signal transduction, the HIF-1 signaling pathway, and the MYC signaling pathway ( ). As reported in numerous tumor systems [ , ], such pathway overactivation exhibits prototypical oncogenic behavior—NF-κB could initiate proliferative gene transcription, while MYC maintains its position as one of the most pervasively overexpressed cancer drivers. In addition, pathway-enrichment analysis revealed significant involvement of inflammatory mediator-related pathways in angiosarcoma cells, supporting their functional role in the tumor microenvironment.
The status of T-cell infiltration and characteristics displayed in the T-cell subclusters are usually associated with different prognostic outcomes [ ]. Our analysis of T-cell subclusters revealed an enrichment of CD4+ T cells within the tumor region, of which the Treg–FOXP3 cell subcluster highly expressed Treg-related genes ( ). Enrichment of Treg cells in tumor-infiltrating lymphocytes is observed in many tumor types, e.g. hepatocellular carcinoma, leading to an immunosuppressive microenvironment [ ]. The CD4–CCR7 subcluster presented an upregulation of naive-related genes ( ), indicating that the CD4–CCR7 subcluster tended to be in an undifferentiated state without antigen exposure. The enrichment of this naive-like subcluster within tumor tissues strongly suggests the existence of profound local immunosuppression, which may cause an impaired function of antigen-presenting cells. The Tfh–CXCL13 cell subpopulation highly expressed C–X–C motif chemokine ligand 13 (CXCL13) and PDCD1, of which CXCL13 has been reported to be involved in tumorigenesis and progression, whereas PDCD1 is reported to be upregulated in many tumors and is considered to be a major immune checkpoint in tumors, negatively regulating the function of immune cells [ , ]. The CD8–Tex–CTLA4 subcluster, enriched within tumor regions, exhibited elevated expression of exhaustion markers ( ), confirming its functionally exhausted state in the tumor microenvironment. Our gene-set scoring showed significant elevated exhaustion scores and Treg scores in tumor-infiltrating T cells, reinforcing the results of our aforementioned analysis ( ).
Enrichment analysis revealed that the CD4+ T-cell cluster showed upregulation of pathways mediating immune tolerance, while CD8+ T cells showed upregulation in cell pyroptosis pathways, the HIF-1 pathway, and the PD-L1 pathway ( ). The expression levels of immune checkpoints such as CTLA4, PDCD1, LAG3, and TIGIT in T/NK cells within the tumor region were also significantly higher than those in the adjacent normal tissues ( ). The immunosuppressive function of these immune checkpoints and pathways has been well established by previous studies. For example, Chen et al. [ ] and Juneja et al. [ ] reported that the PD-L1 pathway could achieve immunosuppressive effects by inhibiting immune cells from activating and eliminating tumor cells, thereby promoting the immune escape of cancer. LAG-3 has been reported to have a similar ability to promote tumor-immune escape to PD-L1, and Treg cells expressing LAG-3 produce high levels of the immunomodulatory cytokines interleukin 10 (IL-10) and TGF-β and suppress tumor-specific T cells [ ]. Hosseini et al. [ ] and Sharpe et al. [ ] reported that the CTLA-4 pathway may suppress immune function by inhibiting T-cell activation, cell-cycle progression, interleukin 2 (IL-2) production, and T-cell differentiation. In addition, TIGIT not only directly inhibits the cytotoxic activity of T/NK cells, but also promotes the differentiation of naive T cells into Treg cells, which leads to an immunosuppressive microenvironment and tumor progression [ , ]. The study revealed elevated expression of immunosuppressive checkpoints in pancreatic angiosarcoma metastasis, reflecting their functional overactivity. This may establish a T-cell-mediated immunosuppressive microenvironment that appears to be relatively unique among tumors. For example, Yan Zhou et al. [ ] discovered relatively weak T-cell-mediated tumor suppression in the immune microenvironment of metastatic osteosarcoma, in which the T cells presented a relatively low expression of immune checkpoint genes such as PDCD1, HAVCR2, and LAG3. In pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma (PDAC) liver metastasis, CTLA4 and TIGIT were seldom expressed in other T/NK-cell populations except Treg cells. In addition, the immune checkpoints PDCD1 and LAG3 were also poorly expressed in T/NK cells, as reported by Shu Zhang et al. [ ]. Collectively, our findings suggest an aberrant state of T-cell exhaustion, immune tolerance, and microenvironmental immunosuppression in pancreatic angiosarcoma liver metastasis, highlighting potential targets for immunotherapeutic intervention.
Minimizing immunosuppressive myeloid cells in tumor-infiltrating regions is also a very attractive direction to promote antitumor effects. We observed a higher prevalence of most myeloid-cell subsets in tumor regions compared with matched normal tissue ( ). Specifically, TAMs exhibited accumulation within the tumor niche, indicating their functional interplay with angiosarcoma cells and surrounding immune populations. Several studies have shown that TAMs may promote resistance to various treatments, including chemotherapy [ ]. Our gene-set scoring and gene-enrichment analyses revealed significantly higher M1-polarization scores in TAMs, accompanied by upregulated antigen presentation and Toll-like receptor signaling pathways ( ). These findings align with established functional profiles of M1-polarized macrophages [ ]. Although M1 macrophages have been reported to have antitumor activity in most types of cancer, in some cases, inflammatory mediators and reactive oxygen species released by M1 macrophages can create ideal conditions for a pro-inflammatory microenvironment, which may exert a pro-tumorigenic effect, e.g. in PDAC [ ]. In addition, M1 macrophages can promote tumor growth and facilitate cancer-cell invasion by producing matrix metalloproteinase (MMP) that degrades the extracellular matrix (ECM) and promote angiogenesis by producing VEGF [ , ]. This is corroborated by the elevated angiogenesis scores of macrophages in the tumor region in our analysis ( ). Notably, all macrophage subpopulations in tumor tissues exhibited significantly higher angiogenesis functional scores compared with their counterparts in adjacent normal tissue, indicating a potent pro-angiogenic tumor microenvironment. The critical involvement of angiogenesis and neovascularization in tumor progression and metastasis is well documented [ ]. TAMs contribute to the angiogenesis process through multiple mechanisms, including the NF-κB-pathway-mediated production of TNF-α, which stimulates tumor-cell proliferation and angiogenesis [ ]. Additionally, TAMs secrete C–X–C motif chemokine ligand 12 (CXCL12) in a HIF-1α-dependent manner, recruiting CXCR4-expressing endothelial cells to facilitate distant pro-angiogenic signaling [ ]. Our results suggested that macrophage-mediated angiogenesis may play a pivotal role in driving the aggressive progression and metastatic potential of pancreatic angiosarcoma.
Interactions between cellular subpopulations play an integral role in the development of the tumor ecosystem and immune checkpoint genes also rely on intercellular pathways to function. Detailed intercellular communication mapping revealed enhanced PD-L1-, PD-L2-, CTLA4-, and CD86-pathway activity between immune-cell populations ( ), confirming the pivotal contribution of these checkpoint molecules to immune microenvironment establishment in pancreatic angiosarcoma liver metastasis. PD-L1 overexpression has been reported in multiple malignancies including lung cancer, melanoma, glioma, and breast cancer, in which it contributes to an immunosuppressive tumor microenvironment [ ]. Tumor cells can achieve immunosuppression by expressing PD-L1 or PD-L2 acting on PD-1 molecules in T cells, thus assisting in immune escape and the invasion of cancer [ ]. Notably, angiosarcoma cells significantly enhanced interactions with DCs, monocytes, and macrophages through ANGPTL-pathway activation ( ), which is known to promote angiogenesis [ ]. Combined with elevated angiogenic gene signatures and pathways upregulated in macrophages, these findings demonstrate that angiosarcoma cells likely drive neovascularization and subsequent aggressive progression by strongly enhancing macrophage angiogenic functions. Among the TAMs, we discovered the maphage–MRC1 subcluster exhibiting the highest angiogenic gene-set score and receiving the influence of tumor cells while promoting endothelial-cell neovascularization through the TGF-β, ANGPTL, GDF, and MDK pathways. Gene-set scores revealed significantly higher tip-like scores in endothelial cells, suggesting that endothelial cells may display more active angiogenic functions ( ) [ , ]. Our analysis suggests considering immunotherapy targeting PD-1, LAG-3, and CD86 (e.g. isatuximab, Opdualag, and abatacept) for pancreatic angiosarcoma, while anti-angiogenic therapies may represent another viable option worthy of investigation.
There are several limitations in our study. First, due to the very small number of patients with pancreatic angiosarcoma as well as the difficulties in obtaining matched primary and metastatic tissues from patients with pancreatic angiosarcoma by surgical resection, the sample size of this study was limited to liver metastatic tissues and adjacent normal tissues from one patient. Our data may not reflect the entire tumor ecosystem of pancreatic angiosarcoma liver metastasis because the tumor microenvironment of metastatic multifocal tumors is highly heterogeneous, even within a single patient. In addition, the analysis of pathway activities and cell–cell interactions between different cellular subclusters was mainly derived from transcriptome predictions. Further confirmation of the reliability and generalizability of these findings through subsequent experiments is needed. In conclusion, our study provides an in-depth analysis of the transcriptomics and functional phenotypes of various cellular components of the tumor microenvironment in a unique sample of pancreatic angiosarcoma liver metastasis. The study also highlights possible reasons for the limited response of pancreatic angiosarcoma to current targeted therapies, and uncovered the presence of pathways and immune checkpoints associated with immunosuppressive and angiogenesis, which contributed to a deeper understanding of the mechanisms underlying the rapid invasion and metastasis of pancreatic angiosarcoma. Although further functional validation of these analyses is needed, our dataset can serve as a valuable resource for the design of immunotherapy as well as other targeted therapies for metastatic pancreatic angiosarcoma.

## Conclusions
In conclusion, our study provides an overview of the immunosuppressive and angiogenic tumor ecosystem presented in pancreatic angiosarcoma liver metastases at a single-cell level, which was characterized by functionally exhausted T cells and angiogenesis-promoting myeloid cells and angiosarcoma cells. Our findings suggested that pancreatic angiosarcoma may be insensitive to most targeted therapies, whereas immunotherapies targeting LAG3, PD-L1, and CD86 (e.g. isatuximab, Opdualag, and abatacept) and anti-angiogenic agents may be therapeutically effective and worthy of subsequent exploration.

## Supplementary Material
goaf046_Supplementary_Data

## Acknowledgements
We thank all the patients for donating tissue samples.

## Supplementary data

 is available at Gastroenterology Report online.

## Authors’ contributions
Y.Y.: Writing—Original Draft, Writing—Review & Editing, Methodology, Software, Formal analysis, Validation, Visualization, Data Curation, Conceptualization. L.C.: Writing—Review & Editing, Methodology, Validation, Conceptualization. M.L.: Writing—Review & Editing, Methodology, Validation. X.L.: Methodology, Software. S.P.: Writing—Review & Editing. Y.X.: Writing—Review & Editing, Methodology, Software. Z.Z.: Writing—Review & Editing. M.C.: Writing—Review & Editing. N.Z.: Writing—Review & Editing, Methodology, Supervision, Funding acquisition, Project administration, Conceptualization.

## Funding
This work was supported by grants from the Guangdong Basic and Applied Basic Research Foundation [no. 2021A1515110241] and grants from China Postdoctoral Science Foundation [no. 2022M723602].

## Conflicts of interest
The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper.

## Data availability
The datasets used and/or analysed during the current study are available from the corresponding author on reasonable request.