319nihpaCell reportsCell RepPMC128693561286935612869356NIHMS21428984147462110.1016/j.celrep.2025.116838Eos plays a critical role in Treg homeostasis and modulates the function of recirculating thymic Tregs in the control of Treg development
XieXuan ThorntonAngela M TanwarShalini KortyPatricia WellsAlexandria C SegristElisha TeijeiroAna RiveraClaudia A WeiDanping ChenXi ZhuJinfang KhleborodovaAsya HillTom MarkowitzTovah E SmelkinsonMargery KabatJuraj VeresTibor SchwartzOwen M Otaizo-CarrasqueroFrancisco GardinaPaul ShamsaddiniAmirhossein MartensCraig ChoKyoungin LinCheng-Chao KhillanJaspal S LevinYelena WuYing ShevachEthan M 1Laboratory of Immune System Biology, National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD, USA2Laboratory of Host Immunity and Microbiome, National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD, USA3Integrated Data Sciences Section, Research Technologies Branch, National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD, USA4Biological Imaging Facility, National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD, USA5Genomic Research Section, Research Technologies Branch, National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD, USA6Comparative Medicine Branch, National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD, USA7Sequencing Facility, Illumina (CCR), National Cancer Institute, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD, USA8Advanced Biomedical Computational Science, Frederick National Laboratory for Cancer Research, Frederick, MD 21702, USA9Lead contactAUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS
Conceptualization, X.X. and E.M.S.; methodology, X.X., T.H., and T.E.M.; investigation, X.X., S.T., A.C.W., E.S., A.T., C.A.R., D.W., X.C., A.K., T.H., T.E.M., M.S., J.K., T.V., F.O.-C., P.G., A.S., K.C., C.-C.L., Y.L., and Y.W.; writing – original draft, X.X. and E.M.S.; writing – review & editing, X.X. and E.M.S.; funding acquisition, E.M.S.; resources, A.M.T., P.K., J.Z., O.M.S., C.M., J.S.K., and E.M.S.; supervision, E.M.S.
*Correspondence: xxsabrina0408@outlook.com (X.X.), eshevach@niaid.nih.gov (E.M.S.)
29122025451116838116838522026This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/).The publisher's version of this article is available at Cell Rep

## SUMMARY
Eos, a member of the Ikaros family of transcription factors, is expressed by T regulatory cells (Tregs) and has been postulated to play a role in Treg suppression and maintenance of Treg stability. We demonstrate that expression of Eos was limited to a subpopulation of thymus-derived, activated Tregs and is undetectable in resting or activated T conventional cells. Eos associates with Helios and Foxp3 and binds directly to the CD25 locus at a site identical to the Foxp3-binding site, thereby enhancing CD25 expression. Studies in heterozygous female mice demonstrate that Eos is critical for Treg survival and activation. Eos+ Tregs also represent the major population of recirculating thymic Tregs, in which Eos plays a critical role in regulating their migration and suppression of Treg precursors in the thymus by competing for IL-2 and depleting MHC II from thymic dendritic cells.

## Graphical abstract

 

## In brief
Xie et al. demonstrate that the transcription factor Eos associates with Helios and Foxp3 in regulatory T cells (Tregs) to control their migration, suppressive capacity, survival, and fitness. Eos mediates the enhanced expression of CD25 on recirculating thymic Tregs, thereby controlling the production of thymic Tregs.

statusreleaseddisplay-pdfyesis-in-collection-domainyesis-olfnois-manuscriptyesis-preprintnois-journal-matternois-scannednois-retractednohas-published-versionnoIssue date 2026 Jan 27.

## INTRODUCTION
Regulatory T cells (Tregs) play a critical role in maintaining immune homeostasis and preventing autoimmune diseases by modulating immune responses. , Among the various subsets of Tregs, thymus-derived Tregs (tTregs) are crucial for establishing central tolerance, while peripherally induced Tregs (pTregs) arise from conventional CD4+ T cells in response to specific antigens. In addition to the function of the thymus in regulating the development of tTregs, a major subset of Tregs in the thymus is composed of Tregs that have recirculated from peripheral tissues, likely directed by Ccr6/Ccl20 and Cxcr4/Cxcl12 chemokine axes. , A number of studies have suggested that recirculating Tregs play a major role in restraining the development of Tregs in the thymus. , Thiault et al. added mature peripheral Tregs to thymic organ cultures and demonstrated that these peripheral Tregs can suppress the development of Tregs by ~30%–60%, but did not inhibit the development of T conventional cells (Tconvs). While the addition of mature Treg cells inhibited the development of CD4+Foxp3+ Tregs, they had no effect on the numbers of CD4+CD25+Foxp3− precursor cells in the thymus. As the differentiation of precursor cells requires the presence of IL-2, these authors postulated that the recirculating Tregs inhibited Treg development in the thymus by absorbing IL-2. Additionally, Weist et al. used a thymic tissue slice culture model to study the differentiation of Tregs expressing a specific TCR transgene. They demonstrated a 50% reduction in Treg development when OT-II Foxp3− thymocytes were added to thymic slices derived from OVA protein-injected IL-2-deficient (−/−) mice. Partial reconstitution of Treg development was induced by the addition of IL-2-anti-IL-2 immune complexes to the slice. The failure of OT-II WT thymocytes to fully restore Treg development in IL-2−/−slice cultures suggested that thymocytes were unlikely the important source of IL-2. The addition of OVA-loaded WT dendritic cells (DCs) to IL-2-deficient cultures restored Treg development, suggesting that antigen-bearing DCs could provide a local source of IL-2 needed for Treg development. Taken together, these studies demonstrate that the development of Tregs within the thymus is very sensitive to the local concentration of IL-2 in the thymus. One of the mechanisms by which recirculating thymic Tregs exert a regulatory influence on local thymic IL-2 concentrations is to compete for IL-2 availability. However, most of the studies were conducted in vitro or using TCR transgenic mice, leaving the relevance of this mechanism in vivo unclear.
The Ikaros family of zinc-finger transcription factors (TFs) comprises five members (Ikzf1-5: Ikaros, Helios, Aiolos, Eos, and Pegasus) essential for the development and function of hematopoietic and immune cells. Two distinct regions characterize Ikaros family members: N-terminal zinc finger domains that mediate DNA binding, and C-terminal zinc finger domains crucial for protein interactions (homo- and heterodimerization between Ikaros family members). Among the Ikaros family members, Helios was reported to be a potential marker of tTregs and to play a critical role in Treg fate determination. – Eos is a second member of the Ikaros family that is preferentially expressed in Tregs. Pan et al. initially showed that Foxp3 and Eos physically interacted in Treg cells, as evidenced by co-immunoprecipitation (coIP). Furthermore, Tregs treated with Eos-specific siRNA were unable to suppress inflammatory bowel disease (IBD) induced by Tconvs, underscoring the essential role of Eos in Treg function. Sharma et al. demonstrated that at sites of inflammation, the loss of Eos resulted in the reprogramming of Tregs into T helper (Th)-like T cells, loss of suppressor function, and acquisition of a pro-inflammatory phenotype. One major problem with both of these studies was that the specificity of the anti-Eos antibodies was not adequately confirmed using Tregs from Eos−/− mice. Gokhale et al. (2019) used a genetic approach to define the role of Eos in Treg function by generating Eosfl/fl × Foxp3-Cre (Eos cKO) mice, which developed loss of suppressor function in vivo accompanied by systemic- and organ-specific autoimmunity at the age of 3 months. However, global Eos-deficient mice (Eos KO) did not develop overt autoimmunity until approximately 1 year of age, and mice with T cell-specific Eos depletion (Eosfl/fl × CD4-Cre) developed autoimmunity at 7–8 months of age, suggesting a potential regulatory role for Eos in Tconvs and possibly non-T cells. , 
In this study, we show that Eos associates with Helios and Foxp3 to form a complex regulating multiple aspects of Treg function. Importantly, Eos is preferentially expressed in recirculating thymic Tregs, where it regulates their migration and suppressive function through modulation of their chemotaxis, extracellular matrix, affinity for IL-2, and ability to capture MHC II from thymic DCs, thereby limiting thymic Treg generation and establishing immune homeostasis. Overall, our study demonstrates that Eos controls critical aspects of Treg biology, which may lead to advancement of potential therapeutic strategies for autoimmune diseases and other immune-related disorders.

## RESULTS

## Eos is preferentially expressed in a subpopulation of Helios+Foxp3+ Tregs
To investigate the function of Eos, we generated a monoclonal anti-Eos antibody (clone 18H2) by immunizing a hamster with aa 416–464 peptide of mouse Eos protein ( ). Binding specificity of this antibody was tested using splenic CD4+ T cells from Eos KO and wild-type (WT) mice ( ). Consistent with a previous report, we observed preferential expression of Eos in Foxp3+CD4+ Tregs from thymus, spleen and mesenteric lymph nodes (mLNs; and ). In young adult mice, approximately 50% of Foxp3+ T cells expressed Eos, and all Eos+ Tregs were Helios+. Very low numbers of Eos+Foxp3− T cells could be detected. Even though Eos was predominantly expressed in a subpopulation of Helios+Foxp3+ Tregs, the expression of Foxp3 and Helios was not required for the expression of Eos. In hemizygous male scurfy mice, which lacked Foxp3-expressing T cells, significant numbers of Eos+CD4+ T cells were observed. Compared to WT mice, scurfy male mice showed an even higher percentage of Eos+CD4+ T cells in the spleen ( ). In Heliosfl/fl × CD4-Cre mice, which lacked Helios-expressing T cells and remained autoimmune-free, we also observed abundant Eos+CD4+ T cells. When compared to WT mice, the ratio of Eos-expressing CD4+ T cells and Eos MFI remained comparable, suggesting that the expression of Eos is independent of Helios ( ).
 Ikaros family members use their C-terminal zinc finger (ZF) domains to form homo- or heterodimers between themselves, and other Ikaros TFs were reported to directly interact with Hdac1, a core component of the NuRD complex, and Foxp3. , , , To validate if Eos could form heterodimers with Helios, we performed immunofluorescence (IF) microscopy and observed significant co-localization of Eos with Helios in the nucleus of Tregs from the spleen and thymus of WT mice ( and ). The binding specificity of anti-Eos (clone 18H2) and anti-Helios (clone 22F6) antibodies under these experimental conditions was also confirmed using splenic Tregs from Eos KO and Heliosfl/fl × CD4-Cre mice ( ). Even though Foxp3 did not co-localize with Eos and Helios, coIP experiments using purified Tregs from WT mice revealed that the anti-Eos antibody precipitated both Helios and Foxp3, while Helios and Foxp3 also precipitated with each other, as previously reported ( ). , This finding is consistent with the possibility that Eos and Helios form heterodimers and physically interact with a subset of Foxp3 molecules.

## Eos is preferentially expressed in tTregs
As Eos+ Tregs represented a subpopulation of Helios+ Tregs, and our previous studies demonstrated that Helios was selectively expressed in tTregs, we evaluated Eos expression in peripherally induced Tregs (pTregs) in vivo. In the gastrointestinal tract, a substantial population of pTregs is present, which plays an important role in maintaining tolerance to the gut microbiota and dietary antigens. Notably, these pTregs are characterized as RORγt+Helios−, distinguishing them from tTregs. – In the large intestine (LI), the percentage of Foxp3+ T cells expressing Eos was less than that seen in spleen. Importantly, all RORγt+ Treg cells were Eos−, indicating that most of the Eos+ Tregs in the gut were likely tTregs ( ).
 To determine whether Eos could be induced in pTregs in vivo, we used an oral tolerance model in which naive WT or Eos KO OT-II CD4+ T cells were adoptively transferred into congenically marked WT recipient mice, which were then given OVA-supplemented water for 7 days ( ). While the induction of pTregs in the mLNs from WT and Eos KO OT-II cells occurred at a similar ratio, Eos expression in WT OT-II pTregs could not be detected ( ). It has been reported previously that pTregs in the lamina propria in the oral tolerance model failed to express Helios, but a substantial number of pTregs in the mLNs expressed Helios. This finding was also observed in our study ( ). This raises the possibility that Eos is more selectively expressed in tTregs than Helios. We also examined the expression of Eos in pTregs generated during the induction of IBD following transfer of naive CD4+Foxp3− T cells to immunodeficient mice. In contrast to the results in the oral tolerance model, when purified naive CD4+Foxp3− T cells from Foxp3-Cre or Eosfl/fl × Foxp3-Cre mice were transferred to TCRα KO mice ( ), pTregs expressed high levels of Eos 4 weeks post transfer, and most of those Eos+ pTregs were Helios+ ( ). This suggests that under inflammatory conditions, Eos and Helios could be induced at high levels in pTregs.

## Eos expression is markedly lower in Tconvs compared to Tregs
Our previous studies suggested that Eos was expressed in Tconvs and may play a role in their function, as mice with either global deletion of Eos or T cell-specific depletion of Eos developed autoimmunity much later in life than mice with Treg-specific deletion of Eos. , While Eos expression could not be detected in CD4+ Tconvs and CD8+ T cells in the steady state, we examined Eos expression in Th cells polarized in vitro. We purified naive CD4+ T cells from CD45.1 WT and Eos KO (CD45.2) mice, mixed the cells at a 1:1 ratio, and cultured them under Th-polarizing conditions and iTreg conditions. Eos expression could not be detected in in vitro-polarized Th1, Th2, and Th17 cells compared to iTregs ( and ). We also examined cytokine production by the polarized cells upon stimulation with cell stimulation cocktail and found no differences between WT cells and Eos KO cells ( and ).
Next, we examined the function of Eos in Tconvs in vivo. We transferred CD4+CD45RBhiFoxp3− cells from WT or Eos KO mice to Rag1 KO recipients to induce IBD ( ). Two weeks post transfer, we observed similar levels of IFN-γ, IL-10, and IL-2 production by transferred WT and Eos KO CD4+ T cells isolated from the spleen of recipient mice ( and ). Next, we examined the potential function of Eos in Th2 cells in vivo by challenging WT or Eosfl/fl × CD4-Cre mice with Alternaria alternata (A. alternata) extract intranasally (i.n.) twice ( ). 7 days post-second challenge, no differences were observed in the production of IL-13 and IL-4 by CD4+ T cells isolated from the lung between the two groups ( and ). Lastly, we transferred WT or Eos KO naive OT-II T cells to congenically marked WT recipients and immunized them with OVA323–339 in CFA subcutaneously (s.c.) to induce Th1 and Th17 cells. No differences in IFN-γ and IL-17 production by the two types of transferred OT-II cells were seen ( and ). Thus, we were unable to define a role for Eos in Tconvs in these relatively short-term in vitro and in vivo assays, and the function of Eos in Tconvs, if any, requires further careful examination.

## Eos is critical for the fitness and homeostasis of Tregs
We analyzed the expression of activation markers and effector Treg (eTreg)-associated markers on Tregs from WT mice and found that Eos+ Tregs exhibited higher expression levels of these markers compared to Eos− Tregs in both the thymus and spleen, indicating that Eos+ Tregs were more activated than Eos− Tregs ( ). Due to the development of autoimmunity in Eosfl/fl × Foxp3-Cre mice, to further characterize the intrinsic functions of Eos in Tregs under normal conditions, we generated heterozygous female mice (Eosfl/fl × Foxp3-YFPCre/RFP) by crossing Eosfl/fl × Foxp3-RFP mice to Eosfl/fl × Foxp3-Cre mice ( ). The ratio of Eos cKO Tregs to WT Tregs was 1:1 at 6 weeks of age in both the thymus and spleen, but this ratio decreased dramatically at 8 weeks and 12 weeks, indicating a critical role for Eos in the maintenance of Treg fitness ( and ). We also observed that in 6 wo heterozygous females, both the percentage of CD25+ cells and the CD25 MFI were lower on Eos cKO Tregs than on WT Tregs, in both the thymus and spleen ( and ).
 

## Eos is preferentially expressed in recirculating thymic Tregs
We analyzed the frequencies of Eos+ Tregs in the thymus and spleen of WT mice at different ages and found a logarithmic growth curve ( ), which closely resembled the reported curve of increasing recirculating thymic Tregs with aging. In previous studies, GFP− thymic Tregs in Rag-GFP mice were defined as recirculating Tregs, and the majority of them expressed CD73. , Their homing to the thymus was postulated to be mediated by Cxcr4 and/or by the Ccr6/Ccl20 chemokine axes. We re-examined the expression of recirculating thymic Treg-related proteins on Eos+ thymic Tregs and found that Eos+ thymic Tregs were a subpopulation of CD73+ thymic Tregs. Furthermore, Eos expression on thymic Tregs was more closely correlated with both Ccr6 and Cxcr4 expression ( ). By contrast, the majority of thymic Tregs expressed Helios, as previously reported ( ). This finding aligns with the established role of Helios as a marker of tTregs and its early expression during T cell development. We speculated that Eos+ thymic Tregs were the actual recirculating thymic Tregs, while Eos−CD73+ thymic Tregs were mostly thymus-resident Tregs, which are mature Tregs that have never left the thymus.
 To better define subpopulations of thymic Tregs, we isolated WT and Eos cKO thymic Tregs from 6 wo heterozygous female mice and performed combined scRNA-seq and TCR sequencing. High-resolution clustering identified 17 distinct clusters from sorted cells ( ). We then examined the expression of Foxp3, Nt5e (CD73), Ccr6, and Cxcr4 in each cluster ( ) and regrouped the 17 clusters into 5 groups ( ). To determine the order in which cells change over time, we performed pseudotime analysis ( ), which allowed us to infer the progression of biological processes over time. During pseudotime analysis, we observed that certain small and biologically inconsistent clusters (mostly CD73+Ccr6+Cxcxr4−) interfered with the trajectory inference. These minor clusters, potentially representing rare cell states, outliers, or technical artifacts, introduced noise and disrupted the overall continuity of the inferred developmental paths. To improve the robustness and interpretability of the trajectories, we opted to exclude these low-population clusters prior to rerunning the pseudotime analysis. This refinement step facilitated a smoother and more biologically plausible reconstruction of cellular differentiation and transition trajectories. In the end, we obtained four trajectories, all originating from the Foxp3− group. The Foxp3− group exhibited transient expression of Nr4a1, Nr4a3, and Ccr8 along the trajectories, features that are typical of Treg precursors. All four trajectories then transitioned to the CD73− group, which was reported to contain mostly newly generated Tregs. , Subsequently, one trajectory terminated in the CD73− group, while another led to the CD73+Ccr6−Cxcr4− group, and two trajectories entered the CD73+Ccr6+Cxcr4+ group. These findings suggest a more mature status of CD73+ cells but also indicate distinct developmental pathways for the CD73+Ccr6−Cxcr4− and CD73+Ccr6+Cxcr4+ groups.
Next, we compared the proportions of the top 5 most abundant TCR clones from each of the 5 groups (20 clones in total) based on TCR sequencing data ( ). The CD73+Ccr6−Cxcr4− group shared highly overlapping major clones with both the Treg precursor group and the newly generated Treg group, suggesting that the CD73+Ccr6−Cxcr4− cells had never left the thymus. In contrast, the CD73+Ccr6+Cxcr4+ group contained very distinct major clones from all other four groups, suggesting that they are recirculating thymic Tregs whose TCR repertoire was shaped by antigens they encountered in the periphery. Taking the pseudotime analysis into consideration, we suggest that the Foxp3− group primarily comprised Treg precursors, the CD73− group was predominantly composed of newly generated Tregs, the CD73+Ccr6−Cxcr4− group was largely thymus-resident Tregs, and the CD73+Ccr6+Cxcr4+ group was predominantly recirculating thymic Tregs. Since Eos+ thymic Tregs were highly overlapping with Ccr6+ and Cxcr4+ thymic Tregs, this further confirmed that Eos was preferentially expressed in recirculating thymic Tregs.
We also analyzed differentially expressed genes between WT Tregs and Eos cKO Tregs from the thymus of 6 wo heterozygous female mice and observed reduced expression of eTreg-associated genes (Tigit and Icos; ). We then performed a pathway enrichment analysis and observed a significant enrichment in pathways associated with T cell activation and migration in WT thymic Tregs ( ). Furthermore, we performed pathway enrichment analysis within each cluster and observed that in cluster 6 (the most mature recirculating thymic Treg cluster), multiple chemotaxis- and migration-related pathways were enriched in WT thymic Tregs ( ), confirming the important role of Eos in regulating the migration of recirculating thymic Tregs.
To more definitively address the preferential expression of Eos in recirculating thymic Tregs, we performed parabiosis experiments, in which two congenically marked WT mice were surgically joined for 1 month ( ). With congenic markers, we could easily distinguish between host cells and recirculating donor cells. Analysis of the frequency of Eos+ cells within host Tregs and donor Tregs in the thymus demonstrated a much higher frequency of Eos+ cells within donor Tregs but similar ratios of Eos+ cells in host and donor Tregs in the spleen ( and ). Additionally, we also observed a similarly higher frequency of Ccr6+ and Cxcr4+ cells within donor Tregs in the thymus ( and ), suggesting that the majority of recirculating thymic Tregs were Eos+, Ccr6+, and Cxcr4+. We did not observe a higher ratio of Eos+ cells within donor Tregs compared to host Tregs in the spleen, most likely secondary to non-selective circulation of both Eos+ Tregs and Eos− Tregs to the spleen.
It has recently been reported that recirculating Tregs were responsible for the repair of thymic injury in association with the following genes: Areg, Tff1, and Penk. We induced thymic injury with sublethal total body irradiation (SL-TBI) as described ( ). The irradiation caused a dramatic decrease of thymocyte cellularity, but the total number of Tregs was unchanged, consistent with an influx of recirculating Tregs from the periphery ( ). The frequency of Eos+ Tregs increased significantly post SL-TBI, raising the possibility that the majority of the recirculating Tregs were Eos+ ( and ). In contrast to what we observed in a normal mouse, where the majority of recirculating thymic Tregs were both Ccr6+ and Cxcr4+, the majority of the recirculating Tregs in the injury model were Ccr6+Cxcr4− ( and ). This study is consistent with the preferential expression of Eos in recirculating Tregs in the injury model but raises the possibility that different chemotaxis pathways are involved in their migration to the thymus. We also analyzed the expression of the three Treg reparative-function related genes across the 5 groups of thymic Tregs identified in our scRNA-seq analysis ( ). In WT samples, the highest expression levels of the three genes were observed in the CD73+Ccr6+Cxcr4+ subset, which represented the recirculating thymic Tregs in mice at steady state. Comparison of the mRNA levels of the three genes in the CD73+Ccr6+Cxcr4+ cells from WT cells and Eos cKO cells demonstrated a reduction in Eos cKO cells ( ), implicating the relevance of Eos in the reparative function of recirculating thymic Tregs.

## Eos is involved in the migration of recirculating thymic Tregs
To further confirm the relationship between Eos expression and the migration capacity of recirculating thymic Tregs, we first performed bulk RNA-seq of sorted Eos+ Tregs, Eos− Tregs, and Foxp3− CD4SP (Tconv) cells from the thymus of WT mice using Ccr6 as a surrogate marker for Eos+ Tregs. Principal component analysis revealed that all three cell populations were very different from each other ( ). Analysis of genes differentially expressed between Eos+ and Eos− thymic Tregs confirmed the higher expression of Eos and Ccr6 in the Ccr6+ thymic Treg sample ( ). Pathway enrichment analysis comparing Eos+ Tregs to Eos− Tregs and Eos+ Tregs to Foxp3−CD4+ Tconvs demonstrated selective enrichment of pathways related to GPCR signaling and down-regulation of pathways related to extracellular matrix in Eos+ thymic Tregs ( ). Both GPCR and extracellular matrix are important for T cell migration, suggesting a differential migration capacity of Eos+ thymic Tregs. To further confirm the involvement of Eos in Treg migration, we purified Ccr6+ and Ccr6− thymic Tregs from WT and Eos cKO mice and performed an in vitro migration assay in 5-μm Transwell plates with the presence of Ccl20 (the ligand of Ccr6) in the bottom chamber ( ). We observed higher migration of Ccr6+ cells than Ccr6− cells, suggesting that the migration system was set up successfully. While Ccr6 was expressed on the cell surface of both WT and Eos cKO Tregs, Eos cKO Tregs migrated less efficiently than WT thymic Tregs, suggesting that Eos regulated other genes that are important for the migration of Ccr6+ thymic Tregs. To prove the relevance of Eos in the migration of recirculating thymic Tregs in vivo, we injected 6 wo heterozygous female mice with anti-CD45-BUV737 antibody intravenously (i.v.), resulting in the instantaneous labeling of all CD45+ cells in the bloodstream. After 24 h, we harvested the thymus and spleen and identified cells that had migrated from the bloodstream to the thymus using CD45 labeling ( ). Among the migrated cells, a comparison of the ratio of WT (Foxp3-RFP+) and Eos cKO (Foxp3-YFP+) Tregs demonstrated a reduction of Eos cKO Tregs in the thymus but no reduction in the spleen. This result suggests that the lack of Eos expression impaired the capacity of Tregs to migrate from the bloodstream back to the thymus, whereas the migration of Tregs from the bloodstream to the spleen was unaffected ( and ).
 

## Eos regulates the responsiveness of Tregs to IL-2 via direct binding to the CD25 locus
During our analysis of 6 wo heterozygous female mice, we noted that the expression of CD25 was reduced on Eos cKO Tregs. To further explore the role of Eos in the IL-2 signaling pathway, we analyzed the relationship between Eos expression and CD25 expression in Tregs in WT mice at steady state. Eos+ Tregs expressed higher levels of CD25 than Eos− Tregs in both the thymus and spleen ( and ). We compared the expression of CD25 on recirculating thymic Tregs in young adult WT and Eos KO mice and observed that the expression of CD25 on Ccr6+ recirculating thymic Tregs was reduced in Eos KO mice ( ). As phosphorylation of Stat5 (pStat5) is a crucial step in the IL-2 signaling pathway, we stimulated WT thymic Tregs in vitro with IL-2 for 20 min. Almost 100% of Eos+ thymic Tregs became pStat5+, whereas only ~60% of Eos− Tregs became pStat5+ ( ). We also examined whether deletion of Eos would reduce the ratio of pStat5+ cells in recirculating thymic Tregs. However, the anti-Ccr6 antibody did not work under the staining conditions designed for pStat5. We therefore compared the frequency of pStat5+CD73+ cells (approximately half of which are recirculating thymic Tregs) among thymic Tregs between WT and Eos KO mice and observed a reduction in Eos KO mice ( ).
 As the total number of Tregs in the thymus is low, we performed anti-Eos and anti-Helios ChIP-seq on purified splenic Tregs from WT and Eos cKO mice. We observed very clear binding of Eos to the CD25 locus in WT cells compared to Eos cKO cells. Additionally, the binding of Helios to the CD25 locus was also markedly decreased in Eos cKO Tregs, suggesting that Eos was also important for the binding of Helios to the CD25 locus ( ). We confirmed this finding with ChIP-qPCR ( ). We also observed that the Eos-Helios complex binding site at the CD25 locus was identical to that of Foxp3. Considering that Eos, Helios, and Foxp3 can physically interact with each other, it is possible that Eos, Helios, and Foxp3 collaborate to regulate CD25 expression directly. With peak calling, we identified all genes directly targeted by Eos and genes targeted by Helios that also require the assistance of Eos ( ). GO (Gene Ontology) enrichment analysis of Eos and Helios ChIP-seq identified multiple pathways directly targeted by Eos and pathways regulated by both Helios and Eos ( ), which included pathways related to IL-2 response, T cell activation, and T cell migration ( and ). Taking into consideration that Eos and Helios are highly colocalized in the nucleus of Tregs and that the two TFs may potentially form heterodimers, it remains likely that the two TFs cooperate with each other and play a major role in controlling CD25 expression and Treg responsiveness to IL-2 by direct binding to the CD25 locus.

## Eos mediates the suppression of Treg precursors by recirculating thymic Tregs via IL-2 deprivation and MHC II depletion from thymic DCs
Previous studies have claimed that the major function of recirculating thymic Tregs was to suppress the development of thymic Tregs via IL-2 deprivation. , As our studies strongly suggest that Eos regulates the expression of CD25 on recirculating thymic Tregs, we re-examined Treg frequencies in young adult Eos KO mice (before onset of autoimmunity). Both CD73− newly generated thymic Tregs and CD73+Ccr6+ recirculating thymic Tregs were increased in Eos KO mice ( and ). This increase was not due to defects in T cell development, because Eos was minimally expressed during T cell development ( and ), and the cellularity of thymocytes, frequencies of DN, DP, CD4SP, and CD8SP cells were all normal in Eos KO mice ( ). This increase in newly generated and recirculating Tregs was also not due to lack of Eos in thymic DCs and thymic epithelial cells (TECs), as Eos was not expressed by these two cell types ( ). Even with more recirculating thymic Tregs present in Eos KO mice, the generation of new Tregs was still increased, suggesting reduced suppression of Treg precursors by recirculating thymic Tregs in Eos KO mice. We also examined 8 wo Eosfl/fl × CD4-Cre mice, which do not exhibit an autoimmune phenotype until 7–8 months of age. While we observed a higher frequency of CD73− newly generated Tregs, thymocyte cellularity was already reduced in these mice, most likely secondary to stress induced by slowly developing autoimmunity ( and ). In addition, these mice exhibited increased frequencies of DN cells and decreased frequencies of DP cells, a phenotype consistent with thymic stress ( and ). The development of autoimmune manifestations in Eosfl/fl × Foxp3-Cre mice occurred even faster, precluding a detailed analysis of thymic subpopulations. 
 The decreased expression of CD25 on Eos KO Tregs raised the possibility that Eos might play an important role in the regulation of recirculating thymic Tregs to suppress Treg generation via IL-2 deprivation. We purified Foxp3−CD25hiGITRhi CD4+CD8− Treg precursors, which have the potential to differentiate into CD25+Foxp3+ Tregs in response to IL-2 in vitro, and co-cultured them with WT or Eos KO recirculating thymic Tregs for 24 h. In the presence of low levels of IL-2 (0.1 U/mL), the addition of WT recirculating thymic Tregs reduced the generation of Tregs. In contrast, the addition of Eos KO recirculating thymic Tregs resulted in much less inhibition of Treg induction ( and ). When higher levels of IL-2 (10 U/mL) were added to the co-cultures, similar levels of Treg induction were observed in all 3 groups ( , lower panel). These observations strongly suggest that Eos is important in mediating IL-2 deprivation of Treg precursors by Eos+ recirculating thymic Tregs.
One additional mechanism of Treg suppressor function is depletion of MHC II-peptide complexes from DCs. – As recognition of MHC II on thymic DCs contributes to Treg generation, we speculated that recirculating thymic Tregs may also regulate Treg generation in the thymus by depleting MHC II-peptide complexes from thymic DCs. The absolute numbers of thymic DCs were similar in WT and Eos KO mice, but the expression of MHC II on thymic DCs from Eos KO mice was much higher than that observed on DCs from WT mice ( ). While mTECs also play a crucial role in inducing Tregs, no significant differences in MHC II expression were observed between WT and Eos KO mice ( ). To directly assess whether the differences in MHC II expression on thymic DCs were related to the presence of Eos+ thymic Tregs, we co-cultured WT thymic Tregs and Eos KO thymic Tregs with WT thymic DCs that had been pre-stained with an anti-MHC II antibody (clone KH74, labeled with AF647) that does not interfere with the interactions between MHC II and the TCR. WT thymic Tregs exhibited enhanced uptake of the pre-labeled MHC II compared to Eos KO thymic Tregs ( and ). Furthermore, among WT thymic Tregs, Ccr6+ (Eos+) thymic Tregs captured higher levels of MHC II than Ccr6− thymic Tregs, suggesting a critical role of Eos in mediating the depletion of MHC II on thymic DCs by recirculating thymic Tregs ( and ).
Lastly, to determine if the differences in the levels of MHC II on thymic DCs between WT and Eos KO mice were of functional importance, we purified Foxp3−CD25−CD4+ thymocytes, which contained cells that could eventually differentiate into Tregs in the presence of thymic DCs and IL-2 (or IL-7). These cells were then co-cultured with thymic DCs from WT or Eos KO mice in the presence of IL-2. Thymic DCs from Eos KO mice were more potent inducers of Tregs than thymic DCs from WT mice ( and ). Taken together, Eos plays a critical role in the suppressor function of recirculating thymic Tregs on Treg precursors, both via IL-2 deprivation of Treg precursors and MHC II depletion from thymic DCs.

## DISCUSSION
Previous studies have suggested that Eos potentially plays a critical role in multiple aspects of Treg function. RNA interference studies demonstrated that Eos cooperated with Foxp3 directly in silencing Treg signature genes. Other studies demonstrated that at sites of inflammation, Tregs can rapidly reprogram into helper-like cells, losing Eos expression but retaining Foxp3 expression. More importantly, the conditional deletion of Eos in Tregs led to the onset of both systemic- and organ-specific autoimmunity at 3 months of age, confirming the critical role of Eos in Treg function. 
The generation of a monoclonal anti-Eos antibody allowed us to more thoroughly investigate the function of Eos in Tregs. Surprisingly, in young adult mice at steady state, only ~50% of Foxp3+ T cells in the periphery expressed Eos. Eos expression was confined to cells expressing Helios and was absent from RORγt+Foxp3+ T cells in the gastrointestinal tract, consistent with the view that Eos is selectively expressed in tTregs in vivo. Under the steady-state and activation conditions tested here, Eos expression was barely detected in Tconvs. However, our previous work suggests that Eos may play a role in Tconvs or non-T cells to prevent Eos KO mice from developing autoimmune disease until they reach 1 year of age. Recent reports indicate the involvement of Eos in the function of Th1 and Th2 cells, although we could not detect obvious defects in the function of major Th cell subsets lacking Eos. , Thus, the function of Eos in Tconvs might be highly context dependent and requires further investigation.
While the rapid development of autoimmune manifestations in Eos cKO mice prohibited the analysis of Eos’s role in the steady state, heterozygous female mice that carry one WT allele and one Foxp3-Cre allele allowed us to study the intrinsic function of Eos under normal conditions. The rapid disappearance of Eos cKO Tregs in these mice demonstrated a critical requirement for Eos in maintaining Treg fitness and survival. A similar defect in Treg cell fitness was observed in heterozygous female mice with Treg conditional deletion of Helios, but the loss of the deficient cells occurred much more slowly over a period of 2–5 months. We did not evaluate whether the Eos-deficient cells converted into ex-Tregs using fate-mapping techniques, and this would be of interest in future studies. Eos expression is acquired in the periphery following egress from the thymus, and it is thus curious that Eos-deficient Tregs (at least by staining) survive normally in WT mice. While we cannot exclude the possibility that very low levels are sufficient to maintain Treg fitness, an alternative possibility is that Eos is induced in peripheral Tregs during their transition from the resting state to the activated state, as Eos+ Tregs in WT mice express higher levels of CD25 and eTreg-related markers. Expression of Eos is thus required to prevent activation-induced death of Tregs when they differentiate from resting to activated Tregs. Unfortunately, despite several attempts, we have been unable to generate an Eos reporter mouse strain, which would enable cell transfer studies to address this issue.
It has been known for some time that Tregs recirculate from the periphery to the thymus and that the Ccr6/Ccl20 and Cxcr4/Cxcl12 axes mediate this process. Our parabiosis experiments and scRNA-seq analysis of thymic Tregs have directly demonstrated that Eos+ thymic Tregs are recirculating thymic Tregs and are marked by co-expression of Ccr6 and Cxcr4. The generation of Rag-GFP mice allowed researchers to distinguish between newly generated GFP+ Tregs and older GFP− Tregs. It was suggested that the GFP− thymic Tregs in these mice were recirculating Tregs that had migrated from the periphery back to the thymus. We believe that this compartmentalization of thymic Tregs is overly simplistic. Therefore, we propose a better classification of thymic Treg subpopulations based on their actual gene expression profiles and phenotypic characteristics. Newly generated thymic Tregs can also be identified by the lack of CD73 expression. Recirculating thymic Tregs, as shown above, are characterized as CD73+Ccr6+Cxcr4+Eos+ and express a unique gene signature with a distinct TCR repertoire. The third population, characterized as CD73+Ccr6−Cxcr4−, is hypothesized to represent thymus-resident Tregs whose significance and function remain unknown. A significant presence of Eos+ recirculating thymic Tregs involved in the reparative process within the thymus was also observed following sublethal irradiation. Unlike recirculating thymic Tregs in mice at steady state, these cells expressed Ccr6 but not Cxcr4, presumably secondary to the production of different chemokines after thymic injury
The regulation of Treg production in the thymus is a tightly controlled process, as enhanced production can lead to immunosuppression while defective production can result in autoimmunity. Thymic development of tTregs is a “TCR-instructive” process, where TCR plays a critical role in directing T cells into the Foxp3+ lineage but is limited by a small niche that can be saturated at low clonal frequencies. , The second major factor modulating Treg generation is the availability of IL-2. Studies using thymic organ cultures or thymic slice cultures have suggested that recirculating thymic Tregs mediate a rheostat-like function by competing for IL-2. Our studies at steady state, both in vivo and in vitro, strongly suggest that the Eos+ Treg population, due to its elevated expression of CD25, is the major mediator of this competition. While the cellular source of IL-2 in the thymus has been controversial, recent studies have shown that CD4+CD25+Foxp3− thymocytes, the same population that contains Treg precursors, are the primary source of IL-2 in the thymus. It is likely that the IL-2 producers, the Treg precursors, and the Eos+ recirculating Tregs exist in close physical space in the thymic medulla, creating a unique microenvironment permitting highly specific production, utilization, and competition for IL-2. Our demonstration by ChIP-seq that a complex containing Eos, Helios, and Foxp3 binds to the CD25 locus in Tregs and the observation that Eos positively regulates the expression of CD25 further confirm the importance of Eos in regulating IL-2 availability for Treg precursors.
Lastly, we noted that Eos+ recirculating thymic Tregs have an enhanced ability to capture MHC II-peptide complexes from thymic DCs but not mTECs. It has been reported that GITRhiPD-1hiCD25hi Tregs are more self-reactive. We also observed higher expression of these markers on Eos+ Tregs. This may help explain why Eos+ recirculating thymic Tregs have a higher uptake of MHC II from thymic DCs. As high levels of MHC II on thymic DCs likely contribute to the generation of Tregs in the thymus, modulation of MHC II levels on thymic DCs may provide a further safeguard against overproduction/underproduction of Tregs in the thymus, which cooperates with the role of Eos+ Tregs in limiting intra-thymic availability of IL-2 to Treg precursors.
Taken together, the TF Eos appears to play multiple unique but interrelated roles in the function of Tregs. Eos regulates both (1) the thymic homing of recirculating thymic Tregs (to limit de novo thymic Treg generation) and (2) the functional maturation of peripheral Tregs. The autoimmune phenotype in Eos cKO mice arises from severe functional defects in peripheral Tregs, which in turn cause thymic injury and dampen overall T cell development. Even though Eos cKO mice have higher frequencies of newly generated Tregs at an early age, these Tregs are less suppressive due to the lack of Eos and thus insufficient to suppress the autoimmune phenotype in these mice. Due to the absence of an Eos reporter mouse strain, we were unable to further investigate the role of Eos in peripheral Tregs. However, all evidence points to the dual functions of Eos in both recirculating thymic Tregs and peripheral Tregs. Future studies examining the involvement of Eos in peripheral Tregs are therefore required. Eos appears to be absolutely essential for Treg survival in a competitive environment. We believe this is secondary to Eos-mediated enhanced expression of CD25 in cooperation with Helios and Foxp3. Enhanced binding of IL-2 by Eos+ Tregs in the periphery may also be needed for the transition of resting Tregs to the activated stage. Similarly, Eos-mediated enhanced expression of CD25 on recirculating thymic Tregs is critical for controlling the production of thymic Tregs, in addition to its effects in controlling the migration of Tregs to the thymus. Multiple effects of Eos in controlling Treg function may contribute to the enhanced capacity of Eos+ thymic Tregs to capture MHC II from thymic DCs and thereby provide an additional level of control on Treg development in the thymus.

## Limitations of the study
Our study demonstrated that Eos plays a critical role in the suppressor function of recirculating thymic Tregs on Treg precursors through IL-2 deprivation of Treg precursors and MHC II depletion from thymic DCs. It remains unclear to what extent the two mechanisms work in vivo. Eos could potentially function in non-Treg cells and thus affect the generation of Tregs as well. We examined the major components in Treg induction and observed no defects in T cell development in Eos KO mice. Based on the phenotypes of Eos KO, Eosfl/fl × CD4-Cre, and Eosfl/fl × Foxp3-Cre mice, Eos probably plays a role in Tconvs and/or non-T cells. However, we could not detect Eos expression in Tconv cells and we did not observe defects in the ability of Tconvs to differentiate into Th subsets or to produce effector cytokines. It remains possible that Eos is expressed at very low levels in Tconvs and plays important roles in other aspects of Tconv function, which will only become apparent in long-term studies. Lastly, our failure to generate an Eos-reporter mouse strain limited our ability to directly examine the differential properties of Eos+ and Eos− Tregs in the periphery.

## RESOURCE AVAILABILITY

## Lead contact
Requests for further information, resources, and reagents should be directed to and will be fulfilled by the lead contact, Ethan M Shevach (eshevach@niaid.nih.gov).

## Materials availability
Anti-Eos 18H2 antibody and Eosfl/fl mouse strain generated in this study will be available upon request.

## Data and code availability
scRNA-seq, ChIP-seq, and bulk RNA-seq data have been deposited at GEO (accession numbers: GSE305537, GSE305408, and GSE305409) and are publicly available as of the date of publication.
Original western blot images have been deposited at Mendeley at https://doi.org/10.17632/4s8sxvpp4j.1 and are publicly available as of the date of publication. Microscopy data reported in this paper will be shared by the lead contact upon request.
This paper does not report original code.
Any additional information required to reanalyze the data reported in this paper is available from the lead contact upon request.

## STAR★METHODS

## EXPERIMENTAL MODEL AND STUDY PARTICIPANT DETAILS

## Mouse strains and cell preparation
B6 (C57BL/6), CD4-Cre, Foxp3-Cre, Foxp3-RFP mice were purchased from The Jackson Laboratory. Female heterozygous Scurfy mice were purchased from The Jackson Laboratory and bred to B6 WT male mice to generate hemizygous male Scurfy offspring. Foxp3-GFP, TCRα KO, Rag1 KO, OT-II, OT-I, CD45.1, CD45.1/CD45.2 mice were obtained from Taconic Biosciences under the National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases (NIAID) contract. We previously generated Heliosfl/fl × CD4-Cre mice. CD4-Cre × Foxp3-GFP mice were generated by crossing CD4-Cre mice to Foxp3-GFP mice. Eos KO mice were generated by deleting the last three exons of the gene. Eos KO × Foxp3-GFP mice were generated by crossing between Eos KO and Foxp3-GFP mice. CD45.1 Foxp3-GFP mice were generated by crossing Foxp3-GFP and CD45.1 mice. OT-II mice (Rag2+/+) used in this study were generated by crossing between CD4-Cre × Foxp3-GFP and OT-II mice. Eos KO OT-II (Rag2+/+) mice were then generated by crossing Eos KO mice to OT-II mice. Eosfl/fl Mice were generated by Genomic Research Section, Research Technologies Branch, NIAID, NIH ( ). Eosfl/fl × Foxp3-Cre mice were generated by crossing Eosfl/fl mice to Foxp3-Cre mice. Eosfl/fl × Foxp3-RFP mice were generated by crossing Eosfl/fl mice to Foxp3-RFP mice. Then Eosfl/fl × Foxp3-YFPCre/RFP mice were generated by crossing Eosfl/fl × Foxp3-Cre mice to Eosfl/fl × Foxp3-RFP mice. Eosfl/fl × CD4-cre mice were generated by crossing Eosfl/fl mice to CD4-Cre × Foxp3-GFP mice. All studies were approved by the NIAID Animal Care and Use Committee (Protocol LISB 15E and LISB 8E).
For the isolation of lymphocytes, thymi, spleens or LNs were first ground with cell strainer pestles (Stellar Scientific) and pushed through a 70 μm filter in RPMI 1640 (Thermo Fisher Scientific) with 10% heat-inactivated FBS (Sigma-Aldrich). Spleen samples were treated with ACK Lysis Buffer (gibco) to lyse red blood cells. For autoMACS (Miltenyi Biotec) separations, cells were resuspended in autoMACS Running Buffer (Miltenyi Biotec). For purification using a FACSAria IIIu sorter (BD), cells were maintained in Sorting Buffer (RPMI 1640 without phenol red supplemented with 10% heat-inactivated FBS and 10 mM HEPES). To isolate splenic DCs, spleens were digested in PBS with 50 μg/mL Liberase and 200 μg/mL DNase I for 30 min at 37°C and pushed through a 70 μm filter, after which red blood cells were lysed with ACK Lysis Buffer (gibco). To isolate thymic DCs, thymi were chopped into small pieces and digested in PBS with 200 μg/mL Liberase and 40 μg/mL DNase I for 30 min at 37°C. Then cells were dissociated by pipetting with pipette tips and 27G needles and filtration with 100 μm filters. In the end cells were wash with autoMACS Running Buffer to dissociate T cells and DCs. For both splenic and thymic samples, DCs were labeled with CD11c MicroBeads (Miltenyi Biotec) and purified by autoMACS (Miltenyi Biotec) according to the manufacturer’s instructions.
To isolate lymphocytes from the gut, large intestine was physically emptied, opened longitudinally, and cut into 2–3 cm pieces. Tissue pieces were incubated in RPMI 1640 (Thermo Fisher Scientific) containing 5 mM EDTA (Thermo Fisher Scientific) and 1mM DTT from NuPAGE Sample Reducing Agent (10x) (Thermo Fisher Scientific) for 20 min at 37°C with shaking, washed vigorously with PBS to remove remaining mucus, cut into even smaller pieces, and digested in RPMI 1640 (Thermo Fisher Scientific) containing 2.5 mg/mL Liberase (Millipore Sigma) and 40 μg/mL DNase I (Millipore Sigma) for 30 min at 37°C. The supernatant was filtered and the remaining tissue was smashed through a 70 μm filter. Red blood cells were lysed with ACK Lysis Buffer (gibco).

## METHOD DETAILS

## Antibodies and reagents
Antibodies and reagents used in this study are listed in .
 

## Flow cytometry
Cells were first incubated with anti-CD16/32 antibody (BD Biosciences) then stained with Live/Dead cell viability dye (BD Biosciences), and antibodies for surface markers. Cells were subsequently fixed and permeabilized with a Foxp3/Transcription Factor Staining Buffer Set (Thermo Fisher Scientific) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. Then cells were stained with antibodies for intracellular proteins. For intracellular cytokine staining, cells were incubated with Cell Stimulation Cocktail (plus protein transport inhibitors) (Thermo Fisher Scientific) for 4–5 h before staining. After surface staining, cells were fixed with 2% PFA for 15 min at RT before proceeding with fixation and permeabilization using Foxp3/Transcription Factor Staining Buffer Set. Then cells were stained with antibodies for cytokines and intracellular proteins. For pStat5 staining, cells were first stimulated with IL-2 (2 U/mL) for 20 min at 37°C. Stimulated cells were then subjected to BD Cytofix Fixation Buffer (BD Biosciences) and BD Phosflow Perm Buffer III (BD Biosciences) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. Finally, cells were stained with antibodies for pStat5 and other marker proteins. Data were acquired through a FACSymphony A3 or LSRFortessa (BD Biosciences) and analyzed with FlowJo software (FlowJo).

## Immunofluorescence microcopy
For imaging of Tregs, single cell suspensions were prepared from spleen or thymus of WT mice. CD4 T cells were enriched using CD4 (L3T4) MicroBeads, mouse (Miltenyi Biotec) or Tregs were isolated by FACS sorting. Purified cells were fixed and permeabilized with a Foxp3/Transcription Factor Staining Buffer Set (Thermo Fisher Scientific), blocked with α-CD16/32 antibody and stained with DAPI (Millipore Sigma) and antibodies for Helios, Eos and Foxp3 in 1x Perm Buffer (Thermo Fisher Scientific). In the end, cells in a small volume of suspension were transferred to a microslide and mounted with Prolong Gold Antifade Mountant (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Confocal imaging was performed using a Leica SP-8 inverted microscope (Leica Microsystems). Images were processed with Fiji (Open source image processing software).

## Co-immunoprecipitation (Co-IP)
For Co-IP using primary mouse cells, Tregs were purified using CD4+CD25+ Regulatory T cell Isolation Kit (Miltenyi Biotec). Co-IP was performed with 5 μg anti-Eos 18H2 (this study), anti-Helios 22F6 (BioLegend) and anti-Foxp3 (Invitrogen) antibodies using Pierce MS-Compatible Magnetic IP Kit (Thermo Fisher Scientific) according to manufacturer’s instructions. Protein samples from whole cell lysates (Input) or Co-IP were analyzed by Immunoblot analysis.

## Immunoblot (IB)
Input and Co-IP samples were boiled at 70°C for 10 min in 1x NuPAGE LDS Sample Buffer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) and separated using NuPAGE 4 to 12% Bis-Tris protein gels (Thermo Fisher Scientific) under reduced conditions and then transferred to a PVDF membrane (Thermo Fisher Scientific) using XCell II Blot Module (Thermo Fisher Scientific) under reduced conditions. The membranes were blocked with SuperBlock (TBS) Blocking Buffer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) and probed with the following primary antibodies: anti-Helios D8W4X (Cell Signaling) and anti-Foxp3 FJK-16s (Invitrogen).

## In vitro T cell differentiation
Naive CD4 T cells were purified from the spleens of CD45.1 or Eos KO mice using the Naive CD4 T cell Isolation Kit (Miltenyi Biotec) according to the manufacturer’s instruction and mixed at a 1:1 ratio. Enriched cells were cultured for 3 days under Th1 polarizing conditions (α-CD3 1 μg/mL, α-IL-4 10 μg/mL, IL-12 10 ng/mL, IL-2 50 U/mL), Th2 polarizing conditions (α-CD3 1 μg/mL, α-IFN-γ 10 μg/mL, α-IL-12 10 μg/mL, IL-4 5000 U/mL, IL-2 100 U/mL), Th17 polarizing conditions (α-CD3 1 μg/mL, α-IL-4 10 μg/mL, α-IFN-γ 10 μg/mL, α-IL-12 10 μg/mL, TGF-β 1 ng/mL, IL-6 10 ng/mL, IL-1b 10 ng/mL) and iTreg conditions (α-CD3 1 μg/mL, α-IL-4 10 μg/mL, α-IFN-γ 10 μg/mL, α-IL-12 10 μg/mL, TGF-β 5 ng/mL, IL-2 100 U/mL). DCs were isolated from CD45.1/CD45.2 mice as described above and added to the culture at 1/5 the concentration of CD4 T cells. Then cells were rested in cRPMI with IL-2 (no IL-2 for Th17 cells) for 2 days. For cytokine expression analysis, differentiated cells were stimulated with Cell Stimulation Cocktail (plus protein transport inhibitors) (Thermo Fisher Scientific) for 4–5 h.

## In vitro migration assay
To test the importance of Eos in regulating the migration of recirculating thymic Tregs, Ccr6+ (CD4+Foxp3+CD73+Ccr6+) or Ccr6− (CD4+Foxp3+CD73−Ccr6−) thymic Tregs were sorted from WT or Eos cKO (Eosfl/fl × CD4-Cre Foxp3-GFP) mice. Cells were resuspended in cRPMI at a concentration of 5 × 105 cells/mL and 100 μL/well cells were plated in the apical chambers of 96-well Transwell (5-μm, fisher scientific). 150 μL/well cRPMI containing 200 ng/mL Ccl20 (BioLegend) was added to the bottom chambers. 20 h post culture, cells from the bottom chamber were collected and mixed with Precision Count Beads (BioLegend). Cells were then stained with surface markers in PBS for 20 min at RT and analyzed using flow cytometry.

## In vitro Treg precursor suppression assay
Foxp3−CD25hiGITRhi CD4SP Treg precursors were FACS-sorted from thymus of CD45.1 Foxp3-GFP mice. CD73+Ccr6+ recirculating thymic Tregs were FACS-sorted from CD4-Cre × Foxp3-GFP or Eos KO mice. In 96-well plate, 1 × 104 Treg precursors and 1 × 105 recirculating thymic Tregs were co-cultured with IL-2 for 24 h. Thymic Treg suppression was assessed by analyzing Treg induction from Treg precursors using flow cytometry.

## In vitro thymic Treg induction
Thymic DCs were isolated from B6 or Eos KO mice as described above. Foxp3−CD25− thymic CD4SP cells (containing Treg precursors) were FACS-sorted from CD45.1 Foxp3-GFP mice. In a round-bottom 96-well plate, 5 × 103 thymic DCs and 1 × 104 sorted Foxp3−CD25− thymic CD4SP cells were cultured together with 10 U/mL IL-2 for 4 days. Thymic Treg induction was assessed by staining for CD45.1, CD4, CD25, and Foxp3.

## In vitro MHC II capture assay
Thymocytes were isolated from thymus of CD45.1 WT mice or Eos KO mice. Then CD8+ cells were depleted using CD8a (Ly-2) MicroBeads (Miltenyi Biotec) and CD25+ cells were enriched using α-CD25-PE antibody (BD Biosciences) and Anti-PE MicroBeads (Miltenyi Biotec). Thymic DCs were isolated from B6 mice and pre-stained with α-MHC II KH74-AF647 antibody (BioLegend) at 4°C for 20 min. Purified CD45.1 WT thymocytes, Eos KO thymocytes and pre-stained DCs were co-cultured for 18 h at 37°C at a 1:1:1 ratio. Then thymocytes and DCs were dissociated by washing with autoMACS Running Buffer containing 2mM EDTA. Cell suspensions were then stained with antibodies for CD45.1, CD45.2, CD4, CD8, CD25, CD11c, CD73, Ccr6 and Foxp3 and analyzed by flow cytometry.

## Oral tolerance model
Naive CD4+Foxp3−CD44loCD45RBhi T cells were FACS-sorted from the spleens of WT OT-II or Eos KO OT-II mice and 1 × 106 cells were injected retro-orbitally into CD45.1/CD45.2 recipients. Then mice were given 1% OVA (Millipore Sigma) supplemented water for 7 days, changing the water every 2 days.

## IBD model
Naive CD4 T cells were purified from the spleens of Foxp3-Cre or Eosfl/fl × Foxp3-Cre mice using the Naive CD4 T cell Isolation Kit (Miltenyi Biotec) according to the manufacturer’s instruction. 1 × 106 or 2 × 106 cells were transferred by retro-orbital injection into TCRα KO or Rag1 KO recipient mice. In some experiments, naive CD4 T cells were purified from B6 or Eos KO mice. Mice were monitored for weight loss and analyzed after 2–4 weeks.

## Parabiosis
Female B6 and CD45.1 mice underwent surgery to establish parabiosis, pairs of mice expressing either CD45.1 or CD45.2 were cohoused for 1 month. To distinguish host and donor derived cells, the congenic markers CD45.1 and CD45.2 were used by flow cytometry.

## SL-TBI
To induce thymic damage, mice were given 550 centi-gray (cGy) sublethal total body irradiation.

## In vivo Th2 model
WT or Eosfl/fl × CD4-Cre mice were challenged i.n. with A. Alternata extract on day 1 and day 7. On day 14, lungs were harvested, and cells were analyzed with flow cytometry.

## In vivo Th1/Th17 model
Naive CD4+Foxp3−CD44loCD45RBhi T cells were FACS-sorted from the spleens of WT OT-II or Eos KO OT-II mice and 2 × 106 cells were injected retro-orbitally into CD45.1/CD45.2 recipients. The following day, recipient mice were immunized s.c. with 50 μg of OVA323–339 peptide in CFA to each flank. Draining LNs (dLNs) were harvested on day 7 post immunization and cells were analyzed with flow cytometry.

## ChIP
Tregs were purified using CD4+CD25+ Regulatory T cell Isolation Kit (Miltenyi Biotec) from the spleens of WT or Eosfl/fl × Foxp3-Cre (Eos cKO) mice and fixed for 10 min at room temperature with 1% Formaldehyde (Millipore Sigma). Cross-linking reaction was stopped by adding 125 mM Glycine (Millipore Sigma). Cells were washed twice in ice-cold PBS and cell pellets were flash-frozen and stored at −80°C. Cross-linked DNA was fragmentated by sonication using Digital Sonicator (Diagenode). The lysates were incubated overnight at 4°C with 50 μL Protein A/G magnetic beads (Thermo Fisher Scientific) that had been pre-incubated with 6 μg appropriate antibodies. Samples were washed, eluted, reverse cross-linked at 65°C for 24 h, and purified using ChIP DNA Clean & Concentrator (Zymo Research). For each ChIP analysis, 5 × 106 – 10 × 106 cells were used. Antibodies used were α-Eos 18H2 (this study) and α-Helios D8W4X (Cell Signaling).
For ChIP-seq, library was prepared using NEBNext Ultra II End repair/dA-Tailing Module (New England Biolabs) and NEBNext Ultra II Ligation Module (NEB#E7595S/L) according to manufacturer’s instructions. All samples were pooled and sequenced on NextSeq 2000 P2 using paired-end sequencing. Reads were processed using chrom-seek (1.2.0) pipeline (https://github.com/OpenOmics/chrom-seek). Reads were trimmed with Cutadapt v4.4 and then aligned to mm10 GRCm38.p6 using BWA v0.7.1. All reads aligning to the mm10 v2 blacklist regions were identified and removed with Picard SamToFastq. Reads with a mapQ score less than 6 were removed with SAMtools v1.17 and PCR duplicates were removed with Picard MarkDuplicates. Data was converted into bigwigs for viewing and normalized by reads per genomic content (RPGC) using deepTools v3.5.1. Coverage plots were created using karyoploteR and GenomicRanges. Narrow peaks were called using macs v 2.2.7.1 treating matching Eos cKO samples as controls. Peaks were annotated using Uropa v4.0.2 and the Gencode reference M18. Specifically, peaks were associated with the nearest protein coding gene’s TSS. Pathway enrichment analysis was accomplished using ShinyGO v0.82. This work utilized the computational resources of the NIH HPC Biowulf cluster.
For ChIP-qPCR, enrichment of binding to CD25 locus was analyzed using qPCR with probes or primers in . Reads were normalized to Gaphd and the sample of Eos ChIP using Eos cKO Tregs.

## scRNA-seq
scRNA-seq was performed on FACS-sorted WT (RFP+) or Eos cKO (YFP+) Tregs from the thymus of 6 wo Eosfl/fl × Foxp3-YFPCre/RFP mice. Cells were sorted into RPMI (without phenol red) (Thermo Fisher Scientific) medium supplemented with 10% heat-inactivated FBS (R&D Systems) and 10 mM HEPES (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Subsequently cells were washed with PBS supplemented with 10% heat-inactivated FBS (R&D Systems). At the Genomic Research Section (RTB, NIAID, NIH), libraries were prepared using the 10X Genomics Chromium GEM-X Universal 5′ Gene Expression v3 workflow for gene expression, cell hashing, and full-length V(D)J T cell receptor sequencing. Sequencing was performed on an Illumina NovaSeq X Plus and CellRanger 8.0.1 was used to process the sequencing data. The data was initially processed using Seurat 5.2.1 in combination with scRepetiore v2.3.2 to integrate the gene expression and V(D)J data, using the standard pipeline. Samples were integrated based on the gene expression data using Harmony v1.2.0. Treg type was identified based on the expression of known Treg markers. Differentially expressed markers between conditions were identified using a pseudobulk analysis and DeSeq2 within Seurat. scRepetiore was then used to identify differences in surface marker complement and diversity between groups.

## Bulk RNA-seq
For Bulk RNA-seq analysis, Eos+ Tregs (CD4+Foxp3+Ccr6+Cxcr4+), Eos− Tregs (CD4+Foxp3+Ccr6−Cxcr4−) and Tconvs (CD4+Foxp3−) were sorted from thymus of CD4-Cre × Foxp3-GFP mice. RNA was extracted from sorted cells using TRIzol (Thermo Fisher Scientific) and RNeasy Plus Micro Kit (QIAGEN) according to the manufacturer’s instruction. RNA-sequencing was performed at the Sequencing Facility, Illumina (CCR) (NCI, NIH). The SMARTer Ultra Low Input RNA Kit was used to generate high-quality cDNA directly from 1 ng of Total RNA using their patented SMART (Switching Mechanism at 5′ End of RNA Template) technology. The cDNA was then made into a sequencing ready library using the Nextera XT DNA Sample Preparation Kit from Illumina. Samples were sequenced on NextSeq 2000 P2 using paired-end sequencing. The instrument run was processed by using Real Time Analysis software (RTA 3.10,30). The Illumina bcl2fastq2.20 was used to demultiplex and convert binary base calls and quality scores to fastq format. The sequencing reads were trimmed of adapters and low-quality bases using Cutadapt (version 1.18). The trimmed reads were mapped to mouse reference genome (mm10) and Gencode annotation M21 using STAR aligner (version 2.7.0f) with two-pass alignment option. RSEM (version 1.3.1) was used for gene and transcript quantification based on GENCODE annotation file. Principal component analysis was performed using iDEP (2.0). Differential gene expression analyses were performed using the DESeq2 package. Pathway enrichment analysis was performed using GSEA enrichment analysis.

## QUANTIFICATION AND STATISTICAL ANALYSIS
Statistical analyses were calculated with Prism software. Normal distribution was assumed a priori for all samples. p values of less than 0.05 were considered significant (*p < 0.05; **p < 0.01; ***p < 0.001; ****p < 0.0001).

## Supplementary Material
1234Supplemental information can be found online at https://doi.org/10.1016/j.celrep.2025.116838.

## Highlights
Eos is expressed preferentially in activated, thymus-derived Foxp3+Helios+ Tregs
Eos forms complexes with Helios and Foxp3 and directly binds the CD25 locus
Eos is critical for the survival, activation, migration, and suppression of Tregs
Eos+ Tregs are the major recirculating thymic Tregs and suppress Treg precursors

## ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This research was supported by the Intramural Research Program of the National Institutes of Health (NIH) (award number: AI000959-20). The contributions of the NIH authors were made as part of their official duties as NIH federal employees, are in compliance with agency policy requirements, and are considered works of the United States government. However, the findings and conclusions presented in this paper are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the NIH or the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services. We thank all the CCR Sequencing Facility lab and bioinformatics team at the Frederick National Laboratory for Cancer Research (FNLCR) for sequencing and primary analysis. We thank CCR Genomics Core for the RNA sample quality check. We thank the Integrated Data Sciences Section (RTB, NIAID) for the analysis of all our RNA sequencing data. We thank the Flow Cytometry Section (RTB, NIAID, NIH) for cell sorting. We thank all our animal caretakers for taking care of our mice.

## Footnotes
DECLARATION OF INTERESTS
The authors declare no competing interests.
DECLARATION OF GENERATIVE AI AND AI-ASSISTED TECHNOLOGIES IN THE WRITING PROCESS
During the preparation of this work, the authors used NIAID GenAI Toolkit to check for grammar errors. After using this tool or service, the authors reviewed and edited the content as needed and take full responsibility for the content of the publication.

## REFERENCES
 

## Associated Data

## Supplementary Materials
1234

## Data Availability Statement
scRNA-seq, ChIP-seq, and bulk RNA-seq data have been deposited at GEO (accession numbers: GSE305537, GSE305408, and GSE305409) and are publicly available as of the date of publication.
Original western blot images have been deposited at Mendeley at https://doi.org/10.17632/4s8sxvpp4j.1 and are publicly available as of the date of publication. Microscopy data reported in this paper will be shared by the lead contact upon request.
This paper does not report original code.
Any additional information required to reanalyze the data reported in this paper is available from the lead contact upon request.