pmcAntiviral ResAntiviral Res3815pheelsevierAntiviral Research0166-35421872-9096pmc-is-collection-domainyespmc-collection-titleElsevier - PMC COVID-19 CollectionPMC10110284PMC10110284.110110284101102843707608910.1016/j.antiviral.2023.105606S0166-3542(23)00084-01056061ArticleOmicsynin B4 potently blocks coronavirus infection by inhibiting host proteases cathepsin L and TMPRSS2
LiYihua WangKun SunHongmin WuShuo WangHuiqiang ShiYuanyuan LiXingxing YanHaiyan YangGe WuMengyuan LiYihong DingXiaotian SiShuyi JiangJiandong DuYu LiYuhuan HongBin aCAMS Key Laboratory of Synthetic Biology for Drug Innovation, Institute of Medicinal Biotechnology, Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences and Peking Union Medical College, Beijing, 100050, ChinabCAMS Key Laboratory of Antiviral Drug Research, Institute of Medicinal Biotechnology, Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences and Peking Union Medical College, Beijing, 100050, ChinacNHC Key Laboratory of Biotechnology of Antibiotics, Institute of Medicinal Biotechnology, Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences and Peking Union Medical College, Beijing, 100050, China∗Corresponding author. Institute of Medicinal Biotechnology, Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences and Peking Union Medical College, Beijing, 100050, China.∗∗Corresponding author. Institute of Medicinal Biotechnology, Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences and Peking Union Medical College, Beijing, 100050, China.∗∗∗Corresponding author. Institute of Medicinal Biotechnology, Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences and Peking Union Medical College, Beijing, 100050, China.620231742023214433595105606105606181202313420231742023170420231804202329052024© 2023 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.2023Elsevier B.V.Since January 2020 Elsevier has created a COVID-19 resource centre with free information in English and Mandarin on the novel coronavirus COVID-19. The COVID-19 resource centre is hosted on Elsevier Connect, the company's public news and information website. Elsevier hereby grants permission to make all its COVID-19-related research that is available on the COVID-19 resource centre - including this research content - immediately available in PubMed Central and other publicly funded repositories, such as the WHO COVID database with rights for unrestricted research re-use and analyses in any form or by any means with acknowledgement of the original source. These permissions are granted for free by Elsevier for as long as the COVID-19 resource centre remains active.The emergence of SARS-CoV-2 variants represents a major threat to public health and requires identification of novel therapeutic agents to address the unmet medical needs. Small molecules impeding viral entry through inhibition of spike protein priming proteases could have potent antiviral effects against SARS-CoV-2 infection. Omicsynin B4, a pseudo-tetrapeptides identified from Streptomyces sp. 1647, has potent antiviral activity against influenza A viruses in our previous study. Here, we found omicsynin B4 exhibited broad-spectrum anti-coronavirus activity against HCoV-229E, HCoV-OC43 and SARS-CoV-2 prototype and its variants in multiple cell lines. Further investigations revealed omicsynin B4 blocked the viral entry and might be related to the inhibition of host proteases. SARS-CoV-2 spike protein mediated pseudovirus assay supported the inhibitory activity on viral entry of omicsynin B4 with a more potent inhibition of Omicron variant, especially when overexpression of human TMPRSS2. Moreover, omicsynin B4 exhibited superior inhibitory activity in the sub-nanomolar range against CTSL, and a sub-micromolar inhibition against TMPRSS2 in biochemical assays. The molecular docking analysis confirmed that omicsynin B4 fits well in the substrate binding sites and forms a covalent bond to Cys25 and Ser441 in CTSL and TMPRSS2, respectively. In conclusion, we found that omicsynin B4 may serve as a natural protease inhibitor for CTSL and TMPRSS2, blocking various coronavirus S protein-driven entry into cells. These results further highlight the potential of omicsynin B4 as an attractive candidate for broad-spectrum antiviral therapy that could rapidly respond to emerging variants of SARS-CoV-2.

## Graphical abstract
 

## Keywords
Omicsynin B4/antipainProtease inhibitorCOVID-19Cathepsin LTMPRSS2Antiviralpmc-status-qastatus0pmc-status-liveyespmc-status-embargonopmc-status-releasedyespmc-prop-open-accessyespmc-prop-olfnopmc-prop-manuscriptnopmc-prop-legally-suppressednopmc-prop-has-pdfyespmc-prop-has-supplementyespmc-prop-pdf-onlynopmc-prop-suppress-copyrightnopmc-prop-is-real-versionnopmc-prop-is-scanned-articlenopmc-prop-preprintnopmc-prop-in-epmcyes1

## Introduction
The ongoing global pandemic of COVID-19 caused by the spread of severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2) has resulted in a worldwide health crisis associated with huge socio-economic losses, with 6.68 million deaths among more than 657 million conﬁrmed cases worldwide as of Jan 7, 2023 ( ). Although the rapid development of SARS-CoV-2 vaccines and universal vaccination with public health measures have contributed to combating COVID-19 pandemic, the possible immune evasion by new variants of concern (VOCs) of SARS-CoV-2 compromised the effectiveness of the vaccines ( ). Up to now, there are three antiviral drugs targeting SARS-CoV-2 main protease (Mpro) or RNA-dependent RNA polymerase (RdRp) have been approved by the US Food and Drug Administration ( ). However, there is still an urgent need for more effective and broad-spectrum antiviral therapeutics with limited side effects to reduce the ongoing public health threat posed by SARS-CoV-2 VOCs ( ). More efforts are required to identify novel therapeutic agents to mitigate COVID-19 associated morbidity and mortality.
Compared to direct antiviral agents, therapeutics targeting host cellular machinery that usurped by viruses for efficient infection and replication can be broadly active and may reduce drug-resistance ( ). The entry of SARS-CoV-2 into host cells relies on its binding to angiotensin converting enzyme-2 (ACE2) via the viral surface glycoprotein, spike (S) protein, which requires proteolytic priming by host proteases, ﬁrst at the S1/S2 cleavage site and then at the S2’ site to generate the S1 and S2 subunits before it triggers the membrane fusion event ( ). According to the priming proteases utilized in S protein cleavage, SARS-CoV-2 enters the cells through at least two different pathways, either direct cell membrane fusion by transmembrane protease serine 2 (TMPRSS2) at the cell surface or endocytosis by cathepsin L (CTSL) in the late endosome or endolysosome ( ; ; ). In addition to the cell surface receptor ACE2, the cellular expression levels of host proteases, such as TMPRSS2 and CTSL, dictate the viral tropism of SARS-CoV-2 in various tissues and cells ( ).
Seven human coronaviruses (HCoVs) have been identified to date, namely HCoV-229E, HCoV-OC43, HCoV-NL63, HCoV-HKU1, SARS-CoV, Middle East respiratory syndrome coronavirus (MERS-CoV) and SARS-CoV-2 since 1960s ( ). The subfamily Orthocoronavirinae in the family Coronaviridae is currently divided into four genera, the Alpha-, Beta-, Delta-, and Gamma-coronavirus. The Alpha- and Beta-coronaviruses cause infections in mammals, and SARS-CoV, MERS-CoV along with SARS-CoV-2 falls within the Beta-coronavirus genus. HCoV-229E and HCoV-OC43 belong to Alpha- and Beta-coronavirus genus, respectively. Infection by these two common human coronaviruses is associated with mild upper respiratory tract disease, usually the seasonal common cold, and to a less extent, pneumonia in immunocompromised patients ( ). As previously reported, the S protein of HCoV-229E and HCoV-OC43 mediates host cell entry, which is also proteolytically activated by host cell proteases via two pathways by TMPRSS2 at the cell surface and CTSL in the endosome ( ; ). These findings suggest it is a highly conserved process for human coronavirus using similar host cell proteases to infect target cells despite through different receptors ( ).
Small molecules impeding viral entry through inhibition of TMPRSS2 or/and CTSL could be considered as attractive prophylactic or therapeutic candidates for preventing SARS-CoV-2 infection ( ; ). Drug repositioning for COVID-19 treatment targeting TMPRSS2 have attracted considerable attention. Camostat mesylate and nafamostat mesylate, clinically used serine protease inhibitors in treating pancreatitis, were investigated in clinical trials and showed some beneficial clinical effects in patients with COVID-19, especially for early treatment ( ; ; ). More effort has been devoted to discovery and development of novel candidate inhibitors of TMPRSS2 or CTSL for inhibiting SARS-CoV-2. Avoralstat, a clinically tested kallikrein inhibitor for angioedema, was identified as an effective TMPRSS2 inhibitor by structure-based phylogenetic analysis and prophylactically protected mice susceptible to SARS-CoV-2 infection ( ). A designed peptidomimetic TMPRSS2 inhibitor N-0385 with ketobenzothiazole warhead was demonstrated as a pan-SARS-CoV-2 prophylactic and therapeutic candidate in vivo ( ). A marine natural product gallinamide A and some synthetic analogues were identiﬁed as potent CTSL inhibitors, and potently inhibited SARS-CoV-2 infection in vitro ( ). TMPRSS2 and CTSL inhibitors often show synergism with each other, and protease inhibitor cocktail therapy using both TMPRSS2 and CTSL inhibitory agents has been suggested to combat COVID-19 ( ; ).
In our previous study, omicsynins were identified as a series of bioactive secondary metabolites produced by Streptomyces sp. 1647 isolated from soil samples from southern China. Omicsynin Bs were pseudo-tetrapeptides with C-terminal arginal showing potent antiviral activity against influenza A viruses (IAV) and HCoV-229E, with omicsynin B4 (chemical structure in ) as a known compound antipain ( ). However, the detailed anti-coronavirus spectrum and the mechanisms responsible for omicsynin Bs against coronavirus have not been elucidated. Here, we showed that omicsynin B4 suppressed coronavirus replication in various types of cell lines, including HCoV-229E, HCoV-OC43 and SARS-CoV-2 strains. Omicsynin B4 inhibited the entry of coronaviruses into host cells, which might be reversed by over-expression of CTSL and TMPRSS2. Omicsynin B4 was found to be a potent inhibitor of both CTSL and TMPRSS2 at sub-nanomolar or sub-micromolar level respectively, by formation of a covalent bond to the active site of these host proteases. Our findings provide a good starting point for the further development of omicsynin Bs to broad-spectrum antivirals for SARS-CoV-2.

2

## Materials and methods
2.1

## Cells, viruses, and infection conditions
Human hepatocellular carcinoma Huh7 and Huh7.5 cells were kindly provided by Dr. Zonggen Peng from the Institute of Medicinal Biotechnology (IMB), Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences (CAMS). Human large-cell lung carcinoma line H460 cells were provided by Dr. Zhen Wang from IMB, CAMS. Human embryonic kidney HEK293T cells and monkey kidney Vero E6 cells were obtained from the American Type Culture Collection (ATCC). Human colonic Caco-2 epithelial cells were purchased from the Chinese Academy of Sciences Cell Bank (Shanghai, China). HEK293T cell line stably overexpressing recombinant human ACE2 (HEK293T-hACE2) was obtained from the Delivectory Biosciences Inc. (Beijing, China). All cells mentioned above were cultured in Dulbecco's Modified Eagle's Medium (Invitrogen, Carlsbad, CA, USA) or Minimum Essential Medium (Invitrogen) supplemented with 10% fetal bovine serum (FBS; Gibco, Grand Island, USA) and antibiotics (100 U/mL penicillin and 100 μg/mL streptomycin, Invitrogen). Human lung adenocarcinoma A549 cells were purchased from the ATCC and grown in Ham's F–12K (Kaighn's) Medium (Invitrogen) supplemented with 10% FBS and antibiotics. All cells were maintained in a humidified atmosphere of 5% CO2 at 37 °C.
HCoV-229E (strain VR-740) was obtained from the ATCC and propagated in Huh7.5 cells. HCoV-OC43 (strain VR-1558) was kindly provided by Dr. Xuesen Zhao from Beijing Ditan Hospital, Capital Medical University and propagated using human colon cancer HCT-8 cells. The prototypic strain, Alpha variant (B.1.1.7) and Beta variant (B.1.351) of SARS-CoV-2 were supplied by Guangdong Provincial Center for Disease Control and Prevention and propagated in Vero E6 cells.
Antiviral assays against HCoV-229E were performed in the Huh7.5, Huh7, A549 and Caco-2 cells, while the anti-HCoV-OC43 assays used HEK293T, Huh7.5, A549 and H460 cells. All cells infected with indicated virus at different multiplicity of infection (MOI) were cultured in a maintenance medium supplemented with 2% FBS in the humidified atmosphere of 5% CO2 at 35 °C.
Human immunodeficiency viruses (HIV)-based SARS-CoV-2 pseudovirus with S protein of SARS-CoV-2 prototype or Omicron BA.2 was purchased from Nanjing Vazyme Biotech Inc. (Nanjing, China). The vesicular stomatitis virus glycoprotein (VSV-G) pseudotyped viral particle was purchased from Delivectory Biosciences Inc. (Beijing, China).

2.2

## Compounds and plasmids
The compound antipain (i.e., omicsynin B4) was purchased from the Efebio Inc. (Shanghai, China) and the purity was above 97% based on HPLC. The inhibitors in this study were used as follows. Ribavirin (RBV) was purchased from Sigma-Aldrich (St. Louis, MO, USA). Camostat mesylate, nafamostat mesylate, E−64d, remdesivir (RDV), ammonium chloride (NH4Cl), hexa-D-arginine, bivalirudin TFA, argatroban monohydrate, ebselen and boceprevir were purchased from MedChemExpress (Monmouth Junction, NJ, USA). All of compounds were greater than 95% purity and prepared in DMSO, and the concentrations were described in the figure legends.
Human CTSL expression plasmid (pCMV3-CTSL) and empty control vector (pCMV3) were purchased from Sino Biological Inc. (Beijing, China). pcDNA3.1(+)-TMPRSS2, pcDNA3.1(+)-Furin and pcDNA3.1(+) empty control vector were synthesized and provided by Genscript Inc. (Nanjing, China).

2.3

## Cytopathic effects (CPE) inhibition assay
The inhibitory activity of compounds against HCoV-229E or HCoV-OC43 was determined by CPE assay. 100 μL of maintenance medium (2% FBS) containing virus and indicated concentrations of compounds was used to treat cells in 96-well plates for 2–3 days at 35 °C, followed by identifying and quantifying the characteristic CPE referring to the vehicle treated control cells. RBV, a broad-spectrum antiviral agent, was used as a positive control. Anti-SARS-CoV-2 assay was conducted in biosafety level-3 laboratory. Cells were infected with the prototypic strain, Alpha variant (B.1.1.7) or Beta variant (B.1.351) of SARS-CoV-2 for 1 h with the presence of test compounds. Then the medium was removed,followed by the treatment with the test compounds for 2–3 days. RDV was used as a positive control. The cytotoxicity effects of compounds were determined by the CPE assay at the same time. The half-maximal cytotoxicity concentration (CC50) and the half-maximal effective concentrations (EC50) of compounds were determined by Reed and Muench method ( ). The selectivity index (SI) values were calculated as the ratio of CC50/EC50.

2.4

## Cytotoxicity assay
The cytotoxic effects of compounds on various cells were measured by the cell counting kit-8 (CCK-8) (Vazyme Biotech). Cells seeded in 96-well plates were treated with different concentrations of compounds for 48 h, followed by adding 10 μL of CCK-8 solution and incubating for 1–4 h. The optical density was determined at 450 nm in a Victor X5 Plate Reader (PerkinElmer, Waltham, MA, USA).

2.5

## Quantitative reverse-transcription polymerase chain reaction (qRT-PCR) assay
Total RNA extractions from cells were performed using the RNeasy Kits (Qiagen, Germantown, MD, USA) as recommended by the manufacturer's protocol, followed by analyzing with the One-Step qRT-PCR Kit (TransGen Biotech, Beijing, China). The mRNA level of HCoV-229E nucleocapsid (N) protein was detected with sense primer 5′-GACCRATCCTGTCACCTCTGAC-3′ and antisense primer 5′- GGGCATTYTGGACAAAKCGTCTACG-3′ targeting a conserved region of the gene of N protein. The mRNA level of HCoV-OC43 N protein was detected by primers and TaqMan probe: sense primer 5′-CGATGAGGCTATTCCGACTAGGT-3′, antisense primer 5′-CCTTCCTGAGCCTTCAATATAGTAACC-3′ and probe 5′-[TAMRA]-TCCGCCTGGCACGGTACTCCCT-[BHQ2]-3′. The housekeeping glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate dehydrogenase (GAPDH) gene mRNA level was detected using sense primers 5′- GGTATCGTGGAAGGACTCATGAC-3′ and antisense primer 5′-ATGCCAGTGAGCTTCCCGTTCAG-3′. The mRNA level of GAPDH was also detected by primers and TaqMan probe: sense primers 5′-CGGAGTCAACGGATTTGGTCGTAT-3′, antisense primer 5′-AGCCTTCTCCATGGTGGTGAAGAC-3′ and probe 5′-[TAMRA]-CCGTCAAGGCTGAGAACGG-[BHQ2]-3′. PCR analysis was performed in a CFX96 Touch Real-Time PCR Detection System (BioRad, Hercules, CA, USA). The comparative threshold (ΔΔCT) method was used for relative quantification.

2.6

## Western blot assay
Total cellular proteins were extracted using the Protein Extraction Reagent (Applygen, Beijing, China), followed by boiling for 8 min at 100 °C. Approximately 15 μg protein was applied for SDS-PAGE. The primary antibodies against HCoV-229E N protein (Cat# 40640-T62, 1:5000; Sino Biological), HCoV-OC43 N protein (Cat# MAB9013, 1:1000; Millipore, Billerica, MA, USA), GAPDH (Cat# TA-08, 1:1000; Zsbio, Beijing, China), human TMPRSS2 (Cat# GTX64544, 1:1000; GeneTex, Irvine, CA, USA), human CTSL (Cat# BMS1032, 1:1000; Invitrogen) and human furin (Cat# PA5-96680, 1:1000; Invitrogen) were used for this assay. The goat anti-rabbit (Cat# ZB-5301, 1:4000) and anti-mouse (Cat# ZB-2305, 1:4000) HRP-labeled antibodies were purchased from the Zsbio Inc. The expression level was defined within the Image J software based on the grayscale values.

2.7

## Immunofluorescence assay
Cells were infected with virus and simultaneously treated with the indicated concentrations of compounds for 24 h. The infected cells were fixed by 4% paraformaldehyde and permeabilized by 0.5% Triton X-100 followed by blocking in phosphate buffer saline (PBS; HyClone, Logan, Utah, USA) containing 1% bovine serum albumin (Applygen, Beijing, China) for 2 h at room temperature. Cells were then incubated with a double-stranded RNA (dsRNA) antibody (Cat# 10010200, 1:200; SCICONS, Szirák, Hungary) or HCoV-OC43 N protein antibody (Millipore, 1:200) overnight at 4 °C. After washing with PBS containing 0.1% (v/v) Tween 20 (Beyotime Institute of Biotechnology, Shanghai, China) for 3 times, the samples were reacted with Alexa Fluor-488 conjugated secondary antibody (Cat# HS231-01, 1:200; TransGen Biotech) for 1 h at room temperature away from light. Later, the nucleus was counterstained with Hoechst 33342 (Beyotime Institute of Biotechnology) for 30 min in the dark. Images were captured by a fluorescence microscope (Olympus IX71, Tokyo, Japan).

2.8

## Time-of-addition and time course assay
Huh7.5 cells were infected with HCoV-229E for 2 h and compounds were added at different time to carry out time-of-addition and time course assay. Compounds were added at the following periods of time: before infection (−12 or −2–12 h), during infection (0–2 h), full time of infection (0–12 h) and different time post infection (2 to 8–12 h). Cells were harvested at 12 h post infection. Then the viral titer was determined via CPE assay, and the viral dsRNA or N protein was detected by immunofluorescence assay and Western blot assay, respectively.

2.9

## Virus attachment and penetration assay
For virus attachment assay, Huh7.5 cells were chilled on ice for 2 h and then infected with HCoV-229E at 4 °C to allow virus attachment on the cell surface in the presence or absence of omicsynin B4. 2 h post attachment process, the cells were extensively washed with PBS and the relative RNA level of virus bound to cells was quantified by qRT-PCR assay using HCoV-229E N protein and GAPDH primers.
For virus penetration assay, chilled Huh7.5 cells were infected with HCoV-229E at 4 °C for 2 h, followed by washed out with PBS and treated with omicsynin B4 at 35 °C. After 1, 2, 3 or 4 h post penetration, the infected cells were treated with the acidic PBS (pH 3.0) for 1 min to inactivate non-penetrating viruses, followed by adding the alkaline PBS (pH 10.0) to neutralize the mix. Then cells were washed with the neutral PBS, and the total RNA was extracted and the relative viral RNA level was quantified by qRT-PCR assay using HCoV-229E N protein and GAPDH primers.

2.10

## Trypsin bypass assay
Trypsin bypass assay was performed as previous reported ( ). Briefly, Huh7.5 cells were pre-treated with omicsynin B4 for 2 h. Then, virus was attached to Huh7.5 cells at 4 °C for 1 h with the treatment of omicsynin B4, followed by replacing the media with or without dilutions of trypsin at 35 °C to start the entry step in the presence of omicsynin B4. The vehicle control was cells treated with neither trypsin nor omicsynin B4. Cells were harvested at 12 h post infection and viral N protein level was detected by Western blot assay.

2.11

## Pseudoparticle inhibition assay
HEK293T-hACE2 cells at 80% confluence in 96-wells black culture plates were inoculated with a HIV pseudotyped virus bearing SARS-CoV-2 S protein or VSV-G in the presence of 2-fold serial diluted compounds or vehicle control. After incubation at 37 °C for 24 h, 200 μL culture media was dispensed in place of the mixture of virus-compounds into wells. At 2 days post infection, cells were lysed by the lysis buffer (Promega, Madison, WI, USA) for 15 min, followed by adding the luciferase (Luc) substrate (Promega) to quantify the Luc activity using an EnSpire instrument (PerkinElmer).
For transfection experiment, plasmid DNA and lipofectamine3.0 transfection reagent (Invitrogen) were mixed in Opti-MEM Reduced Serum Media (Invitrogen) at a 1:2 ratio and incubated for 0.5 h. The mixture was added into HEK293T-hACE2 cells. At 12–16 h post transfection, the media was replaced by SARS-CoV-2 pseudoparticles in the presence or absence of the test compound. Then cells were performed as previously described. This pseudoparticle inhibition assay was performed according to the method described previously ( ).

2.12

## Transfection and expression of plasmid DNA
To determine the effects of exogenous host proteases expression on coronavirus replication, plasmid DNA of human CTSL/TMPRSS2/Furin was transfected into cells before viral infection. 1 μg plasmid DNA was pre-incubated with 0.2 μL P3000 reagent (Invitrogen) in 50 μL Opti-MEM Reduced Serum Media (Invitrogen) at room temperature for 5 min, followed by mixed with another 50 μL Opti-MEM Reduced Serum Media consisting of 1 μL lipofectamine3.0 transfection reagent (Invitrogen). After 0.5 h of incubation, the transfection mixture was added into cells at 70% confluence for 24 h at 37 °C. Then 1 mL of maintenance medium (2% FBS) containing HCoV-229E or HCoV-OC43 (MOI = 0.1) and test compounds was used to treat cells for 24 h at 35 °C. Total cellular proteins were extracted for Western blot assay after infection.

2.13

## Continuous fluorescence-based enzyme activity assay
The inhibitory activities of test compounds on the host proteases were determined by a continuous fluorescence-based assay. To assess the protease activity of the recombinant human TMPRSS2 (Cat# P1679, Abcam), the reaction mixture containing 50 ng protein and serially diluted compounds in assay buffer consisted of 50 mM Tris-HCl, 150 mM NaCl, pH 8.0 was pre-incubated at 37 °C for 10 min in 96-well black plates, followed by addition of 50 μM protease substrate BOC-Gln-Ala-Arg-AMC (Hanhong Scientifc, Shanghai, China) to start the reaction ( ). To analyze the proteolytic activity of CTSL or CTSB, 170 pM recombinant human CTSL (Cat# 952-CY, R&D Systems, Minneapolis, USA) or 120 pM recombinant human CTSB (Cat# C398, Novoprotein, Shanghai, China) was incubated with test compounds in assay buffer (20 mM sodium acetate, 100 mM NaCl, 5 mM DTT, 1 mM EDTA, pH 5.5) at 37 °C up to 30 min 10 μM Z-Phe-Arg-AMC (Genscript) was added to start the reaction and the fluorescent signals were tested for 3 h continuously ( ). For furin activity assay, 8 nM recombinant human furin protein (Cat# ab126908, Abcam) was pre-incubated with test compounds in assay buffer (50 mM sodium acetate, 5 mM CaCl2, 0.1% Triton X-100, pH 7.0) at 37 °C for 30 min, followed by adding 10 μM pGlu-Arg-Thr-Lys-Arg-AMC (Genscript) ( ). For thrombin activity assay, 2 nM recombinant human thrombin (Cat# HY-114164, MedChemExpress) was mixed with test compounds in assay buffer (50 mM Tris-HCl, 150 mM NaCl, pH 8.0) at dark, followed by addition of 10 μM protease substrate Benzoyl-Phe-Val-Arg-AMC (Cat# 605211, Sigma-Aldrich) to start the reaction. The fluorescent signals were measured at an excitation wavelength of 355 nm and emission wavelength of 460 nm for 4–6 h continuously using the Victor X5 Plate Reader (PerkinElmer). The half maximal inhibitory concentration (IC50) was determined using nonlinear regression analysis. All the data were repeated at least three times.

2.14

## Molecular docking assay
Molecular docking assay was performed using the Maestro Elements (Schrödinger Release, 2018–1). The structure of CTSL (PDB ID: 5MQY) and TMPRSS2 (PDB ID: 7MEQ) were obtained from the Protein Data Bank (PDB) databases (https://www.rcsb.org/). The protein was preprocessed to optimize the amino acid residue interaction network and restrained minimization was performed using the protein preparation module of Maestro. The structure of omicsynin B4 with specific stereochemical configuration was drawn by ChemDraw19.0 software and saved in SDF format. The small molecule structure was prepared to a suitable ionization at target pH (5.5 for CTSL and 7.4 for TMPRSS2) and computation in ligand preparation module for docking procedure. The verified protein structure in its ligand-free state and omicsynin B4 structure were submitted to the covalent docking wizard. The docked ligand is confined to the enclosing box which is referred to the centroid of the original ligand. The nucleophilic addition to a double bond was chosen as the reaction type, and the docking mode was refined. PyMOL software was used to draw and analyze the intermolecular interactions between the ligand and protein complexes.

2.15

## Statistical analysis
The CC50 and EC50 values of CPE assay were presented as mean values with error bars representing the standard deviation (SD). Other results were expressed as mean values with error bars representing the standard error of the mean (SEM) value. All the data and graphs were analyzed and plotted by GraphPad Prism 7.00 (GraphPad Software, San Diego, CA, USA). The statistical analysis was assessed by one-way analysis of variance (ANOVA) followed by Dunnet's test or two-way ANOVA followed by Tukey's multiple comparisons test. P value < 0.05 was considered as statistically significant.

3

## Results
3.1

## Omicsynin B4 exerts broad-spectrum anti-coronavirus activity in multiple cells
To investigate the anti-coronavirus activity of omicsynin B4, antiviral assays were performed using cell lines derived from different tissues. Omicsynin B4 did not exhibit obvious toxicity in all tested cell lines at concentrations up to at least 500 μM measured by CCK-8 assay ( ). As shown in 
, omicsynin B4 inhibited CPE induced by HCoV-229E in liver-derived Huh7.5 and Huh7 cells with EC50 values of 2.0 μM and 15.2 μM, respectively. The expression of HCoV-229E N protein was detected at both mRNA and protein levels in different cells, with RBV as a positive control. As depicted in 
A and B, omicsynin B4 displayed consistent dose-dependent inhibition for HCoV-229E N protein in Huh7.5, Huh7, lung-derived A549 and intestine-derived Caco-2 cells. In line with these observations, the amounts of viral replication intermediate dsRNA visualized by immunofluorescence were significantly decreased in a dose-response manner upon omicsynin B4 treatment ( C, ). Among these tested cells, omicsynin B4 showed the most potent inhibition against viral replication in Huh7.5 cells infected with HCoV-229E. 
Omicsynin B4 exerted a moderate inhibition of CPE induced by HCoV-OC43 in H460 cells ( ). Similarly, viral N protein and dsRNA levels were detected on multiple infected cells including kidney-derived HEK293T, Huh7.5, lung-derived A549 and H460 cells. It was shown that both the intracellular HCoV-OC43 N protein and dsRNA levels were reduced in a dose-dependent manner ( 
, ). The results showed that omicsynin B4 also decreased the replication of HCoV-OC43 in different cell types, and in A549 cells it showed similar antiviral activity level to that of HCoV-229E. Moreover, the antiviral efficacy of omicsynin B4 against different strains of SARS-CoV-2 infection was evaluated in kidney-derived Vero E6 cells by CPE assay, including RDV as a positive control. SARS-CoV-2-induced CPE was inhibited when cells were treated with omicsynin B4 and the EC50 values were 31.5 μM, 35.4 μM and 26.1 μM for the SARS-CoV-2 prototypic strain, Alpha variant (B.1.1.7) and Beta variant (B.1.351), respectively ( ). Overall, these results convincingly confirmed that omicsynin B4 showed broad-spectrum anti-coronavirus activity against both human Alpha-coronavirus (229E) and Beta-coronavirus (OC43, SARS-CoV-2 and its variants) in multiple cell lines. 

3.2

## Omicsynin B4 inhibits coronavirus entry into host cells
To identify the replication step(s) of the viral life cycle that might be modulated by omicsynin B4, time-of-addition and time course assays were performed in Huh7.5 cells against HCoV-229E. Cells were infected with HCoV-229E for 2 h and treated with omicsynin B4 at the indicated times, followed by the protein extraction at 12 h post infection. The protein expression was almost completely inhibited when omicsynin B4 was added 12 h before the infection, while it was dramatically inhibited when the compound was added 2 h before and at the early periods of infection (0–2 h). However, there was no significant effect on viral replication when the omicsynin B4 was added 6 h post infection ( 
A). The results indicated the compound may affect the early stage of viral replication. To validate the observation, cells were treated with omicsynin B4 before (−12–0 or −2–0 h), during (0–2 h) or after viral incubation (2–12 h) and harvested at 12 h post infection, and then viral titers were determined by the end-point dilution (50% tissue culture infective dose, TCID50) using CPE assay. As illustrated in B, the viral infectious titer of progeny virions was significantly reduced when omicsynin B4 was added before or during the virus exposure, whereas treatment post infection resulted in less reductions, further suggesting omicsynin B4 targeted the early stage of the viral life cycle. 
The life cycle of coronavirus is initiated with its attachment to host cells upon the binding of S protein to its cell surface receptor, followed by fusion to the plasma membrane via the cell surface or the endosomal pathway to enter the cells. The effects of omicsynin B4 on viral attachment and penetration were therefore determined. Omicsynin B4 showed no significant inhibition on the viral attachment ( C, left panel). Remarkably, omicsynin B4 significantly reduced the viral entry at 4 h post infection, the effect of which was similar to that of NH4Cl, an entry inhibitor blocking endosomal acidification ( C, right panel). The results indicated the inhibition of omicsynin B4 on viral replication might due to interfering of the entry of virus into cells, possibly affect the penetration process. Importantly, coronavirus showed a superior entry into cells in the presence of exogenous trypsin or trypsin-like proteases by enhancing the activation and cleavage of viral S protein ( ; ). Thus, the trypsin bypass assay was performed to investigate the effect of omicsynin B4 on the blockage of exogenous trypsin-mediated coronavirus infection. The results showed the inhibitory effect of viral replication by omicsynin B4 could be reversed upon the addition of exogenous trypsin in a dose-dependent manner, further indicating that the compound might interrupt coronavirus entry into cells ( D).
To further confirm omicsynin B4 targeting to the viral entry step, the reported inhibitors of host proteases were used to make a comparison on the inhibitory effect of viral replication. Immunofluorescence assay was performed to detect the viral dsRNA level of infected cells with omicsynin B4 added at the indicated time points. E−64d, an efficient pan-cathepsin inhibitor, and nafamostat mesylate, a potent serine proteases inhibitor, were detected in the same way. As shown in E, the three compounds acted in a similar mode, all exerting significant inhibition on viral replication when treated in advance and at the early periods of infection. Little effect was found when compounds were added 6 h post infection, consistent with the inhibition of the N protein level ( A). These results proposed that the anti-coronavirus activity of omicsynin B4 might be related to the inhibition of host proteases at the early entry step of the viral life cycle.

3.3

## Omicsynin B4 inhibits SARS-CoV-2 S protein mediated pseudovirus infection
To further investigate whether omicsynin B4 specifically inhibits SARS-CoV-2 cell entry process, a pseudotyped virus bearing SARS-CoV-2 S protein was used. HEK293T-hACE2 cells were applied as highly permissible host cells, in which viral entry mainly relies on the endosomal pathway as the cells do not endogenously express TMPRSS2 ( ). It was found that omicsynin B4 exhibited a signiﬁcant dose-dependent inhibition on the infection of SARS-CoV-2 prototype pseudoparticles, with an EC50 of 0.64 μM ( 
A). The antiviral activity of omicsynin B4 was further investigated on a pseudovirus of SARS-CoV-2 Omicron (BA.2), the earlier dominant circulating VOC worldwide. A strong reduction of the entry of pseudoparticles carrying the S protein of BA.2 was observed in omicsynin B4-treated cells with an EC50 of 1.11 μM, similar to that of antiviral activity to prototype ( B). In addition, prototype-S protein-driven entry could be significantly inhibited by E−64d (EC50 = 0.23 μM), whereas no obvious inhibition was exerted by the treatment of camostat mesylate even at 100 μM ( ). There was no effect on the entry of the same pseudotyped virus carrying the VSV-G ( ), demonstrating the antiviral activity of omicsynin B4 was speciﬁc to the viral entry driven by SARS-CoV-2 S protein. These results further suggested that the inhibitory effect of omicsynin B4 against SARS-CoV-2 pseudovirus might be mainly ascribed to the CTSL-dependent entry pathway. 
Consistent with the observation in common coronavirus HCoV-229E, the time-of-addition assay showed omicsynin B4 and E−64d significantly suppressed SARS-CoV-2 pseudovirus entry into cells in a same way when added 0–6 h post infection ( C and D). Interestingly, the inhibitory effect of omicsynin B4 was superior to E−64d when treated 12 h or 2 h before infection (−12/−2–0 h), suggesting omicsynin B4 exhibited similar but not identical mechanism of action as the known cathepsin inhibitor E−64d.
TMPRSS2 route has also been proposed to be essential for efficient infection of SARS-CoV-2. Therefore, TMPRSS2 was over-expressed in HEK293T-hACE2 cells to determine the effect of omicsynin B4 on SARS-CoV-2 pseudovirus entry. The infectivity of prototype pseudovirus into cells was positively correlated with the expression level of TMPRSS2 ( ), indicating the protease could increase the susceptibility to infection. Camostat mesylate effectively blocked the SARS-CoV-2 prototype pseudovirus-driven entry into HEK293T-hACE2-TMPRSS2 cells, and the inhibitory effect appeared more potent with the increased expression of TMPRSS2 ( E). The antiviral efficacy of omicsynin B4 was undermined as the expression level of TMPRSS2 increased in a dose-dependent manner, as E−64d did ( E). Furthermore, the infection of Omicron BA.2-S-driven pseudovirus into TMPRSS2 over-expressed cells was investigated. The infectivity was not significantly altered with the expression of TMPRSS2 ( ), emphasizing the preference to CTSL in the S protein priming in SARS-CoV-2 Omicron variant. The results were consistent with the recent findings that the replication and fusion activity of the Omicron variant is much more dependent on the endosomal entry pathway ( ). Omicsynin B4, as well as E−64d, retained its antiviral activity against BA.2-S-driven pseudovirus entry even in the presence of high-level expression of TMPRSS2 ( F). Omicsynin B4 was probably a more powerful inhibitor against Omicron and the detailed effects of omicsynin B4 on the cell surface entry route need further study.
Then CTSL was over-expressed in HEK293T-hACE2 cells to further explore the possible mechanism of omicsynin B4 ( G, H and G). The results showed that over-expression of CTSL resulted in partially reduced inhibitory effect of omicsynin B4 and E−64d against the prototype and BA.2-S-driven entry in a similar way. In particular, low concentration of omicsynin B4 (2.5 μM) still showed the potential to block pseudovirus entry even when CTSL was transfected with a high amount of plasmid DNA, indicating omicsynin B4 has a potent inhibition of CTSL activity.
Taken together, omicsynin B4 has a great potential to inhibit the entry of SARS-CoV-2 and its variants, and host proteases might be the targets of omicsynin B4 in suppressing coronavirus infection.

3.4

## Omicsynin B4 inhibits host cell proteases’ activity to exert antiviral activity
Next, we verified whether omicsynin B4 exerts inhibitory activity on authentic human coronavirus through host proteases. Huh7 cells were transfected with the plasmid DNA encoding each of the host proteases respectively, followed by infection with HCoV-229E and treatment with omicsynin B4 simultaneously. After more than one round of viral replication, cells were harvested and Western blot assays were performed to detect the expression of proteases and the viral N protein to figure out the possible relationship between the host proteases and the antiviral effect of omicsynin B4. Similarly, after overexpressing exogenous CTSL or TMPRSS2, the antiviral effect of omicsynin B4 was reversed, indicating that CTSL and TMPRSS2 expression may restore the viral infection by overcoming the inhibition of host proteases by omicsynin B4 ( 
A and B). Furin, another key host protease in coronavirus pathogenesis including SARS-CoV-2, MERS-CoV, HCoV-HKU1 and HCoV-OC43 ( ), was also taken into account. The over-expression of furin in HEK293T cells did not significantly change the efficacy of omicsynin B4 on HCoV-OC43 replication, suggesting furin may not be a major target responsible for antiviral effect of omicsynin B4 ( C). Furin over-expression in Huh7 cells did not influence the efficacy of omicsynin B4 on inhibition of HCoV-229E replication ( D), in accordance with previous reports that furin is not involved in its infectivity ( ). Together, these results further suggested that omicsynin B4 might exert inhibitory effect on the viral replication through host proteases in a furin-independent way. 
Thus, fluorogenic substrate-based proteolytic activity assays were performed to measure the inhibitory activity of omicsynin B4 on the vital host proteases. The test compounds were incubated with recombinant human CTSL, TMPRSS2 and furin at the indicated times respectively, followed by adding ﬂuorescently labeled substrate that emits fluorescence after proteolytic cleavage. E−64d, camostat mesylate and nafamostat mesylate, or hexa-D-arginine was detected as positive controls of CTSL, TMPRSS2 or furin inhibitor, respectively. As shown in E, omicsynin B4 was found to effectively inhibit human CTSL activity with an IC50 of 0.44 nM, while the IC50 value of E−64d is 19.1 nM. Meanwhile, this compound displayed inhibitory activity against human serine protease TMPRSS2 with an IC50 value of 0.38 μM, whereas camostat mesylate or nafamostat mesylate showed an IC50 of 1.73 and 0.17 nM, respectively ( F). Omicsynin B4 was also found to mildly suppress furin activity with an IC50 of 30.4 μM, while the IC50 of hexa-D-arginine is 0.69 μM ( G). In addition, we assessed the enzymatic inhibition activity of omicsynin B4 toward thrombin, a recently reported host protease which may directly cleave SARS-CoV-2 spike and enhance viral entry ( ). Omicsynin B4 dose-dependently inhibited human thrombin activity with an IC50 value of 6.07 μM, while two direct thrombin inhibitors argatroban and bivalirudin with IC50 at nanomolar level ( H). However, no obvious proteolytic-inhibiting activity of omicsynin B4 was observed for the SARS-CoV-2 encoded papain-like protease (PLpro) even at 100 μM, while the IC50 for SARS-CoV-2 encoded Mpro was 48.6 μM ( ). These data confirmed that omicsynin B4 is a host protease inhibitor, much more potent in inhibiting the activity of CTSL than TMPRSS2. Omicsynin B4 acts as a natural protease inhibitor for both CTSL and TMPRSS2 below micromolar levels, and thus suppress coronavirus entry into cells.
Peptidyl aldehydes, such as leupeptin and α-keto-β-aldehydes, have been demonstrated to effectively inhibit the activity of cysteine and serine proteases primarily through the covalent bond formation between the electrophilic warheads with the nucleophilic cysteine or serine residue ( ). Omicsynin Bs are pseudo-tetrapeptides with an internal ureido linkage and a C-terminal arginal, which may form covalent binding to the CTSL active site Cys25 ( ). Molecule docking assay was performed to predict the possible binding model of omicsynin B4 to CTSL using Maestro software. The three-dimensional structure of human CTSL with compound 35 (PDB ID: 5MQY) ( ) was retrieved from RCSB protein data bank for molecular docking studies. Subsequent refinement of the protein and small molecule structure was pursued at pH of 5.5. The molecular docking analysis revealed that omicsynin B4 interact with CTSL by a covalent binding of arginal aldehyde to the active Cys25 residue ( 
A and C). Omicsynin B4 is well engaged with the catalytic triad of CTSL by forming multiple hydrogen bonds with Gln19, Gly61, Glu63, Asn66 and Asp162. What's more, Glu63 and Asp162 interacts with guanidine groups of omicsynin B4 through salt bridges. Hence, these interactions could stabilize omicsynin B4 into the substrate binding pocket of the CTSL, which underscore omicsynin B4 as a potent covalent inhibitor of CTSL. 
We next investigate the molecular interactions between human TMPRSS2 and omicsynin B4. The active residue Ser441 has been reported as the most necessary residue for the proteolytic cleavage of viral S protein ( ). The protein structure of TMPRSS2 (PDB ID: 7MEQ), originally from a cocrystal structure of TMPRSS2 and nafamostat mesylate ( ), was used for covalent docking. The protein and small molecule structure were refined for docking procedure at pH 7.4. Aldehyde, the reactive group of omicsynin B4, forms a covalent bond with the active Ser441 residue present in the triad of TMPRSS2. Three salt bridges formed between the ligand with Lys342, Asp435 and Glu389 in the binding pocket, respectively. And several hydrogen bonds were observed between omicsynin B4 and the Glu389, Asp435, Ser436, Ser460, Gly462 and Gly464 residues, with some hydrogen bonds as observed in the complex of nafamostat mesylate and TMPRSS2 ( B and D).

4

## Discussion
In this study, we report that omicsynin B4 exhibited potential broad-spectrum antiviral efficacy against a range of coronavirus including common human coronaviruses and SARS-CoV-2 and its variants, in various cells derived from different types of tissues. Further investigations revealed that omicsynin B4 inhibits the coronavirus replication by affecting the viral entry stage of infection. This was confirmed by SARS-CoV-2 pseudovirus inhibition assay, in which a great potency against Omicron variant was also displayed. According to the current data from pseudo- and authentic coronavirus, a mechanism similar but not identical to CTSL inhibitor E−64d may be responsible for omicsynin B4. Indeed, omicsynin B4 exhibited superior inhibitory activity in the sub-nanomolar range against CTSL, and in a sub-micromolar inhibition against TMPRSS2 in biochemical assays. The molecular docking results showed that omicsynin B4 can fit well in the substrate cavity of both CTSL and TMPRSS2, with the C-terminal aldehyde group covalently binding to the active site Cys25 and Ser441 respectively. Thus, omicsynin B4 may be a broad-spectrum anti-coronavirus candidate by acting as a potent covalent reversible inhibitor of host proteases CTSL and TMPRSS2. Further studies to clarify its anti-coronavirus efficacy and mechanism in vivo are thus highly warranted.
Omicsynin Bs are a group of pseudo-tetrapeptides as novel antivirals discovered from Streptomyces sp. 1647 based on anti-IAV activity under the guidance of multi-omics data ( ). Back to the late 1970s, the fermentation extracts from Streptomyces sp. 1647 were applied to patients with inﬂuenza and showed potent efficacy to reduce fever within 1–2 days compared to normal treatment group. However, the structures of active compounds were not identified until recently ( ). Antipain (i.e., omicsynin B4), which was previously identified from culture filtrates of various species of actinomycetes, especially Streptomyces, has been characterized as a serine and cysteine protease inhibitor against papain and trypsin ( ). A recent report found antipain was an effective inhibitor of serine protease TMPRSS2 by structure-based screening and blocked SARS-CoV-2 replication in high TMPRSS2-expressing human airway epithelial Calu-3 cells to a similar extent as avoralstat and camostat did at 100 μM ( ). Antipain was also reported to exhibit in vitro inhibitory activity to cathepsins (IC50 = 2, 0.9, and 200 μM against CTSA, B, and D, respectively) ( ).
In this study, we reported for the first time that omicsynin B4 (i.e., antipain) is a highly potent human CTSL inhibitor at sub-nanomolar level in vitro, 43 times more potent than that of E−64d. Although as a peptide aldehyde inhibitor it was reported to inhibit a wide range of cysteine proteases ( ), omicsynin B4 showed about 18 times more effective for CTSL than for CTSB (IC50 = 8.22 nM, ), which was also indicated as a host protease that helps SARS-CoV-2 enter target cells ( ). Coronaviruses including SARS-CoV-2 encode two cysteine proteases, Mpro and PLpro, which are responsible for processing the huge polyproteins (pp1a and pp1ab) ( ). Omicsynin B4 showed no significant inhibition of PLpro even at a concentration of 100 μM, and with an IC50 value of Mpro five orders of magnitude higher than that of CTSL ( ). Here we find omicsynin B4 inhibit the activity of TMPRSS2 with an IC50 value of 0.38 μM, comparable to the level that reported for antipain by other investigators ( ). Although omicsynin B4 inhibit the enzyme activity of TMPRSS2 three orders of magnitude less than CTSL, the inhibition activity is at sub-micromolar level and could be at least partially responsible for its anti-coronavirus activity (which is micromolar level) at cellular level, possibly depending on the host protease profile of a specific cell type. We also note omicsynin B4 is unlikely to cross cellular membranes due to its hydrophilic property. As TMPRSS2 is expressed on the cell surface and CTSL might be targeted during endocytosis, both host proteases TMPRSS2 and CTSL are accessible to omicsynin B4. Inefﬁcient entrance of omicsynin B4 into cells may even be beneﬁcial because this may help avoid off-target inhibition of intracellular proteases.
CTSL-dependent endosomal pathway is a common entry route for coronavirus into all kinds of host cells, expressing TMPRSS2 or not ( ). Notably, some variants of SARS-CoV-2, especially Omicron, inefficiently rely on the TMPRSS2 pathway with preference to the CTSL-mediated endosomal route of entry via the enhanced protonation of S protein ( ; ), which was also observed in this study ( ). Moreover, clinical evidence showed the plasma level of CTSL was elevated in patients with SARS-CoV-2 infection and in turn enhanced the viral infection in a “vicious circle”, thus associated with the progression and severity of the disease ( ). CTSL was found to be significantly elevated in the lung tissue in fatal cases of COVID-19 disease ( ). CTSL secretion has also been proposed to be stimulated by SARS-CoV-2 induced inflammatory cytokines, such as interleukin-6, which play an essential role in inducing cytokine storms ( ). Thus, CTSL is considered as a more valuable and attractive therapeutic target for the development of antivirals against ongoing SARS-CoV-2, especially for Omicron variants which has been sweeping the globe since November 2021. However, no specific inhibitor of CTSL has entered clinical evaluation so far. The results presented here raise the exciting possibility that omicsynin B4 can potently inhibit CTSL together with TMPRSS2, underlining the mechanism of its broad-spectrum anti-coronavirus activity and suggesting a high genetic barrier to the development of drug-resistance.
Meanwhile, other host proteases may also be involved in cleavage activation of SARS-CoV-2 spike. Recent studies have identified several metalloproteinases as well as thrombin as redundant routes to enhance SARS-CoV-2 infection by promoting viral entry ( ; ; ; ). Therefore, effectively targeting additional host proteases that facilitate the infection simultaneously should be considered to achieve a synergistic potentiation of antiviral activity. The inhibition of thrombin at micromolar level (IC50 = 6.07 μM) suggests this may benefit antiviral activity of omicsynin B4 under certain circumstances. COVID-19 patients are reported to be more susceptible to thrombotic complications due to a hyperinflammatory response caused by the virus, particularly in critically ill patients ( ; ). It seems warranted to assess the potential effect of omicsynin B4 on coagulation pathway as its inhibition of thrombin and possibly other proteases involved in the blood coagulation cascade, especially when considering potential clinical applications.
In our previous study, omicsynin B4 exhibited an inhibitory activity against different strains of IAV ( ). It was found that omicsynin B4 could inhibit the IAV replication at the early stage in MDCK cells. Similar to the role of S protein in coronavirus, hemagglutinin is synthesized as a precursor protein and proper proteolytic cleavage with host cell proteases is required for a competent fusion ( ). Previous studies identiﬁed human airway trypsin-like protease (HAT, also referred to as TMPRSS11D) and TMPRSS2 as efficient proteases that activate hemagglutinin at a monobasic cleavage site ( ). The role of cathepsins in IAV infection and replication has not been thoroughly investigated, with CTSW and CTSB reported as cellular factors required for IAV entry into target cells or production of progeny virions ( ; ). The underlying molecular mechanism of omicsynin B4 against IAV is reminiscent of that of coronaviruses, which is currently under further investigation in vitro and in vivo.
In summary, omicsynin B4 of microbial origin could effectively inhibit infection of pseudotyped and/or authentic SARS-CoV-2 and variants, including Alpha, Beta and Omicron, as well as common coronavirus HCoV-229E and HCoV-OC43. It showed anti-coronavirus activity in multiple cell lines as a dual inhibitor targeting host CTSL and TMPRSS2, especially as a sub-nanomolar inhibitor of human CTSL. Human respiratory viruses, such as influenza viruses and coronaviruses, mostly require host proteases for virus priming. The good activity of omicsynin B4 and its analogues against both cysteine and serine proteases may be the reason for the good effect of fermentation filtrates in the pilot human experiment against influenza in the 1970s. The results so far suggest that omicsynin B4 represents an attractive lead or candidate suitable for developing novel broad-spectrum prophylactic or therapeutic antiviral. With improved activity and druggability, omicsynin derived antivirals may be able to help coping with the challenges of the emerging variants of coronavirus.

## Declaration of competing interest
The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper.

 Appendix A

## Supplementary data
The following is the Supplementary data to this article.

## Multimedia component 1
Multimedia component 1

## Data availability
Data will be made available on request.

## Acknowledgments
This work was supported by grants from the 10.13039/501100001809National Natural Science Foundation of China (82273832 and 82104046), 10.13039/501100012166National Key Research and Development Program of China (2018YFA0902000), CAMS Innovation Fund for Medical Sciences (2022-I2M-2-002, 2021-I2M-1–029) and Beijing Natural Science Foundation (7214286).
Appendix ASupplementary data to this article can be found online at https://doi.org/10.1016/j.antiviral.2023.105606.