3532isciiScienceiScienceElsevierPMC1305378413053784130537844195298510.1016/j.isci.2026.115339Mechanism-based prediction of drug synergy via network controllability analysis of therapeutic pathways in intractable diseases
NambaSatoko GodaMitsuhiro KunikiYurika IshizawaKeisuke IidaMidori TakeshitaJun-ichi YamanishiYoshihiro 1Department of Complex Systems Science, Graduate School of Informatics, Nagoya University, Chikusa, Nagoya 464-8601, Japan2Department of Clinical Pharmacology and Therapeutics, Graduate School of Biomedical and Health Sciences, Hiroshima University, Kasumi 1-2-3, Minami-ku, Hiroshima 734-8553, Japan3Department of Clinical Pharmacology and Therapeutics, Tokushima University Graduate School of Biomedical Sciences, Kuramoto-cho, Tokushima 770-8503, Japan4Department of Pharmacy, Tokushima University Hospital, Kuramoto-Cho, Tokushima 770- 8503, Japan5Clinical Research Center for Developmental Therapeutics, Tokushima University Hospital, Kuramoto-cho, Tokushima 770-8503, Japan6Faculty of Computer Science and Systems Engineering, Kyushu Institute of Technology, Iizuka, Fukuoka 820-8502, Japan7Research Institute of Science for Safety and Sustainability, National Institute of Advanced Industrial Science and Technology (AIST), Tsukuba, Ibaraki 305-8569, Japan8Division of Interdisciplinary Research and Development (R&D), Aichi Cancer Center Research Institute, Nagoya 464-8681, Japan∗Corresponding author yamanishi@i.nagoya-u.ac.jp
9Lead contact
1132026294115339115339842026© 2026 The AuthorsThis is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/).

## Summary
Identifying effective drug combinations for multidrug therapies in intractable diseases remains challenging, and drug synergy depends on regulatory mechanisms. Herein, we introduce a mechanistic framework that redefines drug combination strategies into two distinct synergy paradigms—“boost” and “complement”—and present a network-based method called SYNERGIE to predict associated combinations across diseases. For diseases lacking known therapeutic targets, we introduced network controllability analysis to estimate therapeutic pathways and target molecules. SYNERGIE integrates drug-disease and drug-drug interactions across multiomics layers using Bayesian optimization to prioritize disease-state-specific combinations. SYNERGIE outperformed existing methods across 14 diseases, and identified both doublets and triplets. Therapeutic effects of triplets predicted for colorectal cancer were validated through in vitro experiments and multi-resolution omics analyses of human cohort data at bulk and single-cell levels. SYNERGIE offers a mechanism-aware approach to identifying clinically viable combination therapies, and is expected to support stratified treatment of intractable diseases.
Subject areas: systems medicine, pharmacology, pharmacoinformatics

## Graphical abstract
 

## Highlights
•Mechanistic framework redefines drug synergy as boost or complement
•SYNERGIE predicts drug combinations considering synergy types
•Network controllability analysis estimates therapeutic pathways and targets
•Predicted doublets and triplets were validated through in vitro experiments

Systems medicine; pharmacology; pharmacoinformatics

statusreleaseddisplay-pdfyesis-olfnois-manuscriptnois-preprintnois-journal-matternois-scannednois-retractednoReceived 2025 Aug 1; Revised 2025 Dec 7; Accepted 2026 Mar 9; Collection date 2026 Apr 17.

## Introduction
Intractable disease conditions, such as cancers, are typically caused by the dysregulation of multiple biomolecules (e.g., proteins) and are difficult to treat with single-drug therapies that can regulate only a limited subset of targets. These diseases are commonly multifactorial, involving complex disruptions across multiple pathways ; thus, single-drug therapies are often insufficient to achieve durable responses. To overcome this limitation, multidrug therapies (e.g., doublet or triplet combinations) that exhibit synergistic effects have emerged as a promising strategy , for simultaneously targeting multiple disease mechanisms. , For example, surgery is not suitable for some patients with colorectal cancer (CRC) because of the tumor location or the risk of colon perforation and intestinal obstruction. In such cases, multidrug therapy is a potential alternative. However, the identification of effective drug combinations remains challenging owing to the vast space of possible drug combinations and the absence of reliable strategies to identify combinations with clinical potential. As an example, there are 499,500 possible pair combinations of 1000 drugs. Thus, the experimental evaluation of the synergistic effects of all possible drug combinations across thousands of disease conditions is infeasible.
To address this bottleneck, computational approaches have been developed to prioritize the discovery of synergistic drug combinations. Existing methods include supervised learning using known drug pairs, , , , and unsupervised or network-based models that do not rely on prior knowledge. , The supervised learning approach has become mainstream in this field, and it is effective for identifying drug combinations in which the chemical structures and mechanisms of action are similar to those of known drug combinations. However, as the supervised approach depends heavily on prior knowledge of such combinations; therefore, it is unlikely to discover combinations in which the chemical structures and mechanisms of action differ from those of known drug combinations. In contrast, the unsupervised learning approach, which does not rely on prior information about existing combinations, is more desirable in clinical practice. The use of transcriptome data to predict drugs that can be combined with first-line treatments for a specific disease has been proposed. However, the prediction is constrained because one of the drugs in the pair is fixed. The use of topological relationships between drug target modules in biomolecular networks was also proposed to predict drug combinations. However, this method is not applicable to diseases with few known therapeutic target molecules and often focuses only on the largest network modules, limiting the ability to address complex disease conditions involving diverse molecular mechanisms. There is still substantial room for improving the accuracy and applicability of drug combination prediction, particularly for complex disease conditions. Moreover, previous approaches have rarely distinguished between mechanistically distinct types of synergy.
To address this unmet need, we introduce the mechanistic classification of drug synergy into two paradigms—“boost” and “complement”—to distinguish synergy modes based on their molecular targeting patterns. Boost synergy describes the amplified therapeutic effect of multiple drugs acting on the same therapeutic target molecules. There is a bias toward boost-type combination in clinical practice; most drug combinations currently used involve drugs approved for the same disease category. For example, combinations of antineoplastic drugs are commonly used to treat patients with cancer. However, boost-type drug combinations result in clinical challenges such as the risk of treatment discontinuation due to cumulative side effects and unexpected drug-drug interactions. Conversely, in complement synergy, multiple drugs are used to regulate different therapeutic target molecules and enhance therapeutic effects in a complementary manner. Complement-type drug combinations for cancers achieve high therapeutic efficacy with minimal antineoplastic doses by leveraging complementary interactions with non-antineoplastic drugs. However, the mechanisms underlying complement-type synergy are complex and often unpredictable and the lack of intrinsic anticancer effects in non-antineoplastic drugs makes achieving synergy particularly difficult. Thus, the design of complement-type synergy regimens poses significant scientific and technical challenges; indeed, their development remains largely reliant on trial-and-error approaches. However, their potential to reduce adverse effects and expand treatment options—particularly for elderly patients and those with comorbidities—is central to their clinical importance. In the context of precision medicine, demand is increasing for predictive models that account for disease-specific regulatory complexity. These challenges highlight an unmet need for predictive models with the ability to mechanistically distinguish and identify clinically actionable drug synergies.
In this research, we developed a mechanism-aware computational framework that categorizes drug synergy into boost-type and complement-type paradigms; here, we present a network-based method called SYNERGIE (drug SYNERGy inference engine) to predict context-specific and clinically useful drug combinations for a variety of disease conditions. The algorithm incorporates network controllability analysis, which models how disease-specific perturbations propagate through molecular systems to estimate potential therapeutic pathways and target molecules, extending its applicability to intractable disease conditions without clearly characterized therapeutic target molecules. We validated the identified complement-type drug triplets for CRC using in vitro experiments and cell type-resolved multiomics analyses of human cohort data at bulk and single-cell levels, demonstrating its utility for mechanism-driven drug combination therapy design. This dual-mechanism framework is distinguished from conventional predictors by accounting for mechanistic diversity and enabling its application, even in clinically challenging contexts. Notably, the predicted triplets enhanced first-line therapies, suggesting that SYNERGIE can enhance existing treatment regimens to support patient-contextualized precision medicine and increase the available therapeutic options for patients with limited alternatives.

## Results

## Overview of SYNERGIE for predicting synergy-aware drug combinations
SYNERGIE enables the systematic prediction of synergy-aware drug combinations across diverse diseases, including those without known therapeutic target molecules. Although the overlap between disease therapeutic target molecules and drug target molecules is critical for the prediction of effective drug combinations, many diseases—particularly intractable ones—lack known therapeutic target molecules. Moreover, as most known therapeutic target molecules are associated with first-line therapies, there is a need to identify alternative target molecules for the development of effective combination strategies. To address these challenges, SYNERGIE estimates therapeutic pathways and potential target molecules to facilitate the prediction of synergistic drug combinations.
To identify upstream therapeutic pathways regulating disease-specific expression changes, we first extracted differentially expressed gene (DEG)-enriched pathways (DEGPs) from disease transcriptome data using weighted gene co-expression network analysis (WGCNA) followed by subsequent pathway enrichment ( A). The DEGPs were mapped onto a directed pathway-pathway association network to model inter-pathway regulatory relationships. The upstream pathways predicted to exert strong regulatory control over downstream DEGPs and mediate therapeutic effects through drug-induced modulation (e.g., inhibition or activation) were defined as therapeutic pathways based on network topology (see ).
 To identify therapeutic target molecules for each disease, we performed the network controllability analysis for each therapeutic pathway. This analysis modeled how disease-specific perturbations propagate through molecular systems and exert control over biological signal flow using a protein-protein functional interaction (PPI) network. From this analysis, we then identified essential genes—indicated by dominating nodes capable of exerting dynamic control over the therapeutic pathways—and considered them as therapeutic target molecules ( B; see ).
Then, we conceptually redefined drug combination strategies into two different types of synergy paradigms based on the therapeutic target molecule relationships between drugs ( C): (1) “boost type,” in which the drugs regulate the same therapeutic target molecules to amplify therapeutic efficacy, and (2) “complement type,” in which the drugs regulate different therapeutic target molecules to enhance efficacy in a complementary manner. We distinctively predicted the associated drug combinations by integrating drug-disease and drug-drug interactions across multiomics layers of a PPI network using a Bayesian optimization framework, to reflect biological response flow (see ).
Finally, we achieved the comprehensive prediction of drug doublets and triplets for CRC. By building upon existing treatment regimens to ensure clinical feasibility, we constructed a triplet consisting of a first-line drug and a predicted drug doublet, and evaluated its therapeutic relevance using in vitro experiments and human-level validation from disease cohort data at both the bulk and single-cell level ( D).

## SYNERGIE reveals upstream therapeutic pathways that govern disease-specific gene expression programs across a range of diseases
Using SYNERGIE, we identified therapeutic pathways that regulate disease-specific DEGPs in 14 diseases by analyzing the pathway-pathway association network (see and ). The diseases studied were acute myeloid leukemia, breast cancer (BC), chronic myeloid leukemia (CML), CRC, melanoma, diffuse large B cell lymphoma (DLBCL), glioblastoma, multiple myeloma, non-small cell lung cancer, ovarian cancer, prostate cancer, renal cell carcinoma (RCC), T cell acute lymphoblastic leukemia, and type 2 diabetes mellitus. A presents the network modules containing both DEGPs and therapeutic pathways for CRC. The DEGPs included pathways such as “post-translational phosphorylation” and “MET signaling,” whereas the therapeutic pathways included “deubiquitination” and “PIP3-AKT signaling.” Using independent resources, we explored these therapeutic pathways. For example, the deubiquitination of lymphoid-specific helicase has been shown to suppress erastin-induced ferroptosis in CRC cells. Additionally, PIP3-AKT signaling is a promising therapeutic target as it is crucial for CRC cell proliferation and migration. Other pathways, such as Notch1 signaling, Toll-like signaling, and vitamin metabolism, are also strongly associated with CRC. , Together, these findings suggest that targeting the identified therapeutic pathways could offer a mechanism-based strategy for modulating CRC-specific gene expression programs.
 Next, we examined the regulatory relationships between therapeutic pathways and DEGPs based on their pathway categories in CRC ( B). Among therapeutic pathways, “Signal transduction” was found to regulate multiple DEGPs, including “programmed cell death.” Conversely, among DEGPs, pathways such as “DNA repair” and “cell-cell communication” were regulated by multiple therapeutic pathways. These findings suggest that targeting the identified therapeutic pathways could simultaneously modulate multiple DEGPs. Further details for CRC and other diseases are provided in the and . In additionally, the identified therapeutic pathways were validated by analyzing the network topology between the therapeutic pathways and DEGPs ( ).

## Network controllability-derived therapeutic target molecules reveal additional intervention opportunities across diseases
To uncover the therapeutic target molecules regulating each therapeutic pathway, we applied network controllability analysis using the PPI network ( ). For CRC, we examined the overlap among the estimated therapeutic target molecules, the known therapeutic target molecules, and causal genes ( C), and identified six proteins, including EGFR and KIT, that were present in all three categories. Ten proteins, including MTOR and MAPK1, were both estimated and known therapeutic target molecules, and 23 proteins, including SRC and SMAD3, were both estimated therapeutic target molecules and causal genes. Notably, SRC has been recently identified as a potential inhibitory target molecule for CRC. Estimated therapeutic target molecules that did not overlap with known therapeutic target molecules included EFNA5, PDE4D, and MAP2K1, which are potential inhibitory target molecules for CRC. , , EFNA5, identified as a putative therapeutic target molecule in the Axon guidance pathway ( D and 2E), may be an effective treatment for CRC by interacting with causal genes such as SRC. PDE4D, a candidate target molecule in the GPCR downstream pathway ( D and 2F), may support CRC treatment by interacting with proteins such as APP, which enhances proliferation via the phosphorylation of ERK pathway proteins. MAP2K1, an estimated target molecule of the MAPK1/MAPK3 signaling pathway ( D and 2G), may participate in CRC treatment through interactions with causal genes including EGFR, KIT, RAF1, and RET. Importantly, these estimated therapeutic target molecules were expressed at medium to high protein expression levels in the colon and rectum ( H–2J). These findings suggest that the estimated therapeutic target molecules encompass both established and previously unrecognized candidates for therapeutic intervention. We also validated the therapeutic potential of the estimated target molecules for CRC and other diseases by examining their functional roles within the PPI network ( and ).

## SYNERGIE achieves accurate prediction of mechanistically different drug synergies across diseases
We evaluated the predictive performance of SYNERGIE for two types of synergistic doublets across various diseases: (1) the boost type and (2) the complement type. To facilitate comparisons with previous methods that did not differentiate between these two synergy types, we also assessed the performance of SYNERGIE for (3) the “indistinct type,” which includes synergistic drug doublets combining both boost and complement types without distinction. We compared SYNERGIE with two baseline methods: the topology-based method and the opposite-direction method. SYNERGIE was tested in three variations: using causal genes (SYNERGIE-CG), known therapeutic target molecules (SYNERGIE-KT), and estimated therapeutic target molecules (SYNERGIE-ET). The performance was evaluated using gold standard data for 14 diseases (see ) and measured using three accuracy metrics: area under the receiver operating characteristic curve (AUC), area under the precision-recall curve (AUPR), and Boltzmann-enhanced discrimination of the AUC (BED AUC). 
We first evaluated the performance of boost-type doublets across 14 diseases. No significant differences were observed among the three variations of SYNERGIE ( A). For BED AUC, SYNERGIE-ET was the most accurate for CRC and BC ( B). Although SYNERGIE-KT was not applicable to DLBCL owing to the lack of known therapeutic target molecules, SYNERGIE-ET still exhibited higher accuracy. These findings suggest that SYNERGIE-ET is effective for predicting boost-type doublets and remains applicable to diseases without known therapeutic target molecules.
 Next, we evaluated the performance of complement-type doublets across 14 diseases. SYNERGIE-ET was particularly effective for CRC, RCC, and DLBCL, where known therapeutic target molecules were unavailable ( D). These findings indicate that SYNERGIE is highly effective for the prediction of complement-type doublets.
Finally, we compared the performance of indistinct-type doublets across 14 diseases between the proposed and baseline methods. SYNERGIE-ET outperformed the topology-based method (p∗ <1.2 × 10−4) and the opposite-direction method (p∗ <5.3 × 10−3), where p∗ indicates the adjusted p-value ( E). Additionally, SYNERGIE-KT and SYNERGIE-CG outperformed the topology-based method (SYNERGIE-KT: p∗ <9.6 × 10−3; SYNERGIE-CG: p∗ <2.4 × 10−4) as well as the opposite-direction method (SYNERGIE-KT: p∗ <1.2 × 10−4; SYNERGIE-CG: p∗ <3.4 × 10−3). For AUPR and BED AUC, SYNERGIE-ET achieved the highest performance for CRC, BC, and DLBCL, even in the absence of known therapeutic target molecules ( F). These results demonstrate that SYNERGIE can robustly predict synergistic drug combinations, even when synergy types are not explicitly distinguished and known therapeutic targets are unavailable.

## SYNERGIE identifies clinically relevant drug combinations across a range of diseases
We systematically predicted drug combinations of three mechanistic synergy types across 14 diseases. Using SYNERGIE-ET, we explored 500,500 possible drug pairs involving 1001 orally administered drugs ( , , and ).
For CRC, we focused on predicted complement-type drug combinations and cross-referenced clinical trial data from ClinicalTrials.gov ( A; A). All of the predicted drugs except chlorotrianisene, ponatinib, and lucitanib have been tested for therapeutic or preventive effects against CRC in clinical trials ( B and S3C). Aspirin (Asp) has undergone multiple phase 1–3 clinical trials for its preventive effects in patients with CRC. Similarly, ibrutinib (Ibru), in combination with pembrolizumab, was tested in phase 1/2 clinical trials for metastatic CRC, showing limited antineoplastic effects but good tolerability. 
 We further validated the predicted drug combinations using independent resources not included in the learning process. For example, Asp use before the age of 70 years has been shown to reduce the risk of CRC. Sodium phenylbutyrate (PB) exhibits antitumor effects on CRC, with enhanced cytotoxicity when combined with 5-fluorouracil and irinotecan. Additionally, drugs such as pimasertib, saracatinib, ponatinib, tanespimycin, and cediranib have demonstrated therapeutic effects against CRC. , , , , Further details on CRC and other diseases are provided in the and . Overall, these results demonstrate SYNERGIE’s ability to uncover clinically plausible and mechanistically diverse drug combinations for a range of diseases, and provide validation using independent sources.

## The Ibru-Asp doublet predicted by SYNERGIE synergizes with first-line CRC therapy and demonstrates clinical potential in in vitro validation
To validate the complement-type drug combinations predicted by SYNERGIE, we conducted in vitro cell survival assays using HT29 human CRC cells, focusing on 14 out of the 18 predicted pairs ( ). Combinations involving chlorotrianisene were excluded from validation as the drug is now discontinued. HT29 cells were treated with these drug combinations for 72 h, and cell survival was measured using the water-soluble tetrazolium (WST) assay.
The survival ratios of singlets versus doublets predicted for CRC were compared. B–4I and 4J–4O present the survival ratios for the Asp-containing and PB-containing combinations, respectively. Asp alone slightly reduced the survival ratio, but its combination with Ibru, tacedinaline, or vandetanib further enhanced this reduction ( B–4I). Conversely, neither PB alone nor PB-containing combinations significantly affected survival ratios ( J–4O), potentially because HT29 cell were used, as PB is known to exhibit antitumor effects in CRC. These findings suggest that Asp-containing complement-type combinations are promising for CRC treatment.
We then evaluated the significance of synergistic effects of the 14 drug combinations using the independent action (IA) model, an indicator of drug synergy ( D). Drug pairs with an IA score greater than 0 were considered synergistic. Among the combinations, Asp with Ibru, dasatinib, or vandetanib were clearly synergistic ( P). Although Asp is recognized for its preventive effects against CRC, no evidence supports its effectiveness as a single-drug treatment. These results suggest that Asp, a non-antineoplastic drug, enhances the antitumor effects of antineoplastic drugs in multidrug therapies.
We also assessed the synergistic effects of combining Asp with Oxa, a first-line CRC drug ( Q). At doses lower than its IC50, synergistic effects were observed when Oxa was combined with 1 mM Asp. This indicates that Asp can potentiate the efficacy of low concentrations of Oxa, affording a potential reduction in Oxa-related side effects while enhancing its effectiveness against difficult-to-treat tumors.
Finally, we evaluated the triplet combination of Oxa with the Ibru-Asp doublet predicted for CRC ( R). Synergy was observed for all doublets involving these three drugs, and the triplet combination further reduced CRC cell survival ratios compared to the doublets, indicating strong synergistic effects ( ). These findings suggest that the Oxa-Ibru-Asp triplet exhibits significant synergistic potential against CRC and holds considerable clinical promise, with the non-antineoplastic agent Asp enhancing the efficacy of standard therapies in specific combinations.

## Mechanistic analysis reveals complementary and partial boost-like synergy of the Oxa-Ibru-Asp triplet in drug-disease and drug-drug contexts
We explored the synergistic mechanisms of the Oxa-Ibru-Asp triplet, validated using in vitro experiments, by analyzing the gene expression patterns in CRC and following induction of the triplet. Transcriptome data at 24 h and 9 months post-Oxa induction in HT29 cells were obtained from the Gene Expression Omnibus (GEO) database (see ).
First, we examined the drug-disease associations between each drug in the triplet and CRC by comparing the gene expression patterns ( A–5C). For Ibru ( A), MYC, CDC25A, and IER3, which are highly expressed in CRC, were downregulated in response to Ibru. MYC, overexpressed 7-fold in CRC owing to mutations in APC and β-catenin, as well as the activation of growth factors, signaling pathways, hormones, and inflammation, regulates 215 metabolic responses. 
CDC25A, involved in the G2/M transition of the cell cycle, is linked to the poor prognosis of CRC. 
IER3 plays a critical role in stress responses in colon epithelial cells. For Asp ( B), CDC45 and CCNB1, which are both upregulated in CRC, were downregulated in Asp. CDC45, a target molecule of the KNK437 protein, suppresses CRC growth and metastasis when regulated. 
CCNB1, which is overexpressed via Chk1 activation in CRC, promotes tumor cell growth. For Oxa ( C), CCNB1 and CDKN2A, which are upregulated in CRC, were downregulated by Oxa. CDKN2A, which is significantly overexpressed in CRC, is associated with poor prognosis. These findings suggest that Ibru, Asp, and Oxa exert therapeutic effects by inversely regulating key genes involved in CRC progression and prognosis.
 We then analyzed drug-drug associations by comparing gene expression patterns between drugs in the triplet ( D–5F). There were minimal or no significant correlations for all doublets involving the triplet (Ibru-Asp: cor = 0.093, p = 3.5 × 10−4; Ibru-Oxa: cor = −0.026, p = 0.42; Asp-Oxa: cor = 0.014, p = 0.66). These low correlation coefficients suggest that the drugs act through different pathways, which is consistent with a complement-type mechanism. With Ibru and Asp ( D), ERBB3 was upregulated by Ibru but downregulated by Asp. Although ERBB3 is a therapeutic target molecule in metastatic CRC, its upregulation by Ibru may be mitigated by Asp. With Ibru and Oxa ( E), Ibru downregulated MYC and CCND1, both critical CRC targets, whereas Oxa had little effect. CCND1 is associated with the G1/S phase transition of cell cycle, and its upregulation is a marker of poor prognosis in CRC. For Asp and Oxa ( F), CAPN1, which is slightly downregulated by Oxa but upregulated by Asp, participates in apoptotic signaling and platinum resistance. Using transcriptome data from 9-month post-Oxa treatment, we confirmed that Asp could alleviate CAPN1 downregulation and potentially address platinum resistance ( and ). CDKN2A and CCNB1, critical CRC target molecules, were downregulated by both Oxa and Asp. Together, these results show that all doublets involving the triplet achieve mechanistic synergy via the complementary regulation of CRC-related genes, with partial boost-like interactions, supporting their potential as a multi-target therapeutic strategy. We also confirmed the synergistic effects of the triplet in relation to transporters, mutations, and causal genes ( ).

## The Oxa-Ibru-Asp triplet broadly and coordinately regulates key pathways for CRC treatment beyond the reach of single-drug therapies
To elucidate the biological relevance of the triplet, we evaluated the associations between CRC and the triplet by comparing CRC-associated DEGs with drug-induced DEGs ( G and 5H). In terms of drug-disease associations, there was very little overlap of upregulated and downregulated DEGs between CRC and Ibru, or between CRC and Asp, suggesting that neither Ibru nor Asp exacerbates CRC. In terms of drug-drug associations, the minimal overlap between Ibru and Asp suggests that these drugs can complement each other. Furthermore, the small overlaps between Ibru and Oxa and between Asp and Oxa indicate that the triplet can exhibit boost-like effects in certain processes. In addition, we also confirmed that several DEGs were inversely expressed between CRC and each drug ( ); these results suggest that the Oxa-Ibru-Asp triplet can counteract CRC in a complementary manner.
We conducted pathway enrichment analyses of the DEGs of each drug to elucidate the mechanisms of action of the triplet ( I and 5J; ). In the pathway analyses of upregulated DEGs, we focused on pathways that were not enriched by single drugs but instead on those that were enriched by the doublets or the triplet ( I). “Calcium reabsorption” and “vascular smooth muscle contraction” were not enriched by single drugs but were enriched by the triplet. For “calcium reabsorption,” the expression status of calcium-sensing receptors reduces the risk of CRC. The calcium signaling pathway is a downstream process of BCR signaling, which is a target of Ibru, suggesting that Ibru regulates the upstream pathway, whereas the triplet regulates the downstream pathway ( K). Additionally, “vascular smooth muscle contraction” has been associated with CRC treatment. These results suggest that these pathways may contribute to the mechanism of the synergistic effects of the triplet.
Next, we focused on pathways enriched in an Ibru- or Asp-specific manner in terms of the upregulated DEGs ( I). Ibru-specific enriched pathways included “inositol phosphate metabolism,” and “PPAR signaling,” both of which are associated with the oncogenic processes of CRC. , The Asp-specific enriched pathways included “ECM-receptor interaction,” and “valine, leucine and isoleucine,” which are also associated with the oncogenic processes of CRC. , These findings indicate that coordination between single-drug-specific and combination-specific pathways contributes to synergistic efficacy.
In the pathway analyses of downregulated DEGs, we focused on pathways that were not enriched by single drugs but rather instead by the doublets or triplet ( J). “ErbB signaling” and “MAPK signaling” were enriched specifically for the Ibru–Asp doublet, both of which are crucial in CRC treatment, indicating their potential contribution to the synergistic effects. “Apoptosis,” “AMPK signaling,” and “pentose phosphate pathway (PPP)” were not enriched by either single drugs or the doublet but were enriched in the Oxa-Ibru-Asp triplet. Regarding “AMPK signaling,” inhibiting AMPK suppresses tumor growth and development by suppressing most anabolic processes ; AMPK also inhibits PIP3K/Akt/mTOR, a key target for CRC therapy, reducing protein synthesis. The PIP3K/Akt/mTOR signaling pathway was specifically enriched by Oxa ( I and 5J), indicating that the triplet regulates the upstream AMPK signaling, whereas Oxa regulates the downstream PIP3K/Akt/mTOR signaling ( K). Regarding “PPP,” its activation in CRC promotes the production of ribose 5-phosphate (R5P), which facilitates nucleotide synthesis. Metabolic pathways relating to “nucleotide,” “purine,” and “pyrimidine” were specifically enriched by Asp; DNA is a target of Oxa, and protein synthesis via mTOR is regulated by Oxa. Thus, the synthesis of purines, pyrimidines, and deoxyribonucleotides is regulated by Asp, ribonucleotide synthesis is regulated by the triplet, and DNA and protein synthesis are regulated by Oxa. This combination regulates the DNA replication and RNA synthesis pathways ( L). Consequently, results suggest that these pathways may contribute to the synergistic effects of the Oxa-Ibru-Asp triplet.
In addition, we analyzed pathways enriched in Ibru- or Asp-specific manners relating to the downregulated DEGs ( J). The Ibru-specific enriched pathways included “apelin signaling,” and “spliceosome,” both of which are involved in CRC growth and progression. , These results suggest that the coordination of singlet-specific, doublet-specific, and triplet-specific pathways enhances therapeutic efficacy.
Finally, we examined whether the enriched pathways were related to five processes critical for CRC treatment ( M and 5N): (1) the WNT system, (2) the RAS system, (3) the mTOR system, (4) the TGFβ system, and (5) the p53 system. For the upregulated DEGs, these critical pathways were more frequently enriched by the triplet than by the single drugs ( M). For downregulated DEGs, these important pathways were most frequently enriched by the triplet, followed by the Ibru-Asp doublet, and then by the single drugs ( N). We also examined the distribution of the key enriched pathways ( O and 5P). Among upregulated DEGs, “PI3K-Akt signaling” and “cell cycle” were most significantly enriched by the triplet ( O). Among the downregulated DEGs, “MAPK signaling” and “ErbB signaling” were not enriched by the single drugs but were enriched by the Ibru-Asp doublet ( P). Additionally, “apoptosis” was not enriched by the single drugs or the doublet but was enriched by the triplet, whereas “cell cycle” and “p53 signaling” were most significantly enriched by the triplet. Collectively, these results demonstrate that the Oxa-Ibru-Asp triplet orchestrates the complementary regulation of essential CRC pathways, including apoptosis, cell cycle, MAPK, and p53 signaling, beyond what can be achieved with single agents or doublets.

## The Ibru-Asp doublet exerts synergistic effects in CRC patient cohorts at both bulk and single-cell levels
To evaluate the clinical relevance of the Ibru-Asp doublet, we validated its effects using large cohorts of patients with CRC. The CRC cohorts included The Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA) COAD dataset (244 patients), which was used for predictions, and GEO datasets (GSE3958268: 557 patients; GSE14333: 290 patients) that were not part of the training process. Because the primary target of Oxa is DNA, this validation focused specifically on the Ibru-Asp doublet.
We compared the survival ratios of patients with upregulated and downregulated expression of the target molecules ( A–6L). We focused on PTGS1 (COX-1) and PTGS2 (COX-2), which are target molecules of Asp, and BTK, which is a target molecule of Ibru. Patients in whom PTGS1 or PTGS2 are downregulation have minimal differences in survival ratios compared with patients with upregulated PTGS1 or PTGS2 ( A–6F), suggesting that Asp alone has limited therapeutic effects in CRC. Similarly, patients with downregulated BTK had slightly higher survival ratios than those with upregulated BTK ( G and 6K), indicating that Ibru alone also provides limited therapeutic effects for CRC. Notably, patients with the simultaneous downregulation of PTGS1, PTGS2, and BTK had higher survival ratios compared with patients with upregulated expression of these target molecules ( J–6L). These findings suggest that the Ibru-Asp doublet may exert synergistic effects in CRC treatment.
 We further investigated the cell type-specific synergistic effects of the Ibru-Asp doublet using single-cell transcriptome data from patients with CRC (371,223 cells; mismatch repair proficient [MMRp], 28 samples; mismatch repair deficient [MMRd], 34 samples). In both MMRp and MMRd samples, the proportions of B cells, epithelial cells, and plasma cells decreased, whereas the proportions of T/NK/ILC and myeloid cells increased ( M). Next, we analyzed the expression patterns of target molecules for Ibru and Asp ( N). PTGS1, PTGS2, and BTK were upregulated in mast cells, indicating that mast cells are regulated by the Ibru-Asp doublet. PTGS2 was also upregulated in myeloid cells. Furthermore, off-target molecules of Ibru, such as ERBB2, IKBKB, and MAPK3, were upregulated in epithelial and stromal cells. Together, these results indicate that Ibru and Asp act through both complementary and partial boost-like mechanisms by targeting distinct and common CRC-associated cell types. Further details are provided in .

## Discussion
This study introduces a paradigm in drug combination prediction by categorizing and mechanistically modeling synergy into two distinct types—“boost” and “complement”. To implement this concept, we developed SYNERGIE, a computational method for predicting such synergy-aware drug combinations across a wide range of diseases, including intractable and multifactorial conditions. The SYNERGIE method integrates drug-disease and drug-drug interactions across multiple omics layers using a Bayesian optimization framework over a PPI network. By combining this with network controllability analysis to estimate disease-specific therapeutic pathways and target molecules, SYNERGIE effectively identified disease-context-specific synergistic combinations, even for diseases lacking known targets. Furthermore, SYNERGIE can expand beyond doublet synergies to triplet synergies by integrating predicted doublets with first-line drugs for a given disease, enhancing its clinical relevance.
Drug synergism can be categorized into boost-type and complement-type. In the treatment of cancers, boost-type combinations—consisting predominantly of antineoplastic drugs—are commonly used, partly owing to their established clinical use and well-characterized mechanisms. These combinations often leverage independent mechanisms while exerting convergent synergistic effects on cancer cells, enhancing therapeutic outcomes, inhibiting proliferation, and reducing drug resistance. However, these combinations also pose significant clinical challenges that may lead to treatment discontinuation, including increased cumulative toxicity and unexpected drug-drug interactions. These limitations underscore the need to explore alternative synergy paradigms that offer efficacy without compromising safety.
Conversely, complement-type drug combinations for cancers can achieve strong therapeutic effects with minimal doses of antineoplastic drugs that are enhanced through complementary interactions with non-antineoplastic drugs. These combinations are particularly beneficial for elderly patients and patients with pre-existing conditions who are more likely to experience adverse effects and require higher safety standards. Thus, complement-type combinations are anticipated to improve patient quality of life by balancing safety and therapeutic effects. Additionally, this approach may enable the reevaluation of antineoplastic drugs that are currently considered insufficiently effective or are restricted in usage, thereby expanding treatment options. Despite their potential, however, complement-type combinations have been historically overlooked owing to their mechanistic complexity and unpredictable efficacy. By distinguishing these synergy modes computationally, SYNERGIE reveals latent therapeutic opportunities that might otherwise be missed in conventional screens, thereby broadening the landscape of combination therapy.
Most previous computational methods for drug combination prediction do not differentiate between types of synergism, although SYNERGIE can distinguish between them. We validated our SYNERGIE-based predictions of complement-type drug combinations for CRC using in vitro experiments and human cohort data ( ) to demonstrate the synergistic effects of certain drug combinations. Notably, synergy was observed when combining the predicted drug pair with Oxa, a standard first-line treatment for CRC. This result emphasizes the practical utility of SYNERGIE: it does not aim to replace established treatments, but rather to enhance them through the addition of rationally selected complementary agents. This complementarity improves clinical feasibility by building upon existing therapeutic frameworks, which may facilitate exploratory use in clinical settings compared to entirely new regimens. Therefore, SYNERGIE represents a promising tool that clinicians can use to identify clinically actionable drug combinations that balance innovation with translational plausibility.
In the future, the stratified synergy strategies may reshape the landscape of combination therapy. Boost-type combinations are expected to remain the mainstay therapy owing to their broad applicability, but the risk of increased side effects may pose significant challenges for boost-type combinations, potentially hindering the feasibility of clinical trials. In contrast, complement-type combinations offer a promising avenue for patient-tailored therapies, particularly where safety and tolerability are critical. Complement-type combinations, with a lower risk of side effects, are less challenging to evaluate in clinical settings. Our findings suggest that the generation of complement-type synergies by incorporating non-antineoplastic drugs can broaden the therapeutic arsenal for intractable disease conditions and thus redefine combination therapy beyond conventional cytotoxic strategies.

## Limitations of the study
In this study, we defined complement-type synergy as a drug combination that enhances therapeutic efficacy by regulating distinct target molecules in a complementary manner. We therefore evaluated synergistic effects using Bliss’s IA model, which assumes independence between the mechanisms of action of the two drugs. It should be noted, however, that the IA model is not specifically designed to quantify complement-type synergy, and the development of synergy metrics tailored for such mechanisms would likely allow more accurate assessment in future studies.
Although many methods have been proposed for quantifying synergy in doublets, , , , , triplet synergy remains difficult to evaluate because there are few established synergistic metrics available. We therefore applied the IA model for triplets because it provides simple calculation and clear interpretation, which is suitable under data-limited conditions. IA scores were computed from survival ratios obtained from single-drug and double-drug treatments, following the same procedure used for doublets (see ). Since only oxaliplatin concentrations were varied in the triplet experiments, the CA model was not applied. We expect that future development of dedicated triplet synergy metrics will enable more precise evaluation.
In this study, we performed survival analysis primarily to evaluate the validity of the predicted doublet and triplet drug combinations. To do so, we included only those patient samples (donors) whose expression directions for all target genes within a given doublet or triplet were consistently aligned. This filtering step substantially reduced the number of eligible samples. To ensure robustness despite the small sample size, we performed survival analyses across three independent cohorts. As larger cohorts become available in the future, more accurate and statistically robust validation will be possible.

## Resource availability

## Lead contact
Further information and requests for resources and reagents should be directed to and will be fulfilled by the lead contact, Yoshihiro Yamanishi (yamanishi@i.nagoya-u.ac.jp).

## Materials availability
This study did not generate new unique reagents.

## Data and code availability

•All datasets analyzed in this study were obtained from publicly available repositories. Accession numbers and URLs are listed in the .
•The source code for SYNERGIE is publicly available at GitHub repository [https://github.com/YamanishiLab/SYNERGIE].
•Any additional information required to reanalyze the data reported in this paper is available from the upon request.

## Acknowledgments
This work was supported by Grant-in-Aid for JSPS fellows (22KJ2494, and 25KJ0159, S.N.). This study was also supported by JSPS KAKENHI (grant nos. 20H05797, 21H04915, 21K18327, and 24K21338, Y.Y.). This work was also supported by the JSPS, KAKENHI Grant-in-Aid for Transformative Research Areas (B) (20H05799, M. G.). This study was also supported by the Naito Foundation, an Intramural Research Grant, Grant-in-Aid for JSPS Fellows Restart Postdoctoral Fellow (RPD) (22J40019, M.I.), and Grant-in-Aid for Scientific Research (C) (22K12265, M.I.). Graphical abstract, , K, and 5L were created with BioRender.com under a publication license.

## Author contributions
S.N. and Y.Y. designed and supervised the study. S.N. carried out the methodological development and analyzed the data. M.G. and Y.K. carried out the experimental validation. S.N. and M.G. prepared the manuscript’s first draft and figures. M.I. and J.T. carried out the data preparation and provided and the methodological advice. K.I. and Y.Y. provided constructive suggestions for results and discussion in manuscript completion. All authors read and approved the final version of the manuscript.

## Declaration of interests
The authors declare no competing interests.

## STAR★Methods

## Key resources table

 

## Experimental model and study participant details

## Cell line and culture conditions
The HT-29 cell line was purchased directly from the American Type Culture Collection (ATCC) in 2021. The cells were authenticated by the supplier using STR profiling before shipment. Upon receipt, the cells were expanded and used at low passage numbers (less than ten passages after receipt) to maintain their original characteristics. The cells were tested for mycoplasma contamination using PCR-based detection and were confirmed to be negative throughout the experimental period.
The human colorectal cancer cell line HT-29 (HTB-38; ATCC) was used for in vitro validation experiments. Cells were maintained in Dulbecco’s Modified Eagle Medium (DMEM) with high glucose (4.5 g/L; NACALAI TESQUE, INC., Japan), supplemented with 10% fetal bovine serum (FBS; Funakoshi Co., Ltd., Japan). Cultures were incubated at 37°C in a humidified atmosphere with 5% CO2. Passages between 5 and 15 were used for all experiments.
No animals or human subjects were used in this study.

## Method details

## Disease- and patient-specific transcriptome data
In this study, we selected 14 diseases for which known drug combination data were available in DrugCombDB and corresponding drug-induced gene expression profiles were available in LINCS database. We obtained transcriptome data for patients with 14 diseases from TCGA or GEO ( ). The diseases were acute myeloid leukemia, breast cancer (BC), chronic myeloid leukemia (CML), CRC, melanoma, diffuse large B-cell lymphoma (DLBCL), glioblastoma, multiple myeloma, non-small cell lung cancer, ovarian cancer, prostate cancer, renal cell carcinoma (RCC), T cell acute lymphoblastic leukemia, and type 2 diabetes mellitus. For TCGA, cohort data were downloaded from UCSC Xena Platform using UCSCXenaTools R package, including transcriptomic, clinical, and survival data. Donors were selected based on primary tissue site and histological type from the clinical annotations (see ). Normal tissue gene expression data from Genotype-Tissue Expression (GTEx) project were also obtained via UCSCXenaTools, with donors selected based on primary tissue site (see ).
Then, we constructed patient-specific and disease-specific gene expression signatures. Differential expression analysis was performed using limma R package, which are referred to as “patient-specific gene expression signatures.” The patient-specific signatures were then averaged for each disease to generate “disease-specific gene expression signatures.”

## Drug-induced transcriptome data
Gene expression profiles after chemical treatments were obtained from LINCS. We selected cell lines corresponding to each disease (see ) where available; otherwise, we averaged the gene expression profiles of all cell lines. In total, 1001 approved and orally administered drugs were selected. We imputed missing values using a tensor decomposition algorithm. The tensor decomposition method was performed according to the default settings described in the reference paper. Specifically, we used the tensor-train weighted optimization (TT-WOPT) algorithm with TT-ranks set to {1, 30, 30, 30, 1}.

## Drug–protein interaction data
Interactions between small compounds and their target proteins were collected from seven public databases (ChEMBL, MATADOR, Drug Bank, Psychoactive Drug Screening Program Ki, KEGG DRUG, BindingDB, and Therapeutic Target Database ): we extracted 35,366 known compound–protein interactions involving 4956 compounds and 3062 target proteins. Additionally, from a computationally predicted chemical–protein interactome dataset, we extracted 182,021 estimated compound–protein interactions involving 7468 compounds and 4001 target proteins. 

## Drug combination data
Drug combinations for the 14 diseases were obtained from DrugCombDB, a database in which drug combinations are based on high-throughput screening, manual curation, and the FDA Orange Book. Drug combinations were classified into three interaction types based on the overlap of their target molecules. Specifically, for each disease, all known drug combinations were initially regarded as indistinct type. Among them, if two drugs share at least one common target molecule, the combination was labeled as boost type, whereas if the two drugs have no common target molecules, the combination was labeled as complement type. Drugs for which drug-induced gene expression signatures were available were selected. summarizes the number of known drug combinations for each disease.

## Protein–protein functional interaction (PPI) undirected and directed networks
We constructed PPI undirected and directed networks. We combined different types of functional associations between proteins into a single one (yeast-two-hybrid high-throughput datasets, protein complexes, kinase–substrate pairs, metabolic enzyme-coupled interactions, signaling interactions, innate immune response interactions, and 3D structurally resolved protein-protein interactions ). These PPIs yielded 219,192 interactions among 12,648 proteins. For the PPI-directed network, we obtained a directed graph using the KEGGgraph R package. From this graph, 63,409 interactions between 6354 proteins were identified.

## Pathway–pathway association network
A pathway–pathway association network was constructed by converting protein-level directed networks (PPI-directed network) to pathway-level directed networks accounting for the biological response flow. We used a general approach for measuring group-level centralities by averaging or summing the individual centralities of group members. 
First, the edge betweenness centrality was calculated for all edges in the PPI-directed network. We then annotated the KEGG and Reactome pathways for each node (protein), where the only third layer Reactome pathways in the pathway hierarchy were used to remove global pathways with many genes and small pathways with a few genes. The edge betweenness centrality of each protein pair was then summed for each pathway pair; this was defined as “edge weight” for each pathway pair. For the same pathway pair (e.g., pathway A–pathway A), the sum of the edge betweenness centralities in the pathway was defined as the “edge weight.” These operations revealed 52,246 interactions between 431 pathways.

## Estimation of therapeutic pathways from differentially expressed gene (DEG)-enriched pathways (DEGPs)
We defined therapeutic pathways as those that regulate DEGPs and exert therapeutic effects through drug regulation (e.g., inhibition or activation) for each disease. Pathways upstream of multiple DEGPs are assumed to be promising therapeutic pathways. Therefore, we estimated controllable therapeutic pathways based on the topology of the pathway–pathway association network ( A).
First, a weighted gene co-expression network analysis (WGCNA), which is used to identify co-expression network modules, was performed for each disease using the patient-specific gene expression signatures. For each identified disease module, pathway enrichment analyses were then performed, and significant DEGPs were used in subsequent procedures.
Therapeutic pathways were then estimated for each DEGP based on the network topology of the pathway–pathway association network. Let be a pathway–pathway association directed network with node (pathway) set . The adjacency matrix of is the matrix , and its entry is denoted as follows:
(Equation 1)ekl=e(Vk,Vl)={1,ifVk∼Vl0,otherwise.Let the DEGP subset be . We estimated a pathway with the largest weight of the input edge to the -th DEGP as a therapeutic pathway as follows:
(Equation 2)VkTarget∶=argmaxVk∈Ve(Vk,VlDEGP).As the pathway–pathway association network contains self-loops, DEGPs themselves can be their therapeutic pathways. Finally, these operations yielded a therapeutic pathway subset .

## Therapeutic target molecule estimation based on the network topology
Essential nodes for controlling network systems (i.e., dominating nodes) can be identified from a network controllability analysis based on network topology. , The minimum dominating set (MDS)-based controllability analysis , is a popular approach to estimate the MDS, the smallest set of dominating nodes, where nondominating nodes must be controlled by at least one dominating node adjacent to nondominating nodes. Therapeutic target molecules for each disease were assumed to correspond to the dominating nodes (proteins) for controlling therapeutic pathways in the PPI network. Here, the problem of estimating therapeutic target molecules is formulated in the framework of network controllability analysis based on MDS ( B).
Let be a PPI undirected network, and let be a PPI undirected network of the -th therapeutic pathway ( ) with node (protein) set . The adjacency matrix of the -th network, , is the matrix , and its entry is denoted as follows:
(Equation 3)hij=h(vi,vj)={1,ifvi∼vj0,otherwise.Here, we solve the problem of estimating MDSs as a binary integer programming problem. Each node is assigned a binary integer variable representing a dominant node. Let be the class label of the dominating set assigned to the -th node, where means that the -th node belongs to the dominating set, and means that the -th node does not belong to the dominating set. To compute the MDS of the -th therapeutic pathway, we consider the minimization of the following linear function:
(Equation 4)Minimize∑i=1qλi(Equation 5)subjecttoλi+∑j=1qhijλj≥1(Equation 6)λi∈{0,1}.The estimated dominating nodes were defined as therapeutic target molecule candidates. To prioritize the therapeutic target molecule candidates, we filtered them based on their reachability to the DEGP corresponding to the -th therapeutic pathway. Finally, these operations yielded the therapeutic target molecules, ( ) for the -th therapeutic pathway. shows the number of estimated target molecules for each disease.

## Prediction of different types of synergistic drug combinations considering target commonality, DEG inversion, and random walk (SYNERGIE-ET)
The treatment of a disease requires the consideration of drug-response pathways, which involve upstream drug–target interactions and downstream changes in gene expression. This is of particular importance for diseases with complex pathologies, in which therapeutic target molecules are often broadly distributed across PPI networks, necessitating comprehensive evaluation. To predict synergistic drug combinations, we considered five types of interactions encompassing both drug–disease and drug–drug interactions at the multiomics levels.

## (I) Drug–disease target commonality score (target commonality)
Complex diseases can be treated by simultaneously regulating multiple therapeutic target molecules. Consequently, drug pairs that regulate many therapeutic target molecules are assumed to exhibit synergy.
Let be an index set of therapeutic pathways for a disease and a set of disease therapeutic target molecules for the -th therapeutic pathway ( ). Additionally, let and represent a set of target molecules for drugs A and B, respectively. To quantify the commonality of disease therapeutic target molecules for a drug pair, the similarity between the set of disease therapeutic target molecules ( ) and the sets of drug target molecules ( or ) is computed for each therapeutic pathway. To adjust for the number of drug target molecules, the Kendall tau rank correlation coefficient was used to calculate the commonality of the -th therapeutic pathway as follows:
(Equation 7)slTargetcommon(ATarget,BTarget,ClTarget)∶=Kendall(ATarget,ClTarget)+Kendall(BTarget,ClTarget)2,where represents the Kendall tau rank correlation coefficient between the set of drug A target molecules and the set of disease therapeutic target molecules on the -th therapeutic pathway. Similarly, denotes the Kendall tau rank correlation coefficient between the set of drug B target molecules and the set of disease therapeutic target molecules . Finally, we measured drug–disease commonalities at the protein level by calculating the overall “drug–disease target commonality score,” combining the Kendall tau rank correlation coefficients across all therapeutic pathways, as follows:
(Equation 8)sTargetcommon(ATarget,BTarget,CTarget)=∑l∈LslTargetcommonrTarget,where represents the total number of therapeutic pathways.

## (II) Drug–disease DEG inversion score (DEG inversion)
In diseased states, gene expression systems are disrupted. However, normal states can be restored if disease-specific gene expression patterns are counteracted by drug-induced gene expression patterns. Therefore, drug pairs that reverse a substantial number of disease-related DEGs may be able to exert synergistic effects.
Let the disease-specific gene expression signature be , the drug-A gene expression signature be , and the drug-B gene expression signature be in the -th therapeutic pathway ( ). Drug–disease inversions for the -th therapeutic pathway at the transcriptomic level are quantified as the “drug–disease DEG inversion score,” based on the number of DEGs that show an inverse direction between the disease and drug A or drug B. The score is zdefined as
(Equation 9)slDEGinvers(xlA,xlB,zl)∶=12(∑iqwixiA′∑iqwi+∑iqwixiB′∑iqwi)withxiA′={1ifxiA·zi<00otherwise}andxiB′={1ifxiB·zi<00otherwise}.In this formulation, represents the weight for the -th DEG, which is computed based on the shortest distance from the disease therapeutic target molecules on the PPI undirected network ( ) to the disease DEGs as follows:
(Equation 10)wi=maxcj∈ClTargetexp(−d(ciDEG,cjTarget)),where is the shortest path distance. The overall drug–disease DEG inversion score for drugs A and B is computed by combining the scores across all pathways as follows:
(Equation 11)sDEGinvers(xA,xB,z)=∑l∈LslDEGinversrTarget,where represents the total number of therapeutic pathways.

## (III) Drug–drug target random walk score (target random walk score)
Interactions between target molecules of drugs are a crucial determinant of synergistic effects. Here, these interactions are quantified using the random walk with restart (RWR) algorithm, which models the propagation of biological responses to drugs across a PPI network. The drug–drug target random walk scores are calculated as follows:
(Equation 12)sTargetrandom=1|ATarget|+|BTarget|∑a∈ATarget,b∈BTargetmax(rwr(aTarget,bTarget),rwr(bTarget,aTarget)),where represents the set of drug A target molecules, represents the set of drug B target molecules, and are the number of target molecules for drugs A and B, respectively. The terms and represent the RWR scores from a target molecule of drug A to a target molecule of drug B , and vice versa. RWR computations were performed using the Python pyrwr package [https://github.com/jinhongjung/pyrwr].

## (IV) Drug–drug DEG random walk score (DEG random walk score)
Interactions between the DEGs induced by drugs are another key factor influencing synergistic effects. Here, these interactions are quantified using the RWR algorithm, which models the propagation of biological responses to drugs across the PPI network. The drug–drug DEG random walk scores are calculated as follows:
(Equation 13)sDEGrandom=1|ADEG|+|BDEG|∑a∈ADEG,b∈BDEGmax(rwr(aDEG,bDEG),rwr(bDEG,aDEG)),where represents the set of DEGs for drug A, and represents the set of DEGs for drug B. The terms and represent the number of DEGs for drugs A and B, respectively. The RWR scores, and , capture the interaction strength from a DEG of drug A to a DEG of drug B and vice versa.

## (V) Synergy type-specific score (STS score)
1.Boost type. Boost-type synergy occurs when two drugs have common target molecules. Therefore, drug pairs with overlapping target molecules are considered to exhibit boost-type synergy. The STS score was calculated based on the overlap of target molecules between drugs as follows:
(Equation 14)sSTS=1−exp(−α|ATarget∩BTarget|),where denotes the number of shared target molecules between drugs A and B, and is a hyperparameter (default: ).
2.Complement type. Complement-type synergy occurs when two drugs regulate different target molecules in a complementary manner. Thus, drug pairs with a minimal number of common target molecules are assumed to exhibit complement-type synergy. The STS score is calculated as
(Equation 15)sSTS=exp(−α|ATarget∩BTarget|),where indicates the number of shared target molecules between drugs A and B, and is a hyperparameter (default: ).
3.Indistinct type. For this type, we merge the boost and complement synergy types. Drug pairs with or without shared target molecules are considered to exhibit synergistic effects. The STS score is calculated as follows:
(Equation 16)sSTS=0.Unless otherwise noted, the calculations related to the networks were performed using the Python NetworkX package. 

## Integration of drug combination scores using bayesian optimization
We combine the target commonality score, DEG inversion score, target random walk score, DEG random walk score, and STS score for each disease; this integration is possible using Bayesian optimization to identify the most optimal drug combinations.
Assume there are diseases and candidate drug pairs. We aim to predict which drug pair would form a synergistic drug combination for the -th disease . For the -th drug pair ( ), we integrated the five types of prediction scores: and . The weighted sum of the prediction scores of the -th drug pair for the -th disease can be expressed as follows:
(Equation 17)γt·st,u(t=1,2,⋯,m;u=1,2,⋯,n),where is the weight vector for the prediction scores for the -th disease, and is the prediction score vector for the -th drug pair for the -th disease. The weight vector was optimized using Bayesian optimization with a radial basis function (RBF) kernel to maximize the prediction accuracy, measured using Boltzmann-enhanced discrimination of the AUC (BED AUC). 
We assume that the function g
 is drawn from a Gaussian process prior, with observations , where ( = 1, 2, …, K) induces a multivariate Gaussian distribution on , and represents the corresponding BED AUC value. The distribution is determined using a mean function and a positive definite covariance function. From the prior and the observations, we infer a posterior distribution over the function, referred to as the acquisition function. We employed the upper confidence bound (UCB) as the acquisition function. Under the Gaussian process prior, the function is defined as follows:
(Equation 18)aUCB(γt;{γt,κ,oκ},τ)=−μ(γt;{γt,κ,oκ},τ)+φσ(γt;{γt,κ,oκ},τ),where is a hyperparameter in the Gaussian process, is an exploration weight controlling the balance between exploration and exploitation (default: ), is a predictive mean function, and is a predictive variance function. We estimated , the value that maximizes the BED AUC, and obtained the optimized weight vector as follows:
(Equation 19)γt∗=argmaxγtg(γt)The obtained weight vector was then used to compute the prediction score of the -th candidate drug pair for the -th disease as follows:
(Equation 20)γt∗·st,u(t=1,2,⋯,m;u=1,2,⋯,n).Drug pairs with high scores are predicted to have synergistic effects in treating the corresponding disease.
For triplet construction, each triplet was generated by pairing a predicted doublet with a first-line drug ( D).

## Proposed drug combination prediction method with causal genes (SYNERGIE-CG)
In SYNERGIE-CG, we formulate SYNERGIE using known causal genes. We treated known causal genes as therapeutic target molecules and identified pathways with causal genes as therapeutic pathways. Then, based on the therapeutic pathways and causal genes, we predicted drug combinations using the methods described in , , , , , , , , , , , , , and . Causal genes for diseases were acquired from six public databases (DisGeNet (v7.0), OMIM, ClinVar, NHGRI-EBI GWAS catalog, GWASdb, and PheWAS catalog ). provides the number of causal genes for each disease.

## Proposed drug combination prediction method with known therapeutic target molecules (SYNERGIE-KT)
In SYNERGIE-KT, we formulate SYNERGIE using known therapeutic target molecules. We identified pathways with known therapeutic target molecules as therapeutic pathways to predict drug combinations, as described in , , , , , , , , , , , , , and . The therapeutic target molecule information was compiled by manually curating data from medical monographs and the KEGG DISEASE database. 
 provides the number of known target molecules for each disease.

## Baseline drug combination prediction method with network topology (topology-based method)
The topology-based method hypothesizes that drug–drug relationships are characterized by a network-based proximity measure between the target molecules of the two drugs. The network proximity between drugs A and B is calculated as described in Equation 2 in Cheng et al., referred to as the “separation score.” If the separation score has a positive value, drugs A and B are considered to be separated, and the combination is predicted to have a synergistic effect for treating a disease.

## Baseline drug combination prediction method with the transcriptome opposite direction (opposite-direction method)
The opposite-direction method hypothesizes that drug combinations with synergistic effects are characterized by the directions of gene expression signatures between drugs and diseases. The relationship between drugs A and B was calculated using the drug-induced gene expression signatures as described in Equation 2 in Stathias et al. The relationship among drug A, drug B, and a specific disease was calculated using drug-induced and disease-specific gene expression signatures, as presented in Equation 3 of Stathias et al. Finally, the prediction score for drugs A and B was obtained by integrating the two relationships, as described in Equation 4 in Stathias et al. Drug pairs with high prediction scores are predicted to have synergistic effects in the treatment of a disease.

## Performance evaluation procedure
We used three accuracy measures: the area under the receiver operating characteristic (ROC) curve (AUC), the area under the precision–recall (PR) curve (AUPR), and the Boltzmann-enhanced discrimination AUC (BED AUC). ROC curves and PR curves for the performance of classifiers over all possible cutoffs were generated by plotting the true positive rates (TPRs) against the false positive rates (FPRs) and precision against recall, respectively. AUC scores range from 0 to 1.0, where 1.0 indicates perfect inference (100% TPR, 0% FPR), and 0.5 indicates random inference. AUPR scores range from 0 to 1.0, with 1.0 indicating perfect inference (100% precision, 100% recall). The BED AUC scores range from 0 to 1.0, with 1.0 indicating perfect inference in the early retrieval performance.

## Chemicals used for the cell survival assay
Pimasertib and infigratinib were purchased from Selleck Chemicals (Houston, TX, USA). Aspirin (acetylsalicylic acid) and sodium phenylbutyrate (sodium 4-phenylbutyrate) were purchased from Tokyo Chemical Industries Co., Ltd. (Tokyo, Japan). Saracatinib, tanespimycin, cediranib, tacedinaline, and vandetanib were purchased from Cayman Chemical (Ann Arbor, Michigan, USA). Lucitanib and ibrutinib were purchased from MedChemexpress (South Brunswick Township, NJ, USA). The Cell Counting Kit-8 (CCK-8) used for the WST-8 assay was purchased from DOJINDO (Tokyo, Japan).

## Cell culture and reagents
The HT-29 human CRC cell line (HTB-38; ATCC) was obtained from the ATCC (Rockville, MD, USA). Cultures were used between passages 5 and 15. HT-29 cells were cultured in Dulbecco’s modified Eagle medium with high glucose (4.5 g/mL) (NACALAI TESQUE, INC., JAPAN) supplemented with 10% fetal bovine serum (Funakoshi Co., Ltd., JAPAN). All cells were incubated at 37°C in a humidified atmosphere containing 5% (v/v) CO2.

## Cell survival assay
In vitro growth inhibition was evaluated according to the manufacturer’s standard protocol using CCK-8. Cells were seeded in 96-well plates at a density of 5,000 cells/well in a total volume of 100 μL and exposed to various drugs for 72 h at 37°C in a 5% CO2 atmosphere. WST-8 was added, and after 3 h, the absorbance was measured at a wavelength of 450 nm (ref. 630 nm) using a microplate reader (Bio-Rad Laboratories, Inc., Hercules, CA). The results are expressed as percentages [i.e., as the ratio of the absorbance of treated cells to that of the control (drug untreated group, 100%)]. Percent survival was calculated using the following formula: percentage survival = (absorbance of treated wells − absorbance of blank wells)/(absorbance of untreated wells − absorbance of blank wells) × 100.

## Statistical evaluation of drug synergy based on in vitro experiments
The Bliss’s Independent Action (IA) model and Loewer’s additivity (CA) model were used to evaluate the synergistic effects of drug combinations.
In the IA model, it is assumed that the effects of drugs are stochastic events, and thus, it is appropriate to apply the model when all drugs to be used at the same time are considered to have different modes of action. The effects of a drug combination were calculated as the joint probability of each effect. Drug A has v% effects and Drug B has w% effects at a given combination of concentrations. The total effect rate of the combination can be computed as under the IA model’s assumption. Let, in the experiment, the combination of Drug A and Drug B obtain z% effect and if the 
 , a given drug combination is considered to have a synergistic effect based on Bliss’s IA model. IA score = is denoted in this study.
In the CA model, it is assumed that the toxic unit equals one under the non-interaction assumption between drugs. The concentrations weighted by the effect of each drug (toxic unit [TU]) are added together to yield the TU of a given drug combination.
(Equation 21)ToxicUnit(TU)=CAECuA+CBECuBFor a given drug combination, and stand for the concentrations of drug A and drug B, respectively. and are the concentrations of the drugs causing u% effect by drug A and drug B, respectively. If TU = 1, the effect rate of the drug combination remains at u% under the additive assumption. Thus, if TU < 1, a given drug combination is assumed to have synergistic effect based on the CA model, when u% is selected as the results of the growth inhibition assay. TU is denoted as the CA score in this study.

## Validation of predicted complement-type drug combinations for CRC using TCGA cohort
To stratify patients based on the gene-expression ratios of the target genes of drugs, we defined the donors with z-scores of a target gene >1 as “high-expression donors”, and donors with z-scores of a target gene < −1 as low-expression donors.” The survival curves were fitted with Cox models based on a tabulation of the number at risk and number of events for each unique death time using the “survival” R package. 

## Validation of predicted complement-type drug combinations for CRC using GEO bulk and single-cell cohorts
We validated predicted drug combinations for CRC using an independent resource, CRC bulk cohort (made up of 557 donors) and CRC single-cell cohort (made up of 28 MMRp donors and 34 MMRd donors) from GEO under the accession code GSE39582 and GSE178341, respectively. The single cell data were processed according to the original paper. 
We compared the levels of gene expression for drug targets of predicted drug combinations between healthy and CRC donors. To stratify patients based on drug-target gene expression, we calculated the gene expression ratios between patient and healthy donors. We defined donors with a fold change of a target gene > as “high-expression donors” and those with a fold change of a target gene < as “low-expression donors.” Here, and were determined so that the number of donors was at least 3. The survival curves were fitted with Cox models based on a tabulation of the number at risk and number of events for each unique death time using the “survival” R package. 

## Quantification and statistical analysis
Bayesian optimization was employed to integrate five types of drug–disease and drug–drug interaction scores for predicting synergistic drug combinations. For each disease, the optimal weight vector was estimated to maximize prediction accuracy, measured using BED AUC. The Gaussian process prior and UCB acquisition function were used for optimization. Performance metrics included AUC, AUPR, and BED AUC. For in vitro experiments, absorbance values were analyzed using the CCK-8 assay and normalized to untreated controls. Drug synergy was assessed using the Bliss independence model. Random walk with restart (RWR) was implemented using the pyrwr package. Network analyses were conducted using NetworkX.
All statistical analyses were performed using Python (version 3.10) with custom scripts. For the performance evaluation of proposed methods, we calculated AUC scores for 14 diseases in the indistinct-type combination prediction ( E and 3F). The performance comparison was made between SYNERGIE-ET and Topology-based method or Opposite direction method, between SYNERGIE-KT and Topology-based method or Opposite direction method, and between SYNERGIE-CG and Topology-based method or Opposite direction method. The two groups were compared by one-sided Wilcoxon signed-rank test. We made corrections for multiple testing using the false discovery rate (FDR) by Benjamini–Homberg (BH) corrections, adjusting significance values for two tests per analysis stream. The test was considered nominally significant with and FDR-corrected significant if FDR <0.05. Statistical significance in figures is indicated as follows: ∗p < 0.05, ∗∗p < 0.01, ∗∗∗p < 0.001.
For the omics analyses, differential expression analysis was performed ( A–5F). This analysis was conducted using linear models with empirical Bayes moderation implemented in limma package. The test was considered nominally significant with and FDR-corrected significant if FDR <0.05.
For the KEGG pathway analyses ( I, 5J, 5O, and 5P), we performed enrichment analyses of the DEGs in singlets, doublet, and triplet by Fisher’s exact test. Corrections for multiple testing were applied, adjusting significance values based on the number of pathway terms. The test was considered nominally significant with and FDR-corrected significant if FDR <0.05. Statistical significance in figures is indicated as follows: ∗p < 0.05, ∗∗p < 0.01, ∗∗∗p < 0.001.
For the validation of synergistic effects of the Ibru–Asp doublet using CRC cohorts ( A–6L), we performed Cox regressions for the survival curves. We compared the survival curves between donors with low expressed target genes and donors with high expressed target genes. The two groups were compared by two-sided Log rank test. The test was considered nominally significant with p < 0.05.

Published: March 11, 2026

## Footnotes
Supplemental information can be found online at https://doi.org/10.1016/j.isci.2026.115339.

## Supplemental information

## Document S1. Figures S1–S17, Tables S3, S4, and S8–S13

## Table S1. DEGPs and therapeutic pathways estimated for diseases, related to Figure 2A and B
DEGPs were identified from disease transcriptome data by weighted gene co-expression network analysis (WGCNA) and pathway analysis. Therapeutic pathways regulating the DEGPs were estimated based on network topology of pathway–pathway interaction network. The “disease_id” and “disease_name” columns correspond to KEGG DISEASE IDs and disease names, respectively. The “pathway_type” column represents whether a pathway is DEGP or therapeutic pathway. The “pathway_id” and “pathway_name” columns correspond to REACTOME pathway IDs and pathway names, respectively.

## Table S2. Estimated therapeutic targets for various diseases by network controllability analysis, related to Figure 2C–J
Gene set column represents the type of estimated target set.

## Table S5. Predicted boost-type drug combinations for various diseases, related to Figure 4A
Top 20 drug combinations predicted for each disease by proposed method with estimated targets are listed. “Prediction rank” represents prediction rank based on prediction score. The “drug_id1” and “drug_id2” columns correspond to KEGG DRUG IDs of predicted drug combinations. The “drug_name1” and “drug_name2” columns correspond to drug names of predicted drug combinations. The “drug_efficacy1” and “drug_efficacy2” correspond to drug efficacy of drug combinations. The “score” column corresponds to prediction scores representing therapeutic druggability.

## Table S6. Predicted complement-type drug combinations for various diseases, related to Figure 4A
Top 20 drug combinations predicted for each disease by proposed method with estimated targets are listed. “Prediction rank” represents prediction rank based on prediction score. The “drug_id1” and “drug_id2” columns correspond to KEGG DRUG IDs of predicted drug combinations. The “drug_name1” and “drug_name2” columns correspond to drug names of predicted drug combinations. The “drug_efficacy1” and “drug_efficacy2” correspond to drug efficacy of drug combinations. The “score” column corresponds to prediction scores representing therapeutic druggability.

## Table S7. Predicted indistinct-type drug combinations for various diseases, related to Figure 4A
Top 20 drug combinations predicted for each disease by proposed method with estimated targets are listed. “Prediction rank” represents prediction rank based on prediction score. The “drug_id1” and “drug_id2” columns correspond to KEGG DRUG IDs of predicted drug combinations. The “drug_name1” and “drug_name2” columns correspond to drug names of predicted drug combinations. The “drug_efficacy1” and “drug_efficacy2” correspond to drug efficacy of drug combinations. The “score” column corresponds to prediction scores representing therapeutic druggability.

## Table S14. Differential expression analysis using CRC disease-specific transcriptome data, related to Figure 5A–D
Differential expression analysis was performed between healthy controls and patients with CRC using CRC disease-specific transcriptome data.

## Table S15. All pathways significantly enriched for upregulated DEGs in singlets, doublet, and triplet, related to Figure 5I
Exact −log(p-value) values obtained from pathway enrichment analysis of upregulated genes are provided.

## Table S16. All pathways significantly enriched for downregulated DEGs in singlets, doublet, and triplet, related to Figure 5J
Exact −log(p-value) values obtained from pathway enrichment analysis of downregulated genes are provided.

## Table S17. Enriched pathways important for CRC treatment using upregulated DEGs in the singlets, doublets, and triplet, related to Figure 5O
Exact −log(p-value) values obtained from pathway enrichment analysis of upregulated genes are provided.

## Table S18. Enriched pathways important for CRC treatment using upregulated DEGs in the singlets, doublets, and triplet, related to Figure 5P
Exact −log(p-value) values obtained from pathway enrichment analysis of downregulated genes are provided.

## References
 

## Associated Data

## Supplementary Materials

## Document S1. Figures S1–S17, Tables S3, S4, and S8–S13

## Table S1. DEGPs and therapeutic pathways estimated for diseases, related to Figure 2A and B
DEGPs were identified from disease transcriptome data by weighted gene co-expression network analysis (WGCNA) and pathway analysis. Therapeutic pathways regulating the DEGPs were estimated based on network topology of pathway–pathway interaction network. The “disease_id” and “disease_name” columns correspond to KEGG DISEASE IDs and disease names, respectively. The “pathway_type” column represents whether a pathway is DEGP or therapeutic pathway. The “pathway_id” and “pathway_name” columns correspond to REACTOME pathway IDs and pathway names, respectively.

## Table S2. Estimated therapeutic targets for various diseases by network controllability analysis, related to Figure 2C–J
Gene set column represents the type of estimated target set.

## Table S5. Predicted boost-type drug combinations for various diseases, related to Figure 4A
Top 20 drug combinations predicted for each disease by proposed method with estimated targets are listed. “Prediction rank” represents prediction rank based on prediction score. The “drug_id1” and “drug_id2” columns correspond to KEGG DRUG IDs of predicted drug combinations. The “drug_name1” and “drug_name2” columns correspond to drug names of predicted drug combinations. The “drug_efficacy1” and “drug_efficacy2” correspond to drug efficacy of drug combinations. The “score” column corresponds to prediction scores representing therapeutic druggability.

## Table S6. Predicted complement-type drug combinations for various diseases, related to Figure 4A
Top 20 drug combinations predicted for each disease by proposed method with estimated targets are listed. “Prediction rank” represents prediction rank based on prediction score. The “drug_id1” and “drug_id2” columns correspond to KEGG DRUG IDs of predicted drug combinations. The “drug_name1” and “drug_name2” columns correspond to drug names of predicted drug combinations. The “drug_efficacy1” and “drug_efficacy2” correspond to drug efficacy of drug combinations. The “score” column corresponds to prediction scores representing therapeutic druggability.

## Table S7. Predicted indistinct-type drug combinations for various diseases, related to Figure 4A
Top 20 drug combinations predicted for each disease by proposed method with estimated targets are listed. “Prediction rank” represents prediction rank based on prediction score. The “drug_id1” and “drug_id2” columns correspond to KEGG DRUG IDs of predicted drug combinations. The “drug_name1” and “drug_name2” columns correspond to drug names of predicted drug combinations. The “drug_efficacy1” and “drug_efficacy2” correspond to drug efficacy of drug combinations. The “score” column corresponds to prediction scores representing therapeutic druggability.

## Table S14. Differential expression analysis using CRC disease-specific transcriptome data, related to Figure 5A–D
Differential expression analysis was performed between healthy controls and patients with CRC using CRC disease-specific transcriptome data.

## Table S15. All pathways significantly enriched for upregulated DEGs in singlets, doublet, and triplet, related to Figure 5I
Exact −log(p-value) values obtained from pathway enrichment analysis of upregulated genes are provided.

## Table S16. All pathways significantly enriched for downregulated DEGs in singlets, doublet, and triplet, related to Figure 5J
Exact −log(p-value) values obtained from pathway enrichment analysis of downregulated genes are provided.

## Table S17. Enriched pathways important for CRC treatment using upregulated DEGs in the singlets, doublets, and triplet, related to Figure 5O
Exact −log(p-value) values obtained from pathway enrichment analysis of upregulated genes are provided.

## Table S18. Enriched pathways important for CRC treatment using upregulated DEGs in the singlets, doublets, and triplet, related to Figure 5P
Exact −log(p-value) values obtained from pathway enrichment analysis of downregulated genes are provided.

## Data Availability Statement

•All datasets analyzed in this study were obtained from publicly available repositories. Accession numbers and URLs are listed in the .
•The source code for SYNERGIE is publicly available at GitHub repository [https://github.com/YamanishiLab/SYNERGIE].
•Any additional information required to reanalyze the data reported in this paper is available from the upon request.