pmcILIVERILIVER4765iliverILIVER2772-9478ElsevierPMC12305244PMC12305244.112305244123052444074110810.1016/j.iliver.2025.100179S2772-9478(25)00037-41001791ReviewThe application of liver cancer organoids in tumour precision medicine: A comprehensive review
MoJiaye GongDa ZhaiMei YangJintao LiZhike WuMeilongwmliliver@163.com DengXuesongdengxuesong@21cn.com DaiXiaoyongdaixy18@jnu.edu.cn aGraduate School, Guangxi University of Chinese Medicine, Nanning 530200, Guangxi, ChinabDepartment of Hepatobiliary Surgery, The First Affiliated Hospital of Shenzhen University, Health Science Center, Shenzhen Second People's Hospital, Shenzhen 518035, Guangdong, ChinacThe Second Clinical Medical College of Jinan University, Department of General Surgery, Shenzhen People's Hospital, Shenzhen 518020, Guangdong, ChinadDepartment of Physiology, School of Medicine, and State Key Laboratory of Bioactive Molecules and Druggability Assessment, Jinan University, Guangzhou 510632, Guangdong, ChinaeDivision of Hepatobiliary and Pancreatic Surgery, Department of General Surgery, Shenzhen People's Hospital (the Second Clinical Medical College, Jinan University, The First Affiliated Hospital, Southern University of Science and Technology), Shenzhen 518020, Guangdong, China⁎Corresponding authors. Graduate School, Guangxi University of Chinese Medicine, Nanning 530200, Guangxi, China. wmliliver@163.comdengxuesong@21cn.comdaixy18@jnu.edu.cn1These authors have contributed equally to this work and share first authorship.
920250572025434939931001791222025252025852025050720253007202531072025© 2025 The Authors2025https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/).Liver cancer is a leading cause of cancer-related death worldwide, and its complexity and heterogeneity pose considerable challenges to conventional treatment. In recent years, the rise of organoid technology has provided new perspectives and tools for precision medicine in oncology. The use of high-fidelity organoids capable of recapitulating patients' genotypic and phenotypic features can further facilitate personalised treatment. In this review, we discuss 1) the advantages of liver cancer organoids as disease models over traditional models; 2) the origin and establishment of liver cancer organoids; 3) the application of liver cancer organoids technology in tumour precision medicine; 4) the technical tools of liver cancer-derived organoids; and 5) current solutions for the deficiencies and challenges of liver cancer organoids. This review should provide both a deeper understanding of the research progress and application prospects of liver cancer organoids, as well as theoretical support and practical guidance for more complete integration of liver cancer research and precision medicine.

## Graphical abstract
Multifunctional application model of organoids in liver cancer research. This figure summarizes the key roles of patient-derived organoids in liver cancer research, including tumor biology research, drug screening, precision medicine, drug resistance study, and immunotherapy research. 

## Highlights
•Liver cancer's complexity and heterogeneity demand innovative precision medicine approaches.
•Organoid can replicate liver cancer patient-specific genotypic/phenotypic traits.
•Comprehensive review of liver cancer organoid establishment and applications.
•Critical evaluation of current challenges and actionable solutions to refine organoid systems.

## Keywords
Liver cancerLiver cancer organoidsPrecision medicineDrug screeningMicrofluidic chips3D bioprintingpmc-status-qastatus0pmc-status-liveyespmc-status-embargonopmc-status-releasedyespmc-prop-open-accessyespmc-prop-olfnopmc-prop-manuscriptnopmc-prop-legally-suppressednopmc-prop-has-pdfyespmc-prop-has-supplementnopmc-prop-pdf-onlynopmc-prop-suppress-copyrightnopmc-prop-is-real-versionnopmc-prop-is-scanned-articlenopmc-prop-preprintnopmc-prop-in-epmcyespmc-license-refCC BY-NC-ND1

## Introduction
Primary liver cancer (PLC) is a malignant epithelial tumour of the liver. Its pathological types include hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC), intrahepatic cholangiocarcinoma (iCCA), and mixed hepatocellular carcinoma (cHCC-CCA); of these, HCC is the most common pathological tissue type, comprising 75%–85% of PLCs. According to global cancer statistics, PLC is the sixth most common cancer in the world, and PLC-related mortality is the third highest, posing a serious threat to the lives and health of people worldwide. The main therapeutic options for PLC are liver transplantation, surgical resection, local therapy and anti-cancer drugs. Patients with early-stage HCC who meet specific criteria such as the Milan criteria (single tumour ≤5 cm or up to three tumours each ≤3 cm; no vascular invasion or extrahepatic spread) and have underlying liver disease (e.g., cirrhosis) are best suited for liver transplantation, which treats the cancer and removes the underlying liver disease. , After careful selection of patients, i.e., those with early-stage HCC and some preserved liver function (Child-Pugh A), surgical resection can achieve a 5-year survival rate of about 50%–70%. For patients with intermediate-stage liver cancer, ablation techniques or transarterial chemoembolisation can be used to help shrink the tumour or control its growth before surgery or transplantation. However, it is difficult to diagnose early-stage liver cancer in clinical practice, and most patients with liver cancer are diagnosed in the middle-to-late stage, when they have lost the chance of surgical cure. Therefore, anti-cancer drug therapy is particularly important for patients with advanced liver cancer who are ineligible for surgery. Pharmacological therapies include systemic therapies such as sorafenib and lenvatinib, as well as immunotherapy regimens such as atezolizumab combined with bevacizumab. However, because of the toxicity of therapeutic agents and the complex biological characteristics of liver cancer, such as strong tumour heterogeneity and the presence of an immunosuppressive microenvironment (which refers to the dynamic surroundings of a tumour where diverse cells, molecules and conditions collectively weaken immune responses, enabling cancer progression and immune evasion), therapeutic efficacy is unsatisfactory and prognosis is poor.
Chemotherapy, a traditional and widely used cancer treatment, kills rapidly dividing cancer cells. However, it is unable to distinguish between cancerous and healthy cells, leading to serious side effects including nausea, fatigue, liver dysfunction and haematological toxicities such as neutropenia and thrombocytopenia. In addition, many patients with HCC have underlying liver disease like cirrhosis, which impairs the liver's ability to metabolise these drugs; this may exacerbate toxicity and limit chemotherapy dose, thereby reducing efficacy. Chemotherapy side effects can seriously affect patients' quality of life, leading to treatment interruptions or dose reductions, affecting not only immediate treatment outcomes, but potentially leading to tumour progression or recurrence. PLC is characterised by a complex and diverse landscape of genetic alterations, including high aneuploidy, DNA copy number variation, somatic mutations and epigenetic alterations, all of which directly affect tumour heterogeneity and are major challenges for pharmacological treatment. HCC exhibits both inter-tumoral heterogeneity (variations between tumours of different patients) and intra-tumoral heterogeneity (variations within individual tumours). This diversity can lead to differential responses to chemotherapy, as some tumour cells may contain mutations that lead to resistance to specific drugs. The presence of cancer stem cells (CSCs) is also important for heterogeneity; these cells can withstand chemotherapy, leading to tumour recurrence after treatment. Related studies have shown that even if chemotherapy is successful, the remaining CSC population can regenerate a heterogeneous tumour mass. In addition, tumours can create an immunosuppressive microenvironment that allows them to evade detection and destruction by the immune system, and this evasion reduces the efficacy of chemotherapy and immunotherapy. Furthermore, chemotherapy can interact with immune cells to either enhance or inhibit anti-tumour immunity. Heterogeneous tumour masses generated by CSC populations are also associated with the tumour microenvironment (TME), where interactions between CSCs and surrounding cells promote their maintenance and contribute to aggressive tumour behaviour. The toxicity of chemotherapy combined with the complex biology of liver cancer make the development of effective treatment strategies difficult; thus, a personalised strategy is necessary. Patients should be offered tailored treatment plans using the concepts and modalities of precision medicine to better cope with these complex tumours.
Precision medicine has facilitated the development and application of targeted therapy for the molecular characterisation of liver cancer. Precision medicine allows identification of specific genetic mutations and molecular pathways associated with HCC, enabling the use of targeted therapy to inhibit signalling pathways, potentially leading to better treatment outcomes. For example, tyrosine kinase inhibitors such as sorafenib and lenvatinib have shown efficacy in targeting specific signalling pathways in patients with HCC. , Precision medicine also reduces the toxicity associated with conventional chemotherapy by targeting specific molecular alterations rather than broadly affecting all rapidly dividing cells. This is particularly important for patients with HCC, who often have impaired liver function due to cirrhosis or other liver disease. Molecular analysis, a key component of precision medicine, plays a crucial role in understanding the heterogeneity of liver cancer. Next-generation sequencing allows a comprehensive analysis of the tumour genome, revealing mutations and alterations that may lead to cancer progression. Using molecular analysis, clinicians can tailor treatments to the specific genetic make-up of an individual's tumour, shifting from a one-size-fits-all approach to a more personalised strategy that improves treatment response rates and minimises use of ineffective treatments. , Precision medicine emphasises a personalised approach to treatment that considers the unique characteristics of each patient and promotes a risk-based approach to diagnosis and treatment that allows early intervention based on genetic and environmental risk factors. It also enhances the overall management of patients with HCC by integrating various therapeutic modalities tailored to individual needs and ensuring that treatment decisions are made jointly based on the latest molecular data and clinical guidelines. However, although precision medicine has many advantages over traditional treatment methods, it may be difficult to implement. One of the most important issues is accuracy, which requires precise knowledge of the patient's disease, including the molecular mutations of the tumour cells, and the tumour immune microenvironment, including the intercellular, intracellular and extracellular microenvironments. Therefore, the development of robust research models that accurately reflect the patient's disease profile is critical for precision medicine. Organoid technology is an outgrowth of this need.
Patient-derived organoids (PDOs) recapitulate tumour heterogeneity by retaining the genetic and phenotypic diversity of the original tumour, which is similar to the structural and cellular composition of the parental tumour. , The metabolic profile, proliferation rate and response to drugs are similar to the parental tumour, and this stability and functional fidelity of organoids is essential for performing genotype–phenotype correlation analyses and evaluating an individual's response to various treatments. , Additionally, organoids can be designed to contain a variety of cell types and extracellular matrix components, thus creating a more realistic TME that reflects the interactions between cancer cells and surrounding tissues. , In terms of personalised drug screening, drug sensitivity testing in organoids enables clinicians to tailor treatment regimens based on the response of individual organoids to specific therapies, a personalised approach that can significantly improve therapeutic efficacy and minimise adverse effects.
In summary, organoids offer significant advantages to enhance precision medicine in oncology as they can accurately reproduce tumour characteristics, enable high-throughput drug screening, facilitate personalised treatment planning, and can be combined with advanced technologies such as gene-editing techniques using clustered regularly interspaced short palindromic repeats (CRISPR/Cas9; a gene editing tool that acts like molecular scissors, allowing precise cutting and modification of DNA to correct genetic disorders) to gain a deeper understanding of cancer biology. This provides a personalised therapeutic strategy with more accurate models that make a key contribution to the development of precision cancer medicine. Additionally, it is important for the prevention and treatment of liver cancer to establish an accurate liver cancer research model based on organoid technology that simulates the liver cancer development process in the body and explores pathogenesis to help guide both the choice of treatment and future drug development. 

2

## Traditional models for studying liver cancer
Before the development of organoid technology, the main liver cancer research models included cell lines and animal models. , These led to significant developments in liver cancer research until today, and have greatly advanced the field.
2.1

## Cell line models
2.1.1

## Standard cell lines
HCC cell lines, the most basic liver cancer research models, are second to none for their contributions to understanding tumour biology and discovering cancer therapeutic targets. The HepG2 cell line in two-dimensional (2D) cell cultures is one of the most widely used cell lines in liver cancer research. It retains many genetic characteristics of the primary tumour, including the TERT promoter mutation (C228T), which allows cancer cells to grow and divide rapidly without restriction. Mutations in the tumour suppressor gene TP53 are a major cause of cancer, but the TP53 gene is wild type in HepG2 cells, unlike in other liver cancer cell lines, such as Huh7, PLC/PRF/5 and HLE, where TP53 is mutated. Mutations in TP53 are associated with higher tumour malignancy, and these characteristics of liver cancer cell lines highlight their origin and relevance to liver cancer research. , HCC cell lines besides HepG2 have unique characteristics; for example, Hep3B cells are sensitive to chemotherapeutic agents such as sorafenib, and HuH-7 cells have been used to study viral infections associated with HCC and exhibit more aggressive tumour characteristics. A study by Liang et al. showed that the HCCLM3 cell line had a stronger tendency for invasion and metastasis compared with other HCC cell lines. This is owing to the upregulation of lncRNA-SOX2OT in HCCLM3 cells, which supports an invasive phenotype by enhancing glycolytic activity, thereby promoting cell survival and proliferation in the metastatic environment. Therefore, targeting and inhibiting lncRNA-SOX2OT may become an effective strategy for suppressing HCC invasion and metastasis. Nwosu et al. compared global gene expression patterns of poorly differentiated HCC cell lines with those of well-differentiated cell lines using three publicly available microarray datasets (GSE36133, GSE35818, and GSE57083). They found that poorly differentiated HCC cell lines (such as HLE, HLF and SNU-449) exhibited molecular and phenotypic characteristics more similar to human liver cancer. Additionally, 148 metabolic genes that were downregulated in liver tumours also showed reduced gene and protein expression in these cells, particularly in pathways related to fatty acid β-oxidation, the urea cycle, molecular transport and amino acid metabolism. These findings demonstrate the consistency and specific metabolic gene expression patterns between HCC cell lines and human liver cancer, which can help to identify metabolic weaknesses at different stages of HCC, thus providing potential targets for selective therapy.

2.1.2

## Drug-resistant cell lines
Drug-resistant cell lines are important tools for studying the mechanisms of resistance to chemotherapy. Drug-resistant cell lines are generated by exposing parental cell lines to chemotherapy over time, thereby selecting cells that can survive higher drug concentrations, a process that typically takes between 3 and 18 months. These cell lines typically exhibit increased expression of drug transporter proteins such as P-glycoprotein and breast cancer resistance protein (BCRP; also known as ABCG2), which acts primarily as an efflux pump, actively transporting multiple chemotherapeutic agents away from the cancer cells to reduce the intracellular concentration of the drugs. Overexpression of BCRP is associated with multidrug resistance, where cancer cells can not respond to several chemotherapies. , , , This cross-resistance complicates treatment options for patients. By comparing the sensitivity of resistant cell lines to different chemotherapies, the patient's response to specific treatments can be predicted based on their tumour characteristics. Meena et al. constructed a drug-resistant Hep3B cell line and a naturally drug-resistant single-cell clone to explore a variety of molecular factors that may be involved in the mechanism of resistance. They found that Caveolin-1, P glycoprotein, fatty acid synthase and cytochrome P450 were elevated in drug-resistant cells. Inhibiting these molecules using small interfering RNA technology or pharmacological inhibitors restored cellular sensitivity to paclitaxel, indicating their significant role in the development of drug resistance. This suggests that detecting the expression levels of these molecules help predict patient responses to certain treatments. 

2.1.3

## Transgenic cell lines
Transgenic cell lines are essential, technically demanding research models for studying diseases (like cancer) that are caused by mutations in specific genes. The use of technologies such as CRISPR-Cas9 or RNA interference to genetically modify and alter cell lines to express or suppress specific genes allows study of the role these genes have in disease progression and drug response. The combination of gene therapy and chemotherapy may be a new paradigm in cancer treatment; cancer cells are selectively targeted while normal cells are less susceptible to damage from chemotherapy, thus the toxic side effects of chemotherapeutic agents are reduced. In a study on KBV200 and HCT-8/V cancer cells, knocking down the ABCB1 gene using CRISPR/Cas9 significantly enhanced sensitivity to chemotherapeutic drugs. In another study on ovarian cancer, investigators designed three single guide RNAs targeting exons four and five of the human ABCB1 gene. After effectively downregulating the expression of the ABCB1 target gene, there was a significant increase in sensitivity to doxorubicin . These studies demonstrate the development of new combined therapeutic strategies based on gene therapy to improve the overall effectiveness of cancer treatment.

2.2

## Animal models
Animal models also play a major role in liver cancer research. Mouse models are commonly used, including cell line-derived xenograft (CDX) models, patient-derived xenograft (PDX) models, chemically induced models (CIMs) and genetically engineered mouse models (GEMMs) ( ). 
2.2.1

## Subcutaneous xenograft models
HCC subcutaneous xenograft models involve subcutaneous transplantation of human HCC cell lines or tumour tissues into immunodeficient mice (e.g., nude or NOD/SCID mice) to simulate the process of tumour growth in humans. , These models are mainly used to evaluate the efficacy of drug treatment and study the biological characteristics of human tumours. Because of the relative simplicity and minimally invasive nature of the subcutaneous implantation procedure, which allows the establishment and maintenance of tumour models without the need for extensive surgical interventions, these animal models have become the most widely used for liver cancer research. He et al. established a subcutaneous xenograft model in nude mice using HepG2 cells and found that Chol-miR375 treatment effectively controlled tumour growth. Furthermore, the proportion of Ki67-positive cells in Chol-miR375-treated tumour tissues was significantly reduced, further confirming the inhibitory effect of Chol-miR375 on HCC cell proliferation. Liver CSCs are primary mediators of drug resistance in HCC. The subcutaneous xenograft model in mice can effectively evaluate the targeting effects of anti-tumour drugs and therapeutic approaches on CSCs, thereby facilitating the screening of more effective treatment strategies. Haraguchi et al. conducted studies using an HCC subcutaneous transplantation model and found that combining a CD13 inhibitor and the genotoxic chemotherapeutic agent fluorouracil (5-FU) significantly reduced tumour volume compared with monotherapy with either agent. Specifically, 5-FU inhibited CD90+ proliferating CSCs, while the CD13 inhibitor suppressed the self-renewal and tumour-initiating capacity of dormant CSCs. This study demonstrated the synergistic effect of 5-FU and CD13 inhibition, potentially offering a more effective therapeutic regimen for HCC patients. CD133 is recognised as a marker of CSCs, and Ma et al. isolated CD133-expressing HCC cells from human cell lines and transplanted them into immunodeficient mice to investigate their characteristics and resistance to chemotherapy. The study demonstrated that these CD133-overexpressing tumour cells exhibited significantly higher survival rates compared with CD133-negative counterparts. This phenomenon was attributed to chemoresistance, which was mediated through sustained activation of the Akt/PKB and Bcl-2 cell survival pathways. However, while a subcutaneous xenograft model is useful for some studies of cancer cell behaviour during tumour progression, it does not recapitulate key tumour–stroma interactions in HCC, nor does it allow the study of spontaneous development of distant or local (intrahepatic) metastases.

2.2.2

## PDX models
The PDX model is another example of a liver cancer research model that is favoured by investigators. It preserves the original characteristics of the tumour and is important for individual treatment assessment. The PDX model involves implanting the patient's tumour tissue into an immune-compromised mouse, allowing the characteristics of the tumour to be studied. A study by Hidalgo et al. transplanted fresh samples of tumour resections from 14 patients with refractory advanced cancers into immunodeficient mice and tested 232 treatment regimens with 63 drugs; this reflects the ability of personalised tumour transplantation models to effectively guide clinical cancer treatment. Although PDX can be used to personalise treatment and identify determinants of drug response, the low success rate of transplantation (currently less than 20% globally) is the biggest limitation in establishing this model. In addition, the need for large amounts of fresh tumour tissue, resource-intensiveness, and the additional time needed for amplification have largely limited the widespread use of these models.

2.2.3

## CIMs
CIMs use chemical carcinogens to trigger the development of liver cancer. Commonly used carcinogens include diethylnitrosamine (DEN), aflatoxin, and carbon tetrachloride (CCl4), which cause DNA damage and mutations. These chemicals allow replication of the multi-stage process of human liver tumourigenesis, making them valuable for studying the progression from normal liver tissue to malignant tumour. CIMs reveal the underlying mechanisms of carcinogenesis by highlighting the environmental, genetic and immunological factors that contribute to human carcinogenesis. Luo et al. developed a two-stage HCC model in BALB/c mice that was initiated with DEN and facilitated with CCl4 and ethanol; the model mimicked the molecular pathogenesis of HCC by expressing the oncogene or tumour-suppressor genes. A study by Vesselinovitch et al. showed that irrespective of the dose, DEN-induced HCC formation undergoes histochemical changes from basophilic foci to proliferative nodules, which progress to hepatocellular adenomas, and finally to HCC. Uehara et al. established a combined DEN and CCl4-induced HCC model; compared with individual administration of DEN or CCl4, chronic liver fibrosis was accompanied by a significantly increased incidence of HCC. Notably, 100% of mice developed liver cancer by 5 months of age. This chemical HCC model recapitulates the fibrotic phenotype of human HCC and provides an opportunity to study molecular activity associated with early and late events in the development and progression of HCC, in particular, the combined etiological factors of genotoxicity and advanced liver fibrosis. However, the major drawbacks of CIM include the long time required for cancer induction, with the time to tumour formation and tumour size varying greatly depending on the mouse strain. In addition, the efficiency of chemo-induction and tumour incidence are affected by factors such as the inducer dose, and the time and frequency of administration; the lack of tight control of these variables will lead to inconsistent and non-reproducible experimental results. The model is more of a guide to cancer initiation, and prevention of exposure factors is more instructive; there is a need for other models to better predict the specific effects of personalised treatments in established liver cancer studies. These issues have led to a recent decline in the use of this model.

2.2.4

## GEMMs
Genetically engineered models have become powerful research tools, and the use of genetically engineered mice, which can be studied not only at the tissue and organ level, but also at the cellular and molecular levels, can provide ideal experimental animal models for cancer pathogenesis, drug screening and clinical medical research. GEMMs are created by techniques such as CRISPR/Cas9, zinc finger nuclease or transcription activator-like effector nuclease, which introduce specific genetic alterations that may include activation of oncogenes, inactivation of tumour-suppressor genes, or both. Sandgren et al. employed the albumin enhancer/promoter to direct c-Myc expression in the livers of transgenic mice. They found that c-Myc expression induced mild-to-severe hepatic dysplasia in young mice and resulted in focal hepatic adenomas in mice over 15 months of age. Subsequently, an increasing number of research teams employed strategies that conditionally activate proto-oncogenic mutations to construct mouse liver cancer models. For example, a mouse model with hepatic co-overexpression of c-Myc and transforming growth factor (TGF)-α (Alb-c-Myc/MT-TGF-α) was developed; these double-transgenic mice exhibited significantly earlier onset of HCC compared with mice overexpressing c-Myc or TGF-α alone. In further studies using MYC transgenic mice, activating mutations in the β-catenin gene (CTNNB1) were detected in 55% (17/30) of liver cancers that developed. The mutation patterns included fragment deletions or point mutations in β-catenin, demonstrating that c-Myc activation induced somatic mutations in the β-catenin gene. This leads to dysregulated β-catenin signalling and ultimately contributes to hepatocarcinogenesis. In addition to overexpression, inactivation of oncogenes is also a strategy for modelling, and oncogene overexpression and inactivation have been combined in some models. Chung's group developed an in vivo model of transgenic HCC using the hydrodynamic transfection method and the Sleeping Beauty transposon system, which induced both c-Myc expression and p53 inhibition. They combined this technique with CCl4 treatment to create a hepatic fibrosis background that significantly accelerated the hepatocarcinogenesis induced by c-Myc upregulation and p53 downregulation. 
It should be noted that establishing a GEMM of liver cancer with the characteristics of human liver cancer is critical to the model's success, and a model will only be useful for decision making on clinical treatment options if it is representative. The main advantage of platforms like gene modification models is in understanding the initiating mutation. For example, a genome-wide microarray analysis of three transgenic HCC mouse models by Thorgeirrson et al. found that despite the highly similar tumour gene expression profiles of the three transgenic mouse lines, oncogene-specific gene expression signatures could be identified at the early dysplastic stages of hepatocarcinogenesis; these play a crucial role in evaluating molecularly targeted anti-HCC therapeutic regimens. Disadvantages of such models are the absence of fibrosis and cirrhosis, and the reduced mutational burden. These contrast with human HCC, which is characterised by altered genes and pathways, and pre-existing liver disease. 
Overall, traditional liver cancer models have an unassailable place in liver cancer research, yet huge gaps and shortcomings still exist in the performance of these models. First, for the traditional in vitro 2D cell line culture system, the instability of tumour cell line passages and the obvious changes in biological characteristics directly limit its ability to recapitulate the original tumour's complexity, making clinical translation less effective. Additionally, the lack of a TME in 2D cells directly affects the typical biological tumour cell behaviour. , , The PDX model, which is the most powerful for studying individualised therapy, can maintain the original 3D structure of the tumour and the original genomic and phenotypic features, and interacting and communicating with host stroma and immune cells, making it suitable for predicting drug response and preclinical experiments. , In addition to the very low transplantation success rate discussed above, the original human stromal cells and immune cells will be replaced by mouse stromal cells after tumour passaging and culture. The gradual loss of PDX-specific copy number during PDX passaging directly affects tumour heterogeneity, , and the changes in the TME and gene expression profiles will, in turn, affect the response to treatment. Therefore, these two preclinical models cannot adequately reach and maintain the primary tumour's complexity, resulting in inconsistency between clinical results and cellular and animal experimental results; in the era of targeted precision therapy, this reduces the predictive value of drugs. It was not until 2009, with the development and construction of the first organoid, that the landscape of tumour research models was changed, and the development of precision medicine in oncology was accelerated and invigorated by organoid models.
Organoids are a three-dimensional (3D) in vitro cell culture system. They are miniaturised ex vivo organs that are highly similar to source tissues or organs in vivo, , , , , have organ-specific functions and are capable of self-renewal and self-organisation. Organoid models can compensate for the shortcomings of traditional cell lines and animal models. First, HCC organoids maintain the genetic features and phenotype of the primary tumour tissue and can recapitulate the genetic and molecular heterogeneity of human HCC. Second, the 3D structures and intercellular interactions in organoids more realistically represent the TME, and preserving microenvironmental features enables them to better mimic human HCC complexity. Therefore, the organoid model is closer to the primary tumour and provides a more reliable experimental platform for basic research and new drug development ( ). The emergence of organoid models has led to considerable acceleration of liver cancer research, which is especially important for drug screening and determining treatment protocols for individualised precision medicine. 

3

## The evolution of liver cancer-related organoids
Liver organoids can be obtained from adult liver stem cells and PSCs (including ESCs and induced PSCs [iPSCs]) in culture ( ). Stem cells are a class of cells that can differentiate into various cell types with different functions; they include ESCs, iPSCs and adult stem cells. In Huch et al.'s 2013 study, a population of LGR5-labelled hepatic stem cells induced by liver injury was identified after sorting individual LGR5+ cells from the bile duct epithelium of injured livers in mice. By adding special in vitro medium with RSPO1 and other growth factors, a 3D culture system of LGR5+ cells was established that was capable of long-term and stable expansion, and maintained differentiation potential and genotypic stability. In a subsequent experiment, this team established the first human liver organoids from adult bile duct-derived bipotent progenitor cells ; these organoids showed a high degree of stability at the chromosomal and structural levels, could function after transplantation in vivo, and were transformed into functional hepatocytes in vitro. However, they were only 3D ‘chol-orgs’ (bile duct epithelial-like organs), which do not support long-term expansion of mature hepatocytes in culture. In 2018, Hu et al. cultured single primary hepatocytes isolated from mice and humans in Matrigel medium containing growth factors and small molecule compounds that activate Wnt, epidermal growth factor (EGF), fibroblast growth factor (FGF), hepatocyte growth factor (HGF), and other pathways, and formed tightly packed ‘liver-orgs’ (Hep-orgs) after about 15–20 days. Hep-orgs mimic the transcriptional profile of liver regeneration at the molecular level, and the first pioneering system for the long-term expansion and culture of mature hepatocytes was established, thus solving the problem of the long-term expansion and culture of mature hepatocytes and opening the new field of 3D organ culture. The iPSC is an important source of organoids. Takebe et al. induced hepatocyte progenitors from human iPSCs and co-cultured them with endothelial and mesenchymal stem cells, inducing hepatocyte progenitors to spontaneously organise and form a 3D ‘iPSC-liver bud’. This was the first report of functional 3D liver organ generation from human iPSCs. Although the generation of these organoids requires a complex 3D culture system and precise cell–cell interactions and is difficult to replicate and standardise on a large scale, the generation of liver organoids has provided a new preclinical model for liver diseases, , and ushered in the era of organoid research on liver disease. 
Research on liver cancer has also benefited from the creation of liver organoids. Liver cancer organoids can be constructed using either tumour tissue from clinical patients or gene editing ( ). A 2017 study in Nature Medicine succeeded in the isolation and long-term culture of tumour cell lines from eight patients with HCC, iCCA, and cHCC-CCA tumours by setting up a novel HCC cell culture system, thus developing the first human primary HCC organoid model. The established HCC organoids retained the histological features, genome and gene expression profiles of the original tumour when cultured for a long period in vitro, replicating the characteristics of primary HCC and providing a valuable model for liver cancer biology research, novel target discovery and individualised therapy. However, the acquisition of HCC specimens through surgical resection is typically limited. This limitation can be overcome by HCC needle biopsy, which also allows creation of HCC organoids at different stages of progression, although the development of tumour-specific organoids is difficult to achieve using tissue from patients with early-stage disease.
The development of CRISPR/Cas9 gene editing technology enables precise modification of DNA sequences in living cells. When combined with organoid technology, CRISPR/Cas9 can correct or delete potential mutations to treat various genetic disorders. In 2013, Schwank et al. used the CRISPR/Cas9 system to edit intestinal epithelial organoids derived from cystic fibrosis patients and corrected the F508del mutation on the CFTR gene to address intestinal epithelial dysfunction in these patients. Similarly, using CRISPR/Cas9 technology, specific genes can be knocked out or introduced to generate mutations in liver organoids from sources described above to study the occurrence and development of HCC. In 2019, Artegiani et al. used CRISPR gene editing to knock out the BAP1 gene from normal human liver organoids to explore the role of its mutation in the formation and progression of iCCA, revealing its important function as a tumour suppressor, i.e., maintaining the normal structure and function of epithelial tissues by regulating chromatin status and gene expression. In subsequent experiments, Artegiani's team also reported CRISPR/Cas9-mediated homology-independent organoid transgenesis, a novel gene-editing approach that enables efficient and precise genetic modifications in human organoids without relying on homology-directed repair (HDR; a DNA repair mechanism that uses homologous templates to accurately fix double-strand breaks, typically active during the late S and G2 phases of the cell cycle), thereby circumventing the limitations of traditional HDR. This method demonstrated significantly higher knock-in efficiency compared with conventional HDR in both human liver ductal organoids and hepatocyte organoids.
In addition, Sun et al. obtained liver cancer organoids by overexpressing the oncogene c-Myc after transfecting fibroblasts with FOXA3, HNF1A, HNF4A and generating human-induced hepatocytes by SV40 large T antigen amplification, revealing that c-Myc and RAS were the main contributors to the important malignant features of the hepatocyte. In 2023, Lam et al. successfully established a TP53 loss and R249S mutation organoid model by CRISPR/Cas9 gene editing and reported that the combined effect of TP53 loss and R249S mutation conferred an early clonal selection advantage and resistance to stress on the cells, which promoted early HCC development. Therefore, organoid technology combined with the CRISPR/Cas9 strategy is a powerful tool for studying human cancer gene function, providing an efficient and versatile method for investigating the role of genes in disease pathogenesis.
In addition to the expansion and development of methods for generating liver cancer organoids, culture conditions and other features have been optimised. Early liver cancer organoid culture protocols were adapted from healthy liver organoid culture systems and include essential microenvironmental factors that support stem cell growth and organoid formation, such as R-spondin-1, Wnt3a and Noggin. Classical isolation media also contain these factors along with EGF, FGF10, HGF, forskolin and A83-01 (a TGF-β inhibitor), and supplements such as B27 and N2. , When these classical media are applied to tumour tissues, healthy hepatocytes tend to be more competitive than tumour cells owing to their higher genetic stability and proliferative advantage, which leads to contamination of cultures with normal organoids and reduces the purity and relevance of tumour organoids in cancer research. Selection pressure in favour of tumour organoids is exerted by removing R-spondin-1, Noggin and Wnt3a from the culture medium; these are essential for healthy cell growth but less necessary for tumour cells, whereas dexamethasone is added to inhibit healthy cell proliferation, and a Rho-kinase inhibitor (Y27632) is included to enhance tumour cell proliferation during the isolation and early culture stages. Additionally, extended enzymatic digestion is employed to reduce yields of contaminating healthy cells, thereby enriching tumour cells in initial cultures. Samples can also be cultured in classical media (containing R-spondin-1, Noggin, Wnt3a) and tumour-specific media (without these factors but containing dexamethasone) in parallel to capture different tumour subtypes. , These methods improve the selective growth of tumour cells and reduce contamination of healthy hepatocytes to further purify tumour organoid cultures. Extracellular matrix (ECM) is an important support for the formation of structures in 3D organoids, with Matrigel being the most used. Matrigel is a basement membrane extract derived from Engelbreth–Holm–Swarm mouse sarcoma that is rich in multiple basement membrane proteins, growth factors and more; however, its composition is not well defined, which can cause variability and safety issues, while batch-to-batch compositional differences can affect reproducibility. This has driven the development of synthetic hydrogels, such as polyethylene glycol matrices modified with ECM peptides (e.g., RGD motifs) and protease-sensitive linkers, which allow precise control of biochemical and mechanical properties. Blending natural hydrogels such as alginate or fibrin mixed with ECM proteins (e.g., laminin-111) to better mimic natural ECM components is currently being explored, and these engineered hydrogels are designed to provide reproducible, customisable, and clinically compatible matrices. , 
The general procedure for liver cancer organoid construction is to isolate primary cells from patient carcinoma tissue (by surgical resection or biopsy) using enzymatic digestion and then embed the cells in a 3D extracellular matrix scaffold. The initial organoid culture is established by inoculating the cells (∼50 μL) as small dome-shaped Matrigel cell suspensions in multi-well plates and polymerising them at 37 °C for 15–30 min, followed by the addition of culture medium. Thereafter, depending on the growth rate and density of the organoids, passaging should be performed every 7–14 days, usually when the organoids become large or begin to fuse. Organoid passage involves a combination of mechanical dissociation (up and down blowing by pipette) and enzymatic digestion (e.g., using TrypLE or Dispase) to break down the organoids into small fragments or individual cells. Isolated organoids are cleaned and then re-embedded in fresh Matrigel domes containing fresh medium, which is renewed twice a week to maintain nutrient supply and remove waste. , , , , 

4

## The application of liver cancer organoid technology in precision medicine research
To achieve significant therapeutic effects in liver cancer, the expression status of various molecular signals in the oncogenic pathway must be clarified. Furthermore, implementation of precision medicine requires a thorough understanding of HCC heterogeneity, which is a key cause of treatment failure and death in patients with HCC. This heterogeneity includes inter-subclonal heterogeneity of tumour cells, as well as inter-patient tumour heterogeneity. One reason for heterogeneity is the mutation of multiple genes at multiple loci in HCC cells, resulting in differential sensitivity and responsiveness to anti-cancer drugs both within an individual patient and between different patients. This undoubtedly increases the difficulty of cancer treatment. Therefore, identifying mutations in each patient's tumour-associated genes and achieving individualised treatment by blocking specific targets is the essence of precision medicine in cancer treatment. Patient-derived liver cancer organoids retain the mutational characteristics and complex heterogeneity of the primary tumour with high fidelity, and provide great impetus to cancer treatment and research in the era of precision medicine.
The use of liver cancer organoids in precision medicine allows large-scale drug screening. In 2017, investigators tested 29 different anti-cancer drugs using liver cancer organoids. Preliminary screening and validation experiments showed that the organoids had varying degrees of sensitivity to drugs such as dasatinib, gemcitabine, AZD8931, SCH772984 and taselisib, with SCH772984 (a selective ERK inhibitor) also showing good anti-tumour activity in vivo. In 2018, Nuciforo et al. used HCC organoids constructed from patient biopsy tissues for drug sensitivity testing. They found that organoids from different patients exhibited differential sensitivity to sorafenib, reflecting inter-patient heterogeneity in drug response. Li et al. established 27 strains of PDOs from surgically resected tissues, and 129 FDA-approved anti-cancer drugs were used for high-throughput drug screening of these organoids. They found that the liver cancer organoids were unresponsive to most of the drugs, with only 13 having more than 90% killing effect in all organoids; these drugs were termed “comprehensively effective”. Together, these studies have shown the promise of HCC organoids as drug screening tools.
Drug resistance in HCC cells is a key reason for poor patient outcomes and may even lead to no useful drug for HCC treatment, and the exploration of HCC drug resistance mechanisms using HCC organoid models is being explored for precision medicine. Zhao et al. established a patient-derived hepatobiliary tumour organoid model and combined it with single-cell transcriptome sequencing technology. They found that higher levels of hyperoxia signalling in metabolically predominant subpopulations of the organoids upregulated nuclear paraspeckle assembly transcript 1 (NEAT1) expression, which led to an increase in the CD44+ subpopulation, activation of the JAK-STAT pathway and subsequent drug resistance in these subpopulations. To elucidate the applicability of tumour organoids to the inherent resistance of PLC and the mechanism of acquired resistance, Xian et al. studied HCC PDOs and a xenograft model, reporting that the majority of PLC PDOs showed in vitro resistance to lenvatinib but in vivo sensitivity. Additionally, in four cases of HCC organoids with acquired sorafenib resistance, induction of phosphorylated S6 kinase promoted the survival and drug resistance of tumour cells through activation of the mTOR pathway, and inhibition of this signalling pathway could be a strategy for treating acquired drug resistance. Wang et al. used HCC organoids from patients with HCC to study drug resistance, and found that FZD was the most important drug target for the treatment of HCC, and that the FZD10/β-catenin/c-jun/MEK/ERK signalling axis determines the resistance of HCC cells to lenvatinib treatment. Further studies demonstrated the important role of FZD10 in the maintenance of HCC stem cell properties and in the resistance to lenvatinib, which provided a new target for HCC prevention and treatment.
Drug prediction is another important application of HCC organoids in precision medicine. Castven et al. found that organoids from primary HCCs carried known driver mutations, such as TP53, KRAS and CTNNB1, and that after treatment with therapies targeting KRAS, MET and KIT, HCC organoid sensitivity did not correlate fully with the presence of these driver mutations. Li et al. found that pan-effective drugs uniformly inhibited the growth of many cancer organoids, but other drugs were only moderately effective in a few organoids from the same patient, highlighting the replication of tumour heterogeneity by organoids. Identifying reliable biomarkers that can accurately predict drug response is essential for effective cancer treatment. Ji et al. used multi-omics data to construct an elastic net model capable of accurately predicting drug responses, identified all possible drug combinations for each of the 76 drugs tested, and found that lenvatinib may have a better effect in combination with either YM155 or tilomox. This study also predicted that HCC organoids resistant to lenvatinib or tilomox would be sensitive to their combination. These experimental studies demonstrate the potential of HCC organoids for drug screening, study of resistance mechanisms and prediction of drug response; they also provide suitable organoid models for targeted therapies and precision drug administration.
Patient-derived cancer organoids are important models for cancer heterogeneity and precision oncology studies, and systematic characterisation of organs using multiple levels of genotype-phenotype data is required for precision therapy. Wang et al. used a human leukocyte antigen (HLA)-class I algorithm based on whole-genome sequencing (WGS) to analyse the immunogenic potential of neoantigen peptides in liver and bile duct tumour tissues and matched organoids. By integrating multi-omics analysis (including WGS, RNA sequencing, single-cell RNA sequencing [scRNA-seq], and mass spectrometry analysis), the tumour organoid model was used as an in vitro platform to assess the immunogenicity of 93 neo-antigen peptide candidates, providing a practical strategy for the effective screening and rapid validation of neoantigen peptides in precision immunotherapy. Additionally, Ji et al. established a large-scale (65 strains) and all-type (four liver cancer types) patient-derived HCC organoid biobank, and for the first time systematically characterised HCC organoid models in a multi-omics manner, including genome, epigenome, transcriptome and proteome. Based on the multi-omics data, four molecular subtypes of HCC, the potential therapeutic target (glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase) and drug combination regimens (synergistic oncogenic effect of lenvatinib combined with the mTOR inhibitor temsirolimus) were identified, greatly advancing the development of precision therapy for HCC. Yang et al. used a large-scale biobank of 399 HCC organoids obtained from 144 patients with HCC, and revealed inter- and intra-tumoral heterogeneity through multi-regional organoid analyses, including genomic profiles and drug responsiveness heterogeneity. They identified c-Jun as a major mediator of resistance to lenvatinib through JNK and β-catenin signalling pathways, and overcame this resistance by synthesising the compound PKUF-01 (a combination of lenvatinib and c-Jun inhibitor), which is clinically important for precision medicine in HCC. Ma et al. developed a lamination-based organoid spatially resolved transcriptomics technology ( A), which provided an automated and integrated spatial transcriptomics method suitable for standardised and rapid characterisation of organoids derived from primary tissue. This method preserves the composition of nearly all cells within the organoid and maintains their regional distribution, enabling spatial annotation at the single-cell level. The technology integrates STEREo-seq with lamination techniques to form a closed-loop analytical workflow, revealing the specific aggregation patterns of hepatocytes within organoids and providing new insights into hepatocyte interactions ( B–F). 
Immunotherapy has become a revolutionary approach to treating cancer, especially for advanced cases that cannot be treated with surgery or have spread to other parts of the body. The use of organoid technology in conjunction with immunotherapy has the potential to benefit patients with advanced liver cancer. The key to applying immunotherapy is identifying patients who are sensitive to immune checkpoint inhibitors (ICIs). Zou et al. developed an organoid chip-based mesenchymal stromal cell-patient derived organoids-peripheral blood mononuclear cell (MSC-PDO-PBMC) model to create a TME and assessed its sensitivity to immunotherapeutic drugs (e.g., the anti-programmed death-ligand 1 [PD-L1] drug atezolizumab), and found that the accuracy of predicting immunotherapeutic responses in HCC patients could be significantly improved by a microfluidic microarray-based high-throughput drug screening platform, which was superior to the traditional PDO model. Using a combination of organoid platforms and multi-omic sequencing, Wang et al. screened for neo-antigenic peptides, including peptides derived from the TP53 R90S mutation, then used an ICI to enhance the anti-tumour activity of neoantigenic peptide-specific CD8 T cells, assessed the effect of ICIs on the efficacy of neoantigenic peptides, and explored a solution for the low response rate to ICIs in HCC treatment.
Single-cell transcriptomic and functional analyses have shown that CSCs in HCC are highly heterogeneous, with different CSC subpopulations (defined by surface markers such as CD24, CD44 and EpCAM) that exhibit different molecular features and oncogenic drivers, contributing to intra-tumour diversity and tumour progression. , , Combining organoid and single-cell sequencing technology can resolve the gene expression profiles at the individual cell level and identify the unique features of different cellular subpopulations, thus revealing intra-tumour heterogeneity and providing important support for the study of drug-resistance mechanisms and precision medicine. Zhao et al. sequenced hepatobiliary tumour organoids derived from seven patients to generate single-cell profiles containing 22,505 cells and identified cellular subpopulations with different metabolic profiles in different organoids using principal component analysis and uniform manifold approximation and projection analyses; these play different roles in tumour evolution and included CTNNB1, glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate dehydrogenase (GAPDH) and NEAT1. The CellPhoneDB analysis further showed that the expression ratios of CSC markers varied greatly in different organ classes, with CD44+ cell clusters showing higher drug resistance in metabolically dominant organ classes enriched in hypoxic signalling. The study also suggested that the combination of GAPDH and NDRG1 expression could be used as an independent risk factor and predictor of patient survival, providing a potential biomarker for precision treatment of hepatobiliary tumours.
Additionally, single-cell studies have provided insight into the heterogeneity of stromal and immune cells within liver cancer. Multiple cell populations of tumour-associated macrophages, cancer-associated fibroblasts (CAFs) and tumour-associated endothelial cells exhibit differential expression of factors that influence hypoxic responses and TME remodelling, , suggesting that complex interactions shape tumour heterogeneity and may involve potential therapeutic targets. It has been shown that non-stem tumour cells could acquire CSC-like properties through trans-differentiation, with drivers including transcription factors such as KLF-4, and that this plasticity further exacerbates tumour heterogeneity and complicates therapeutic targeting. , With the development of emerging technologies such as scRNA-seq, organoids from liver cancer patient tissue may be promising translational models to reveal the mechanisms of tumour heterogeneity. Future studies could further optimise the model and reveal the spatiotemporal dynamics of heterogeneity regulation through multi-omic integration (e.g., single-cell assay for transposase-accessible chromatin sequence (sATAC-seq), spatial proteomics) and microfluidic chip co-culture technology, ultimately realising the leap from basic research to precision therapy in the clinic.
Diagnosis and treatment are both crucial for patients with PLC, and the properties of liver cancer organoids show great potential to improve the efficiency and accuracy of both. For diagnosis, liver cancer organoids can provide a highly simulated model of the TME, enabling investigators to identify biomarkers more accurately and with high specificity. By comparing differences in gene expression patterns and protein levels between healthy tissues and liver cancer organoids, molecular markers that are significantly altered only in the cancer cells can be identified, helping to improve diagnostic accuracy and inform individualised medical strategies by predicting which patients are more sensitive to specific treatments. , Therapeutically, it is often difficult to achieve optimal results using standard therapies because of the unique genetic background and molecular characteristics of each patient's tumour. Using liver cancer organoid technology, physicians can test the effects of multiple drug combinations to quickly screen for the most effective treatment options; this not only speeds up the search for a personalised treatment strategy, but also reduces the risk of unwanted side effects. In addition, by observing changes in liver cancer organoids before and after treatment, investigators can also gain insights into how tumours develop drug resistance and how this can be overcome, leading to the development of new anti-tumour drugs or combination therapies. 
In conclusion, liver cancer organoids represent an advanced in vitro model with the advantage of closely mimicking the biological properties of tumours in vivo; they play a key role in promoting the development of precision medicine for liver cancer. This technology offers unprecedented opportunities to improve the prognosis of liver cancer patients, both from the perspective of improving diagnostic accuracy and optimising treatment.

5

## Techniques for generating liver cancer organoids
As emerging and remarkable models for preclinical research, organoids must be combined with specific engineering techniques to facilitate efficient output and stable maintenance of phenotypic characteristics after output. A novel automated organoid culture platform established by Jiang et al. and consisting of two modules, M1 (a microfluidic system) and M2 (a customised 3D droplet printer), achieved highly uniform, high-throughput organoid production and distribution. The organoids prepared using this method were highly similar to their source tissues in terms of morphology, histology and gene expression, and reached the size required for drug screening (>400 μm) within 1 week, which meets the need for rapid personalised drug screening. Schuster et al. developed an automated, high-throughput microfluidic 3D organoid culture and analysis system that integrated two microfluidic chips with multiplexing for self-controlled fluid delivery and multicavity arrays for 3D cell culture ( A–C), enabling automated operation of hundreds of parallel culture pools, dynamic adjustment of culture conditions, and real-time imaging monitoring ( D–F). This system was particularly suitable for the culture of tumour organoids and drug efficacy screening studies, helping to facilitate therapeutic decisions for personalised treatment. 
Prior to this, the traditional organoid production process was the dispensing method, which involves embedding isolated cells in ECM, such as matrix gel or basement membrane extract, and distributing them in the form of domes, droplets or suspended hydrogel filaments into multi-well plates for culture. This process involves labour-intensive manual pipetting and handling of individual organoids, which is inconvenient and leads to a lack of uniformity in the size and cellular composition of the generated organoids ( A). Furthermore, as the organoids grow and expand during 3D culture, the core has less contact with fresh medium. As a result, the growing organoid is not supported by oxygen and nutrients, and removal of waste generated in the core region is limited, leading to the emergence of necrosis in the central core; this must be prevented by contact with fresh medium. Using microfluidics, organoid culture can be carried out in a controlled environment with optimised temperature, pH, nutrient and oxygen supply and waste removal, , all of which are important for high quality organoid generation and maintenance ( B). Telles-Silva et al. constructed microchannels and microchambers on a microfluidic chip to cultivate hepatic organoids, and used a micrometre-scale microfluidic chip to precisely control environmental factors and physiological parameters such as nutrients and oxygen to reduce the influence of human factors and make hepatocytes with functionality close to in vivo levels. Ya et al. successfully developed a biomimetic hepatic lobule chip using microfluidic guidance to construct a self-assembled perfused hepatic sinusoidal network that could regulate oxygen concentrations in different areas. This solved the lack of vascularisation associated with an organ cultured in matrix gel, allowing liver organoid function to be maintained in the long term. Wang et al. developed a liver organoid chip using polydimethylsiloxane, which was designed to allow 3D cell culture while maintaining medium circulation, solving the problem of organoid vascularisation. Advances in microfluidics and organoid vascularisation have enabled controlled design of organoids with basic structural and physiological characteristics as well as microstructures and parameters close to in vivo conditions, , , guaranteeing adequate and high-quality models for precision therapeutic research and drug development. 
Three-dimensional bioprinting is widely used in biomedical engineering. Its development has opened a new chapter in bioengineered medicine, and it plays an important role in the construction of organoid models. Jian et al. used droplet-based 3D bioprinting to co-print hepatic progenitor cells (HepaRG), human umbilical vein endothelial cells, and hepatic stellate cells with different charged sodium alginate-based and dipeptide-based bioinks to construct liver organoids featuring biomimetic lobular structures. These bioprinted organoids maintained structural integrity and multicellular distribution while demonstrating significantly enhanced cell viability, albumin secretion and urea synthesis compared with 2D cultures. This provides a novel construction platform for liver organoids and meaningful insights for new drug discovery, allowing the study of cancer cell behaviour, drug response and interactions with other cell types, such as endothelial cells, in a more physiological 3D structure. In addition to microfluidics, the vascularisation problem in organoids can also be solved using 3D bioprinting ( C). Bioprinting of vascularised liver cancer organoids or tumour tissues can be achieved by incorporating endothelial cells and sacrificial bioinks to create a perfusable vascular network in 3D tumour constructs, which allows for a better supply of nutrients and oxygen as well as removal of waste products, thus enabling long-term culturing and study of tumour models. Bernal et al. combined bioprinting technology and organoid technology to develop a new 3D printing strategy called volumetric bioprinting technology, which is driven by light without using a layer-on-layer printing method ( A). Printing positive and negative features at high resolution (41.5 ± 2.9 μm and 104.0 ± 5.5 μm, respectively) ( B,C) can quickly (within 20 s) shape complex centimetre-level 3D structures to construct liver organoid-supported hydrogels with complex structures ( D). Moreover, biofactories with different geometric structures printed by volumetric bioprinting technology can regulate the function of the embedded liver organoids ( E), demonstrating the potential of this technology in the simulation of liver metabolic function. 

6

## Deficiencies and challenges of liver cancer-derived organoids
Liver cancer organoids are excellent preclinical models capable of retaining and reproducing the characteristics and complexity of primary tumours, making them highly suitable for drug screening, resistance studies and treatment prediction. However, there are significant challenges and limitations associated with their production, culture and maintenance. Organoids reflect the interactions between cells and the ECM, addressing the limitations of traditional 2D cell culture systems where cells lack communication and interaction. However, they are currently limited to interactions between liver cancer cells and do not capture the interactions between liver cancer cells and stromal cells (such as hepatic stellate cells and vascular endothelial cells) or immune cells. These cells constitute the primary components of the TME and play crucial roles in tumour invasion, metastasis and migration, and the accumulation of tumour heterogeneity. Additionally, organoids lack support from immune cells, stroma and blood cells, , leading many existing organoid models to be unaffected by inflammatory responses. Therefore, co-culture of liver cancer organoids with these cells has become essential.
Co-culture is a method of introducing different cell types together in the same culture environment ( A). CAFs make up the majority of the TME and play an important role in tumour cell proliferation, maintenance of stemness and drug resistance during cancer progression. Farin et al. established a co-culture model of CRC organoids and CAFs and found that in the absence of growth factor supplementation, the CAFs were able to maintain CRC PDO proliferation in hydrogel and restore key biological pathways that were present in primary tumour tissue but missing when CRC PDOs were cultured alone. This suggests that the established CRC PDO-CAFs co-culture model is suitable for evaluating standard therapy drugs and provides a new technological platform for achieving precision medicine. In the context of liver cancer, Zou et al. co-cultured fibroblasts, liver cancer organoids and peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMCs) to establish a CAF-PDO-PBMC model, which recreated a microenvironment similar to that of the primary tumour, including promoting macrophage survival and M2-type differentiation. Additionally, for ICIs such as anti-PD-L1 drugs, the CAF-PDO-PBMC model predicted patient treatment responses more accurately than traditional PDO models, providing a precise platform to investigate the efficacy of immunotherapy in HCC patients. Zou et al. isolated CD8+ T cells from patient peripheral blood and co-cultured them with autologous HCC organoids to mimic the heterogeneity of the tumour and the TME to assess the killing activity of targeted T cells. In this co-culture system, CD39+ CD8+ T cells had a stronger tumour cell killing ability compared with CD39- CD8+ T cells, which is an important indicator of potent immune cells and provides a new strategy for further improvement of HCC immunotherapy. Classical organs with functional vasculature are closer to in situ human tissues in terms of structure and function and are, therefore, more suitable for disease modelling. Organoid vascularisation is a critical issue that affects organoid maturation, long-term maintenance and the ability to reflect the TME; this is equally true for liver cancer organoids. There are two methods for organoid vascularisation: in vivo and in vitro vascularisation. In vivo vascularisation involves implanting organoids into animals to construct organoids with vascular networks, whereas in vitro vascularisation is achieved by combining platforms such as hybrid cell culture, gene editing and microfluidics. Lim et al. used a hydrogel system to establish a co-culture model of HCC organoids and vascular endothelial cells, which was found to recapitulate known vascular secretory signalling. Following RNA sequencing and transcriptomic analysis of co-cultures and monocultures, upregulation of gene expression associated with tumour necrosis factor signalling was observed, indicating that endothelial cells induce HCC cells to generate an inflammatory microenvironment by recruiting immune cells. This provides new clues for exploring the development of HCC and identifying new therapeutic targets to achieve personalised treatment. Vascular support during organoid culture can also be optimised using the bioprinting and microfluidics techniques described above. 
The duration of organoid preservation is another important issue that limits the effective and long-term use of the model. If organoids can be ‘dormant’ like traditional 2D cells, i.e., they can be frozen when they are not needed and revived for use when needed using a ‘freeze-resuscitate-freeze’ cycle like traditional cell lines, the research efficiency of organoids can be greatly improved ( B). However, this is difficult to achieve with existing technologies, and many issues have been encountered in the organoid preservation process. During freezing or thawing, the 3D cellular structure and tissues of organoids may be damaged by ice crystal formation, which is a key problem in long-term organoid preservation. Lu et al. encapsulated gastrointestinal organoids in core–shell hydrogel, which protected them from some damage during cryopreservation, but mechanical damage, such as deformation of the shell layer, could occur during thawing, affecting the integrity of tissues. Additionally, mainly gastrointestinal organs were tested, and the applicability of other types of organs needs verification. Therefore, standardisation of cryopreservation protocols for different types of organoids and ensuring the reproducibility of resuscitation after long-term storage remains an area for further study. The recent report by Xue's team of a method for cryopreserving cerebral cortical organoids using methylcellulose, ethylene glycol, DMSO and Y27632 (known as MEDY) without disrupting the neuronal cellular structure and functional activity and maintaining pathological features after thawing is a significant breakthrough and a promising result, which may lead to the development of techniques for long-term preservation of other organoids, including hepatic organoids.
The systematisation of human organs is another great challenge. Although each organ performs its unique physiological function, the human body is an organic whole. There are interconnections and influences between the organs; damage to one organ will affect the normal function of another organ, and the occurrence of disease involves synergistic effects on multiple organ systems. Consequently, the development of a purely single-organ model is insufficient to show a holistic view of the interconnections of the organism. The maintenance of liver function is highly related to other organs such as the gallbladder, pancreas and intestines, making it important to develop co-culture models of liver organoids with these organs ( C). Koike et al. achieved co-culture of liver, gallbladder and pancreatic organoids by first differentiating human PSCs into foregut and midgut spheroids and then inducing the formation of organ progenitors through the fusion of foregut–midgut stem-cell spheroids. This hepatobiliary–pancreatic integration model provided a valuable experimental platform for the study of the interactions and regulatory mechanisms during the development of these organs. The development of organoid microarrays is underway, and advanced microarrays allow the study of interconnections and interactions between different organoids. Tao et al. created a model of iPSC-derived hepatopancreatic islet organoids by modifying previous organoid microarrays such that the two organoid types were co-cultured in the same circulatory system. When cultured under the same conditions, the co-cultured organoids exhibited higher cell viability and organ functional maturity than those cultured alone, further emphasising the importance of inter-organ interactions. However, although liver organoids can be co-cultured with other organoids, current cultures are unable to reproduce the complex network of different systems in the human body, which is a limiting factor in the study of the coordinated roles of different organs.
In addition to the three major challenges mentioned above, the widespread clinical application of organoid technology is influenced by several factors. First, the standardisation of organoids remains an issue. Currently, there is no unified standard for assessing the quality of organoids, such as how to define whether an organoid is ‘mature’ or ‘functionally normal’. There is also no standard for identifying optimal culture conditions for each type of organoid. The absence of a consistent evaluation system makes it difficult to compare findings across different studies and clinical applications. To ensure that organoids can be reliably used in treatments and research, strict standardised protocols must be established to guarantee their quality and consistency. Second, while high-throughput technologies enable rapid generation of large quantities of organoids and large-scale drug screening, these technologies require advanced technical support, including automated equipment, precision control systems and data analysis software. The development and maintenance of these technologies demand specialised expertise and significant financial investment, which may limit widespread clinical use. Additionally, patients' waiting time is a critical concern; the process of creating organoids and achieving functional maturity takes time, yet patients' medical conditions may not allow for delays. Shortening this waiting period remains a challenge that further limits broad clinical adoption of organoids. Another important consideration is the current lack of unified ethical guidelines and national regulations governing organoid use. Establishing relevant policies at the national level or harmonising ethical requirements across hospitals is indispensable, and would ensure that clinical trials involving organoids adhere to ethical standards and operate under regulatory oversight, thus preventing societal misuse or ethical controversies. Such measures are vital for fostering the vital and sustainable development of organoid technology.

7

## Summary and prospects
Organoid technology has developed rapidly in recent years, and in particular, the construction of patient tissue-derived organoids has been favoured by an increasing number of investigators. Most notably, organoids are an excellent preclinical model that can more realistically reflect the characteristics of human beings. While organoids show great potential, there are many challenges in the construction process despite the availability of appropriate engineering techniques for implementation. First, the cost of materials such as matrix gels used to construct organoids is often prohibitively high due to the inclusion of various growth factors; this prevents organoids from becoming an economical research model with widespread application. Second, the success rate of organoid construction is not only associated with components such as matrix gel and culture medium, but is also closely related to the degree of differentiation of the tissue itself, which varies greatly at different tumour stages, and varies from organoid to organoid. Furthermore, when simulating human physiology, although organoids can recapitulate genetic profiles and the histological structure of the primary tumour, some research has shown that there are differences in gene expression levels between tumour organoids and primary tumours. , These differences may affect the similarity between the organoid model and the parental tumour, making it unable to fully reflect the true characteristics of the tumour.
Although current organoid technology has many limitations in the field of liver cancer research, new and updated versions of organoid technology should provide important advantages in clinical translation and precision medicine. In the future, it is likely that organoid culture and applications such as drug screening and the identification of therapeutic efficacy will be standardised, allowing more comprehensive and appropriate application to clinical research. At the same time, future research should refine culture methods for rare and heterogeneous cancer organoids and apply them to precision medicine to promote individualised medical treatment and accelerate the development of new drugs. This should help open a new path for medical research, helping patients to find precisely adapted therapies and providing tailor-made treatment solutions for more diseases. This is likely to be a difficult project that requires the concerted efforts of both organoid investigators and clinicians. We believe that organoid technology can achieve greater results and stimulate greater advances in the field of cancer precision medicine in the future.

## CRediT authorship contribution statement
Jiaye Mo: Writing – review & editing, Writing – original draft, Investigation, Formal analysis. Da Gong: Writing – review & editing, Visualization, Methodology. Mei Zhai: Visualization, Resources. Jintao Yang: Software, Investigation. Zhike Li: Visualization, Formal analysis. Meilong Wu: Writing – review & editing, Visualization, Funding acquisition. Xuesong Deng: Writing – review & editing, Supervision, Resources, Funding acquisition, Conceptualization. Xiaoyong Dai: Writing – review & editing, Visualization, Validation, Supervision, Project administration, Funding acquisition, Formal analysis, Conceptualization.

## Informed consent
Not applicable.

## Data availability statement
Not applicable.

## Ethics statement
No need for ethical approval.

## Declaration of Generative AI and AI-assisted technologies in the writing process
Not applicable.

## Funding
This work was financially supported by the Shenzhen Fundamental Research Program (JCYJ20240813112004006); the Shenzhen Health Talent Program (2022); the Shenzhen Municipal Science and Technology Foundation (JCYJ20240813141046059); the GuangDong Basic and Applied Basic Research Foundation (2023A1515110688, 2024A1515220011); and the Guangdong Medical Science and Technology Research Fund (A2024025).

## Declaration of competing interest
The authors and funders declare no conflicts of interest. The final decision on the manuscript and whether to publish the findings was made by all authors.

 

## Acknowledgments
We would like to thank Synorg Biotechnology Co., Ltd., for providing the concepts and support for the engineered organoid technologies discussed in this review.