822acssdJournal of Chemical Theory and ComputationJ Chem Theory ComputPMC1041386310413863104138633747078410.1021/acs.jctc.2c01306SiteFerret: Beyond
Simple Pocket Identification in
Proteins
GagliardiLuca RocchiaWalter 1CONCEPT Lab, Istituto Italiano di Tecnologia, Via Melen - 83, B Block, 16152 Genova, Italy*Email: luca.gagliardi@edu.unige.it;
*Email: walter.rocchia@iit.it.
2072023191552425242–52591182023© 2023 The Authors. Published by American Chemical SocietyPermits the broadest form of re-use including for commercial purposes, provided that author attribution and integrity are maintained (https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/).

## Abstract
 We present a novel method for the automatic detection
of pockets
on protein molecular surfaces. The algorithm is based on an ad hoc
hierarchical clustering of virtual probe spheres obtained from the
geometrical primitives used by the NanoShaper software to build the
solvent-excluded molecular surface. The final ranking of putative
pockets is based on the Isolation Forest method, an unsupervised learning
approach originally developed for anomaly detection. A detailed importance
analysis of pocket features provides insight into which geometrical
(clustering) and chemical (amino acidic composition) properties characterize
a good binding site. The method also provides a segmentation of pockets
into smaller subpockets. We prove that subpockets are a convenient
representation to pinpoint the binding site with great precision.
SiteFerret is outstanding in its versatility, accurately predicting
a wide range of binding sites, from those binding small molecules
to those binding peptides, including difficult shallow sites.

statusreleaseddisplay-pdfyesis-in-collection-domainyesis-olfnois-manuscriptnois-preprintnois-journal-matternois-scannednois-retractednoReceived 2022 Dec 23; Collection date 2023 Aug 8.

1.

## Introduction
The automated prediction
of protein active sites for biological
processes (e.g., protein–protein or protein–ligand binding
regions) is a central problem in computational biophysics. It has
fundamental implications for structural biology and drug design. Predicting protein–ligand binding regions
is particularly relevant in this respect. Indeed, identifying candidate
binding sites is an essential preparatory step for rational drug design.
Due to its importance and difficulty, the problem of binding site
prediction has been tackled by many methods. They fall into three
broad categories: (a) Evolutionary and
template-based (i.e., based on multiple sequence alignments): These mainly address the problem from a biological
perspective. (b) Energy-based , (binding sites are assessed
by estimating the interaction energies between protein atoms and a
probe representing a small molecule): These address the problem from
a physicochemical standpoint. (c) Geometry-based: These use properties
of the molecular surface (MS) to infer the presence of potential binding
sites.
In this work, we mainly focus on geometric methods.
1.1.

## Pocket Generation in Geometric Methods
Geometric methods, in turn, fall into the following subcategories:
(1) Sphere-based: pockets and cavities are defined using spherical
probes that fill voids on the surface. , (2) Grid-based:
the protein volume is mapped onto a three-dimensional (3D) grid. Then,
according to different geometric criteria, one identifies the grid
points belonging to the pockets/cavities. − (3) Tessellation/α-shape-based: these methods
define pockets via filtered subcomplexes of the Delaunay triangulation
of the MS (α-shape-based approach). , (4) Surface-based: this much smaller set of methods identifies binding
sites using local analytical geometric properties of the MS (e.g.,
curvature). Interestingly, there is a
resurgence of surface-based methods to address the less explored problem
of protein–protein interaction. Several approaches use a combination of the methods above (e.g.,
sphere and grid). 
In geometric
methods, a special role is played by the MS concept. A protein’s
MS is the region accessible by the solvent (water) and is the natural
search area when seeking binding regions. Here, using the MS definition,
we focus on the solvent-excluded surface (SES) or Connolly surface
of a protein, − which is defined as the separation surface between
locations that can be accessed by a spherical probe representing water,
and locations where the probe is hindered by the protein’s
atoms, described as hard spheres. Geometrically, the SES can be imagined
as the result of the spherical water probe rolling over the protein’s
van der Waals volume. The SES comprises exposed regions that are locally
convex and coincide with atoms and atom parts that most protrude into
the solvent, and concave re-entrant regions. For more details on the
SES and how it differs from the SAS (solvent-accessible surface),
the reader is referred to ref ( ) and to the Supporting Information of ref ( ). In this framework, one
should seek a potential binding site among the concave regions of
the MS (e.g., pockets, clefts/grooves, and invaginations).

1.2.

## Ranking the Candidates
In most site
identification methods, the second step is to rank the identified
candidates. Often, ranking criteria rely on physics-based scores,
which are not trained on available data. Despite its simplicity, one
of the most widely adopted and successful scoring systems of this
kind is based on volume. , Alternative descriptors
include the degree of buriedness and
descriptors based on chemical or biological properties, such as the
evolutionary conservation of the constituting residues. , 
Different approaches rank pockets according to more complex
scoring functions that are trained or fitted on available datasets. , , Such scores, obtained via standard
techniques such as logistic regression or more modern such as Support Vector Machine, estimate the probability that a pocket is ligandable/druggable.
Given the growing availability of crystallographic data, modern
computational algorithms can leverage a vast amount of information,
fostering the emergence of data-driven/machine learning (ML) methods. , − As described above, statistical learning methodologies
are used in the scoring phase only. However, ML methods can also be
used as a standalone tool to directly select the binding region of
interest. ML methods may heavily rely on chemical information that
is gathered (i.e., learned) from large protein–ligand binding
datasets containing labeled examples. , These often
rely on some (strong) assumptions about the nature and distribution
of negative samples (i.e., regions not observed in contact with the
ligand are usually labeled as nonbinding). This is an open question, since truly negative samples can hardly
be ascertained, and may turn into positive as soon as a ligand is
found to bind them. For a conceptualization of this problem and a
possible solution in the field of ML and kernel methods, the reader
is referred to ref ( ). Despite the increasing presence of standalone ML approaches, there
is still interest in geometric methods to better rank, interpret,
and hierarchically segment binding regions into subregions of interest
(subpockets). , , , 

1.3.

## State-of-the-Art Site Predictors
In this work, we extensively use Fpocket as a benchmark for binding
site identification, and NanoShaper’s pocket detection function,
which we combine with a volume-based ranking.
Fpocket is an
open-source tool based on Voronoi tessellation and α-shape theory,
which is widely used and serves as standard reference for benchmark
in the literature. , 
NanoShaper (NS) , is an efficient software tool
for building and triangulating complex representations of the MS according
to several definitions, mainly the Connolly/SES. Although NS was mainly
designed for the construction and triangulation of MSs, it also offers
a pocket detection function. This function
defines pockets as the volumetric difference between the space regions
enclosed within the SESs of the protein obtained with two different
probe radii, 3 and 1.4 Å (being the latter the water molecule’s
average radius). The implementation is grid-based as it flags the
grid points that are both inside the 3 Å SES and outside the
1.4 Å SES. Once these grid points are identified, a filtering
procedure is adopted and the pocket is represented by building the
MS of the union of water spheres (1.4 Å) centered on the pocket
grid points. Customarily, only pockets with a volume greater than
that of three water molecules are returned. As originally presented
in ref ( ), the customized
volume-ranked pockets are referred to as NS-Volume. 

1.4.

## SiteFerret
In this work, we introduce
SiteFerret, a new geometry-based approach that identifies good candidate
binding sites by leveraging the information gathered from spherical
probes’ clustering events obtained from the construction of
the SESs at different probe radii. To create a valuable benchmark,
we started from the freely available binding MOAD dataset. For the first time to our knowledge, we use
the Isolation Forest, a classical anomaly detector method, to rank
our candidate pockets, overcoming the two-class discrimination paradigm.
Below, we describe in detail the database we used, the SiteFerret
tool, and we provide extensive comparisons against existing methods
with similar purpose.
Specifically, we independently tested
Fpocket and NS-Volume on the same datasets and with the same evaluation
metrics used to test SiteFerret. Indirect comparison with other methods
can capitalize on the abundance of assessments done on the LIGSITE-PocketPicker
dataset, where many tools, including Fpocket, have been challenged.
However, it is hard to perform a direct and fair comparison. This
is due to the sensitivity to the comparison criteria adopted. With
this in mind, we also perform qualitative comparisons with DogSite and CAVIAR, two
geometry-based pocket detection methods that, like SiteFerret, return
a pocket segmentation in terms of subpockets. Interestingly, we include
in the evaluation also a recent deep-neural-network-based method,
DeepSurf. 

2.

## Material and Methods
The algorithm
proposed in this work is based on the SES constructed
by the NanoShaper software. , The SES is constructed
for different probe radii, ranging from 1.4 to 3.0 Å. NanoShaper
was instructed to report the probe spheres located in the re-entrant
regions, which are then clustered together in order to trace the concave
regions of the SES. To avoid arbitrary assumptions about the distribution
of negative samples and to consider this as a real one-class classification
problem, our scoring strategy uses an unsupervised Isolation Forest
anomaly detection method. The classifier
was trained on geometric features provided by the pocket generation
step and also on chemical information.
Below, we start by illustrating
the datasets, how the pockets are
generated, and the metric used to evaluate how close a pocket is to
an observed binding site. Datasets and metrics form the ground truth
against which SiteFerret is trained and assessed. The third part of
this section illustrates how the learning is performed by treating
this as an anomaly detection problem. Finally, we discuss how the
final ranking is obtained and presented, and how subpockets are considered,
if present.
2.1.

## Datasets
The main dataset is extracted
from the binding MOAD database (BM).
The structures are selected by considering complexes with ligand molecular
weights greater than 200 Da, a resolution better than 2 Å, available
binding data, and limited redundancy (sequence identity ≤ 90%).
The Binding MOAD separates “valid”, i.e., biologically
relevant, from “invalid” ligands (such as co-factors
or binding due to the crystallization process). We only consider the
former. Note that, in contrast to what is often done, we include multimeric
structures in order to also consider the sites at the interface between
different monomers.
We also consider a second dataset, originally
introduced to evaluate the LIGSITEcsc method. It contains 48 complexes (holo) taken from the
RCSB Protein Data Bank as well as their corresponding 48 unbound (apo)
structures. It has been used as a benchmark in several studies. , , , We refer to this dataset as the LIGSITE-PocketPicker database (LP).
Finally, we create a further subset of the BM database by isolating
only protein–peptide cases.

2.2.

## Data Preparation
The BM database
was processed using a homemade Python script , which: (i) Establishes which subset of the PDB file represents the
valid ligand according to the BM website information; (ii) Removes
the ligand and other HETATMs from the input PDB file, and creates
a PQR file using the AMBER force field via the pdb2pqr software; (iii) Exports the valid ligands in an xyz file;
(iv) Creates an ASCII lookup table mapping protein structure and ligand(s),
discarding any invalid ligands and any moiety that does not match
what is expected from the MOAD naming scheme. Furthermore, we also
filtered out structures containing more than 10,000 lines in the PQR
format. This initially resulted in a dataset of 1100 structures and
1808 ligand binding sites (indeed, the same structure can have more
than one valid co-crystallized ligand). In the presence of multiple
co-crystallized ligands, in order to avoid excessive overlap between
the respective sites, we performed a further filtering. First, for
each ligand, we defined the corresponding binding region as the set
of protein heavy atoms lying within 5 Å of any of the ligand’s
heavy atoms. Then, we evaluated the ratios of the cardinality of the
intersection set between every pair of binding regions and that of
the individual regions. If one was above 50%, the corresponding region
was removed. This allowed us to exclude small sites, which are essentially
included in larger ones. Otherwise, we evaluated the degree of overlap
between the observed binding regions via their Jaccard index. A Jaccard index greater than or equal to 30% led
us to discard the region with the higher ratio among those calculated
in the previous step.
1 This filtering resulted in a final
set of 1762 binding sites. Finally, the peptide binding sites were
also discarded, leaving a total of 1647 protein–small-molecule
binding sites.
As per the preparation of the LP database, for
homogeneity and
comparability with previous studies, we removed five holo structures
from the LP database, as previously described (PDB codes: 1CDO, 5CNA, 1IGJ, 1SWB, 1A4J). We also discarded one of the two co-crystallized ligands
from the 4PHV structure. This is because it occupies exactly the same binding
site as another ligand. After this pruning, the total number of remaining
binding sites was 57.
Concerning the apo structures, we first
localized the reference
“ground truth” binding sites by identifying the protein
residues within 5 Å of any co-crystallized ligand heavy atom
in the corresponding holo structures. Then, by sequence alignment,
we found a matching of residues in the apo form. Of these, we kept
only the residues with at least one solvent-exposed atom (in the apo
structure). The solvent-exposed residues were determined by considering
the SES surface of the apo structure with probe radius 1.4 Å (see , APO analysis).

2.3.

## Pocket Generation
In our approach,
candidate pockets are first generated and then ranked. Similarly to
other sphere-based site detection methods,
the main idea behind SiteFerret is that pockets, and cavities in general,
can be well-approximated by the spherical probes used to build the
SES in the concave/re-entrant regions. In SiteFerret, these spheres
are obtained from successive calls to NanoShaper, where the probe
radius is gradually increased from that of a water molecule, 1.4 Å,
to a value of 3 Å. These probe spheres are related to analytical
geometric primitives representing re-entrant concave patches in the
SES surface. , In the α-shapes-based construction
procedure, the probe instances originating the concave patches of
the SES correspond to the so-called “regular facet cells”.
Via NanoShaper, together with the probe instance position, we identify
three protein atoms tangent to it and extract the corresponding trimming
plane as well as the associated normal. During the process of SES
generation with a different probe radius, the probes are progressively
clustered using a tailored hierarchical clustering algorithm. According
to this algorithm, clustering events can occur only between probes
of equal radius or with radii differing by a single increment, corresponding
to δ = 0.1 Å. Given a probe of radius ri, with i being the ith call to NS, we will refer hereafter to “different”
radii only when considering radii that differ by δ (i.e., ri+1 = ri + δ). Only specific conditions, summarized
in , allow a
clustering event between two spheres. Two of these conditions lead
to events that are central features for a putative binding site: a
bottleneck and a so-called radial shift event.
 Formally, a bottleneck forms when two probes of equal
or different
radii are on the opposite sides of the same plane, and the projections
of their centers on that plane coincide and fall within the triangle
formed by the centers of the three tangent atoms defining the plane.
More simply, this type of event is observed in the presence of a narrowing
of the SES, which can be approximately “sealed” on each
side by two opposed probe spheres.
Radial shift clustering events
are related to the concept of pocket
mouth.
The automated identification of mouth openings is one
of the open
problems in cavity detection methods. Our approach is based on the
observation that, when the local surface features become insensitive
to (large) probes, increasing the probe radius causes the probes to
be aligned in the same direction, defined by the same protein atom
triplet. We call these events ’radial shifts’ and the
number of aligned probes the depth index. The above observation explains
the conventional definition of pockets in SiteFerret: a large cluster
terminating in a series of aligned spherical probes. After several
tests, we adopted for the radial shift a threshold value of 4 aligned
spheres of increasing radius (which we define as significant alignment).
In addition, to enforce a minimum size, we also introduced a threshold
value of at least 100 clustered spheres. Slight variations in these
two parameters (aligned “exit” spheres and minimum cluster
size) do not, however, significantly affect the results. Thus, the
concomitant realization of a radial shift of 4 aligned spheres (i.e.,
a pseudo-mouth) and a cluster size equal to or larger than 100 spheres
defines a (conventional) pocket. Pockets can have more than one pseudo-mouth.
It can happen that these pseudo-mouths are located in an intermediate
position within a larger pocket. Therefore, one could provide an irreducible
representation by recording all of the minimal subclusters containing
more than 100 spheres and presenting at least one pseudo-mouth. We
call these subclusters subpockets. Some types of clustering event
and the conventional definition of mouths and of subpockets are illustrated
in . Interestingly,
neither bottleneck nor radial shift clustering events require parametrization
( ).
 Finally, the probe aggregation process considers two
other types
of clustering events: lateral and pyramidal aggregation. The former
is the clustering of probes with the same radius which are tangent
to the same two out of three atoms and are on the same side of each
of the tangent planes. The latter considers two distinct successive
probe radii (therefore the probes are not aligned, and not tangent
to the same three atoms, or it would fall into a radial shift event).
These two types of events without an extra constraint could lead to
percolation of the “pocket” over the surface by successive
aggregation of neighboring probes. Therefore, we introduce two parameters
that control the maximum allowed distance for clustering two probes:
γ for lateral and β for pyramidal aggregation. As shown
in the Supporting Information (Figures
3 and 4), the main effect of β is to increase the total number
of (putative) pockets (and subpockets). In turn, the effect of γ
is to decrease the total number of generated pockets while increasing
their size. Based on this observation, an optimal trade-off could
be found between the size and number of pockets. However, we found
that this choice is suboptimal with respect to the ranking performance.
Thus, β and γ are the basic hyperparameters of our method
and have been determined by considering the algorithm’s ranking
performance. This is discussed more extensively in the following sections.
More details on the types of signature characterizing a clustering
event are given in Table 1 in the Supporting Information.

2.4.

## Subpockets and Clustering: A Comparison with
Similar Approaches
The concept of subpockets has been introduced
by the CAVIAR and DogSite methods in different flavors. In CAVIAR, subpockets
are the result of a post-processing step that borrows techniques and
concepts from image processing (watershed algorithm ). In DogSite, similarly to our method, the concept of a
subpocket is embedded in the procedure adopted to generate the putative
pockets themselves. However, there are two main differences between
SiteFerret and DogSite in this respect: (i) We ensure that all subpockets
are the smallest unique clusters fulfilling our definition of pocket.
In DogSite, subpockets are large core elements, or cavities, which
are subsequently merged into larger pockets. (ii) Our concept of subpocket
is independent of that of narrowing or bottleneck, but related to
the concept of size and pocket mouth/entrance; therefore, we can have
subpockets even in shallow sites.
Our approach is reminiscent
of other sphere-based methods such as SURFNET or PASS, , but it differs from them as follows: (i) SiteFerret’s probe
spheres are always related to the SES traced out by their corresponding
radius (SURFNET uses non-SES-like spheres which are tangent to two
atoms, while PASS uses SES-like spheres but grows them on the van
der Waals surface of previously placed spheres); (ii) SiteFerret uses
a (hierarchical) clustering approach; (iii) SiteFerret’s ranking
score is trained (see ).
In the sense of clustering, our method is
reminiscent of Fpocket,
which uses an ad hoc clustering of α spheres. However, a fundamental difference with respect to Fpocket
is that our spheres are probe instances and as such they are directly
related to the protein’s SES. Indeed, a drawback of Fpocket
is that it can also include protein atoms which are not solvent-exposed
( ).
 
2.5.

## Evaluation of the Generated Pockets
Several binding site prediction methods score generated pockets without
adopting ML or statistical learning approaches. For instance, one
simple yet successful score is based on volume. Other descriptors
can be the degree of buriedness , , , or residue conservation. 
Some methods use ML techniques, such as
regressing methods, trained on given datasets. Fpocket, which is based
on the α-shape complex of the Delaunay triangulation of protein
atoms (see Tessellation Methods in ), returns a score based on five descriptors.
Other examples of linear regressors include the “Simple Score”
of DogSiteScorer, the score of SiteMap, or those derived in druggability studies, such
as the hit rate obtained by NMR-based screening. A drawback of these types of approaches is that one must
choose a (small) set of features on which to build the regression.
On the one hand, this requires a good degree of a priori knowledge
to select the most relevant parameters, which might vary considerably
according to the system and problem considered. On the other hand,
if one considers a large set of (probably redundant) descriptors,
there is an increased risk of overfit and of losing generality. Another
potential problem is to rely too much on the chosen score to be fitted.
A slightly different approach is to directly machine learn a druggability/ligandability
score from a dataset according to a classification
scheme. These methods are very effective
but, similarly to many ML approaches, they rely on the availability
of datasets containing negative examples. This is a major issue in
protein–ligand binding site recognition because the nature
of the problem per se does not allow an unambiguous identification
of a negative example. , While a few pockets have been
labeled nondruggable sites as a result of pharmaceutical screening
campaigns, , one must note that: (i) nothing excludes
the possibility that a drug may eventually be discovered binding in
these pockets; (ii) the concept of druggability, which is restricted
to pharmaceutical applications, is not equivalent to ligandability.
For example, to populate the negative dataset in the DogSiteScorer
algorithm, so-called decoys have been
used. These consist of putative pockets generated by the algorithm
on regions of the structures where no binding has been observed. This
choice, however, is conceptually unsatisfactory since: (i) it is method-specific
(every method will return differently shaped putative pockets); (ii)
false negatives cannot be ruled out. Moreover,
the ligand binding process may structurally rearrange the binding
region, making more questionable strong claims over the nature of
a pocket. 
More recently, researchers
have proposed a new family of data-driven
approaches that use a different strategy. Rather than using ML to
classify/score previously generated putative pockets, they directly
predict the probability that a point on the surface belongs to a binding
region. They then build putative binding regions by clustering nearby
points with a predicted probability greater than some threshold. State-of-the-art
data-driven ML approaches based on this procedure include P2Rank, based on a Random Forest classifier, DeepSite, and DeepSurf, which
use deep neural networks. Their performance is extremely good, despite
the conceptual flaws described above. Indeed, these methods intrinsically need negative examples (e.g.,
in DeepSurf, surface points that are not observed binding are labeled
as nonbinding sites) and suffer from data imbalance problems (the
distribution between positive and negative labels is strongly uneven).
Since the prediction of putative binding regions does not rely on
a previous pocket generation phase, a strong advantage of this type
of methods is that they return a rather small set of putative pockets
compared to other approaches.
After considering these rich and
diverse criteria for evaluating
putative pockets, we opted for an unsupervised method that does not
require explicit negatively labeled samples: the Isolation Forest
anomaly detector. Below, we present a fairly sizeable number of features
to describe pockets, mostly taken from the geometric clustering process,
and we integrate them with others that are chemical in nature.
2.5.1.

## Geometric and Clustering Features
Given a pocket, we consider the ensemble of clustering events that
generated the final cluster during its growth (child nodes). They
are gathered by performing a “pre-order traversal” of
the cluster (step 10 in the algorithm table).
2.5.1.1.

## Geometric Features
1.Number of entrances. As a post-processing
step, pocket entrances are obtained by considering significantly aligned
probes (above the threshold of 4 aligned spheres) and grouping terminal
probe spheres with a radius greater than 2.4 Å. This clustering
step is based on a standard single-linkage procedure where probes
are clustered if their squared distance is smaller than the sum of
their squared radii (orthogonality condition for the power distance ). Entrances are characterized by a center, an
effective radius, and an average depth index. The effective radius
is defined as the average distance of all centers of the clustered
entrance spheres with the geometric center of the cluster plus the
average radius of the cluster. The average depth index is obtained
by averaging all depth indexes of the clustered terminal spheres.
If there are no significant alignments with a radius above the threshold,
the
2.Buried Boolean flag
is assigned, meaning
that the putative pocket is likely in a deep hollow. Note that, by
definition, subpockets have a single entrance associated with their
unique pseudo-mouth. Again, if the terminal sphere is below 2.5 Å,
the subpocket is considered buried.
3.Average entrance (effective) radius:
The average of all entrance radii, where each entrance radius is the
effective radius defined above.
4.(Average) Entrance depth score: Weighted
average of the effective depth of entrances in the putative pocket.
The weight is given by the number of spheres in the entrance cluster.
This descriptor is normalized by the significant alignment (fixed
to 4, see in the previous section) so that 1 would correspond to the
minimum requirement of a pocket pseudo-mouth, and greater than 1 signifies
that the entrance is deep.
5.Number of bottlenecks. 
6.Average bottlenecks radius
7.Average large-aggregation
radius: Average
radius of the large-aggregation clustering events defined in the following
paragraph. The average is weighted by the number of elements in the
clusters prior to merging. A large radius indicates that child node
clusters are merged closer to superficial parts of the SES.
8.Volume: Given that clusters
(putative
pockets) are represented as an ensemble of overlapping probe spheres,
a cluster is associated with a volume and a surface area. Volume and
area are computed via the NanoShaper molecular surface triangulation
of the pocket-clustered spheres (using the NS “Skin”
surface option, which is more robust
for a small set of strongly overlapping spheres). The advantage of this approach is that it is fast and simultaneously
produces the triangulation of the pocket mold, which is one of the
outputs returned to the user.

2.5.1.2.

## Clustering-Event-Based Features
One of the novelties of our approach is that the clustering events
used to build pockets are leveraged as descriptors for the following
learning stage.
The following descriptors are heuristic scores
related to the number of significant clustering events. We introduce
an aggregation list linked to the lateral and pyramidal clustering
events. Given a cluster, the aggregation list is a container where
each entry contains further information about a clustering event (radius
of the probe, cardinality of the clusters before merging) except for
bottlenecks and radial shifts. Similarly to the aggregation list,
given a cluster, we also define a persistence list, which is a container
where each entry is the depth index (number of aligned spheres) of
the sets of aligned spheres whose depth index is larger than the significant
alignment threshold. Below, some scores are normalized by the cluster
number of elements to allow comparability of differently sized clusters.
9.Size: Simple count of the cluster elements.
This correlates to the volume but includes overlaps among spheres.
10.Aggregation score: The
normalized
length of the aggregation list.
11.Persistence score: The normalized
sum of all persistence entries. This corresponds to the number of
aligned spheres (above threshold).
12.Clustering score: The sum of aggregation
and persistence scores. This is a measure of the total number of nontrivial
clustering events.
13.Large-aggregation score: Similar to
the aggregation score, but considering a subset of the aggregation
list (i.e., containing only pyramidal and lateral aggregation events),
which includes only major clustering events. These are selected by
considering the relative size of two clusters before merging, which
must be at least in a ratio of 1–5. That is, the smallest cluster
before merging is at least one-fifth the size of the largest one.
To avoid including irrelevant events related to the early stages of
the clustering process, we consider only events involving clusters
larger than 10 probe spheres prior to merging.

2.5.1.3.

## Compactness
The idea of correlating
compactness with druggability is not new. , We here consider more classical evaluations and some ad hoc descriptors
inspired by our specific clustering algorithm.
14.Volume ratio: Ratio of volume to number
of elements (spheres) in the cluster. This number correlates to the
cluster’s degree of compactness. A small value indicates that
the spheres are more overlapping and vice versa. This is similar to
the ratio between volume and area proposed in ref ( )
15.HW index: (Hakon Wadell) Sphericity,
a measure of how spherical an object is. This is given by the surface
area of a sphere with an identical volume, divided by the object’s
actual surface area2 with A and V the surface area and volume of the putative pocket, respectively.
The closer to 1 this index is, the more spherical is the cluster.
This descriptor was proposed in ref ( )
The following are ad hoc heuristic compactness descriptors
derived from the clustering process. Given the persistence list detailed
above, we introduce the following descriptors:
16.Ramification: The standard deviation
of the persistence list. This is heuristically linked to the degree
of deviation with respect to the average channeling (represented by
the average significant depth or persistence) and represents a measure
of the cluster’s complexity.
17.Protrusion: The difference between
the entrance depth and the average persistence, minus the ramification.
The idea behind this descriptor is to obtain a measure of the cluster’s
complexity closer to the SES surface.

2.5.2.

## Chemical Features
We can easily
assign to each surface region the list of constituting atoms because
they are tangent to corresponding probe spheres. Thus, we can also
generate chemical features for every pocket. To infer the chemical
features, we consider the percentages of representation of each of
the 20 amino acids in a pocket’s composition. A protein’s
residue is considered represented if at least one atom of that residue
is tangent to any of the cluster probe spheres which comprise the
pocket itself. The count is normalized by the total number of residues
found in the pocket. A detailed statistical analysis of amino acid
presence in binding pockets is shown in the Supporting Information (Section 2.3 and Figure 4) and thoroughly discussed
in ref ( ). The other
two chemical descriptors consider the global degree of hydrophobicity
and hydrophilicity of each putative pocket, referred to as hydrophobic
score and hydrophilic score, respectively. Similarly to Fpocket, we
consider the degree of hydrophobicity of the residues, , dividing them into two broad families: hydrophilic and hydrophobic
(following the table published at https://gilles-hunault.leria-info.univ-angers.fr/Idas/proprietes.htm–accessed May 2023, and reproduced in the Supporting Information, Table 4). The hydrophilic and hydrophobic
scores are then computed by simply counting the number of residues
in each class, normalized by the total number of residues. We exclude
glycine from these counts due to its neutral behavior (although it
participates in the normalization).
As discussed in detail in
the Supporting Information (Section 2.2.1),
local hydrophilic and hydrophobic scores, accounting for the spatial
distribution of the hydrophobic and hydrophilic residues within the
pocket, were also implemented to identify if the binding pocket contains
local parts that are rather hydrophobic (hydrophilic). However, this
descriptor is not currently implemented because it did not improve
performance and was computationally demanding (since it requires the
computation of all pair distances between protein atoms of a putative
pocket). A schematic description of how the feature extraction and
ranking are done is given in .
 
2.5.3.

## Evaluation of the Matching of the Pockets
and Binding Sites
To choose which pockets approximate the
observed binding sites well enough to be fed into the ML tool and
to compare the method’s performance against others, we need
to define an evaluation criterion. We require our metric to be based
on the atom composition of putative and observed sites rather than
on concepts that depend on the specific pocket construction or representation
(e.g., spheres, α-spheres, grid
points − , , ). Since our method uses probe spheres that contact at least three
atoms, we used the list of contacted atoms to assess the degree to
which a pocket matches an observed binding site.
Many site detection
methods consider a pocket to be a correct match if its center of mass
lies within 4 Å of any ligand atom. In agreement with the initial
suggestion of the Fpocket authors (who
define a mutual overlap criterion) and with the dogSite method, we instead adopted a score based on combining
two figures of merit, as detailed below. This metric was extensively
tested in ref ( ).
2.5.3.1.

## Ligand Coverage Score (LC)
If
we define as ’contact’ the property of being closer
than 5 Å to an atom center, LC represents the ratio of ligand
heavy atoms that are in contact with at least one heavy atom of the
putative pocket, divided by those in contact with at least one heavy
atom of the entire protein. For a given pocket, we indicate with d(i, j) the Euclidean
distance between the centers of two atoms, with nL being the number of ligand heavy atoms within 5 Å
of the protein that comprises the set, and with nP being the number of protein heavy atoms that belong to the pocket,
producing the set, we have
3 An LC value close to 1, or 100%, denotes a
pocket in contact with most of the co-crystallized ligand.

2.5.3.2.

## Pocket Coverage Score (PC)
A
good LC score alone cannot exclude that there is a large part of the
putative pocket that is not in contact with the ligand (for instance,
the entire protein by definition always scores 100% on LC). To account
for this possibility, we introduce the PC, which represents the fraction
of protein surface atoms that belong to a pocket and that are within
5 Å of any heavy atom of the ligand. This score is the symmetric
version of the LC
4 A large pocket coverage score implies that
only a few atoms of the putative pocket are not in contact with the
ligand. Again, this score alone would not be sufficient to correctly
evaluate a prediction. Indeed, small pockets in contact with a large
ligand would score very high in PC but could nevertheless miss a large
portion of the binding region.
In summary, we consider a putative
pocket to be a correct match if it scores at least 50% in Ligand Coverage
and at least 20% in Pocket Coverage. The obtained evaluation scores
are rounded up to the first decimal in percentage. In some cases,
we made the requirements for the PC score stricter in order to see
whether an approach can more precisely pinpoint a binding site.

2.5.4.

## Nonbinding Pockets as Anomalies: The Isolation
Forest Approach
Due to the above-discussed issues inherent
in defining negative examples for binding sites, we approached the
problem of scoring putative pockets as a one-class discrimination
problem. Namely, we assumed that we only
have samples of the positive class (also referred to as the normal
or inlier class). One-class learning is a task that typically arises
in outlier (anomaly) detection or, more generally, in discrimination
data mining problems, where it is too expensive or challenging to
obtain examples of “the other” class. , , 
For this purpose, we borrowed a standard
unsupervised anomaly detector method, the Isolation Forest (IF). The advantages of IF here are:
it requires minimal parametrization;
it can handle high-dimensional problems with a large
number of irrelevant or redundant attributes (descriptors), which
is ideal, considering our 17 geometric/clustering and 22 chemical
descriptors;
it is highly efficient,
which makes it ideal for large
datasets.
The central rationale of IF is that anomalies are more subject
to isolation under random data partitioning with respect to normal
points (see left panel of ). An IF comprises multiple binary decision trees (iTree)
trained on different random subsets (subsampling) of the training
dataset. In the training phase, each iTree is grown by dividing data
at each node by randomly selecting an attribute (feature) and a split
value. The process terminates when the tree reaches a height limit
or each external node (leaf) contains a single observation.
 Given a sample x = (x1, ···, xn) with xi the ith observation, n the subsample size,
and an observation vector in a d-dimensional feature space, we define h(x) as the path length of an observation (pocket) measured as the number
of edges traversed in a tree (right panel of ). Given a collection of trees, E(h(x)) is the mean of h(x). The anomaly score is defined as
5 where c(n) is a normalization factor corresponding to the average path length
of an unsuccessful search in the Binary Search Tree. Therefore, s → 1 corresponds to a strong anomaly, and s → 0 corresponds to a “normal” sample.
An improved version of IF, named Extended Isolation Forest, was
recently proposed to address some issues related to assigning an anomaly
score to data. This method did not substantially
improve our performance while carrying a significantly higher computational
cost in terms of memory (about 10 times larger than for standard IF).

2.5.5.

## Training, Validation, and Test
The training set for the IF comprises about 86% of the BM dataset
and amounts to a total of 1416 binding sites. The positive samples were selected by selecting all of the “hitting”
pockets according to the metrics detailed in . At this stage, the algorithm
still contains 2 free hyperparameters, γ and β. We ran
the clustering algorithm on the range γ = 0 → 0.7 β
= 0 → 0.6. As discussed in the Supporting Information (Section 1.2), this range covers many pocket numbers
and volumes and returns very high “hit” rates. To maximize
the training set, we used all of the obtained positive examples for
the considered range of hyperparameters. We also considered hitting
subpockets as distinct positive samples. Since the Ligand Coverage
score was on average higher than the Pocket Coverage score, we artificially
replicated entries with a frequency proportional to the PC score, . This informs the IF about
the best training samples by increasing the number of samples with
a large PC score and thus biasing the scoring toward preferring smaller
pockets. The IF was implemented using the open-source Python library
scikit-learn. After several tests, the
IF was trained with the following parameters: no bootstrap (i.e.,
no random repetition of data across the different iTrees of the forest,
since we already introduced replicas in the sample following the PC
score), subsampling size of 256, and 10,000 iTrees. We chose to consider
the geometric and chemical descriptors separately in two distinct
IFs. This allowed us to gain insight into the discriminating power
of geometry/clustering-based and chemistry-based ranking individually.
We found that, when the training included both “master”
pockets (which contain one or more subpockets) and small pockets (such
as subpockets), this negatively impacted the overall performance.
This is probably due to their very different geometric signatures
(see Supporting Information, Section 2.4
and Figure 7). We therefore considered two distinct populations separately:
“large” pockets and “small” pockets, where
large pockets are master pockets that contain more than one subpocket. We therefore trained a total of 4 IFs (1 geometric
+ 1 chemical for the positive samples of each population). In the
validation stage, we selected the optimal clustering parameters, γ
and β, and identifed the combination of the 4 trained IFs delivering
the best performance. In the training phase, we were only feeding
the IFs with the positive samples. During validation, in contrast,
we provided the already trained IFs with all of the generated pockets,
regardless of whether they hit an observed binding site or not. We
then evaluated which combination of IFs, especially of hyperparameters,
yielded the best results.
After several trials, we decided to
use the chemical and geometric forests trained on the “large
pockets” population to provide the main scoring for both large
and small pockets. However, the IFs trained on the “small pockets”
were used to rank subpockets within their parent master pocket, when
present. As illustrated in more detail in the Supporting Information (Section 2.1 and Table 3), we also
found that the best ranking performance was achieved by averaging
the score of the geometric and chemical IFs.
Finally, we found
that γ = 0 and β = 0.9 is the combination
of clustering parameters that yields the best ranking. More details
on the effect of clustering parameters are discussed in the Supporting Information (Sections 1.2 and 2.1,
and Table 2).
As is customary, we assessed the method in the
deployment (test)
phase without free parameters and on a previously unseen set of putative
sites. The main test set corresponded to approximately a fraction
of 14% of the entire BM dataset described in , and it was similar to the test set first
used in the Shrec2022 Computer Graphics benchmark, with the only difference being that the 20 peptide-protein
structures were not included. This resulted in a set of 229 protein–ligand
pairs distributed on 150 structures (versus the 249 sites in ref ( )). We then used the LP
database, which is divided into bound (holo) and unbound (apo) structures.
Finally, we performed a dedicated assessment of the protein–peptide
structures found in the BM (115 entries, see , which were not used in the training).
2.5.5.1.

## Feature Importance Analysis
Given
an unsupervised ML method, which is not constructed around a specifically
designed scoring measure, it is particularly interesting to try to
interpret the results by estimating how the different features impact
the performance. For a simple ML model, such as linear or logistic
regression, one can quickly evaluate the feature importance by analyzing
the coefficients associated with each feature. However, it is more
difficult to interpret complex methods such as random forest or artificial
neural networks. Here, we adopted the Shapley Additive exPlanations
(SHAP) framework, based on cooperative
game theory, to estimate each feature’s relative contribution
to the model outcome. The SHAP method assigns an importance value
to each feature. This value represents the impact of the presence
of that feature on the model prediction. In principle, to compute
it, one would need to retrain the model with that feature withheld
and compare it to the full model. This would imply to retrain the
model on all feature subsets. SHAP effectively approximates this value
and avoids the computationally daunting retraining process.
In particular, we here used the treeSHAP algorithm, which is specifically optimized for ensemble-based decision
tree methods and thus compatible with IF anomaly detection. 

2.6.

## Ranking Protocols and Comparison between Different
Methods
The problem of evaluating pocket detection algorithms
in a reproducible and comparable way is far from trivial. Assessments
of existing methods vary in both the ranking scheme adopted and the
definition of a “correct prediction” (i.e., evaluation
metrics). Here, similarly to what was done in refs ( , , ), we propose
that, for a given structure with one or more known co-crystallized
ligands and a given method returning an ordered list of putative sites,
the final ranking position is given by the number of nonmatching pockets
that occupy a higher position in the prediction list than the hit
pocket. The normalization is then given by the number of observed
binding sites (structure–ligand pairs) rather than the number
of examined structures. In this way, we resolve the issue of structures
having more than one crystallized ligand.
As anticipated in
the Introduction section, we explicitly compared SiteFerret’s
performance with that of Fpocket and with a customized version of
the NanoShaper pocket detection method, which we called NS-Volume and which ranks the pockets generated with NS
by volume. These alternative tools were chosen to allow a fair comparison.
Both Fpocket and NS-Volume could be run on the same datasets and with
the very same evaluation metrics and ranking protocols because they
also return the protein atoms associated with the generated pockets.
For Fpocket, these are the atoms contacted by the α spheres.
For NS, these are the surface atoms facing the triangulated volume
which defines the pocket. This information is needed to compute the
LC and PC scores in . Finally, we also compared SiteFerret to DeepSurf,
a recent deep-neural-network-based method, on the test set of the
BM dataset. This was because we could use the (partially unpublished)
data from ref ( ),
which used the same evaluation metrics as for SiteFerret.
2.6.1.

## Master Pockets and Subpockets
The
raw output of SiteFerret is a score for the pockets found in the structures
that are fed as input. As discussed above, our pocket generation method
means that a generated pocket may contain zero, one, or several subpockets.
If it contains one or more subpockets, we call it a “master
pocket”. As discussed in detail in the next section, for each
returned master pocket, the user is provided with the ranking of internal
subpockets and can inspect them. The full list of generated pockets,
which includes the subpockets isolated from the parent master pockets,
is passed to the IFs for the scoring phase. While the identification
of subpockets is interesting and in agreement with findings in some
recent studies, it also poses the problem of whether the same scoring
system can be used for both classes. We tried to address this issue
in the following ranking protocol.
First, for each master pocket,
we considered only its three top-ranking subpockets and discarded
any further ones. Then, if a subpocket was ranked after its parent
master pocket, it was skipped, since it was already contained in a
pocket higher in ranking. Unless explicitly specified, we did not
consider the segmentation into subpockets when evaluating the master
pocket. However, we tracked the presence of successful subpockets
(according to the same evaluation metrics used for the parent pocket),
as indicated in the footnotes of the tables. We adopted two possible
schemes when evaluating subpockets.
2.6.1.1.

## Single-Pocket Evaluation
According
to this protocol, if present, the three top-ranking subpockets replace
their parent master pocket in the prediction chart. We empirically
established that the master pocket’s score (given by the IF
trained on the population of “large” pockets) leads
to the best ranking performance. Therefore, to build a ranking of
the new ensemble of pockets, we decided that the score of a (former)
subpocket is given by a penalized version of its parent master pocket’s
score, calculated proportionally to its subranking within the parent
pocket
6 with R ≥ 1 being the
subpocket (integer) ranking position and s being
the master pocket’s score (which is lower for higher ranking
positions). Therefore, if a pocket has only one subpocket (R = 1), it is simply substituted for the latter with no
effect on its ranking score (see ). When a pocket contains more than one
subpocket, these are inserted into the ranking according to scores
given by . Pockets
with no subpockets are not affected.

2.6.1.2.

## Nested Evaluation
In this protocol,
if one of the three top-ranking subpockets of a master pocket matches
a binding site according to the current evaluation metric (i.e., the
combination of PC and LC scores), we label the parent master pocket
as successful (even if the entire master pocket would not meet the
PC requirement). When reported, LC and PC scores refer to the system
i.e., the master pocket or, when it does not meet the coverage requirements,
its subpocket, which match the binding site.
The Nested Evaluation
concept stems from evidence that binding sites are often found as
part of more elaborated structures, as observed elsewhere. However, Nested Evaluation can also be seen
as a way to implicitly increase the number of potential candidates,
requiring that the final user look at more than 10 candidate pockets.
This is why we report the results from both protocols.

2.7.

## Summary of SiteFerret Output
In addition
to the ranking of pockets and the geometric/clustering and chemical
features needed to derive it, SiteFerret returns to the user a significant
amount of extra information. For instance, for a given entrance (as
defined previously), the normal (with respect to the plane described
by the protein atoms tangent to the probes) is returned (see a) together with
the corresponding residues. Similarly, for each bottleneck, SiteFerret
provides the user with the bottleneck axis and with the list of associated
residues. The user can also access the entire list of normal vectors
and residues associated with each pseudo-mouth, represented by aligned
probes as described in . SiteFerret also produces visual representations,
which can be loaded in VMD. Pockets are
represented in three ways: (i) as the actual cluster of probe spheres
( a); (ii) in
terms of tangent protein atoms ( a, b, orange spheres); and (iii)
as a triangulated “mold” of the clustered spheres ( b), similarly to
the representation of the pockets returned by NanoShaper. Representation
(ii) is the most useful because it is explicitly related to the protein,
and it is the one considered when applying the evaluation metrics
described in and used to build the tables discussed in .
 To conclude this section, we show in a summary of the SiteFerret
software workflow
as provided to the user.
 

3.

## Results
As described in more detail
in , SiteFerret
was directly compared against
Fpocket and NS-Volume on the BM test set, on the LP dataset (holo
and apo separately), and on a set of peptide-protein complexes excerpted
from the BM dataset. Moreover, it was also compared to DeepSurf on
the BM test set.
3.1.

## Binding MOAD Dataset
Results are
summarized in . While SiteFerret had a lower hit rate in the Top1 and Top3 positions,
it outperformed NS-Volume and Fpocket on Top10. In analogy with previous
findings, DeepSurf was significantly
better than the other methods. However, SiteFerret and DeepSurf had
similar Top10 performance. This suggests that a successful strategy
could involve directly learning the binding regions on the SES (as
done by DeepSurf), rather than building the pockets first and then
using descriptors for ranking. In this regard, as already pointed
out in ref ( ), it
must be noted that DeepSurf has been trained on a very large dataset,
most likely including some of the BM structures. Moreover, unlike
NS-Volume and Fpocket, the hyperparameters of the DeepSurf version
used here were specifically optimized on a similar training set (the
Shrec2022 Computer Graphic Benchmark ).
As indicated in the table footnote, about 87% of the top-ranked 3
subpockets by SiteFerret within successful parent pockets also matched
a binding site. This leads to the analysis proposed in the lower part
of the table, where the PC requirement is increased from 20 to 50%.
This stricter threshold limits the portion of a successful pocket
that is allowed to be not in contact with the ligand. As observed
in the table, this stricter requirement, expectedly, worsens the performance
of all methods. However, the Nested Evaluation in SiteFerret strongly
reduces the gaps with NS-Volume and Fpocket on the top-ranking positions,
with SiteFerret surpassing Fpocket in Top3, and SiteFerret being superior
to all methods, including DeepSurf, on Top10. However, for the single-pocket
evaluation method, where the master pockets are substituted by their
three best ranking subpockets (if any), SiteFerret’s performance
decreases significantly. This is because some of the largest master
pockets are good matches for large ligands, in contrast to their subpockets.
It is also due to the significantly increased number of pockets that
are put into the “hit parade” when the master pockets
are unpacked, that push some successful subpockets below the 10 position.
Finally, NS-Volume clearly outperforms Fpocket when increasing the
Pocket Coverage, highlighting the value of both the generation of
smaller pockets and a simple volume-based ranking criterion.
 
3.2.

## LIGSITE-PocketPicker Database
As
anticipated in , we analyzed this database due to its large popularity in
protein–ligand benchmarks. Importantly, in addition to the
standard bound complexes, corresponding apo (unbound) structures are
also present. This is important because, in any realistic application
of a binding site predictor, only apo structures would be available,
which could significantly differ from their holo counterparts due
to the rearrangements induced by the binding. , 
3.2.1.

## Holo
The 48 bound structures of
the LIGSITE-PocketPicker (LP) database, after the filtering steps
described in , comprise 57 binding sites. Results are shown in for SiteFerret against
Fpocket and NS-Volume. Similarly to what we observed for the BM dataset,
SiteFerret’s performance on the Top1 and Top3 ranked pockets
is inferior to Fpocket and NS-Volume, and superior on the Top10. Again,
the second half of the table shows that, when the stricter requirements
apply, SiteFerret outperforms the competitors in the Nested Evaluation
protocol, while it is inferior when the Single Pocket protocol is
used.
 
3.2.2.

## Apo
There is no well-defined procedure
in the literature to assess the performance of pocket retrieval methods
over unbound structures. Since the exact position of the ligand in
the apo form is unavailable by definition, a specific procedure was
devised to map binding residues in the holo structure to the apo form.
This procedure is detailed in . The LC and PC score definitions are preserved,
provided that one refers to residues rather than atoms. Notably, by
slightly increasing the probe radius used to identify exposed residues
via the SES, one can strongly impact Fpocket’s performance,
which tends to include buried residues in its pockets. This is shown
in detail in the Supporting Information (Section 3 and Table 5).
In terms of residues, the cardinality
of the clusters is much smaller. As such, a quantitative comparison
of the LC and PC score thresholds with the previous analysis based
on atoms is not obvious. Here, we consider the same thresholds as
used before for LC and PC, as well as a smaller LC threshold of 20%.
As illustrated in , the results are more sensitive to the adopted thresholds. Finally,
we note that NS-Volume’s performance is significantly worse
than that of Fpocket and SiteFerret for most of the evaluation criteria.
This seems to be due to NS-Volume’s tendency to present small
pockets, with too few exposed residues. Indeed, NS-Volume’s
performance significantly improved when we lowered the threshold on
the LC score to 20%.
 

3.3.

## Protein–Peptide Binding Sites
Finally, we show the results for the set of 115 protein–peptide
binding sites. Peptides are on average larger than ligands and tend
to occupy large riverbed-like pockets. It is interesting to assess
the method’s performance on protein–peptide sites since
they are both geometrically and chemically similar to protein–protein
interaction sites. The prediction of protein–protein interaction
sites is distinct from and more complex than protein–ligand
binding prediction and goes beyond the scope of the present work.
However, there is remarkable evidence that a suitably adapted computational
method can cover both tasks.
As illustrated in , SiteFerret performs significantly
better on this database than Fpocket and NS-Volume according to all
figures of merit. Here, the number of subpocket hits decreases from
about 90%, found previously on ligand/small-molecule binding predictions,
to 65%. This is due to the size of the peptides, which are often significantly
larger than subpockets.
 
3.4.

## Subpocket Identification and Characterization
To our knowledge, only a few methods leverage the concept of subpockets:
DogSite (and similarly Lsite and Dsite, discussed by the same authors) and the more recent CAVIAR method. In contrast to CAVIAR, which ranks with an ad
hoc scoring based on size and “buriedeness”, DogSite
uses a machine-learned druggability score (DogSiteScorer). However, a weak point of DogSite is its tendency
to generate very large subpockets, which do not capture small and
localized parts of cavities that potentially encompass defined functional
groups of ligands. This ability is instead attributed to CAVIAR. These methods could not be directly included
in the current performance analysis due to the different figures of
merit adopted to evaluate a good hitting pocket, which is based on
a geometric center criterion in one case (a pocket is successful if
its geometric center lies within 4 Å of any ligand atoms, DogSite)
and based on a weak single ligand atom overlapping criterion in the
other case (it is sufficient that one ligand atom overlaps a pocket
grid point for the latter to be considered a correct binding site,
CAVIAR). However, we provide below a qualitative analysis supported
by some examples. We start by analyzing the same examples discussed
in the CAVIAR paper, which also provided a critical comparison with
DogSite. In general, SiteFerret performs a subpocket segmentation
that more closely resembles the segmentation obtained by CAVIAR rather
than that of DogSite. In the next section, we then provide examples
of shallow sites where SiteFerret outperforms several methods, including
CAVIAR and Fpocket.
3.4.1.

## HSP90-α
As a first example,
we present the binding pocket of the chaperone protein HSP90-α,
PDB code 2FWZ. SiteFerret ranks first as a large master pocket containing three
subpockets. As shown in , the first-ranked subpocket (red) is occupied by the ligand’s
adenine head group, while the second-ranked subpocket (orange) is
occupied by the ligand’s iodo-benzodioxole group. As shown
in ref ( ), this result
is very similar to what was obtained by CAVIAR, while DogSite extends
over the two subpockets.
 
3.4.2.

## HIV-1 Protease
Another interesting
example is that of HIV-1 protease (PDB code 1C70), where CAVIAR identifies
seven subcavities, six of which correspond to the standard subsites
of specific amino acid side chains of the peptidic substrate. In this case, DogSite outputs only a single
pocket. Our result lies somewhat between the results of CAVIAR and
DogSite. Indeed, our top-ranked pocket contains 3 out of 5 subpockets
corresponding to sites occupied by the ligand. This is shown in , where the ligand
occupies a channel and the top-ranked subpocket (red) points to one
of the cavity entrances. The 2nd and 4th ranked subpockets (orange
and green) describe two dips within the wide second entrance to the
channel.
 
3.4.3.

## HCV NS3 Protease
A further interesting
example is HCV NS3 protease (PDB code 3KEE). The binding pocket, ranked second,
is illustrated in (white). The part of the binding site corresponding to the
deeper groove is segmented into 2 subpockets (red, ranked first, and
orange, ranked second) describing cavities separated by a cleft (bottleneck
located at the surface). These subpockets are similar to the one reported
by CAVIAR. However, while CAVIAR and DogSite do not include the remaining
relatively shallow region where the ligand binds (Figure 4c,d in ref ( )), this is part of the
master pocket in SiteFerret (white). Similarly, as shown in b, when running Fpocket
(second-ranked pocket shown), the pocket partially matching the ligand
(pink) roughly corresponds to the top-ranked subpocket in SiteFerret.
This last example also illustrates SiteFerret’s ability to
overcome the aforementioned difficulty in describing shallow sites,
which is commonly found in other pocket detection algorithms. Indeed,
while its top-ranking performance is poorer than the best state-of-the-art
techniques, our method performs outstandingly on difficult shallow
sites. This is suggested by the results on peptide binding sites in and can be further
illustrated with the following examples.
 

3.5.

## Difficult Targets and Shallow Sites
3.5.1.

## Targeting Protein–Protein Interaction
Sites: B-Cell Lymphoma-Extra Large (Bcl-xL)
We consider here
an example of protein–protein (PP) interaction target where,
as pointed out in ref ( ), it is difficult to spot possible binding sites for small-molecule
drugs (in particular, the Authors show the need to resort to light
backbone and side chain movements to “open” these pockets).
We tested SiteFerret on three structures of Bcl-xL. The first (PDB
code 2BWZ) is
a co-crystallized protein–protein structure, the second is
a co-crystallized protein–ligand structure (PDB code 2YXJ) where the ligand
(ABC-753) binds at the PP interface, and finally the apo form corresponding
to the latter (PDB code 1R2D). For the protein–protein and protein–ligand
complexes, as shown in , SiteFerret finds the site of interest within the second
(orange) and the 9th top-ranked pockets (white). We applied the same
quantitative analysis described in and , based
on LC and PC scores but evaluating residues rather than atoms, to
the apo structure. We found that the second ranking pocket is actually
a successful hit (LC ≈ 55% and PC ≈ 80%). The same analysis
done with Fpocket, shows that it performs very well on the PP and
holo structures (the second and the third top-ranked pockets cover
the sites of interest). However, on the apo structure, Fpocket performs
worse than SiteFerret, with the second top-ranked pocket matching
the holo residues with only LC ≈ 36% and PC ≈ 62%, a
score which would not pass our conventional thresholds.
 
3.5.2.

## HIV-Integrase, Hexameric Insulin, and a
Few Systems from the LP Database
Let us now consider HIV-integrase,
PDB code 3LPT, a structure where both DogSite and
Fpocket fail to identify the observed binding site. As illustrated in a, SiteFerret reports this site as the 8th ranked pocket.
Another notably hard example is Hexameric insulin with its ligand
methylparaben, PDB code 1MPJ, where, as reported
in ref ( ), LIGSITEcsc, LIGSITE, PASS, CAST, and SURFNET fail. In addition to
those methods, we tested Fpocket and found that it could not correctly
identify the binding pocket, as well. As illustrated in b, SiteFerret correctly predicted
the binding sits, which ranks 5th. Finally, SiteFerret was able to
reproduce two of the binding sites in the LP dataset (PDB codes 3MTH and 5CNA), where both Fpocket
and CAVIAR failed. These binding sites are characterized by a very
exposed and flat surface. PDB code 3MTH corresponds to a conformation of Hexameric
insulin with methylparaben; here, the
binding pocket ranks 5th (not shown). PDB code 5CNA corresponds to the
complex between methyl α-d-mannopyranoside and concanavalin
A. Restricting our analysis to chain A, as in the LP database, SiteFerret
correctly identifies the binding pocket and places it at the 8th position.
This is shown in c.
 

3.6.

## SHAP Importance Analysis of Features
The SHAP importance analysis is shown in for the clustering/geometric IF (left panel)
and the chemical IF (right panel). The analysis is done on the training
dataset and it highlights the most representative features of binding
pockets observed by SiteFerret in this set. On the y-axis, the plot sorts the features by importance. On the x-axis, the plot represents the SHAP value i.e., the relative
impact on the model outcome. Values on the left of the dashed vertical
line (also called the “decision” line) point to an “anomaly”,
i.e., to a putative nonbinding site, while the values on the right
of the dashed vertical line point to a “normal” point
(i.e., a plausible binding pocket).
 Finally, each dot represents a realization of a
random subset of
the training set. As illustrated in the plot, the numerical values
of each feature are color-coded from blue (lower values) to red (higher
values).
3.6.1.

## Geometric and Clustering Descriptors
The topmost position is occupied by the average radius associated
with bottlenecks and the number of bottlenecks. Given the feature
values, it then appears that the presence of bottlenecks counts positively,
but that too many bottlenecks constitute a strong anomaly score (red
dots with large negative SHAP value). This scenario likely corresponds
to very large pockets. Similarly, many entrances and/or a large effective
radius of the entrance point to an anomaly and highly impact the score.
Many entrances are likely correlated to large canyon-like superficial
pockets. Moreover, features ranked high in importance include those
related to complexity, size of the branching, and others related to
the clustering process. Indeed, ramification, large-aggregation score,
entrance depth score, and large-aggregation radius all appear to be
highly important. The tendency of druggable pockets to be more complex
in shape was also reported in ref ( ). In contrast, a tendency to partially favor
more compact pockets is shown by the volume ratio (high in ranking)
together with other less relevant descriptors related to geometric
compactness and size. The lower importance of these descriptors could
also be due to a partial redundancy with the others.

3.6.2.

## Chemical Descriptors
The SHAP analysis
of the chemical IF shows residues such as CYS, MET, and TRP at the
topmost positions, while some appear low in importance (e.g., PHE).
As discussed in , this result has some interesting analogies with previously published
broader statistical analysis of the binding MOAD dataset. 
Concerning the hydrophilic and hydrophobic
scores, our findings confirm that ligandable pockets mostly tend to
be hydrophilic (as shown by , both large hydrophobic
score values and low hydrophilic score values count against being
a plausible binding site). However, we also show that a certain degree
of hydrophobicity is acceptable (purplish color on the right-hand
side of the decision line, while excessive hydrophobic values count
as an anomaly ). The SHAP analysis also
suggests that the hydrophobic score is a stronger indicator than the
hydrophilic score. As shown in Figure 6 in the Supporting Information, this is justified by the distribution
shape, which is narrower for the hydrophobic score than for the hydrophilic
one (see also ).

4.

## Discussion
The identification of potential
binding sites in a protein structure
is a relevant and much-studied problem. In this context, it is interesting
to identify the features that make a pocket a plausible binding site.
Furthermore, as pointed out by Simões et al., the current problems with site detection algorithms include
the ability to produce a meaningful hierarchical segmentation of cavities
(expressed here as finding meaningful subpockets), and the need to
return both standard deep clefts and shallow sites (grooves). The
latter task often requires dedicated procedures (e.g., in sphere-based
methods to distinguish shallow sites from deeper invaginations, it
could be key to correctly compare the size of the “entrance”
to the value of the mouth radius ).
As shown here, SiteFerret is remarkably successful in reporting,
among the top ten positions, pockets that significantly overlap with
the observed binding site(s), either as a whole or via one of their
three main subpockets. The significance of the subpocket segmentation
is reflected in the remarkable performance achieved when stricter
requirements are adopted in terms of PC.
Overall, evidence suggests
that SiteFerret can correctly identify
shallow sites, although they are rarely ranked in the highest positions.
This is expected since these sites are less frequent and thus less
represented in the training set.
4.1.

## Feature Importance Analysis
In summary,
a good binding pocket is generally determined by a combination of
significant clustering complexity and some geometric compactness,
especially concerning superficial features (e.g., entrances number
and radius thereof, and protrusion). A certain degree of complexity
in the pocket’s structure also seems desirable (i.e., the presence
of bottlenecks, ramification, entrance depth). Interestingly, the
analysis of chemical features mostly confirms the previous analysis
of the BM database in ref ( ). That study compared residues in contact with ligands with
respect to the rest of the protein surface and considered both valid
and invalid sites (according to the binding MOAD definition). The
study concluded that the following residues are preferred indicators
of a pocket’s ligandability: ILE, MET, PHE, CYS, GLY, TYR,
TRP. The SHAP analysis of the IF reached the same conclusion about
the relative residue population of CYS, MET, TRP, and GLY, which all
appear in the topmost positions. Conversely, ILE, TYR, and PHE are
found in the lowest positions of the graph. This strong agreement
is surprising, given that the IF has no information about the distribution
of amino acids on the rest of the protein surface. As extensively
discussed in Section 2.3 in the Supporting Information, the feature importance can then only correlate with the shape of
the observed distribution. As shown in Figure 5 in the Supporting Information, narrow unimodal distributions
of relative residue populations will tend to be placed on the topmost
positions (e.g., CYS and MET), while residues characterized by a bimodal
wide distribution are not a strong anomaly indicator (e.g., PHE).
In the latter case, since many valid pockets have a wide variety of
admissible values, this is not useful in comparing different putative
sites.

4.2.

## IF Discrimination Ability
In this
work, we trained IFs on geometric/clustering and on compositional/chemical
features, both individually and after merging the feature sets. As
discussed in Section 2.1 and Table 3 in the Supporting Information, taken separately the trained forests already have
similarly high discrimination abilities (with chemistry being slightly
better in the Top3 category). However, their combination, via averaging,
improves the ranking performance, confirming that the information
leveraged by the two forests is, at least, partially complementary.
This result is also slightly better (about 2%) than what would be
obtained by considering a single IF trained on both geometric and
chemical descriptors together. Finally, as also shown in the Supporting Information (Table 3), the IF ranking
is superior to the simpler standard volume-based ranking. However,
the difference is not as great as expected, confirming that a simple
volume-based ranking remains a quick and reasonable strategy if coupled
with a suitable pocket generation stage, when more sophisticated approaches
are not available. In principle, the
method can be tailored to a given dataset of interest. In this work,
we chose the BM dataset as our reference for training and parameter
optimization since it is fairly large and representative. In conclusion,
the IF’s discrimination power was effective since we decided
not to prune the set of pockets generated in the first stage, which
leads to large numbers for a given structure (around 100 on average
for the chosen clustering parameters, as also illustrated in the Supporting Information, Figure 2).

4.3.

## Comparison with Other Site Predictors
As described above, our main benchmark was Fpocket. Direct comparisons
with other methods were prevented by: proprietary software; unclear
normalization and ranking procedure in the reference papers; impossibility
of applying the LC- and PC-based scoring system. Moreover, in many
cases, other tools have already been compared against Fpocket, which
is certainly one of the most competitive open-source pocket detection
software tools available today. The possibility of using the same
metric prompted us to include in the comparison NanoShaper with a
volume-based ranking criterion. Using standard assessment criteria,
both methods outperformed SiteFerret on Top1 and Top3, while the latter
had a better Top10 score. However, when stricter requirements in terms
of pocket coverage were adopted, SiteFerret generally outperformed
the competitors. Interestingly, as highlighted in ref ( ), pockets generated by
NS with a simple volume-based ranking remain very competitive (see and ) against our and other more complex scoring approaches. Overall,
DeepSurf, a tool based on deep neural networks, despite some caveats
that have been discussed, performs outstandingly in terms of providing
a few putative binding sites. Its Top1 and Top3 were significantly
higher than the other methods.
A comment is needed on the ability
to identify and characterize subpockets. When considering the quality
of the generated subpockets in several examples (see ), SiteFerret compares similarly
to the recent CAVIAR method, which turns out to be superior to DogSite,
at least as far as the subpocket segmentation is concerned. , To our knowledge, these are the only other tools using the concept
of subpockets, although they adopt a different approach from ours,
as discussed above.
Interestingly, when considering the performance
on protein–peptide
binding sites, SiteFerret definitely outperformed Fpocket and NS-Volume
in all of the considered metrics. Moreover, the results suggest that
SiteFerret also performs well on shallow sites, while retaining a
good performance on the most commonly found deep groove/invagination-shaped
binding sites (typical of small binding molecules).

5.

## Conclusions
In this work, we present
SiteFerret, a method for identifying ligandable
sites on protein structures. SiteFerret combines a pocket generation
stage based on an ad hoc clustering method of SES probe spheres at
different radii, with a ranking stage based on the IF anomaly detector.
Overall, SiteFerret was excellent in reporting observed binding sites
among its Top10 results, while other approaches were superior in the
Top1 or Top3 categories. SiteFerret had an unprecedented flexibility
in identifying relevant binding regions in a wide variety of systems,
while requiring minimal parametrization. It also reliably segmented
putative binding pockets into smaller subpockets. Moreover, it effectively
recognized protein–peptide binding regions and, more importantly,
binding sites in unbound (apo) structures, as shown on the LigSite/PocketPicker
database. This aspect is of particular importance since it actually
reproduces the most realistic case of searching for a potential binding
site in a new protein target, for which only the apo structure is
available. Finally, SiteFerret provides a remarkable amount of descriptive
information about the pockets. When considering protein–peptide
sites, SiteFerret is superior in all figures of merit to the other
geometry-based approaches considered (Fpocket and NS-Volume). When
stricter requirements are enforced in terms of Pocket Coverage score,
which assesses a found site’s capacity to more precisely pinpoint
the binding region, SiteFerret is more robust than other methods,
including state-of-the-art deep-neural-network-based approaches such
as DeepSurf. This is thanks to the generated subpockets, which can
more precisely fit the actual binding region. In this work, we both
qualitatively and quantitatively demonstrate the effectiveness of
subpocket segmentation. Our method achieved a hit rate within successful
(master) pockets of around 90% in most of the databases considered,
even though the analysis was limited to only the first three subpockets
of each master one. Finally, we also demonstrate SiteFerret’s
outstanding ability to detect difficult shallow binding sites.
On the technical side, this work also shows that one can use a
standard anomaly detector, such as the IF, as a one-class classifier,
and that it can be used to combine the effects of geometric/clustering
and chemical descriptors. Furthermore, we confirm that the commonly
used volume-based ranking remains a competitive strategy.
Given
these results and its flexibility, SiteFerret is a promising
tool for an exhaustive exploration of potential sites on the protein
surface, and for bridging the gap between the task of recognizing
small-molecule binding sites and that of recognizing protein–peptide
binding regions. This suggests the prediction of protein–protein
interaction interfaces as a natural extension of this work.

## Acknowledgments
The authors thank Pedro Reis for performing
the sequence alignment
of apo residues and useful discussion. They also thank the IMATI-CNR
group, and especially Andrea Raffo, Ulderico Fugacci, and Silvia Biasotti,
for providing useful insights in the early stage of the project. The
authors acknowledge the “PNRR MUR project PE0000013-FAIR”.
They also acknowledge the CINECA award under the ISCRA initiative,
for the availability of high-performance computing resources and support.

## Supporting Information Available
The Supporting Information
is available free of charge at https://pubs.acs.org/doi/10.1021/acs.jctc.2c01306.
Technical details of the clustering algorithm, a detailed
analysis of the effects of the clustering hyperparameters, the descriptors
used for ranking, the Isolation Forest, and overall feature importance
(PDF)

## Accession Codes
The code is freely
available at https://github.com/concept-lab/SiteFerret. We also provide
in the same repository scripts and tools used to generate the data
shown in .

## Author Present Address
# MalGa, Department
of Civil, Chemical and Environmental Engineering,
University of Genoa, via Montallegro 1 - 16145 Genoa, Italy

The
authors declare no
competing financial interest.

## Footnotes
aGiven two sets , , the Jaccard index is
bNote that Fpocket uses different nonhierarchical
clustering steps: (0) All α spheres are generated at once, (1)
single-linkage distance criterion, (2) center of mass linkage, (3)
linkage based on a majority vote.
cThe same probe can also describe multiple
bottleneck events when it is clustered to another probe of the same
radius and with one or more larger radius probes (with different tangent
atoms/planes). This situation describes, for instance, a superficial
narrowing (canyon) that can be accessed from multiple directions.
dAn alternative analytical method , was implemented (in ref ( ) a standalone Python interface), but it is significantly
slower due to the high number of overlapping spheres in a cluster.
eNote that, for discrimination
tasks/anomaly
detection, the usual distinction between training and test set is
blurry. Indeed, the training considers exclusively positive examples,
while, in the test phase, all generated pockets are fed into the IF
to be scored.
fThe second group
(small pockets) greatly
outnumbers the first: 174,224 against 32,688 (considering the pockets
generated with all 56 combinations of clustering parameters, β
and γ).

## Supplementary Material
ct2c01306_si_001.pdf

## References
 

## Associated Data

## Supplementary Materials
ct2c01306_si_001.pdf