pmcCell Rep MedCell Rep Med3954cellrepsmedCell Reports Medicine2666-3791ElsevierPMC12711668PMC12711668.112711668127116684120559210.1016/j.xcrm.2025.102427S2666-3791(25)00500-21024271ArticleFluorinated prodrug-engineered nano-remodeler relieves tumor hypoxia for dual-enhanced ferroptosis-immunotherapy
LeiJin SunXinxin ShiJianbin WangPengfei GuanQingyue ZhangZhixiao HeZhonggui SunJin HuangPeng LinJingjingl@szu.edu.cn LuoCongluocong@syphu.edu.cn ZhangShenwuzhangshenwu@syphu.edu.cn 1Department of Pharmaceutics, Wuya College of Innovation, Shenyang Pharmaceutical University, Shenyang 110016, P.R. China2Joint International Research Laboratory of Intelligent Drug Delivery Systems, Ministry of Education, Shenyang Pharmaceutical University, Shenyang 110016, P.R. China3Marshall Laboratory of Biomedical Engineering, International Cancer Center, Laboratory of Evolutionary Theranostics (LET), School of Biomedical Engineering, Shenzhen University Medical School, Shenzhen University, Shenzhen 518055, China4School of Pharmacy, Shenyang Pharmaceutical University, Shenyang 110016, P.R. China5Department of Pharmacy, The First Affiliated Hospital of Jinzhou Medical University, Jinzhou, China∗Corresponding author jingl@szu.edu.cn∗∗Corresponding author luocong@syphu.edu.cn∗∗∗Corresponding author zhangshenwu@syphu.edu.cn6These authors contributed equally
7Lead contact
18112025071120256115026921024271010202431120256102025071120251912202519122025© 2025 The Authors2025https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/).

## Summary
Ferroptosis is recognized as a form of regulated cell death characterized by iron-dependent lipid peroxidation and significant immunogenic properties. However, we observe that the hypoxic tumor microenvironment (TME) of solid tumors severely limits ferroptosis induction and antitumor immune responses, while simultaneously promoting programmed death-ligand 1 (PD-L1) expression, thereby further compromising tumor immunotherapy. Herein, we exploit a fluorinated prodrug-engineered nano-remodeler to reverse the hypoxic and immunosuppressive TME for enhancing ferroptosis/immunomodulation-driven antitumor therapy. The nano-remodeler is elaborately co-assembled by the disulfide-bonded fluorinated JQ1 prodrug (a PD-L1 inhibitor) and sorafenib (Sor, a ferroptosis inducer). As expected, the ferroptosis induction efficiency and antitumor immunogenicity of Sor are significantly improved due to oxygen supply in hypoxic solid tumors, resulting in a highly synergistic ferroptosis-immunotherapy with JQ1. As a result, this nano-remodeler exerts a potent tumor inhibitory effect in multiple tumor models. This study provides insights into the nanotherapeutic paradigm of tumor hypoxia intervention in multimodal ferroptosis-immunotherapy.

## Graphical abstract
 

## Highlights
•Fluorinated prodrug promotes self-assembly and enables efficient oxygen loading
•Fluorinated nano-remodeler enhances ferroptosis induction and immune activation
•Synergistic ferroptosis-immunotherapy exhibits satisfactory antitumor treatment

Lei et al. design a nano-remodeler composed of a fluorinated JQ1 prodrug and sorafenib to enhance ferroptosis induction and immune activation by reversing the hypoxic and immunosuppressive tumor microenvironment. This synergistic approach effectively counteracts tumor immune escape and demonstrates potent antitumor efficacy through combined ferroptosis and immunotherapy.

## Keywords
fluorinated prodrugnano-remodelerhypoxiaferroptosisimmunotherapypmc-status-qastatus0pmc-status-liveyespmc-status-embargonopmc-status-releasedyespmc-prop-open-accessyespmc-prop-olfnopmc-prop-manuscriptnopmc-prop-legally-suppressednopmc-prop-has-pdfyespmc-prop-has-supplementyespmc-prop-pdf-onlynopmc-prop-suppress-copyrightnopmc-prop-is-real-versionnopmc-prop-is-scanned-articlenopmc-prop-preprintnopmc-prop-in-epmcyesPublished: November 7, 2025

## Introduction
In recent years, ferroptosis has emerged as a promising approach for anti-tumor therapy. It is primarily driven by the oxidation of polyunsaturated fatty acids in cell membranes, leading to lipid peroxidation, membrane disruption, and ultimately cell death. Beyond direct tumor cell killing, ferroptosis is often accompanied by the release of damage-associated molecular patterns (DAMPs). These DAMPs can be used as immunogenic molecular patterns to induce dendritic cell (DC) maturation, thereby further effectively enhancing T cell activation. To date, several typical types of ferroptosis induction strategies have been developed, including increasing the intracellular iron ion content, reducing the synthesis of glutathione (GSH) in tumor cells, and increasing the levels of reactive oxygen species (ROS). , , Unfortunately, although these related ferroptosis inducers like sorafenib (Sor, system Xc− inhibitor) can induce ferroptosis and produce immunogenicity with immunogenic cell death (ICD) features to enhance T cell infiltration, upregulation of programmed death-ligand 1 (PD-L1) expression in tumor cells can impede cytotoxic T cell recognition, ultimately resulting in immunosuppression. , , Therefore, ferroptosis, combined with immune checkpoint blockade therapy, may represent a promising synergistic strategy.
However, the hypoxic microenvironment of solid tumors, marked by abnormal vasculature, fluctuating blood flow, and inadequate oxygen diffusion, poses significant challenges to the efficacy of ferroptosis induction and immune stimulation. , , Typically, the oxygen tension in normal tissues ranges between 10 and 80 mm Hg, whereas the oxygen tensions in most solid tumors are below 5 mm Hg, markedly lower than the normoxic tissue levels. , Studies have reported that tumor hypoxia has an increased effect on the expression of both system Xc− and PD-L1. These effects may limit the overall efficacy of ferroptosis-based immunotherapy. , , Therefore, strategies aiming to relieve tumor hypoxia have the potential to enhance therapeutic outcomes by modulating both ferroptosis sensitivity and immune activation. In recent years, perfluorocarbons (PFCs), owing to their good biocompatibility and high oxygen-decomposing capacity, have demonstrated promising clinical potential, even being utilized as artificial blood substitutes. , , Moreover, the gas-solubility properties of PFCs differ from the covalent binding of oxygen in hemoglobin, enabling a quicker release of oxygen when needed. The former typically relies on encapsulating liquid PFCs within nanocarriers to facilitate oxygen delivery. In contrast, covalently integrating PFCs moieties into drug molecules or nanostructures offers a more efficient alternative, enhancing oxygen solubility and enabling higher delivery efficiency and bioavailability without the need for additional carriers. , Therefore, the strategy based on covalent modification of PFCs shows good advantages and potential in alleviating hypoxia.
With ongoing advancements in bio-nanotechnology, various nanodrug delivery systems have emerged. Notably, carrier-free nanodrug delivery systems based on the self-assembly of small-molecule drugs or prodrugs have garnered increasing attention from researchers. , This carrier-free system avoids the challenges associated with druggability and provides multiple advantages, such as ease of preparation, high drug-loading capacity, and the absence of carrier-related toxicity. In addition to the self-assembly of a single small-molecule drug or prodrug, such systems can also be co-assembled through the screening of suitable drug pairs. , , The carrier-free hybrid nanodrug delivery system, which is established through the co-assembly of two pharmacological agents, enables precise regulation of the dosage ratio between the two drugs. , , This capability facilitates stable co-assembly while simultaneously promoting an effective and synergistic multimodal antitumor effect. , Furthermore, the integration of structural elements such as disulfide bonds, thioether bonds, and copper thiol bonds, which are responsive to the high redox environment characteristic of tumors, allows for on-demand drug release. , , , Consequently, this smart-responsive carrier-free small-molecule nanodrug delivery system presents considerable promise for the development of antitumor drug delivery.
Herein, we proposed a fluorinated prodrug-engineered nano-remodeler with the potential to reverse the tumor hypoxic microenvironment for enhancing ferroptosis/immunomodulation-driven antitumor therapy. Specifically, we designed a redox-sensitive drug (FSSJ) integrating fluorinated modification, response module, and PD-L1 inhibitor, which contained perfluorooctanoic acid, disulfide bonds, and JQ1. Compared to the non-fluorinated prodrug (HSSJ), FSSJ tended to spontaneously co-assemble with Sor into relatively stable carrier-free nanomedicines. Meanwhile, the DSPE-PEG2K was modified to nanoassemblies (NAs) to improve the in vitro stability. The fabricated fluorinated prodrug-engineered nano-remodeler (FJSO NAs) exhibited high oxygen solubility. At tumor sites, oxygen can be released due to low oxygen partial pressure, which contributes to alleviating tumor hypoxia, downregulating the expression of PD-L1, and improving the induction efficiency and antitumor immunogenicity of ferroptosis. Moreover, the released Sor induced tumor ferroptosis and initiated ICD, thereby potentially achieving synergistic immunotherapy with JQ1. Finally, the nano-remodeler effectively inhibited tumor growth without significant toxicity in multiple tumor models. This study represents a promising direction in the realm of hypoxia relief for ferroptosis-enhanced antitumor immunotherapy.

## Results

## Modular design of fluorinated prodrug
Given that the antitumor efficiency of Sor can be significantly impeded by the hypoxic TME, we began by exploring its cytotoxicity against 4T1, B16-F10, and CT26 cells under normoxic and hypoxic conditions. As shown in A–1C and A–S1C, there was a significant reduction in the antitumor activity of Sor Solution (Sol) against three cell lines under hypoxia than under normoxia. Subsequently, we examined the ferroptosis-inducing effect of Sor Sol in different cell lines. As shown in D, E, and S1F, compared to the untreated control group, treatment with Sor Sol reduced the expression of GPX4 in 4T1, CT26, and B16-F10 cells. In contrast, Sor Sol elevated LPOs fluorescence intensity and malondialdehyde (MDA) levels ( E, 1F, and G–S1I). Notably, these effects of Sor Sol were suppressed under hypoxic conditions ( E, 1F, and G–S1I). Moreover, we further explored the potential impact of hypoxia on ICD. As shown in G–1I, the levels of ATP secretion, HMGB1 release, and calreticulin (CRT) expression in hypoxic 4T1 cells treated with Sor Sol were significantly suppressed compared to the control under normoxia, suggesting an inhibitory effect of hypoxia on Sor-mediated ICD. Moreover, we further examined whether hypoxia also influences PD-L1 expression. As shown in J, under both normoxic and hypoxic conditions, JQ1 suppressed PD-L1 expression compared to untreated cells. However, hypoxia markedly induced PD-L1 upregulation in 4T1 cells, which in turn attenuated the inhibitory effect of JQ1. In addition, we investigated the impact of oxygen availability on the expression of PD-L1 mRNA in various tumor cell lines. As shown in D, hypoxia led to a marked upregulation of PD-L1 transcripts in all three cell lines tested, confirming the hypoxia-induced increase in PD-L1 expression. These results indicated that hypoxia inhibited the ability of JQ1 to induce tumor immunogenicity and suppress immune evasion. 
To further validate our hypothesis, this project started with an interesting attempt to modularly design a functional prodrug, which consisted of an oxygen-carrying/nano-remodeler module (fluorination chain), a tumor-stimuli-responsive module (disulfide bond), and an immunoregulatory module (JQ1). Specifically, the fluorinated module endowed the prodrug with the ability of proficient oxygen-carrying delivery while fostering molecular assembly. Modular multifunctional JQ1 prodrug, in combination with Sor, was predicted to induce potent tumor ferroptosis and enhanced immunotherapy through hypoxia-relieving strategies, which contributed to desirable antitumor effects. First, fluorinated prodrug (FSSJ) and non-fluorinated prodrug (HSSJ) were designed and synthesized ( K and J). The successful synthesis of these JQ1 prodrugs was further verified by proton nuclear magnetic resonance (1H NMR) and matrix-assisted laser desorption/ionization time-of-flight (MALDI-TOF) mass spectrometry (MS) analysis ( K–S1N). As shown in L, the LogP values of the HSSJ and FSSJ prodrugs were simulated by MarvinSketch, and the fluorination modification enhanced the hydrophobicity of the prodrugs, which heralded superior NA performance of the FSSJ prodrug.

## Molecular engineering of nano-remodeler
As observed in , the antitumor effects of both the cytotoxic drug Sor and the PD-L1 inhibitor JQ1 can be greatly limited by hypoxia, rendering the combination of ferroptosis and immunotherapy much less effective. To address this challenge, we constructed a fluorinated prodrug-engineered nano-remodeler to reverse hypoxic and immunosuppressive TME for oxygen-enhanced synergistic ferroptosis/immunotherapy. Given the superior hydrophobicity of fluorinated chains and their notable ability to carry oxygen, the synthesized fluorinated prodrug was anticipated to offer significant benefits in terms of NAs and oxygen-carrying capacity. As shown in , HSSJ and FSSJ showed favorable properties of self-assembly without any carrier materials, with particle sizes below 250 nm and PDI less than 0.2. It was noteworthy that the fluorinated FJ NAs (∼90 nm) exhibited relatively small particle sizes compared to the non-fluorinated HJ NAs (∼220 nm). This result confirmed our speculation that fluorinated chains confer robust hydrophobicity and enhanced NAs ability to FSS compared to aliphatic chains (HSS), resulting in more compact nanostructures, and hence superior NAs ability of FSSJ. In contrast, Sor exhibited poorer self-assembly properties, and the particle size was around 600 nm ( ), which also presented a challenge for its single nanodrug delivery.
As previously observed, Sor can effectively improve tumor immunogenicity through the induction of ICD ( G–1I). Fortunately, during the preliminary experiments, we observed interesting NAs behaviors between FSSJ and Sor. To optimize the preparation conditions for nano-remodeler, we prepared a series of non-PEGylated FSSJ/Sor NAs with different molar ratios (FSSJ/Sor). As outlined in , the NAs formed at a molar ratio of 1:1 (FSSJ/Sor) emerged as the optimal formulation, exhibiting desirable particle size. To improve colloidal stability and circulation time, PEGylated nano-remodelers (FJS NAs) were fabricated by incorporating DSPE-PEG2K (20%, w/w) as a surface modifier. Subsequently, the same molar ratio of 1:1 (JQ1 prodrugs/Sor) was utilized to fabricate PEGylated non-fluorinated NAs (HJS NAs) and oxygen-carrying FJS NAs (FJSO NAs). As depicted in A, A, S2B, and , the fluorinated NAs (FJS NAs and FJSO NAs) presented a homogeneous spherical morphology (∼70 nm) and displayed a similar negative zeta potential (∼−30 mV), confirming that the oxygen-carrying property of fluorinated NAs has no significant effect on the assembly of the fabrications. Notably, the particle size of the FJS NAs was smaller than that of the HJS NAs (∼180 nm), which was consistent with the results of the self-assembled prodrug NAs ( ). The superior NA characteristics of dual drugs were ascribed to the enhanced hydrophobicity of fluorinated prodrug. The drug loading rates (DLR, %) of Sor and JQ1 in the FJS NAs were determined to be 26.6% and 23.0%, respectively. Moreover, both FJS NAs and FJSO NAs exhibited superior colloidal stability compared to HJS NAs, HJSO NAs, and non-PEGylated FJS NAs, as evidenced by their unchanged morphology both in PBS (pH 7.4) and in the absence or presence of 10% FBS ( B, 2C, C, and S2D). Notably, FJS NAs can also exhibit good colloidal stability after lyophilization and long-term storage at 4°C for 1 month ( E and S2F). These results indicated that PEGylation and fluorination modification were important for the stability of NAs. 
Subsequently, we investigated the oxygen-carrying capacity of NAs. The oxygenated HJ NAs and FJ NAs were designated as HJO NAs and FJO NAs, respectively. As shown in D and 2E, the HJO NAs exhibited minimal variation in oxygen concentration over time and essentially lacked oxygen-carrying capacity. In contrast, both fluorinated hybrid nanostructures (FJSO NAs) and fluorinated prodrug self-assembled nanostructures (FJO NAs) demonstrated similar oxygen-carrying capacities, approximately 80 mg/L. These results indicated the superior oxygen-carrying ability of the fluorinated formulations, which remained effective even when co-assembled with FSSJ and Sor.

## Nanoassembly mechanisms
Based on the inferior assembly performance, we conducted a preliminary study on the assembly mechanism of FSSJ and Sor using computer molecular docking techniques. As shown in F, hydrogen bonding and hydrophobic forces were observed during the assembly of FSSJ and Sor. Subsequently, we further validated the presence of these intermolecular forces through NA destruction tests. As shown in G, the particle size of non-PEGylated FJS NAs exhibited a notable increase following incubation with sodium dodecyl sulfate (SDS) after 12-h incubation, suggesting the predominant role of hydrophobic interaction in the NA process. In addition, the particle size of FJS NAs also slightly increased after incubation with NaCl and urea ( G), suggesting the considerable contribution of electrostatic forces and hydrogen bonding. Collectively, these results provided compelling evidence that multiple intermolecular forces jointly drove the NA of FSSJ and Sor.

## On-demand nanoassembly collapse
To evaluate the reductive responsiveness of the nano-remodeler (FJS NAs and FJSO NAs), the drug release behavior was investigated. As shown in H and G, drug release of Sor and JQ1 was significant in the presence of 10 mM GSH, with a cumulative drug release of 70% within 24 h, compared to slow release in the presence of 0 mM GSH. Notably, there was no significant difference in the release behavior between FJS NAs and FJSO NAs, suggesting that oxygen-carrying capacity had no effect on the drug release pattern. In addition, we observed the morphology of FJS NAs and FJSO NAs by transmission electron microscopy (TEM) to confirm their biodegradability with or without the addition of GSH. As shown in H, the morphology of both NAs was uniformly spherical in the blank medium without GSH. On the contrary, after incubation in 10 mM GSH, FJS NAs and FJSO NAs underwent significant disintegration, the particle size increased, and the appearance became inhomogeneous ( H). These results suggested that the disulfide bonds in fluorinated prodrugs had on-demand disassembly properties under GSH stimuli, and on-demand drug release from NAs could be achieved when exposed to overproduced GSH in tumor cells.

## Cellular internalization, in vitro hypoxia alleviation, and cytotoxicity
To investigate the cellular internalization of NAs in 4T1 cells, we further fabricated Cy7-labeled NAs (Cy7-FJS NAs and Cy7-FJSO NAs) to trace their cellular behavior. As shown in A and I, the fluorescence intensity of Cy7 in 4T1 tumor cells treated with Cy7-FJS NAs and Cy7-FJSO NAs was significantly higher compared to Cy7 Sol at both 0.5 and 2 h. Furthermore, the cellular internalization of NAs exhibited a time-dependent manner. Notably, no significant difference was observed between Cy7-FJS NAs and Cy7-FJSO NAs, suggesting that the existence of oxygen had a negligible influence on cellular uptake. 
Subsequently, we evaluated the expression of hypoxia-inducible factor (HIF-1α) in 4T1 cells treated with different formulations. First, we examined the differences in the expression of HIF-1α mRNA under normoxic and hypoxic conditions. The results showed that HIF-1α mRNA exhibited an upward trend under hypoxic conditions ( J). Furthermore, we investigated the effect of the drug action on the expression of HIF-1α protein. As shown in B and C, the expression of HIF-1α in 4T1 cells was extremely low after PBS (pH 7.4) treatment under normoxic conditions. Under hypoxic conditions, 4T1 cells treated with PBS (pH 7.4) showed obvious fluorescence and HIF-1α expression. Compared with FJS NAs without oxygen-carrying capacity, FJSO NAs with high oxygen-carrying capacity could effectively reduce the expression of HIF-1α, which indicated that FJSO NAs had a good hypoxia mitigation ability ( B and C). Then, we further investigated their potential in vitro antitumor efficacy. As shown in C, 3D, K, and S2L, Sor Sol and SJ Sol possessed certain cytotoxicity under normoxia, while the antitumor effect was significantly suppressed by hypoxia. In addition, the hybrid NAs showed significantly enhanced tumor cell inhibition compared to the SJ Sol under both normoxia and hypoxia. More importantly, the difference in cytotoxicity between FJS NAs and FJSO NAs was negligible under normoxia, whereas the cytotoxicity of FJSO NAs was superior to that of FJS NAs under hypoxia ( C, 3D, K, and S2L). Given that Sor is widely employed as a first-line therapeutic agent for both liver and kidney cancers, we further assessed cytotoxic responses in relevant cell lines. Consistent with C, 3D, K, and S2L, FJSO NAs exhibited the most potent cytotoxicity in Hepa1-6 cells and effectively countered hypoxia-induced resistance, maintaining their efficacy even under oxygen-deprived conditions ( M–S2P). This superior efficacy of FJSO NAs should be attributed to its favorable colloidal stability ( C), efficient cellular uptake ( A and I), and potential of hypoxia alleviation by sufficient oxygen supply ( D and 2E). Furthermore, compared with the JQ1 Sol, Sor Sol, and SJ Sol, the FJS NAs and FJSO NAs showed significantly attenuated cytotoxicity in 3T3 cells, which may be attributed to the tumor-specific disulfide bonds contained in NAs ( D).

## Validation of the ferroptosis mechanism
The mode of cell death was confirmed by co-incubating with Fer-1 (a ferroptosis inhibitor). As shown in E, the cell viability of 4T1 cells treated with Sor Sol, SJ Sol, FJS NAs, and FJSO NAs was significantly increased upon co-treatment with Fer-1, and the cytotoxicity inhibition was further enhanced with the increase of Fer-1 concentration. Similar results could also be observed in B16-F10 cells and Hepa1-6 cells. As shown in A and S3B, under both normoxic and hypoxic conditions, Fer-1 exerted only a minimal inhibitory effect on the cytotoxicity of Sor Sol. In contrast, cells treated with FJSO NAs demonstrated significantly enhanced sensitivity to Fer-1, particularly under hypoxia, indicating a stronger ferroptosis response.
After clarifying the modality of cell death, we further characterized the mechanisms involved in ferroptosis. First, as shown in D, the expression of system Xc− in B16-F10 cells was significantly upregulated under hypoxia. Treatment with Sor Sol induced a modest inhibitory effect on system Xc−, whereas FJSO NAs, owing to their oxygen-carrying capacity, exhibited a more significant downregulation ( D). Since Sor induces tumor ferroptosis primarily by inhibiting system Xc−, reducing intracellular GSH content and GPXs enzyme activity, disrupting redox homeostasis, and increasing oxidative stress and lipid peroxidation, we further examined indicators related to the intracellular redox system, including GSH, GPXs, ROS, LPOs, and MDA. As illustrated in F and 3G, Sor Sol significantly reduced GSH and GPXs levels compared to the control under normoxic conditions, and this inhibitory effect was further amplified with NAs. Whereas hypoxia resulted in a significant decrease in the ability to deplete GSH and downregulate GPXs after administration of Control, Sor Sol, and FJS NAs, which suggested the resistance under hypoxia on ferroptosis induction ( F and 3G). Notably, the GSH and GPX depletion capacity of FJSO NAs in hypoxia was basically consistent with normoxia ( F and 3G). We further characterized the ROS, LPOs, and MDA levels after different treatments by confocal laser scanning microscopy (CLSM) and flow cytometry analysis. According to H–3J, E, and F, Sor Sol could enhance the expression of ROS, LPOs, and MDA to some extent, while FJS NAs showed stronger levels based on effective cellular uptake behavior and specific drug release. However, the hypoxic environment significantly inhibited the expression of these indicators after treatments of Sor Sol and FJS NAs ( H–3J, E, and S3F). FJSO NAs unlocked the niches created by hypoxia for FJS NAs application by alleviating tumor hypoxia and exhibited enhanced ROS, LPOs, and MDA expression in hypoxic conditions ( H–3J, E, and S3F). Meanwhile, the FJSO NAs-treated cells exhibited a severe loss of mitochondrial cristae, which was a hallmark morphological feature of ferroptosis ( K).

## ICD induction and PD-L1 inhibition
In order to explore the regulatory effects of nano-remodeler on ICD and PD-L1 ( A), we first investigated the typical DAMP changes in 4T1 cells treated with Sor Sol, FJS NAs, and FJSO NAs. As shown in B–4F, G, and S3H, 4T1 cells treated with FJS NAs and FJSO NAs exhibited more robust ATP secretion, HMGB1 release, and CRT exposure capacity compared to Sor Sol, while the 4T1 cells without any treatment basically did not secrete abovementioned DAMPs. Furthermore, hypoxia reduced the levels of ATP, HMGB1, and CRT in 4T1 cells treated with Sor Sol and FJS NAs but did not affect FJSO NAs. This was because FJSO NAs can alleviate hypoxia by delivering oxygen, which enhanced oxidative stress and ensured adequate secretion of DAMPs to trigger ICD ( B–4F, G, and S3H). A comparable pattern of CRT expression was also observed in Hepa1-6 cells subjected to the various treatments, further confirming the consistent ICD-inducing capability of the nano-remodeler ( I). Furthermore, we explored the relationship between different treatments and DC maturation in 4T1 cells. As illustrated in G, Sor Sol induced a moderate level of DC maturation. In contrast, FJS NAs significantly enhanced DC maturation, which was likely attributable to their improved cellular uptake compared to the solution formulation ( G). Notably, FJSO NAs exhibited the most significant DC maturation effect, even under hypoxic conditions ( G). We then evaluated the expression level of PD-L1 after treatment. As shown in H and J–S3L, treatment with the cytotoxic drug (Sor Sol) led to an upregulation of PD-L1 expression in 4T1 cells, which was significantly downregulated when the cells were co-incubated with JQ1-containing preparations (FJS NAs and FJSO NAs). Although hypoxia led to an increase in PD-L1 expression, FJSO NAs effectively mitigated hypoxia, allowing it to perform effective PD-L1 inhibition. 

## Pharmacokinetics, biodistribution, and in vivo hypoxia alleviation
The Cy7-labeled DSPE-PEG2K was employed to modify nano-remodelers to trace their in vivo fate. As shown in A and , the fluorescence signals of Cy7 Sol rapidly declined, indicating rapid clearance from the bloodstream upon intravenous injection. In contrast, Cy7-FJS NAs and Cy7-FJSO NAs exhibited a significantly increased area under the concentration-time curve (AUC). Importantly, no substantial differences were observed in the pharmacokinetics of Cy7-FJS NAs and Cy7-FJSO NAs, which suggested that oxygen-carrying capacity had no significant effect on the in vivo delivery fate of nano-remodeler. These results were favorable for enhancing in vivo drug delivery efficiency and promoting tumor-specific drug accumulation. 
Subsequently, we evaluated the biodistribution of Cy7 Sol, Cy7-FJS NAs, and Cy7-FJSO NAs in 4T1 breast tumor-bearing mice. As shown in B and 5C, Cy7 Sol displayed weak fluorescence intensity in tumors, attributed to its suboptimal pharmacokinetic behavior. The quantification of fluorescence signal in preset time points showed that Cy7 Sol had the strongest fluorescence signal at 2 h. In contrast, both Cy7-FJS NAs and Cy7-FJSO NAs exhibited significantly higher fluorescence signals in tumors compared to Cy7 Sol in the tumor during 36 h ( B and 5C) and had the maximum fluorescence accumulation signal at 4 h. Furthermore, ex vivo fluorescence imaging of Cy7 Sol, Cy7-FJS NAs, and Cy7-FJSO NAs in tumors and major organs (heart, liver, spleen, lungs, and kidneys) was conducted at the time points of peak fluorescence signal. As shown in D and M, although the endothelial reticular system of the liver can exert a certain trapping effect on nano-remodeler, Cy7-FJS NAs and Cy7-FJSO NAs still had stronger fluorescence signals than Cy7 Sol in the tumor due to the EPR effect. In addition, there was no significant difference in the fluorescence intensity between Cy7-FJS NAs and Cy7-FJSO NAs. Fluorescence imaging of tumor sections further demonstrated that the nano-remodelers were specifically localized to EpCAM-positive 4T1 tumor cells ( N). Meanwhile, liquid chromatography-mass spectrometry (LC-MS) was utilized to quantitatively examine the accumulation of the drug in different organs. The results were consistent with previous results ( D and M). Compared to a single solution, FJSO NAs exhibited better tumor accumulation behavior in tumor tissues than Sor Sol and JQ1 Sol ( E and 5F). These results underscored that the precise fabrication of PEGylated NAs significantly improved pharmacokinetics and biodistribution.
To further investigate the ability of in vivo hypoxia alleviation, a photoacoustic (PA) imaging system was employed to measure OxyHb and DeoxyHb signals. As shown in G and O, the PA signal fluctuations in saline or FJS-NAs-treated mice remained minimal over the 12-h observation period. Significantly, FJSO NAs, with their hypoxia-alleviating properties, produced significantly stronger PA signals in tumors, particularly at 4 h, consistent with biodistribution results ( G and O). In addition, the Hypoxyprobe-1 was used to investigate the tumor hypoxia. As illustrated in P, the 4T1 tumor tissues treated with FJSO NAs exhibited significantly reduced hypoxia fluorescence signals. These results supported the necessity of designing reliable oxygen-modulating nanomedicines to effectively relieve tumor hypoxia.

## Hypoxia alleviation-enabled antitumor therapy
Motivated by the advantage of hypoxia alleviation, we embarked on an evaluation of its antitumor efficiency and safety in the 4T1 breast-tumor-bearing mouse model ( H). As shown in I–5K, Sor Sol, JQ1 Sol, and SJ Sol exhibited limited tumor growth inhibition, likely due to rapid in vivo elimination and low tumor accumulation. As expected, the FJSO NAs demonstrated significant therapeutic advantages over the other formulations, effectively inhibiting tumor progression ( I–5K). In contrast, FJS NAs presented a modest antitumor effect, demonstrating the necessity of alleviating tumor hypoxia to enhance tumor elimination ( I–5K). Furthermore, a preliminary assessment of therapeutic safety was conducted. As shown in L, 5M, 5P, and I, multiple treatments did not lead to significant abnormalities in hepatorenal function parameters, organ sections observed by H&E staining, or changes in body weight. In addition, both FJS NAs and FJSO NAs exhibited negligible hemolytic activity ( E). A consistent therapeutic trend and safety profile were observed in the Hepa1-6 tumor model, where FJSO NAs exhibited the most effective anti-tumor efficacy without any noticeable impact on body weight ( A–S4D). These results indicated that FJSO NAs possessed potent antitumor activity and good safety.

## In vivo antitumor mechanisms and immune responses
The potent antitumor effects of FJSO NAs prompted us to further investigate the in vivo antitumor mechanisms. First, we examined the expression of HIF-1α in tumor tissues after different treatments. Tumors treated with Sor Sol, JQ1 Sol, and SJ Sol exhibited signs of hypoxia, as indicated by strong red fluorescence of HIF-1α ( P). Notably, FJSO NAs effectively inhibited the expression of HIF-1α, significantly reducing fluorescence intensity ( P). Subsequently, we validated different indicators of ferroptosis in tumors treated with various formulations. As illustrated in F, treatment with Sor resulted in downregulation of system Xc− expression in the 4T1 tumor. Notably, administration of FJSO NAs with oxygen-carrying capability led to a more significant suppression of system Xc− in tumor tissues compared to FJS NAs treatment. The result suggested that system Xc− may function as a key mediator linking oxygen availability in the tumor microenvironment to the induction of ferroptosis. As shown in N, 5O, and G, FJSO NAs significantly reduced GSH content and elevated the levels of LPOs and MDA in the tumors. Similarly, we also observed a significant accumulation of LPOs in Hepa1-6 tumors treated with FJSO NAs ( H).
To further explore ICD effect, we assessed CRT exposure, HMGB1 secretion, DC maturation, and immune cell infiltration in tumors after treatment. As illustrated in P and J–S4L, FJSO NAs induced stronger CRT exposure and HMGB1 secretion in the 4T1 tumor model than that of the other formulations. As shown in Q, 5R, and M, Sor effectively promoted DC maturation and enhanced the activation of both CD4+ and CD8+ T cells in the 4T1 tumor model. Notably, FJSO NAs elicited a more robust immunostimulatory response compared to FJS NAs and other formulations ( Q, 5R, and M). In addition, FJSO NAs effectively promoted DC maturation and significantly enhanced the activation of CD4+ and CD8+ T cells within the Hepa1-6 tumor microenvironment ( N–S4P and A–S5C). To evaluate the potential for immune escape, intratumoral PD-L1 expression levels were assessed. As anticipated, JQ1 downregulated PD-L1 expression, and treatment with FJS NAs further amplified this inhibitory effect. The most significant suppression of PD-L1 was observed in FJSO NAs group ( S). These results suggested that FJSO NAs not only enhanced antitumor immunity but also effectively inhibited tumor immune escape, leading to superior immunotherapeutic outcomes.

## In vivo anti-metastasis effect
Considering the promising efficacy of FJSO NAs in inducing ICD and mitigating the immunosuppressive TME, the antitumor metastasis was further evaluated ( A). As shown in B–6E and D, FJSO NAs exhibited higher efficacy in suppressing tumor growth and mitigating lung metastasis compared to either monotherapy or combination therapy, with the tumors and metastatic lesions being nearly eradicated. This was attributed to the satisfactory formulation behavior, oxygen-carrying capacity, cellular uptake, and in vivo long circulation effects of FJSO NAs and synergistic treatment with ferroptosis and anti-tumor immunotherapy. Moreover, there were no significant changes in body weight throughout the treatment period, indicating the favorable safety of the nano-remodeler ( E). 

## Abscopal tumor eradication
Moreover, we further explored the potential of FJSO NAs to induce a systemic immune response capable of suppressing abscopal tumors ( F). As shown in G and H, JQ1 Sol demonstrated minimal effect on abscopal tumor growth. Similarly, Sor Sol and SJ Sol exhibited limited suppression of abscopal tumor progression ( G and S5H). In contrast, FJSO NAs exhibited more effective inhibitory effect on abscopal tumors ( G and S5H). No significant change in body weight was observed during the treatment ( I). Meanwhile, the expression level of system Xc− within the tumor further confirmed that the potent tumor-suppressive effect of FJSO NAs may be attributed to their distinct advantages in nano-delivery and hypoxia alleviation ( J). The intratumoral LPOs levels also showed similar results. The fluorescence intensity of LPOs in the tumor after FJSO NAs administration was significantly higher than that in the Sor Sol group ( F).
To elucidate the mechanisms driving the robust immune response induced by FJSO NAs, we focused on the maturation of DCs, a pivotal step in initiating adaptive immunity. As illustrated in G and K, FJSO NAs induced an approximately 3-fold increase in DC maturation compared to the PBS (pH 7.4) group. Moreover, FJSO NAs also demonstrated a significant advantage over other Sor-based formulations (Sor Sol, SJ Sol, and FJS NAs) in DC maturation ( G and K). To further investigate the potency and immune-mediated antitumor contributions, we assessed the infiltration of CD8+ and CD4+ T cells into tumors, as their increased presence signifies a robust immune response. As shown in H, 6I, L, and S5M, treatment with FJSO NAs significantly enhanced the infiltration of both CD8+ and CD4+ T cells compared to other formulations. Additionally, FJSO NAs upregulated the expression of tumor necrosis factor alpha (TNF-α) and interferon gamma (IFN-γ), while downregulating interleukin-10 (IL-10) level ( J–6L). Collectively, these results underscored the potential of FJSO NAs to amplify specific antitumor effects by synergistically inducing PD-L1 blockade and ICD-related immune responses.

## Discussion
In summary, we developed a fluorinated prodrug-engineered nano-remodeler through the integration of modular prodrug design and small-molecule NAs technology. This approach offers a transformative strategy in addressing the hypoxic and immunosuppressive TME by integrating fluorinated prodrug-mediated oxygen supply with PD-L1 inhibitors and ferroptosis inducers into NAs. Importantly, we have validated the feasibility of the small-molecule fluorinated prodrug-engineered nano-remodeler in terms of oxygen-carrying capabilities. The hypoxia-alleviating capacity of the nano-remodeler facilitates ROS generation and lipid peroxidation for ferroptosis, while also boosting antigen presentation to potentiate immune response synergy. Moreover, the nano-remodeler (FJSO NAs) demonstrated a range of advantageous attributes for drug delivery, including good colloidal stability, on-demand drug release, efficient cellular uptake, hypoxia alleviation, potent in vitro cytotoxicity, superior pharmacokinetics, and tumor-specific accumulation. Finally, FJSO NAs significantly enhanced tumor growth inhibition through oxygen enrichment, ferroptosis induction, and immunotherapy in multiple tumor models, confirming the broad applicability and effectiveness of this strategy. Overall, this work provides a practical and effective paradigm for employing single or multiple therapies to overcome hypoxic niches and achieve potent antitumor effects.

## Limitations of the study
While the nano-remodeler demonstrated potent antitumor efficacy in cell-line-derived xenograft mouse models, further validation in patient-derived xenograft models would provide more clinically relevant evidence for translational potential. In addition, although robust tumoricidal effects were observed across multiple in vitro tumor cell lines and in vivo xenograft models, the precise synergistic mechanism between Sor and the fluorinated JQ1 prodrug, as well as the in vivo oxygen release kinetics of the fluorinated formulation, remains to be fully elucidated.

## Resource availability

## Lead contact
Requests for further information and resources should be directed to and will be fulfilled by the lead contact, Prof. Shenwu Zhang (zhangshenwu@syphu.edu.cn).

## Materials availability
All reagents generated in this study are available from the with a completed materials transfer agreement.

## Data and code availability

•1H NMR of FSSJ and HSSJ are available at Mendeley Data. Accession numbers are listed in the .
•The published article does not report custom computer code.
•Any additional information required to reanalyze the data reported in this paper is available from the upon request.

## Acknowledgments
This work was financially supported by the 10.13039/501100018617Liaoning Revitalization Talents Program (no. XLYC2403107), the Basic Scientific Research Project of Liaoning Provincial Department of Education (no. LJ212410163015), and the 10.13039/501100001809National Natural Science Foundation of China (no. 82204317).

## Author contributions
S.Z., C.L., and J.L. conceived this work. J.L., X.S., and P.W. prepared and characterized the materials. J.L., J.S., and X.S. carried out the in vitro, ex vivo, and in vivo experiments. J.L., X.S., P.H., Z.H., and J.S. contributed technical support. J.L., S.Z., C.L., X.S., Q.G., and Z.Z. analyzed the data and discussed the results. J.L., S.Z., X.S., and J.S. wrote and edited the manuscript. S.Z. and C.L. supervised the project. All authors approved the final version of the manuscript.

## Declaration of interests
The authors declare no competing interests.

## STAR★Methods

## Key resources table

 

## Experimental model and study participant details

## Cell culture
Cell lines were purchased from the cell bank of the Chinese Academy of Science (Shanghai, China). 4T1 cells, B16-F10 cells, ACHN cells and RENCA cells were maintained in RPMI-1640 Medium supplemented with 10% FBS and 1% antibiotic solution. Hepa1-6 cells and HepG2 cells were maintained in DMEM Medium supplemented with 10% FBS and 1% antibiotic solution. 3T3 cells were maintained in Dulbecco’s Modified Eagle Medium/Nutrient Mixture F-12 Medium. Meanwhile, cell cultures were maintained at 37°C with 5% CO2. All cell lines were routinely screened to confirm the absence of mycoplasma contamination.

## Animal
The animals were purchased from Changsheng biotechnology co., Ltd (Shenyang, China). The animal experiment procedures were carried out according to the Guide for the Care and Use of Laboratory Animals issued by the Institutional Animal Ethical Care Committee of Shenyang Pharmaceutical University. Male Sprague-Dawley rats (6–8 weeks, 180–220 g) were raised for pharmacokinetic study. Female BALB/c mice (6–8 weeks, 18–22 g) were raised for biodistribution studies. Female BALB/c mice and male C57BL/6 mice (6–8 weeks, 18–22 g) were raised for pharmacodynamic study. The influence of sex on the study results was not specifically evaluated and thus represents a limitation of this work.

## Method details

## Synthesis of fluorinated prodrug (FSSJ) and control prodrugs (HSSJ)
The synthesis of the target fluorinated prodrug (FSSJ) is achieved through a two-step reaction process. In the initial step, pentadecafluorooctanoic acid (3 mmol) was dissolved in 15 mL of dichloromethane within a 250 mL reaction vessel. EDCI (9 mmol) and HOBt (3 mmol), pre-dissolved in dichloromethane, were subsequently introduced to the system. The reaction was activated for 2 h at 0°C under a nitrogen atmosphere. Following activation, the reaction mixture was allowed to return to ambient temperature. A solution of 2,2′-Dithiodiethanol (4 mmol) and DMAP (1.5 mmol), also pre-dissolved in dichloromethane, was added dropwise with stirring. The reaction was then maintained at 25°C under nitrogen for 12 h. The intermediate product was obtained after rotary evaporation of the solvent and purified using silica gel column chromatography. In the subsequent step, JQ1 (1 mmol) was dissolved in 20 mL of DMF. EDCI (3 mmol) dissolved in dichloromethane was introduced, and the reaction was initiated in an ice bath under nitrogen protection for 2 h. Upon completion of the activation period, the intermediate (1 mmol) and DMAP (0.2 mmol), both pre-dissolved in dichloromethane, were added to the reaction mixture. This was then stirred under nitrogen at 30°C for 48 h. The target fluorinated prodrug (FSSJ) was finally purified using preparative liquid chromatography with an acetonitrile/water ratio of 85:15. 1H NMR (400 MHz, DMSO-d6) δ 7.47 (d, J = 8.9 Hz, 2H, Ar-H), 7.42 (d, J = 8.7 Hz, 2H, Ar-H), 4.67 (t, J = 6.1 Hz, 2H, -COOCH2-), 4.51 (dd, J = 8.1, 6.4 Hz, 1H, -OCOCH2-CH-), 4.34 (td, J = 5.9, 3.6 Hz, 2H, -COOCH2-), 3.45 (dd, J = 7.3, 5.0 Hz, 2H, -OCO-CH2-CH-), 3.10 (t, J = 6.1 Hz, 2H, -CH2SSCH2-), 3.01 (t, J = 6.2 Hz, 2H, -CH2SSCH2-), 2.60 (s, 3H, triazole-CH3), 2.40 (s, 3H, thiophene-CH3), 1.62 (s, 3H, thiophene-CH3).
The synthesis of HSSJ follows a similar procedure to that of FSSJ, with the exception that octanoic acid is employed in place of pentadecafluorooctanoic acid. The successful synthesis of the JQ1 prodrugs was confirmed through 1H NMR and mass spectrometry analysis. 1H NMR (400 MHz, DMSO-d6) δ 7.48 (d, J = 8.9 Hz, 2H, Ar-H), 7.43 (d, J = 8.7 Hz, 2H, Ar-H), 4.51 (dd, J = 8.1, 6.5 Hz, 1H, -N-CH-CH2), 4.41–4.28 (m, 2H, -O-CH2-), 4.23 (t, J = 6.2 Hz, 2H, -O-CH2-), 3.50–3.41 (m, 2H, -N-CH-CH2), 3.04–2.92 (m, 4H, -CH2-S-S-CH2-), 2.60 (s, 3H, -CH3), 2.41 (s, 3H, -CH3), 2.27 (t, J = 7.4 Hz, 2H, -OCO-CH2-), 1.63 (s, 3H, -CH3), 1.57–1.42 (m, 2H, -OCO-CH2-CH2-), 1.30–1.15 (m, 8H, -CH2CH2CH2CH2-), 0.87–0.78 (m, 3H, -CH2CH3).

## Identification of FSSJ and Sor assembly ratios
To screen a reasonable formulation prescription, we prepared co-assembled NAs (non-PEGylated FJS NAs) with different ratios of FSSJ and Sor by one-step nano-precipitation method using particle size and PDI as evaluation indices. Specifically, anhydrous ethanol was used to dissolve FSSJ and Sor into a mother liquor of 5 mg/mL. Then, the FSSJ and Sor mother liquor were mixed at a molar ratio of 5:1-1:5, and 200 μL of the mixed solution was taken dropwise into deionized water (2 mL) and stirred at 1300 rpm for 3 min. The organic solvent was then removed from the solution by using the rotary evaporator at 30°C for 4 min. Finally, the solution volume was replenished to 2 mL to obtain non-PEGylated FJS NAs. The particle size, PDI, and zeta potential of the non-PEGylated FJS NAs were determined using ZetaSizer (Nano ZS, Malvern, UK).

## Preparation and characterization of NAs
The one-step nanoprecipitation method was used to prepare PEGylated self-assembled NAs (FJ NAs and HJ NAs) and PEGylated co-assembled NAs (FJS NAs and HJS NAs). The self-assembled NAs were prepared as follows. The FSSJ solution dissolved in anhydrous ethanol (5 mg/mL) was mixed with DSPE-PEG2K solution (10 mg/mL, 20%, w/w). The mixture solution (200 μL) was taken and slowly dripped into 2 mL of deionized water, stirred for 3 min, and the organic reagents were removed by a rotary evaporator to obtain the FSSJ NAs (0.5 mg/mL). The HJ NAs were prepared by the same process. The preparation process of co-assembled NAs is similar to that of self-assembled NAs. First, precisely weighed FSSJ and Sor were dissolved into 5 mg/mL, and DSPE-PEG2K was dissolved into 10 mg/mL by using anhydrous ethanol. Subsequently, a DSPE-PEG2K solution containing 20% (w/w) was added to the Sor and FSSJ mixture (200 μL) and thoroughly mixed. The resulting ternary mixture was added dropwise into 2 mL of deionized water and stirred at 1300 rpm for 3 min. Finally, the organic reagents were removed by rotary evaporator at 30°C, and the NAs were supplemented to 2 mL using deionized water. The prepared 0.5 mg/mL FJS NAs were stored in a refrigerator at 4°C. Control NAs (HJS NAs) were prepared like those of FJS NAs.
To investigate whether the oxygen-carrying properties of the fluorinated side chains have an impact on the assembly properties of the NAs, a comparison between FJS NAs and FJSO NAs will be performed in the formulation-related characterization section. The hydrodynamic diameter and zeta potential of the NAs were determined by Zetasizer (NanoZS, Malvern, UK). In addition, the LogP values of FSSJ and HSSJ were calculated by MarvinSketch. The micro-morphology of NAs was observed by transmission electron microscope (TEM) (Hitachi, HT7700, Japan). Before observation, the samples were treated with phosphotungstic acid (2% w/v) staining.
The drug loading rate (DLR, %) was calculated using the following formula:DLR(%)=AmountofloadeddrugTotalweightofthenanosystem×100%

## Investigation of in vitro stability
To investigate the in vitro stability of non-PEGylated FJS NAs, FJS NAs, and FJSO NAs, 1 mL of each type of NAs (0.5 mg/mL) was incubated in 9 mL of PBS (pH 7.4) with or without 10% FBS in a shaker at 37°C, and NAs were taken at set time points. Changes in the particle size of NAs at different time points were determined by ZetaSizer (Nano ZS, Malvern, UK).
To investigate the long-term stability and effect of lyophilization,1 mL of FJS NAs was stored at 4°C, and the particle size of the formulation was measured at 0, 1, 2, 4, 8, 15, and 30 days. To prepare the lyophilized sample, 10% sucrose was utilized to dissolve FJS NAs, which were then processed with a universal lyophilization program. The stability of FJS NAs before and after lyophilization was represented by the change in the particle size.

## Molecular co-assembly mechanisms
The molecular co-assembly mechanism was mainly confirmed by computer-simulated molecular docking technique and force disruption experiments. Three-dimensional structures of the Sor and FSSJ compounds were constructed using molecular docking simulations, and the assembly mechanisms of Sor and FSSJ at 1:1 (mol/mol) were investigated by the AutoDock Vina program. Additionally, intermolecular forces within the NAs were assessed by monitoring changes in particle size. Specifically, non-PEGylated FJS NAs were added to NaCl (10 mM), SDS (10 mM), and urea (10 mM), respectively, and incubated for 12 h at 37°C. Changes in particle size were visualized by ZetaSizer (Nano ZS, Malvern, UK).

## Oxygen-carrying capacity of NAs
The oxygen-carrying capacity of the formulations was recorded by the dissolved oxygen meter (WLDO-300, Shanghai Water Inst Technology Co. Ltd.). Oxygen-saturated HJO NAs, FJO NAs, and FJSO NAs were prepared via passing pure oxygen (5 L/min) through HJ NAs, FJ NAs, and FJS NAs for 30 min. The baseline was equilibrated with deoxygenated water. Subsequently, equal volumes of 2 μmol/mL pentadecafluorooctanoic acid/octanoic acid in PBS (pH 7.4), HJO NAs, FJO NAs, and FJSO NAs (5 mL) were added to 15 mL of deoxygenated water, while ultrasound was applied to trigger oxygen release, and the changes in oxygen concentration were recorded via a dissolved oxygen meter. The oxygen-carrying capacity of 1 mL of NAs (containing an equal amount of 2 μmol/mL pentadecafluorooctanoic acid/octanoic acid) was calculated by the following equation:OxygenloadingcapacityincreasedoxygenvaluesaftertheadditionofNAs×totalvolumeoffinalsolutionenteredvolumeofNAs

## In vitro drug release patterns of Sor and JQ1
Given the hydrophobicity of Sor and JQ1, 30% anhydrous ethanol and 1% Tween 80 were added to PBS (pH 7.4) to enhance the solubility of the cytotoxicity drugs. The reduction-sensitive drug release behavior of the drugs was investigated using a dialysis method as follows: 1 mL of FJS NAs or FJSO NAs (equivalent to 200 μg of Sor and 172 μg of JQ1) were loaded into a dialysis bag, placed into 30 mL of release medium containing 0 Mm or10 mM GSH, and incubated in the shaker (100 rpm, 37°C). The cumulative releases of Sor and JQ1 were measured at presupposed time points using high-performance liquid chromatography (HPLC), respectively (n = 3). The chromatographic separation was monitored by the C18 column (4.6 × 150 mm, 5 μm). The mobile phases were acetonitrile:1‰ acid water at a flow rate of 1 mL/min. The detection wavelengths were 266 nm for Sor and 254 nm for JQ1.
To explore the relevance of responsive drug release and disintegration of NAs in the presence of GSH, the morphological changes of FJS NAs and FJSO NAs were examined in the presence/absence of GSH incubation. Morphological changes of the NAs under the effect of GSH were observed using transmission electron microscopy. Briefly, FJS NAs and FJSO NAs (0.5 mg/mL) were incubated in PBS (pH 7.4) containing 0 mM and 10 mM GSH for 4 h, respectively. Subsequently, the NAs were negatively stained using phosphotungstic acid, and their morphology was observed under TEM.

## Cellular uptake
NAs were prepared using Cy7-labelled DSPE-PEG2K to trace the cellular uptake behavior. 4T1 cells were seeded into 24-well plates at a density of 5 × 104 cells/well and cultured for 12 h. Fresh medium containing Cy7 solution, Cy7-labelled FJS NAs, and FJSO NAs (Cy7-FJS NAs and Cy7-FJSO NAs) was substituted for the original medium, where the concentration of Cy7 was equimolar at 2 μg/mL, and the cells were co-incubated with the cells for 0.5 h and 2 h. Subsequently, the cells were washed three times in duplicate with cold PBS (pH 7.4) and fixed with 4% paraformaldehyde to fix the cells for 15 min at room temperature. Further, after three repeated washes with cold PBS (pH 7.4), Hoechst 33342 was added to stain the cell nuclei for 10 min. Fluorescence images of cellular uptake were observed by confocal laser scanning microscopy (CLSM, C2, Nikon, Japan). In addition, plates were spread in 12-well plates at a density of 1 × 105 cells/well, and cells were digested and dispersed after administration as described above. The behavior of cellular uptake was determined by flow cytometry (n = 3).

## In vitro cytotoxicity evaluation and ferroptosis proof
The cytotoxicity assay was investigated with the MTT assay, in which 4T1 cells, CT26 cells, B16-F10 cells, Hepa1-6 cells, HepG2 cells, ACHN cells, and RENCA cells were taken as the tumor cell models, and mouse fibroblasts (3T3 cells) were taken as a normal cell model. As follows, 4T1 cells were seeded into 96-well plates at a density of 2×103 cells/well, and the cells were allowed to grow adherently for 12 h in the cell culture incubator (37°C, O2 21%, CO2 5%). Subsequently, the cells were divided into normoxic and hypoxic groups and continued to be cultured for 12 h at an oxygen concentration of 21% and 5%, respectively. JQ1 solution (JQ1 Sol), Sor solution (Sor Sol), Sor/JQ1 solution (SJ Sol), FJS NAs and FJSO NAs were diluted to different concentrations by fresh medium, which was further replaced the original medium, and co-incubated with the cells for 48 h under normoxic (O2 21%) and hypoxic conditions (O2 5%). Then, 20 μL of MTT (5 mg/mL) was added to each well and incubated with cells at 37°C for 4 h. Finally, the original medium was substituted with DMSO (200 μL per well) to lyse the mezanine, which was produced by the interaction of living cells with MTT. The microplate reader (Thermo Scientific, USA) was used to measure the UV absorbance of each well at 490 nm to calculate the cell viability (n = 3). Similar steps were applied to HepG2, ACHN, Hepa1-6, and Renca cells. In addition, 3T3 cells were seeded at a density of 1 × 104 cells/well and further cultured and administered under normoxic conditions. The rest of the manipulations were performed as above to examine the cytotoxicity of different formulations in 3T3 cells (n = 3).
In addition, ferroptosis inhibition was examined in 4T1, B16-F10, and Hepa1-6 cells. The specific operations were as follows: 4T1 cells were seeded into 96-well plates at a density of 2 × 103 cells/well to grow adherent to the wall for 12 h in the cell culture incubator (37°C, O2 21%, CO2 5%). Subsequently, JQ1 Sol, Sor Sol, SJ Sol, FJS NAs, and FJSO NAs were diluted to different concentrations by using fresh medium, to which Fer-1 (0 μM, 5 μM, and 10 μM) was added and mixed to substitute for the original medium. After 48 h incubation, the cytotoxicity of cells in the presence of ferroptosis inhibitors was determined by adding MTT and DMSO as above. Similar steps were applied to B16-F10 cells and Hepa1-6 cells: under normoxic and hypoxic conditions, the tumor cells were incubated with the drugs (Sor Sol and FJSO NAs), with or without the ferroptosis inhibitor Fer-1 (0 or 10 μM). After incubation, the MTT assay was used to evaluate cytotoxicity and verify the ferroptosis-inducing ability of Sor on the tumor cells.
Mitochondrial morphology was observed by transmission electron microscopy (TEM). In detail, 4T1 cells were incubated with blank medium or FJSO NAs (equal Sor 5 μM). After being collected and fixed in 2.5% electron microscopy-grade glutaraldehyde, the mitochondrial morphology was observed using TEM.

## Expression of HIF-1α mRNA, PD-L1 mRNA, and system Xc− proteins
CT26, 4T1, and B16-F10 cells were incubated with blank culture medium under normoxic and hypoxic conditions. Total RNA was extracted from the cells using TRIzol reagent, and RT-PCR was performed to examine the mRNA expression levels of HIF-1α and PD-L1.
Under normoxic conditions, B16-F10 cells were incubated with blank medium; under hypoxic conditions, B16-F10 cells were incubated with blank medium, Sor Sol, or FJSO NAs (equal Sor 5 μM). After incubation, proteins were extracted from the tumor cells, and western blot analysis was performed to evaluate the regulatory effect of Sor on system Xc− expression in B16-F10 cells.
Tumor tissues from B16-F10 tumor-bearing C57BL/6 mice and 4T1 tumor-bearing BALB/c mice treated with PBS, JQ1 Sol, Sor Sol, SJ Sol, FJS NAs, and FJSO NAs (equivalent Sor concentration of 15 mg/kg) were collected, homogenized, and lysed. Western blot analysis was conducted to investigate the regulatory effect of the drugs on system Xc− expression in tumor tissues.

## In vitro hypoxia alleviation
The mitigation effect of different formulations on the hypoxic environment was investigated by the HIF-1α. Briefly, 4T1 cells were seeded into 24-well plates at a density of 5×104 cells/well, and the cells were allowed to grow adherent to the well under normoxic conditions for 12 h. Subsequently, the cells were divided into normoxic and hypoxic groups and continued to be cultured for 12 h at an oxygen concentration of 21% and 5%, respectively. After pouring off the old medium, the cells were incubated with medium containing PBS (pH 7.4), JQ1 Sol, Sor Sol, SJ Sol, FJS NAs, and FJSO NAs (equal to 5 μM of Sor) for 4 h. After fixation of the cells with 4% paraformaldehyde, the cells were incubated with anti-HIF-1α antibody (1:200) for 12 h at 4°C. Furthermore, a FITC-conjugated monoclonal secondary antibody was used to incubate the cells at room temperature for 4 h. Finally, the cell nuclei were stained with Hoechst 33342 (100 nM). Fluorescent signals were observed with CLSM (C2, Nikon, Japan).

## Cellular reactive oxygen species (ROS) detection
The DCFH-DA probe was used to detect the ROS levels in 4T1 cells after administration of different formulations. Mechanistically, DCFH-DA, which is non-fluorescent, can interact with intracellular ROS to generate fluorescent DCF after being uptake into cells. Specifically, 4T1 cells were seeded into 24-well plates at a density of 5 × 104 cells/well and cultured for 12 h. Subsequently, the cells were co-incubated with PBS (pH 7.4), Sor Sol, FJS NAs, and FJSO NAs (equivalent to 5 μM of Sor) for 4 h. After the cells were washed three times with cold PBS (pH 7.4), DCFH-DA (10 μM) was used to treat 4T1 cells for 30 min. Finally, the cells were additionally washed three times using cold PBS (pH 7.4), and the green fluorescence intensity of DCF was detected using CLSM (C2, Nikon, Japan). In addition, intracellular ROS levels in 4T1 cells were quantified by flow cytometry (n = 3).

## LPOs and MDA detection
Intracellular LPOs was detected by the fluorescent probe C11 BODIPY 581/591. Briefly, 4T1 cells, CT26 cells, and B16-F10 cells were seeded into 24-well plates at a density of 5 × 105 cells/well for 12 h in the cell culture incubator (37°C, O2 21%, CO2 5%). Subsequently, the cells were divided into normoxic and hypoxic groups and continued to be cultured for 12 h at oxygen concentrations of 21% and 5%, respectively. After that, the original culture medium was removed and replaced with the fresh blank culture medium, Sor Sol, FJS NAs, and FJSO NAs (equivalent to 5 μM of Sor) to further incubate cells for 4 h. Then, cells were washed three times with ice-cold PBS (pH 7.4), and C11 BODIPY 581/591 (10 μM) was added and co-cultured with the cells for 1 h. Finally, cells were fixed using 4% paraformaldehyde and intracellular LPOs levels were observed by CLSM (C2, Nikon, Japan).
In addition, intracellular levels of LPOs and MDA were quantified by the content determination kit. Briefly, 4T1 cells, CT26 cells, and B16-F10 cells were seeded and cultured in 6-well plates at a density of 1×105 cells/well for 12 h, and further cultured in normoxia and hypoxia for 12 h. Subsequently, the cells were administered at the doses and groups described above. The level of LPOs and MDA in the cells was measured as indicated by the respective kits.

## GSH detection, GPXs enzyme activity and GPX4 inhibition
4T1 cells, CT26 cells, and B16-F10 cells were seeded into cell culture dishes at a density of 1×106 cells/well and cultured for 12 h in a cell culture incubator (37°C, O2 21%, CO2 5%). Subsequently, the cells were divided into normoxic and hypoxic groups and continued to be cultured for a further 12 h at oxygen concentrations of 21% and 5%, respectively. Subsequently, the cells were further cultured by replacing the original medium with fresh blank culture medium, Sor Sol, FJS NAs, and FJSO NAs (equivalent to 5 μM of Sor) to further incubate the cells. After 4 h, ice-cold PBS (pH 7.4) was utilized to wash the cells three times, and then the cells were collected, sonicated, and centrifuged to collect the supernatant. Finally, GSH, GPX4 and GPXs content were measured by respective kits according to the instructions (n = 3), and absorbance of GSH, GPX4 and GPXs was measured at 412 nm using a multi-mode microplate reader (Thermo Scientific, USA).

## CRT exposure
Immunofluorescence analysis was employed to assess CRT exposure in 4T1 cells and Hepa1-6 cells. Initially, 4T1 cells and Hepa1-6 cells were seeded into 24-well plates at a density of 5×104 cells/well, and the cells were allowed to grow adherent to the well under normoxic conditions for 12 h. Subsequently, the cells were divided into normoxic and hypoxic groups and continued to be cultured for 12 h at an oxygen concentration of 21% and 5%, respectively. Besides, the old medium was replaced by the fresh medium containing PBS (pH 7.4), Sor Sol, FJS NAs, and FJSO NAs (equal to 5 μM of Sor), and the cells were further treated for 12 h. After fixation of the cells with 4% paraformaldehyde, the cells were incubated with the primary antibody for 12 h at 4°C. Whereafter, the cells were washed with ice-cold PBS (pH 7.4) three times, followed by incubating with Cy3-conjugated monoclonal secondary antibody for 2 h. Ultimately, the cell nuclei were stained with Hoechst 33342 (100 nM). Fluorescent signals were observed with CLSM (C2, Nikon, Japan).
Quantitative results were accomplished by flow cytometry. Briefly, 4T1 cells were seeded into 12-well plates at a density of 1 × 105 cells/well and cultured normoxically for 12 h. The normoxic and hypoxic groups were then incubated at an oxygen concentration of 21% and 5% for 12 h, respectively. Subsequently, the cells were treated with different formulations for 12 h. After washing, collecting, and suspending in PBS, the 4T1 cells were then co-incubated with the primary antibody and followed by Cy3-conjugated monoclonal secondary antibody. At last, the cells were washed three times with PBS (pH 7.4), subsequently dispersed, and analyzed by flow cytometry.

## HMGB1 release
To detect the HMGB1 distribution of 4T1 cells, immunofluorescence analysis was employed. Briefly, 4T1 cells were first inoculated into 24-well plates and after 12 h of normoxic culture, the cells were grouped and additionally cultured for 12 h under normoxic and hypoxic conditions, respectively. After 12 h of co-incubation with the cells using different formulations, the cells were fixed with 4% paraformaldehyde (15 min) at room temperature. The Nuclei were punched with Triton X-100 (0.1%) for 10 min. Subsequently, the 4T1 cells were incubated with FITC-conjugated HMGB1 antibody for 12 h at 4°C. After three washes with PBS (pH 7.4), the 4T1 cells were stained with a secondary antibody for 2 h at room temperature, and nuclei were stained with Hoechst 33342 (100 nM) for 15 min. Fluorescence images were observed with CLSM (C2, Nikon, Japan). Extracellular HMGB1 was quantified in the culture medium secreted by the formulation-treated cells using the HMGB1 Elisa kit according to the manufacturer’s instructions.

## ATP secretion
Extracellular ATP secretion was assessed by an ATP analysis kit. Briefly, 4T1 cells were seeded at a density of 2 × 105 cells/well in 6-well plates and the cells were aimed to grow adherent to the well under normoxic conditions for 12 h. Subsequently, the cells were grouped and continued to be cultured for 12 h at the oxygen concentration of 21% and 5%, respectively. Besides, the old medium was replaced by the fresh medium containing PBS (pH 7.4), Sor Sol, FJS NAs, and FJSO NAs (equal to 5 μM of Sor), and the cells were further treated for 12 h. After that, the supernatant was collected and centrifuged for 5 min (12,000 rpm). The supernatant was then processed and extracellular ATP secretion was quantified using the ATP analysis kit.

## PD-L1 expression
Immunofluorescence analysis was performed to analyze the expression of PD-L1 in 4T1 cells. First, 4T1 cells were seeded into 24-well plates and the cells were cultured under normoxic and hypoxic conditions as described above. After treatment with the formulations, 4T1 cells were washed three times with ice-cold PBS (pH 7.4) and fixed with 4% paraformaldehyde. Cells were incubated with primary antibody for 12 h at 4°C. Subsequently, the cells were incubated with FITC-conjugated monoclonal secondary antibody for 2 h. Fluorescence images were observed by CLSM (C2, Nikon, Japan).
Quantitative results were completed by flow cytometry. Briefly, 4T1 cells were seeded into 12-well plates at a density of 1×105 cells/well, and the cells were cultured under normoxic and hypoxic conditions as described above. The 4T1 cells were collected and suspended in PBS (pH 7.4), co-incubated with primary antibody, and followed by FITC-conjugated monoclonal secondary antibody. Finally, cells were washed three times with PBS (pH 7.4), dispersed, and analyzed by flow cytometry (n = 3).

## DCs maturation
Specifically, bone marrow-derived DCs were isolated from mice and cultured in the presence of IL-4 and granulocyte-macrophage colony-stimulating factor. After 7 days of culture, DCs were co-cultured with hypoxia-treated 4T1 cells that had been pretreated with Control, Sor Sol, FJS NAs, and FJSO NAs (equal to 5 μM of Sor) for 12 h. Subsequently, DCs were stained with anti-CD80 and anti-CD86 antibodies, and analyzed by flow cytometry.

## Animal studies
All animal procedures were performed by the Guidelines for Care and Use of Laboratory Animals of Shenyang Pharmaceutical University and approved by the Animal Ethics Committee of Shenyang Pharmaceutical University.

## Pharmacokinetics
NAs were prepared with Cy7-labelled DSPE-PEG2K (denoted as Cy7-FJS NAs and Cy7-FJSO NAs, respectively) to trace in vivo fate. Sprague-Dawley (SD) rats (180–220 g) were randomly divided into three groups to investigate the pharmacokinetic behavior of Cy7 Sol, Cy7-FJS NAs, and Cy7-FJSO NAs at an equivalent Cy7 dose of 2 mg/kg (n = 5). After, blood samples were collected from the ophthalmic vein of rats at predetermined time points (5 min, 15 min, 30 min, 1 h, 2 h, 4 h, 8 h, and 12 h) and centrifuged (8,000 rpm for 3 min) to obtain plasma samples. Ultimately, Cy7 was extracted from plasma samples by protein precipitation, and the fluorescence intensity of Cy7 was measured by the microplate reader with excitation at 748 nm and emission at 780 nm.

## Biodistribution
BALB/c mice bearing 4T1 breast tumors served as the model to assess in vivo biodistribution of NAs. Briefly, the 4T1 cells were digested, collected, centrifuged, and re-dispersed in PBS (pH 7.4). Subsequently, the tumor-bearing BALB/c mice were established by subcutaneously injecting 100 μL of PBS suspensions containing 4T1 cells into the right back of the mice at a density of 5 × 107 cells/mL. Once the tumor volume reached about 400 mm3, the mice were randomly divided into three groups and injected intravenously with Cy7 Sol, Cy7-FJS NAs, and Cy7-FJSO NAs at an equivalent Cy7 dose of 2 mg/kg (n = 3), respectively. The fluorescence signals were examined at predetermined time points (1, 2, 4, 8, and 12 h) post-injection using an IVIS imaging system (PerkinElmer). Fluorescence intensity, which was 748 nm excitation and 780 nm emission. In addition, mice were sacrificed at the time point of maximum accumulation of each group in the tumor, respectively. Besides, the main tissues (heart, liver, spleen, lung, and kidney) and the tumor were collected and analyzed for fluorescence intensity in isolated tissues using the IVIS imaging system (PerkinElmer). Tumor tissues from mice treated with Cy7 Sol or Cy7-FJSO NAs were harvested and stained with an anti-EpCAM antibody, followed by nuclear counterstaining with DAPI. Nanoparticle distribution was visualized via intrinsic Cy7 fluorescence, and colocalization with EpCAM-positive 4T1 tumor cells was assessed using confocal microscopy.
A 4T1 tumor-bearing BALB/c mouse model was established, and JQ1 Sol, Sor Sol, and FJSO NAs were performed when the tumor reached approximately 300 mm3. At the time point of maximum drug accumulation, the mice were sacrificed, and major organs, including the heart, liver, spleen, lung, kidney, and tumor tissues, were harvested and homogenized. The concentrations of JQ1 and Sor in different tissues were quantitatively analyzed using LC-MS.

## Oxygen saturation in tumor
For PA monitoring the variation of OxyHb and DeoxyHb content in tumor regions, the PA-Mode 2D/3D (Multiwavelength) of Vevo LAZR-X system (Fujifilim Viualsonic, Toronto, Canada) was employed to record corresponding images and signals. Saline, FJS NAs, and FJSO NAs were intravenously administered (equal to 13.3 mg/kg pentadecafluorooctanoic acid or 15 mg/kg of Sor). At certain time intervals, the 4T1 tumor-bearing BALB/C mice were anesthetized and in vivo PA images were monitored by using the Vevo LAZR-X system.
4T1 tumor-bearing BALB/c mice were treated with PBS, FJS NAs, FJSO NAs (equivalent Sor concentration of 15 mg/kg) for 4 h, followed by intraperitoneal injection of pimonidazole hydrochloride (60 mg/kg). After 0.5 h, the mice were euthanized, and tumors were collected and snap-frozen in liquid nitrogen. Immunofluorescence staining was then performed on tumor sections to evaluate the extent of hypoxia alleviation.

## In vivo antitumor efficacy
The 4T1 breast tumor-bearing mice xenograft model was used to investigate the in vivo antitumor efficacy. When the average tumor volume of the mice reached about 120 mm3, the mice were randomly divided into six groups: saline, JQ1 Sol, Sor Sol, SJ Sol, FJS NAs, and FJSO NAs (n = 5). The formulations were intravenously injected with an equivalent Sor concentration of 15 mg/kg every two days for a total of five injections. Meanwhile, the body weight and tumor volume of the mice were monitored and recorded during the treatment. After two days following the last treatment, the blood samples were collected, and the mice were sacrificed to obtain the heart, liver, spleen, lungs, kidneys, and tumors. Serum samples were centrifuged and collected for liver and kidney function analysis. The major organs and tumors were stained with hematoxylin and eosin (H&E) to analyze the pathological changes and antitumor effects. Similar procedures were used to investigate the therapeutic effects of PBS, Sor Sol, FJS NAs, and FJSO NAs in the Hepa1-6 tumor-bearing mice xenograft model.

## Hemolysis assays
Fresh rat blood was collected and transferred into heparinized anticoagulant tubes. After centrifugation to separate serum and blood cells, the cells were washed three times with normal saline to obtain red blood cells. PBS and water served as the negative and positive controls, respectively. A 2% red blood cell suspension was incubated with FJS NAs and FJSO NAs (0.5 mg/mL) at 37°C for 4 h. Subsequently, the samples were centrifuged, and the supernatants were transferred to a 96-well plate. The absorbance was measured using an enzyme reader at a wavelength of 545 nm.

## In vivo ferroptosis effect and hypoxia relief evaluation
The expressions of GSH, LPOs, and MDA in tumors were measured by respective content assay kits. Briefly, fresh tumors from each group were washed three times with ice-cold PBS (pH 7.4). Therewith, the tumors were ground and homogenized with the extraction solution from the kit. Subsequent sample processing and content determination were performed following the instructions of the corresponding kits.
Tumor tissues from B16-F10 tumor-bearing mice treated with PBS, JQ1 Sol, Sor Sol, SJ Sol, FJS NAs, and FJSO NAs (equivalent Sor concentration of 15 mg/kg) and Hepa1-6 tumor-bearing mice treated with PBS, Sor Sol, FJS NAs, and FJSO NAs (equivalent Sor concentration of 15 mg/kg) were collected and processed for boron-dipyrromethene(BODIPY) (1μmol) staining to assess the LPOs levels in tumor tissues from each group.
To examine the hypoxia relief within the tumor, the mice were sacrificed two days after the final treatment. The obtained tumor tissues were fixed with 4% paraformaldehyde. Subsequently, tumor sections were subjected to immunofluorescence staining with anti-HIF-1α antibody, and the fluorescent images were observed by CLSM.

## In vivo immune responses
To investigate the expression of intratumoral CRT and HMGB1, the mice were sacrificed two days following the final injection. Subsequently, the tumor tissues were obtained and fixed with 4% paraformaldehyde. Ultimately, tumor sections were subjected to immunofluorescence staining, and the fluorescent images were observed by CLSM.
In addition, the tumor tissues were prepared into a tumor cell suspension, and they were incubated together with PE-conjugated PD-L1 antibody and quantified using flow cytometry to assess PD-L1 levels in tumor cells across the treatment groups.
The tumor tissues and draining lymph nodes will be harvested from tumor-bearing mice treated with different formulations (equivalent Sor concentration of 15 mg/kg), mechanically dissociated into single-cell suspensions, and incubated with fluorescence-labeled antibodies against CD4+, CD8+, CD80+, and CD86+. Flow cytometry will be performed to evaluate the immune cell subsets and DCs maturation.

## Lung metastasis study
To investigate the anti-metastasis effect, the right flank region of C57BL/6 mice was subcutaneously injected with B16-F10 cell suspension (5 × 106 cells per mouse). Then, the mice were intravenously injected with 1 × 106 cells. So far, the pulmonary metastasis model has been established. The mice were randomly divided into six groups (n = 5), followed by treatment with saline, JQ1 Sol, Sor Sol, SJ Sol, FJS NAs, and FJSO NAs (equivalent Sor concentration of 15 mg/kg). The treatment was performed five times, once every 2 days. Tumor development processes were evaluated by supervising the body weight and primary tumor size every 2 days. The mice were euthanized after the final treatment. All of the lungs were excised, photographed, and fixed, and sections were taken for H&E staining. The metastasis lesions of all groups were counted to evaluate the anti-metastasis effect.

## Abscopal tumor eradication
Primary subcutaneous tumors (5 × 106 B16-F10 cells) were established, and treatment was initiated when the tumor volume reached approximately 20 mm3. Administration was performed every other day, for a total of four doses with the equivalent Sor concentration of 15 mg/kg. After treatment, recurrent tumors were established on the contralateral side of the primary tumor, and tumor growth as well as body weight changes in the mice were monitored. When the primary tumor approached the ethical endpoint, mice were euthanized, and their draining lymph nodes and tumor tissues were harvested for immune and immunological memory analysis.

## Quantification and statistical analysis
All data were analyzed using GraphPad Prism 8 and represented as mean ± standard deviation (SD). The significant differences between groups were determined by one-way analysis of variance (ANOVA) and Student’s t test. Statistical differences were considered as ∗p < 0.05, ∗∗p < 0.01, ∗∗∗p < 0.001, and ∗∗∗∗p < 0.0001, while ns indicates p > 0.05, which means no significance.

 

## Supplemental information

## Document S1. Figures S1–S5 and Tables S1–S3

## Document S2. Article plus supplemental information

Supplemental information can be found online at https://doi.org/10.1016/j.xcrm.2025.102427.