2814apsbActa Pharmaceutica Sinica. BActa Pharm Sin BElsevierPMC1227841212278412122784124069812510.1016/j.apsb.2025.05.023RXRα modulates hepatic stellate cell activation and liver fibrosis by targeting CaMKKβ–AMPKα axis
CaiLijun YinMeimei PengShuangzhou LinFen LaiLiangliang ZhangXindao XieLei WangChuanying ZhouHuiying ZhanYunfeng AlitongbiekeGulimiran LianBaohuan SuZhibin LiuTenghui ZhouYuqi LiZongxi ChenXiaohui ZhaoQi DengTing ChenLulu SuJingwei ShengLuoyan SuYing ZhangLing-Juan JiangFu-Quan ZhangXiao-Kun aSchool of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Fujian Provincial Key Laboratory of Innovative Drug Target Research, Xiamen University, Xiamen 361102, ChinabState Key Laboratory of Cellular Stress Biology, School of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Xiamen University, Xiamen 361102, ChinacNucMito Pharmaceuticals Co., Ltd., Xiamen 361101, ChinadCollege of Pharmacy, Qinghai Minzu University, Xining 810007, China⁎Corresponding authors. jiangfq@xmu.edu.cnxkzhang@xmu.edu.cn
†These authors made equal contributions to this work.
265202515736113611–36312272025© 2025 The AuthorsThis is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/).

## Abstract
Hepatic stellate cells (HSCs) are the primary fibrogenic cells in the liver, and their activation plays a crucial role in the development and progression of hepatic fibrosis. Here, we report that retinoid X receptor-alpha (RXRα), a unique member of the nuclear receptor superfamily, is a key modulator of HSC activation and liver fibrosis. RXRα exerts its effects by modulating calcium/calmodulin-dependent protein kinase kinase β (CaMKKβ)-mediated activation of AMP-activated protein kinase-alpha (AMPKα). In addition, we demonstrate that K-80003, which binds RXRα by a unique mechanism, effectively suppresses HSC activation, proliferation, and migration, thereby inhibiting liver fibrosis in the CCl4 and amylin liver NASH (AMLN) diet animal models. The effect is mediated by AMPKα activation, promoting mitophagy in HSCs. Mechanistically, K-80003 activates AMPKα by inducing RXRα to form condensates with CaMKKβ and AMPKα via a two-phase process. The formation of RXRα condensates is driven by its N-terminal intrinsic disorder region and requires phosphorylation by CaMKKβ. Our results reveal a crucial role of RXRα in liver fibrosis regulation through modulating mitochondrial activities in HSCs. Furthermore, they suggest that K-80003 and related RXRα modulators hold promise as therapeutic agents for fibrosis-related diseases.
Key words: K-80003, RXRα, AMPKα, CaMKKβ, HSCs, Liver fibrosis, Phase separation, Mitophagy

## Graphical abstract
Nuclear receptor RXRα regulates hepatic stellate cell (HSC) activation during liver fibrosis through the CaMKKβ/AMPKα pathway. K-80003 binds to RXRα, enhances mitophagy, suppresses HSC activation, and alleviates fibrosis.
 
statusreleaseddisplay-pdfyesis-olfnois-manuscriptnois-preprintnois-journal-matternois-scannednois-retractednoReceived 2024 Jul 23; Revised 2024 Oct 27; Accepted 2024 Dec 20; Issue date 2025 Jul.

1.

## Introduction
Nonalcoholic steatohepatitis (NASH), also known as metabolic dysfunction-associated steatohepatitis (MASH), is an advanced form of nonalcoholic fatty liver disease (NAFLD). It is characterized by liver steatosis, inflammation, and fibrosis, which can progress to cirrhosis, liver failure, and hepatocellular carcinoma , . Members of the nuclear receptor family hold significant potential for treating metabolic diseases . Among them, retinoid X receptor-alpha (RXRα), liver X receptor (LXR), farnesoid X receptor (FXR), peroxisome proliferator-activated receptors (PPARs), and thyroid hormone receptor (T3R) are highly expressed in the liver and play crucial roles in regulating bile acid, lipid, and glucose homeostasis . Several modulators targeting these nutrient-sensing nuclear receptors, including obeticholic acid (OCA; an FXRα agonist), pioglitazone (a PPARγ agonist), T3Rβ agonist (resmetirom), elafibranor (GFT505; a dual PPARδ/PPARα agonist), and lanifibranor (a pan-PPAR agonist), have been extensively evaluated in clinical trials for treating MASH. Resmetirom has recently become the first approved drug for the treatment of adults with MASH , , , , , . However, improving the therapeutic index of these compounds remains a challenge. There is a need for nuclear receptor modulators with enhanced anti-fibrotic efficacy and fewer side effects to optimize NASH treatment outcomes.
Liver fibrosis, the primary determinant of mortality in MASH , is reversible, making it a key target for therapeutic intervention. There is significant interest in developing new strategies to reverse liver fibrosis and/or prevent its progression to cirrhosis , . The key fibrogenic effector cell type in the liver is the activated hepatic stellate cells (HSCs) , . The activation of hepatic stellate cells (HSCs) plays a central role in fibrosis, as these cells transdifferentiate into myofibroblasts that produce extracellular matrix (ECM) proteins, driving the fibrogenic response to liver injury , . A hallmark of HSC activation is the depletion of lipid droplets, which store 50%–80% of the body's vitamin A , , . Upon activation, vitamin A is released and subsequently converted into retinoic acids (RAs), which regulate HSC activation and fibrosis , , . RA and its natural and synthetic analogs (retinoids) are crucial in various biological processes, including cell growth, differentiation, apoptosis, lipid metabolism, and calcium signaling , , , . Their effects are primarily mediated by 2 classes of nuclear receptors, RA receptors (RARs) and RXRs, both belong to the nuclear receptor superfamily , , , , . Among the three RXR subtypes, RXRα is highly expressed in HSCs , , , yet its levels decline during liver fibrosis . Modulating RXRα activities with its ligands has been shown to inhibit HSC activation and liver fibrosis , , , . However, the precise role of RXRα in HSC activation remains obscure, warranting further investigation.
Members of the nuclear receptor superfamily contain a C-terminal ligand-binding domain (LBD), responsible for ligand-binding and receptor dimerization, and a DNA-binding domain (DBD), which enable specific DNA interaction . These receptors act as transcription factors, regulating target gene expression by binding to its cognate DNA response elements either as homodimers or heterodimers , . Additionally, nuclear receptors can act independently of their transcription regulation by interacting with various cytoplasmic signaling proteins , , , . Beyond the LBD and DBD, nuclear receptors possess an intrinsically disordered region (IDR) at their N-terminal end. The IDR contributes to the complexity of nuclear receptor regulatory networks and cell- and tissue-specific signaling , , . Proteins containing IDR often function as interaction hubs within signaling networks, playing central roles in pathway regulation and the assembly of molecular complexes implicated in the development and progression of cancer and diseases. As a result, they are increasingly recognized as potential drug targets and are under extensive investigation , . Recent studies indicate that intrinsically disordered proteins participate in multivalent interactions, driving liquid–liquid phase separation (LLPS) and the formation of biomolecular condensates , . We recently reported that the IDR of the orphan nuclear receptor Nur77 engages in multivalent interactions with p62, leading to condensate formation essential for mitophagy . However, whether and how the IDR of RXRα contributes to LLPS remains unknown.
AMP-activated protein kinase-alpha (AMPKα) is a master regulator of metabolism that maintains cellular energy homeostasis , , , , . It has emerged as an attractive therapeutic target for hepatic fibrosis. AMPKα activity is significantly lower in patients with advanced fibrosis or cirrhosis compared to healthy individuals . Both pharmacological and genetic activation of AMPKα in the liver have been shown to alleviate liver injury and attenuate hepatic fibrosis in various MASH models . In human HSCs, AMPKα activation by adiponectin or 5-aminoimidazole-4-carboxamide1-β-d-ribofuranoside (AICAR) suppresses platelet-derived growth factor (PDGF)-induced HSC activation, whereas AMPKα silencing enhances PDGF-induced HSC proliferation, migration, and activation . In the mouse carbon tetrachloride (CCl4) model, treatment with the AMPKα agonist AICAR reduces HSC proliferation mitigates hepatic fibrosis, and improves liver function . Given its role in fibrosis suppression, understanding the mechanisms by which AMPKα is activated to inhibit HSC activation has become an area of active research.
We report here that K-80003, a small molecule that binds RXRα through a unique mechanism , , , , effectively inhibited HSC activation in vitro and improved liver fibrosis in vivo by activating AMPKα. Mechanistically, K-80003 promoted the interaction of RXRα with calcium/calmodulin-dependent protein kinase kinase β (CaMKKβ), an upstream kinase of AMPKα, in a RXRα phosphorylation-dependent manner. Furthermore, K-80003 binding facilitated the formation of IDR-dependent condensates of phosphorylated RXRα with CaMKKβ and AMPKα through a two-phase LLPS process, which in turn resulted in AMPKα activation and subsequently mitochondrial autophagy (mitophagy) in HSCs. Our results reveal an RXRα–CaMKKβ–AMPKα signaling axis that regulates HSC activation and hepatic fibrosis through phase separation and identifies K-80003 as a promising anti-fibrosis agent by targeting this pathway.

2.

## Materials and methods
2.1.

## Cell culture
Cell lines were passaged for fewer than 4 months after resuscitation in culture for this study. Human primary hepatic stellate cells (hHSC, iXCells Biotechnologies, San Diego, CA, USA, Cat. 10HU-210, Lot. 300074) used in this study were passaged less than twice. Mouse primary hepatic stellate cells (mHSC) were isolated from 16-week-old C57BL/6 mice. CFSC rat HSCs, LX-2 human HSCs, and primary HSCs were cultured in DMEM (Gibco, Carlsbad, CA, USA, Cat. C11965500BT) supplemented with 10% FBS (Sigma, St Louis, MO, USA, Cat. F0193) in a humidified atmosphere containing 5% CO2 at 37 °C. Cell transfections were carried out by Lipofectamine 2000 (Invitrogen, Carlsbad, CA, USA, Cat. 11668019) according to the manufacturer's instructions.

2.2.

## Plasmids
Myc-RXRα, Myc-RXRα-NESm, Myc-RXRα-S49A, Myc-RXRα-T53A, Myc-RXRα-S78A, Myc-RXRα-T82A, Myc-RXRα-S49/T53A, Myc-RXRα-S78/T82A, Myc-RXRα-1-235, Myc-RXRα-1-235-S78/T82A, Myc-RXRα-1-235-S78/T82D, Myc-RXRα-LBD, Flag-RXRα-LBD, Flag-CaMKKβ, Flag-AMPKα, Myc-AMPKα, pET-28a-mEGFP-RXRα, pET-28a-mEGFP-RXRα-IDR, pET-28a-mEGFP-RXRα-LBD, pET-28a-mCherry-RXRα, pET-28a-mCherry-RXRα-IDR, pET-28a-mCherry-RXRα-DBD, pET-28a-mCherry-RXRα-LBD, pET-28a-mCherry-CaMKKβ, pET-28a-6His-AMPKα, pmCherry-RXRα, pmCherry-RXRα-ΔIDR, pmCherry-RXRα-DBD, and pmCherry-RXRα-LBD were constructed with standard methods.

2.3.

## Compounds
All-trans-retinoic acid (ATRA) (Sigma, Cat. R2625); 9-cis-RA (Sigma, Cat. R4643); CD3254 (Tocris, Bristol, UK, Cat. 3302); malotilate (Target Mol, Shanghai, China, Cat. T6576); ocaliva (MedChemExpress, Monmouth Junction, NJ, USA, Cat. HY-135400); actinomycin D (Target Mol, Cat. T3356); leptomycin B (Beyotime Biotechnology, Haimen, China, Cat. S1726); STO-609 (MedChemExpress, Cat. HY-19805), metformin (MedChemExpress, Cat. HY-B0627), AICAR (MedChemExpress, Cat. HY-13417), cyclosporin A (MedChemExpress, Cat. HY-B0579). K-80003 was synthesized as described .

2.4.

## Western blot (WB)
Cell lysates were boiled in sodium dodecyl sulfate (SDS) sample loading buffer, resolved by 10% SDS–polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis (SDS–PAGE) and transferred to nitrocellulose. The membranes were blocked in 5% milk in Tris-buffered saline and Tween 20 [TBST: 10 mmol/L Tris–HCl (pH 8.0), 150 mmol/L NaCl, 0.05% Tween 20] for 1 h at room temperature. After washing 3 times with TBST, the membranes were incubated with appropriate primary antibodies (Supporting Information ) in TBST with 0.5% BSAfor 4 °C overnight and then washed 3 times with TBST, probed with horseradish peroxide-linked anti-immunoglobulin (1:10,000 dilution) for 1 h at room temperature. After 3 washes with TBST, immunoreactive products were visualized using enhanced chemiluminescence reagents. The recombinant proteins involved in the experiments included TGF-β (Novoprotein, Suzhou, China, Cat. CA59), PDGF-BB (Novoprotein, Cat. C199), and Calmodulin/CALM1 (Novoprotein, Cat. C911).

2.5.

## Isolation of mouse HSCs
Mouse primary HSCs were freshly isolated from the livers of mice (12-week-old) using pronase/collagenase methods . After anesthetizing C57BL/6 mice with isoflurane, their limbs were fixed, and the liver and gastrointestinal organs were exposed. A surgical needle and suture were inserted beside the inferior vena cava under the liver, and the suture was pulled behind the blood vessel. A catheter was inserted under the suture into the inferior vena cava. The needle was removed from the catheter, and the catheter was sutured and hand-tightened. The pump was turned on and connected to the catheter, followed by pinning the filter and tubing tightly. The liver was allowed to inflate for several seconds, and then the portal vein was cut to release pressure, ensuring that it was not overinflated to prevent liver rupture. The diaphragm was cut, and the upper part of the inferior vena cava under the heart was clamped. Perfusion was done for 4 min, followed by 5 min of pronase E digestion, and then 5 min of collagenase D (Sigma, Cat. V900893-1 g) digestion. The mouse was raised, and the fascia was cut to drop the liver into a culture dish, ensuring minimal liquid entry. The liver was kept moist in digestion solution (about 25 mL without DNAse I). After preparing all livers, membranes were gently torn to release dissociated cells. The tissue was transferred to a 50 mL tube, with an additional digestion solution of 49 mL, and 1 mL DNAse I (Roche, Basel, Switzerland, Cat. 10104159001), gently pipetting 5–10 times for further dissociation. Incubate at 37 °C for 10–15 min with gentle stirring. Filter the digested liver through a cell filter into a new 50 mL tube, centrifuge at 935 × g for 8 min, discard the supernatant, and resuspend the pellet, centrifuging again at 935 × g for 8 min. Resuspend the pellet in Nycodenz (Serumwerk Bernburg AG, Bernburg, Germany, Cat. 18003) solution and mix. Centrifuge at 2000 × g for 20 min without a brake. Remove the top fat layer and collect the upper white cell layer containing HSCs into a new 50 mL tube. Centrifuge at 800 × g for 7 min, collect the pellet, resuspend in 10% FBS DMEM medium, count cells, and plate for culture.

2.6.

## Animal studies
Protocols for animal studies were approved by the Animal Care and Use Committee of Xiamen University (approval No. XMULAC20230178), and all mice were handled in accordance with the “Guide for the Care and Use of Laboratory Animals” and the “Principles for the Utilization and Care of Vertebrate Animals”. All of the mice were maintained in the animal room with 12-h light/12-h dark cycles at the laboratory animal center at Xiamen University.
CaMKK2−/− mice were obtained from The Jackson Laboratory, provided by Dr. Chen-Song Zhang.
For the CCl4-induced liver fibrosis model, eight-week-old male C57BL/6 mice were treated with 0.5 mL/kg CCl4 dissolved in corn oil (25% v/v, intraperitoneally) once per 3 days for 6 weeks. Mice were then treated with K-80003 (60 mg/kg, K-80003 with 5% Tween-80 dissolved in normal saline, gavage) for the last 2 weeks.
For AMLN diet-induced insulin-resistant obese NAFLD/NASH model, six-week-old male C57BL/6 mice were fed AMLN diet (40% fat kcal, 22% fructose and 2% cholesterol) for 29 weeks, and then mice were treated with K-80003 (50 mg/kg, K-80003 with 5% Tween-80 dissolved in normal saline, gavage) or OCA (25 mg/kg, OCA with 5% Tween-80 dissolved in normal saline, gavage) for 4 weeks.
Mice blood samples were bled from the eye and liver tissues were also collected for histological, serological, and gene expression analysis.

2.7.

## Statistical analysis
All data are presented as mean ± standard deviation (SD). The data between groups were performed with the OriginPro, and analyzed by t-test or one-way ANOVA. P-values less than 0.05 were considered statistically significant.
Additional materials and methods details are given in the Supporting Information.

3.

## Results
3.1.

## RXRα ligand K-80003 inhibits HSC activation in vitro
To study the role of RXRα in HSCactivation, we evaluated the effect of several natural and synthetic RXRα ligands on TGF-β-induced α-smooth muscle actin (α-SMA) expression, a fibrosis marker, in rat CFSC stellate cells ( A, Supporting Information ). TGF-β induction of α-SMA expression was inhibited by all-trans-retinoic acid (ATRA) that binds and activates RARs and can also activate RXRs as a result of its conversion to 9-cis-RA, a ligand of RXRα . Similarly, both 9-cis-RA and RXR-selective ligand CD3254 inhibited TGF-β-induced α-SMA expression. These results demonstrated that RXRα modulation could be a promising approach for inhibiting TGF-β activation of HSCs. Notably, K-80003, a unique RXRα modulator derived from the non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drug sulindac , , , , exhibited a strong inhibitory effect on TGF-β-induced α-SMA expression in CFSC cells ( A, ). The inhibitory effect of K-80003 was more pronounced than that of OCA, a ligand for FXR with promising anti-MASH activity in clinical studies , and comparable to malotilate, a 5-lipoxygenase inhibitor with anti-fibrotic activity ( B, ). Furthermore, K-80003 dose-dependently suppressed TGF-β-induced expression of not only α-SMA but also collagen α1 (COL1A1), another HSC activation marker ( ). These results identified K-80003 as a potent inhibitor of TGF-β signaling in HSCs, underscoring its potential as an anti-fibrotic agent.
 To determine whether the inhibitory effect of K-80003 on HSC activation is RXRα dependent, we employed a CRISPR-Cas9 approach to knock out RXRα in CFSC cells . The resulting RXRα−/− CFSC cells, which lack RXRα expression, were evaluated for α-SMA expression in the absence or presence of TGF-β and/or K-80003. Notably, both basal and TGF-β-induced α-SMA expression were significantly elevated in RXRα−/− CFSC cells compared to their parental counterparts ( C, ), indicating a crucial role for RXRα in modulating HSC activation. When the effect of K-80003 was examined, its ability to inhibit TGF-β induced α-SMA expression was markedly attenuated in RXRα−/− CFSC cells. Interestingly, K-80003-induced suppression of α-SMA expression coincided with AMPKα activation, as evidenced by the increased level of phosphorylated AMPKα (p-AMPKα) ( B and C). Furthermore, this AMPKα activation was also RXRα dependent, suggesting that AMPKα plays a role in mediating the anti-fibrotic activity of K-80003. The effect of K-80003 was also evaluated in human primary hepatic stellate cells (hHSCs) ( C). Consistent with the results in CFSC cells, K-80003 inhibited TGF-β-induced α-SMA expression in hHSCs while simultaneously activating AMPKα. To confirm the role of RXRα, RXRα was knocked down in hHSCs by transfecting RXRα siRNA. Similar to RXRα knockout, RXRα knockdown attenuated the ability of K-80003 to suppress TGF-β-induced expression of α-SMA and COL1A1 and to activate AMPKα ( C). Thus, both the inhibition of TGF-β signaling and the activation of AMPKα by K-80003 are RXRα dependent, revealing the importance of RXRα in mediating the anti-fibrotic effects of K-80003.
To further determine the anti-fibrogenic effect of K-80003, we examined its impact on the expression of pro-fibrotic genes in HSCs following TGF-β stimulation. K-80003 significantly inhibited TGF-β-induced mRNA expression of COL1A1, TGFB1, and PDGFRB in hHSCs ( D) and Acta2, Col1a1 and Timp1 in mouse primary HSCs (mHSCs) ( E). K-80003 also antagonized the pro-fibrotic effects of TGF-β in both CFSCs and hHSCs ( ). A hallmark of HSC activation is the depletion of lipid droplets , , . Treatment of primary HSCs with TGF-β led to a significant loss of lipid droplets, an effect largely prevented by co-treatment with K-80003 ( F). Furthermore, K-80003 reversed TGF-β-induced morphological change in CFSC cells, restoring their long fusiform shape to a more quiescent phenotype ( G). Since HSC activation promotes cell proliferation and migration , we also investigated the effect of K-80003 on these processes and found that K-80003 dose-dependently inhibited the proliferation of CFSCs and human LX-2 HSCs ( H). Transwell migration assay also revealed that K-80003 strongly suppressed TGF-β-induced CFSC migration ( I), which was further confirmed by scratch assays demonstrating that K-80003 effectively inhibited TGF-β-induced migration of both CFSC cells ( J) and LX-2 cells ( K). Thus, K-80003 effectively inhibits HSC activation, proliferation, and migration.

3.2.

## Anti-fibrogenic effects of K-80003 in animals
To evaluate the anti-fibrogenic effects of K-80003 in vivo, we examined its impact on liver fibrosis using CCl4-induced liver fibrosis mouse model . C57BL/6 mice were injected intraperitoneally with CCl4 every three days for six weeks and gavaged daily with K-80003 (60 mg/kg) during the final two weeks. Morphological analysis revealed that the liver of mice lost luster and became rough after CCl4 treatment, which was significantly improved after K-80003 treatment ( A). Histological analysis showed that K-80003 reduced CCl4-induced infiltration of inflammatory cells ( B) and attenuated collagen deposition and fibrous morphology ( C). K-80003 administration also decreased the levels of serum AST and ALT ( D). Analysis of liver tissue samples demonstrated that K-80003 inhibited CCl4-induced expression of pro-fibrotic genes, including α-SMA and N-cadherin, while simultaneously promoting AMPKα activation ( E). Immunohistochemical staining further confirmed the inhibitory effect of K-80003 on the expression of pro-fibrotic genes and inflammatory markers as well as its activation of AMPKα ( F). The anti-fibrogenic effect of K-80003 in the CCl4 mouse model was verified by its downregulation of the mRNA expression of various pro-fibrotic genes ( G). Similar results were obtained in a separate experiment where mice received simultaneously CCl4 and K-80003 treatment for 4 weeks (Supporting Information ). Thus, K-80003 effectively mitigates CCl4-induced liver injury and liver fibrosis in animals.
 We further evaluated the anti-fibrotic effects of K-80003 using an AMLN diet-induced insulin-resistant obese NAFLD/MASH model . Male C57BL/6 mice approximately 6 weeks of age were fed a high-trans fat, high-fructose, and high-cholesterol diet (AMLN) for 29 weeks, followed by daily treatment with K-80003 (50 mg/kg) for 4 weeks (Supporting Information ). For comparison, OCA (25 mg/kg) was used. AMLN-fed mice exhibited significant weight gain and liver enlargement, both of which were reduced by co-treatment with K-80003 and OCA ( ). Like OCA, K-80003 effectively lowed the AMLN-induced elevations in serum AST and ALT levels ( ). Histological analysis demonstrated that both K-80003 and OCA treatments significantly reduced hepatic lipid accumulation in AMLN-fed mice ( ). K-80003 also effectively inhibited AMLN-induced hepatic inflammation, as evidenced by CD68 immunostaining, and reduced hepatic lipid accumulation, as shown by bodipy staining, with effects comparable to OCA ( ). Evaluation of the anti-fibrogenic effect of K-80003 demonstrated that it strongly suppressed AMLN-induced α-SMA expression by immunostaining. Sirius red staining and collagen quantitation also revealed that K-80003 was more effective than OCA in reducing fibrosis in AMLN-fed mice ( ). The anti-fibrosis effect of K-80003 was further illustrated by a marked reduction in α-SMA levels ( ) and the downregulation of pro-fibrotic genes Acta2 and Col1a1 ( ). While treatment with K-80003 and OCA had no significant effect on body weight in mice, K-80003 notably reduced the ratio of epididymal white adipose tissue (eWAT) weight to body weight ( ). Additionally, K-80003 exhibited an inhibitory effect on serum TC and LDL-c levels ( ). Thus, K-80003 is also effective in inhibiting fibrosis in the AMLN animal model.

3.3.

## K-80003 does not inhibit canonical TGF-β/Smad signaling pathway
To study the mechanism underlying the anti-fibrogenic effects of K-80003 in HSCs, we first examined its impact on the TGF-β/Smad signaling pathway, a key pathway for HSC activation . TGF-β signaling is initiated upon its binding to its receptors, followed by phosphorylation of Smad2 and Smad3 and their association with Smad4, which then translocate into the nucleus and activate fibrosis-related genes . However, K-80003 did not affect the intracellular localization (Supporting Information ) or phosphorylation of Smad2/3 ( ). Additionally, K-80003 showed a similar inhibitory effect on TGF-β-induced α-SMA expression in both wild-type CFSC cells and Smad3−/− CFSC cells ( ). These results indicate that the anti-fibrotic effects of K-80003 are independent of the canonical TGF-β/Smad pathway, suggesting an alternative mechanism of action.

3.4.

## K-80003 modulates energy metabolism and mitochondrial function
To identify signaling pathways regulated by K-80003, we conducted RNA-Seq analysis using mHSCs treated with TGF-β in the presence or absence of K-80003 ( A and B). KEGG pathway analysis ( B, ) revealed that mitochondrial functions, including amino acid metabolism and biosynthesis of unsaturated fatty acids, were significantly suppressed by K-80003, whereas the glycolysis pathway remained largely unaffected. Consistently, K-80003 reduced intracellular ATP levels and increased the ADP/ATP ratio in an RXRα-dependent manner ( C–E). Given the central role of mitochondrion in energy metabolism , , , we further assessed mitochondrial function using oxygen consumption rate (OCR) and extracellular acidification rate (ECAR) assays, which measure mitochondrial respiration and glycolysis, respectively. TGF-β stimulation enhanced mitochondrial energy metabolism while having little effect on glycolysis in CFSC cells ( F). However, K-80003 treatment strongly suppressed TGF-β-induced mitochondrial respiration without significantly affecting glycolysis ( F). K-80003 also reduced mitochondrial membrane potential (MMP) ( ) and increased mitochondrial reactive oxygen species (MitoROS) ( ) in CFSC cells in an RXRα-dependent manner.
 Recent studies reveal a critical role of mitophagy, the selective degradation of mitochondria by autophagy, in the control of both the quality and the number of mitochondria to meet cellular metabolic demands . Therefore, we studied whether K-80003 regulated mitophagy using the COX8–EGFP–mCherry reporter, which targets the inner mitochondrial membrane and serves as a widely used mitophagy marker . In this system, normal mitochondria appear yellow due to the presence of both green (EGFP) and red (mCherry) fluorescence. However, when mitochondria are engulfed by acidic lysosomes, the green fluorescence is quenched, leaving only red fluorescence as an indicator of mitophagy. While control or TGF-β-treated CFSC cells showed no mitophagy, as evidenced by the absence of red fluorescence, CFSC cells treated with K-80003, either alone or in combination with TGF-β exhibited extensive red fluorescence, which was accompanied by a dramatic morphological change of mitochondria ( G). In addition, K-80003 treatment led to a reduction in COXII/MTCO2, a mitochondrial protein, an effect that was mitigated by co-treatment of cyclosporin A, a known mitophagy inhibitor ( ). Thus, K-80003 regulates mitochondrial function by inducing mitophagy in HSCs.

3.5.

## The anti-fibrogenic effect of K-80003 is mediated by its activation of AMPKα
K-80003 could activate AMPKα in both CFSC cells ( ) and animals ( ). This activation was also confirmed through KEGG pathway analysis of RNA-Seq data, showing a significant effect of K-80003 on the AMPK signaling pathway ( B). To further investigate the role of AMPKα activation in mediating the anti-fibrogenic effect of K-80003, we conducted several experiments. Knocking down AMPKα expression using AMPKα siRNA in CFSC cells reduced the inhibitory effect of K-80003 on HSC activation. Specifically, AMPKα knockdown impaired the ability of K-80003 to suppress TGF-β-induced α-SMA protein expression ( H) and to inhibit the mRNA expression of fibrosis-related genes Acta2 and Col1a1 ( I). Moreover, K-80003-induced mitophagy was significantly diminished in CFSC cells transfected with AMPKα siRNA ( J). Thus, AMPKα plays a crucial role in mediating both the anti-fibrotic and mitophagic effects of K-80003 in HSC cells. Furthermore, RXRα knockout in CSFC cells abrogated the effects of K-80003 on activating AMPKα and inhibiting TGF-β-induced α-SMA expression, demonstrating that RXRα is required for K-80003 activation of AMPKα. However, RXRα depletion did not affect AMPKα activation by malotilate, or by AMPK agonists AICAR and metformin ( ). Additionally, PPARγ knockdown had no impact on K-80003 activation of AMPKα ( ). Thus, RXRα specifically mediates K-80003-induced AMPKα activation.

3.6.

## The effect of K-80003 is mediated by the extranuclear function of RXRα
Nuclear receptors are ligand-dependent transcriptional factors that regulate gene transcription by binding to target gene promoter , , , . We investigated whether the transcription regulation of RXRα contributed to the anti-fibrotic effect of K-80003. Treatment of CFSC cells with the transcription inhibitor actinomycin D did not affect K-80003-induced activation of AMPKα ( A). In contrast, actinomycin D completely abolished TGF-β-induced α-SMA expression ( B). Thus, transcription regulation by K-80003 was not involved in its activation of AMPKα. This conclusion was further supported by data showing that K-80003 did not affect AMPKα protein expression despite inducing AMPKα phosphorylation ( B and C). RXRα exerts its biological effects by acting both inside and outside the nucleus , . Notably, we observed that RXRα was diffusely distributed in both the nucleus and cytoplasm when CFSC cells were treated with K-80003 regardless of TGF-β presence ( C). This observation prompted us to study whether the activation of AMPKα by K-80003 was mediated through RXRα’s cytoplasmic action. Indeed, treatment of cells with the nuclear export inhibitor leptomycin B not only prevented the cytoplasmic localization of RXRα ( D) but also blocked K-80003-induced activation of AMPKα and inhibition of α-SMA expression ( E). To further confirm the role of cytoplasmic RXRα in AMPKα activation, we mutated the nuclear export sequence (NES) ( F). The resulting mutant, RXRα-NESm, failed to translocate to the cytoplasm in response to K-80003 treatment, whereas wild-type RXRα remained diffusely distributed in both the nucleus and cytoplasm ( G). The RXRα-NESm mutant also failed to restore the inhibitory effect of K-80003 on intracellular ATP levels ( H). When RXRα-NESm was transfected into RXRα-depleted CFSC cells, it could not support K-80003-induced activation of AMPKα and inhibition of TGF-β-induced α-SMA expression. In contrast, transfection with wild-type RXRα successfully rescued these effects ( I). To study whether the cytoplasmic localization of RXRα was required for K-80003-induced mitophagy, we conducted the COX8–EGFP–mCherry reporter assay in CFSC and RXRα−/− CFSC cells. The results showed K-80003-induced mitophagy in the absence or presence of TGF-β was lost in RXRα−/− CFSC cells. However, mitophagy was restored upon transfection with wild-type RXRα but not RXRα-NESm ( J). Together, these results reveal a transcription-independent mechanism by which RXRα mediates AMPKα activation, α-SMA inhibition, and mitophagy induction by K-80003 in HSCs.
 
3.7.

## A unique interaction between RXRα and CaMKKβ and its modulation by K-80003
AMPKα can be activated by LKB1, CaMKKβ, and TAK1. However, the activation of AMPKα and the inhibition of TGF-β-induced α-SMA expression by K-80003 were unlikely to be mediated through LKB1 or TAK1, as K-80003 had no apparent effect on their expression or activation (Supporting Information ). We therefore focused on the role of CaMKKβ in K-80003-induced AMPKα activation. Surprisingly, co-transfection of Flag-tagged CaMKKβ (Flag-CaMKKβ) and Myc-tagged RXRα (Myc-RXRα) into CFSC cells resulted in a significant shift of the Myc-RXRα band on SDS/PAGE ( A), suggesting that Myc-RXRα might be modified by transfected Flag-CaMKKβ. Similarly, endogenous RXRα protein in the liver exhibited a shift when mice were administered with CCl4, which correlated with inhibition of AMPKα activation ( B). These data suggested a crucial role of RXRα modification in regulating AMPKα activation during liver fibrosis.
 Given that RXRα was modified upon CaMKKβ co-transfection, we studied their interaction. Co-immunoprecipitation (CoIP) assay showed that the upshifted, but not the regular, Myc-RXRα strongly interacted with Flag-CaMKKβ, and this interaction was slightly enhanced by K-80003 but not by TGF-β ( A). This suggested a unique interaction between modified RXRα (m-RXRα) and CaMKKβ. We also studied the interaction between endogenous RXRα and CaMKKβ in cells treated with K-80003 and/or TGF-β for 24 h. Using anti-RXRα antibody for immunoprecipitation, we found that CaMKKβ was pulled down only when the upshifted RXRα band was pulled down. In contrast immunoprecipitation of the regular RXRα band in the absence of K-80003 failed to pull down CaMKKβ ( C), reinforcing the specificity of the interaction between m-RXRα and CaMKKβ.
The modification of RXRα and its interaction with CaMKKβ depended on CaMKKβ activation, as treatment of CFSC cells with the CaMKK inhibitor STO-609 blocked K-80003-induced precipitation of m-RXRα and its co-immunoprecipitation of CaMKKβ by anti-RXRα antibody ( D). Interestingly, K-80003 did not affect CaMKKβ activation of other downstream kinases, such as CaMKI and CaMKIV ( ), suggesting that the K-80003-induced interaction between m-RXRα and CaMKKβ specifically contributes to CaMKKβ-mediated AMPKα activation. Such an effect of K-80003 might play a role in CaMKKβ-mediated calcium signaling, as it induced fluctuations in intracellular calcium levels ( ).
To further investigate the interaction between CaMKKβ and RXRα, we conducted an immunostaining experiment in cells transfected with Flag-CaMKKβ and treated with K-80003 and/or TGF-β ( E, ). In control cells, RXRα resided predominantly in the nucleus. However, upon K-80003 but not TGF-β treatment, RXRα was redistributed to the cytoplasm, forming punctate structures that co-localized with Flag-CaMKKβ. Collectively, these results demonstrate that K-80003-induced RXRα modification depends on CaMKKβ activation and that the RXRα modification confers it with the ability to interact with CaMKKβ in the cytoplasm, highlighting a novel mechanism of AMPKα activation.

3.8.

## RXRα is modified by CaMKKβ through phosphorylation
Our observation that K-80003-induced RXRα modification depended on CaMKKβ activation prompted us to investigate whether RXRα was phosphorylated by CaMKKβ. Thus, lysates prepared from cells transfected with Flag-CaMKKβ and Myc-RXRα were incubated with alkaline phosphatase FastAP. The Flag-CaMKKβ-induced upshift of the Myc-RXRα band, detected using either anti-Myc or anti-RXRα antibody, was completely abolished following FastAP treatment ( F), demonstrating that RXRα undergoes phosphorylation upon CaMKKβ co-transfection. Consistently, inhibiting CaMKKβ activity by STO-609 prevented CaMKKβ-induced phosphorylation of RXRα (p-RXRα) ( G). The induction of p-RXRα by K-80003, TGF-β, or PDGF-BB in CFSC cells or mHSCs was also inhibited by STO-609, further revealing the role of CaMKKβ in RXRα phosphorylation ( H).
To identify CaMKKβ phosphorylation sites in RXRα, we conducted mutagenesis on several putative phosphorylation sites within its N-terminal A/B domain ( I), as phosphorylation in this region may cause a mobility shift of RXRα on SDS/PAGE . Mutation of Ser78 or Thr82 resulted in mutants (RXRα-S78A and RXRα-T82A, respectively) that showed reduced phosphorylation upon CaMKKβ co-transfection. Moreover, simultaneous mutation of both sites (RXRα-S78/T82A) completely abolished CaMKKβ-induced phosphorylation ( J). In contrast, mutations at other amino acid residues had either no effect or slightly enhanced phosphorylation, indicating Ser78 and Thr82 are the primary phosphorylation sites targeted by CaMKKβ. Further, CoIP assay revealed that mutation of either Ser78 (RXRα-S78A) or Thr82 (RXRα-T82A) impaired the interaction between RXRα and CaMKKβ, while the simultaneous mutation of both sites (RXRα-S78/T82A) completely abolished the interaction ( ). Additionally, in vitro kinase assays confirmed that the RXRα-S78/T82A mutant was not phosphorylated by CaMKKβ ( K). Together, these data demonstrate that phosphorylation of RXRα at Ser78 and Thr82 is required for its interaction with CaMKKβ, elucidating the mechanism by which CaMKKβ regulates RXRα function.

3.9.

## Interaction between RXRα with CaMKKβ promotes AMPKα activation by K-80003
To determine the role of RXRα interaction with CaMKKβ in K-80003-induced AMPKα activation, we first examined the effect of CaMKKβ knockdown. Transfection of CFSC cells with CaMKKβ siRNA, which inhibited CaMKKβ expression, significantly attenuated the ability of K-80003 to activate AMPKα and inhibit TGF-β-induced α-SMA expression ( A). Similarly, pharmacological inhibition of CaMKKβ activation using STO-609 ( B) or the calcium chelator EGTA AM ( C) also impaired K-80003-induced AMPKα activation. To further study the role of AMPKα activation in K-80003-induced mitophagy, we used the COX8-EGFP-mCherry reporter to assess mitophagy in response to STO-609 treatment. We found that STO-609 effectively blocked K-80003-induced mitophagy both in the presence or absence of TGF-β ( D). Furthermore, mutation of Ser78 and Thr82, either individually or simultaneously, impaired the ability of RXRα to rescue the effects of K-80003 on activating AMPKα, inhibiting TGF-β-induced α-SMA expression ( E), reducing intracellular ATP level ( F), and promoting mitophagy ( G) in RXRα-depleted cells. Thus, the phosphorylation-dependent interaction between RXRα and CaMKKβ plays a critical role in K-80003-induced activation of AMPKα, induction of mitophagy, and inhibition of HSC activation.
 Next, we studied the mechanism by which RXRα interaction with CaMKKβ activates AMPKα. Since CaMKKβ is known to activate AMPKα through direct interaction , , we hypothesized that RXRα interaction with CaMKKβ might facilitate its association with AMPKα, thereby enhancing AMPKα activation. To test the hypothesis, we examined whether K-80003 could promote the interaction between CaMKKβ and AMPKα. Thus, CFSC cells were co-transfected with Myc-AMPKα and Flag-CaMKKβ, and their interaction was assessed in the presence or absence of K-80003 and TGF-β. CoIP assay revealed that K-80003, but not TGF-β, significantly enhanced the interaction between Myc-AMPKα and Flag-CaMKKβ ( A). The effect of K-80003 was likely mediated by p-RXRα, as transfection with wild-type RXRα, but not the RXRα-S78/T82A mutant, enhanced the ability of CaMKKβ to interact with AMPKα ( B). Interestingly, immunoprecipitation of Flag-CaMKKβ with an anti-Flag antibody not only pulled down Myc-AMPKα but also the up-shifted Myc-RXRα, suggesting the formation of a p-RXRα/CaMKKβ/AMPKα complex. This hypothesis was further supported by CoIP data showing that immunoprecipitation of Myc-RXRα using an anti-Myc antibody resulted in the co-immunoprecipitation of both Flag-CaMKKβ and Flag-AMPKα ( C). Notably, Myc-RXRα did not interact with Flag-AMPKα in the absence of Flag-CaMKKβ ( C and Supporting Information ), indicating that CaMKKβ interaction with p-RXRα is essential for the formation of p-RXRα/CaMKKβ/AMPKα complex. Further analysis revealed that K-80003 not only promoted the interaction between Flag-CaMKKβ and Myc-AMPKα but also enhanced the association between Flag-CaMKKβ and p-Myc-RXRα ( D). Thus, K-80003 enhances AMPKα activation by inducing the interaction between p-RXRα and CaMKKβ, which in turn strengthens the interaction between CaMKKβ and AMPKα, ultimately leading to increased AMPKα activation.
 To study how p-RXRα enhances the interaction between CaMKKβ and AMPKα, we examined whether the C-terminal LBD (RXRα-LBD) or the N-terminal region of RXRα (RXRα-1–235) ( E) interacted with CaMKKβ. Co-transfection experiments revealed that CaMKKβ strongly phosphorylated RXRα-1-235 but not RXRα-LBD. However, RXRα-LBD, rather than phosphorylated or unphosphorylated RXRα-1–235, interacted with CaMKKβ ( F). This interaction was further confirmed by the ability of RXRα-LBD to promote CaMKKβ interaction with AMPKα, whereas RXRα-1–235 did not. Furthermore, transfection of RXRα-LBD, but not RXRα-1–235, into RXRα−/− CFSC cells promoted AMPKα activation and enhanced the inhibitory effect of K-80003 on α-SMA activation ( G). These findings suggest that the C-terminal LBD of RXRα plays a key role in mediating CaMKKβ-dependent AMPKα activation. To explore the mechanism by which CaMKKβ-induced phosphorylation of RXRα promotes its interaction with CaMKKβ, we hypothesized that phosphorylation disrupts an intramolecular interaction within RXRα , , which may normally conceal the CaMKKβ-interaction site in RXRα-LBD. To test this, we examined the effect of RXRα phosphorylation on the intramolecular interaction between RXRα-LBD and RXRα-1–235 ( H). Consistent with our previous results , , CoIP analysis revealed that Flag-RXRα-LBD efficiently pulled down the unmodified Myc-RXRα-1–235, demonstrating an intramolecular interaction between the N-terminal and C-terminal regions of RXRα. However, phosphorylated Myc-RXRα-1–235 failed to interact with Flag-RXRα-LBD, suggesting that phosphorylation disrupts this intramolecular interaction. Further analysis revealed that Flag-RXRα-LBD interacted with Myc-RXRα-1-235/S78/T82A mutant but not with the phosphomimetic mutant Myc-RXRα-1–235/S78/T82D ( H), reinforcing the idea that phosphorylation of RXRα at its N-terminal region promotes its interaction with CaMKKβ by disrupting the intramolecular N–C interaction within RXRα, thereby exposing the CaMKKβ-binding site in RXRα-LBD ( I).

3.10.

## RXRα phase separation provides hubs for AMPKα activation by recruiting CaMKKβ
A major discovery in the past decade is the recognition that proteins, nucleic acids, or their mixture can demix into 2 phases through liquid–liquid phase separation (LLPS) . The condensed phase can give rise to membraneless organelles that facilitate various biological functions . For proteins, intrinsically disordered regions (IDRs) and low-affinity multivalent interactions can drive phase separation, providing a driving force for generating various biomolecular condensates . To study whether the N-terminal A/B domain, which is largely unstructured with a high disordered tendency ( A), mediated RXRα interaction with CaMKKβ, we examined whether RXRα could form condensates in vitro and in vivo. For in vitro analysis, we expressed and purified mEGFP-tagged RXRα (mEGFP-RXRα) and mCherry-tagged RXRα (mCherry-RXRα). Notably, mEGFP-RXRα readily formed condensates when NaCl concentration was reduced from 300 mmol/L to 50 mmol/L ( B). At 50 mmol/L NaCl concentration, mCherry-RXRα and mEGFP-RXRα formed co-condensate ( C). Additionally, mEGFP-RXRα condensates could fuse to form larger condensates, revealing condensate coalescence ( D). Examination of the spatiotemporal dynamics of RXRα condensates by fluorescence recovery after photobleaching (FRAP) ( E) revealed their liquid-like property. When added to droplet formation buffer containing a crowding agent (10% PEG-8000) to simulate the densely crowded environment of the nucleus, mEGFP-RXRα but not mEGFP formed micro-sized condensates in solution (Supporting Information ). Similar condensate formation was observed in the presence of other crowding agents such as ficoll-400, dextran-70, or highly concentrated lysozyme (1 mmol/L) ( ), suggesting that the formation of RXRα condensates was a general result of macromolecular crowding rather than being an artifact of PEG. However, mEGFP-RXRα failed to form condensates in a 10% glycerol solution ( ), indicating that molecular weight may affect droplet formation. Consistently, the formation of RXRα condensates was dependent on the molecular weight of PEG, with the highest efficiency observed at 8 kDa PEG ( ). Similarly, the size distribution and turbidity of RXRα condensates increased in a protein and crowding agent concentration-dependent manner ( ). Thus, these results indicate that RXRα forms a reversible and plasticity of phase-separated condensate.
 When transfected into CFSC cells, mCherry-RXRα formed bright, liquid-like condensates within the nucleus ( F). Similarly, endogenous RXRα in CFSC cells exhibited droplet-like spheres in the nucleus ( G), indicating that these condensates were not an artifact of the mCherry tag. FRAP analysis demonstrated that mCherry-RXRα redistributed rapidly from the unbleached area to the bleached area in cells ( H), revealing the dynamic nature of the condensates. These results demonstrated that RXRα forms liquid-like condensates in cells. To identify the domains of RXRα required for phase separation, we generated various RXRα mutants ( I). Deletion of IDR (RXRα-ΔIDR) significantly impaired the ability of RXRα to form nuclear puncta, whereas neither the LBD nor the DBD alone was sufficient to form droplets in cells ( J and K). We also purified mEGFP-RXRα-IDR and mEGFP-RXRα-LBD mutant proteins and tested their ability to undergo phase separation in vitro. Consistent with the results obtained from cells, mEGFP-RXRα-IDR readily formed condensates, whereas mEGFP or mEGFP-RXRα-LBD did not ( L). Interestingly, mCherry-RXRα-LBD, but not mCherry-RXRα-DBD, was strongly incorporated into the condensates formed by mCherry-RXRα-IDR ( M and N), suggesting that the LBD may interact with phase separated RXRα-IDR. Taken together, the N-terminal IDR is critical in driving RXRα phase separation.
We next determined whether RXRα phase separation enabled it to form condensates with CaMKKβ, thereby serving as a reactive center for AMPKα activation. When purified RXRα and CaMKKβ proteins were mixed in vitro, they co-assembled into phase separated condensates, where the core RXRα condensate was encapsulated by a spherical shell of CaMKKβ. This two-phase LLPS, a condensed demixed phase, and a surrounding dilute aqueous phase, is a well-recognized mechanism for the formation of membraneless organelles to promote biological functions . K-80003 significantly promoted the enrichment of CaMKKβ in the peripheral phase of these condensates ( O and P). Similarly, when CaMKKβ and AMPKα were mixed, K-80003 promoted the formation of AMPKα condensates that co-localized with CaMKKβ ( Q). These results suggested that RXRα phase separation may provide a localized environment for the activation of AMPK signaling pathway by CaMKKβ. In the presence of K-80003, the phosphomimetic RXRα-S78/T82D mutant, but not the non-phosphorylatable RXRα-S78/T82A mutant, efficiently recruited a large amount of CaMKKβ and AMPKα to its peripheral phase ( R and S, ), demonstrating a pivotal regulatory role of RXRα phosphorylation in the formation of CaMKKβ condensates for AMPKα activation.

4.

## Discussion
Retinoid receptors are expressed in quiescent HSCs in both rodents and humans, with RXRα being highly abundant . Previous studies have shown that RXRα and its ligands can suppress liver fibrosis by inhibiting HSC activation and proliferation . However, the underlying molecular mechanisms remain rescue. Here, we provide in vitro and in vivo evidence demonstrating that RXRα is a key regulator of HSC activation by regulating AMPKα activation through its unique interaction with CaMKKβ via phase separation. In investigating the therapeutic potential of RXRα, we identified K-80003, an RXRα modulator derived from the NSAID sulindac , , , as a potent inhibitor of HSC activation in vitro ( ) and liver fibrosis in both the CCl4 and AMLN animal models ( , ). These results highlight RXRα as an attractive nuclear receptor target for developing new therapies against MASH and identified K-80003 as a promising lead compound for anti-fibrotic treatment.
Our results revealed a close correlation between the anti-fibrogenic effects of K-80003 and its activation of AMPKα in HSCs ( ). Knockdown of AMPKα in HSCs dramatically reduced the ability of K-80003 to antagonize TGF-β-induced expression of several fibrogenic genes ( G and H), indicating that AMPKα activation is essential for the anti-fibrogenic effects of K-80003. This finding is consistent with recent studies showing a critical role of AMPK in regulating HSC activation in vitro and animals , , . The mechanism of AMPKα action in HSCs remains to be fully elucidated. AMPKα can antagonize TGF-β signaling by disrupting the interaction between Smad3 and its transcriptional coactivator p300 . However, our results demonstrated that Smad3 knockout did not affect the ability of K-80003 to inhibit TGF-β-induced α-SMA expression ( ), ruling out the involvement of AMPKα/Smad3 pathway. Recent studies have revealed a critical role of AMPKα in maintaining mitochondrial health and homeostasis during disease progression , . Notably, AMPK activation has been linked to mitochondrial fragmentation in response to energy stress . However, little is known about mitochondrial status in HSCs and its role in HSC activation and reversion. Our findings reveal that mitochondrial activity increases during TGF-β-induced HSC activation, as evidenced by elevated production of ATP ( C–F). This is consistent with the high energy demand associated with HSCactivation and is supported by previous reports showing that mitochondrial activity increases during HSCactivation . Furthermore, mild mitochondrial uncouplers, which reduce ATP and ROS levels, have been shown to prevent HSC activation and proliferation .
Interestingly, we found that AMPKα activation by K-80003 is required for its induction of mitophagy, which coincides with its inhibition of HSC activation ( I). In addition, inhibition of CaMKKβ/AMPKα pathway by STO-609 suppressed mitophagy ( D). Moreover, the RXRα-S75A/T82A mutant, which is incapable of mediating K-80003-induced AMPKα activation, failed to promote mitophagy in HSCs ( G). Defective mitophagy has been linked to various MASH-related phenotypes . Melatonin has been shown to protect against liver fibrosis by upregulating mitophagy in rat . Although the role of mitophagy in eliminating dysfunctional mitochondria in hepatocytes is well recognized, its function in HSCs remains largely unknown. Mitophagy not only removes dysfunctional mitochondria but also regulates mitochondrial numbers to change cellular metabolic demands . A well-known example is the elimination of mitochondria via mitophagy during cellular differentiation of red blood cells , . Mitophagy also serves to reduce mitochondrial mass in yeast cells when oxidative phosphorylation is no longer needed . We observed that RXRα-dependent inhibition of TGF-β-induced production of ATP and ROS was associated with AMPKα-dependent mitophagy and reduced mitochondrial mass ( , ). Thus, it is tempting to speculate that AMPK induction of mitophagy may contribute to the suppression of HSC activation by reducing mitochondrial number. It is noteworthy that a recent study reported that mitophagy in HSCs increases in parallel with apoptosis during the reversal of hepatic fibrosis , suggesting an additional mechanism by which AMPKα inhibits HSC activation. Despite these insights, the precise mechanisms by which AMPK mediates the mitophagic effects of RXRα/K-80003 remain unknown. Given that both AMPK and RXRα can localize to mitochondria, further studies are needed to determine whether their mitochondrial localization plays a role in the induction of mitophagy.
Although energy stress-mediated and LKB1-mediated AMPK activation has been extensively characterized, the regulatory mechanisms governing calcium- and CaMKK2-mediated AMPK activation remain poorly understood. Several proteins, including IQGAP1 and STIM2 , have been shown to regulate calcium-mediated AMPK activation by modulating CaMKKβ-AMPK interaction. Our study identifies RXRα as a novel modulator of this interaction in HSCs. We showed that K-80003 enhances AMPK activation by promoting RXRα interaction with CaMKKβ, independent of the LKB1-mediated pathway ( , ). These results revealed a previously unrecognized mechanism of RXRα in promoting AMPKα activation. Traditionally, RXRα is considered a ligand-dependent transcription factor that modulates target gene transcription , . However, our study revealed that RXRα activates AMPKα through direct interaction with CaMKKβ in the cytoplasm, highlighting a novel non-transcriptional mechanism of RXRα action ( ). Notably, CaMKKβ phosphorylated RXRα, and only the phosphorylated form of RXRα interacted with CaMKKβ ( ), underscoring its role in an auto-regulatory mechanism that mediates CaMKKβ activation of AMPKα. As RXRα is a critical mediator of vitamin A action, this mechanism may play a pivotal role in modulating HSC activation and maintaining liver homeostasis, particularly in environments rich in vitamin A and its derivatives.
The interaction between RXRα and CaMKKβ is both unique and highly specific, as only phosphorylated RXRα interacts with CaMKKβ ( A). Interestingly, a similar modified RXRα was detected in the liver of mice treated with CCl4, coinciding with reduced AMPKα activation ( B). These observations suggest that RXRα phosphorylation may be a critical event in liver fibrosis, positioning the modified RXRα as an attractive target for MASH therapeutics. The selective interaction of phosphorylated RXRα with CaMKKβ indicates that this interaction is regulated by an intra-molecular interaction between the N- and the C-terminal segments of RXRα, which serves to mask the CaMKKβ-interaction motif within the C-terminal LBD ( H). CaMKKβ-mediated phosphorylation at the N-terminal region of RXRα disrupts this N/C interaction, unveiling a regulatory paradigm for RXRα action. The N/C intramolecular interaction has been described for several nuclear receptors, including estrogen receptor , peroxisome proliferator-activated receptors , and androgen receptor . We previously reported that RXRα engages such N/C interaction that modulates its binding to the p85α regulatory subunit of phosphoinositide 3-kinase (PI3K) and mitotic kinase polo-like kinase 1 (PLK1) . Thus, this mechanism plays an important role in the transcription-independent action of RXRα, orchestrating its crosstalk with other cellular signaling pathways and contributing to a complex RXRα-mediated signaling network.
Our study provides compelling evidence that RXRα phase separation is essential for CaMKKβ-dependent activation of AMPKα through a two-phase condensation mechanism, in which RXRα forms condensates that are encapsulated by a spherical shell of CaMKKβ. The assembly of this layered liquid, regulated by RXRα phosphorylation and K-80003, facilitates the recruitment and activation of AMPKα. These data suggest that layered condensates function as reaction hubs for AMPKα activation, providing new molecular insights into the regulation of AMPKα signaling. IDRs, especially those containing low-complexity domains, are known to drive the formation of intracellular membraneless organelles through LLPS for compartmentalized biochemical reactions , . The N-terminal IDR of RXRα exhibits liquid-like properties, which are necessary not only for RXRα phase separation but also for the formation of RXRα/CaMKKβ condensates and the subsequent recruitment of AMPKα. Similarly, we previously reported that the N-terminal IDR of the nuclear receptor Nur77 exhibits liquid-like properties, facilitating its condensation with p62 for mitophagy . Furthermore, a recent study has shown that RXRβ and RXRγ also undergo phase separation via their N-terminal IDR , . The N-terminal IDRs of nuclear receptor family members play a crucial role in many nuclear receptor activities . Many nuclear receptor subtypes with distinct IDRs, arise through alternative splicing, translation initiation , and proteolytic cleavage , contributing to the complexity of nuclear receptor regulatory networks and cell/tissue-specific signaling. Given that LLPS-mediated membraneless organelles have emerged as key platforms for diverse biological processes, IDR-mediated phase separation may represent a fundamental mechanism by which nuclear receptors regulate a wide range of cellular activities. Interestingly, the majority of phosphorylated residues in nuclear receptors are located within their N-terminal IDR regions . Our findings reveal that the phosphorylation of Ser78 and Thr82 in RXRα IDR is critical for its phase separation with CaMKKβ ( R and S, ), revealing the pivotal role of phosphorylation in regulating nuclear receptor phase separation. This regulation likely occurs through the formation of charge blocks known to strongly induce LLPS in a spatiotemporal manner .

5.

## Conclusions
Our study demonstrates that K-80003, a unique RXRα modulator, inhibits fibrosis by promoting AMPKα activation and subsequent mitophagy in hepatic stellate cells. We show that K-80003 enhances AMPKα activation by facilitating RXRα interaction with CaMKKβ, a process driven by the phase separation of the N-terminal intrinsically disordered region of RXRα and regulated by phosphorylation. Our results highlight the critical role of RXRα in modulating liver fibrosis through mitochondrial regulation in hepatic stellate cells. Moreover, our study identifies K-80003 and related RXRα modulators as promising therapeutic agents for fibrosis-related diseases.

## Author contributions
Lijun Cai: Formal analysis, Data curation, Conceptualization. Meimei Yin: Formal analysis, Data curation. Shuangzhou Peng: Funding acquisition, Formal analysis, Data curation. Fen Lin: Data curation. Liangliang Lai: Data curation. Xindao Zhang: Data curation. Lei Xie: Data curation. Chuanying Wang: Data curation. Huiying Zhou: Data curation. Yunfeng Zhan: Data curation. Gulimiran Alitongbieke: Methodology, Data curation. Baohuan Lian: Data curation. Zhibin Su: Data curation. Tenghui Liu: Data curation. Yuqi Zhou: Data curation. Zongxi Li: Data curation. Xiaohui Chen: Data curation. Qi Zhao: Data curation. Ting Deng: Data curation. Lulu Chen: Data curation. Jingwei Su: Data curation. Luoyan Sheng: Data curation. Ying Su: Formal analysis. Ling-Juan Zhang: Funding acquisition, Formal analysis. Fu-Quan Jiang: Supervision, Resources, Funding acquisition, Conceptualization. Xiao-Kun Zhang: Writing – review & editing, Writing – original draft, Supervision, Funding acquisition, Formal analysis, Conceptualization.

## Conflicts of interest
Xindao Zhang, Baohuan Lian, Zhibin Su, Yuqi Zhou, and Ying Su are employees and/or shareholders of NucMito Pharma. All other authors declare no competing interests.

## Acknowledgements
We thank Xiao Liu (University of California, San Diego, USA), Chen-Song Zhang (Xiamen University, Xiamen, China), and Mengqi Li (Xiamen University, Xiamen, China) for technical assistance. This work was partially supported by grants from the National Natural Science Foundation of China, China (81672749, 81772993, 81971551, 82302954, and K2918001), Natural Science Foundation of Fujian Province, China (2024J08346), Xiamen Municipal Bureau of Ocean Development, China (16PYY007SF17 and 23YYZP022QCB33), Xiamen Science & Technology Department, China (3502Z20231022, 3502Z20193004, 3502Z20150007, and 2023CXY0107), and National Key R&D Program of China, China (2020YFA0112900), the Postdoctoral Science Foundation of China (2023M732956), and fund from NucMito Pharmaceuticals Co., Ltd., China.

## Footnotes
Peer review under the responsibility of Chinese Pharmaceutical Association and Institute of Materia Medica, Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences.
Appendix ASupporting information to this article can be found online at https://doi.org/10.1016/j.apsb.2025.05.023.

## Contributor Information
Fu-Quan Jiang, Email: jiangfq@xmu.edu.cn.
Xiao-Kun Zhang, Email: xkzhang@xmu.edu.cn.

Appendix A.

## Supplementary data
The following is the Supporting Information to this article:

## Multimedia component 1
Multimedia component 1

## References
 

## Associated Data

## Supplementary Materials

## Multimedia component 1
Multimedia component 1