2933advsciAdvanced ScienceAdv Sci (Weinh)WileyPMC1262240312622403126224034085562810.1002/advs.202510888Targeting of the CD161 Inhibitory Receptor Enhances Bone‐Marrow‐Resident Memory CD8+ T‐Cell‐Mediated Immunity against Multiple Myeloma
WangLiwen XieLinzhi ZhouYi TanShiming YuYan ZhangQin ChenXuefeng YanYuhan LuoRuiheng XiaoHan ChengQian ZhangJian LiYing WangErhua JiangTiebin LiuJing LiXin 
1
Department of Hematology, Third Xiangya Hospital, Central South University, Changsha, Hunan Province, 410013, China*
E‐mail: lixin1975@csu.edu.cn

✉Corresponding author.
25820251242e10888e1088818112025© 2025 The Author(s). Advanced Science published by Wiley‐VCH GmbHThis is an open access article under the terms of the http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/ License, which permits use, distribution and reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited.

## Abstract
Immune checkpoint inhibitors (ICIs) have transformed the treatment of many solid tumors. Still, their effectiveness in multiple myeloma (MM) remains underwhelming, highlighting the need to explore alternative approaches beyond conventional ICIs. Here, CD161 is identified as a novel inhibitory receptor on bone marrow (BM) tissue resident memory CD8+ T cells (CD8+ TRM), known for their sustained presence and vital role in local immune surveillance in MM BM tumor microenvironments. The CD161–CLEC2D axis, where CD161 interacts with CLEC2D on MM cells, mediates immune suppression and TRM dysfunction. Blocking CD161 enhances TRM function, including tissue residency, proliferation, and antitumor activity. CD161 blockade significantly alleviates chimeric antigen receptor T‐cell (CAR‐T) exhaustion and enhances their antimyeloma function ex vivo. These findings identified the CD161–CLEC2D pathway as a potential novel target for immunotherapy of MM.
Keywords: bone marrow microenvironment, CD161, multiple myeloma, tissue resident memory T cells

CD161 is identified as a novel inhibitory receptor on bone marrow (BM)‐resident CD8⁺ T cells in multiple myeloma (MM). Through interaction with its ligand CLEC2D, CD161 impairs T‐cell function and promotes immune suppression. Blockade of CD161 restores tissue residency and cytotoxicity of CD8⁺ T cells and enhances chimeric antigen receptor T‐cell (CAR‐T) activity, providing a potential immunotherapeutic target in MM.

 
statusreleaseddisplay-pdfyesis-olfnois-manuscriptnois-preprintnois-journal-matternois-scannednois-retractednoRevised 2025 Jul 23; Received 2025 Jun 16; Collection date 2025 Nov.

1.

## Introduction
Multiple myeloma (MM) is the second most prevalent hematologic malignancy and remains incurable. Despite advances in therapies, most patients eventually succumb to disease progression and complications.[
 
] In patients with relapsed and refractory MM (RRMM), factors such as tumor heterogeneity and clonal selection, and the tumor microenvironment (TME), significantly hinder the effectiveness of MM treatments.[
 
] Immune cell exhaustion and immunosuppressive TME are critical drivers for MM relapse and progression.[
 , 
] Unfortunately, the classical immune checkpoint inhibitors (ICIs) targeting PD‐1, LAG3, and CTLA‐4 have shown limited clinical efficacy in both newly diagnosed MM (NDMM) and RRMM.[
 
]

MM cells primarily infiltrate the bone marrow (BM), interacting with stromal and immune cells to establish an immunosuppressive TME.[
 , 
] Among BM immune cells, tissue resident memory CD8+ T cells (CD8+ TRM) play a crucial role in maintaining local immune surveillance and restraining tumor growth. The depletion of BM CD8+ TRM and increased expression of inhibitory receptors, such as PD‐1 and T cell immune receptor with Ig and ITIM domains (TIGIT), correlate with weakened immune surveillance in MM patients.[
 
] However, single‐agent blockade targeting these pathways fails to effectively rescue TRM function.[
 
]

Identifying the inhibitory receptors that govern BM CD8+ TRM exhaustion is of substantial clinical importance. Here, we conducted a meta‐analysis of BM CD8+ TRM across different disease stages integrating single‐cell RNA sequencing (scRNA‐seq) datasets from 17 healthy individuals and 83 patients. Our findings reveal that BM CD8+ TRM highly express the inhibitory receptor CD161, which interacts with its ligand CLEC2D on MM cells to suppress CD8+ TRM function. Blocking the CD161–CLEC2D interaction enhances the function of CD8+ TRM, including tissue residency, proliferation, cytotoxicity, and cytokine production. Importantly, CD161 blockade significantly alleviates chimeric antigen receptor T‐cell (CAR‐T) exhaustion and enhances their antimyeloma function ex vivo. Additionally, CD8+ TRM expressing CD161 are present in various hematologic malignancies and exhibit similar functional impairments. Our findings identified the CD161–CLEC2D pathway as a potential novel target for immunotherapy of MM.

2.

## Results
2.1.

## Transcriptional Features of BM CD8+ TRM Correlate with MM Disease Progression
To systematically analyze the BM–TME during the progression of MM, we first integrated publicly available BM scRNA‐seq data across normal bone marrow (NBM, n = 17) and four progression stages of MM, including monoclonal gammopathy of undetermined significance (MGUS, n = 5), smoldering multiple myeloma (SMM, n = 11), MM (n = 48), and RRMM (n = 19). In total, 195 589 high‐quality cells were identified following rigorous quality control (Figure  ), and 13 distinct cell types were classified for downstream analysis (Figure  ; Figure  and Table  , Supporting Information). CD4+ and CD8+ T cells constituted the most abundant subset, with an increase in CD8+ T‐cell fraction during the disease progression (from 7% in MGUS to 28% in RRMM) (Figure  ). We next analyzed the functional changes of CD8+ T cells. Due to the limited cell numbers in MGUS and SMM, these two stages were merged into a single group. Compared to NBM, CD8+ T cells in MM and RRMM exhibited enhanced cytotoxicity, alongside increased exhaustion, senescence, stress responses, and natural killer (NK) cell signature (Figure  ). Notably, CD8+ T cells in RRMM exhibited the highest TRM signature scores (Figure  ), indicating that a greater proportion of CD8+ T cells in this stage possess tissue‐resident features. However, whether these cells remain functionally competent or are impaired remains unclear. Therefore, we subsequently performed an in‐depth phenotypic and functional analysis of CD8+ TRM cells within the BM.
 First, we analyzed the correlation between TRM signature scores and several core TRM‐related genes (CD69, CXCR3, CXCR6, ITGAE, GZMB, PRDM1, RUNX3, and SMAD3) in CD8+ T cells. Among these, CD69 showed the strongest association with higher TRM signature scores (Figure  , Supporting Information), consistent with its previously reported role as a marker for BM TRM.[
 , 
] CD8+ T cells were stratified into CD69
high and CD69
low subpopulations (Figure  ). Consistently, CD69
high cells exhibited higher TRM signature scores and lower circulating T‐cell (Tcir) signature scores (Figure  , Supporting Information). Subsequently, we validated the expression of CD69 on BM T cells at the protein level. Mononuclear cells from BM and peripheral blood (PB) of healthy controls (HC) and MM patients were analyzed by flow cytometry. Initial analysis identified a distinct cluster of BM T cells (Figure  , Supporting Information), which was almost absent in PB, suggesting that these cells are BM‐resident and do not circulate in PB. This cluster expressed CD3, CD8, and CD69, but neither CD4 nor CD103 (Figure  , Supporting Information). In all tested patient samples, CD8+CD69+CD103– cells were almost exclusively restricted to BM (≈40%) and essentially absent from PB (Figure  , Supporting Information). Collectively, we identified that CD69+CD8+ T subsets were BM CD8+ TRM by integrating scRNA‐seq and flow cytometry data.
We next investigated the transcriptional features of the CD8+ TRM during the progression of MM. Compared to NBM, CD8+ TRM in MM and RRMM exhibited enhanced cytotoxicity, exhaustion, senescence, and stress‐response states (Figure  ). Interestingly, higher cytotoxicity signature scores were correlated with elevated NK signature scores in CD8+ TRM (Figure  ). This finding aligns with previous studies suggesting that the transition of CD8+ T cells to NK‐like T cells is associated with T‐cell dysfunction,[
 
] highlighting a potential causal link between increased NK‐like characteristics and impaired TRM functionality in MM.

2.2.

## CD161/CLEC2D Axis Marks Dysfunctional CD8⁺ TRM State and Poor Prognosis in MM
Although BM CD8⁺ TRM cells exhibit increased expression of NK‐related genes that positively correlate with cytotoxicity signatures (Figure  ), we hypothesize that this transcriptional state reflects a dysfunctional or exhausted phenotype rather than effective antimyeloma activity. To explore this, we analyzed the expression levels of NK signature genes across NBM and the three progressive stages of MM (Figure  , Supporting Information). A distinct cluster of genes showed a stepwise increase as the disease progressed (i.e., increased from MGUS/SMM to MM and further enhanced in RRMM) (Figure  ). Furthermore, to identify shared co‐upregulated genes between RRMM and MM compared to NBM, we performed a differential gene expression analysis of CD8+ TRM from both conditions. This analysis revealed 18 genes that were significantly upregulated in CD8+ TRM from both RRMM and MM compared to NBM (Figure  ; Table  , Supporting Information). Among these, we selected KLRB1 for further investigation due to two key reasons: 1) KLRB1 encodes the inhibitory receptor CD161, representing a promising therapeutic target; and 2) its expression was notably higher in RRMM, indicating a potentially critical role in advanced stages of MM (Figure  ).
 To determine the function of CD161 in CD8+ TRM in MM, we categorized CD8+ TRM into KLRB1
high and KLRB1
low subsets. The gene set enrichment analysis (GSEA) revealed that KLRB1
high cells were associated with exhaustion, migration, apoptosis, and hypoxia, whereas KLRB1
low ones exhibited enhanced tissue residency and effector functions (Figure  ). Furthermore, we compared KLRB1 expression with that of other inhibitory receptor genes. Notably, distinct from KLRB1, most other inhibitory receptor genes (e.g., PDCD1, CTLA4, LAG3, and TIGIT) did not exhibit a disease‐stage‐dependent expression pattern (Figure  ).
Given the potential role of KLRB1 in suppressing CD8+ TRM function, we next investigated the expression of KLRB1 ligand, CLEC2D in MM cells. First, we profiled the expression of several immunosuppressive receptor ligand genes, including CLEC2D, in CD138+ tumor cells from MM patients using bulk RNA‐seq data (MMRF‐CoMMpass cohort). Notably, CLEC2D expression was significantly higher than that of other immunosuppressive receptor ligand genes (e.g., CD274 for PD‐1, CEACAM1/LGALS9 for TIM3, CD80/CD86 for CTLA‐4) (Figure  ). Additionally, leveraging publicly available RNA‐seq data from 34 MM cell lines, we confirmed the expression of CLEC2D across multiple MM cell lines (Figure  ). This finding was further validated at the protein level (Figure  ). Next, we categorized patients into CLEC2D
high and CLEC2D
low expression groups and conducted a differential expression analysis based on the MMRF‐CoMMpass cohort. The gene ontology (GO) enrichment analysis of CLEC2D
high versus CLEC2D
low MM cells revealed an upregulation of biological processes (BP) and cellular components (CC) related to ribosome biogenesis, oxidative phosphorylation, and active transmembrane transport. Conversely, downregulated genes were enriched in pathways related to DNA damage repair and epigenetic regulation (Figure  ; Table  , Supporting Information). These adaptations may allow for the survival and proliferation of MM cells in a challenging BM‐TME.
Finally, we assessed the prognostic value of KLRB1 and CLEC2D expression levels using two MM patient cohorts (GSE136337 and MMRF‐CoMMpass). Indeed, MM patients with high expression levels of KLRB1 or CLEC2D had unfavorable overall survival (OS) (Figure  ). In contrast, CD274 (PD‐L1) and CEACAM1 displayed a protective trend, with higher expression levels correlating with improved OS (Figure  , Supporting Information). The expression of other inhibitor receptors or ligands was not associated with clinical outcomes in MM patients (Figure  , Supporting Information).

2.3.

## CD161–CLEC2D Axis Represents a Major Inhibitory Pathway in CD8+ BM‐TRM in MM
Building on the observation that CLEC2D expression in MM cells may contribute to immune evasion via its interaction with KLRB1 (CD161) on CD8+ TRM, we next aimed to confirm these bioinformatics findings. First, we validated the expression of CD161 using immunofluorescence and flow cytometry. Multiplex immunofluorescence labeling of BM biopsy tissues from MM patients confirmed the co‐localization of CD3+, CD8+, CD69+, and CD161+ cells within the BM‐TME (Figure  ; Figure  , Supporting Information). Flow cytometry further revealed three prominent features associated with CD161 expression in BM: 1) MM CD8⁺ T cells and NK cells showed significantly increased CD161 expression versus HC, but no difference in CD4+ T cells (Figure  , Supporting Information); 2) among CD8+ T cells, the majority of CD161 expression was restricted to CD69+ TRM, but not CD69‐ Tcir (Figure  ; Figure  , Supporting Information); 3) compared with HC, the expression of CD161 was significantly upregulated on CD8+ TRM isolated from MM patients (Figure  ).
 In contrast to CD161, no significant differences in other co‐inhibitory receptors between HC and MM BM CD8+ TRM were identified, including PD‐1 (Figure  ), TIM3, and LAG3 (Figure  , Supporting Information). Notably, the proportion of CD161+ TRM in MM was substantially larger than that of PD‐1+ TRM (Figure  , Supporting Information). These findings may help explain the limited clinical efficacy of anti‐PD‐1, anti‐TIM3, or anti‐LAG3 therapies in MM.[
 
]

Finally, we would like to highlight additional features associated with the expression of CD161–CLEC2D in MM patients: 1) CD161, but not PD‐1 expression correlated with MM disease classification. We observed a significant increase in the proportion of CD161‐expressing CD8+ TRM in RRMM patients, whereas PD‐1 levels showed no notable differences (Figure  ). 2) The expression of CD161 was age and gender independent in MM patients (Figure  , Supporting Information). 3) The major population of CD161+ BM CD8+ T cells was conventional T cells, not mucosal‐associated invariant T cells (MAIT cells) (Figure  , Supporting Information). 4) CLEC2D expression was highest in BM B cells from MM patients, followed by plasma cells and monocytes (Figure  , Supporting Information). Importantly, CLEC2D expression in plasma cells from MM patients was significantly higher than in those from HC (Figure  ).
Overall, these findings highlight the CD161–CLEC2D axis as a potentially major immunosuppressive signaling pathway mediating CD8+ BM‐TRM dysfunction in MM.

2.4.

## CD161 Blockade Enhances CD8+ TRM Function Ex Vivo
Next, we interrogated the function of the CD161–CLEC2D pathway through an ex vivo blocking assay using primary bone marrow mononuclear cells (BMNCs) from MM patients. BMNCs were stimulated with phorbol‐12‐myristate‐13‐acetate (PMA) and ionomycin in the presence of anti‐CD161 monoclonal antibody (mAb), anti‐PD‐1 mAb, or Immunoglobulin G (IgG) isotype control for 6 h (Figure  ). Compared to the isotype control and PD‐1 mAb group, blocking CD161 significantly enhanced cell‐killing capacity against malignant plasma cells (CD138+ cells) (Figure  ). To assess TRM proliferation, BMNCs were labeled with carboxyfluorescein succinimidyl ester (CFSE), and flow cytometry was used to measure CFSE dilution CD8+CD69+ cells. CD161 blockade promoted the proliferation of CD8+CD69+ cells (Figure  ).
 Next, cytokine production was evaluated. Anti‐CD161 treatment resulted in a notable increase in the proportions of Tumor Necrosis Factor‐α (TNF‐α)+, Interferon‐γ (IFN‐γ)+, and perforin+ cells within CD8+ T cells compared to the isotype control and PD‐1 blockade groups (Figure  , Supporting Information). When zoomed in to focus on CD8+CD69+ and CD161+CD8+CD69+ subsets, both the proportion of cytokine‐positive cells and their mean fluorescence intensity (MFI) levels showed significant increases upon CD161 blockade, suggesting enhanced activation and functional capacity of these specific subpopulations (Figure  ; Figure  , Supporting Information). Importantly, IFN‐γ upregulation was the most pronounced, particularly in CD161+CD8+CD69+ subsets (Figure  ; Figure  , Supporting Information). Additionally, Interleukin 2 (IL‐2) expression was detected in CD161+CD8+CD69+ cells, and its levels also showed a significant increase following CD161 blockade, further emphasizing the functional reactivation of this subset (Figure  ; Figure  , Supporting Information). Together, CD161 suppresses the function of BM CD8+ T cells in freshly isolated samples from human patients.

2.5.

## NK1.1 Blockade Enhances CD8+ TRM Function and Extends Survival In Vivo
To confirm these ex vivo findings, 5TGM1‐Luc cells were engrafted via tail vein injection into C57BL/KaLwRij mice, establishing a classical MM model within 5 weeks (Figure  ). By week 5, MM mice exhibited hind leg fractures and a significant increase in serum IgG2b levels (Figure  , Supporting Information). Examining mice spleen stained with Swiss dye under a light microscope further confirmed the presence of typical MM plasma cell morphology (Figure  , Supporting Information). Bioluminescence imaging (BLI) was initiated on day 1 relative to antibody treatment to assign mice with comparable BLI signals into four experimental groups. To determine whether the therapeutic effects of NK1.1 blockade were CD8+ T‐cell dependent, we performed CD8+ T cell depleted on two groups of mice (Figure  ). MM mice were treated with NK1.1 mAb, IgG isotype control, CD8‐deplete mAb, CD8‐deplete mAb plus NK1.1 mAb, administered twice weekly. Tumor burden was monitored using in vivo BLI. Anti‐CD8 antibody treatment significantly reduced the percentage of CD8+ T cells in vivo (Figure  , Supporting Information).
 NK1.1 blockade significantly reduced tumor burden on days 14, 21, and 28 post treatment (Figure  ; Figure  , Supporting Information), and extended the survival of MM‐bearing mice (Figure  ). BLI demonstrated that the combination of anti‐CD8 with NK1.1 blockade completely abolished both the tumor control and survival benefits observed with NK1.1 blockade monotherapy (Figure  ). On days 7 and 14, NK1.1 blocking significantly decreased the proliferation of tumor cells, as evidenced by a reduction in KI67 expression (Figure  , Supporting Information). Moreover, by day 14 post‐treatment, NK1.1 blockade significantly reduced BM tumor burden compared to the isotype group. Still, the antitumor benefit conferred by NK1.1 blockade was completely abrogated​ when CD8⁺ T cells were simultaneously depleted (Figure  ). Interestingly, CD8⁺ T‐cell depletion alone did not alter tumor burden relative to the isotype control, indicating that endogenous CD8⁺ T cells may be functionally exhausted and thus insufficient to mediate effective tumor control (Figure  ).
To profile the impact of NK1.1 blocking on the tumor and immune compartments, PB was collected on day 3 post treatment, while spleen and BM samples were obtained on days 7 and 14 post‐treatment for flow cytometric analysis. The proportions of CD3+CD8+ cells in PB and BM, and CD8+CD69+ TRM in the BM were markedly increased in the NK1.1 blockade group (Figure  , Supporting Information). Consistent with the functional restoration observed in MM patient samples ex vivo (Figure  ), NK1.1 blockade significantly boosted in vivo production of Tnf, Ifng, Gzmb, and Il2 in mice, but this enhancement was substantially attenuated when NK1.1 blockade was combined with CD8+ T‐cell depletion (Figure  ). On day 28, all mice were euthanized, and spleens were weighted. NK1.1 blockade significantly reduced spleen weight compared to the isotype control group (Figure  , Supporting Information). Additionally, the proportion of NK cells in the BM were reduced in the NK1.1‐treated group, although the overall number of NK cells remained low in both groups (Figure  , Supporting Information).
We next set out to investigate the transcriptional alterations driven by NK1.1 blockade in vivo, BM‐derived CD8+ T cells were sorted from the two groups (isotype and NK1.1 mAb) for bulk RNA‐seq. Using differential expression analysis, we observed that the expressions of pro‐TRM genes, including Cd69, Bhlhe40, Nr4a3, Nothc1, Ahr, and Runx3, were significantly elevated on CD8+ T cells from NK1.1 blockade‐treated mice, while genes facilitate T‐cell circulation, such as Itgb1, Ly9, Cdc25b, and Prss12, were downregulated (Figure  ; Table  , Supporting Information). Furthermore, NK1.1 blockade led to upregulation of effector‐cell genes (Ifng, Prf1, and Gzmb) and stemness‐like genes (Ccr7, Stat4, Il7r, and Tcf7) (Figure  ). As shown in GSEA, NK1.1 blockade significantly activated the interferon pathway in CD8+ T cells, enhanced tissue residency, promoted proliferation, increased cytokine and chemokine secretion, and elevated their tumor cell‐killing capacity (Figure  ; Figure  , Supporting Information). Furthermore, re‐analysis of single‐cell RNA‐seq data from a separate study (GSE220200)[
 
] confirmed that CD161 blockade increased the TRM signature scores of T cells, particularly CD8+ T cells (Figure  , Supporting Information). Thus, CD161 delivers a key inhibitory signal to BM CD8+ TRM during anti‐MM responses in vivo.

2.6.

## CD161 Blockade Enhances CAR‐T Cytotoxicity, Reduces exhaustion, and Sustains a Resident Memory Signature
While CAR‐T‐cell therapy has become an essential treatment for RRMM, addressing CAR‐T‐cell exhaustion remains a significant challenge.[
 , 
] Building on our findings that the CD161–CLEC2D interaction induces CD8+ BM‐TRM dysfunction and promotes MM progression, we next determined whether CD161 is expressed on CAR‐T cells in RRMM patients and whether it contributes to their functional exhaustion. First, we collected PB from five RRMM patients who underwent B‐cell maturation antigen (BCMA)‐directed CAR‐T therapy at multiple time points (Table  , Supporting Information). Most patients exhibited a peak in CAR‐T‐cell expansion between days 10 and 14 post infusion (Figure  ; Figure  , Supporting Information). The expression of CD161 exhibited a biphasic pattern, with high expression in early BCMA CAR‐T cells after infusion, a decline reaching a nadir around days 10–14, which coincided with the peak of CAR‐T expansion, and a subsequent increase during CAR‐T contraction (Figure  ; gating strategy in Figure  in the Supporting Information). The proportion of BCMA CAR‐T cells in CD3+ cells was significantly inversely correlated with the expression level of CD161 on BCMA CAR‐T cells (Figure  ; Figure  , Supporting Information). Moreover, CD161 expression in BCMA CAR‐T cells was considerably higher than that in endogenous T cells, while PD‐1 expression showed no significant fluctuation (Figure  ), and there was no correlation between PD‐1 levels and BCMA CAR‐T frequency (Figure  , Supporting Information). Critically, the proportion of CD161+ BCMA CAR‐T cells in MM was substantially larger than that of PD‐1+ BCMA CAR‐T cells, with the difference becoming even more pronounced at later stages (>30 days) (Figure  ).
 Next, we sorted the CAR‐T cells from PB and BM of one RRMM patient at day 35 after BCMA CAR‐T infusion for scRNA‐seq. Indeed, KLRB1 expression was observed in CAR‐T cells from both the BM and PB (Figure  ; Figure  , Supporting Information). CAR‐T cells were categorized into KLRB1
high and KLRB1
low subsets for subsequent analysis. KLRB1
high CAR‐T cells displayed a higher expression of inhibitory genes (PDCD1, LAG3, CTLA4, and TOX), and cell migration‐related genes (KLF2 and S1PR1) (Figure  ). In contrast, KLRB1
low CAR‐T cells highly expressed cytotoxicity genes (GZMB, TCF7, and GNLY), resident genes (ITGAE, ITGA1, CXCR3, RUNX3, and PRMD1) (Figure  , Supporting Information). Functionally, KLRB1
high CAR‐T cells were enriched with exhaustion, stress response, and apoptosis features, whereas KLRB1
low CART cells exhibited enhanced cytotoxicity, chemokine production, and adhesion functions (Figure  ). We further examined the expression dynamics of CD69, KLRB1, and several representative exhaustion‐related genes (PDCD1, LAG3, TIGIT, and TOX) in CAR‐T cells along pseudotime. Notably, we observed a progressive increase in CD69 expression as pseudotime advanced (Figure  ). KLRB1 exhibited a biphasic pattern, with an initial decrease in expression followed by a subsequent increase (Figure  ), consistent with the expression pattern of CD161 on BCMA CAR‐T cells (Figure  ). TOX is a well‐established master regulator of T‐cell exhaustion.[
 
] Along the pseudotime, the dramatic induction of TOX at the later stage correlated very well with KLRB1 expression. In contrast, other inhibitory receptor genes exhibited an opposite expression pattern (Figure  ). Notably, CAR‐T cells in the BM showed higher KLRB1 expression compared to those in PB (Figure  ), suggesting that KLRB1 may exert a stronger inhibitory effect on CAR‐T cells within the BM–TME and a potential link between KLRB1 and TRM programs. Together, these results strongly suggest that KLRB1 is the major inhibitory receptor at the later stages of CAR‐T differentiation.
To probe the functional importance of CD161 in BCMA CAR‐T cells, we conducted in vitro culture assays. BCMA CAR‐T cells were cultured with U266 cells at varying effector‐to‐target (E: T) ratios (1:1, 2:1, 5:1) in the presence of anti‐CD161 mAb, anti‐PD‐1 mAb, or an IgG isotype control for 24 or 48 h (Figure  ; Figure  , Supporting Information). As expected, CD161 blockade significantly promoted BCMA CAR‐T‐cell proliferation, increased IFN‐γ secretion (Figure  , Supporting Information), and enhanced killing compared to the anti‐PD‐1 and isotype groups (Figure  ). Additionally, we validated this finding using a different CAR (GPRC5D CAR) (Figure  , Supporting Information). Next, BCMA CAR‐T cells treated with either CD161 blockade or the isotype, and activated by CD3/CD28 for 24 h were subjected to RNA‐seq. Differential expression analysis revealed that CD161 blockade enhanced the expression of pro‐TRM (ITGAE) and effector (IL4R) genes (Figure  and Table  , Supporting Information). Functionally, CD161 blockade activated interferon signaling in CAR‐T cells (Figure  , Supporting Information), promoted their proliferation and activation, increased cytokine and chemokine secretion, and enhanced TRM characteristics (Figure  ). Furthermore, transcriptional profiling revealed a marked reduction in exhaustion‐associated genes, including PDCD1, LAG3, TOX, and TIGIT, in CAR‐T cells treated with anti‐CD161 (Figure  ). Together, KLRB1 is a critical inhibitory receptor dampening CAR‐T function.

2.7.

## Identification of a KLRB1‐Driven Exhaustion Program in CD8+ TRM across Hematological Malignancies
To investigate whether the KLRB1‐driven exhaustion program is present in CD8+ TRM across other hematologic malignancies, we analyzed published scRNA‐seq datasets from patients with acute myeloid leukemia (AML), diffuse large B‐cell lymphoma (DLBCL), follicular lymphoma (FL), mantle cell lymphoma (MCL), Hodgkin lymphoma (HL) (Figure  , Supporting Information). CD8+ TRM and Tcir cells were identified as CD8+CD69+ and CD8+CD69‐ cells within the BM–TME, respectively (Figure  ). For DLBCL and FL, ITGAE was selected as an additional marker to define TRM (Figure  ). Comparing the TRM signature scores between TRM and Tcir cells revealed that all identified TRM consistently exhibited higher TRM signature scores (Figure  ). Moreover, CD8+ TRM demonstrated a strong correlation between cytotoxicity and exhaustion in TME across all malignancies (Figure  , Supporting Information). Notably, the expression of KLRB1 was significantly upregulated in CD8+ TRM from AML and MCL (Figure  ). To further explore whether KLRB1 expression correlates with T‐cell exhaustion, CD8+ TRM were categorized into KLRB1
high and KLRB1
low subsets. Although the expression varied, KLRB1high
 subset could be detected in CD8+ TRM across all hematological malignancies (Figure  ). Except for FL, KLRB1
high CD8+ TRM consistently showed higher exhaustion scores (Figure  ). Notably, in AML, KLRB1
high CD8+ TRM exhibited elevated expression of multiple exhaustion‐related markers such as TOX, LAG3, TIGIT, and CD160, except PDCD1, whose expression pattern was opposite from that of KLRB1 (Figure  ). Flow cytometry analysis revealed that CD8+ TRM from AML patients exhibited significantly higher CD161 expression compared to HC (Figure  ). In MCL, KLRB1
high CD8+ TRM showed a similar trend with increased expression of exhaustion‐related genes (Figure  ; Figure  , Supporting Information). In DLBCL and HL, KLRB1
high CD8+ TRM also display higher levels of inhibitory markers, albeit with a less pronounced difference compared to AML and MCL (Figure  ). Together, these findings suggest that KLRB1 expression can be detected in CD8+ TRM infiltrating most hematological tumors. KLRB1 expression, but not PD‐1 expression, correlates with TRM exhaustion, suggesting that KLRB1 may deliver a broad inhibitory signal to CD8+ TRM in hematological malignancies.
 

3.

## Discussion
The advent of ICIs has revolutionized the treatment for many solid tumors. However, the clinical outcomes of PD‐1, LAG‐3, and CTLA‐4 targeting in MM are disappointing.[
 
] This lack of efficacy emphasizes the unique challenges of MM's immunosuppressive TME and the urgent need to identify novel therapeutic targets.[
 
] BM CD8+ TRM have garnered attention in MM. While these cells exhibit antimyeloma responses, they upregulate inhibitory receptors, such as PD‐1 and TIGIT, leading to functional impairment.[
 
] However, single‐agent blockade of these receptors is not effective to restore the TRM function. Our study identified KLRB1 (CD161) as a novel inhibitory receptor controlling the immunosuppressive and dysfunctional state of CD8+ BM TRM in MM. CD161 interacts with CLEC2D, expressed on MM cells and other cells within the MM TME, positioning the CD161–CLEC2D axis as a key driver of immune suppression.
Additionally, our results show that blocking CD161 effectively alleviates exhaustion while promoting TRM‐like characteristics in CAR‐T cells, including enhanced tissue residency and persistence within the MM BM–TME. These improvements in residency and sustained antitumor functionality suggest that CD161 inhibition is a promising strategy for MM CAR‐T therapy. Intriguingly, KLRB1 (CD161) expression in CAR‐T cells exhibits a biphasic pattern, reflecting a dynamic interplay between CAR‐T and the MM TME. We propose that CLEC2D in the microenvironment drives high CD161 expression in the early post‐infusion stage, partially inhibiting CAR‐T activity. However, at early stages, CD161 alone is insufficient to induce terminal exhaustion. Thus, CAR‐T continues to expand and target MM cells. At the peak of CAR‐T expansion, strong activation signals and reduced CLEC2D expression might lead to CD161 downregulation and enable efficient tumor cell killing. In the late post‐infusion phase, as tumor burden decreases, residual antigens induce the re‐expression of CD161, accelerating CAR‐T exhaustion and functional decline. This stage‐specific pattern highlights the potential to target CD161 to sustain CAR‐T activity and enhance residual tumor clearance. However, the precise regulatory mechanisms underlying this biphasic pattern require further investigation.
In addition to MM, our findings reveal a KLRB1‐driven exhaustion program in CD8+ TRM across various hematologic malignancies, a pattern also observed in solid tumors.[
 , , 
] Notably, in Human Papillomavirus (HPV)‐positive oropharyngeal squamous cell carcinoma, elevated CD161 expression on CD8+ TRM correlates with reduced antitumor activity, further supporting the relevance of TRM‐specific exhaustion mechanisms across tumor types.[
 
] Moreover, high CD161 expression has been reported to be associated with poor outcomes in several malignancies. For instance, it correlates with worse prognosis in hepatocellular carcinoma[
 
] and shorter relapse‐free survival in AML patients 3 months post‐transplant.[
 
] In MM, our transcriptomic analysis revealed that higher KLRB1 and CLEC2D expressions correlate with worse survival. However, opposite trends have been observed in certain cancers, such as pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma, where patients with low tumor‐infiltrating CD161+CD8+ T cells exhibited the worst survival.[
 
] This highlights a tumor‐type‐specific role of CD161, likely influenced by the distinct TME and the dynamic balance between activation and exhaustion of CD161+CD8+ T cells.
In summary, our study highlights the critical role of the CD161–CLEC2D axis in mediating TRM‐specific immunosuppression within the MM BM–TME, thereby facilitating disease progression. These findings demonstrate that the transition of CD8+ T cells into NK‐like T cells is closely linked to T‐cell dysfunction. Targeting the CD161–CLEC2D pathway emerges as a promising therapeutic strategy to mitigate immunosuppression and enhance the efficiency of immunotherapy against MM (Figure  ).
 
4.

## Experimental Section

## Cell Lines
The murine MM cell line 5TGM1‐luc (RRID:CVCL_VI66) and the human MM cell lines ARP1 (RRID:CVCL_D523), H929 (RRID:CVCL_1600), RPMI 8226 (RRID:CVCL_0014), and U266 (RRID:CVCL_GZ72) were kindly provided by Zhou and co‐workers (Cancer Research Institute, School of Basic Medical Sciences, Central South University) and verified through short tandem repeat (STR) authentication. All cell lines were confirmed to be free from other microbial contamination. All cell lines were cultured in complete RPMI 1640 medium (supplemented with 10% fetal bovine serum and 1% penicillin–streptomycin). Cells were maintained at 37 °C in a humidified atmosphere with 5% CO2 and 21% O2, with the medium refreshed twice weekly.

## Collection of Human Samples
Fresh PB and BM aspirates from healthy donors, MM and AML patients at diagnosis, were collected at the Third Xiangya Hospital of Central South University. In total, 50 MM patients (with 50 BM and 20 PB samples), 7 AML patients (with 7 BM samples), and 30 HC (with 30 BM and 10 PB samples) were tested (Table  , Supporting Information). PB mononuclear cells (PBMCs) and BMNCs were isolated using density gradient centrifugation with Ficoll (Sigma–Aldrich). The percentage of MM cells in BM samples was assessed using ten‐color single‐tube flow cytometry. For the generation of CAR‐T cells, fresh PBMCs were obtained by apheresis from patients. All donors and patients provided written informed consent, and the study was approved by the Ethical Committee of the Institute of the Third Xiangya Hospital of Central South University (Approval No. 24836).

## Experimental Mouse Models
Animal studies were conducted using female C57BL/KaLwRij (KAL) mice (aged 6–10 weeks), which were kindly provided by Zhou and co‐workers[
 
] (Cancer Research Institute, School of Basic Medical Sciences, Central South University). All mice were housed under specific pathogen‐free conditions with unrestricted access to food and water. The study protocol (#CSU‐2024‐0169) was approved by the Department of Laboratory Animals at Central South University. All experiments involving mice were performed in strict compliance with ethical standards and guidelines for animal research.

## Flow Cytometry
To identify CAR‐T cells by flow cytometry, mononuclear cells isolated from PB or BM were prewashed and incubated with biotinylated human BCMA protein (ACROBiosystems) for 1 h on ice. After incubation, the cells were washed once with staining buffer. Expression of the anti‐BCMA CAR was assessed using PE (P‐phycoerythrin)‐conjugated streptavidin. Additional surface markers were stained for 30 min on ice using the following antibodies: APC (Allophycocyanin) antihuman CD3 (OKT3), BV510 antihuman CD45 (2D1), PE/Cyanine7 antihuman CD161 (W18070C), PerCP/Cyanine5.5 antihuman PD‐1 (NAT105), and LIVE/DEAD fixable viability dye. After staining, cells were washed and resuspended in PBS (Phosphate Buffered Saline) for further analysis. Other surface staining procedures involved incubating cells with antibodies on ice in the dark for 20 min, followed by washing with PBS and resuspension for analysis. For intracellular protein staining, cells were fixed and permeabilized using the Intracellular Fixation and Permeabilization Buffer kit (eBioscience) and subsequently stained with intracellular antibodies for 30 min. The following antibodies were used: PE antihuman Perforin (B‐D48), APC/Fire750 antihuman Granzyme B (QA16A02), FITC (Fluorescein Isothiocyanate) antihuman IFN‐γ (4S.B3), Pacific Blue antihuman TNF‐α (MAb11), APC antihuman IL‐2 (MQ1‐17H12), and Alexa Fluor 700 antimouse Ki67 (SolA15). All samples were analyzed using a Navios flow cytometer (Beckman Coulter) and FlowJo 10.8.1 software (see Figures  and  for gating strategies, Supporting Information). Detailed antibody information is provided in Table  (Supporting Information).

## Immunohistochemistry and Multiplex Immunofluorescence Staining
Tissue specimens were fixed in 4% formalin for 48 h and embedded in paraffin for sectioning. The sections were incubated overnight at 4 °C with primary antibodies against CD161 (1:900, ab302564, Abcam), followed by PBS washing. Staining was performed using an automated immunostainer (Leica Bond‐III, Dako Autostainer Link 48). Finally, section images were scanned with a NanoZoomer S360. Swiss staining was performed following standard procedures. For fluorescent multiplex immunohistochemistry (mIHC), a tyramide signal amplification (TSA)‐based fluorescence kit was used according to the manufacturer's protocol. The sections were incubated overnight at 4 °C with the following primary antibodies: anti‐CD161 (1:1000, ab302564, Abcam), anti‐CD3 (1:4000, ab237721, Abcam), anti‐CD8 (1:1000, CL488‐65135, Proteintech), anti‐CD69 (1:1000, ab233396, Abcam), and anti‐CD138 (1:1000, 67155‐1‐Lg, Proteintech). After completing the final TSA cycle, DAPI (4',6‐diamidino‐2‐phenylidole) was applied for counterstaining at a 1:1000 dilution for 10 min. Fluorescence microscopy images were acquired using the Pannoramic SCAN II system and visualized by CaseViewer (3D HISTECH).

## Ex Vivo Blocking Assays
Primary mononuclear cells isolated from the BM of MM patients were stimulated with PMA and ionomycin (eBioscience) and cultured with 5 µg mL−1 anti‐CD161 mAb (HP‐3G10), anti‐PD‐1 mAb (EH12.2H7), or mouse IgGκ isotype control Ab (MG1‐45) for 6 h.[
 
]

## Cell Apoptosis Experiment
After 6 h of culture, cells were stained with APC‐conjugated CD138 (DL‐101) and BV510‐conjugated CD45 (2D1), followed by staining with the FITC Annexin V/Dead Cell Apoptosis Kit (Invitrogen). Apoptosis (%) was calculated by determining the percentage of Annexin V+ cells among CD138+ tumor cells using flow cytometry.

## T‐Cell Proliferation Experiment
Primary cells were prestained with CellTrace CFSE dye (Invitrogen) prior to culture. The CFSE input before culture served as the baseline for unstimulated cells. After culture, cells were stained with APC‐conjugated CD3 (OKT3), APC‐Cy7‐conjugated CD8 (SK1), and PE‐conjugated CD69 (FN50). CFSE intensity post‐culture was measured by flow cytometry.

## Cytokine Secretion Detection
Cells were cultured with a mixture of PMA, ionomycin, and protein transport inhibitors (eBioscience) for 6 h and subsequently collected for staining with PerCP‐conjugated CD3 (SK7), APC‐Cy7‐conjugated CD8 (SK1), PE‐conjugated CD69 (FN50), PerCP‐conjugated CD69 (FN50), and PE‐Cy7‐conjugated CD161 (W18070C). Following fixation and permeabilization using the intracellular fixation and permeabilization buffer kit (eBioscience), intracellular staining was performed using the following antibodies: PE‐conjugated Perforin (B‐D48), APC/Fire750‐conjugated Granzyme B (QA16A02), FITC‐conjugated IFN‐γ (4S.B3), Pacific Blue‐conjugated TNF‐α (MAb11), and APC‐conjugated IL‐2 (MQ1‐17H12). Cytokine secretion levels in CD8+, CD8+CD69+, and CD8+CD69+CD161+ cells were analyzed by flow cytometry.

## Polymerase Chain Reaction with Reverse Transcription
PB samples were collected at multiple time points before and after CAR‐T‐cell infusion (Table  , Supporting Information). CAR copy numbers in PB were quantified using the Detection Kit for Blood/Cell CAR Copy Number (Bioswan). TaqMan real‐time polymerase chain reaction (PCR) was performed on the SLAN (Sansure Real‐Time PCR Analysis)–YGP system (Sansure Biotech). Total RNA was extracted from PBMCs using Trizol reagent (Sangon Biotech). Reverse transcription was carried out according to the manufacturer's protocol using a reverse transcription kit. Relative transcript expression levels were quantified using AceQ quantitative PCR (qPCR) SYBR Green Master Mix (Vazyme) with a CFX touch real‐time PCR System (Bio‐Rad). The primers used in the study were as follows: Ifng (forward, 5′‐ATGAACGCTACACACTGCATC‐3′; reverse, 5′‐CCATCCTTTTGCCAGTTCCTC‐3′), Tnf (forward, 5′‐CCCTCACACTCAGATCATCTTCT‐3′; reverse, 5′‐GCTACGACGTGGGCTACAG‐3′), Gzmb (forward, 5′‐CCACTCTCGACCCTACATGG‐3′; reverse, 5′‐GGCCCCCAAAGTGACATTTATT‐3′), Il2 (forward, 5′‐TGAGCAGGATGGAGAATTACAGG‐3′; reverse, 5′‐GTCCAAGTTCATCTTCTAGGCAC‐3′), and Beta actin (forward, 5′‐ATGTGGATCAGCAAGCAGGA‐3′; reverse, 5′‐AAGGGTGTAAAACGCAGCTCA‐3′).

## Culture of CAR‐T Cells with Tumor Cells
BCMA CAR‐T or GPRC5D CAR‐T cells were cultured in RPMI 1640 medium supplemented with 10% fetal bovine serum, 1% penicillin/streptomycin, and 50 ng mL−1 human IL‐2 (AbMole) at 37 °C, 5% CO2, and 21% O2. U266 cells were seeded into 96‐well plates at a density of 5 × 105 cells per well. To assess the effect of anti‐CD161 mAb on CAR‐T cells, CAR‐T cells were cultured with U266 cells at varying effector‐to‐target (E:T) ratios (1:1, 2:1, and 5:1) in the presence of 5 µg mL−1 anti‐CD161 mAb (HP‐3G10), anti‐PD‐1 mAb (EH12.2H7), or mouse IgGκ isotype control antibody (MG1‐45) in 96‐well plates. After 24 or 48 h of culture, cells were collected and stained using the FITC Annexin V/Dead Cell Apoptosis Kit (Invitrogen). Tumor cells were gated based on side scatter (SSC) and forward scatter (FSC) by flow cytometry. The percentage of Annexin V+ cells among tumor cells was calculated to determine the apoptosis rate of U266 cells. After 48 h of culture, supernatants from 96‐well plates were collected, and IFN‐γ levels were measured using enzyme‐linked immunosorbent assays (ELISA) according to the manufacturer's protocol (Abbkine, Cat#KTE6011). Optical density (OD) was determined using a Synergy HTX microplate reader (141222F) set to 450 nm.

## CAR‐T‐Cell RNA Sequencing
CAR‐T cells were cultured in 96‐well plates in the presence of 5 µg mL−1 anti‐CD161 mAb (HP‐3G10) or mouse IgGκ isotype control antibody (MG1‐45). Stimulation was achieved using 5 µg mL−1 anti‐CD3 (BioLegend, Cat#317 326) and anti‐CD28 mAbs (BioLegend, Cat#302 934). After 24 h, cells were collected, and total RNA was extracted using the RNA rapid extraction kit (RNAfast200, Cat#220 011) for RNA sequencing.

## Mouse Experiments
The 5TGM1 MM model was established by intravenously injecting luciferase‐expressing 5TGM1 cells (1 × 10⁶ cells in 200 µL of PBS) into C57BL/KaLwRij mice. Disease progression was monitored by assessing tumor burden through BLI and measuring serum IgG2b levels. Mouse IgG2b in serum was quantified using the mouse IgG2b ELISA Kit (#E99‐109, Bethyl Laboratories, USA). For BLI, mice were anesthetized using a precision isoflurane vaporizer (VetEquip, Livermore, CA, USA) with 4% isoflurane for 5 min, followed by intraperitoneal administration of luciferin (15 mg kg−1, Abiowell). Ten minutes post injection, images were captured using an IVIS Spectrum System with automatic exposure settings. BLI was performed weekly, and signal flux (photons s−1) was quantified using the Living Image software package (PerkinElmer). NK1.1 is the homologous molecule of human CD161 in mice. The NK1.1 mAb is similar to the antihuman CD161 mAb. On week 5, post‐tumor injection, mice exhibiting increased bioluminescence signals were randomized into two treatment cohorts: an isotype control antibody group (Cat#401411, BioLegend) and an anti‐NK1.1 mAb group (Cat#108759, BioLegend), with 9 mice per group. Both groups started with an approximately equivalent mean tumor burden. Antibodies were administered via intraperitoneal injection (5 mg kg−1) twice per week. Samples were collected at various time points for analysis. From days 3–28 post treatment, PB, spleen, and BM were harvested and processed into single‐cell suspensions. For flow cytometry, the suspensions were incubated with an Fc blocker (anti‐mouse CD16/CD32, eBioscience) and stained with surface and intracellular antibodies. Additionally, on day 14 post‐antibody administration, BM single‐cell suspensions were collected, and CD8a+ T cells were isolated using the CD8a+ T‐cell isolation kit (Miltenyi, Cat#130‐104‐075) following the manufacturer's protocol. Isolated CD8a+ T cells underwent RNA sequencing for further analysis. All surviving mice were euthanized on day 28. Detailed antibody information is provided in Table  (Supporting Information).

## CD8+ T‐Cell Depletion
To examine the role of the CD8+ T‐cell population in mediating NK1.1 mAb antitumor responses, after successfully establishing the MM mouse model, the mice were randomly assigned into four experimental groups (isotype group, NK1.1 blockade group, CD8 depletion group, and CD8 depletion with NK1.1 blockade group) based on BLI tumor burden data obtained during week 5. Groups started with an approximately equivalent mean tumor burden. The CD8+ T population in MM mice was depleted using antimouse CD8a antibody (Cat#100764, BioLegend, 10 mg kg−1). The antimouse CD8a antibodies were administered by intraperitoneal route 1 day before NK1.1 administered twice per week. The efficiency of CD8+ T‐cell depletion was confirmed with anti‐CD8a antibody (Cat#46‐0081‐80, eBioscience) staining by flow cytometric analysis on days 3, 5, 7, 14, and 21.

## Bulk RNA‐seq and Data Analysis
Transcriptome sequencing was performed on the DNBSEQ (DNA Nanoball sequencing) platform with paired‐end (PE150) cycles. Raw FASTQ files were trimmed and filtered by Fastp (version 0.19.5), and then aligned to the reference genome (human: GRCh38; mouse: GRCm39/mm39) using Bowtie2 (version 2.4.1), the reads were counted by FeatureCounts (version 2.0.6). Genes with differential expression across samples (differential expression genes, DEGs) were assessed using the “DESeq2” (version 1.42.0) package of R. An FDR (False Discovery Rate) of 0.05 and Log2 fold change cut‐off of 1 were imposed. GSEA was performed using the “enrichr” (version 3.2) and “GSEABase” (version 1.58.0) R packages. Gene sets were derived from MSigDB, including h.all.v2024.1.Hs.symbols.gmt, c2.cp.reactome.v2024.1.Hs.symbols.gmt, and c5.all.v2024.1.Hs.symbols.gmt. Scores for resident,[
 
] nonresident,[
 
] and exhaustion[
 
] gene sets were calculated. Kaplan–Meier survival curves were generated using the “survival” R package (version 3.3.1), with statistical significance assessed by the log‐rank test. Plots were visualized using the “ggpirate” (version 0.1.2) and “ggplot2” (version 3.4.2) R packages. Publicly available transcriptome data were integrated into the analysis. The MMRF‐CoMMpass dataset (NCT01454297), containing bulk RNA‐seq data from BM samples of NDMM patients, was downloaded from UCSC Xena (https://xenabrowser.net/datapages/). After excluding samples with incomplete survival information, 844 MM patients were included in the final cohort. Additionally, transcriptome data from the GEO database (GSE136337; n = 436 NDMM samples)[
 
] provided OS and progression‐free survival (PFS) information. Expression data from 34 MM cell lines were retrieved from the Human Protein Atlas database (https://www.proteinatlas.org/) for comparative analysis of immune checkpoint ligand expression.

## Single‐Cell RNA Sequencing and Data Analysis
BM and PB samples were collected from one RRMM patients on the 35th day post‐BCMA CAR‐T infusion. PBMCs and BMNCs were isolated using density gradient centrifugation with Ficoll (Sigma–Aldrich). CAR‐T cells were sorted based on CD3 and BCMA CAR expression via flow cytometry (BD Biosciences FACS Aria II) and subjected to single‐cell sequencing. Library preparation was conducted using the DNBSEQ technology platform and the DNBelab C4 Single‐Cell Library Prep Set.[
 
] Paired‐end sequencing of single‐cell cDNA libraries was performed on the DIPSEQ T1 sequencing platform. The raw FASTQ files were subjected to quality control, read alignment, and feature quantification using the pipeline provided by DNBC4Tools (https://github.com/MGI‐tech‐bioinformatics/DNBelab_C_Series_HT_scRNA‐analysis‐software). Three single‐cell RNA‐seq datasets were integrated (GSE124310,[
 
] GSE161801,[
 
] and GSE223060[
 
]) comprising BMNCs from healthy individuals (NBM = 17) and 83 patients (SMM = 11;MGUS = 5; NDMM = 48; and RRMM = 19). The RRMM patients relapsed after standard regimens such as IMiDs, PIs, and anti‐CD38 antibodies, without exposure to BCMA‐targeted CAR‐T or BiTE therapies. The raw data for each dataset were processed to create individual Seurat (version 5.1.0) objects. Cell barcodes, gene names, and feature matrices were standardized across datasets, ensuring uniform annotation. Initial quality control metrics were calculated for each dataset. Individual datasets were merged using the merge function in Seurat after filtering. Principal component analysis (PCA) was performed on the top 2000 variable genes in merged datasets for dimensionality reduction. Harmony (version 1.2.1) was applied for batch correction and integration of multiple datasets. Using the Louvain algorithm based on shared nearest neighbors (SNN) for clustering. Uniform manifold approximation and projection (UMAP) and T‐distributed stochastic neighbor embedding (TSNE) were applied for visualization of cell clusters. Clusters were annotated based on known marker genes and enriched pathways. Identification of cluster‐specific marker genes using the FindMarkers function. Expression datasets for NK and Cytotoxicity,[
 
] Exhaustion,[
 
] Adhesion,[
 
] and Trm[
 
] signature genes were queried (Table  , Supporting Information), and module scores were calculated using AddModuleScore function. Gene or signature scores across cell populations were visualized using FeaturePlot function. At the single‐cell level, a CD8 T cell was defined as CD69 high expression (CD69
high; TRM) if its expression > 0.5 (the median expression value of CD69 gene); otherwise, the cell was defined as CD69 low expression (CD69
low; Cir). Correlation analyses were performed using the Spearman algorithm. Similarly, cells with high KLRB1 expression (according to the median of KLRB1 expression) were classified as KLRB1
high cells, and those with low KLRB1 expression were categorized as KLRB1
low cells. DEGs between MM, RRMM, and NBM were identified using the “DESeq2” (version 1.42.0) package. These DEGs were subjected to GSEA using the “clusterProfiler” package (version 4.4.4). Pseudotime trajectories were plotted using the “Monocle 3” (version 1.3.1) package. All visualizations and plots were generated using the “ggplot2” (version 3.4.2) and “pheatmap” (version 1.0.12) packages.
For validation, scRNA‐seq datasets were analyzed from various human hematological malignancies, including AML (GSE250077), DLBCL and FL (GSE182434),[
 
] MCL (GSE184031), and HL (GSE245920).[
 
] TSNE visualizations were generated using the RunTSNE function with perplexity values set to 30 or 15, depending on the dataset. For AML, cells with high CD69 expression were classified as TRM, while those with low CD69 expression were categorized as Tcir. In lymphoma datasets, TRM cells were identified as CD69
high populations, whereas CD69
low populations were designated as Tcir. For DLBCL and FL, ITGAE was selected as an additional marker to define TRM.

## Statistical Analyses
Statistical analyses between two groups were performed using a two‐tailed unpaired or paired Student's t‐test for parametric data or a two‐tailed Wilcoxon rank‐sum test for nonparametric data. All experiments were performed three times. Experimental data were presented as the mean ± standard deviation (SD), as detailed in the figure legends. Survival analyses for human and murine subjects were performed using the log‐rank test. All available specimens from enrolled participants were included in correlative analyses, and no data were excluded from the analysis. Statistical analyses and data visualization were conducted using GraphPad Prism (version 9.4.1) or RStudio (version 4.3.0). Statistical significance was defined as p < 0.05, with significance levels denoted as follows: p < 0.05 (*), p < 0.01 (**), p < 0.001 (***), p < 0.0001 (****), and “ns” indicating no significance.

## Conflict of Interest
The authors declare no conflict of interest.

## Author Contributions
L.W. and L.X. contributed equally to this work. L.W., L.X., and X.L. conceptualized the project and designed the experiments. S.T., Q.Z., and X.C. collected data. Y.Y., R.L., H.X., Q.C., J.Z., Y.L., E.W., and T.J. provided samples from patients. L.X., L.W., Y.Z., and Y.Y. performed the experiments. L.W. and L.X. analyzed the data. L.W. and L.X. wrote the paper. L.W., J.L., and X.L. supervised the project. All authors reviewed the results and approved the final version of the paper.

## Supporting information
Supporting Information
Supplemental Tables

## Acknowledgements
This work was supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China for X.L. (Grant Nos. 81870165 and 82170204). The authors extend their deepest gratitude to Prof. Nu Zhang (Department of Microbiology, Immunology and Molecular Genetics, Long School of Medicine, University of Texas Health Science Center at San Antonio) for his exceptional guidance, invaluable insights, and unwavering support throughout this research. His expertise has been instrumental in shaping the study and ensuring its success. They also sincerely thank our esteemed colleagues, including Dr. Liqing Kang (Institute of Biomedical Engineering and Technology, Shanghai Engineering Research Center of Molecular Therapeutics and New Drug Development, School of Chemistry and Molecular Engineering, East China Normal University), and Prof. Wen Zhou (Cancer Research Institute, School of Basic Medical Sciences, Central South University), for their support. Additionally, the authors are grateful to the contributors of the public databases utilized in this study.

Wang L., Xie L., Zhou Y., et al. “Targeting of the CD161 Inhibitory Receptor Enhances Bone‐Marrow‐Resident Memory CD8+ T‐Cell‐Mediated Immunity against Multiple Myeloma.” Adv. Sci.
12, no. 42 (2025): e10888. 10.1002/advs.202510888

## Data Availability Statement
RNA‐seq and scRNA‐seq data that support the findings of this study have been deposited in the Gene Expression Omnibus under accession code GSE285162, GSE285163, GSE285164. The data that support the findings of this study are available in the Supporting Information of this article.

## References
 

## Associated Data

## Supplementary Materials
Supporting Information
Supplemental Tables

## Data Availability Statement
RNA‐seq and scRNA‐seq data that support the findings of this study have been deposited in the Gene Expression Omnibus under accession code GSE285162, GSE285163, GSE285164. The data that support the findings of this study are available in the Supporting Information of this article.