pmcCell RepCell Rep319nihpaCell reports2211-1247pmc-is-collection-domainyespmc-collection-titleNIHPA Author ManuscriptsPMC12974533PMC12974533.11297453312974533NIHMS21429054142250710.1016/j.celrep.2025.116694NIHMS2142905NIHPA21429051ArticleHistone variant H2BE controls activity-dependent gene expression and homeostatic scaling
FeiermanEmily R. ParanjapyeAlekh SangreeAnnabel K. AhmadRili MaroniMarissa J. QiuQi ChoiKyuhyun FuccilloMarc WuHao KorbErica 1Department of Genetics, University of Pennsylvania Perelman School of Medicine, Philadelphia, PA 19146, USA2Epigenetics Institute, University of Pennsylvania Perelman School of Medicine, Philadelphia, PA 19146, USA3Neuroscience Graduate Group, University of Pennsylvania Perelman School of Medicine, Philadelphia, PA 19146, USA4Cell and Molecular Biology Graduate Group, University of Pennsylvania Perelman School of Medicine, Philadelphia, PA 19146, USA5Department of Neuroscience, University of Pennsylvania Perelman School of Medicine, Philadelphia, PA 19146, USA6Department of Physiology, College of Medicine, Hallym University, Chuncheon-si, Gangwon-do 24252, Republic of Korea7Institute of Medical Science, College of Medicine, Hallym University, Chuncheon-si, Gangwon-do 24252, Republic of Korea8Lead contactAUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS
E.R.F. designed, performed, and analyzed the results for most experiments and wrote the manuscript. A.K.S. performed CUT&Tag from tissue. M.J.M. supported MEA experiments. R.A. performed viral experiments. A.P. performed single-nucleus RNA-seq analyses. Q.Q. performed single-nucleus RNA-seq and data preprocessing. H.W. led single-nucleus RNA-seq experiments. K.C. performed electrophysiology experiments. M.F. led electrophysiology experiments. E.K. led the project.
*Correspondence: ekorb@pennmedicine.upenn.edu27120261912202545150917411669411669420022026100320261103202611032026https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license (https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/).Histone variant H2BE controls activity-dependent gene expression and homeostatic scaling
21120242024.11.01.620920bioRxiv10.1101/2024.11.01.620920PMC1156594439553997

## SUMMARY
Neuronal responses to stimuli rely on transcriptional programs controlled by histone proteins, including histone variants. Recent findings demonstrate that the variant H2BE promotes transcription and is critical for long-term memory, which relies on intact activity-dependent responses. However, whether H2BE is regulated by synaptic stimuli and controls activity-dependent responses remains to be determined. Here, we demonstrate that, unlike other variants, H2BE is depleted following long-term but not short-term increases in activity, indicating that its loss may promote homeostatic downscaling. Neurons lacking H2BE are unable to mount proper long-term activity-dependent transcriptional responses both in cultured neurons and in animal models. Lastly, we demonstrate that H2BE-knockout neurons fail to undergo the electrophysiological changes associated with homeostatic plasticity. In summary, these data demonstrate that H2BE expression is inversely correlated with activity and is necessary for long-term activity-dependent scaling responses, revealing a mechanism through which histone variants control homeostatic plasticity in neurons.

## In brief
Feierman et al. show that the histone variant H2BE is depleted from neurons following long-term increases in neuronal activity. H2BE is also required for the transcriptional response to long-term stimuli and homeostatic plasticity in neurons.

## Graphical Abstract

 

pmc-status-qastatus0pmc-status-liveyespmc-status-embargonopmc-status-releasedyespmc-prop-open-accessyespmc-prop-olfnopmc-prop-manuscriptyespmc-prop-open-manuscriptyespmc-prop-legally-suppressednopmc-prop-has-pdfyespmc-prop-has-supplementyespmc-prop-pdf-onlynopmc-prop-suppress-copyrightnopmc-prop-is-real-versionnopmc-prop-is-scanned-articlenopmc-prop-preprintnopmc-prop-in-epmcyespmc-license-refCC BY-NC-ND

## INTRODUCTION
Neurons have the remarkable capability to change their function in response to diverse environmental stimuli. This experience-dependent plasticity is essential for numerous processes in the brain, including synapse development, learning and memory, and long-term adaptation to environmental inputs. At a molecular level, transcriptional programs that alter neuronal function and circuitry are critical to multiple forms of plasticity.
Synaptic plasticity can be broadly categorized into two categories: Hebbian plasticity and homeostatic plasticity. – Hebbian plasticity occurs on the order of seconds to minutes following synaptic activity and is a positive-feedback mechanism leading to strengthening of a given synapse. , Homeostatic plasticity, which occurs over hours or days, is a negative-feedback process that allows neurons to constrain synaptic signaling to a healthy dynamic range, avoiding runaway potentiation or depression following long-term changes in excitation. , Hebbian and homeostatic plasticity both require transcription but have distinct activity-dependent transcriptional signatures. Specifically, Hebbian plasticity is marked by the induction of immediate-early genes (IEGs), which are induced within minutes of neuronal activation. – In contrast, homeostatic plasticity modulates expression of key synaptic proteins, such as postsynaptic receptors, scaffolding proteins, and cell-adhesion molecules (CADMs) via induction of delayed response genes involved in long-term synaptic remodeling. , 
Recent work has revealed that histone variants play a key role in neuronal plasticity. , Expression of variants H2A.Z and H3.3 in the cortex and hippocampus is regulated in vitro in response to pharmacological changes in neuronal activity as well as in vivo in mice during learning. Importantly, incorporation and eviction of these variants promotes adaptive activity-dependent gene expression. Prior work demonstrated that the histone variant H2BE is regulated by olfactory stimuli in olfactory sensory neurons. In this unique population, neurons have high rates of turnover and can be replaced by newly generated neurons. Here, H2BE expression is inversely correlated to olfactory receptor activation and controls neuronal survival. We recently discovered that H2BE is also expressed throughout the brain where it controls chromatin accessibility, gene expression, and long-term memory. However, whether H2BE is regulated by neuronal activity outside of the olfactory system and how it controls activity-dependent transcription and plasticity remain unknown.
Here, we demonstrate that neuronal activity regulates H2BE expression in the mouse cortex and we define the function of H2BE in regulating activity-dependent gene expression and homeostatic plasticity. First, we show that H2BE expression is inversely regulated by activity in primary cortical neurons and in mouse cortical tissue. Further, using cleavage under targets and tagmentation (CUT&Tag) with sequencing, we find that neuronal activity results in decreased genomic enrichment of H2BE at neuronal promoters. We then analyzed transcriptional changes in H2BE wild-type (WT) and knockout (KO) cortical neurons following modulation of neuronal activity and found that H2BE is required for long-term activity-dependent gene expression. Next, we used multielectrode array recordings to demonstrate that H2BE mediates neuronal firing properties both under basal conditions and in response to long-term stimuli. Lastly, we paired single-nucleus RNA sequencing (snRNA-seq) with a robust seizure paradigm to demonstrate that H2BE has effects on activity-dependent gene expression in vivo. Together, these data demonstrate that H2BE is a critical mediator of neuronal responses to stimuli and provide the first evidence of a widely expressed mammalian H2B variant capable of linking environmental inputs to activity-dependent transcriptional states.

## RESULTS

## H2BE expression is inversely correlated with neuronal activity
We previously found that H2BE is widely expressed in multiple mouse tissues and particularly abundant in the brain. Further, we found that H2BE is critical in controlling chromatin accessibility, gene expression, synaptic strength, and long-term memory in mice. Prior work demonstrated that H2BE is repressed by olfactory receptor activation in the main olfactory epithelium, suggesting it may be controlled by extracellular stimuli. However, whether H2BE is regulated by neuronal activity beyond olfactory receptor activation, and whether H2BE plays a role in regulating activity-dependent gene expression and neuronal responses, remains unknown.
Given the high levels of H2BE in the cortex and its established role in regulating chromatin and gene expression under basal conditions, we examined H2BE regulation in cortical neurons. To test whether H2BE is modulated by activity, we pharmacologically manipulated neuronal activity in primary neuronal cultures derived from WT E16.5 embryonic cortices and measured H2BE levels. To increase activity, we used brain-derived neurotrophic factor (BDNF), which acts through binding of TrkB receptors to trigger downstream signaling cascades and by altering neuronal excitability directly. Unlike other histone variants, which are typically induced by activity, – we observed a significant reduction in H2BE transcript levels with increasing time after BDNF treatment ( ). Strikingly, after 48 h, expression of the gene encoding H2BE, H2bc21, had reduced to nearly half of baseline levels. This finding extended to a reduction in total H2BE protein levels by 24 h, which remained low up to 48 h after stimulation ( and ). Twenty-four hours after washout of BDNF, H2BE levels returned to near baseline levels, suggesting that sustained activation is required to maintain activity-dependent H2BE loss ( ). To ensure that this effect was due to changes in neuronal activity and not specific to BDNF, we performed the same experimental paradigm using the GABAA receptor antagonist bicuculline and observed reductions in H2bc21 levels but with distinct kinetics and magnitude of change ( ). Lastly, we examined the effect of decreasing neuronal activity to determine whether this effect was bidirectional. We treated neurons with a combination of tetrodotoxin (TTX), an Na+ channel blocker, and the NMDA receptor antagonist D-2-amino-5-phosphonovalerate (D-AP5) to dampen neuronal activity. In response to TTX/D-AP5, we observed a significant increase in H2bc21 expression ( ). Further, using a transcriptional inhibitor, we determined that this effect requires de novo transcription ( ). However, we did not detect a concomitant increase in H2BE protein levels, suggesting additional mechanisms are involved in regulating translation or stability of H2BE protein or that extended periods of time are required to detect changes in H2BE protein levels ( ).
To assess whether neuronal activity reduces H2BE levels in vivo using a physiologically relevant stimulus, we placed mice in an enriched environment (EE) cage for 24 h. EE is a well-established method to increase neuronal activity by providing a more varied and stimulating environment than standard housing (reviewed in Carulli et al. ). We observed a decrease in H2BE transcript and protein in the cortex of mice exposed to an EE for 24 h ( and ). To further examine the effect of neuronal activation on H2BE levels in vivo, we induced seizures using intraperitoneal injection of pentylenetetrazol (PTZ), which causes a rapid and large-scale increase in excitatory activity throughout the brain through inhibition of GABAA receptors. We found that seizure induction reduced levels of H2BE transcript and protein within 2 h post injection compared to control mice that received saline injections, and H2BE levels continued to decrease over 4 h ( , , and ). Together, these data illustrate that H2BE expression is inversely correlated to activity both in primary cultured neurons and in vivo.
To further confirm these findings, we performed RNA-seq on H2BE WT and KO primary cortical neurons following treatment with BDNF for 30 min or 24 h, as well as TTX/D-AP5 for 24 h. We again found that H2bc21 is significantly downregulated with 24-h BDNF treatment and upregulated with TTX/D-AP5 ( and ), supporting the finding that H2BE expression is inversely regulated by long-term changes in neuronal activity.

## H2BE enrichment within chromatin is inversely correlated with neuronal activity
We next sought to determine whether the activity-dependent regulation of H2BE expression affects H2BE enrichment within chromatin or the localization of H2BE throughout the genome. Previous work from our lab showed that H2BE is enriched at promoters of highly expressed synaptic genes. Given this specificity of H2BE localization and the need for neurons to regulate transcription in response to changes in neuronal activity, we hypothesized that activity may affect H2BE enrichment. To test this, we performed CUT&Tag with sequencing on primary cortical neurons. Because we did not observe a change in H2BE transcript with 30-min BDNF or changes in H2B protein levels with 48-h TTX/D-AP5 treatment, we focused on the changes in H2BE enrichment at 24 h after BDNF treatment. In agreement with our previous work, we found that H2BE is enriched at neuronal promoters ( and – ). Further, we found that H2BE incorporation around transcription start sites (TSSs) is decreased genome-wide with 24-h BDNF treatment ( , , and ). We also specifically examined whether H2BE peaks identified in control conditions change in response to 24-h BDNF treatment. We observed a drastic reduction in signal following BDNF treatment ( and ). In fact, 79.6% (1,082) of H2BE peaks were lost following 24-h treatment with BDNF, while only 311 H2BE peaks were gained ( ).
To gain insight into transcriptional regulators associated with genomic regions that lose H2BE occupancy in response to stimuli, we performed Homer motif enrichment analysis on H2BE peaks lost following BDNF ( ). The top enriched motifs included NF-Y, a transcription factor known to influence nucleosome positioning and promoter accessibility, as well as seven motifs belonging to the Sp/KLF family. Many members of this family are highly expressed in the brain and are involved in neuronal differentiation, synaptic plasticity, and transcriptional responses to activity. – These findings indicate that H2BE is preferentially lost from regulatory regions associated with promoter-proximal motifs of broadly expressed, activity-responsive transcription factors. To further examine genes that lose H2BE at their promoter, we performed Gene Ontology analysis and found that these genes are enriched for mRNA processing, autophagy, and key neuronal functions such as intracellular transport and vesicle organization ( ). Finally, we examined the relationship between gene expression and H2BE loss following long-term BDNF treatment. Notably, BDNF decreases H2BE at genes regardless of expression level, indicative of a broad response with effects detectable at both highly expressed and lowly expressed genes ( – ).
Next, we sought to determine whether H2BE loss occurs in vivo following stimuli. We again used PTZ to induce seizure in mice to cause broad upregulation of neuronal activity and collected tissue after 2 h, based on decreased H2BE transcript and protein levels detected at this time point ( and ). While environmental enrichment causes similar global decreases, we selected seizure induction due to the inherent variability in mouse behavior during a 24-h period in an enriched cage compared to a high-dose seizure-induction protocol. We performed CUT&Tag for H2BE on prefrontal cortex and again detected a robust decrease in H2BE. This loss was evident genome-wide, at peaks found under basal conditions, and in the number of peaks detected between conditions ( – and – ). Similarly, we also observed that genes that lose H2BE peaks were enriched for specific transcription factor motifs and functions, including several overlapping with those in primary culture data (such as NFY, SP, and KLF transcription factors and autophagy and metabolic-related functions) ( and ).
Together, this work demonstrates that H2BE is both downregulated and lost from chromatin following extended periods of increased neuronal activity. These findings indicate an unexpected and inverse relationship between H2BE expression and neuronal stimuli and provides the first evidence of a histone variant that is decreased in response to increased neuronal activity. Notably, the long timescale of this effect is particularly relevant to mechanisms of homeostatic plasticity in which neurons modulate transcriptional output for proper homeostasis following extended periods of prolonged activity.

## H2BE KO dampens transcriptional responses to neuronal activation
Our prior work demonstrated that H2BE promotes transcription through an innate ability to promote chromatin accessibility. Given that H2BE is downregulated by neuronal activity, we therefore hypothesized that H2BE will affect the transcriptional responses to these stimuli. To test this, we treated neurons with BDNF and used RNA-seq to capture gene expression changes at two critical time points: 30 min for short-term primary response activity-dependent gene expression and 24 h for long-term activity-dependent gene expression.
We previously found that KO neurons have decreased expression of synaptic genes under basal conditions and correspondingly weakened synapses compared to WT neurons. Based on these findings, we hypothesized that KO neurons will show dampened responses to short-term stimuli. Indeed, following 30 min of BDNF treatment, 60 genes were upregulated in WT neurons, with a significant enrichment of IEGs, as expected ( and ). In response to the same stimulus, only a subset of these genes (16) was upregulated in KO, and two genes (Ecrg4, Ptgds) were modestly downregulated ( and ). When directly comparing across genotypes, we saw broad changes in gene expression in KO neurons, with slightly more differentially expressed genes (DEGs) in BDNF-treated neurons compared to basal conditions (1,517 down and 1,372 up following BDNF treatment compared to 1,117 down and 1,047 up under basal conditions) ( – ). Finally, we used a stringent interaction model to define how genotype and treatment interact to influence gene expression. We identified 22 genes that met these criteria, including multiple IEGs (e.g., Fosb, Gadd45b, Egr2, Egr4, Dusp5, Nr4a1, Junb, Fos, Jun, Dusp1, and Atf3). Levels of these genes were not significantly different between WT and KO at baseline ( ). However, for all 22 genes, there was dramatically reduced activation of these genes in KO compared to WT following 30-min treatment with BDNF ( – ). These data suggest a blunted activity-dependent response to short-term BDNF treatment. Given that we did not detect changes in H2BE expression at this time point ( ), and given our prior findings of weakened synaptic strength in H2BE KO neurons, this blunted response is most easily explained as a consequence of decreased synaptic response in KO rather than a direct effect of H2BE in mediating short-term activity-dependent gene induction.
We next sought to determine whether H2BE plays a role in long-term activity-dependent gene expression. In WT neurons, 24-h treatment with BDNF resulted in 889 downregulated genes and 907 upregulated genes ( ). KO neurons had a weaker transcriptional response to 24-h BDNF, with 327 downregulated genes and 361 upregulated genes ( ). There was significant overlap between genes that are differentially expressed in WT and KO neurons, suggesting that KO neurons mount a similar but reduced response to long-term neuronal activation ( ). Direct comparisons of genotypes under both control and 24-h BDNF treatment revealed ~200 up and down DEGs that were specific to the BDNF condition, while the remainder are in common with control ( and – ). Again, using an interaction model, we identified 109 genes that are affected by both treatment and genotype ( and ). Of these genes, those that are downregulated upon BDNF stimulation show a slightly higher basal level of expression in WT neurons than those upregulated upon stimulation ( ). Notably, in nearly all cases, expression of these genes in KO neurons in control conditions is most similar to WT neurons after 24-h BDNF treatment ( and ), including at the scaffold protein Nptx2 ( ).
We next examined the relationship between H2BE loss and transcriptional changes following BDNF treatment. Interestingly, we found that H2BE loss was ubiquitous and not limited to those that change upon stimulation or those with specific expression levels ( – and ). This, together with RNA-seq data showing blunted activity-dependent transcriptional changes in H2BE-KO neurons, suggests a model in which H2BE loss is permissive to subsequent gene expression changes but not sufficient. We therefore performed additional analyses to identify other chromatin factors that may work in concert with H2BE to induce homeostatic plasticity. We used ChromHMM to identify chromatin features that are enriched in gene sets of interest. We found that BDNF up- and downregulated genes have distinct chromatin signatures, particularly those enriched at promoters and TSS-proximal enhancers, suggesting that additional chromatin features are associated with transcriptional responses to long-term increases in activity ( ). We also compared chromatin signatures of genes that are only differentially expressed in WT neurons following BDNF treatment (H2BE dependent) with those that are also differentially expressed in KO neurons (H2BE independent) to determine whether gene expression changes that are reliant on H2BE have distinct chromatin profiles. These same chromatin signatures (promoters and TSS-proximal enhancers) show varied enrichment patterns depending on the reliance on H2BE, suggesting that differing baseline levels of specific chromatin states may contribute to gene expression changes and dictate their reliance on the dynamic regulation of H2BE. These analyses support a model in which H2BE, along with multiple other chromatin regulatory mechanisms, work synergistically to produce the necessary transcriptional changes in neurons.
Finally, we tested whether the loss of H2BE contributes to the transcriptional response to long-term activity or whether the gene expression changes we detected were simply a result of aberrant baseline synaptic function that blunted subsequent responses to stimuli. We generated lentiviruses to express H2BE under a constitutively active promoter that is not subject to the regulatory mechanisms that control endogenous H2BE following stimuli. We confirmed that this system results in increased H2BE expression within 2 days of infection and blocks the BDNF-induced decrease in H2BE expression ( – ). We next performed RNA-seq to determine to what extent H2BE overexpression affected the transcriptional response to 24-h BDNF treatment. We found that H2BE overexpression alone causes modest effects on gene expression and that it blunted the response to long-term BDNF stimulation ( and ). While many genes still showed BDNF-induced changes in the presence of abundant H2BE, others no longer respond as expected ( – ). These data, including activity-dependent decreases in H2BE and blunted transcriptional responses to activity following either H2BE KO or transient overexpression of H2BE, support a model in which neurons decrease H2BE to support transcriptional responses to long-term increases in neuronal activity.

## H2BE is required for homeostatic plasticity responses following long-term increases in activity
Given that long-term activity induces homeostatic scaling in neurons, we first examined gene sets associated with molecular mechanisms of scaling. In WT, relevant gene groups such as those encoding extracellular matrix proteins – and signaling pathway components , respond to long-term BDNF stimulation expected ( and ). Interestingly, in KO neurons, some genes showed similar responses to WT ( ), while many exhibited blunted responses, with unstimulated KO resembling stimulated WT neurons ( ). These findings suggest that KO neurons are able to retain a subset of scaling-related responses, but for many genes appear already in a down-scaled state under control conditions and show limited further responses to stimuli. Notably, this parallels the finding that long-term stimuli result in loss of H2BE, thus causing KO neurons to share a transcriptional state similar to WT neurons after prolonged activity.
We next sought to determine how these transcriptomic differences affect neuronal physiology. We utilized a multielectrode array (MEA) recording system to measure activity of WT and KO primary cortical neurons both at baseline and in response to neuronal activation ( ). We treated neurons with BDNF and measured activity after 48 h based on prior literature demonstrating that homeostatic scaling is detectable by MEA recordings at this time point. , After BDNF treatment, WT neurons had significantly decreased firing rate as well as fewer single-electrode bursts and spikes within bursts ( – ). These findings are consistent with prior MEA findings demonstrating similar responses using long-term pharmacological manipulations to increase activity. , Under basal conditions, KO neurons had significantly fewer spikes per burst and a corresponding increase in inter-spike interval within bursts and overall burst duration ( – ). In response to BDNF, KO neurons showed a similar decrease in firing rate to WT ( ), indicating some activity responses are intact in the absence of H2BE. However, KO neurons also showed several divergent responses to long-term BDNF treatment, particularly those related to bursting patterns in which they failed to respond ( and ). Notably, control KO neurons appear more similar to stimulated WT neurons, with a significant effect observed for spikes within bursts and a similar trend in number of bursts ( and ). As with transcriptional responses to long-term stimuli, KO neurons appear “pre-scaled” in their bursting patterns and fail to show significant further changes following long-term stimulation. Together, these data show that neuronal activity is dysregulated in KO neurons, both under basal conditions and during synaptic plasticity following long-term neuronal activation. Specifically, we observe (1) metrics for which KO neurons are different under basal conditions; (2) metrics with patterns matching our transcriptomic observations in which control KO neurons appear most similar to WT neurons following a long-term stimulus; and (3) metrics for which only WT neurons, and not KOs, respond to activity. These findings demonstrate that while scaling responses are divergent and likely occur through multiple mechanisms, H2BE is required for specific homeostatic responses to long-term increases in activity.
To determine whether loss of H2BE affects other forms of plasticity, we induced long-term potentiation (LTP) in acute slices from control and H2BE-KO hippocampi. Because prior work demonstrated that KO tissue showed weaker responses to higher intensity stimuli, we selected a stimulation paradigm that ensures postsynaptic cells received the same input across genotypes. We found that both WT and KO hippocampi exhibited robust LTP in this paradigm ( – ). This suggests that the transcriptional disruptions we observed in response to short-term pharmacological stimuli ( ) may be the result of weaker synaptic responses to stimuli (observed by both MEA and prior work using slice physiology) rather than a specific impairment of synaptic potentiation mechanisms. However, given trends toward genotype differences observed within the first 30 min following high-frequency stimulation, it remains possible that less robust forms of LTP induction may capture more subtle deficits in H2BE-KO tissue. Together, these data indicate that the blunted transcriptional responses to activity observed in H2BE-KO neurons are not sufficient to block LTP but do disrupt mechanisms that are critical to homeostatic scaling.

## Loss of H2BE affects the transcriptomic response to seizures
We next sought to determine whether H2BE plays a similar role in the transcriptional response to activity in vivo. We utilized PTZ-induced seizures, an extremely robust method for activity induction, to ensure that even adult KO brains that have reduced synaptic strength will experience increased neuronal activation. Using a high dose of PTZ (5 mg/mL), we successfully induced seizures in both WT and KO mice. Interestingly, while we did not detect a significant change in seizure severity scores using a Racine scale, fewer KO mice reached higher seizure levels ( ).
To ensure that we analyzed cells that experienced the same degree of seizure, we selected mice that reached a level 4 seizure and performed single-nucleus Drop-seq on cortical tissue. Using Drop-seq, we identified 22 unique cell clusters comprising all expected cell types; namely, five inhibitory neuronal clusters, 11 excitatory neuronal clusters, and six non-neuronal clusters (oligodendrocytes, oligodendrocyte precursor cells, astrocytes, microglia, radial glial cells, and endothelial cells) ( ). Fitting with prior findings, there were no major changes in cluster identity across genotypes, although cluster Inh_Rgs9 was under-represented in seizure conditions regardless of genotype ( and ). Differential expression analysis of genotypes under control conditions (WTC vs. KOC) yielded results similar to our previous work, with minor deviations due to the alignment to a modified mm10 genome optimized for 3′ capture in single-cell technology ( – ). As expected, primary- and secondary-response genes (e.g., Bdnf and Nptx2, respectively) were among the top upregulated genes in seizure conditions for both WT and KO ( ).
Direct comparison of genotypes in response to PTZ revealed both down- and upregulated genes in excitatory neurons. When examining all excitatory neuronal clusters, we identified 19 down- and 41 upregulated genes, while individual neuron clusters had more modest changes ( and ). Among these changes, we identified three notable patterns of expression regulated by genotype and seizure status: type A, common seizure responsive genes with prior elevation in KO; type B, H2BE-dependent seizure responsive genes (both for up- and downregulated genes; and type C, genes disrupted by H2BE loss with further aberrant regulation following seizure ( ). We observed similar but less drastic transcriptional changes when comparing the WT and KO response to PTZ in all inhibitory neurons, with six down- and 14 upregulated genes ( and ). Notably, inhibitory neuron clusters had many of the same DEGs that fell into the three patterns of expression described above, revealing a common set of genes requiring H2BE and/or essential for seizure response across all neuronal subtypes ( ). Notably, despite the differing stimuli used in vivo and in cultured neurons, we similarly detect gene expression responses showing dampened responses in KOs including cases in which control KO neurons most closely resemble WT neurons following stimulation.
To more precisely parse the role of neuronal activation on transcription in vivo, we assigned a modular activity score , to all nuclei based on expression of 25 IEGs ( ). We then subset nuclei to specifically compare highly activated neurons (those with a positive activity score) ( and ). We confirmed that this activity score accurately subset nuclei by performing differential expression on nuclei with scores >0 to those with scores <0 within genotype for excitatory and inhibitory neurons. All DEGs were upregulated (with one gene significantly downregulated in KO with seizure excitatory neurons), and these genes were almost exclusively IEGs, as anticipated ( and ). We then used this activated population for differential expression analysis to compare activity responses between genotypes following seizure. While these groups contain smaller cell numbers and thus comparisons are less well powered, we identified seven down- and 14 upregulated genes in KO excitatory neurons and two down- and eight upregulated genes in KO inhibitory neurons compared to WT ( ). Notably, this follows similar patterns observed before parsing nuclei based on activity score and thus provides a high-confidence list of genes for which H2BE is necessary to modulate expression following large-scale neuronal activation. Further, this comparison confirms that differential gene expression changes are not due to differences in number of activated neurons by genotype as we detect changes even when specifically examining the population of active neurons. One notable example is Bc1, a synaptic non-coding RNA associated with synaptic transmission and dendritic transport, , which is significantly downregulated in KO neurons following PTZ induction. Among upregulated genes, we note Tiam2, which has been shown to regulate glutamatergic synaptic transmission and synaptic plasticity. , Together, these data show that H2BE is necessary for proper regulation of synaptic transmission and plasticity following robust neuronal activation.
Next, we analyzed differences in signaling pathways using CellChat to define changes in inferred cell-cell connections based on established receptor-ligand pairs. We found that WT and KO tissue showed changes in signal strength between multiple cell types for several critical signaling pathways, including those involving protein tyrosine phosphatase receptors (PTPRs), CADMs, and neurexins (NRXNs) for both total connections and connection strength ( and – ). For pathways such as CADM and PTPR, seizure induction has the most robust effects globally. However, specific cell populations (such as Ex Angpt1 and Cort 5.2) have fully or partially disrupted connectivity in KO tissue even under basal conditions with seizure induction causing limited further changes or, in some cases, opposite changes as in WT tissue. For signaling pathways such as NRXN, KO showed weaker connections under control conditions, with seizure induction reducing signaling to differing degrees across cell types and genotypes.
Finally, we integrated PTZ CUT&Tag and RNA-seq data. Similar to effects observed in primary neuronal culture experiments, the loss of H2BE was ubiquitous and similar across differentially expressed gene groups ( ). This again suggests that H2BE loss may be permissive for long-term transcriptional responses but is not the sole determinant of gene expression changes. To better understand other factors that may dictate which genes are differentially expressed, we performed ChromHMM analysis and found that genes that are up- or downregulated by long-term increases in activity are enriched for distinct chromatin profiles depending on their reliance on H2BE ( ). Similar to primary neuronal culture data, specific chromatin signatures found at promoters and proximal enhancers showed divergent enrichment between groups. In summary, these findings support a model in which H2BE expression decreases in response to prolonged neuronal activation to support activity-dependent transcriptional programs and electrophysiological responses associated with homeostatic downscaling ( ).

## DISCUSSION
Here, we demonstrate the activity-dependent regulation of histone variant H2BE expression and its role in the neuronal response to long-term increases in activity. Unexpectedly, we find that long-term increases in activity led to decreased H2BE expression, distinguishing H2BE from other histone variants. We show that, in neurons lacking H2BE, induction of primary response genes is blunted in response to short-term stimuli. Further, we show that neurons lacking H2BE have dysregulated long-term activity-dependent transcriptional responses in stimulated primary neuronal cultures and mice. Lastly, we show that KO neurons have aberrant electrophysiological responses to long-term stimuli that are critical to long-term homeostatic plasticity. Taken together, these data demonstrate that H2BE itself is regulated by neuronal stimuli, and H2BE is required to mount the appropriate transcriptional response to long-term increases in activity.
The homeostatic scaling response is multi-faceted and requires synaptic remodeling which is supported by changes in transcriptional state. Recent work demonstrates the importance of chromatin in regulating transcriptional changes involved in synaptic scaling. , RNA-seq and MEA data suggest that H2BE plays a role in synaptic scaling in neurons. H2BE levels are decreased with increasing time of stimulation, and H2BE KO dampens the transcriptional and firing responses observed in WT neurons following neuronal activation. In fact, both transcriptional and electrophysiological analysis suggests that KO neurons are pre-scaled, as they appear similar to WT levels post stimulation. Together, these findings indicate that transcriptional plasticity is diminished upon H2BE loss, providing evidence of the first histone variant involved in homeostatic plasticity mechanisms.
While many histone variants are modulated by synaptic activity, , , H2BE remains the only variant whose expression is inversely correlated with long-term activity changes. H2A.Z is actively exchanged in response to neuronal activity; it is evicted from promoters and TSS-flanking CpG islands to allow for the expression of genes and is later reincorporated into chromatin to inactivate those same genes when necessary. , , In response to neuronal activation, H3.3 is incorporated at gene bodies and promoters to allow for high expression of active genes. Interestingly, the H2A variant H2AB is reduced at 30 min following learning acquisition, but the implications of this remain unknown. In the case of both H2A.Z and H3.3, these variants accumulate with learning and age. This makes H2BE unique in that its expression increases with age but decreases with increased activity. Notably, this also suggests that cells such as neurons are capable of using different histone variants to mount proper transcriptional responses to different forms of stimulation.
Our findings in cortical neurons are in line with previously identified H2BE regulatory mechanisms in the olfactory system but result in divergent functional outcomes fitting with the divergent properties of olfactory and cortical neurons. In olfactory neurons, H2BE levels are decreased following activation of olfactory receptors. Olfactory neurons with low activity and high H2BE expression consequently undergo cell death as a means to select for populations of neurons with receptor expression relevant to environmental signals. However, continual cell death and replacement via neurogenesis is a unique feature of the olfactory system that does not occur in the adult cortex. In cortical neurons, we similarly found that H2BE levels are decreased following stimulation ( ). However, the functional implications of this activity-dependent regulation are different in the cortex, given that there is no neuronal turnover. This indicates that multiple tissues use H2BE to respond to environmental signaling changes, but these responses correspond to cell- and tissue-specific functional outcomes.
Prior work demonstrated that the ability of H2BE to promote an open chromatin state is an innate feature of the variant, and, thus, we anticipate that this function will be conserved regardless of the stimulation state of the neuron. Here, we found that, in response to stimulation, neurons modulate expression and incorporation of H2BE. We anticipate that this will result in broad changes to chromatin accessibility to promote and stabilize long-term changes in gene expression, helping to support transcriptional changes underlying homeostatic plasticity. However, we also found that loss of H2BE does not alone dictate subsequent changes in gene expression, with widespread changes observed throughout the genome but only a subset of genes changing expression. Together, this supports a model in which modulating H2BE is permissive to subsequent gene expression changes but is not sufficient to dictate the gene sets that change. Instead, H2BE likely acts synergistically with other chromatin factors and transcription factors to support gene expression changes underlying long-term increases in neuronal activity. As a result, in KO neurons that have no H2BE, neurons effectively appear pre-scaled and subsequent activity responses are dampened, resulting in disrupted homeostatic plasticity.
In summary, this work uncovers the activity-dependent regulation of H2BE in the cortex and the role of H2BE in long-term, activity-dependent gene expression ( ). This work demonstrates that H2BE has unique responses to activity that are not observed for other histone variants. Further, it provides a novel mechanism by which histone variants in the brain respond to changes in activity to promote homeostatic scaling.

## Limitations of the study
While the findings presented here provide insights into the regulation and function of an understudied histone variant protein, many questions remain unanswered. While seizure induction was used as a means of causing robust and widespread activation of neurons in vivo, it is not a physiological reflection of the stimuli that occur under healthy conditions. Thus, defining the changes in H2BE regulation in neurons activated during learning or memory will be critical to understanding histone variant responses in the brain. Further, we found that H2BE has an atypical response to neuronal stimuli and, notably, responds in an opposite manner to other variants. However, further work is needed to better understand the interaction between histone variants in chromatin, whether they can regulate each other, and how this balance contributes to neuronal function. Finally, while this work focused on H2BE, the H2B variant landscape remains poorly understood. It remains possible that other variants of H2B exist and may contribute to transcriptional regulation in neurons.

## RESOURCE AVAILABILITY

## Lead contact
Further information and requests for resources and reagents should be directed to the lead contact, Dr. Erica Korb (ekorb@pennmedicine.upenn.edu).

## Materials availability
This study did not generate new, unique reagents.

## Data and code availability
Sequencing data are available at GSE280196.
This paper did not generate any original code.
Any additional information required to reanalyze the data reported in this paper is available from the lead contact upon request.

## STAR★METHODS

## EXPERIMENTAL MODEL AND STUDY PARTICIPANT DETAILS

## Mice
A previously generated H2BE-KO mouse was used. In brief, the endogenous H2BE CDS was replaced with a membrane-targeted mCherry reporter sequence in C57Bl/6 mice. All mice were housed in a 12-h light-dark cycle and fed a standard diet. All experiments were conducted in accordance with and approval of the IACUC. For all experiments, samples were collected from mice between 3–5-months-old and both male and female mice were included, except for single-nucleus Drop-seq. Drop-seq was performed on cortical tissue from male mice only. This mouse is available from The Jackson Laboratory (strain #023819). All animal experiments were performed in accordance and with approval of the University of Pennsylvania IACUC protocol number 806617.

## Seizure induction
Pentylenetetrazol (PTZ; Sigma P6500) was injected intraperitoneally at 50mg/kg (in PBS). Control mice received PBS injections at equivalent volume. Mice were observed for one hour after injection to score seizures and confirm recovery. The modified Racine scale was used to measure seizure induction as follows.
Stage 1: Hypoactivity culminating in behavioral arrest with contact between abdomen and the cage.
Stage 2: Partial clonus (PC) involving the face head or forelimbs.
Stage 3: Generalized clonus (GC) including all four limbs and tail, rearing or falling.
Stage 4: Generalized Tonic-Clonic seizure (GTC)

Seizure susceptibility score was calculated as: (0.2)(1/PC latency) + (0.3)(1/GC latency) + (0.5)(1/GTC latency). Mice were sacrificed 0.5–4 h after injection.

## METHOD DETAILS

## Primary neuronal culture
Cortices were dissected from E16.5 C57BL/6J embryos and cultured in supplemented neurobasal medium (Neurobasal [Gibco 21103–049], B27 [Gibco 17504044], GlutaMAX [Gibco 35050– 061], Pen-Strep [Gibco 15140–122]) in TC-treated 12- or 6-well plates coated with 0.05 mg/mL Poly-D-lysine (Sigma-Aldrich A-003-E). At 3–4 DIV, neurons were treated with 0.5 μM AraC. For all experiments using cultured cortical neurons, neurons were collected at 12 DIV. For H2BE overexpression experiments, neurons were infected with H2BE-expressing lentivirus at 10 DIV overnight, media was replaced and neurons were treated at 11 DIV, prior to collection 24 h after treatment.

## Pharmacological treatments
The following drugs were diluted into neuronal culture media at the indicated concentrations: brain-derived neurotrophic factor (BDNF; 50 ng/mL, PeproTech 450–02), tetrodotoxin (TTX; 1 μM, Tocris 1069), D-2-amino-5-phosphonovalerate (D-AP5; 100 μM, Tocris 0106), bicuculline (20 μM, Tocris 0130), flavopiridol (FP; 300nM in DMSO, Sigma Aldrich F3055.

## RT-qPCR
cDNA was prepared with a high-capacity cDNA reverse transcription kit (Applied Biosystems 4368813), and quantitative PCR was performed with Power SYBR Green PCR master mix (Applied Biosystems 4367659). Data was analyzed using the common base method. 

## Histone extraction
Primary neurons were washed 1× with cold sterile 1× DPBS and collected in 1mL cold 0.4N H2SO4. Samples were incubated overnight on ice at 4°C. Following the overnight incubation, samples were pelleted for 10 min at 18,000g at 4°C and the supernatant was transferred to a new tube. Trichloroacetic acid was added to 25% by volume, and the cells were left on ice at 4°C overnight. Cells were again pelleted 10 min at 18,000g at 4°C, and the supernatant was discarded. The pellet was washed 3× with ice-cold acetone. After the third wash, samples were air-dried. The pellet was resuspended in molecular biology-grade H2O, incubated at 50°C for 30min, and then sonicated in a Biorupter for 10 min (settings: High, on/off = 0.5min/0.5min, 4°C). The 50°C incubation and Biorupter sonication were repeated 1–2X until samples were fully solubilized. Protein concentration was measured using the Bradford assay.

## Western blotting
Histone samples were mixed with 5× Loading Buffer (5% SDS, 0.3M Tris pH 6.8, 1.1mM Bromophenol blue, 37.5% glycerol) and boiled for 10 min. Protein was resolved by 16% Tris-glycine SDS-PAGE, followed by transfer to a 0.45-μm PVDF membrane (Sigma-Aldrich IPVH00010) for immunoblotting. Membranes were blocked for 1 h at RT in 5% milk in 0.1% TBST and probed with primary antibody overnight at 4C. The following primary antibodies were used for western blot analysis: rabbit anti-H2BE (Millipore ABE1384, 1:2000) rabbit anti-H2B (abcam ab1790, 1:10,000). Membranes were incubated with secondary antibody for 1 h at RT. The following secondary antibody was used for western blotting: goat anti-rabbit HRP (abcam ab6721, 1:5000).

## Environmental enrichment
Wildtype cage-mates were moved into an enriched environment or remained in their standard home cage. Enriched environments consisted of a large rat cage with Alpha-Dri bedding enriched with a tunnel, hut, water dish, Nestlet and other toys to interact with, as well as a vanilla scent. Mice remained in the enriched environment for 24h before tissue was collected.

## CUT&Tag-sequencing

## Library preparation & sequencing
Input samples were ~400K primary cortical neurons per biological replicate. CUT&Tag was performed according to published protocols. Concanavalin A-coated beads (Bangs Laboratories BP531) were washed twice with 1mL cold filter-sterilized Binding Buffer (20mM HEPES pH 7.9, 10mM KCl, 1mM CaCl2, 1mM MnCl2) and resuspended in 11uL/reaction Binding Buffer. Cells were collected in 500uL room temperature Wash Buffer (20mM HEPES pH 7.5, 150mM NaCl, 0.5mM spermidine, supplemented by EDTA-free protease inhibitor [Roche 4693159001]), pelleted at 600 g for 3 min at room temp., washed once with 500uL Wash Buffer (room temp.), pelleted again, and resuspended in 100uL/reaction Wash Buffer (room temp.). To bind cells to ConA beads, 10uL activated beads were added to 100uL cells per reaction, vortexed briefly, and incubated for 10 min at room temperature. Beads were collected on a magnet, supernatant discarded, and beads were resuspended in 50uL ice-cold Antibody Buffer (0.05% digitonin, 2mM EDTA, 0.1% BSA in Wash Buffer). To each reaction, 1ug primary antibody against the target protein was added (anti-H2BE [Millipore ABE1384] or rabbit IgG [Sino Biological CR1], vortexed briefly, and incubated overnight at 4°C on a rocking shaker. Beads were collected on a magnet, supernatant discarded, and beads were resuspended in 50uL secondary antibody (guinea pig anti-rabbit IgG (antibodies-online ABIN101961, diluted 1:100 in Dig-Wash Buffer [0.05% digitonin in Wash Buffer]). Samples were then incubated for 1hr at room temperature on a nutator. On a magnet, beads were washed 2× with 200uL Dig-Wash Buffer. Beads were collected on a magnet, supernatant discarded, and beads were resuspended in 50uL loaded pA-Tn5 adapter complex (Diagenode C01070001-T30, diluted 1:250 in Dig-300 Buffer [20mM HEPES pH 7.5, 300mM NaCl, 0.5mM spermidine, 0.01% digitonin]). Samples were then incubated for 1hr at room temperature on a nutator. On a magnet, beads were washed 2× with 200uL Dig-300 Buffer. Beads were collected on a magnet, supernatant discarded, and beads were resuspended in 300uL Tagmentation Buffer (10mM MgCl2 in Dig-300 buffer). Samples were then incubated for 1hr in a 37°C heat block. To stop tagmentation, 10uL 0.5M EDTA, 3uL 10% SDS, and 2.5uL 20mg/mL Proteinase K were added to each reaction and mixed by vortexing. Protein was digested for 1hr in a 55°C heat block. DNA was isolated using Zymo DNA Clean & Concentrator Kit (D4013) and eluted in 22uL molecular biology grade H2O. A universal i5 primer and uniquely barcoded i7 primer were ligated and libraries were amplified by PCR with NEBNext High-Fidelity 2x PCR Master Mix (NEB M0541). Library clean-up was performed with AMPure XP beads (Beckman A63880) and eluted off beads in 25uL Tris-HCl pH 8. Prior to sequencing, library size distribution was confirmed by capillary electrophoresis using an Agilent 4200 TapeStation with high sensitivity D1000 reagents (5067–5585), and libraries were quantified by qPCR using a KAPA Library Quantification Kit (Roche 07960140001). Libraries were sequenced on an Illumina NextSeq550 instrument (42-bp read length, paired end).

## RNA-sequencing

## Library preparation & sequencing
RNA was isolated from primary cortical neurons using Zymo Quick-RNA Miniprep Plus Kit (R1057). Prior to library preparation, RNA integrity was confirmed using an Agilent 4200 TapeStation with high sensitivity RNA reagents (5067–5579). Sequencing libraries were prepared using the TruSeq Stranded mRNA kit (Illumina 20020595), except for H2BE overexpression RNA-seq in , which was prepared using the NEBNext Ultra II RNA Library Prep Kit (NEB E7775). Prior to sequencing, library size distribution was confirmed by capillary electrophoresis using an Agilent 4200 TapeStation with high sensitivity D1000 reagents (5067–5585), and libraries were quantified by qPCR using a KAPA Library Quantification Kit (Roche 07960140001). Libraries were sequenced on an Illumina NextSeq1000 instrument (66-bp read length, paired end).

## Multi-electrode array (MEA)
Neurons were plated on CytoView MEA 48-well plates (Axion BioSystems M768-tMEA-48W). Prior to plating, plates were coated with 50 μg/mL poly-D-lysine (Sigma-Aldrich A-003-E) in borate buffer pH 8.4, incubated overnight at 37°C, washed 4× with H2O, and air dried overnight. After air drying, wells were coated with 20 μg/mL laminin (Roche 11243217001) in ice-cold Opti-MEM (Gibco 51985091) and incubated 4h at 37°C. Immediately prior to seeding, laminin was removed from wells and 80K neurons were seeded on the CytoView plate. Recordings were performed using an Axion Maestro Pro multiwell microelectrode array with 5% CO2 at 37°C. Baseline recordings were taken after 18 days in vitro. Following baseline recordings, BDNF was added to the wells, and the MEA plate was returned to the incubator for an additional 48h. AxIS software (Axion Biosystems) was used for the extraction of spikes and bursts. Burst activity was defined as a minimum of 5 spikes with a maximum inter-spike interval of 100 ms. 

## Electrophysiology
Mice were deeply anesthetized and trans-cardially perfused with ice-cold aCSF containing (in mM): 124 NaCl, 2.5 KCl, 1.2 HaH2PO4, 24 NaHCO3, 5 HEPES, 13 Glucose, 1.3 MgSO4, 2.5 CaCl2. After perfusion, the brain was quickly removed, submerged and coronally sectioned on a vibratome (VT1200s, Leica) at 400 μm thickness in ice-cold aCSF. Slices were transferred to NMDG based recovery solution at 32°C of the following composition (in mM): 92 NMDG, 2.5 KCl, 1.2 NaH2PO4, 30 NaHCO3, 20 HEPES, 25 Glucose, 5 Sodium ascorbate, 2 Thiourea, 3 Sodium pyruvate, 10 MgSO4, 0.5 CaCl2. After 12–15 min recovery, slices were transferred to room temperature aCSF chamber (20°C–22°C) and left for at least 1 h before recording. Following recovery, slices were placed in a recording chamber, fully submerged at a flow rate of 1.4–1.6 mL/min and maintained at 29°C–30°C in oxygenated (95% O2, 5% CO2) aCSF, with 100μM Picrotoxin included.
In extracellular recordings, recording pipettes were fabricated by pulling borosilicate glass (World Precision Instruments, TW150–3). These pipettes exhibited a tip resistance ranging from 4 to 5 MΩ when filled with an aCSF. Stimulus pipettes were made by pulling theta glasses (TG150–4, Warner Instrument) and adjusting the tip size to 30–50 μm. For measurements of evoked post-synaptic response in Schaffer-collateral pathway, Hippocampal layers were identified using IR-DIC optics (BX51, Olympus), with visual guidance. The stimulus electrode was positioned on the surface of the striatum radiatum (s.r.) from the CA3 direction. A recording electrode was placed on the postsynaptic site in CA1, opposite the stimulus electrode.
Brief electrical pulses (0.2 ms) were delivered on each sweep to measure post-synaptic responses every 10 s. We identified the field excitatory postsynaptic potential (fEPSP) based on the temporal separation of the fiber volley and then measured the fEPSP slope of the 10–90% range from baseline to peak.
The stimulation intensity was determined as 30% of the maximum response intensity obtained from input-output (I-O) curve measurements. A stable baseline was established by recording fEPSP responses for 10 min before LTP induction, and all subsequent responses were normalized to this baseline. For LTP induction, we applied a 2x high-frequency stimulation (HFS) protocol consisting of two trains of 100 Hz stimulation delivered 10 s apart. Following LTP induction, fEPSP responses were monitored for 60 min to assess the magnitude and persistence of potentiation.
Recordings were performed using a MultiClamp 700B (Molecular Devices) and Igor7 (WaveMetrics; recording artist addon, developed by Richard C Gerkin, github: https://github.com/rgerkin/recording-artist), filtered at 2.8 kHz and digitized at 10 kHz. Axon terminals were stimulated with brief (0.2 ms) pulses using isoflex isolator (Voltage control). Data were analyzed using Igor7.

## Single-nucleus Drop-sequencing (snDrop-seq)

## Nuclei isolation
Snap-frozen brain tissues were homogenized in 1mL Buffer A (0.25M sucrose, 50mM Tris-HCl pH7.4, 25mM KCl, 5mM MgCl2 supplemented by EDTA-free protease inhibitor [Roche 4693159001]) using a pre-chilled dounce and pestle. Homogenate was then transferred to a pre-chilled 15mL conical tube and mixed with 6mL Buffer B (2.3M sucrose, 50mM Tris-HCl pH7.4, 25mM KCl, 5mM MgCl2). An additional 2mL Buffer A was used to rinse leftover homogenate from the dounce and combined with the sample. The homogenate was gently transferred to a pre-chilled 15mL ultracentrifuge tube containing 2mL Buffer C (1.8M sucrose, 50mM Tris-HCl pH7.4, 25mM KCl, 5mM MgCl2). Nuclei were pelleted at 100,000 × g for 1.5hr at 4C using a SWI41 rotor. The supernatant was discarded and 1.5mL Buffer D (0.01% BSA in 1× PBS with 0.5U/uL RNase inhibitor [Lucigen 30281–2]) was gently added to the nuclei pellet and incubated on ice 20min. The nuclei pellet were resuspended and the suspension was transferred to a 1.5mL lo-bind tube.

## Library preparation and sequencing
The single-nucleus suspensions were individually diluted to a concentration of 100 nuclei/mL in DPBS containing 0.01% BSA. Approximately 1.5 mL of this single-nucleus suspension was loaded for each sNucDrop-seq run. The single-nucleus suspension was then co-encapsulated with barcoded beads (ChemGenes) using an Aquapel-coated PDMS microfluidic device (mFluidix) connected to syringe pumps (KD Scientific) via polyethylene tubing with an inner diameter of 0.38mm (Scientific Commodities). Barcoded beads were resuspended in lysis buffer (200 mM Tris-HCl pH8.0, 20 mM EDTA, 6% Ficoll PM-400 (GE Healthcare/Fisher Scientific), 0.2% Sarkosyl (Sigma-Aldrich), and 50 mM DTT (Fermentas; freshly made on the day of run) at a concentration of 120 beads/mL. The flow rates for nuclei and beads were set to 4,000 mL/hr, while QX200 droplet generation oil (Bio-rad) was run at 15,000 mL/hr. A typical run lasts 20 min. Droplet breakage with Perfluoro-1-octanol (Sigma-Aldrich), reverse transcription and exonuclease I treatment were performed, as previously described, with minor modifications. For up to 120,000 beads, 200 μL of reverse transcription (RT) mix (1x Maxima RT buffer (ThermoFisher), 4% Ficoll PM-400, 1 mM dNTPs (Clontech), 1 U/mL RNase inhibitor, 2.5 mM Template Switch Oligo (TSO: AAGCAGTGGTATCAACGCAGAGTGAATrGrGrG), and 10 U/mL Maxima H Minus Reverse Transcriptase (ThermoFisher)) were added. The RT reaction was incubated at room temperature for 30min, followed by incubation at 42C for 120 min. To determine an optimal number of PCR cycles for amplification of cDNA, an aliquot of 6,000 beads was amplified by PCR in a volume of 50 μL (25 μL of 2x KAPA HiFi hotstart readymix (KAPA biosystems), 0.4 μL of 100 mM TSO-PCR primer (AAGCAGTGGTATCAACGCAGAGT, 24.6 μL of nuclease-free water) with the following thermal cycling parameter (95C for 3 min; 4 cycles of 98C for 20 s, 65C for 45 s, 72C for 3 min; 9 cycles of 98C for 20 s, 67C for 45 s, 72C for 3 min; 72C for 5 min, hold at 4C). After two rounds of purification with 0.6x SPRISelect beads (Beckman Coulter), amplified cDNA was eluted with 10 μL of water. 10% of amplified cDNA was used to perform real-time PCR analysis (1 μL of purified cDNA, 0.2 μL of 25 mM TSO-PCR primer, 5 μL of 2x KAPA FAST qPCR readymix, and 3.8 μL of water) to determine the additional number of PCR cycles needed for optimal cDNA amplification (Applied Biosystems QuantStudio 7 Flex). We then prepared PCR reactions per total number of barcoded beads collected for each sNucDrop-seq run, using 6,000 beads per 50- μL PCR reaction, and ran the aforementioned program to amplify the cDNA for 4 + 10 to 12 cycles. We then tagmented cDNA using the Nextera XT DNA sample preparation kit (Illumina, FC-131–1096), starting with 550 pg of cDNA pooled in equal amounts, from all PCR reactions for a given run. Following cDNA tagmentation, we further amplified the tagmented cDNA libraries with 12 enrichment PCR cycles using the Illumina Nextera XT i7 primers along with the P5-TSO hybrid primer (AATGATACGGCGACCACCGAGATCTACACGCCTGTCCGCGGAAGCAGTGGTATCAACGCAGAGT*A*C). After quality control analysis by Qubit 3.0 (Invitrogen) and a Bioanalyzer (Agilent), libraries were sequenced on an Illumina NextSeq 500 instrument using the 75-cycle High Output v2 Kit (Illumina). We loaded the library at 2.0 pM and provided Custom Read1 Primer (GCCTGTCCGCGGAAGCAGTGGTATCAACGCAGAGTAC) at 0.3 mM in position 7 of the reagent cartridge. The sequencing configuration was 20 bp (Read1), 8 bp (Index1), and 60 bp (Read2).

## QUANTIFICATION AND STATISTICAL ANALYSIS

## CUT&Tag-sequencing

## Data processing and analysis
Reads were mapped to Mus musculus genome build mm10 with Bowtie2 (v2.4.5). For primary culture data, six million reads from each biological replicate were subset and each condition was then merged across biological replicates (SAMtools v1.15). Metaplots were generated using ngs.plot (v2.63). Heatmaps were generated using deepTools (v3.5.1). Peaks were called using MACS3 (v3.0.0b1) and annotated using Homer (v4.10). For downstream analysis, we used a Peak Score cutoff of 25 and removed peaks that were assigned to ‘ChrUn’ (unknown chromosome) by Homer. The R package GenomicDistributions (v1.6.0) was used to analyze the genomic distribution of peaks. IGV tools (2.12.3) was used to generate genome browser views. For tissue data, 2 male and 2 female replicates were used per condition with all reads merged for downstream analysis.
To compare CUT&Tag signal to gene expression, normalized read counts from RNA-sequencing of WT primary neuronal cultures (see RNA-sequencing methods section) were used to generate gene lists by expression level. Genes with base mean <3 were defined as ‘not expressed’. The remaining genes were divided into 2 bins (by base mean) to define ‘low expression’ and ‘high expression’.

## Gene ontology
For gene ontology analysis, gene names were assigned to peak coordinates using Homer. PANTHER , (v18.0) was used to perform an overrepresentation test against the biological process complete ontology using default parameters. The Mus musculus genome was used as a background gene list. For conciseness and visualization, parent terms were excluded and only the most specific GO terms were plotted.

## Homer motif analysis
For motif analysis, Homer was used to identify enriched ‘Known motifs’ in H2BE peaks found at the TSS of genes under control conditions that were lost upon stimulation conditions.

## RNA-sequencing

## Data processing and analysis
Reads were mapped to Mus musculus genome build mm10 with Star (v2.7.9a). The R packages DESeq2 (v1.38.3) and limma (v3.54.2) via edgeR (v3.40.2) were used to perform differential gene expression analysis. We defined genes as differentially expressed where FDR<0.05 and absolute fold change ≥ 1.5. Volcano plots were generated using VolcaNoseR. IGV tools (2.12.3) was used to generate genome browser views. Overlap significance of gene lists was determined by hypergeometric testing. For WT vs. KO comparisons, differential gene expression analysis for interactions was performed using DESeq2. The input design matrix for model fitting factored genotype and treatment (design = ~genotype + treatment + genotype:treatment). The DESeq function estimates size factors using the standard mean ratio and parametric dispersion fitting. Differential expression was calculated using a generalized linear model with negative binomial GLM fitting accounting for individual effects and the interaction term. Genes exhibiting a significant interaction from the Wald test were extracted from the results table using a contrast specifying the interaction term (0,0,0,−1). For H2BE overexpression comparisons, ComBat-ref. was used for batch correction between biological replicates and differential gene expression analysis was performed using DESeq2.

## Gene set enrichment analysis (GSEA)
The R package FGSEA was used to perform pre-ranked gene set enrichment analysis (GSEA) , based on log2 fold changes obtained from DESeq2 differential expression analysis. The immediate-early gene set was defined in Tullai et al. 2007. 

## Single-nucleus Drop-sequencing (snDrop-seq)

## Data preprocessing
Paired end sequencing reads were processed using 10× Genomics Cellranger v5.0.1. Reads were aligned to the mm10 genome optimized for single cell sequencing through a hybrid intronic read recovery approach (https://doi.org/10.1038/s41592-023-02003-w). In short, reads with valid barcodes were trimmed by TSO sequence, and aligned using STAR v2.7.1 with MAPQ adjustment. Intronic reads were removed and high-confidence mapped reads were filtered for multimapping and UMI correction. Empty GEMs were also removed as part of the pipeline. Initial dimensionality reduction and clustering was performed prior to processing to enable batch correction and removal of cell free mRNA using SoupX (https://doi.org/10.1093/gigascience/giaa151). Raw expression matrices with counted, individual nuclei UMI and genes were used for subsequent steps and filtering by QC metrics.

## Clustering and merging by condition and comparison
Raw matrices for each individual replicate per condition were converted to Seurat objects using Seurat 5.0.1 and filtered to remove UMIs with thresholds of >200 minimum features, >250 genes detected per nuclei, <20% mitochondrial reads, and <2% ribosomal reads. Replicates were merged to generate objects per condition for the subsequent steps. Each dataset was normalized using the default scale factor of 10000, variable selection was performed using 2000 features, then scaled and centered using all features without regressing any variables. Dimensionality reduction with PCA used the first 30 principal components and the nearest-neighbor graph construction used the first 10 dimensions. Clustering was next performed using a resolution of 0.4 before layers corresponding to each replicate were integrated using CCAIntegration with a k weight of 60 and then rejoined. The dataset per condition was then dimensionally reduced using the integrated CCA at with 30 dimensions and the same resolution of 0.4. ScType (https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-022-28803-w) was used for automated, de novo cell type identification of the clusters followed by manual curation for clusters with low confidence scores. Each automatically assigned cluster was manually validated using previously generated cluster identity labels. Differential clustering analysis was performed using the scProportionTest R package. For all comparisons, the objects per condition were merged and processed using the same integration methodology above to scale and normalize between all incorporated samples. Pseudobulk differentially expressed genes were identified using DElegate (https://github.com/cancerbits/DElegate?tab=readme-ov-file), a wrapper for EdgeR on single nuclei data, with a fold change threshold of 1.5 and Benjamini-Hochberg adjusted p value ≤.05. Counts were aggregated by individual mice per condition under the orig.ident identity, then pairwise comparisons were computed using quasi-likelihood dispersion with glmQLFit through the findDE function.

## Modular activity scoring and subsetting
Modular activity scores were calculated for excitatory and inhibitory neurons using AddModuleScore with the list of the 25 putative immediate-early genes (Arc, Bdnf, Cdkn1a, Dnajb5, Egr1, Egr2, Egr4, Fos, Fosb, Fosl2, Homer1, Junb, Nefm, Npas4, Nr4a1, Nr4a2, Nr4a3, Nrn1, Ntrk2, Rheb, Sgsm1, Syt4, Vgf) against a control feature score of 5. Nuclei with an activity score over zero were isolated as IEG+. Those under the 25th percentile threshold were marked as IEG-. Each IEG score group was remerged and RNA layers were jointed before FindMarkers was used to perform all IEG+/IEG-pairwise comparisons with findDE.

## CellChat
CellChat (v2.1.0) was used to infer and compare cell-cell communication networks across the four conditions. The full manually curated database of mouse ligand-receptor interactions (v2) was analyzed against the combined single nuclei dataset by projecting the gene expression data onto the protein-protein interaction networking using a diffusion process to reduce dropout effects of lowly-expressed ligands or receptors. Significant communication pathways were assigned to each dataset by performing a permutation test via the ‘trimean’ statistical method, approximating 25% truncated me ans. The identified interactions were further filtered by only including those found in groups of 10 or more cells.

## Gene ontology
Gene ontology analysis was performed using gProfiler g:GOSt. Each gene list was analyzed using an over-representation test against the gene ontology biological process database with a Benjamini-Hochberg FDR correction for multiple testing correction. Only terms with a size between 0 and 2000 genes were selected for specificity.

## Statistical details
All statistical details can be found in figure legends and/or in figures, including statistical tests used and replicate information, and data visualization details.

## Supplementary Material
1SUPPLEMENTAL INFORMATION
Supplemental information can be found online at https://doi.org/10.1016/j.celrep.2025.116694.

## ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We thank Drs. Catherine Dulac and Stephen Santoro for sharing reagents and mouse lines. E.R.F. was supported by NIH grant F31MH126576. A.P. was supported by NIH grant T32-ES019851. Research was supported by NIH grants 1DP2MH129985, R01NS134755, R00MH111836, and U01HG012047, and by the Klingenstein-Simons Fellowship from the Esther A. & Joseph Klingenstein Fund and the Simons Foundation, the Alfred P. Sloan Foundation Research Fellowship (FG-2020–13529), the Brain and Behavior Research Foundation NARSAD Young Investigator Award, Autism Spectrum Program of Excellence (ASPE), and pilot funding from the Epigenetics Institute at the University of Pennsylvania. MEA equipment was provided by NIH Shared Equipment Grant 1S10OD032363.
DECLARATION OF INTERESTS
The authors declare no competing interests.
 

## Highlights
Histone variant H2BE is depleted by long-term increases in neuronal activity
H2BE-knockout neurons have blunted transcriptional responses to stimuli
Loss of H2BE blocks homeostatic scaling responses in neurons
H2BE-knockout mice have aberrant transcriptional responses to seizure induction