pmcACS Pharmacol Transl SciACS Pharmacol Transl Sci3799acsptsptACS Pharmacology & Translational Science2575-9108American Chemical SocietyPMC10000013PMC10000013.110000013100122553692311010.1021/acsptsci.2c001811ReviewAssociation of
COVID-19 with Comorbidities: An Update
ChatterjeeSayan NallaLakshmi Vineela SharmaMonika SharmaNishant SinghAditya A. MalimFehmina Mushtaque GhatageManasi MukarramMohd PawarAbhijeet PariharNidhi AryaNeha https://orcid.org/0000-0003-3375-774XKhairnarAmit †Department
of Pharmacology and Toxicology, National
Institute of Pharmaceutical Education and Research (NIPER), Ahmedabad, Gujarat 382355, India‡Department
of Pharmacy, Koneru Lakshmaiah Education
Foundation, Vaddeswaram, Andhra Pradesh 522302, India§Department
of Translational Medicine, All India Institute
of Medical Sciences (AIIMS), Bhopal, Bhopal 462020, India∥International
Clinical Research Center, St. Anne’s
University Hospital Brno, Brno 602 00, Czech Republic⊥ICRC-FNUSA Brno 656 91, Czech Republic#Department
of Physiology, Faculty of Medicine, Masaryk
University, Kamenice
753/5, 62500 Brno, Czechia*Phone: +91 7089202021. Email: neha.arya@gmail.com.*Phone: +91 9284349396. Email: amitkhairnar520@gmail.com.27022023100320236343121733435407092022270220241003202304072025© 2023 American Chemical Society2023American Chemical Societyhttps://pubs.acs.org/page/vi/chemistry_coronavirus_researchThis article is made available via the ACS COVID-19 subset for unrestricted RESEARCH re-use and analyses in any form or by any means with acknowledgement of the original source. These permissions are granted for the duration of the World Health Organization (WHO) declaration of COVID-19 as a global pandemic. 
Coronavirus disease (COVID-19) is caused by severe acute
respiratory
syndrome-coronavirus-2 (SARS-CoV-2) which was identified in Wuhan,
China in December 2019 and jeopardized human lives. It spreads at
an unprecedented rate worldwide, with serious and still-unfolding
health conditions and economic ramifications. Based on the clinical
investigations, the severity of COVID-19 appears to be highly variable,
ranging from mild to severe infections including the death of an infected
individual. To add to this, patients with comorbid conditions such
as age or concomitant illnesses are significant predictors of the
disease’s severity and progression. SARS-CoV-2 enters inside
the host cells through ACE2 (angiotensin converting enzyme2) receptor
expression; therefore, comorbidities associated with higher ACE2 expression
may enhance the virus entry and the severity of COVID-19 infection.
It has already been recognized that age-related comorbidities such
as Parkinson’s disease, cancer, diabetes, and cardiovascular
diseases may lead to life-threatening illnesses in COVID-19-infected
patients. COVID-19 infection results in the excessive release of cytokines,
called “cytokine storm”, which causes the worsening
of comorbid disease conditions. Different mechanisms of COVID-19 infections
leading to intensive care unit (ICU) admissions or deaths have been
hypothesized. This review provides insights into the relationship
between various comorbidities and COVID-19 infection. We further discuss
the potential pathophysiological correlation between COVID-19 disease
and comorbidities with the medical interventions for comorbid patients.
Toward the end, different therapeutic options have been discussed
for COVID-19-infected comorbid patients.

COVID-19comorbiditydiabetescancerParkinson’s diseasecardiovascular diseaseNational Institute of Pharmaceutical Education and Research, Ahmedabad10.13039/100019125NADepartment of Biotechnology, Ministry of Science and Technology, India10.13039/501100001407BT/RLF/Re-entry/24/2017pmc-status-qastatus0pmc-status-liveyespmc-status-embargonopmc-status-releasedyespmc-prop-open-accessyespmc-prop-olfnopmc-prop-manuscriptnopmc-prop-legally-suppressednopmc-prop-has-pdfyespmc-prop-has-supplementnopmc-prop-pdf-onlynopmc-prop-suppress-copyrightnopmc-prop-is-real-versionnopmc-prop-is-scanned-articlenopmc-prop-preprintnopmc-prop-in-epmcyesdocument-id-old-9pt2c00181document-id-new-14pt2c00181ccc-priceThis article is made available via the ACS COVID-19 subset for unrestricted RESEARCH re-use and analyses in any form or by any means with acknowledgement of the original source. These permissions are granted for the duration of the World Health Organization (WHO) declaration of COVID-19 as a global pandemic.
1

## Introduction
Coronavirus disease (COVID-19)
is a communicable disease associated
with the dysfunction of the upper respiratory tract caused by severe
acute respiratory syndrome-coronavirus-2 (SARS-CoV-2). The city of
Wuhan, China was the first to document pneumonia cases of unknown
etiology at the end of December 2019. It
was spread to around 188 nations, resulting in many confirmed cases
and severe health and socioeconomic consequences. The total number
of confirmed cases worldwide reached 574,818,625 with 6,395,451 fatalities
by the fourth week of July 2022; this data was presented by the Coronavirus
Resource Center at Johns Hopkins University. 
Ejaz and colleagues reported that SARS-CoV-2 infections could
cause
various symptoms, from mild diseases that go away independently to
dangerous ones that affect many organs. There are mainly four types
of coronavirus (CoV), classified as α-CoV, β-CoV, γ-CoV,
and δ-CoV. Of these, only α-CoV and β-CoV have been
shown to cause animal sickness. Further,
β-CoV was responsible for SARS in 2003 and the Middle East respiratory
syndrome (MERS) in 2012. According to
several genomic studies, SARS-CoV-2 is an encapsulated virus with
a positive sense-RNA genome. The genome of SARS-CoV-2 is approximately
96% similar to that of bat CoV RaTG13. Furthermore, the genomic sequence
and evolution of the analysis of SARS-CoV-2 have a 79.5% genomic similarity
to the severe acute respiratory syndrome-coronavirus (SARS-CoV). 
SARS-CoV-2 enters human cells by attaching
to the angiotensin convertase
enzyme2 (ACE2) receptor of the upper respiratory tract, which acts as an entry point for this virus. , Although the virus travels by intranasal and oral pathways, it affects
olfactory sensory neurons. Eventually, it infects the central nervous
system (CNS), causing hyposmia (loss of sensation of smell) and hypogeusia (loss of taste) as well as other sensory symptoms. , Although SARS-CoV-2 infects people of all ages and genders, research
shows that individuals with comorbidities are more susceptible to
COVID-19 infection. Further evidence suggests that male patients 50
years of age with or without comorbidities show a significantly increased
risk of death. According to the Centers
for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC), USA, individuals aged 65
and above accounted for around 30% of COVID-19 infections, 45% of
hospitalizations, 53% of intensive care unit (ICU) admissions, and
80% of deaths. In addition, after COVID-19 infection, those with a
compromised immune system due to cancer treatments or steroids requiring
hospitalization are prone to mortality. Given those the events of ICU admissions or mortality following
COVID-19 infection increase. It is vital to comprehend the mechanisms
and treatment alternatives that are most suited for marginalized populations. Based on clinical data on COVID-19, comorbidities
like cardiovascular disease (CVD) including hypertension and diabetes
have been the most prevalent. , In this review, we
focused on the link between COVID-19 and comorbidities such as Parkinson’s
disease (PD), cancer, diabetes, and CVD. We also looked at epidemiological
data, pathological relationships, and potential treatment options
for COVID-19-infected people with comorbidities.

2

## Methodology
As was highlighted, this
review illustrates the relationship between
several comorbidities and COVID-19. A literature search was conducted
online using several databases and search engines like PubMed to exploit
this. The keywords such as COVID-19, SARS-CoV-2, and comorbidity in
COVID-19 were used to get the most relevant articles that support
this study. On the other hand, the relationship between PD, cancer,
diabetes mellitus, CVD, and hypertension with COVID-19 articles were
also used to accomplish this study. Besides, the rest of the articles
with mismatched or irrelevant keywords were not considered for this
study. All the publications were examined and referenced based on
their relevancy and compatibility with the current topic of discussion.
We used PubMed’s “Boolean Operators” (AND, NOT,
and OR) search criterion to acquire relevant search results for this. depicts the strategy
for obtaining the data and subsequently filtering the articles, and provides the keywords
used for searching through Pubmed. The significant comorbidities of
COVID-19, such as PD, cancer, diabetes, and CVD, have been included
after a literature search and screening of published research articles,
meta-analyses, and systemic review studies. In this study, 198 articles
were discussed in depth to show how these significant comorbidities
were to blame for hospitalization, ICU admission, and mortality in
most cases. In addition, we looked at the molecular and cellular mechanisms
of COVID-19 and how they relate to its pathophysiology, linked with
substantial comorbidities. For instance, cytokine storm is typical
of all the main comorbidities described above. We looked for several
inflammatory cytokines connected to COVID-19-related comorbidities
in this context. Then, we checked the further information on clinical
trials web site to learn more about the
clinical studies that used the repurposed drugs for the appropriate
comorbidities. Furthermore, we have also included future projections
as well as several treatment strategies for each comorbidity. Patients
with COVID-19 have received treatment using a wide range of therapeutic
modalities globally. In the absence of a vaccine or a SARS-CoV neutralizing
antibody, convalescent plasma therapy and pharmaceutical repurposing
lead the charge.
 
3

## Variants of SARS-CoV-2
During genomic
replication, a virus’s genetic code changes
(gene mutation), a phenomenon also prevalent with the SARS-CoV-2 virus,
wherein constant gene mutations have led to many variants (lineage)
of the same virus over time. A lineage is a set of genetically related
viral variants that share a common ancestor. SARS-CoV-2 has several
lineages, all of which produce COVID-19 infection. Some lineage changes
propagate more rapidly and easily than others, perhaps contributing
to make COVID-19 cases more common. A rise in the number of cases
have imposed a higher burden on healthcare resources, resulting in
additional hospitalizations and, perhaps, fatalities. In the USA,
epidemiological investigations into viral genetic sequence-based monitoring
and laboratory research are routinely conducted to track SARS-CoV-2
genetic lineages. The SARS-CoV-2 Interagency Group (SIG) of the US
government categorized Omicron as a Variant of Concern on November
30, 2021 (Control and Prevention, 2021). According to SIG, there are
four types of SARS-CoV-2 variants: 1. Variant Being Monitored
(VBM): Alpha (B.1.1.7 and Q lineages), Beta (B.1.351 and
descendent lineages), Gamma (P.1 and descendent lineages), Epsilon
(B.1.427 and B.1.429), Eta (B.1.525), Iota (B.1.526), Kappa (B.1.617.1),
1.617.3, Mu (B.1.621, B.1.621.1), Zeta (P.2); 2. Variant of
Interest (VOI): None of the variant(s) yet identified; 3.
A variant of Concern (VOC): Delta (B.1.617.2 and
AY lineages), Omicron (B.1.1.529 and BA lineages); 4. A variants
of High Consequence (VOHC): This sort of variation is yet
to be detected internationally. 
Omicron is constantly evolving mutations even after 3 years of
the pandemic and still giving rise to several new subvariants, such
as BA.2.75 and BA.4.6. Importantly, several of these new variations,
including BA.2.3.20, BA.2.75.2, CA.1, BR.2, BN.1, BM.1.1.1, BU.1,
BQ.1.1, and XBB, exhibit notable growth
advantages over BA.5. Recently reported
in the second week of October 2022 is the name of the latest lineages
variant of Omicron is XBB and sublineages XBB.1 (S:252 V) found in
major regions such as China, United Kindom (UK), Europe, and North
America, resulting in all these countries announcing that they are
now going on nationwide lockdown-like restriction once again due to
the sudden surge of the new COVID variant. XBB and XBB.1 (S:252 V)
are mainly found in Bangladesh, Singapore, and India.
The prevalence
of Delta and Omicron (BA.1) coinfections and Omicron
lineages BA.1 and BA.2 coinfections were estimated at 0.18% and 0.26%,
respectively. Among 6,242 hospitalized patients, ICU admission rates
were 1.64%, 4.81, and 15.38% in Omicron, Delta, and Delta/Omicron
patients, respectively. Among patients admitted to the ICU, there
were no reports of BA.1/BA.2 coinfections. A total of 21 patients
(39.6%) of the 53 coinfected patients missed vaccinations. Even though
SARS-CoV-2 coinfections were rare in their clinical study, it is still
essential to accurately identify them so that they can figure out
how they affect patients and how likely they will make recombinants. 
One clinical study has been conducted
in France to detect the prevalence
of SARS-CoV-2 coinfection during spread of the Delta, Omicron, Delta/Omicron
variant. This study was held from December 2021 to February 2022.
They tested the effectiveness of four sets of whole-genome sequencing
primers using 11 blends of Delta/Omicron isolates at multiple ratios,
and they developed a bioinformatics technique that is impartial for
identifying coinfections involving various genetic SARS-CoV-2 lineages.
Applied to 21,387 samples collected from 6 December 2021 to 27 February
2022, random genomic surveillance in France, they detected 53 coinfections
between different lineages.
The Delta variation was the most
susceptible and transmissible
of all of these variants, that resulted in an increase in the percentage
of fatalities as well as comorbidities such as hospitalization of
older persons. The Omicron variant may spread more quickly than other
variants, such as Delta; however, Omicron was less lethal compared
to the Delta variant. These differences in response could be attributed
to many factors such as the less efficient cleaving of the S protein
fraction of omicron and more α helix stabilization than the
delta variant. 

4

## COVID-19 Risk and Epidemiology in Relation to
Comorbidity
4.1

## Aging and Comorbidities
COVID-19
infection is associated with aging, which is a major risk factor for
severe illness and mortality, especially for those who are in long-term
care facilities. In addition, people at any age with serious underlying
medical conditions are more at risk of getting COVID-19 infection.
The elderly, SARS-CoV-2 infected persons with comorbidities, including
PD, diabetes, cancer, and hypertension (HTN) and CVD, are at higher
risk of death. Early evidence from several epidemiological data sets
shows that the COVID-19 case fatality ratio (CFR) increases with age. reflects the number
of CFRs in various countries; overall, the CFR of China and USA is
2.3% and 2.7%, respectively, while the global CFR was at 2.8%. 
 Italy was the first nation to be affected by the pandemic
after
China. The total CFR of Italy was higher (7.2%) compared to China
(2.3%). This is attributed to a more significant proportion of older
adults (22.8% and 11.9%, respectively) in Italy. In addition, an 82-year-old
man in Brooklyn was the first COVID-19 fatality reported in New York
City. A significant case series of 5,700 COVID-19 patients admitted
to hospitals in New York City revealed a similar pattern of COVID-19
fatalities with age. , However, the mechanism of SARS-CoV-2
infection is still unknown. However, the primary mechanism of SARS-CoV-2
underlies the ACE2 enzyme’s expression and utilization of the
ACE2 receptor, which helps to enter the SARS-CoV-2 inside the cell.
Lymphopenia, abnormal respiration, and a high level of pro-inflammatory
cytokines in plasma are the main manifestations ascribed to individuals
with COVID-19 infection along with very high body temperature and
respiratory issues. COVID-19 is caused
by several metabolic and viral disorders, all of which have a part
in the developing of the more complicated symptoms.
The CFR
for India seems to be lower than in several European nations.
This might attributed to low percentage of population (6.38%) to be
above the age of 65 as per 2019 statistics. According to reports,
COVID-19 puts elderly persons (those over 60) at a greater risk of
mortality. The relationship between CFR and several other health and
socioeconomic factors, variations in the virulence of SARS-CoV-2 across
geographical areas, and COVID-19 response indicators unique to certain
countries has to be further studied.
The projected CFRs (July
2020) based on the random- and fixed-effect
models were 1.42% (95% Cl 1.19–1.70%) and 2.97% (95% CI 2.94–3.00%),
respectively. Estimates made using the random-effects model were more
likely to accurately reflect the real CFR for India because of the
high level of variability. In earlier research, the COVID-19 CFR was
estimated using random-effect models, or the CFR was provided using
both random- and fixed-effect models. We made sure that states with
a lot of cases and fatalities got more weightage than those with fewer
cases and deaths by using a random effects model. shows
that COVID-19-infected patients with comorbidities had a higher death
risk.
 As a consequence of aging, the body experiences progressive
biological
alterations in immune function, concurrently causing an increased
susceptibility to age-related inflammation (inflammaging) and other
associated inflammatory conditions, which makes the elderly population
vulnerable to enhanced risk of infection following exposure to the
virus. Inflammaging is a chronic low-stage
inflammation mediated by dysfunction in the basal responses of the
pattern recognition receptors (PRRs) and pathogen-associated molecular
patterns (PAMPs). A progressive impairment in autophagic signals affect
the PRR signals in the aging population and consequently cause the
exorbitant release of reactive oxygen species (ROS). This condition may further be worsened with the binding
of the virus to immune cells as they also work in synchronization
with PAMPs and PRRs, thereby causing oxidative damage to cells in
older individuals. Another hallmark of inflammaging is increased production
of interleukins (ILs), especially IL-1β and IL-18, due to activation
of the NLR family pyrin domain containing 3 (NLRP3) inflammasome,
in COVID-19 infections. NLRP3 activation is strongly correlated to
the aging population. This consequently causes increased pyroptosis,
which is central to cell death post-infection; increased release of
IL-1β, IL-18 as well as damage-associated molecular patterns
(DAMPs) further cumulates inflammatory responses in the elderly. This mechanism has also been reported to be
the root cause of inflammatory conditions such as cancer, diabetes,
PD, and acute myocardial injury. Furthermore,
with age, there is a progressive hardening of the endothelial cells,
causing the increased formation of plaque, and further leading to
a hypercoagulative state. Following COVID-19 infection, reports have
demonstrated that a hypercoagulative state is associated with an increased
risk of comorbid conditions such as ischemic stroke and myocardial
infarction. 
Therefore, it can be
concluded that aging and comorbid conditions
are crucial factors in eliciting the response mediated by COVID-19
infection alone. So, in the subsequent sections, we discussed the
latest reports of age-related comorbidities, such as PD, cancer, diabetes,
and CVD, and how they relate to the severity and pathology of COVID-19.

4.2

## A Case-Control and Cohort Investigation to
Ascertain the Association between Severe COVID-19 and Comorbidities
The population of patients needing hospital admission is disproportionately
composed of older adults, men, and people with comorbid conditions,
including diabetes and CVDs. , , , After COVID-19 expanded to multiethnic
communities in Western Europe and North America, multiple studies
claimed that Black, Asian, or other minority ethnic groups were more likely to be affected by the illness. , According to the statistical report from USA, in several cities
or cumulative analyses across large states, Black and Hispanic people
had higher per capita mortality rates than White people, but the underlying
reasons were unknown. , A large cohort study has been
conducted in the United Kingdom (UK), wherein they reported higher overall death rates for Black and South
Asian people compared to White people. However, the study ignores
the wide variances in the ethnic makeup of local populations across
various geographic locations.
In this regard, a case-control
and cohort study was conducted at King’s College Hospital Foundation
Trust, UK to investigate if ethnic origin influences the probability
of hospital admission with severe COVID-19 and/or in-hospital mortality.
Inner city adult patients with confirmed COVID-19 admitted to the
hospital (n = 872 cases) were compared with 3,488
matched controls randomly drawn from a primary healthcare database
consisting of 344,083 people dwelling in the same area. For the cohort
study, the authors examined 1,827 people continuously hospitalized
with COVID-19. Self-defined ethnicity served as the primary exposure
factor and analyses were adjusted for socio-demographic and clinical
characteristics. Based on the results obtained by conditional logistic
regression analysis, it was demonstrated that the Black and Mixed/Other
ethnicity were linked with greater admission risk than the White. Further, the Black and Mixed ethinicity could
be linked to disease severity but not to in-hospital mortality. This
was majorly attributed to ethinicity and partly to comorbities and
socioeconomic factors. In addition, the study elucidated the association
of increased in-hospital mortality with ICU admission for Asian ethinicity.
Therefore,it could be concluded that COVID-19 disease outcome is influenced
by the ethnic background. 

4.3

## Sex Differences
Although aging is
a prominent factor for comorbidities, it may not be as labeled as
the only confounding factor for the disease severity. Reports have
suggested that hospitalized males had the highest mortality rate as
compared to females and this association was more prominent with patients
with predisposing conditions such as hypertension, diabetes and obesity
in an age-dependent manner. One study
has shown male patients’ as a predictor of ICU admissions. Contrastingly, in context of the long term COVID-19
manifestations, women were more likely to report uneasiness, breathlessness,
and fatigue following recovery. Outcomes
in severity also resulted from biochemical differences in males and
females; compared to male patients, females had higher lymphocyte
counts, higher levels of high-density lipoprotein, as well as lower
levels of highly sensitive C-reactive protein. Another hypothesis for gender disparity in protection is
that the females have biallelic Toll-like receptor (TLR)7 expression,
thereby leading to a better interferon (IFN)-mediated response after
early infection. Interestingly, studies
have reported that estrogen confers some protection against the severity
of COVID-19. This has been validated
in a preclinical setting, where mice infected with the SARS-CoV virus
had a higher mortality rate following ovariectomy or estrogen receptor
antagonist administration. 
Further,
pregnant women with mild infection demonstrate same outcome as uninfected
pregnant women. However, those with severe infection demonstrate a
higher risk of perinatal infection as well as mortality, usually having
a tendency to feel unwell and this further exacerbates during COVID-19
infection and may result in worsening of conditions of the patients.
Children are disportionately infected with COVID-19 compared to older
population but with low infection severity and could be attributed
to lower concentration of ACE2 receptors in children as well as trained/acquired
immunity as a result of vaccination, indigenous virus competition,
as well as maternal immunity. 
Thus,
it can be concluded that sex differences play a major role
in the outcomes and severity of COVID-19 infection. Due to the pivotal
role of female hormones, they may be less susceptible to long-term
manifestations which are prevalent in male patients.

5

## COVID-19 and Comorbidities
5.1

## Parkinson’s Disease and COVID-19
SARS-CoV-2 is a neurotropic virus, that can enter the CNS either
by hematogenous or neuronal retrograde dissemination. In an autopsy study, viral RNA in the brains of several
COVID-19 patients was detected. Patients
having neurological diseases are generally more vulnerable to the
respiratory system infections.and could be attributed to the involvement
of central respiratory centers in the case of COVID-19 infections. There are shreds of evidence that suggest the
potential of SARS-CoV-2 to enter the brain through the olfactory epithelium
and cause neuronal death in mice. Furthermore, there have been cases
of COVID-19 individuals developing symptomatic parkinsonism after
2–5 weeks of viral infection. SARS-CoV was discovered in the
cerebral fluid of individuals suffering from acute SARS-CoV disease,
as was also reported in the COVID-19 cases. Recent data from a study performed in three designated COVID-19
care hospitals of the Union Hospital of Huazhong University of Science
and Technology in Wuhan, China suggests that 78 patients out of 214
COVID-19 patients demonstrated neurologic manifestations. This involved
the CNS, peripheral nervous system, and skeletal muscles, subsequently
indicating the neurotropic potential of this virus. 
Hitherto, there is not enough evidence regarding
the susceptibility of PD patients to COVID-19. According to a study
from the Parkinson’s and Movement Disorders Unit in Padua,
Italy and the Parkinson’s Foundation Centre of Excellence at
King’s College Hospital in London, UK, PD patients with an
average age of more than 78.3 years and with a disease period of greater
than 12.7 years are more prone to COVID-19. They also have a significantly
high mortality rate of 40%. The patients
in extreme conditions of PD with respiratory muscle rigidity, dyspnoea,
and on deep brain stimulation or levodopa infusion therapy showed
high vulnerability and 50% mortality. Moreover, SARS-CoV and H1N1 viruses (structurally and functionally
similar to COVID-19) can aggravate the mechanisms involved in PD pathophysiology
as supported by previous studies. A few
studies also suggest the role of the CNS in COVID-19 infection indicating
that PD patients might be more prone to COVID-19 infection.
5.1.1

## Possible Pathophysiological Association
between COVID-19 and PD Patients
There are various theories
about how SARS-CoV-2 enters the CNS. Peripheral SARS-CoV-2 infection
can lead to a cytokine storm, which might disrupt the blood–brain
barrier integrity and might be a mechanism for SARS-CoV-2 to infiltrate
into the CNS. Besides this, ACE2 receptors are highly expressed in
the substantia nigra and striatum (the regions which are potentially
affected in PD) making dopaminergic neurons present in these brain
regions more susceptible to SARS-CoV-2 infection. 
Furthermore, the accumulation of alpha-synuclein
(α-Syn) is the major hallmark of PD. , According to previous findings, the entrance of SARS-CoV-2 into
the CNS may upregulate this protein, causing aggregation. On the contrary,
few studies have indicated α-Syn’s protective effect
in blocking viral entry and propagation into the CNS. Moreover, its expression in the neurons can act as a barrier
to viral RNA replication. In a retrospective cohort study conducted
in Japan, PD patients suffering from pneumonia showed a lower mortality
rate. Furthermore, the main pathophysiological
pathway involved in PD development, includes
autophagy disruption, ER stress, and mitochondrial dysfunction. As a result, COVID-19 may trigger frequent modulations
in these pathways, as seen in SARS-CoV and influenza A virus.
Proteostasis plays a vital role in protein translation, folding,
and subsequent clearance with the help of heat shock proteins (HSPs).
Viral infection hijacks the host cellular machinery for its replication
and disrupts the proteostasis pathways by interacting with Hsp40. The viral-Hsp40 interaction results in the binding
of Hsp40 with two subunits of viral RNA polymerase, which further
assists the viral genome to get translocated into the nucleus via
interaction with the viral nucleoprotein and inhibition of protein
kinase R (PKR) activation, thereby restricting the host from producing
an antiviral response. Hsp90 also modulates the activity of viral
RNA polymerase after it enters the nucleus. Under normal conditions, Hsp90 and
Hsp70 restrict apoptosis initiation pathways thereby reducing apoptosis. , However, infection with SARS-CoV-2 suppresses Hsp90 and Hsp70 function,
leading to activation of caspase cascade followed by apoptosis and
subsequent propogation of infection.
Autophagy lysosomal pathways
and ubiquitin-proteasome pathways
are two important components of proteostasis and are responsible for
the degradation of impaired proteins. It has been reported that H1N1 infection obstructs autophagic flux
at the initial stages resulting in the reduced number of autophagosomes
and hindering autophagosome-lysosome fusion at later stages of autophagy.
Both these activities result in autophagy disruption in human dopaminergic
neurons and mouse brain and subsequently lead to α-Syn aggregation. Furthermore, when H1N1 was instilled intranasally
in Rag knockout mice, α-Syn aggregates were found in the cells
near olfactory bulbs, which may further spread in a prion-like manner
to other regions of the brain and originate downstream events of PD
pathogenesis. Furthermore, the ubiquitin-proteasome
system can destroy viral proteins by ubiquitination; however, the
H1N1 virus hijacks this mechanism and inhibits the host cell opponents
of viral reproduction. This disrupts proteostasis and toxic protein
aggregation. , Further, SARS-CoV-2 has also
been shown to act similarly to H1N1 virus and might be involved in
α-Syn accumulation. 
Besides
this, ER has also been reported as a target of various
viruses. SARS-CoV-2 utilizes ER for the synthesis and processing of
viral proteins. It has been shown previously that the Spike (S) protein
gets collected in the ER and induces unfolded protein response (UPR)
by transcriptional activation of several UPR effectors, including
glucose-regulated protein 78 (GRP78), GRP94, and CCAAT/Enhancer-binding
protein (C/EBP) homologous protein to aid viral replication. UPR may result in ER stress, which further activates
cellular signals triggering neuronal death, are implicated in PD. Another study discovered that SARS-CoV open
reading frames (ORF) 6 and 7a produce ER stress via GRP94 activation. 
Mitochondrial dysfunction is another pathway
that connects PD with
COVID-19. ORF-9b of SARS-CoV-2 degrades dynamin-like protein 1 (Drp1),
involved in mitochondrial fission, thus causing mitochondrial elongation.
Moreover, it suppresses antiviral cellular signaling by targeting
the mitochondrial-associated adaptor molecule signalosome. ORF3b is located partially in mitochondria and
is involved in apoptosis along with other accessory proteins (ORF3a,
ORF6, and ORF 7a of SARS-CoV). The virus utilizes the mitochondria
for caspase activation for apoptosis, thereby causing viral dissemination
to other cells. The aforementioned cellular malfunctions result in
increased ROS, redox imbalance, and mitochondrial and lysosomal dysfunction
making the cells more susceptible to infection. According to current research, neuroinflammation is a defining
factor in COVID-19 infection. Proinflammatory cytokine levels are
higher in the periphery and cerebrospinal fluid in PD patients. Strikingly, studies have reported that viral
infection can also induce neuroinflammation. Due to the compromised anti-inflammatory mechanisms in old age,
the older population is more susceptible to develop neurodegenerative
diseases as well as severe COVID-19 infection.
TLRs may play
a role in the immunological response to coronavirus
infections indicated by the presence of PAMPs (lipopolysaccharides,
dsDNA/RNA, ssRNA) in the host cells recognized by specific TLRs derived
from viruses following infection. TLR
3 is known to be activated in the case of HSV-I and influenza A infection. Whenever TLRs are triggered, pro-inflammatory
cytokines are released (IL-1, IL-6, and tumor necrosis factor-alpha
(TNF-alpha)) and type I IFN-α/β via MyD88-dependent and
MyD88-independent pathways, which further translocate nuclear factor
kappa-light-chain-enhancer of activated B cell (NF-κB), interferon
regulatory factor (IRF), IRF-3 and IRF-7, inside the nucleus. Moreover, NF-κB has been reported to contribute
to the pathogenesis of PD by triggering the release of pro-inflammatory
mediators and subsequent neuroinflammation. Therefore, it can be concluded that NF-κB plays a common role
in inflammation in both PD and COVID-19 pathogenesis. Neuroinflammation
can also trigger misfolding and aggregation of α-Syn. Aggregated α-Syn leads to the activation
of microglia which further favors the production of pro-inflammatory
cytokines, ultimately causing neurodegeneration ( ). 
 
5.1.2

## Promising Therapeutic Strategies for PD
Patients during COVID-19 Infection
None of the anti-Parkinsonian
drugs render PD patients at risk for COVID-19; therefore, PD patients
should not alter or stop any medicine without a clinician’s
consultation. However, in order to avoid possible interactions, PD
patients with COVID-19 infection should not use cough suppressants
containing dextromethorphan and pseudoephedrine with Selegiline. Previous data suggest that the therapies used
for COVID-19 such as angiotensin converting enzyme inhibitors (ACEi),
might be safe for PD patients as well. Neuroprotective effects of
ACEi like captopril and perindopril have been observed in PD animal
models, which act by preventing dopaminergic cell loss and increasing
striatal dopamine content, respectively. ACEi also work as antioxidants by reducing oxidative stress, which
has been linked to PD and has been found
to decrease the number of falls in a cross-sectional study involving
91 PD patients. Furthermore, hydroxychloroquine
exhibits anti-Parkinsonian effects by raising Nurr1 expression, inhibiting
glycogen synthase kinase-3 beta (GSK-3β) and functioning as an anti-inflammatory drug, making it
a viable treatment option for PD patients infected with COVID-19. In another study, a COVID-19 patient with PD
was cured with remdesivir in a clinical trial. In addition, the antiviral
drug amantadine used in PD treatment has also been used for years
in the treatment of influenza. Amantadine inhibits viral replication
by blocking the influenza M2 ion channel, thereby preventing the delivery
of viral ribonucleoprotein into the cytoplasm of the host and might
have a disruptive effect on the lysosomal pathway. As a result, amantadine
might be advantageous for treatment in COVID-19-positive PD patients
as a potential treatment approach to lower viral load in these individuals. 
Oseltamivir phosphate, an anti-influenza
drug, was found to be useful in PD as it inhibits H1N1-induced α-Syn
aggregation. Many studies have highlighted
that older people are typically deficient in vitamin D; vitamin D
might have antiviral properties. , As a result,
vitamin D3 supplementation (2000–5000 IU/day) has been recommended
in older PD patients, which might protect them against COVID-19. Moreover,
it has been suggested that vitamin D3 can slow down the progression
of PD. Above all, Fenoldopam, a dopamine
D1 receptor agonist, was shown to be protective against inflammation
as well as lung permeability and pulmonary edema in an endotoxin-induced
acute lung injury mouse model. Taken
together, it can be concluded that therapies used in PD and COVID-19
infection do not have any detrimental drug interaction. However, diagnosis
presents a challenge in PD patients especially in the older population
as they might neglect the COVID-19 symptoms because of other chronic
diseases. Furthermore, early symptoms of COVID-19, for example dyssomnia,
might be neglected by PD patients as they commonly suffer from olfactory
dysfunction. Still, people with COVID-19 pneumonia who take medications
for PD should have their doses changed because motor symptoms can
impair breathing thereby worsening the condition.

5.1.3

## Future Perspectives
There is a
scarcity of data linking PD and COVID-19 outcomes. However, evidence
from molecular processes of SARS coronaviruses changing proteostasis,
mitochondrial and ER malfunction, and α-Syn aggregation suggests
that it is necessary to identify medications acting on these pathways
as a treatment for PD patients suffering from COVID-19. Detailed investigations
on these mechanisms are required to determine PD patients’
sensitivity to COVID-19 as well as the safety of antiviral medicines,
vaccinations, ACEi, and other antiviral drugs used for COVID-19. The
indirect effect of this pandemic on PD patients including no direct
patient–doctor visits, depression due to social distancing,
reduced physical activity, and battery failure in patients on deep
brain stimulation therapy also need attention and should be taken
care of with the help of video conferencing and the availability of
sufficient stock of medications.

5.2

## Cancer and COVID-19
Reports suggest
patients with lung cancer, hematological cancer, or any metastatic
cancer are potentially at high risk of COVID-19 infection either due
to treatment or disease susceptibility. Toward this, COVID-19-infected
cancer patients were studied retrospectively; analysis showed a higher
incidence of severe events following infection of COVID-19 infection,
especially in the patients who received the anticancer treatment for
14 days. In one study, a total of 15 (53.6%) patients developed severe
clinical event, and 28.6% were found to be morbid. Similar studies
suggested being vigilant toward cancer patients who are on anticancer
treatments as they are prone to COVID-19 infection as a result of
reduced immunity. 
As per a nationwide
study in China, roughly 39% (7 out of 18) of cancer patients infected
with COVID-19 experienced severe symptoms, compared to only 8% (124
out of 1572) of patients not suffering with cancer. Another collective report has stated that there were 52
different studies worldwide involving 18,650 cancer patients infected
with COVID-19 with 4,243 deaths. The data further implied that the
risk of mortality of cancer patients is about 25.6 % COVID-19 as compared
to 2.3% in the normal population. COVID-19
puts lung cancer patients at significant risk of developing severe
episodes. , In this regard, a study reported
that out of 102 lung cancer patients infected with COVID-19 infection,
62% of lung cancer patients were hospitalized, and the mortality rate
was approximately 25%. In another study,
55% (6 out of 11) mortality was observed in lung cancer patients infected
with COVID-19 which was very high compared to other cancers. 
5.2.1

## Possible Pathophysiological Association
between COVID-19 and Cancer Patients
SARS-CoV-2 infects the
host cell via the ACE2, which is a cell surface receptor. It is highly
expressed on the lung epithelial cells and subsequently gets cleaved
with the help of the host transmembrane serine protease2 (TMPRSS2).
The viral internalization evokes the host immune response through
the activation of alveolar macrophages and the complement cascade.
This activation leads to a massive release of pro-inflammatory cytokines
such as IL-1, IL-6, IL-8, and IFN-γ. This phenomenon, termed the cytokine storm, further causes alveolar
endothelial tissue damage. Among these cytokines, IL-6 is involved
in the pathophysiology of cancer, especially, lung cancer and other
chronic diseases. It has been reported
that IL-6 promotes tumorigenesis and anti-apoptotic signaling and
is an important biomarker for cancer diagnosis and prognosis. The involvement of IL-6 in abnormally immune-activated
conditions like cancer , inflammation and immunosuppression
have also been reported. Apart from IL-6, the activation of serine/threonine
p21 activated kinase1 (PAK1), an essential component of malaria and
some viral infections, is also a critical mediator of cytokine storm
and gets overexpressed in SARS-CoV-2 infected lungs, , resulting in mortality of COVID-19 patients. One study has reported
that the human PAK, is an important component of host–pathogen
interactions. PAK paralogues (Group I PAKs, include PAK1, PAK2, and
PAK3; Group II PAKs, including PAK4, PAK5, and PAK6) are found in
nearly all mammalian tissues, wherein they play important roles in
a variety of processes including cell survival and proliferation,
cell cycle progression, and cytoskeletal organization and are involved in different types of cancer.
In drug development, the role of PAKs in cell survival along with
proliferation, as well as participation in a variety of malignancies,
is of significant interest. PAK1 activation can lead to the development
of lung fibrosis by stimulation of the
chemokine (C–C motif) ligand 2 (CCL2) production, thereby aggravating
the patient’s condition. PAK1 blockers can help in restoring
the immune response thereby combating virus-induced lung fibrosis.
In this regard, the PAK1 inhibitor (propolis) was tested as a therapeutic
approach for treating COVID-19 patients. Its extract components were
shown to have inhibitory effects against other targets like ACE2 and
TMPRSS2 ( ). 
 Besides, underlying conditions and altered immune
responses increase
the risk of developing venous thromboembolism, microvascular COVID-19
lung and vessels obstructive thrombo-inflammatory syndrome in cancer
patients. The progressive endothelial
thrombo-inflammatory syndrome may also cover the brain’s microvascular
bed and other vital organs, resulting in multiple organ failures and
death. Additionally, Bhotla et al. and
colleagues hypothesized that platelets are getting infected due to
COVID-19 infection which exacerbate the SARS-CoV-2 infection and ultimately
lead to the bronchopneumonia or death. 
In conclusion, the biochemical and immunological characteristics
outlined above demonstrate that cancer patients, are more susceptible
to COVID-19 infections than the general population. However, non-biological
variables such as increased contact with the healthcare system for
cancer treatment may potentially contribute to the increase in COVID-19
prevalence in cancer patients.

5.2.2

## Promising Therapeutic Strategies for Cancer
Patients during COVID-19 Infection
Because of the current
pandemic situation, as well as the associated risk factors, cancer
patients must take additional precautions. As a result, in order to
minimize the adverse consequences of the COVID-19 pandemic on highly
susceptible cancer patients, hospitals should have, more robust management
procedures in place. To this end, chemotherapy or surgery should be
postponed, intense treatment should be provided, greater personal
protection should be provided, telemedicine should be used, and a
separate treatment approach for COVID-19 cancer patients should be
implemented. As discussed in the previous
section, IL-6 has been recognized as a crucial component of the immune
response to SARS-CoV-2. Many clinical trials are currently underway
to investigate treatment strategies targeting IL-6 by repurposing
anti-IL-6 therapeutics for COVID-19 in cancer patients. Tocilizumab, a monoclonal antibody against
the IL-6 receptor, has shown promising results in a double-blind,
placebo-controlled phase-III study called EMPACTA (NCT04372186). Similarly, siltuximab, an IL-6 receptor chimeric
mouse–human monoclonal antibody, has already exhibited its
antitumor efficacy and is under diverse randomized control trials
for further assessing its efficacy for COVID-19 patients (NCT04486521,
NCT04330638, and NCT04329650). 
In addition, tumor reversion therapy might be the near future therapy
for the treatment of cancer. The molecular biology behind the tumor
reversal process is not only fascinating but alluring. Some chemical
compounds used for tumor reversion include LY294002, metformin, sertraline,
and ellipticine. 
Apart from this,
T cell therapy such as immune checkpoint inhibitors
(ICIs) and chimeric antigen receptor T cell (CAR-T) therapy may increase
the risk of cytokine release resulting in increased severity of COVID-19
infection. Cytokine storm is directly linked to COVID-19-associated
diseases such as acute respiratory distress syndrome (ARDS) and multiorgan
failure. Moreover, an immunocompromised cancer patient with immunocompromised
therapy and also those at risk for immune-related side effects in
response to immuno-oncology treatments should be monitored closely. 
Another treatment approach is mesenchymal
stem cell therapy; this
is approved and is now used for cancer treatment alone or in combination
with other drugs. It was even applied
on 7 patients with COVID-19 infection, resulting in a negative effect
on the expression of ACE2 along with TMPRSS2. On the sixth day, cytokine-secreting
cells (CXCR3+ CD4+ T, CXCR3+ CD8+ T, and NK CXCR3+ cells) disappeared as peripheral
lymphocyte counts increased. While the TNF-alpha levels were reduced,
dendritic cell populations and IL10 levels were increased. , 
Along with IL-6, other cytokines associated with the pathogenesis
of COVID-19 infection in cancer patients include type I IFN, IL-1,
IL-7, IL-17, and TNF-alpha. Even a clinical study named Bee-COVID
was conducted with the Brazilian Green Propolis Extract for the treatment
of the COVID-19 condition (NCT04480593). In conclusion, targeting
these inflammatory markers may serve as a good approach to treating
COVID-19 infection in cancer patients. 

5.2.3

## Future Perspectives
The COVID-19
outbreak is a global threat to the health system. Despite the substantial
study, there is currently no recognized treatment for COVID-19. Still,
it is unclear why some people respond abruptly to SARS-CoV-2 infection
and others are asymptomatic. Further, why people with coexisting comorbidities
are more susceptible to severe clinical events of COVID-19 is unclear.
Being at high risk of infection and deteriorating outcomes, cancer
patients are suggested to be more cautious and follow the guidelines
issued by World Health Organization and the European Society for Medical
Oncology.

5.3

## Diabetes and COVID-19
Diabetes mellitus
(DM) is a common metabolic disorder with multiple etiologies primarily
associated with a deficiency of insulin secretion and/or its action.
Besides the clinical complication of the disease, an individual with
diabetes is more susceptible to a broad range of infections (such
as foot infection, rhinocerebral mucormycosis, malignant external
otitis, and gangrenous cholecystitis) as well as predisposed to certain
conditions that primarily affect lungs like influenza, tuberculosis, and legionella pneumonia. , Moreover, diabetes and its complications such as disrupted glycemic
control and ketoacidosis were found to be a potential risk factor
for mortality in the influenza A (H1N1) pandemic in 2009, SARS-COV,
and MERS coronavirus infection. 
Several studies have reported high mortality in COVID-19 patients
with diabetes. More specifically, diabetes was the most common underlying
comorbidity in approximately 22% of the 32 nonsurvivors from a cohort
of 52 COVID-19 patients in intensive care. Detailed clinical research on 140 hospitalized COVID-19 patients
in Wuhan indicated the second highest prevalence was diabetes (12.1%)
after hypertension. Another study on
a subset of 1099 patients discovered that out of 177 severe cases,
16.2% of patients with seriously infected conditions had diabetes.
Eighteen of these patients had composite outcomes, including death,
use of mechanical ventilation, and admission to an ICU. Recent epidemiological research of 72,314 COVID-19
patients at the Chinese Center for Disease Control and Prevention
found that diabetics mortality in diabetic patients was three times
greater than non-diabetic patients (7.3% mortality rate as compared
to the overall 2.3% mortality rate). , Besides,
a recent retrospective multicenter cohort study on 191 laboratory-confirmed
COVID-19 cases observed a statistically significant association between
diabetes and increased mortality. In
yet another study, Fadini and his colleagues at the University Hospital
of Padova discovered that the mortality rate of diabetic SARS-CoV-2
patients were 1.75 times greater than the general population. This
research, coupled with earlier research, suggested that diabetes may
exacerbate the outcome of a new coronavirus illness. The CDC data further suggested that COVID-19-infected diabetic
patients have a higher risk of the developing severe symptoms. Toward this, in a retrospective research conducted
in Wuhan, China, 32% of cases patients had comorbidities, 20% of which
were diabetics. In addition, hyperglycemia
or dysregulated glycemic management is associated with a high risk
of complications. Diabetes as a major risk factor for the course and
prognosis of COVID-19 was further mentioned according to a study of
174 COVID-19 patients admitted to Wuhan Union Hospital. 
5.3.1

## Possible Pathophysiological Association
between COVID-19 and Diabetic Patients
COVID-19 infection
in diabetic patients might increase stress hormone levels such as
glucocorticoids and catecholamines, leading to high glucose levels.
Hyperglycemia in diabetes induces glucose allowing non-enzymatic glycosylation
of lung collagen and elastin by advanced glycation end products thereby
resulting in reduced elasticity of the lungs COVID-19 infection. This
causes thickening of the alveolar epithelial basal lamina and microvascular
alterations in the pulmonary capillary beds, further leading to a
reduction in pulmonary capillary blood volume and diffusing capacity,
which influence the patient’s overall survival. Even a brief period of hyperglycemia has the
potential to alter immune cell function. Diabetes increases pro-inflammatory cytokines, including IL-1, IL-6,
and TNF-alpha. IL-6, C-reactive protein, serum ferritin, and coagulation
index, D-dimer are significantly higher in diabetic individuals than
in those without diabetes. Current research suggests that diabetic
patients are more prone to cytokine storms. This may be further exaggerated in response to a stimulus as seen
in patients with COVID-19 infection. In a study, patients infected
with COVID-19 have developed a fatal hyperinflammatory syndrome characterized
by a fulminant and fatal hypertyrosinemia, and was thought to be associated
with disease severity as demonstrated increased IL-2, IL-7, IL-12,
TNF-alpha, and IFN-γ inducible protein 10, macrophage inflammatory
protein-1α (MIP-1α/CCL3). A prolonged hyperglycemic state causes an elevated immune response,
which further leads to inflammation. Interestingly, increased glucose levels were discovered to directly
promote SARS-CoV-2 replication in human monocytes and to sustain SARS-CoV-2
replication through the formation of ROS and activation of hypoxia-inducible
factor-1α. This massive influx
of inflammatory cells has the potential to disrupt the activities
of the primary insulin-responsive organs, i.e., the skeletal muscles
and liver, which are primarily responsible for insulin-mediated glucose
absorption. High glucose concentration
in the plasma leads to cytokine production, glucotoxicity, and viral-induced
oxidative stress; these factors promoted a greater risk of thromboembolic
problems as well as damage to important organs in diabetic patients
( ). Moreover, one enzyme, dipeptidyl peptidase-4
(CD26 or adenosine deaminase complexing protein 2), tends to bind
with the virus and promote the ACE2 expression which is involved to
initiate the infectious disease. 
 Furthermore, studies have shown severe lung pathology
with dysregulated
immune response in mice (with existing Type2 DM (T2DM)) infected with
MERS-CoV. In addition, COVID-19 patients
with diabetes have an easier progression to acute respiratory distress
syndrome and septic shock resulting in multiple organ failures. 
Another direct metabolic link that exists
between coronavirus infection
and diabetes is based on the expression of ACE2 present in specific
tissue. ACE2 is a transmembrane glycoprotein that converts angiotensin
II (Ang II) to angiotensin (Ang). ACE2
is also expressed in blood vessels, macrophages, and monocytes. The expression of ACE2 is of prime importance
in the etiology of SARS-CoV-2. It has been observed that inflammatory
signals produced by macrophages, such as type I IFN, increase ACE2
receptor expression. The infection of
pancreatic macrophages may have triggered these inflammatory signals.
As a result, more immune cells particularly pro-inflammatory monocyte/macrophages
are recruited, causing further damage to islets of Langerhans and
β-cells in the pancreas. Subsequently, it reduces insulin release,
subsequently resulting in acute hyperglycemia and transitory diabetes
in healthy people. 
Additionally,
macrophages and monocytes are mobile, and once infected
with the SARS-CoV-2 virus, they can infiltrate the cells of the pancreatic
islets and spread the virus throughout the pancreas. Furthermore, SARS-CoV-2 infection of the β-cells
can directly damage them, causing apoptosis, and further worsening
the glycemic control of diabetic patients. 
Furthermore, anti-diabetic medicines, such as glucagon-like
peptide
1 agonists, antihypertensive drugs, and statins, also increase ACE2
expression. COVID-19-infected patients
were treated with different medications, such as systemic corticosteroids
and antiviral medicines, which may potentially cause hyperglycemia.
Glucocorticoid-induced DM (GIDM) is a frequent and potentially critical
issue to address in clinical practice, although it may contribute
to worsening hyperglycemia and ultimately aggravate the diabetic condition
associated with COVID-19 infection. The detailed mechanism causing
glucocorticoid-induced hyperglycemia is the promotion of weight gain,
decrease in peripheral insulin sensitivity, increase in the production
of glucose with the promotion of gluconeogenesis, β cell injury
due to the destruction of pancreatic cells, increase in the levels
of fatty acids, and impairment of insulin release. 
However, in the case of SARS-CoV-2 infection, the
effect of diabetes
on ACE2 expression still needs to be studied in detail. In a study,
an increased expression of ACE2 was observed in the kidney of diabetic
patients , in the early stage followed
by a decreased expression in later stages that relatively overlaps
with the occurrence of diabetic nephropathy. − Each of these pathways working synergistically may worsen the situation
for diabetic patients making them frailer and further increasing the
severity of COVID-19 disease. 

5.3.2

## Promising Therapeutic Strategies for Diabetic
Patients during COVID-19 Infection
The glucose level in diabetic
patients is mainly maintained with the administration of insulin and
is mainly recommended for critically ill patients infected with SARS-CoV-2.
It has also been observed that insulin infusion significantly reduces
the inflammatory cytokines and helps in lowering the severity of COVID-19. Metformin has been proven to have anti-inflammatory
properties in preclinical investigations, and it has also been demonstrated
to lower circulating levels of inflammatory biomarkers in persons
with T2DM. 
Besides the anti-inflammatory
action of metformin, it is potentially used against the SARS-CoV-2
virus. , Metformin acts through inhibiting the virus–host-cell
association as well as prevents the expression of ACE2 through the
activation of adenosine monophosphate-activated protein kinase. Another
promising molecule, DPP-4 antagonist (Linagliptin), an anti-diabetic
agent with potential anti-aging properties, was repurposed to combat
COVID-19 infection also demonstrates
antiaging properties. Further, plant-based natural compounds such
as resveratrol, catechin, curcumin, procyanidin, and theaflavin have
been tested for the treatment of COVID-19 disease through in silico, in vitro, and in vivo studies. More recently, convalescent
plasma therapy has also been applied for COVID-19 associated comorbidities
wherein it was used to downregulate the inflammatory cytokines and
the viral load in COVID-19 patients. Sulfonylurea must be avoided in COVID-19 patients comorbid with
T2DM, as they can cause hypoglycemia. Thiazolidinediones can be used
in mild diseases with caution as they have protective effects on the
cardiovascular system. However, due
to weight gain, edema, and heart failure, thiazolidinediones were
not used in moderate and severe conditions. 

5.3.3

## Future Perspectives
COVID-19 pathology
majorly involves inflammation that eventually leads to multiple organ
failure and even death. Comorbid diabetic patients are highly susceptible
to hospitalization-based COVID-19 infection. Diabetes is characterized
by a persistent state of hyperglycemia that can aggravate SARS-CoV-2-induced
inflammation. Therefore, diabetic patients’ medication should
be monitored as some drugs can increase the expression of viral entry
receptors leading to a poor prognosis of COVID-19 in these patients.
Further, insulin resistance has also been reported in comorbid, especially,
T2DM patients. Hence, management of diabetes is of utmost importance
in infected patients. Drugs that do not interact with ACE2 receptors
could be given, though insulin treatment is unanimously given for
COVID-19 patients with comorbid status of diabetes.

5.4

## COVID-19 and Cardiovascular Diseases
CVD is a broad classification for a range of conditions that involve
dysregulation of the heart and vascular systems. Since COVID-19 infection
is a multiplexed pathophysiological condition, it is obvious that
the cardiovascular systems are at the crux of exposure. Toward this,
in a multicenter study conducted in Wuhan involving 191 patients,
24% of the patients that died had coronary heart disease. In addition, in a systemic review of 199 patients
with COVID-19, 40% of them were diagnosed with myocarditis. Further, a meta-analysis study reported that
25% of the patients developed acute cardiac injury and the mortality
rate was 20 times higher than those pre-existing comorbidities in
comparison to those with no pre-existing comorbidities. 
As discussed in the previous section,
systemic inflammation due to viral infection is prevalent and is a
consequence of the cytokine storm. This inflammation is of particular
concern for cardiac tissues and has been shown to cause myocarditis.
The mechanism proposed for this pathology demonstrates the involvement
of hepatocyte growth factor release, followed by priming of the immune cells such as T cells and subsequent
release of IL-6 , As a result, COVID-19 patients
have been found to have pericardial effusion, which can lead to inflammation
of the membranes around the heart and pericarditis. Conversely, the safety of mRNA vaccines is of particular
concern as they have been reported to cause myocarditis. 
In the earlier section we discussed PD,
its association with COVID-19
and the importance of olfactory nerves and the brain. Although nerves
express ACE2 receptors, which are of utmost importance for infectivity,
one cannot rule out the importance of the possible involvement of
the heart–brain axis. This bidirectional communication is important
as it is mediated by the control of endothelial cells and the regulation
of cerebral blood flow by somatosensory signaling mechanisms. Thus,
infection with COVID-19 disrupts this normal physiological function
and, as a consequence, vascular–neuronal communication is disturbed
thereby causing headaches and increased incidences of stroke in infected
patients. Along with this, serious implications such as the neural
spread of viruses and consequent, central disturbances such as anxiety
are predisposed due to neuroinflammation and lower brain-derived neurotropic
factor levels. Elevated levels of inflammatory
biomarkers, CRP and D-dimer are the most common markers for COVID-19-associated
coagulopathy. Particularly, elevated levels of D-dimer in hypertensive
patients indicate the severity of the disease since COVID-19 patients’
death rates are more likely to rise with D-dimers upon admission or
throughout time. Alternatively, in patients
with diabetic complications, depletion of the ACE2 receptor causes
activation of the renin-angiotensin-aldosterone system (RAAS), leading
to β-cell destruction and an increased risk of cardiomyopathy
in an age-dependent manner. However,
these concepts are still premature and need a discussion on hypertension,
which has been studied to a great extent with COVID-19 and is a predisposing
factor for other cardiovascular complications as well.
HTN is
the most common disorder in people aged 50 years or more. Epidemiological studies have reported a high
risk of hospitalization for patients with CVD such as HTN after COVID-19
infection. One study has shown hypertension
(30%) and coronary heart disease (20%) as the most prevalent comorbidities
(8%) in COVID-19-infected patients. Another investigation has shown
that HTN (27%) and cardiovascular complications were the most prevalent
comorbidities among COVID-19 patients with acute respiratory distress
syndrome (6%). , The high prevalence of hypertension
in COVID-19 patients is not surprising, nor does it necessarily imply
a causal relationship between hypertension and COVID-19 or its severity.
Further, hypertension is extremely common in the elderly and older people appear to be at a higher risk
of contracting SARS-CoV-2 and developing severe forms and complications
of COVID-19.
Hypertensive patients are frequently treated with
ACEi or angiotensin
receptor blockers (ARBs) to lower the volume of blood and ultimately
blood pressure. However, the application of ACEi or ARBs in hypertensive
patients is questionable as ACEi or ARBs are reported to increase
the levels of ACE2 in hypertensive patients, and importantly, SARS-CoV-2,
is reported to enter inside the lung cells through ACE2 receptors. Therefore, it is crucial to understand how
RAAS reacts to COVID-19 infection and whether it is feasible to use
ACEi or ARBs.
5.4.1

## Possible Pathophysiological Association
between COVID-19 and Cardiovascular Diseases Patients
ACE2
is a monocarboxypeptidase that is homologous to ACE and has an an
extracellular active site. Angiotensin
I (Ang I) is cleaved by ACE to produce Ang II, which constricts blood
vessels and increases salt and fluid retention by binding to and activating
the angiotensin receptor 1 (AT1 receptor), causing HTN.
However, the membrane-bound ACE2 inactivates Ang II to Angiotensin
I–VII (Ang I–VII) which then binds to the Mas1 oncogene
(Mas receptor), which has further shown to possess a vasodilator effect.
Furthermore, ACE2 converts Ang II into Angiotensin I–IX (Ang
I–IX) which is then transformed into Ang I–VII by ACE.
In addition, ACE2 converts Ang I with less binding affinity as compared
to Ang II. ACE2 acts as a negative regulator of the RAAS, modulating
vasoconstriction, fibrosis, and hypertrophy. , Hypertensive individuals have lower gene expression and/or ACE2
activity than normotensive patients. Ang II, on the other hand, inhibits
ACE2. It has been reported in preclinical studies that ACE2 deficiency
induces HTN in rats when Ang II exceeds. , 
In several studies, SARS-CoV infection lowered ACE2 expression
in cells, causing severe organ damage by disturbing the physiological
homeostasis between ACE/ACE2 and Ang II/Ang I–VII. − The ACE2 transmembrane domain is internalized along with the virus
during SARS-CoV-2 infection, which reduces ACE2 expression. For some
transmembrane proteinases and proteins, disintegrin is one of the
proteins that may be involved in the binding and membrane fusion processes
and ADAM metallopeptidases domain 17 (ADAM17), TMPRSS2, and TNF-converting
enzyme. , TMPRSS2 cleaves ACE2 to increase viral uptake,
and ADAM17 can cleave ACE2 to produce ectodomain shedding. 
Importantly, lower levels of ACE2 in
COVID-19-infected hypertensive
patients resulted in a lower degradation rate of Ang II, overexpression
of the AT1 receptor with reduced activity of Ang I–IX and I–VII
and promotion of hypertension, ARDS, hypertrophy, and myocardial injury. , 
The ACE2/Ang I–VII/Mas axis has been shown to play
a beneficial
role in the heart. It can enhance post-ischemic
heart functions by inducing coronary
vessel vasorelaxation, inhibiting oxidative stress, attenuating abnormal
cardiac remodeling, and inhibiting oxidative stress. ACE2 expression
rises early in the course of a heart attack but declines as the disease
progresses. ACE2 knockout mice develop
myocardial hypertrophy and interstitial fibrosis, which accelerates
heart failure. , Furthermore, ACE2 deletion in
mice exacerbates diabetes-related heart failure. ACE2 expression in cardiac cells has been shown to be significantly
reduced in both SARS-CoV-infected humans and mice. 
Due to the significant
downregulation of ACE2 and overexpression
of Ang II in COVID-19 infection, the lack of protective actions of
Ang I–VII may exacerbate and perpetuate cardiac damage. According
to current research and several clinical studies, HTN is a comorbidity in a significant proportion of individuals
with severe illness. RAAS overactivation may have already occurred
in these people before infection. The absence of the protective effects
of Ang I–VII may accelerate and perpetuate cardiac damage due
to considerable downregulation of ACE2 and overexpression of Ang II
in COVID-19 infection. ACE2/Ang I–VII/Mas receptor axis counteracts
excessively activated ACE/Ang-II/AT1 receptor axis as seen in HTN
( ).
 Notably, soluble ACE2 molecules have been demonstrated
to limit
SARS-CoV infection and suggested that
a soluble recombinant form of ACE2 molecules can act as competitive
interceptor of SARS-CoV-2 virus and prevent it from latching onto
cellular membrane-bound ACE2. In ARDS,
recombinant human soluble ACE2 was planned to be tested clinically
for its efficacy against COVID-19 infection so that a larger phase
IIB trial can be performed which may potentially benefit the hypertensive
COVID-19-infected patients (NCT04287686). 
Cardiac damage induced by SARS-CoV and SARS-CoV-2 is a major
cause
of mortality and morbidity, affecting up to a third of those who have the
disease in its most severe form. , − SARS-CoV was found in one-third of human autopsy hearts, accompanied
by a substantial drop in cellular ACE2. Also, the involvement of ACE2 has been studied in critically ill
patients, wherein continued treatment with ACE2i (ACE2 inhibitor)
was deemed to demonstrate less load on the heart as the alveolar spaces
are critically dismantled in these patients. Even though the powerful immune response seen in these people might
affect cardiac dysfunction similar to the lungs, Ang II is expected
to contribute to the negative effects of SARS-CoV on the heart and
SARS-associated cardiomyopathy. Inflammatory
signals are thought to lower ACE2 cell-surface expression and transcription. Some contrasting studies report that ACE2 may
also be involved in vasodilation, anti-inflammatory and antioxidant
roles due to the generation of fragment Ang (I–VII) from Ang
II. However, this is scantly reported
and as a result, the classical hypothesis of disease worsening is
most prevalent.
In conclusion, a decrease in cellular ACE2 may
render the cells
less sensitive to SARS-CoV-2, whereas overexpression of the AT1 receptor
causes more severe tissue damage. On the other hand, as AT1 receptor
activity is decreased, the cell membrane becomes more sensitive to
viral particles with increase in ACE2 levels.

5.4.2

## Promising Therapeutic Strategies for Cardiovascular
Diseases Patients during COVID-19
Both ACEi and ARB have
been demonstrated to upregulate ACE2, and some researchers have speculated
that ARB and ACEi treatments may have a deleterious effect on SARS-CoV-2
infection. Given how commonly these
compounds are used to treat HTN and heart failure, this might be a
major source of concern.
In animal studies, ACEi treatment increased
plasma Ang I–VII levels, decreased plasma Ang II levels, and
increased ACE2 expression in the heart. In contrast, Ang II receptor
blockers (ARBs) increase plasma levels of both Ang II and Ang I–VII,
as well as ACE2 expression and activity in the heart. ACEi/ARBs, renin
inhibitors, and Ang I–VII analogs may minimize organ damage
by blocking the RAAS pathway and/or increasing Ang I–VII levels.
In population-based research, the use of ACEi and ARBs significantly
lowered the 30-day mortality in pneumonia patients requiring hospitalization.
Treatment with ACEi/ARBs has also prompted concerns that increasing
the expression of ACE2 in target organs might facilitate the infection-induced
development in severe COVID-19 infection. According to two large cohort studies, administration of ACEi/ARBs
were connected to hospitalized patients’ having a lower risk
of all-cause mortality rather than an increased chance of SARS-CoV-2
infection. However, further research is warranted to examine the protective
effects of ACEi/ARBs in COVID-19. , 
Despite
the various probable confounders, a decrease in membrane
ACE2 expression might explain many of the anomalies seen in SARS-CoV-2
infection. There is not enough clinical evidence to suggest that there
is a higher chance of acquiring a severe COVID-19 infection; further,
it is unclear if continuation or discontinuation of ARB/ACEi is a
wise decision. In addition, we do not know if switching to another
treatment approach could worsen the patient’s situation, notably
in individuals with heart failure and a poor ejection fraction. Further,
whether RAAS inhibitor medication is useful or detrimental for virally
induced lesions and switching to another medicine could make the patient’s
situation even worse. Clinical trials to detect the effect of losartan
as a potential treatment approach for COVID-19, are currently starting
(NCT04311177 and NCT04312009). Further, trial to detect if stopping
or continuing ACEi/ARB treatment has any consequences are underway
(NCT04338009). ACE inhibitors and angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitors
(ARBs) are not only used to treat HTN and heart failure, but they
also have a minor impact on ACE2. Although β-blockers are unlikely
to interact with ACE or ACE2, they do lower plasma Ang II levels by
preventing the conversion of pro-renin to renin. Calcium channel blockers appear to reduce Ang II-induced
ACE2 downregulation. However, the data is limited to a single research
article that studies nifedipine’s effect on fractionated cell
extracts. Thiazides and mineralocorticoid
receptor antagonists did not improve the hypertensive rats’
naturally low ACE2 activity, although
mineralocorticoid receptor antagonists did reduce ACE expression. In heart failure patients, mineralocorticoid
receptor antagonists, on the other hand, increase membrane ACE2 activity. Newer therapies such as DNA aptamers, short
oligonucleotide sequences that bind to specific proteins, are being
investigated for masking the ACE2 binding domain. In this regard,
a group reported the synthesis of novel DNA aptamers that were shown
to specifically bind to the ACE2-K353 domain and blocked the entry
of the virus through ACE2 receptors. It is still controversial that non-ACEi/BRA drugs (β-blockers,
calcium channel blockers, diuretics) are more likely to increase the
risk of adverse outcomes than ACEi/BRA drugs that increase ACE2 and
provide theoretical protection if the reduction in membranous ACE2
seen in HTN and obesity is important in the pathophysiology of severe
COVID-19.

5.4.3

## Future Perspectives
It has been
confirmed that SARS-CoV-2 enters the lung through the ACE2 receptor
followed by other tissues like the liver, bile duct, gastrointestinal
system (small intestine, duodenum), esophagus, and kidney. SARS-CoV-2
can damage these organs associated with the heart and transmit it
from human to human rapidly, resulting in serious illness and life-threatening
diseases such as heart attack or cancer. Although higher levels of
ACE2 enzyme may be expressed in hypertensive patients, this can be
a marker for the severity of COVID-19. Effective treatment and prevention
of coronavirus infection should begin immediately. However, developing
vaccines or drugs for humans in a shorter period is difficult. Nevertheless,
only Covaxin and Covishield are currently available in India. In the
current scenario, if any person is infected with SARS-CoV-2, then
he/she should be isolated and should be controlling the origin of
the infection. Scientists are trying to develop vaccines or repurposing
drugs with the help of different in vivo or in vitro studies resulting in some positive evidence for
the treatment of COVID-19, but these pieces of evidence are not sufficient
to cure the infection.
As COVID-19 treatment options are evaluated,
it will be important to understand the possible side effects of CVD,
with a focus on drug–drug interactions. Further, in order to
learn more about how COVID-19 affects the heart, we need comprehensive
molecular tests that may look at how things work and prospective and
retrospective studies with good clinical methodology.

6

## Conclusion
The COVID-19 pandemic is
still globally stressful. SARS-CoV-2 has
infected the entire globe and has caused pneumonia-like symptoms in
severely infected populations. Conversely, some new variants have
been reported which have less serious effects with some patients being
asymptomatic post-infection. However, the population afflicted with
comorbid conditions is found to be more vulnerable to death or ICU
admissions comparable to people without comorbid conditions. Age is
found to be the highest risk factor in COVID-19 infection, as aged
people show enhanced sensitivity to immune responses. Similarly, SARS-CoV-2
causes the cytokine storm, which makes aged people more sensitive
to severe infection. There was a significant increase in mortality
observed with COVID-19-infected people having age-related disease
conditions such as PD, cancer, diabetes, and CVD. COVID-19 infection
in comorbid patients causes mitochondrial and ER malfunction that
induces α-Syn aggregation, activates TLRs, and ultimately causes
nuclear translocation of NFκB through JAK/STAT3 pathway in cancer
patients. SARS-CoV-2 infection in diabetic individuals leads to depletion
of beta cells of islets of Langerhans creating imbalance in glucose
levels. Hypertensive patients infected with COVID-19 demonstrate enhanced
Ang-II levels which are responsible for vasoconstriction ultimately
worsening hypertensive condition. Therefore, the population infected
with SARS-CoV-2 and with comorbid conditions needs to be monitored
carefully at the onset of the infection, as the symptoms may worsen
with time which may lead to severe life-threatening conditions. Toward
this, more clinical studies are warranted for an improved mechanistic
understanding of the susceptibility of comorbid patients to COVID-19
infection. Further, the comorbid population should be vaccinated on
a priority basis as compared to people without comorbid conditions.
Though various studies indicate the importance of comorbid disorders
as the possible determinants for COVID-19 infected individuals, a
comprehensive evaluation of an clarification regarding the vulnerability
in COVID-19 patients is required. This article has limits on clinical-epidemiological
conclusions and lacks critical and statistical analysis of COVID-19
and comorbidities and the reader should be aware of the aforementioned
restrictions in our review.

## Author Present Address
∇ International Clinical Research Center,
St. Anne’s University
Hospital Brno, Brno, Czech Republic

## Author Contributions
We declare
that all authors made fundamental contributions to the manuscript.
S.C., A.M.K., and N.A. conceptualized the review and made table of
contents. S.C. made the illustrations, prepared the draft and compiled
the manuscript. L.V.N. and A.P. contributed in cancer and COVID-19
section. N.S. and M.M. contributed in diabetes and COVID-19 section.
M.S. and F.M.M. contributed in PD and COVID-19 section. N.P. and M.G.
assisted in compilation and illustrations. AAS revised the manuscript
and wrote CVD and COVID-19. S.C., M.S., L.V.N., N.S., A.A.S., A.M.K.,
and N.A. proofread the manuscript. All authors read and approved the
final version of the manuscript.
This supplement
was supported by the National Institute of Pharmaceutical Education
and Research (NIPER) seed fund-Ahmedabad, Department of Pharmaceuticals,
Ministry of Chemicals and Fertilizers, Government of India. N.A. acknowledges
the support from SERB-POWER Grant (Project No SPG/2021/004209), Science
and Engineering Research Board, Government of India. A.M.K. gratefully
acknowledges the support of the Ramaligaswami Fellowship (No. BT/RLF/Re-entry/24/2017)
from the Department of Biotechnology, Ministry of Science and Technology,
Government of India.
The authors
declare no competing financial interest.

## Acknowledgments
The authors acknowledge National Institute of Pharmaceutical
Education and Research (NIPER)-Ahmedabad administration for providing
the facility and support for this review article. N.A. would like
to acknowledge Science and Engineering Research Board (SERB), Government
of India for SERB-Power Grant (Project No SPG/2021/004209) and All
India Institute of Medical Sciences (AIIMS), Bhopal, Madhya Pradesh,
India. A.M.K. would like to acknowledge project no. LX22NPO5107 (MEYS):
Financed by European Union – Next Generation EU for support.

## Abbreviations
ACEiangiotensin
converting enzyme inhibitor
ADAM
17ADAM metallopeptidase
domain 17
α-Synalpha-synuclein
COVID-19Coronavirus disease
CVDcardiovascular diseases
PAMPspathogen-associated molecular patterns
PAK1serine/threonine p21
activated kinase1
SARS-CoV-2severe acute respiratory syndrome-coronavirus-2
TRAFtumor necrosis factor
receptor-associated factor
TMPRSS2transmembrane serine protease2