822acssdJournal of Medicinal ChemistryJ Med ChemPMC1000975910009759100097593682182210.1021/acs.jmedchem.2c01882E3 Ligases
Meet Their Match: Fragment-Based Approaches
to Discover New E3 Ligands and to Unravel E3 Biology
MichaelidesIacovos N CollieGavin W 1Discovery Sciences, BioPharmaceuticals
R&D, AstraZeneca, Cambridge, CB4 0WG, United
Kingdom*Email: michaelides@astrazeneca.com.
*Email: gavin.collie@astrazeneca.com.
232202366531733173–31941432023© 2023 The Authors. Published by American Chemical SocietyPermits non-commercial access and re-use, provided that author attribution and integrity are maintained; but does not permit creation of adaptations or other derivative works (https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/).This article has been corrected. See J Med Chem. 2023 Nov 4;66(22):15564.

## Abstract
 Ubiquitination is a key post-translational modification
of proteins,
affecting the regulation of multiple cellular processes. Cells are
equipped with over 600 ubiquitin orchestrators, called E3 ubiquitin
ligases, responsible for directing the covalent attachment of ubiquitin
to substrate proteins. Due to their regulatory role in cells, significant
efforts have been made to discover ligands for E3 ligases. The recent
emergence of the proteolysis targeting chimera (PROTAC) and molecular
glue degrader (MGD) modalities has further increased interest in E3
ligases as drug targets. This perspective focuses on how fragment
based lead discovery (FBLD) methods have been used to discover new
ligands for this important target class. In some cases these efforts
have led to clinical candidates; in others, they have provided tools
for deepening our understanding of E3 ligase biology. Recently, FBLD-derived
ligands have inspired the design of PROTACs that are able to artificially
modulate protein levels in cells.

statusreleaseddisplay-pdfyesis-in-collection-domainyesis-olfnois-manuscriptnois-preprintnois-journal-matternois-scannednois-retractednoReceived 2022 Nov 17; Collection date 2023 Mar 9.

## Introduction
Ubiquitination, also known as ubiquitinylation,
refers to the post-translational
modification of proteins with ubiquitin, and is responsible for the
regulation of numerous biological processes in the cells of eukaryotes. , Ubiquitin, discovered in 1975, is a
76-amino-acid protein (8.6 kDa) that is abundant in cells (20–85
μM ) and highly conserved across
eukaryotes. It is appended to proteins via a sequence of enzymatic
reactions whereby a ubiquitin activating enzyme (E1) uses ATP to form
a high energy thioester bond to ubiquitin via a cysteine residue ( ). The charged E1
then delivers the ubiquitin to a ubiquitin conjugating enzyme (E2).
Finally, the ubiquitin is delivered to the substrate protein either
via a third transient thioester bond formation to an E3 ubiquitin
ligase (E3) that harbors the substrate protein (pathway b →
c, ) or by
a direct delivery to the E3-associated protein (pathway a, ), thus bypassing
the E3 thioester bond formation. The enzymatic sequence for each ubiquitin
terminates once a peptide bond is formed between the C-terminus of
ubiquitin and the lysine or terminal amino group of the substrate
protein. Sequential additions of ubiquitin to a protein, via one of
ubiquitin’s lysines (K6, K11, K27, K29, K33, K48, K63) or via
the amino group of its N-terminal methionine (M1), give rise to distinct
architectures of polyubiquitin chains. These lead to profound consequences for the protein itself and/or
its interacting partners, e.g., protein localization (monoubiquitination),
proteasomal degradation (typically K48- or K11-linked chains), lysosomal
degradation (monoubiquitination or K63-linked chains), regulation
of protein interactions (e.g., monoubiquitination’s involvement
in the DNA damage response and K63-linked chains’ role in kinase
activity in the NF-κB signaling pathway). , , 
 Considering the importance of ubiquitination in
cellular processes,
scientists have long investigated modulators of E1 and E2 enzymes
as well as E3 ligases for therapeutic effect. , The
>600 E3 ligases represent the largest and most diverse family of
proteins
involved in ubiquitination, followed by ∼40 E2s and only 2
E1s. The plethora, diversity, and substrate specificity of E3 ligases
may represent an opportunity for the discovery of selective modulators
of ubiquitination with a potentially wider safety margin than modulators
of E1 or E2 enzymes. However, unlike, for example, the similarly populous
kinase family of proteins, E3 ligases do not have a conserved ligand
binding site for small molecules like ATP. In fact, just like E1s
and E2s, E3s rely on protein–protein interactions (PPIs) to
associate to E2s and their substrates, which is likely the reason
E3s have proven challenging to drug over the years.
E3 ligases
are divided into 3 main classes, namely: RING (really
interesting new gene), HECT (homologous to E6AP C-terminus) and RBR
(RING between RING). RING E3s coordinate the direct delivery of ubiquitin
from the E2 to the endogenous protein substrate (pathway a, ), whereas HECT and
RBR E3s mediate the delivery by forming one last transient thioester
bond to ubiquitin before it is delivered to the substrate (pathway
b → c, ). RING E3s represent the most abundant and largest class of E3s
(∼600) in humans followed by HECTs (28) and RBRs (14). RING
E3s are further divided into subclasses that define their active form:
monomeric-, homodimeric-, heterodimeric-, and multisubunit-RING E3s.
HECTs are also comprised of subclasses including NEDD4 (neural precursor
cell expressed developmentally down-regulated protein 4) and HERC
(HECT and RCC1-like domain). Although not the focus of this perspective,
further details on the structure, classification, and function of
E3 ligases have been comprehensively covered in various excellent
reviews. , 
Despite the challenges of targeting
PPI sites, a number of E3 ligase
small molecule ligands have been discovered that have helped the scientific
community to deepen our understanding of E3 ligase biology and to
advance our ability to target PPI sites. Moreover, scientists have taken the modulation of ubiquitination
a step further and harnessed E3 ligases to ubiquitinate nonsubstrate
proteins, also known as “proteins of interest” (POIs),
for proteasomal degradation using proteolysis targeting chimeras (PROTACs) − and molecular glue degraders (MGDs). , The PROTAC
modality relies on the linking of an E3 ligase ligand to a POI ligand
(POI-L) that anchors the E3 ligase close to the POI in order to ubiquitinate
it. MGDs function by forming a complementary surface between the E3
ligase and a protein, often termed neosubstrate, that once again facilitates
the proximity induced delivery of ubiquitin.
The manipulation
of the ubiquitin proteasome system (UPS) via PROTACs
and MGDs has reinvigorated the quest for E3 ligase ligand discovery.
As such, over the past 10–15 years, many groups have focused
their efforts either on repurposing known E3 ligase ligands or on
initiating hit discovery campaigns to enrich the chemical space of
E3 ligase binders.
Various approaches including virtual screening
(VS), , high throughput screening (HTS), − and DNA-encoded library
(DEL) screening have been used over the
years for the discovery of ligands for PPI sites, including those
of E3 ligases. , This perspective however focuses
specifically on the implementation of fragment-based lead discovery
(FBLD) , for the discovery of ligands for E3 ligases. , Despite the accepted challenges of fragment screening for PPI sites, , ligands have been successfully discovered and developed into leads
and clinical candidates. Furthermore, ligand discovery has also resulted
in chemical tools that have assisted in deciphering the intricate
biology of E3 ligases.
Screening libraries used in FBLD are
composed of small molecules
called fragments that are broadly compliant with what is now widely
recognized as the rule-of-three (Ro3). , The Ro3 represents
a guideline for fragment molecules to satisfy the following parameters:
MW < 300 Da, clogP ≤ 3, hydrogen bond donors (HBD) ≤
3, hydrogen bond acceptors (HBA) ≤ 3, number of rotatable bonds
≤3, and polar surface area (PSA) ≤ 60 Å2. The small size and simplicity of fragments enables a minimalist
approach to drug discovery, whereby a vast chemical space can be efficiently
covered using libraries of only a few hundred molecules. This makes
fragment screening appealing to industry and academic investigators
alike and represents a very accessible, cost-effective, and sustainable
approach to hit discovery. Furthermore, unlike conventional libraries
used for HTS, fragment libraries are not biased toward previously
explored targets. This makes FBLD an indispensable method for assessing
the ligandability of novel proteins’ binding sites, including
PPI sites.
The small size of fragments, however, results in
them having weak
binding affinities to proteins. For this reason, fragments tend to
be screened at high concentrations using biophysical techniques such
as nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR), surface plasmon resonance (SPR),
differential scanning fluorimetry (DSF) – also known as thermal
shift assay (TSA) – and X-ray crystallography. Weak binders
can be skillfully optimized into bespoke potent ligands for proteins
via fragment growing, merging, and hybridizing methodologies. , , However, the successful pursuit
of such approaches is often contingent on the determination of the
binding mode of the fragment hits to the target protein. This is typically
determined using X-ray crystallographic methods and/or 15N 2D-NMR experiments. Recently, scientists at Astex expanded the
FBLD structural biology toolbox by reporting a proof-of-concept fragment
screen using cryogenic electron microscopy (cryo-EM), a technology that may facilitate future FBLD for challenging
structural systems such as multiprotein complexes and membrane proteins.
The focus of this perspective is on the effective use of fragment
screening and FBLD for the assessment of the ligandability, druggability,
and biology of E3 ligases. The perspective is divided into the different
approaches whereby researchers have been successful toward this aim,
namely: (a) noncovalent fragment screens, (b) covalent fragment screens,
(c) fragment based deconstruction-reconstruction (FBDR) approaches,
and (d) fragment scouts for discovering E3s for PROTAC drug discovery.
The majority of the ligands described herein are seen to bind to the
substrate binding sites of the E3s. Case-studies involving binding
to other interfaces of the E3s (such as regulatory sites) or other
components of the multiprotein ubiquitin ligase complexes (such as
adaptor proteins) are indicated where known.

## Noncovalent Fragment Screens
As described above, the
screening of noncovalent fragment libraries
relies on sensitive biophysical and/or structural biology techniques
for the identification of hits. The curation and quality (with respect
to, e.g., chemotype, purity, and solubility of members) of the fragment
libraries can have a significant impact on the discovery and quality
of these hits. Researchers have thus taken an ever evolving range
of strategies for designing these libraries. These include the development
of “technology-appropriate subsets”, technology-wide biophysics “ligandability
sets”, as well as targeted
sets for families of targets , and specific pharmacophores. , 
A range of strategies have been used to identify fragment
hits
for E3 ligases. What is clear from the available literature for E3
ligases, much like other targets, is that having a robust structural
system in place significantly facilitates the hit to lead optimization
in an FBLD campaign.

## VHL
The von Hippel-Lindau (VHL) protein is a multisubunit
RING E3 ligase that has been studied extensively as a tumor suppressor
protein. Under normoxic conditions, VHL
recognizes the prolyl hydroxylated HIF1α (hypoxia-inducible
factor 1α) protein and targets it for ubiquitination via its
E3 ligase activity. This E3 ligase activity is dependent upon VHL
binding to the adaptor proteins elongin B and elongin C, along with
Cullin 2 and RING box protein 1 (Rbx1), thereby linking the substrate
recognition module of VHL to an E2 ubiquitin conjugating enzyme, which
then attaches ubiquitin to HIF1α, marking it for degradation
by the proteasome. In addition to receiving
attention for its role in various cancers (including in von Hippel-Lindau
disease), VHL is one of the few E3 ligases for which validated small-molecule
ligands have been reported. , Despite the interest
in such VHL ligands, which has focused largely on their use as PROTACs, , the limited chemical structural diversity and a desire to improve
drug-like properties results in continued interest in finding new
small molecule binders of VHL. Toward this end, Lucas et al. of the
Ciulli lab have reported an extensive fragment-based screening campaign
against VHL, providing an excellent example
of the strength of combining multiple biophysical fragment hit-finding
techniques with X-ray crystallography to discover novel binders of
an important drug target. Lucas et al. performed three primary fragment
screens – two by DSF and one by NMR. Over 1200 fragments were
screened by DSF against either a complex formed of VHL, elongin C
and elongin B (VCB), or against the VCB complex preincubated with
a peptide fragment of HIF1α. A smaller library of 144 fragments
was also screened against the VCB complex by 1D 1H NMR,
followed by addition of HIF1α peptide to assess binding to the
HIF1α site. The DSF screens yielded 65 primary hits, with the
NMR screen yielding 17 hits. These 82 primary hits were then subject
to a secondary validation screen by NMR (waterLOGSY, STD, and CPMG),
which validated 18 hits in total. These 18 fragments were then soaked
at high concentration (20 mM) into crystals of either the apo VCB complex or crystals of VCB bound by HIF1α,
yielding three ligand-bound crystal structures ( ). Of particular note was the discovery of
all three fragments to bind to sites not previously known to bind
small molecules, with MB235 and MB1200 binding
to a PPI interface on elongin C (the site to which Cullin 2 naturally
binds), and MB756 binding to a previously undiscovered
cryptic pocket on VHL ( B). With Kds determined by isothermal
titration calorimetry (ITC) to be in the millimolar range for MB1200 and MB756 (6.7 and 5.0 mM, respectively),
this study highlights the advantages of combining high-throughput
biophysical methods (such as DSF) with high sensitivity biophysical
techniques (such as NMR) along with X-ray crystallography to discover
novel chemical start points for a protein complex of significant interest
to modern day drug discovery.
 

## UHRF1
Ubiquitin-like-containing PHD and RING finger
domains 1 (UHRF1) is a multidomain E3 ligase from the RING family
of E3 ligases. UHRF1 plays a key role in both epigenetic regulation
and in the maintenance of genome integrity, and as such, the dysregulation of UHRF1 activity is associated with
a number of cancers. , Due to its role as an oncogene,
with the aim of discovering inhibitors of UHRF1, Chang et al. used
an FBLD hit finding approach targeting the UHRF1 tandem Tudor domain
(TTD). TTDs, including that of UHRF1,
are epigenetic reader domains, recognizing and binding to the H3K9me3
histone mark. Chang and co-workers screened a library of ∼2300
fragments against the isolated TTD of UHRF1 using three separate technologies:
DSF, AlphaScreen (amplified luminescent proximity homogeneous assay
screen), and time-resolved-fluorescence resonance energy transfer
(TR-FRET). These screens yielded primary hits of 175, 145, and 101
fragments, respectively. Comparing the hits of the three screens,
just two fragments were identified as hits in all screens. Of these
two fragments, F1957–0227 was identified as a
pan-assay interference compound and was not followed up further ( A). The remaining
hit, F1957–0088 ( A), was screened in a dose-dependent manner
in all three screening assays, yielding EC50 values of
45.1 μM and 56.7 μM by TR-FRET and AlphaScreen, respectively,
with DSF indicating a dose-dependent effect on the melting temperature
(Tm). Structure–activity relationship
(SAR) exploration by catalogue then identified 2,4-lutidine as an
improved inhibitor, with EC50 values of 29.2 μM and
10.0 μM as assessed by TR-FRET and AlphaScreen, respectively
( A). 2,4-Lutidine
was further validated by 1H–15N HSQC
NMR experiments and was subsequently successfully cocrystallized with
the isolated TTD of UHRF1. Of particular note is that the crystal
structure reveals 2,4-lutidine to bind to two distinct sites on UHRF1—both
of which are known to be functional ( B). One 2,4-lutidine molecule binds to the
site known to bind trimethylated lysine residues, , stacking onto the side chain of F152. The second 2,4-lutidine molecule
binds to a regulatory arginine binding site to which, for example,
R121 of the Lig1 DNA ligase binds, forming
a key polar contact to D142 of UHRF1. Overall this work highlights
the importance and efficacy of applying strict validation and triaging
criteria to primary fragment hits, as well as the power of FBLD in
identifying previously unliganded binding sites.
 Curiously, Kori and co-workers independently arrived
at a surprisingly
similar chemical end point, though via considerably different methods. Kori et al. used extensive computational methods
to identify potential inhibitors of the UHRF1 TTD (specifically of
the UHRF1-Lig1 interaction) by virtually screening a library of 200,000
compounds (encompassing both fragments and molecules with a MW >
350
Da). These computational efforts identified 130 compounds as potential
inhibitors of the TTD-Lig1 interaction, which were subsequently screened
experimentally by DSF. These experiments identified just one compound,
fragment 5A-DMP (5-amino-2,4-dimethylpyridine), to thermally
stabilize the TDD to any significant degree (ΔTm = 3.1 °C) ( A). 5A-DMP was then assessed by ITC, yielding
a Kd of 19.3 μM for the TTD. Successful
cocrystallization of this compound with the isolated TTD of UHRF1
revealed a binding mode highly similar to one of the binding sites
of 2,4-lutidine discovered by Chang et al., with 5A-DMP binding to the regulatory arginine binding site ( C), to which the Lig1 DNA ligase
is known to bind. This work highlights
the arguably underexplored potential of applying rigorous computational
methods along with robust experimental validation to discover novel
fragment binders of a challenging PPI site of an important cancer
drug target. It further provides an interesting example of a hit finding
campaign in which both fragments and larger compounds were screened,
yet only fragments were identified as hits for the target protein.

## PRC1
Polycomb repressive complex 1 (PRC1) is a key
epigenetic regulator, able to ubiquitinate histone H2A (on K119) and
thereby modulate transcriptional activity. The E3 ligase activity of PRC1 is carried out by the heterodimeric
proteins RING1B and BMI1, the aberrant activity of which has been
associated with acute myelogenous leukemia (AML) and other cancers. As such, there is a need for inhibitors of the
E3 ligase activity of PRC1. Toward this end, Shukla and co-workers
screened a library of around 1000 fragments against a RING1B-BMI1
fusion protein by 1H–15N NMR. These efforts identified fragment RB-1 as a weak (∼7 mM) binder of RING1B ( ). Extensive chemistry efforts then led to
the significantly more active RB-2, with a Kd of 11.5 μM (as measured by NMR) and E3 ligase
inhibitory activity of 12 μM (IC50). A structural
model of the potential binding mode of RB-2 for RING1B
was then generated using a combination of X-ray crystallography and
NMR, enabling the structure-guided improvement of this inhibitor to RB-3, with a Kd for RING1B-BMI1
of 2.8 μM and an ability to inhibit the E3 ligase activity of
RING1B-BMI1 of 1.6 μM (IC50). Together, this work
highlights the ability of FBLD methods to discover novel inhibitors
of a notoriously hard-to-drug protein fold (i.e., a RING domain) in
the context of an unmet clinical need.
 

## TRIM24
Tripartite motif-containing protein 24 (TRIM24)
is a RING E3 ligase known to promote the degradation of p53. Consequently, overexpression of TRIM24 has been
linked to numerous cancers − with TRIM24 deletion leading
to p53-dependent apoptosis in human breast cancers. TRIM24 is involved in numerous biological processes, including
the regulation of nuclear receptors, thus giving it its original name,
TIF1α (transcription intermediary factor 1 alpha). Like most TRIM proteins, TRIM24 contains a RING
B-Box coiled-coil (RBCC) domain at its N-terminal region, consisting
of a RING domain, two B-box domains, and a coiled-coil region. Furthermore,
TRIM24 belongs to the C–VI subfamily that is characterized
by a C-terminal region that contains a plant homeodomain (PHD) and
a bromodomain region; the latter recognizing histone and nonhistone
tags (e.g., acetylated p53). 
In
search of ligands for the bromodomain of TRIM24, Ruan and co-workers
ran an NMR fragment screen (WaterLOGSY, STD, CPMG) to discover orthogonal and more selective scaffolds to
known inhibitors. , The primary screen resulted in
the identification of 22 fragment hits, 5 of which were confirmed
to bind to the acetyl-lysine recognition pocket of the bromodomain.
Binding affinities were evaluated by measuring the chemical shift
perturbations of 15N-labeled TRIM24 PHD-bromodomain upon
titration of the hits. These were further validated using ITC and
a fluorescence polarization (FP) assay looking at displacement of
a fluorescent peptide surrogate of a natural substrate of the bromodomain.
Two of the hits (not shown) contained the N,N-dimethylbenzimidazolone
scaffold found in the reported TRIM24 inhibitor IACS-9571 ( A), a compound
optimized from a chemotype identified in an HTS screen, which included
a focused library of acetyl lysine mimetics. However, the remainder (1, 2, and 3) were claimed to be “remarkably different” to the known inhibitor and showed a range of binding affinities
( B). The researchers
subsequently focused their efforts on identifying the binding mode
of the three novel scaffolds by soaking them into crystals of the
bromodomain of TRIM24. Two crystal structures were successfully solved
revealing 2 and 3 to bind to residue N980
of the bromodomain, a key residue known to bind acetylated lysine
substrates. Furthermore, both fragment-TRIM24 complexes showed near
identical distribution of the five waters observed in the cocrystal
structure of IACS-9571 with the bromodomain (pdb entry 4yc9, not shown) as represented by the purple waters in the complex
of 3 with TRIM24 in C.
 Noting the proximity of one of the conserved waters
(labeled “w1”
in C) to the
fragment hit 3 in the cocrystal structure, the researchers
appended a polar group on the aminothiazole group in an attempt to
perturb the water network. Indeed by doing so, an increase in binding
affinity from 310 μM to 100 μM was noted for 4. Interestingly, a cocrystal structure with TRIM24 revealed the fragment
to bind 2 Å deeper into the binding pocket, rearranging and partially
displacing the conserved water network ( C, green waters).
While the affinity
of the elaborated fragment 4 is
still fairly weak, it has an appealing ligand efficiency (LE = 0.37 kcal mol–1 per
heavy atom). Additionally, the hydrazine functionalities make compound 4 a suboptimal starting
point for a medicinal chemistry program. Nevertheless, this study
demonstrates that fragment screening, coupled with a robust structural
system can enable researchers to identify opportunities to make small
modifications to fragments resulting in dramatic changes in the binding
modes of ligands to well characterized pockets. Furthermore, this demonstration of the fruitful perturbation
of the conserved water network could open new avenues for inhibitor
optimization for the bromodomain of TRIM24.

## KEAP1 
Kelch-like ECH-associated
protein 1 (KEAP1) is a Cullin-RING E3 ligase responsible for the ubiquitination
and subsequent proteasomal degradation of the transcription factor
nuclear factor erythroid 2-related factor (NRF2), a master regulator
of the antioxidative response. , Under normal conditions,
KEAP1 maintains a homeostatic level of NRF2 in the cell. However,
under oxidative stress, specific cysteine residues on KEAP1 are modified,
leading to a conformational change in the protein responsible for
a cessation of ubiquitination of bound NRF2. , , Newly translated NRF2 is subsequently translocated
to the nucleus where it switches on the antioxidant defense system
by promoting the expression of cytoprotective proteins. , , The relationship between KEAP1
and NRF2 has led to studies aiming to upregulate NRF2 and induce a
potential therapeutic effect for a range of diseases (e.g., respiratory,
metabolic diseases) and disorders (e.g., neurodegenerative, autoimmune
disorders). 
A number of KEAP1 inhibitors
capable of intercepting the ubiquitination and degradation of NRF2
have been reported to date. , These either mimic
the aforementioned oxidative stress response or directly antagonize
the NRF2 PPI with the Kelch domain of KEAP1. Potent inhibitors thus
broadly rely on either (a) electrophilic warheads able to covalently modify key cysteines, (b) multiple acidic
functionalities necessary to bind to
the arginine-rich Kelch domain of KEAP1, or (c) acid-rich peptidic
scaffolds. These compositions, however,
can lead to suboptimal metabolic, safety, and/or physicochemical properties; the
latter characteristic often being the culprit for reduced cell activity
for the inhibitors. 
In 2016, scientists
at Astex and GSK disclosed the first fragment
screen against KEAP1 that was aimed at identifying new hits that could
eventually be optimized to inhibitors with improved properties over
the existing equity. Employing a mouse
KEAP1 Kelch domain construct, a high-throughput X-ray crystallography
screen was performed using a library of ∼330 fragments. This
screen identified three fragments binding to distinct locations of
the Kelch domain that were later characterized as the “acid”, “planar”, and
“sulfonamide” regions of the pocket
as represented by fragments 5, 6, and 7, respectively ( ). , Although the hits were weak (e.g., Kd > 1 mM for 5), the screen
demonstrated
that non-electrophilic and neutral fragments could bind to the Kelch
domain of KEAP1. The researchers used the carboxylic acid fragment 5 as an anchor to the protein’s R483 residue and identified
opportunities for fragment growth into the remaining “sulfonamide” and “planar”
regions. A combination of fragment merging and skillful structure-based
drug design (SBDD) (e.g., the rigidification by cyclization of the
sulfonamide in its bound conformation) resulted in the invention of
the monoacidic lead KI-696 that has a 1.3 nM affinity
for KEAP1 as measured by ITC ( A). , At the time of publication, KI-696 represented the most potent small-molecule KEAP1 inhibitor
capable of activating the NRF2 antioxidative response in human cell-based
and in vivo models with high selectivity (cell EC50 = 12 nM). This work highlights the value of using FBLD and
specifically high-throughput crystallographic screening for challenging
targets such as those containing PPI sites. The small size and chemical
simplicity of fragments, coupled with a robust structural system can
help explore chemical space efficiently and thus inspire alternative
approaches − to designing inhibitors for well-studied binding
sites with established pharmacophores.
 Interestingly, scientists at Dana Farber subsequently
repurposed KI-696 and fused it to JQ1 (a
known inhibitor of members of the Bromo- and Extra-terminal domain
(BET) family of proteins) via an alkyl linker to form PROTAC 8 ( ). , This was reported to promote the KEAP1-dependent
degradation of Bromodomain-containing protein 4 (BRD4), BRD3, and
BRD2 at a 1 μM concentration in MM.1S multiple myeloma cells.
The choice of POI ligand perhaps reflects favorable binding and improved
physicochemical properties of the monoacid KI-696 over
other KEAP1 inhibitors. It is worth noting that the Jin lab recently
explored an ester prodrug of a related PROTAC, MS83,
in order to improve the cell permeability of KI-696-containing
PROTACs ( ). 
 

## Parkin
Parkin is a neuroprotective protein belonging
to the RBR E3 ligase family which plays a key role in mitochondrial
quality control and turnover/mitophagy. Furthermore, mutations within its gene have been linked to an autosomal
recessive form of Parkinson’s disease, making it an appealing
target for neurodegenerative disease drug discovery. , 
With an aim to identify agonists capable of stabilizing functionally
active Parkin, scientists at Elan pharmaceuticals ran the first disclosed
SPR fragment screen against an E3 ligase. Their bespoke library comprised of 5260 fragments that were selected
based on their central nervous system (CNS) “lead-likeness”, chemical diversity, and high solubility. The fragments
were tested at a single concentration by SPR using full length Parkin
and subsequently the hits were progressed to dose response experiments.
A selection of hits were further triaged to STD NMR experiments using
the R0RBR domain of Parkin, to assist in determining the binding sites
of the fragments. A range of SPR binding affinities (18–220
μM) and LEs (0.23–0.50 kcal mol–1 per
heavy atom) were reported. Despite not disclosing the chemical structures
of the hits, the researchers noted a prevalence of thiazole and quinoline
motifs and stated the hits were “excellent candidates
for hit to lead expansion”.

## XIAP and cIAP1
X-linked IAP (XIAP) and cellular inhibitor
of apoptosis 1 (cIAP1) are RING E3 ligases involved in proapoptotic
and prosurvival signaling. − XIAP prevents apoptosis by binding
and thus inhibiting caspase-3, −7, and −9 via its baculovirus
IAP repeat (BIR) domains. cIAP1 is a poor caspase inhibitor; however,
among other roles, it can prevent tumor necrosis factor alpha (TNFα)-mediated
apoptosis by interacting with complexes recruited to the TNF receptor. − This facilitates the nondegradative K63-linked polyubiquitination
of receptor-interacting protein kinase 1 (RIPK1), , , an event key to activating the prosurvival
canonical NF-κB pathway. Conversely, nonubiquitinated RIPK1
acts as a proapoptotic adaptor through the binding and activation
of caspase-8. , − 
Second mitochondria derived activator of caspases
(SMAC) is the endogenous antagonist that binds to the BIR2 and BIR3
domains of IAPs, ultimately leading to the induction of apoptosis. , SMAC binding to XIAP releases caspases, and in the case of cIAP1,
it leads to the autoubiquitination and subsequent loss of the protein. The BIR3 binding motif of SMAC contains the
N-terminal AVPI tetrapeptide, upon which many IAP antagonists have
been based. , The terminal alanine residue
of AVPI, ubiquitous in these peptidomimetic antagonists, is largely
responsible for a higher selectivity for cIAP1 over XIAP. This forms
two charge–charge interactions to acidic residues (D314 and
E319) in cIAP1; however, it is only able to form one charge–charge
interaction in XIAP (with E314) since a glutamine is present at position
319 ( A). Although
many cIAP1 selective SMAC-mimetic inhibitors are capable of promoting
cell death, a more balanced potent antagonism of cIAP1 and XIAP has
been proposed for a more efficient induction of apoptosis. 
 In order to discover nonpeptidic, dual, and balanced
antagonists
of XIAP and cIAP1 for inducing apoptosis in cancer cells, scientists
at Astex performed a crystallographic and a protein-observed NMR fragment
screen against XIAP-BIR3. In this screen,
the Astex fragment library was supplemented with 100 fragments selected
by VS. , As expected, a number of alanine-based fragments,
such as 9, with high LEs were identified. Expectedly,
these were characterized by an unbalanced selectivity profile toward
cIAP1 ( B).
The team instead chose to explore an alternative, piperazine-containing
fragment hit 10 from the supplemented set, as the starting
point for lead optimization. Fragment 10 was cocrystallized
with XIAP and the basic piperazine was shown to form a bidentate interaction
to E314 and the backbone carbonyl of D309 ( C). Although weak (IC50 > 5
mM)
and inefficient (LE < 0.21 kcal mol–1 per heavy
atom), the novel binding mode and the limited exploration of this
scaffold in the context of XIAP encouraged
the team to deprioritize alanine-containing fragments and instead
explore 10 for dual antagonism of cIAP1 and XIAP.
In the hit to lead campaign ( ), the researchers incorporated the methyl group of
alanine-containing fragment 9 to fill a small hydrophobic
pocket identified in the cocrystal structure of XIAP bound by 10 ( C). Additionally, the piperidine was replaced with a 5-azaindoline
group to afford 11 which exhibited a relatively balanced
selectivity profile, as determined by cIAP1 and XIAP FP assays. The
inclusion of the electron deficient aromatic ring in 11 was key in complementing an electronegative region of the protein
that resulted in a mismatch of electrostatics with earlier electron-rich
analogues. Drawing inspiration from the binding mode of the SMAC mimetic
AVPF tetrapeptide to XIAP, 11 was further elaborated into 12. Here, a pendant methoxyethane
and benzyl group occupy the same regions of the pocket as the valine
and phenylalanine residues of AVPF, respectively. Despite improving
the potency overall, the large benzyl group resulted in a bias toward
cIAP1 activity. Nonetheless, at the time of publication, 12 represented the first nonalanine containing, nM affinity, dual antagonist
of cIAP1 and XIAP.
 Scientists at Astex disclosed further optimization , of this series that eventually led to the clinical drug candidate ASTX660, an orally bioavailable cIAP1/XIAP antagonist, for
patients with advanced solid tumors and lymphomas. Similar to SMAC mimetics, , both 12 and ASTX660 lead to the autodegradation of
cIAP1. Overall, this study demonstrates how careful selection of novel/underexplored
fragment hits, however weak, can be merged with known ligands (e.g.,
alanine and phenylalanine residues of the AVPF tetrapeptide) to provide
potent inhibitors for PPIs with a differentiated profile over the
known equity.
It is worth noting that SMAC mimetic antagonists
and members of
the Astex chemical series have been repurposed for the synthesis of
PROTACs, also known as specific and nongenetic IAP dependent protein
erasers (SNIPERs), able to induce the degradation of a number of POIs. − 

## CRBN
Cereblon (CRBN) is a ubiquitously expressed multisubunit
RING E3 ligase that is involved in the regulation of cell metabolism
and the healthy function of ion channels. Furthermore, mutations in its gene have been linked to autosomal
recessive nonsyndromic intellectual disability. CRBN has become a focal point in UPS research since it
was recognized as the protein that the immunomodulatory imide drugs
(IMiDs) , thalidomide, pomalidomide, and lenalidomide
bind to in order to elicit their therapeutic effect via a molecular
glue mechanism of action (MOA). − It has also become
infamous following the characterization of its role in thalidomide-induced
teratogenicity in the unborn child, , arguably
one of the pharmaceutical industry’s most significant tragedies
to date. , Furthermore, since the advent
of the PROTAC modality in the medicinal chemistry community, the ubiquity of CRBN binding motifs in research
papers and patent applications is noteworthy. Akin to the recognition of its exogenous ligands, it has
recently been shown that CRBN recognizes the C-terminal cyclic imide
post-translational modification as a protein damage degron motif. , 
Building on earlier work that described the binding of uridine
to CRBN, Boichenko et al. took a knowledge-based
approach to explore what they referred to as the “chemical
ligand space of CRBN”. Noting the similarities between uridine’s and thalidomide’s
uracil and glutarimide rings, respectively, they employed a FRET assay
to screen a vast selection of a 4–7 membered ring matched molecular
pair (MMP) fragments to reveal the key pharmacophores for CRBN binding
( ).
 Comparing glutarimide (13: Ki = 28 μM, LE = 0.78 kcal mol–1 per
heavy atom) with the corresponding 2-piperidinone (14: Ki = 146 μM, LE = 0.75 kcal mol–1 per heavy atom) demonstrates the requirement of the
second carbonyl for appreciable affinity to CRBN. Interestingly, however,
the azetidine-2-one (15: Ki = 77 μM, LE = 1.1 kcal mol–1 per heavy atom)
shows a 2-fold improved affinity over 14 despite its
smaller size. Furthermore, succinimide (16: Ki = 4.3 μM, LE = 1.1 kcal mol–1 per heavy atom) exhibits improved affinity over glutarimide (13: Ki = 28 μM, 0.78 kcal
mol–1 per heavy atom), suggesting that the 5-membered
ring may be a better starting point for lead optimization. Introduction
of an NH appears to be detrimental to binding as indicated by the
affinities of the dihydrouracil (17: Ki = 88 μM, LE = 0.70 kcal mol–1 per heavy atom) and hydantoin (18: Ki = 43 μM, LE = 0.86 kcal mol–1 per heavy atom) when compared to their MMPs, 13 (Ki = 28 μM, LE = 0.78 kcal mol–1 per heavy atom), and 16 (Ki = 4.3 μM, LE = 1.1 kcal mol–1 per heavy
atom), respectively. Interestingly, it appears as though the planar
fragment uracil (19, Ki 
= 35 μM, LE = 0.76 kcal mol–1 per heavy atom)
shows improved affinity over the dihydrouracil (17: Ki = 88 μM, LE = 0.70 kcal mol–1 per heavy atom). The researchers even noted some weak binding affinity
for the acyclic acetyl urea (20: Ki = 522 μM, LE = 0.64 kcal mol–1 per
heavy atom) and thus postulated that the acetamide group (MeCONH2) may be the minimal pharmacophore for binding to this pocket
of CRBN. Representative hits were progressed to crystallography studies
using a bacterial CRBN model system, confirming binding of selected
active fragments to the same site as the IMiDs ( B).
This work highlights
CRBN’s affinity for fragments and thus
its suitability for a bona fide fragment screen.
This affinity has allowed for the implementation of a high throughput
FRET assay, in lieu of the more sensitive biophysical assays used
in classic fragment screening. The binding affinities, coupled with
the LEs of the reported fragments already represent highly appealing
starting points for hit to lead optimization. Nevertheless, the execution
of a fully fledged fragment screen against CRBN could be particularly
impactful considering how the fragment-like IMiDs have become indispensable
tools in cancer treatment but also more
recently in PROTAC drug discovery, despite
their infamy. , This beyond rule-of-five modality
requires careful modulation of physicochemical properties (e.g., MW,
lipophilicity, and PSA) , in order to achieve
acceptable in vivo properties, and fragments make
excellent starting points in this endeavor. It is thus unsurprising
that the pioneers in the field, Arvinas, have recently started clinical
trials with two orally bioavailable PROTACs: ARV-471 , (estrogen receptor degrader) and ARV-110 (androgen receptor degrader) that contain the glutarimide substructure
common to the fragment-like IMiDs.

## GID4
Glucose-induced degradation protein 4 homologue
(GID4) is the substrate recognition component of the C-terminal to
LisH (CTLH) RING E3 ligase complex, the
orthologous yeast complex of which is involved in glucose metabolism. In an effort to expand the repertoire of E3
ligases able to be harnessed for targeted protein degradation (i.e.,
via molecular glues or PROTACs), Chana and co-workers screened human
GID4 by fragment-based methods in order to find novel small molecule
binders of this understudied E3 ligase. A library of 1000 Ro3-like fragments was screened against 15N labeled GID4 (residues 124–289) using 1H–15N HSQC NMR. This identified nine fragments as potential hits,
eight of which were then screened by DSF, with six fragments seen
to stabilize the protein by greater than 1 °C. Cocrystallization
trials were then performed on all eight available primary hits, yielding
crystal structures for three fragments (21, 22, and 23 in A and B). All three fragments were shown to bind to
the substrate recognition site of GID4, with a shared common interaction
to residue E237. In an effort to increase the affinity of fragments 21, 22, and 23 for GID4, analogues
for all three fragments were purchased and screened by DSF, followed
by assessment of promising compounds using a probe displacement FP
assay (using a modified version of the GID4 substrate peptide as a
displacement probe). This brought the weak affinity (below the limit
of accurate quantification by ITC) of 23 on-scale, yielding
fragments 24, 25, and 26, with
IC50 values of 264.0 μM, 148.5 μM, and 113.2
μM, respectively. No commercially available analogues of 21 or 22 yielded improved binders. However, structure-guided
synthesis of 30 analogues of 22 resulted in compound 27 ( A and C), with an FP IC50 of 18.9 μM for GID4—a
marked improvement on the weak affinity (below the limit of accurate
quantification by ITC) of 22 for GID4. While the ability
of these optimized hits (24, 25, 26, and 27) to function as molecular glues or PROTACs
was not reported, the discovery of novel, validated binders of an
E3 ligase for which no known small molecule binders had been previously
reported in the literature is noteworthy,
and the findings reported by Chana and co-workers will undoubtedly form the basis of further investigations
into the CTLH E3 ligase complex.
 

## Covalent Fragment Screens
PPI sites, which often lack
deep or well-defined binding pockets,
make the discovery of weak reversible fragment ligands challenging.
An alternative to classic reversible fragment screens is the screening–often
using mass spectrometric techniques—of a library of electrophilic
fragments, capable of covalently binding to a protein (either reversibly
or irreversibly). , This approach takes advantage
of an electrophilic handle appended to a fragment (e.g., acrylamide,
chloroacetamide), that is capable of augmenting its binding affinity
by anchoring the fragment to nucleophilic protein residues such as
cysteines. In theory, during the hit to lead optimization, the covalency
of the hit can either be maintained , or alternatively
removed to provide a fully reversible lead. In the context of E3 ligases, covalent fragment screens have proved
effective at revealing ligandable cysteines for initiation of future
research programs, as well as inspiring the design of chemical tools
to probe the biology of E3s and their potential to be harnessed in
PROTAC drug discovery.

## NEDD4–1
Neural precursor cell-expressed developmentally
downregulated 4-1 (NEDD4–1) is a large multidomain E3 ligase
from the HECT family of E3 ligases. Its
dysfunction has been linked to several human pathologies including
Parkinson’s disease, cardiovascular
disease, and cancer, , and as a result, NEDD4–1 is considered an important drug
target. With this in mind, Kathman and co-workers screened a library of electrophilic fragments, by mass
spectrometry, against the isolated HECT domain of NEDD4–1.
These efforts identified two fragments, 28 and 29, to be selective covalent modifiers of a noncatalytic cysteine
residue located at a key ubiquitin binding interface on NEDD4–1
( A). Compound 29 was then cocrystallized with NEDD4–1, yielding the
first reported crystal structure of a HECT E3 ligase bound by a small
molecule, and confirming the fragment to covalently bind to a single
cysteine residue (C627), as well as forming a specific hydrogen bond
to the backbone carbonyl of Y605 ( B). Compound 29 was then optimized
to 30 ( A), which was shown by FP to be 22 times more potent than 29. Notably, 30 was then used to help delineate
the mechanism by which NEDD4–1 catalyzes the formation of polyubiquitin
chains, providing strong evidence in support of the ubiquitin ligase
activity of NEDD4–1 being processive (i.e., more than one reaction
catalyzed per enzyme–substrate binding event) rather than distributive
(i.e., only one reaction catalyzed per enzyme–substrate binding
event). This work therefore highlights the ability of fragment-based
methods to not only generate novel compounds for important drug targets
but also to help uncover the mechanisms of E3 ligase biology.
 

## HOIP
HOIL-1-interacting protein (HOIP), also known
as RING finger protein 31 (RNF31) is an E3 ligase from the RBR family
of E3 ligases and is a key catalytic component of the linear ubiquitin
chain assembly complex (LUBAC). , The LUBAC
plays a critical role in the regulation of the NF-κB signaling
pathway, and thereby influences the regulation of immune and inflammatory
responses. Dysregulation of the NF-κB pathway is associated
with a number of diseases, including inflammation and cancer, , and as such, HOIP is considered an important drug target. Toward
the discovery of novel inhibitors of HOIP, Johansson and co-workers
screened a small bespoke library of 104 electrophilic fragments by
protein LC-MS against the isolated RBR domain of HOIP, with the hope of finding fragments able to
covalently bind to a cysteine residue (C885) known to reside in the
catalytic site of HOIP. , This screening effort
yielded 31 as a potential hit ( A), monolabeling the protein in a time-
and concentration-dependent manner, with an estimated Kd > 400 μM. Johansson et al. were then able to
solve
a crystal structure of HOIP (specifically of the C-terminal RING2
and LDD (linear ubiquitin chain-determining domain) domains) in complex
with 31, showing the fragment to covalently attach to
the protein via the catalytic C885 residue, as anticipated, as well
as forming two hydrogen bonds to the backbone NH and carbonyl groups
of residue H889 ( B). Functional studies then showed 31 to be able
to inhibit the polyubiquitination activity of HOIP both in
vitro and in a cellular system. Together, this work highlights
the utility in using fragment-based methods to discover validated
and highly valuable tool compounds to aid the further investigation
of E3 ligase biology.
 

## RNF4, RNF114, FEM1B, CRBN, DCAF1
In 2019, Nomura and
co-workers reported an alternative fragment screening strategy to
discover ligands for E3 ligases that did not rely on sensitive biophysical
techniques. The team employed a collection
of fragments, appended with reactive warheads (acrylamides and chloroacetamides),
to screen for ligands able to covalently label cysteines of RING finger
protein 4 (RNF4) using gel-based ABPP (activity-based protein profiling). − RNF4 is a RING E3 ligase involved in the recognition and degradation
of proteins bearing polySUMOylated chains. , The screening method involved treatment of purified RNF4 with the
covalent fragments, which was followed by incubation with tetramethylrhodamine-5-iodoacetamide
dihydroiodide (IA-rhodamine). IA-rhodamine served as a fluorescent
label for the cysteines that did not react with the fragment library
members. The protein was then subjected to SDS-PAGE and visualized
by in-gel fluorescence, thus allowing the team to identify the fragments
that perturbed the fluorescent labeling of RNF4 (as compared to the
control experiments performed in the absence of the covalent fragments).
Using this method, the researchers discovered TRH 1–23 as a ligand for RNF4 with an IC50 in the double digit
μM range ( ). Subsequently, the zinc-coordinating C132 and/or C135, present
within the RING domain of RNF4, were identified as TRH 1–23’s anchoring residue(s) to the protein. Elaboration of the
fragment hit afforded the N-benzyl CCW 16, that exhibited an improved IC50 of 1.8 μM.
 This improved potency encouraged the researchers
to pursue computational
docking experiments to both C132 and C135, that assisted in the selection
of an appropriate exit vector for elaborating the ligand into a covalent
PROTAC. Extension of the p-OMe functionality to a
linker conjugated to the BET bromodomain inhibitor JQ1, afforded PROTAC CCW 28–3 with an RNF4 IC50 of 0.54 μM. Treatment of 231MFP
breast cancer cells with CCW 28–3 resulted in
the dose-dependent proteasomal degradation of BRD4, marking the first
discovery of a PROTAC harnessing RNF4 to perform its function.
In the article, the research group noted that the ligand and its
corresponding PROTAC are not fully selective for RNF4 nor can they
achieve good exposure in cells. However, these are the first disclosures
of chemical tools for RNF4 and will thus serve as excellent chemical
starting points for future investigations. It is worth noting that
chemoproteomics approaches employing electrophilic fragments–either
using purified proteins or cells–have also been used to discover
small molecule covalent ligands, and in some cases corresponding PROTACs,
of RING E3 ligases RING finger protein 114 (RNF114), fem-1 homologue B (FEM1B), CRBN, and DDB1- and CUL4-associated
factor 1 (DCAF1). Among other roles,
RNF114 is a known regulator of tumor suppressor p21 and FEM1B is a regulator of folliculin-interacting protein
1 (FNIP1), a protein involved in the
reductive stress response. DCAF1 is a multifunctional protein involved
in numerous biological processes including the regulation of p53-mediated
transcription. 

## FBDR Approaches
For E3 ligases for which a number of
ligands have been reported,
a fragment based deconstruction-reconstruction (FBDR) approach can
be appealing. Through the deconstruction
of a potent inhibitor, one can inform a knowledge-based screening
of a set of fragments that is often more streamlined, and one that
can lead to higher hit rates, compared to conventional fragment screens.
Subsequent binding mode identification of the hits can be used to
reconstruct an inhibitor by merging, growing and linking the fragments
inspired from the deconstruction exercise. This method can lead to
the discovery of inhibitors with novel scaffolds, improved activity
as well as improved physicochemical properties compared to the parent
inhibitor. − 

## VHL
A number of groups have investigated whether a
deconstruction approach could be employed for the challenging class
of PPI-inhibitors (e.g., inhibitors of Bcl-xL, , VHL, , and MDM2 ).
Specifically for E3 ligases, Ciulli and co-workers deconstructed lead-like
inhibitors of the VHL E3 ligase (e.g., 32 in A) to determine
retrospectively whether their comprising fragments would have been
identified in a typical fragment screen. The work concluded that, with the exception of 33,
only fragments that necessitated simultaneous binding to two subpockets
of the PPI site (e.g., 34 and 35) and that
violated the Ro3 (e.g., 35) were detectable via any of
the biophysical methods routinely employed for FBLD (DSF, ITC, NMR,
FP) at the typical screening concentrations ( B). Crystallographic soaking experiments
with VCB at a high ligand concentration (25 mM) did however reveal
fragment 33 to bind exclusively in the expected central
subpocket, despite showing marginal binding by NMR alone ( C). The researchers
revisited this investigation and explored more sensitive ligand-based
NMR screening methods, such as increasing the concentration of the
fragments and/or VHL protein. Gratifyingly,
some of the optimized NMR methods proved capable of detecting the
weak binding affinities of the Ro3 compliant fragments of deconstructed
VHL inhibitors such as 36 and 37 that had
previously been classed as nonbinders.
 

## MDM2
Scientists at Roche performed a similar exercise
on the Nutlin RG7112, a
potent inhibitor of mouse double minute 2 homologue (MDM2), an E3
ligase responsible for the ubiquitination and degradation of p53. Similar to Ciulli and co-workers, the researchers
concluded that only privileged, relatively heavier fragments, capable
of binding simultaneously to two subpockets of the PPI site responsible
for recognizing p53, were identified as hits using NMR and/or SPR
(e.g., 38 with a MW = 305.2 in ). Ro3 compliant molecules such as the MMP 39 and 40 were not detectable by the employed
biophysical methods (SPR and NMR).
 Taken together, these investigations highlight
that adoption of
at least one of three approaches could help make a success of fragment
campaigns for challenging PPI sites: (a) X-ray screening at high ligand
concentration to identify binders that lie beyond the limit of detection
of biophysical methods, (b) careful fine-tuning of the biophysical
methods to enable detection of very weak fragments, (c) if an inhibitor
exists, tailoring a knowledge-based fragment library to encompass
privileged fragments and ones that lie slightly outside the Ro3 realm
to maximize the chances of biophysical detection. Although the latter
method is perhaps not in line with the ethos of fragment screening–which
aims to take advantage of the structural simplicity of small fragments
to explore chemical space efficiently–it nevertheless represents
a worthwhile and perhaps necessary approach for challenging PPI sites.

## KEAP1
Bach and co-workers recently performed a highly
comprehensive FBDR study for the discovery of novel KEAP1 inhibitors
with improved properties. Fragmentation
of six representative ligands of the Kelch domain , was performed to compile a target-biased library containing 77 fragments,
mostly compliant with the Ro3. The library was screened for binding
to KEAP1 in four orthogonal assays (FP, DSF, STD NMR, SPR). Subsequently,
17 “high priority hits” were progressed
to crystallographic studies based on a set of criteria (including,
e.g., activity in >1 assay, validation in SPR dose–response,
and/or an FP counter assay, affinity, LE, 2D structure, etc.). Encouragingly,
this work recapitulated the identification of the three binding hot
spots previously reported for the Kelch KEAP1 domain (vide
supra). − depicts how this methodology succeeded in identifying two
millimolar fragments 41 (SPR Kd = 1.1 mM; FP Ki = 3.5 mM) and 42 (SPR Kd = 1.1 mM), through
the deconstruction of the reported inhibitors 43( , ) and 44, respectively.
An X-ray structure of 41 and a computational docking
of 42 to the Kelch domain, inspired the merging of the
fragments into a novel ligand 45 that exhibited a significantly
improved affinity and inhibitory profile (SPR Kd = 2.9 μM; FP Ki = 15.6
μM). Furthermore, an increase in LE, calculated using FP Ki, from 0.20 to 0.24 kcal mol–1 per heavy atom was noted moving from 41 to 45. A cocrystal structure of 45 bound to the Kelch domain
of KEAP1 confirmed the expected binding mode ( , left crystal structure panel). Subsequent
SBDD led to the synthesis of a number of novel and highly potent inhibitors
including 46 (FP Ki = 40
nM). Interestingly, 46 exhibited a distinctly different
binding mode to previously reported inhibitors, with the pyrazole’s
cyclopropyl moiety no longer occupying the P4 pocket of the Kelch
domain but instead exhibiting a flipped binding mode, with the phenyl
substituent occupying a hydrophobic region of the P1 pocket ( , right crystal
structure panel). This novel binding mode could be used to investigate
underexplored regions of the Kelch domain in future studies. The disclosed
reconstructed inhibitors benefited from improved mouse microsomal
stability compared to the parent inhibitor 43, though
it was noted that they had limited permeability in a parallel artificial
membrane permeability assay (PAMPA). This comprehensive study underscores
the value of the FBDR approach, which can be especially fruitful if
a number of inhibitors, containing a range of functional groups and
binding modes, are known. This enables the curation of target-tailored
libraries that can lead to high hit rates and thus a wealth of opportunities
for novel inhibitor discovery.
 

## Fragment Scouts for Discovering E3s for PROTAC Drug Discovery
By virtue of the irreversible bond formation with protein residues,
covalent fragments have recently been used to great effect also in
a cellular context, in combination with proteomics, for proteome-wide
covalent ligand discovery. In this section
we describe studies whereby covalent fragments have inspired the design
of scout heterobifunctional molecules able to reduce the levels of
POIs via covalent engagement with cell machinery, later revealed to
be E3 ligases.

## DCAF16 and DCAF11
Despite the vast number of known
human E3 ligases (>600), very few have been harnessed by researchers
to affect the ubiquitination and subsequent degradation of targets
via either the MGD and/or PROTAC modalities. Cravatt, Zhang, and co-workers recently disclosed
an inventive approach of exploiting their previously reported electrophilic fragments to identify E3 ligases
that can be engaged by a covalent PROTAC and lead to the successful
degradation of a POI. 
These so-called
“scout” fragments, in conjunction with
chemical proteomics in native biological systems, were first used
in Cravatt’s pioneering work to explore the ligandability of
cysteines in the human proteome. Due
to their covalent handle, the scout fragments are, in theory, able
to access challenging binding sites (e.g., shallow pockets), especially
when compared to reversible fragments. Leveraging this unique attribute,
Cravatt and co-workers selected 3 relatively promiscuous scout fragments
(not shown) and conjugated them to a reversible selective ligand of
FK506-binding protein 12 (FKBP12) using
a polyethylene glycol (PEG) linker to construct scout PROTACs. Following
the treatment of HEK293T cells with these PROTACs, a reduction in
the levels of nuclear FKBP12 was noted with one example KB02-SLF ( ). This
reduction was determined to be: (a) proteasome dependent, (b) Cullin-RING
ubiquitin ligase dependent, and (c) dependent on a covalent interaction.
Using proteomics, the researchers were able to identify DDB1- and
CUL4-associated factor 16 (DCAF16) as the E3 ligase that the scout
PROTAC engages with to elicit the degradation of FKBP12. DCAF16 is
a Cullin-RING E3 ligase that is localized in the nucleus and one that
has since been reported to promote the degradation of Spindlin-4 (SPIN4),
an understudied protein predicted to bind methylated histones. CRISPR-mediated DCAF16 knockouts in HEK293
cells were subsequently performed to demonstrate that nuclear FKBP12
levels remained unperturbed following treatment with KB02-SLF, thus further supporting the key role of DCAF16 in the PROTAC’s
MOA.
 The researchers then replaced the FKBP12 ligand
with the potent
BET bromodomain inhibitor JQ1 and demonstrated
the concentration- and DCAF16-dependent degradation of BRD4 in HEK293T
cells treated with PROTAC KB02-JQ1 ( ). In a separate study, in
collaboration with scientists at Vividion, the scout PROTAC arsenal was expanded to incorporate a larger number
of electrophilic scouts, some with increased molecular weight. These
were fruitfully applied using a similar methodology, this time identifying
DCAF11-dependent PROTAC degraders of FKBP12 (21-SLF)
and androgen receptor (AR) (21-ARL) ( ). Though the biology of DCAF11 has been previously explored (e.g.,
in its role in KEAP1-independent degradation of NRF2), − this study represents the first disclosure of a chemical probe that
may further the community’s understanding of this E3 ligase.

## Conclusions
The large number of unique E3 ligases in
human cells (>600) as
well as their crucial role in the UPS has long established this target
class as a vastly appealing one to modulate with the aim of discovering
novel therapeutics. Moreover, the advent of the PROTAC heterobifunctional
modality in recent years has further increased interest in E3 ligase
research and ligandability.
Screening campaigns for E3 ligase
binders represent a significant
challenge in part due to the shallow nature of the PPI sites present
on these proteins. Due to the structural simplicity of fragments,
FBLD represents one of the most target-agnostic and thus well-suited
approaches for novel hit-finding for these challenging campaigns.
As detailed in this perspective, a number of different methodologies
have been applied and developed by investigators to discover ligands
to E3 ligases and to probe their biology.
To date, noncovalent
fragment screens have been reported on a number
of E3 ligases and Astex’s KEAP1 and cIAP1/XIAP hit to lead
campaigns represent two of the most advanced and comprehensive FBLD
examples in the literature. In both campaigns, the investigators succeeded
in optimizing mM fragments into nM ligands, demonstrating the potential
that weak starting points can have for E3 ligase ligand discovery.
It is interesting to note that in both these campaigns, X-ray crystallography
played a key role in either the hit discovery and/or the hit optimization.
Covalent fragment screening is beginning to address some of the
challenges of liganding the shallow PPI sites of E3 ligases. However,
for the moment, most reports rely on reactive electrophilic warheads
and indeed drug-like leads with appropriate physicochemical properties
are yet to be reported. Work performed by Cravatt and co-workers in
mapping out the ligandable cysteinome , will be invaluable
to E3 ligase ligand discovery and further reports of covalent hits
and leads are expected in the near future.
The FBDR approach
represents an elegant methodology for novel hit
creation, however, it requires precedented ligands for the E3 ligase
being investigated. Despite this prerequisite, this approach remains
a formidable asset in the fragment chemist’s toolkit. As mentioned,
it is also useful in identifying minimal pharmacophores for binding
to specific E3s and can assist in the design of future screening libraries
where perhaps inclusion of privileged, beyond Ro3 fragments could
lead to higher hit rates.
As has been described in this perspective,
fragment screening methodologies
have also been used to probe the biology of E3 ligases. Cravatt and
co-workers’ scout fragments constitute a unique and powerful
method of utilizing fragments for the discovery of E3 ligases that
are capable of being artificially harnessed for the degradation of
POIs.
Despite the benefits and recent progress made in the application
of FBLD approaches to E3 ligases, there of course remain challenges.
For example, E3 ligases inherently reside in large, multiprotein complexes
which can pose difficulties for the production of high quality recombinant
protein. This in turn can impact the feasibility of developing suitable
biochemical and biophysical assays as well as developing robust structural
systems. Nevertheless, FBLD represents an invaluable approach for
hit discovery in the field. The curation of high quality generic-,
bespoke-, and covalent-fragment libraries will remain the bedrock
of successful screening campaigns that will eventually lead to novel
drugs. In addition, the role of structural biology techniques in FBLD
remains paramount and continued advancements in NMR, X-ray crystallography
and cryoEM methods will undoubtedly continue impacting the field.
For example, advancements in cryoEM, a method that typically requires
lower quantities of protein than X-ray crystallography, could address
the challenge of recombinant protein production by enabling the use
of protein samples from endogenous sources. Covalent fragment screening
has already been used to great effect to probe the biology of E3 ligases
and increasing developments in the field of proteomics (including
instrument sensitivity and data analysis rates) will assist in further
advancing these investigations. Furthermore, designing and screening
chemotypes that are capable of covalently targeting residues beyond
cysteine (e.g., tyrosine, lysine) may reveal new opportunities for
ligand design for this target class. 
Lastly, although ligands to E3 ligases can serve as potential
drugs
in their own right, new discoveries are also expected to impact the
rapidly developing MGD and PROTAC fields. The E3 ligases artificially
manipulated in these modalities are currently very limited and expansion
of the repertoire of E3s and their respective ligands will provide
ample opportunities for the design of future therapeutics.

## Acknowledgments
We thank our colleagues S. Lucas, M. Schimpl, J.
Scott, B. Whitehurst for critical reading of the manuscript and for
their valued feedback.

## Glossary

## Abbreviations
ABPPactivity
based protein profiling
Alphascreenamplified
luminescent proximity homogeneous assay screen
AMLacute myelogenous leukemia
ARandrogen receptor
BETBromo- and Extra-terminal
domain
BIRbaculovirus
IAP (inhibitor of apoptosis) repeat
BMI1B cell-specific Moloney murine leukemia virus
integration site 1
BRDbromo domain
CNScentral nervous system
CPMGCarr–Purcell–Meiboom–Gill
CRBNcereblon
CRISPRclustered regularly
interspaced short palindromic repeats
cryo-EMcryogenic electron microscopy
CTLHC-terminal to LisH
DCAF1/16/11DDB1- and
CUL4-associated factor 1/16/11
DELDNA-encoded library
DSFdifferential scanning fluorimetry
E1ubiquitin activating enzyme
E2ubiquitin conjugating
enzyme
E3E3 ubiquitin
ligase
ERFBDD,
fragment based drug discovery
FBDRfragment based deconstruction-reconstruction
FBLDfragment based
lead discovery
FEM1Bfem-1 homologue B
FKBP12FK506-binding protein 12
FNIP1Folliculin-interacting protein 1
FPfluorescence polarization
FRETFörster/fluorescence
resonance energy transfer
GID4glucose-induced degradation protein 4
HACheavy atom count
HBAhydrogen bond acceptor
HBDhydrogen bond donor
HECThomologous to
E6AP C-terminus
HEKhuman embryonic kidney
HERCHECT and RCC1-like domain
HIF1αhypoxia-inducible factor 1-alpha
HOIPHOIL-1-interacting protein
HSQCheteronuclear
single quantum correlation
HTShigh throughput screen
IMiDsimmunomodulatory imide drugs
ITCisothermal titration calorimetry
KEAP1Kelch-like ECH-associated
protein 1
LDDlinear
ubiquitin chain-determining domain
LEligand efficiency
LUBAClinear ubiquitin chain assembly complex
MDM2mouse double minute
2 homologue
MGDmolecular glue degraders
MMPmatched molecular pair
MOAmechanism of action
NEDD4neural precursor cell expressed developmentally
down-regulated protein 4
NF-κBnuclear factor k B
NMRnuclear factor erythroid 2-related factor
NQO1NADPH quinone acceptor oxidoreductase
1
NRF2nuclear factor
erythroid 2-related factor
PAMPAparallel artificial membrane permeability assay
PEGpolyethylene glycol
PHDplant homeodomain
POIprotein of interest
POI-Lprotein of interest
ligand
PPIprotein–protein
interaction
PRC1Polycomb repressive complex 1
PROTACproteolysis targeting chimera
PSApolar surface area
RBCCRING B-Box coiled-coil
RBRRING between RING
Rbx1RING box protein
1
RINGreally interesting
new gene
RIPK1receptor-interacting
protein kinase 1
RNF4/31/114RING finger protein 4/31/114
Ro3Rule-of-3
SARstructure–activity relationship
SBDDstructure-based drug
design
SMACsecond
mitochondria derived activator of caspases
SNIPERsspecific and nongenetic IAP
dependent protein erasers
SPIN4Spindlin-4
SPRsurface plasmon resonance
STDsaturation transfer difference
TF1αtranscription intermediary factor 1
alpha
TNFαtumor necrosis factor α
TR-FRETtime-resolved-Förster/fluorescence resonance
energy transfer
TRIMtripartite motif protein
TSAthermal shift assay
TTDtandem Tudor domain
UHRF1ubiquitin-like-containing PHD and RING finger domains 1
UPSubiquitin proteasome
system
VCBVHL elongin
C elongin B complex
VHLvon Hippel-Lindau (protein)
VSvirtual screening
waterLOGSYwater ligand observed via gradient spectroscopy

## Biographies
Iacovos N. Michaelides received his MChem degree
from the University
of Oxford in 2010. His doctoral studies, under the supervision of
Professor Darren J. Dixon at the University of Oxford (2010-2014),
focused on the total synthesis of calyciphylline A-type Daphniphyllum
alkaloids. Following a postdoctoral research project hosted in the
laboratory of Professor Thomas Carell in LMU Munich, he began his
career at AstraZeneca, Cambridge in 2017. He is currently a medicinal
chemist specializing in fragment based lead discovery, with an interest
in E3 ligase ligandability and proteolysis targeting chimeras.

Gavin W. Collie received his Ph.D. from the UCL
School of Pharmacy
in 2012. He then completed postdoctoral positions at the European
Institute of Chemistry and Biology (France) and the Institute of Cancer
Research (UK). He is currently an Associate Principal Scientist at
AstraZeneca, focussing on structural biology and cancer drug discovery.

## Author Contributions
The manuscript
was written through contributions of all authors. All authors have
given approval to the final version of the manuscript.

The authors
declare the following competing financial interest(s): All authors
are employees of AstraZeneca.

This
paper was published
ASAP on February 23, 2023, with the footnote missing from Figure 16.
The corrected version was reposted on February 24, 2023.

## References