822acssdJournal of Chemical Information and ModelingJ Chem Inf ModelPMC1230880612308806123088064063294210.1021/acs.jcim.5c00641Generative Deep
Learning for de Novo Drug DesignA
Chemical Space Odyssey
ÖzçelikRıza BrinkmannHelena CriscuoloEmanuele GrisoniFrancesca 1
Department of Biomedical Engineering,
Institute for Complex Molecular System (ICMS) and Eindhoven AI Systems
Institute (EAISI), Eindhoven University
of Technology, Eindhoven
5612 AZ, Netherlands
*
Email: f.grisoni@tue.nl.
972025651473527352–73723172025© 2025 The Authors. Published by American Chemical SocietyThis article is licensed under CC-BY 4.0

## Abstract
In recent years, generative deep learning has emerged
as a transformative
approach in drug design, promising to explore the vast chemical space
and generate novel molecules with desired biological properties. This
perspective examines the challenges and opportunities of applying
generative models to drug discovery, focusing on the intricate tasks
related to small molecule generation, evaluation, and prioritization.
Central to this process is navigating conflicting information from
diverse sourcesbalancing chemical diversity, synthesizability,
and bioactivity. We discuss the current state of generative methods,
their optimization, and the critical need for robust evaluation protocols.
By mapping this evolving landscape, we outline key building blocks,
inherent dilemmas, and future directions in the journey to fully harness
generative deep learning in the “chemical odyssey” of
drug design.

 
 
statusreleaseddisplay-pdfyesis-in-collection-domainyesis-olfnois-manuscriptnois-preprintnois-journal-matternois-scannednois-retractednoReceived 2025 Mar 24; Accepted 2025 Jun 25; Revised 2025 Jun 9; Collection date 2025 Jul 28.

1.

## Introduction
Generative deep learning
has emerged as a transformative tool in
de novo drug design, and in the molecular sciences at large.
−

 By leveraging existing molecular data, generative deep learning
enables the on-demand generation of molecules that possess desirable
properties. With the “chemical
universe” estimated to contain up to 1060 drug-like
molecules, generative deep learning has
accelerated the discovery of novel compounds, compared to traditional
rule-based molecular assembly and enumeration approaches.
−

 In less than a decade since its introduction in drug discovery, generative deep learning has been extensively
applied in prospective wet-lab studies
−

 and demonstrated its potential in real-world applications. Meanwhile,
the development of approaches to better explore the chemical universe
is gaining momentum in the cheminformatics community.
−

 Currently, we are observing a productive synergy between computer
science advances and insights rooted in chemical and biological knowledge.
While generative deep learning is making great strides in designing
promising molecules, the understanding of what model to choose and
how to prioritize molecular candidates remains limited. With an ever-growing
pool of methods available for molecular generation and optimization,
choosing the most suited approach might not always be straightforward.
Despite the availability of benchmarks,
,
 retrospective comparisons
are poised to be incomplete for new, prospective applications. Researchers
might face many “traps”, such as overfitting to specific
datasets or overlooking key molecular properties.
,
 Moreover, the generated designs can exhibit limited synthesizability, and current synthetic accessibility scores might
struggle to capture the effect of subtle structural variations, reaction
selectivity, and the availability of building blocks essential to
chemical reactions. Finally, optimizing
conflicting propertiessuch as balancing pharmacophore similarity
with structural diversitypresents another layer of complexity.
As a result, de novo molecule design through generative methods continues
to be an odyssey (from Greek “Oδúσσεια”,
meaning “the journey of Odysseus” or “a long
and adventurous journey”) in chemical space.
This perspective
highlights open questions, “known unknowns”,
and key challenges in generative small molecule design, with a particular
focus on ligand-based approaches. After reviewing current generative
approaches for de novo design, we offer insights and propose potential
future directions. By highlighting both the caveats and advantages
of these methods, we venture to forecast the exciting possibilities
that lie ahead. 

2.

## Charting the Chemical Cosmos with Generative
AI
2.1.

## Molecular Representations for Deep Learning
How to represent molecular information has been a central scientific
question for over a century.
−

 Molecular representations are “a symbolic
transformation of [chemical] reality”, initially devised for the purpose of communication and human reasoning. Examples are the ball-and-stick model, Kekulé’s
representation, and Lewis structure of
molecules. Such models of chemical reality
were progressively developed to address the complexity of molecular
structures at different levels of abstractions. From the mid of the
20th century, with the advent of computers and the need for machine-readable
formats, string-based molecular representations (notations) have started
to be developed, such as Wiswesser Line Notation and the SMILES (Simplified Molecular Input Line Entry System) strings. These representations were initially
proposed to complement systematic chemical nomenclature, and enabled the encoding of chemical structures
in a compact format suitable for information storage, processing,
and retrieval.
With the introduction of machine learning to
cheminformatics, the role of molecular representations has also evolved. Molecular representations have become a fundamental
step to encode chemical information for machine learning and data
analysis. Their role has further become more prominent since the advent
of deep learning. Certain deep learning
algorithms can handle non-structured (i.e., non-tabular) input, allowing
the direct usage of some of these molecular representations, without
the need of feature engineering. This shift enables generative deep
learning to use some molecular representations as inputs to generate
novel chemical structures in an end-to-end fashion.
,
 In other words, models can be trained to directly learn from and
generate molecules in the form of a chosen molecular representation.
To date, the following molecular representations have played a key
role in the field of generative deep learning for de novo design:

Molecular strings. Molecular strings
represent a molecule as a sequence of characters. The most popular
string notation to date is the SMILES notation. SMILES strings are obtained by traversing a two-dimensional
molecular representation (molecular graph), and annotating the atomic
symbols and bond types along the traversal path. Rings and branches
are encoded using numeric labels and parentheses, respectively, to
capture molecular connectivity while maintaining a linear format ( b). SMILES can be
seen as a chemical language, possessing
its own syntax rules to map this string representation back to a chemically
valid molecule. Since the early successes of SMILES strings as a representation
for de novo design,
,
 several extensions to this notation
have been developed. DeepSMILES ( ) were proposed to
address aspects that often caused invalidity of the generated SMILES
(brackets and ring characters), but have found limited application,
due to their difficult syntactic rules. The Self-referencing embedded strings (SELFIES) are built upon “semantically constrained graphs”,
in such a way that SELFIES strings always corresponds to a valid molecule
( ). While SMILES
and SELFIES achieve a similar performance overall, they come with
distinct advantages and drawbacks. The enforced validity of SELFIES
might be ideal to generate complex macromolecular entities, whose
structural complexity increases the likelihood of generating invalid
SMILES (e.g., natural products
,
). SMILES strings might
be more ideal for distribution learning, to as the generation of invalid
SMILES allows to filter out low-quality molecular designs, which would
not be possible when validity is enforced like in the SELFIES language. Recently, great attention has been given to
string representations that are based on molecular fragments, such
as Sequential Attachment-based Fragment Embedding (SAFE), GroupSELFIES and
fragSMILES. These representations have
been developed to provide “chemically-rich” molecular
representations, to better learn the properties of the training molecules,
and/or provide a better representation of molecular chirality (fragSMILES,
 ).

Two- and three-dimensional
molecular graphs. Graphs are among the most intuitive ways
to represent molecular
structures ( c). Any molecule can be represented as a mathematical graph G = (V, E), whose vertices
(v

i
 ∈ V) represent atoms, and edges (e

ij
 ∈ E) constitute their connections
(bonds). Additionally, features of atoms and/or edges can be added
to further characterize the graph. Two-dimensional
(2D) molecular graphs usually consider only topological and chemical
features (e.g., bond and atom types). Three-dimensional information
(3D) can also be added to the features of the molecular graphs, such
as torsional angles, or three-dimensional coordinates. Generating molecules in the form of graphs has
attracted a lot of attention, for both ligand- and structure-based
drug discovery.
−

 A particularly recent direction in the field is the attempt to generate
3D molecular graphs,
,−

 in the attempt
to better capture properties that depend on the spatial arrangement
of atoms (e.g., protein binding). Moreover, 3D graphs can also be
encoded as the so-called point clouds,
,,
 i.e., by omitting bond information and encoding the
spatial positioning of atoms (absolute or relative coordinates). Once
the geometry is generated in the form of point cloud, bond type can
be constructed by dedicated chemistry software (e.g., Open Babel).

Molecular
surfaces. In addition to
3D graphs and point clouds mentioned above, a limited number of studies
have represented molecules via their molecular surface, which encloses
the 3D structure of a molecule at a certain distance from each atom
( d). Surfaces
are then usually represented as (a) 3D meshes
,
 (a set of polygons describing the coordinates in the 3D space),
(b) 3D point clouds,
,
 that is, a collection of discrete
points in 3D space that define the surface geometry without explicit
connectivity between them, or (c) 3D voxels,
,
 that is three-dimensional grid of cubic cells where each voxel represents
a volume element in space, allowing for the discretization of the
surface and surrounding molecular structure into a regular grid format.
Surfaces can then be further characterized by additional chemical
(for example, hydrophobic, electrostatic) and geometric (such as local
shape, curvature) features. While surface representations have mostly
gathered popularity to capture information on protein surfaces or
cavities, and protein–protein interactions,
,
 they have also been used to generate molecules matching desired
ligand shapes,
,
 or conditioned on the information
on surface features.

 Once a molecular representation has been chosen, a
fundamental
step is molecule encoding. Encoding is the transformation of molecular
structures into numerical representations that can be processed by
machine learning models. Encoding ensures that the chosen molecular
representation is converted into a format suitable for deep learning
without loss of information. For molecular strings ( e) common methods include one-hot encoding, which converts
each token into a unique binary vector, and learnable embeddings,
which represents tokens as vectors of unique numbers that are updated
during training. For molecular graphs ( f), encoding involves constructing an adjacency matrix that defines atomic connectivity
and a node features matrix to describe atomic properties. Optionally,
edge features can also be included to specify bond characteristics
(e.g., bond type or order). Recent studies on bioactivity prediction
show that molecular strings encoding strategy has little impact on
the model performance, whereas the choice
of edge features is crucial and task-specific.

Every molecular representation (and corresponding
encoding) requires
ad hoc neural network architectures to learn and aggregate molecular
information, and shows distinct advantages
and disadvantages. To date, models based on molecular string representations
(often referred to as chemical language models) are the ones that
have found extensive experimental validation to generate bioactive
molecules (see ; ).
,,,,,
 Early studies
have demonstrated that relying on string representations for de novo
design better captures complex molecular properties compared to molecular
graphs. Nonetheless, there is ample room
for improvement when it comes to representing and generating molecules
de novo, since molecular strings capture only 2D information (molecular
topology and composition). In this context, methods that learn sophisticated
three-dimensional information (e.g., geometry and chemistry of binding
pockets or known molecular conformers) to generate molecules matching
relevant binding motifs
−

 is a particularly enticing direction. However, to date, it might
be difficult for deep learning models to generate molecules with valid
3D conformations, for instance, in terms of torsional angles and bond
lengths,
,
 albeit current advances show great promise
to overcome such issues.
−

 
2.2.

## Deep Learning Architectures for Drug Discovery
A plethora of generative deep learning architectures was proposed
for designing small molecules with desired properties (e.g., bioactivity
toward a pharmacologically relevant target). In its simplest form,
generative drug discovery can be cast as a ligand-based task,
,,
 where models learn from the molecular
structures of bioactive molecules and generate novel compounds with
desirable characteristics, without requiring explicit knowledge of
the target protein’s structure or sequence. Structure-based
approaches also exist, which leverage structural (or sequence) information
about the target protein to guide molecular design.
,
 For simplicity, in this perspective, we focus mostly on ligand-based
approaches, and strategies for structure-based de novo design are
discussed elsewhere.
,
 Regardless of whether ligand-
or structure-based strategies are employed, the effectiveness of generative
models hinges on how molecular information is encoded and processed
by deep learning approaches for follow-up molecular generation. In
general, different molecular representations require tailored neural
architectures to suitably process and leverage the molecular information
they encode.
2.2.1.

## Molecular Strings
One of the earliest
and most widely adopted approaches in ligand-based drug design is
chemical language modeling (CLM).
,,
 CLMs take inspiration from natural language processing
and treat molecule design as a sequence generation problem. CLMs are
trained to predict the next token in a molecular string given the
preceding ones. This self-supervised learning approach enables models
to generate valid molecular sequences while capturing underlying chemical
patterns. Moreover, CLMs have often been
applied in combination with “data-augmentation”, where
multiple SMILES (or SELFIES) strings are used to represent the same
molecule. This is usually achieved by enumeration, where multiple
molecular stringsobtained by traversing the molecular graph
in different directions or starting from different atomsare
used. Molecular string enumeration can improve generative drug design,
especially in low-data regimes.
,,
 Recently, strategies inspired by natural language processing (such
as atom masking or token deletion) have proven valuable alternatives
to enumeration for de novo drug design.

Early CLMs employed recurrent neural networks (RNNs). RNNs iterate over the input symbols in the sequence
stepwise and compress the past information into a single memory vector
called hidden state ( a). Different RNN variants exist based on the memory update
rules, such as Long Short-Term Memory (LSTM) and Gated Recurrent Units (GRUs). LSTMs
and GRUs were successfully used to generate syntactically valid molecules
with bespoke properties.
,,,

 Transformers  an architecture
that learns all pair relationships between sequence elements ( b)  were
introduced to molecule design due to their transformative impact in
natural language processing.
−

 Transformers have found widespread
application in computer-assisted synthesis planning. In de novo design, they found more limited application.
Recently, a comparison between transformers and RNNs have shown that
the former better capture complex properties of molecules, while the
latter generates more structurally diverse design libraries.
−

 Recently, structured state space sequence models (S4s)
,
 emerged as an alternative to “make the best of both worlds”
by leveraging full-sequence learning (like transformers) and autoregressive
generation (like RNNs). Early results suggest that S4 might enhance
the diversity of design libraries compared to transformers, while
better capturing complex molecular properties than both architectures.

Variational autoencoders (VAEs) introduce
a new component to de
novo design. Rather than predicting the
next symbol based on the memory, they decompose the task into two
subtasks (a) learning how to encode molecules into a structured, continuous
representation, and (b) reconstructing the input molecule from such
learned representation.
,
 In a VAE ( c), an encoder network transforms an input molecule into a
probability distribution over a latent space (typically modeled as
a Gaussian distribution). From this latent representation, another
network (decoder) learns to reconstruct molecules by sampling points
from the learned distribution and mapping them back to valid input
representations. The encoder and decoder can be any deep learning
model, with convolutional neural networks (CNNs) and RNNs being typical
choices for molecular sequences.
,−

 Compared to architectures that rely solely on hidden states (e.g.,
LSTMs and GRUs), VAEs facilitate smoother latent space navigation,
thanks to their explicit learning of latent molecule representations.
These representations can be manipulated to enable tasks such as molecule
optimization and property-guided design.

Encoder-decoder architectures can also be incorporated
in generative
adversarial networks (GANs) for molecule design.
−

 Originally developed for image generation, GANs consist of (a) a generator network that learns to convert random
noise into realistic instances, and (b) a discriminator network that
scores the quality of the generations. These two neural networks are
trained to compete with each other, with the generator aiming to produce
increasingly realistic samples to “fool” the discriminator.
Early applications of GANs showed promise for molecule generation,
by improving drug-like properties. However,
due to the challenges to train GANse.g., mode collapse, where
the generator learns only a few modes of the input distribution
−

 other score-based generators have been replacing GANs for
molecular sequence design, namely diffusion models. Initially successful in generating realistic images, diffusion models learn to iteratively refine
random noise into samples that resemble the input distribution. Diffusion
can be applied on sequences by selecting discrete probability distributions
to model the inputs, or by applying diffusion to latent molecule representation,
a trend gaining popularity for sequence modeling.
−

 Recently developed molecular diffusion sequence models offer more
controllability with more drug-like designs than initial chemical
language models and form an active research direction.
−

2.2.2.

## Molecular Graphs
Like string representations,
molecular graphs also gained widespread interest in de novo design
using deep learning.
−

 Graph neural networks (GNNs) are the predominant deep learning architecture
to learn from graphs. Starting from
random vectors, GNNs iteratively update atom and bond representations
to learn meaningful molecular representations. GNNs were first applied
in combination with VAEs and GANs.
,,,
 While using GNNs as
encoders is relatively straightforward, decoding graphs poses a greater
challenge, as it requires reconstructing molecular structures while
preserving chemical validity and similarity to the input. Calculating
the reconstruction quality becomes increasingly compute-intensive
as molecular size grows.
,
 For large molecules,
using coarse-grained graphs (e.g., fragments as nodes) to shrink the
graph size, and formulating graph generation
as stepwise node extension can mitigate the computational burden. More recently, flow-based and diffusion models have
been proposed for molecular graph generation. Flow-based models learn invertible transformations of simple probability
distributions, such as Gaussian, to model the complex distribution
of molecular datasets.
−

 Unlike VAEs and diffusion models, flow-based
models can provide exact likelihood estimates of generations and provide
an internal score for the designs. Diffusion models on molecular graphs
learn to generate chemically valid topologies from random noise,
−

 Recent research on diffusion and flow-based graph models focus on
improving chemical validity, scalability, and design diversity to
match the performance of string generation models.
,

2.2.3.

## 3D Geometry
3D approaches represent
molecules as atom types and their spatial coordinates (and, optionally,
bond types). Training models on atom-level 3D information allow learning
from proteins and small molecules together and conditioning generations
with the 3D topology of protein binding pockets. While this advantage
is mostly harnessed for structure-based studies, 3D approaches have also been developed for unconditional
small molecule design with diffusion.
,,,−

 Equivariant graph neural networks (EGNNs) are a popular architecture to learn from point clouds. The equivariance
provide the same, or a predictably different, output when the input
molecule is rotated, translated, or reflected and provide performance gains over non-equivariant GNNs. The initial EGNNs struggled to generate valid
3D structures that satisfy bond lengths and atom stability constraints, and recent work integrated of laws of physics. and learned jointly from molecular graphs and
3D coordinates to achieve the validity level of sequence models.
,,
 Using message passing transformers
that respect the geometry of molecules has been recently popular,
as they provide higher validity in generations.
,−

 A recent study unified 3D generation and property prediction within
a two-stage generation framework and improved performance in both
tasks. A bottleneck for 3D generation
molecule design models is the availability of datasets and benchmarks.
QM9 dataset consists of computed geometric, energetic, electronic,
and thermodynamic properties for 134 K molecules up to 9 heavy atoms
(C, N, O, F),
,
 forming a narrow chemical space
for drug discovery studies. GEOM-Drugs is an alternative used in 3D
generation studies and contain molecules up to 91 heavy atoms and
their 3D conformers. A recent improved
GEOM-Drugs by reimplementing a flawed stability metric and re-evaluating
the model trained upon this dataset.

2.2.4.

## Hybrid Approaches
Generating molecules
in any representation has distinctive strengths, motivating approaches
to combine the advantages of each. Creating a VAE with a GNNs encoder
to explicitly represent the chemical structures and a CLM decoder
for fast generation is one such example, resulting in higher diversity of the molecular designs. Similarly,
multimodal modelswhich integrate
multiple data typescan also be used for de novo design. Such
approaches expand the information available to the models, and can
even incorporate additional data sources, such as gene expressions, protein interactome, and textual information, and allow
zero-shot molecule design combined with
human-understandable explanations in natural language.
,
 Each additional modality, however, increases the architectural complexity,
which can pose challenges related to computational efficiency, interpretability,
and long-term scalability.

2.3.

## Focused Molecule Design with Deep Learning

Distribution learning ( a), where a generative model is trained to
learn and replicate the property distribution of a molecular dataset
(e.g., physicochemical and biological properties). Distribution learning is usually achieved via transfer
learning where a model is “pretrained” on a large, diverse
dataset, and then “fine-tuned” on a smaller, task-specific
dataset, with the same training strategy. In de novo design, a particularly
useful training strategy is the next-token generation in molecular
strings,
,
 but other strategies involve reconstructing
molecular structures from corrupted inputs,
,,
 or predicting missing bonds/atoms.
−

 An extensive body of literature using SMILES strings has shown the
benefit of pretraining to learn the “syntax” of the
SMILES language and global physico-chemical properties,
,
 and of fine-tuning to capture bioactivity, as validated in the wet-lab.
,,
 Moreover, by controlling the
extent of transfer learning, it is possible to indirectly navigate
between the properties of the pretraining and fine-tuning molecules.
,,,,

Goal-directed
learning ( b),
where a model is trained to optimize
an external objective. This is typically
implemented through reinforcement learning, in which a generative
model iteratively designs molecules and receives a score (also called
reward) based on an external evaluation function (e.g., docking scores
,
 or predicted properties and bioactivity).
,−

 Usually, these generative models are pretrained on large corpora
of data.
,
 During reinforcement learning, the model
updates its generation strategy based on this reward signal, “reinforcing”
molecular structures that receive higher scores and discouraging those
with lower scores. This iterative process helps the model refine its
output toward molecules with the desired properties. Compared to distribution
learning, goal-directed learning allows for a more flexible steering
of molecule design toward desired regions of the chemical space, e.g.,
for multi-objective molecular design,
−

 scaffold hopping
,
 and hit-to-lead optimization.
,

Conditional generation ( c), where a single generative model is trained
to explicitly produce molecules matching one or more desired properties.
Unlike traditional goal-directed generation (which scores the de novo
designs of a generation), the desirable conditions are explicitly
used to train the generator in a supervised manner. This is achieved
by learning a shared vector space that encodes the desired conditions
(e.g., experimentally determined properties) and the corresponding
molecular structures ( c) together. The desired set properties can be then used as
a conditioning input to generate molecular structures that are likely
to possess those properties. Conditional generation has been used
to design molecules that match a desired three-dimensional shape,
possess a desirable set of physico-chemical properties or substructures,
,,
 or are constrained by a target
protein sequence
,
 or gene-expression signatures.
,

 Each molecular generation approach presents unique
benefits and
limitations, and the choice depends on a multitude of factors, such
as, the availability and quality of available training data, the complexity
of the target molecular properties, and specific design needs (e.g.,
diversity vs property optimization).
Distribution-learning methods
enable end-to-end learning and molecule
generation without the need for explicit scoring functions to guide
the design process. Even with relatively small pretraining datasets
(e.g., in the order of tens of thousands of molecules) and/or fine-tuning sets (e.g., in the order of just a
few dozen molecules
,
), these approaches can successfully
generate molecules with desirable molecular properties, including
bioactivity. Moreover, the fine-tuning process is particularly beneficial
in low-data scenarios,
,
 where the molecules having the
desired properties are too few to train a deep learning model from
scratch, and the target property is resource-intensive and/or challenging
to evaluate in silico. However, while these models
are evaluated based on how well the generated molecules resemble the
training set in terms of properties, they do not inherently assess
the quality of individual molecules. As a result, additional scoring
and filtering steps are often required to identify the most promising
candidates, introducing manual intervention into otherwise “rule-free”
pipelines. Finally, distribution learning might fail at property optimization
if the desired characteristics are underrepresented in the training
data (out-of-distribution generation).
Conversely, goal-directed
strategies offer direct feedback on both
individual molecules and the entire generated population through an
external scoring function. Compared to distribution learning, they
can, in principle, steer the generation of molecules in previously
unexplored regions of the chemical space, if incorporated into a suitable
scoring function. However, goal-directed generation poses several
challenges,
,,
 including (a) the difficulty of accurately capturing complex molecular
attributes  such as bioactivity, drug-likeness, and synthetic
accessibilityinto a single scoring function, which might lead
to molecules that do not realistically match the intended objectives;
(b) the risk of models exploiting spurious correlations or unintended
biases within the scoring function rather than learning meaningful
structure–property relationships (a phenomenon known as “reward
hacking”), and (c) reduced chemical
diversity due to biases imposed by the optimization process, which
can even result in mode collapse. The
reliability of goal-directed methods is therefore heavily dependent
on the quality and diversity of the data and models used to define
scoring functions. Additionally, molecules generated by goal-directed
strategies may exhibit lower synthetic accessibility than those designed
via distribution learning approaches. Several strategies have been explored to retain broad chemical diversity
while achieving the generation objectives, such as incorporating a
memory of previously produced molecules, the penalization of structurally redundant designs, or integrating transfer and reinforcement learning. Overall, whenever dealing with goal-directed
generation, scoring functions play a key role in determining the properties
of the de novo design. As such, scoring functions should be designed
carefully, by balancing computational cost and reliability.
Finally, conditional generation has been explored less extensively
in drug discovery compared to distribution-learning and goal-directed
approaches. In general, however, since these models do not rely on
externally computed scoring functions, they offer several potential
advantages, such as (a) mitigating biases associated with predictive
models (e.g., bioactivity prediction models), (b) capturing complex
structure–property/activity relationships by directly associating
molecular structures with desired properties within latent space,
and (c) maintaining the end-to-end learning characteristics of distribution-learning
methods. Despite these advantages, conditional generation has yet
to be applied extensively and experimentally validated. This might
be due to the fact that conditional generation is well-suited for
scenarios where large molecular databases with accurate and reliable
labels are used. However, such datasets are relatively uncommon in
drug discovery, which might explain the limited application of conditional
approaches. One potential way to overcome this limitation is to incorporate
self-supervised or semisupervised approaches to enhance learning from
smaller datasets. Finally, it remains uncertain whether conditional
generation can effectively explore regions of chemical space beyond
those represented in the training set, raising questions about its
utility relative to more established generative approaches.

2.4.

## Evaluating the Quality of de Novo Designs
While generative deep learning models can rapidly produce millions
of molecular designs, the evaluation of molecular qualitywhether
for follow-up experiments or model analysis and comparisonremains
an open challenge. Despite remarkable strides in generative drug discovery,
determining whether a design is “good” or “bad”
remains a challenge, as it often involves balancing multiple, sometimes
conflicting, objectives in a context-dependent manner. While no universally
accepted guidelines exist for evaluating de novo design studies, assessment
typically considers multiple factors, including chemical validity,
diversity, and alignment with the intended design objectives, as outlined
below.
2.4.1.

## Chemical Validity and Non-redundancy
One of the principal requirements of a good molecular generator is
its ability to generate molecules that are “chemically plausible”in
other words, molecules possessing correct valency, aromaticity and
charge constraints. These aspects are usually commonly referred to
as “chemical validity”. While validity only considers
two-dimensional information, it has recently been extended to three-dimensional
molecular generation (“validity3D”), which evaluates the conformation quality of bond lengths
and valence angles. Additionally, generators should be able to produce
non-redundant molecules, in terms of limiting the duplicated designs
(“uniqueness”) and the overlap with the training set
(“novelty”). These metrics should always be reported,
as they can reveal significant issues in the model training procedure.
However, validity, uniqueness and novelty are vulnerable to trivial
modifications (e.g., the random insertion of a carbon atom), may depend on the number of generated designs, and are easy to optimize by simple heuristic
algorithms. Therefore, they should be
considered as a diagnostic check rather than a conclusive evaluation
metric.

2.4.2.

## Internal Diversity of de Novo Design Libraries
Assessing the structural diversity of generated molecules is crucial
to ensure that a generative model does not produce structurally redundant
or overly similar compounds. High diversity is often desirable, particularly
in early-stage drug discovery, as it increases the chances of identifying
novel bioactive chemotypes. Evaluating and quantifying molecular diversity
is not straightforward, as “similarity is in the eye of the
beholder”  it depends
on the chosen molecular features (molecular descriptors) and similarity/diversity metrics. Often, molecular diversity is captured by computing
the pairwise Tanimoto similarity (the
lower, the higher the diversity) on extended-connectivity fingerprints
(ECFPs), which captures the presence
of shared substructures.
,
 Average pairwise similarities
are frequently reported, at the risk of obscuring important nuances
in molecular diversity. The presence of diverse molecular scaffolds is also commonly used to capture diversity. While providing a more abstract perspective
on diversity compared to ECFP similarity, it can be skewed by the
inclusion of scaffolds that differ only minimally. Recently, the number of circles (“#Circles”)
has been introduced, which leverages
sphere exclusion clustering to quantify the internal diversity of
molecular datasets and measure the chemical space covered by databases
and generative models. #Circles captures well the structural diversity
of molecular sets and allows to better
distinguish generative models with varying exploration capacities. The #Circles metric is computationally expensive,
and this is why the number of unique substructures (computed via the
Morgan algorithm) was recently suggested
as a cost-effective alternative to capture internal diversity.

2.4.3.

## Similarity to Reference Molecules
In de novo drug design tasks, generated molecules are often required
to share key, desirable properties with known compounds, such as binding
affinity or solubility. Consequently, their similarity to these reference
compoundsoften used for model training and validationis
computed as a measure of how well the designed molecules align with
the desired property distributions. Like with measures of internal
diversity, similarity can consider information on shared substructures,
as captured by extended connectivity fingerprints (ECFPs) or Molecular ACCess System (MACCS) keys. Often, evaluations of molecular similarity
are based on physicochemical descriptors, such as molecular weight,
octanol–water partitioning coefficient (logP), topological
polar surface area (TPSA), and number of hydrogen bond donors and
acceptors. Once these descriptors are
obtained for the reference molecules (e.g., training set) and the
molecular designs, the degree of similarity between their distributions
is computed using dedicated metrics,
,
 such as the
Kullback–Leibler (KL) divergence or Kolmogorov–Smirnov (KS) distance (the lower the values, the more similar the distributions). Another
popular measure of distance between distributions is the Fréchet
ChemNet Distance (FCD). FCD is computed
from the internal representations of the penultimate layer of a model
for bioactivity prediction, capturing
both chemical and biological information. Lower FCD values indicate
greater similarity between molecular sets in terms of structure and
bioactivity. An important caveat is
that distribution-based similarities require a minimum number of molecules
to be reliably computed,
,
 estimated to be around
100,000.

2.4.4.

## Predicted Molecular Suitability
Ultimately, de novo drug design aims to find molecular candidates
for hit and lead discovery, possessing an array of desirable properties,
such as potency, selectivity, pharmacokinetics, and safety. These
properties are inherently complex and challenging to determine experimentally,
due to their resource-intensive nature. This is why surrogate computational
approaches of different levels are used for molecule evaluation and
prioritization. Commonly used computational approaches are: (a) quantitative
structure–activity relationship (QSAR) approaches, to predict biological properties such as potency,
selectivity and ADMET (absorption, distribution, metabolism, excretion
and toxicity) properties; (b) pharmacokinetic models, which aid in predicting bioavailability, clearance,
and systemic exposure; (c) estimation of synthetic feasibility,
−

 at varying levels of complexity; and (d) biophysics-based approaches, such as docking and molecular dynamics. Each
computational approach offers distinct advantages and limitations
in molecule evaluation. QSAR models enable rapid, cost-effective predictions
of biological properties but rely heavily on high-quality training
data, which are often not available. At the same time, pharmacokinetic
models provide physiologically relevant insights into drug disposition,
yet they require accurate input parameters, which can introduce uncertainties.
Synthetic feasibility estimations aid in prioritizing accessible compounds,
but may bias toward well-established chemistries, potentially overlooking
innovative or unconventional synthetic routes (see ). Biophysics-based methods
provide mechanistic insights into molecular interactions, with docking
offering rapid but often simplified predictions of binding poses,
while molecular dynamics (MD) captures conformational flexibility
and stability at the cost of significantly higher computational expense.
However, both approaches can suffer from scoring inaccuracies, particularly
in ranking binding affinities. Despite these challenges, these computational
tools have become indispensable to navigate and rationalize the large
virtual libraries designed by generative deep learning.
Evaluating
the quality of de novo designs remains one of the most challenging
open questions in the field.
,
 This complexity arises
from the inherently multi-objective nature of drug discovery, the
unfeasibility of large-scale synthesis and biological testing, and
the absence of perfect models to predict complex in vitro and in vivo
properties. Nonetheless, the cheminformatics community has been particularly
active in delineating guidelines and benchmarks to aid in the evaluation
of the designs produced by generative deep learning algorithms (e.g., ). Overall, the specific
approaches adopted to evaluate a generator’s designs depend
on the intended goalwhether to develop and compare generative
models or to prioritize compounds for experimental validation.
 When comparing generative models or developing new
ones, large-scale
assessment is recommended, typically involving at least 100,000 molecular
designs. In this context, evaluating
chemical validity and non-redundancy are necessary, but not sufficient,
to monitor the correct learning of chemical information. Furthermore,
the analysis of similarity and diversity patterns (e.g., number of
circles or substructures, descriptor similarity and FCD) are required
to provide insights into a model’s potential and limitations.
Practitioners should ensure that the same number of generated designs
should be used across evaluations, to prevent unintended confounding
factors that could bias model comparison.

For applications aiming to bring generative models closer
to experimental
validation, a more refined evaluation strategy might be required.
While similarity vs. diversity analysis remains relevant for optimizing
the exploration-exploitation trade-off, additional layers of molecular
assessment might come into play. Early-stage filters, such as simple
synthetic accessibility estimations, help narrow down the chemical
space before applying more sophisticated and computationally demanding
retrosynthesis predictions. Similarly, biophysics-based evaluations
may start with docking for rapid binding predictions, followed by
more resource-intensive molecular dynamics simulations to refine binding
mode stability and interaction profiles.
To date, the effectiveness
of de novo design evaluation, especially
for prospective applications, remains dependent on the expertise and
viewpoint of the researchers analyzing the results, highlighting the
need for a strong synergy between machine learning specialists and
medicinal chemists to ensure that computationally generated designs
align with real-world drug discovery objectives.

3.

## With Complex Objectives Come Complex Responsibilities
3.1.

## The Similarity-Diversity Paradox
Designing new drug candidates faces a persistent challenge: balancing
structural diversity with molecular similarity to known molecules.
On one hand, similarity to known bioactive compounds increases the
likelihood of identifying viable drug candidates, as structurally
related molecules often share biological activity. On the other hand, excessive similarity can restrict chemical
innovation and the likelihood of charting novel chemical space. This
not only hampers the discovery of molecules with improved therapeutic
propertiessuch as enhanced potency, selectivity, or safetybut
also raises concerns regarding patentability of compounds that closely
resemble existing drugs. In drug discovery, innovation beyond “me-too”
compounds requires striking a balance
between leveraging known bioactivity and exploring sufficiently distinct
chemical matter to uncover new mechanisms of action and therapeutics.
We term this tension as the “similarity-diversity paradox”,
to underscore the difficulty in simultaneously achieving the two.
How to balance similarity and diversity has been a long-standing
question in the cheminformatics and drug discovery communities.
,
 This paradox can be mitigated by aiming to minimize substructure
and scaffold similarity, while preserving three-dimensional information.
In the context of protein–ligand binding, in fact, bioactivity
is primarily driven by three-dimensional shape and electrostatics
complementarity, along with other molecular
recognition factors. Based on this concept,
several generative approaches have incorporated shape and/or electrostatic
complementarity in the design process, e.g., by conditioning the generation
using pharmacophore or three-dimensional pocket information,
−

 or via ad-hoc scoring for reinforcement learning.
,,
 These approaches could allow
to preserve core features for binding (i.e., similarity to pharmacophore
and/or 3D shape and electrostatics) while allowing to explore new
regions in the chemical space in terms of scaffolds and substructures
(ensuring “two-dimensional” diversity). Another strategy
to increase diversity is by drawing inspiration from natural products.
,
 Natural products have been a rich source for medicinal chemists
due to their structural complexity and diverse scaffolds, which often
translate into a wide range of biological activities.
−

 Recognizing this, several studies have employed deep learning techniques
to generate natural product-inspired compounds via transfer learning
,,
 or fragment-based generation. These studies show that incorporating natural-product-derived
information allows to expand the chemical space accessible for drug
discovery while preserving desirable properties such as bioactivity.
Exploring previously uncharted regions of chemical space is nevertheless
not easy. In fact, most available molecule evaluation toolssuch
as docking algorithms, QSAR models and ADMET prediction toolsmight
struggle with highly novel scaffolds.
−

 These tools often rely
on statistical correlations derived from existing datasets, meaning
that molecules with unprecedented cores or non-traditional structural
features may fall outside their applicability domain. For instance,
docking algorithms typically assume that ligands share similarities
with known binders, leading to inaccurate scoring for highly distinct
chemotypes. Similarly, machine learning-based
bioactivity predictors are known to provide unreliable predictions
when applied to molecules that are too different from the molecules
used for training.
,
 Finally, synthetic accessibility
scores often penalize novel molecular structures, and might not consider
current or future advancements in organic synthesis.
Navigating
the similarity-diversity paradox with the current technologies
ultimately requires combining several techniques. De novo designs
occupying the “familiar” chemical space can be scored with the available data-driven tools
such as docking approaches and predictive models, and synthesis routes
can be devised for prospective studies. For diverse designs outside
the applicability domain, physics-based molecular dynamics simulations
of increasing computational complexities can be run. Initial short
or coarse-grained simulations can help preselect a smaller pool of
de novo designs. For these selected candidates, performing more extensive
and accurate simulations (potentially with multiple replicates) might
help the refinement of the compound selection. Ultimately, overcoming
the similarity-diversity paradox will be only possible by combining
efforts from multiple disciplines, such as improving generalizability
in molecular machine learning, and finding synergies, complementarities
and overlaps between physics-based approaches and data-driven predictions.

3.2.

## Benefits and Limitations of Molecular Benchmarks
for de Novo Design
Evaluating generative models poses additional
challenges than evaluating predictive models (e.g., to predict bioactivity
or toxicity). While predictive models can be evaluated via held-out
molecules that were previously tested, de novo designs are, by definition, molecules that have not been
previously tested for their properties. This makes it difficult to
evaluate different model architectures, choose which model should
be used for prospective studies, and identify learning gaps. To overcome
this limitation, in the past few years, several notable benchmarking
efforts,
,,,
 such as GuacaMol and
MOSES, have strived to provide standardized
datasets and metrics, to evaluate and compare generative models ( ).
GuacaMol and MOSES are to
date the most well-known benchmarking platforms. They include datasets
for testing, along with benchmarking metrics for comparing generative
modelswith GuacaMol comprising both distribution-learning
and goal-directed models, while MOSES focusing on distribution-learning
models. These benchmarks have enabled researchers to compare diverse
approaches systematically, facilitating rapid progress in algorithmic
development and model optimization. By offering well-defined tasks
(e.g., optimizing molecular properties, generating diverse compounds,
or mimicking training distributions), these benchmarks have become
indispensable tools for assessing the performance and utility of generative
algorithms in chemistry. While molecular benchmarks are undeniably
valuable, there are inherent limitations and potential pitfalls associated
with their use. Prominent among these is the risk of overfitting models
to benchmark-specific tasks, metrics, or datasets. Such overoptimization
can lead to a “tunnel vision”, where models excel at
predefined tasks but fail to generalize to real-world drug design
challenges. In this context, excessive reliance on benchmarks has
been suggested to stifle creativity, as researchers prioritize improving
benchmark scores over addressing broader, more impactful scientific
questions. Moreover, molecular benchmarks
often simplify the complexity of drug discovery. Real-world drug design
involves multifaceted objectives, iterative processes, and the integration
of experimental validationaspects that are not easily captured
in benchmark tasks. The reliance on computational metrics, such as
similarity or property optimization, may inadvertently bias research
toward generating compounds that are easy to evaluate computationally
but less relevant for practical applications.
To address these
challenges, the field must strike a balance between
leveraging the advantages of benchmarks and fostering innovative,
application-driven research. This includes testing and benchmarking
approaches on more than one benchmark, continue the development of
progressively more realistic evaluation metrics and datasets, and
ultimately, incorporate experimental feedback, whenever possible.
By acknowledging both the benefits and limitations of molecular benchmarks,
we wish for the community to harness the potential while remaining
vigilant against their unintended consequences.

3.3.

## Navigating Feasibility in Molecular Generation
While generative deep learning models allow to produce previously
unseen molecules, difficulties arise in addressing synthetic feasibility. Defining and incorporating synthesizability
is a challenging task, as it may depend on subtle structural variations,
reaction selectivity, and the commercial availability of building
blocks essential to chemical reactions. Moreover, several research has shown that the synthesizability of
molecules proposed by deep learning may be limited, depending on the
chosen approach.

A wealth of research
has focused on assessing the synthetic feasibility of molecules. Commonly
used strategies generally assess one of the following aspects ( ):

Synthetic complexity scores, identify
those molecular characteristics that could challenge the synthesis.
Metrics such as the synthetic accessibility score (SASscore) estimate synthetic complexity based on the
presence of predefined molecular motifs, such as the number of bridged
and spiro systems, stereocenters, or macrocycles. Other complexity
metrics account for functional group distribution, molecular size,
and ring system strain. More recently,
scores of synthetic complexity based on deep learning have been introduced,
for instance, based on the number of estimated reaction steps required.

Predicted
retrosynthesis routes.Determining
retrosynthesis routes involves decomposing a target molecule into
building blocks that are either commercially available or easy to
synthesize. Computationally, retrosynthesis
planning can be approached by using either rule-based methods or machine
learning. Rule-based approaches
,
 identify
functional groups and reaction motifs, then apply a library of predefined
reaction templates to suggest potential precursors. Machine learning
approaches are used to learn retrosynthetic feasibility directly from
large databases of annotated reactions. This can be performed via
(a) template-based retrosynthesis, where the model selects reaction
templates from training data,
,
 or (b) template-free
retrosynthesis, where sequence-to-sequence learning or graph-based
transformations are applied to generate precursors directly, without
predefined templates.
−

 Each strategy has distinct advantages and disadvantages.
Synthetic
complexity scores provide a rapid assessment of synthetic feasibility,
which makes them particularly suited to evaluate large molecular libraries,
or to be included in reinforcement learning pipelines. However, synthetic
complexity scores that rely on predefined heuristics are static as
they may not include new synthetic methodologies and cannot easily
be updated based on new reaction data. Furthermore, these strategies
condense vast information into a single score, which can obscure important
nuances, such as whether a high complexity score is due to challenging
stereochemical features, strained ring systems, or uncommon functional
groups. As a result, these scores may sometimes penalize molecules
that are accessible via modern synthetic routes.
In contrast,
machine learning-based approaches offer a dynamic
and data-driven alternative to static complexity scores. By learning
from large reaction databases, they can capture nuanced relationships
between molecular structures and their synthetic feasibility while
adapting to new reaction data. Lastly, retrosynthesis-based models
further provide explicit synthetic routes, with template-based methods
using established transformations and template-free approaches offering
greater flexibility for novel chemistry. However, these models are
limited by data bias and reaction coverage.
For this reason,
the choice of feasibility assessment method depends
on the application. Complexity scores remain valuable for rapid screening
of large molecular libraries, and computational pipelines where computational
efficiency is crucial. Meanwhile, machine learning-based retrosynthesis
models provide more practical feedback for experimental applications
by suggesting synthesis routes, but they require careful curation
of reaction data to ensure reliability. While synthetic feasibility is typically assessed after molecule
generation, approaches that generate molecules while considering the
synthesizability constraints were also developed. They are divided
into following groups:

Enumeration-based methods, which refers to the systematic generation of (all) possible candidate
of building blocks molecules by following a set of predefined reaction
rules. This method explores the synthetic accessible space, often
using reaction vectors for the reaction rules.
,

Synthesizability-constrained molecular
generation, which include reaction templates,
or reactivity
predictions to generate experimental accessible molecules and their
pathways.
,
 Another promising approach is
to integrate synthetic accessibility as an optimization objective
within reinforcement learning, to steer the generation toward drug-like
synthetically accessible molecules.
,,
 Other approaches have used autoencoders for molecule
optimization that considers both desirable molecular properties and
elements of synthetic accessibility,
,−

 and optimized the score of oracle retrosynthesis prediction models.

Last, estimating synthesizability adds to the challenges
of designing
structurally diverse (and out of distribution) molecules, while remaining
synthetically feasible. In these cases, the designs might not only
fall out of distribution of the approaches used to assess their physico-chemical
and biological properties, but also of the approaches used to estimate
their synthesizability. To bridge this gap, recent research has addressed
the generalizability of synthesis prediction tools when applied to
newly reported patents or reactions. Advancing synthesis estimation models in parallel with molecule
generation ones is expected to be a key strategy to allow charting
the chemical universe in an efficient manner.

3.4.

## The Experimental Validation Dilemma
Unlike bioactivity or molecular property predictionwhere
models are usually evaluated on well-defined test setsmolecular
generation aims to propose novel, previously unseen molecules, whose
properties are unknown. Moreover, generative approaches tend to show
low “molecular rediscovery” rates,
,
 making it difficult to use existing, held-out molecules for the
evaluation. These aspects make direct evaluation of generative approaches
difficult, as there is no ground truth to compare against. Compounding
this challenge, existing tools for assessing de novo designssuch
as similarity metrics, bioactivity prediction, or heuristic scoresare
inherently imprecise and/or only partially capture complex design
objectives.
Arguably, the only definitive “proof-of-the
pudding” of bioactivity is experimental validation. However,
experimental testing is expensive and time-consuming, meaning that
only a small fraction of generated molecules can be synthesized and
evaluated. Hence, this process faces two major bottlenecks:

Selection of molecules to make and test. With thousands of generated designs scoring similarly on computational
metrics, choosing which ones to validate experimentally is challenging.
Many of these scores contain inherent noise, and small variations
in ranking may not correspond to meaningful differences in experimental
properties. At the same time, errors in the scoring functions (e.g.,
for out-of-distribution molecules) might
rule out suitable molecules. Ensuring that promising candidates are
not overlooked requires robust selection strategiesyet, defining
optimal criteria for this process remains an open challenge.

Sufficiency of experimental validation. In machine learning, test sets used to validate predictive models,
typically contain a substantial number of molecules to provide statistically
robust evaluations (e.g., in the order of hundreds to thousands of
compounds
 ,
). In de novo design, however,
synthesizing and testing even a small fraction of generated molecules
is prohibitively expensive. This raises a fundamental challenge: how many designs are sufficient to reliably measure the effectiveness
of (and compare) generative deep learning models? To date,
balancing practical feasibility with robust evaluation remains an
unresolved issue.
In addition to cost and time constraints, experimental
validation
of generative deep learning approaches demands expertise across multiple
disciplines, including synthetic and medicinal chemistry, computational
modeling, assay development, and data analysis. This interdisciplinary
challenge likely contributes to the relatively scarce experimental
validation of generative models ( ), especially when
compared to the vast number of proposed approaches. This might also
be the reason why the field tends to validate new methods predominantly
on well-explored targets, like kinases and nuclear receptors ( ). Finally, the validation
cost and complexity escalate as the targeted property becomes more
clinically relevant, requiring more advanced assays, in vivo studies, or even early stage pharmacokinetics and toxicity evaluations.
These challenges underscore the difficulty of translating de novo
molecular design from computational predictions to real-world applications.
The integration of automated synthesis and self-driving
laboratories
offers a promising solution to such “experimental validation
dilemma”.
,
 By combining robotic synthesis,
high-throughput screening and deep-learning driven molecule design
and synthesis planning, these platforms can accelerate experimental
validation while mitigating the bottlenecks of manual experimentation.
Automated synthesis not only enables a more systematic assessment
of the capabilities of generative drug discovery approaches, but also enhance the efficiency of design-make-test-analyze
cycles. Incorporating adaptive learning strategies (e.g., active learning
,
) could further refine molecular generation strategies, guiding the
exploration of the chemical space with greater precision and versatility.

4.

## Future Directions and Opportunities
Generative deep learning has advanced the opportunities to design
molecules on-demand in search for drug hit and lead candidates. The
field is experiencing rapid advances, offering both exciting prospects
and notable challenges.
One of the biggest challenges remains
the evaluation of design
quality. In complex design tasks, such as the design of bioactive
molecules, accurate and scalable quality metrics are lacking. Fast
evaluation metrics, e.g., quantitative estimate of drug-likeness and QSAR model predictions, can misguide molecule
selection and sacrifice prediction accuracy.
,−

 On the other hand, relying on accurate but
time-consuming simulations is practically unfeasible on large libraries,
and hence it inevitably constrains the breadth of the analysis. We
see accelerating these simulations with deep learning as a promising
research direction,
−

 which could remove a major obstacle to realizing
the full potential of generative deep learning. Until speed and accuracy
are effectively combined, new research should report multiple and
multifaceted evaluation metrics for large design libraries to better
reflect design quality.
,,

A direct consequence of the challenges in design evaluation
is
increased risk of testing the proposed de novo designs in the lab.
While computational scoring functions (e.g., docking and QSAR models)
can prioritize de novo designs,
,
 they are
reliable only within their respective applicability domains, leading
to filtering out structurally novel designs. Hence, training models with better out-of-distribution capabilities
can extend these limits and represents a promising research direction.
We expect the integration of predictive approaches with higher generalization
capabilities into reinforcement learning as a promising direction
to enable fast chemical space exploration in search for structurally
novel molecular entities.
Another fundamental challenge for
de novo design is data scarcity.
,
 Even “large”
bioactivity datasets usually contain
only a few thousand molecules
,
 which constitutes
a bottleneck for deep learning. Transfer learning helps mitigate this
problem by leveraging unlabeled datasets, however, current approaches
also face issues such as catastrophic forgetting and mode collapse, resulting
in reduced design diversity. Designing new training strategies has
attracted increasing attention from the research community. In-context
learning for molecules
−

 and test-time scaling of generations are two promising examples; further research
is needed to validate their applicability. We also view inactive molecules
as an invaluable resource for low-data drug discovery research, since
inactive molecules are typically more abundant than active ones.
It is impossible to ignore the recent rise of large language models
(LLMs) and their potential to accelerate molecular design. While open
questions remain regarding their chemical representation capabilities,
−

 these models offer great ability to integrate diverse sources of
information, from textual descriptions of chemical reactions to structured
datasets, potentially leading to rapid and/or more informed molecular
generation and design evaluation.
−

 However, despite their promise,
LLMs have yet to fully permeate drug discovery, and their role in
addressing key challenges such as generalization, zero-shot learning,
and structure-based design remains an open question.
We currently
see two parallel but increasingly intertwined movements.
The deep learning community continues to push the boundaries of generative
modeling, developing more powerful architectures to explore chemical
space.
,,,
 Meanwhile, the drug discovery community is working
to integrate key factors (e.g., chemistry, bioactivity, synthesizability)
into the evaluation of generative models, to ensure their relevance
for therapeutic applications.
,,
 Historically, these efforts have often progressed in isolation,
but they are now converging as both fields recognize the need for
models that are not only innovative but also grounded in medicinal
chemistry and pharmacology. Bridging this gap will require strong
interdisciplinary collaborations between these communities. Moreover,
advances in model interpretability, evaluation frameworks that better
reflect real-world constraints, and tighter integration between computational
design and experimental validation, will help close such gap. As these
two domains continue to evolve, the true measure of success will not
be in generating molecules alone, but in producing candidates that
can withstand the demands of drug development and make a tangible
impact. Herein, the importance of not only publishing success stories,
but also negative experimental results are key, as it helps researchers
understand better where research pipelines involving computational
methods need to be adjusted.

†.R.Ö.
and H.B contributed equally to this work. Conceptualization:
all authors; Visualization: F.G., with contributions from RÖ;
WritingOriginal Draft: RÖ, H.B., F.G.; WritingReview
& Editing: all authors.

This research
was funded by the European Union (ERC, ReMINDER, 101077879 to FG)
and the Centre for Living Technologies. Views and opinions expressed
are, however, those of the author(s) only and do not necessarily reflect
those of the European Union or the European Research Council.

The
authors
declare no competing financial interest.

## References