3686acsomegaACS OmegaACS OmegaAmerican Chemical SocietyPMC1242384112423841124238414094920710.1021/acsomega.5c05175Exploring SARS-CoV‑2
Spike RBD Pockets as Targets
for Generic Drugs: A Combined Computational, Biophysical, and Biological
Approach
García-MarínJavier Francés-GómezClara Forcada-NadalAlicia AdhavAnmol Marco-MarínClara RubioVicente MarinaAlberto LlácerJosé-Luis GellerRon Martín-SantamaríaSonsoles 
†
Centro
de Investigaciones Biológicas Margarita Salas (CIB), CSIC, 28040
Madrid, Spain

‡
Institute
for Integrative Systems Biology (I2SysBio), UV-CSIC, 46980
Paterna, Valencia, Spain

§
Instituto
de Biomedicina de Valencia (IBV), CSIC, 46010
Valencia, Spain

∥
Group
739 at the IBV-CSIC of the Centro de Investigación Biomédica
en Red en Enfermedades Raras of the Instituto
de Salud Carlos III (CIBERER-ISCIII), 28029
Madrid, Spain
*
Email: javier.garciamarin@uah.es.
*
Email: smsantamaria@cib.csic.es.
258202510354019040190–402071292025© 2025 The Authors. Published by American Chemical SocietyThis article is licensed under CC-BY 4.0

## Abstract
Coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19), caused by the severe
acute
respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2), was a pandemic that
killed over 6 million people worldwide, with devastating social and
economic impacts still being felt today. Despite the recent and successful
development of RNA vaccines, there remains a need for antiviral drugs
to treat patients at risk for drug resistance, immunological disorders,
or reduced treatment efficacy. In this regard, several computational
approaches have been carried out to find small molecules targeting
the SARS-CoV-2 Spike S protein, and drug repurposing strategies have
been applied to find rapid and accessible candidates for clinical
use. In this work, we conduct an exhaustive computational study of
the receptor binding domain (RBD) of the spike S protein to identify
and characterize druggable pockets and to identify generic drugs as
blockers of SARS-CoV-2 entry. The combination of computational screening,
biophysical studies in both the RBD (Wuhan-Hu-1 and Omicron BA.1 variants)
and Spike protein (Wuhan variant), and the in vitro assays in SARS-CoV-2 Wuhan-Hu-1, Delta, and Omicron BA.1 has led
to the identification of generic drugs with S protein binding properties
and antiviral activity. Based on in vitro antiviral
activity and mechanism of action analysis at the atomic/molecular
level, fingolimod exhibited the most promising profile for a possible
SARS-CoV-2 antiviral treatment.

 
 
statusreleaseddisplay-pdfyesis-olfnois-manuscriptnois-preprintnois-journal-matternois-scannednois-retractednoReceived 2025 Jun 2; Accepted 2025 Aug 5; Revised 2025 Aug 4; Collection date 2025 Sep 9.

## Introduction
In December 2019, an outbreak of a new
β-coronavirus spread
in Wuhan (China), rapidly causing the most devastating pandemic of
the XXI century thus far. The causal pathogen was named severe acute
respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2). SARS-CoV-2 infects
human pulmonary cells, causing coronavirus infectious disease 2019
or coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19), a potentially fatal infection,
particularly in the elderly.

In
response to the threat imposed by this new virus, the scientific
community launched a collective effort to develop therapies in record
time, which has yielded several highly effective vaccines as well as antivirals with modest efficacy for
hospitalized patients.
,
 Especially remarkable were the
worldwide efforts to generate the first vaccines against SARS-CoV-2,
proving the success of the first widely used mRNA vaccines, to the
point that the year 2023 Nobel Prize in Medicine or Physiology recognized
the development of the technology and its value for COVID-19. Nevertheless, despite the implementation of promising
COVID-19 vaccination programs, the virus has nonetheless led to millions
of confirmed infections worldwide. Therefore, the discovery and development
of antiviral drugs remain essential for addressing potential future
coronavirus outbreaks.
,
 This health crisis highlighted
the need to develop platforms that enable the development of vaccines
and antivirals for new emerging viral diseases.
While societies
have learned to live with SARS-CoV-2 as part of
the seasonal endemic human viruses, the development of additional
therapies that can help mitigate the cost of SARS-CoV-2 is a top priority.
This is of particular relevance in the face of the rapid evolution
of SARS-CoV-2, which has significantly reduced the vaccine efficacy,
even eliminating the utility of some therapeutic monoclonal antibodies.
In this regard, such discoveries can be facilitated by molecular probes
and drug-like molecules, which provide useful tools to study biochemical
processes relevant to viral replication that can be leveraged to develop
new antiviral drugs.
One of the distinctive features of the
efforts to better understand
SARS-CoV-2 was the availability of detailed, near-atomic-resolution
structural knowledge in molecular terms for the interaction of the
SARS-CoV-2 spike (S) protein with the cellular receptor for the virus,
the human angiotensin-converting enzyme 2 (hACE2). This advanced starting
point was based on previous knowledge gained for the other two severe
human β-coronavirus outbreaks, SARS-CoV-1 and MERS-CoV, and
the advancements in cryo-electron microscopy (cryo-EM).
,
 Thus, there are a large number of publicly available high-quality
structures of the S protein, its receptor binding domain (RBD), or
their complex with the catalytic domain of ACE2 (the region of ACE2
that interacts with the viral RBD).
,,

Beyond their utility for understanding viral
biology, high-resolution
macromolecular structures enable the implementation of in
silico drug-docking methodologies to identify novel antivirals.
Indeed, in silico identification of potential binding
sites and in silico testing of existing pharmaceutical
libraries using molecular dynamics (MD) simulations have proven to
provide a valuable avenue to identify potential drugs. Despite their high potential and flexibility
for clinical development, RBD/ACE2 drug-like small-molecule blockers
have rarely been reported. Capitalizing on both the availability of
high-resolution structures and new MD approaches, we have computationally
explored druggable pockets in the spike RBD and used them to screen
a library of generic drugs to identify potential binders able to interfere
with hACE2 binding and to serve as a starting point for potential
therapeutics. The binding affinity of selected screened drugs was
then assessed by biophysical assays, and their antiviral activity
was evaluated against both the parental SARS-CoV-2 Wuhan-Hu-1 sequence
and variants of concern. We have identified the drug fingolimod as
a novel spike RBD binder and as a promising antiviral agent active
against relevant SARS-CoV-2 variants. The novelty of our findings
lies in the discovery of a drug-like small molecule with high potential
to be optimized and developed as an antiviral targeting the SARS-CoV-2
spike protein.

## Results and Discussion

## Conformational Dynamics of the RBD
SARS-CoV-2 S protein
can be divided into three topological domains: head, stalk, and cytoplasmatic
tail. In the head, the RBD represents
the key structural feature to recognize the hACE2 and trigger the
viral entry into the cell. Given the importance of this protein domain,
we were prompted to explore the potential druggability of the RBD
region. Prior to the computational screening, we decided to study
the conformational space explored by the RBD to assess the possibility
of finding cryptic pockets or significant movements in the tertiary
structure. We took as a starting point the geometric coordinates of
the RBD bound to the human ACE2 (PDB ID: 6M0J) to run molecular
dynamics (MD) simulations of the RBD in the free state in explicit
water.
The root-mean-square deviation (RMSD) relative to the
starting structures was calculated to examine the structural stability
across the trajectories. During our simulations, we observed how the
protein reached equilibrium after 100 ns with mean RMSD values that
did not exceed a mean value of 1.6 Å, thus confirming the stability
of the apo protein in our studies ( A). Analysis of Cα root-mean-square
fluctuations (RMSF) showed a similar picture for three replicas, with
average values at all positions along the RBD under 3 Å ( B,C).
 A detailed visual analysis of the simulation revealed
that despite
the stability of the main structural features of the RBD, one of the
most mobile segments is the loop spanning residues 475–485,
corresponding to the receptor binding ridge of the receptor binding
motif (RBM). This loop is a crucial player in the process of RBD–ACE2
recognition, interacting tightly with several residues at the N-terminal helix of the hACE2 protease domain. Indeed, this hot spot of the RBD is an epitope
for different antibodies that neutralize SARS-CoV-2 infection.
,
 Other RBD regions with the highest RMSF values correspond to those
coils in terminal positions of our structures and the helix α2,
which comprises residues Tyr365–Tyr369. A deep visual insight
into the MD trajectory revealed that this helix is partially displaced
along the simulation toward the α1 helix ( ). This movement opens a small cavity between
the RBD helixes α2 and α3. In the initial configuration,
the entry to this swallowed hollow is enclosed by the “gating”
Tyr369 from helix α2 that interacts with Phe377 through a t-shaped
π-stacking and with Pro384 by a CH–π mediated interaction.
During the MD simulation, the Tyr369 side chain rotated, breaking
its initial intramolecular interactions, allowing the partial displacement
of the α2 helix and the consequent pocket opening. This observation was supported by the work from
Toelzer et al., in which they described that this is a free fatty
acid binding pocket identified in their cryo-electron microscopy structures
(PDB IDs: 6ZB5 and 6ZB4). The presence of linoleic acid in this cavity
seems to relate with a high packing of the full trimeric S protein
and a stabilization effect toward the closed conformation of the whole
protein, thus hindering hACE2 interaction.

 

## RBD Pocket Mapping
Several computational studies have
tried to identify drug candidates that potentially bind to different
regions of the S protein. In silico drug repurposing
strategies against SARS-CoV-2 include those aimed at identifying potential
ligand binders to the RBD.
−

 Most of these studies targeted the interface between the RBD and
hACE2 in an attempt to find hypothetical small molecules able to disrupt
protein–protein interactions. To the best of our knowledge,
only peptides and α-helix constructs based on the hACE2 N-terminal helixes have been claimed as strong binders to
the RBD interaction interface.
,
 A study based on experimental
drug repurposing approaches has identified drugs with the ability
to bind the RBD and to also exert antiviral activity, and only a virtual screening (VS) approach has identified
natural products with RBD affinity. Our
approach to find drug-like binders that can eventually decrease the
SARS-CoV-2 infection by disrupting hACE2 binding relies on the rational
identification of druggable pockets over the entire RBD domain, not
just focusing on the RBD–ACE2 interface. For this, we decided
to map the RBD crystal structure (PDB ID: 6M0J) with two
different programs SiteMap and DoGSiteScorer to find druggable cavities.
In the first
instance, it is important to note that none of these tools were able
to identify RBM as the druggable region. This contrasts with the high
number of studies and approaches to target the RBM of the spike protein
(site 1 hereinafter) in an attempt to find protein–protein
disruptors. However, its irregular topology and highly solvent-exposed
surface may act as a counterpart for drug-like molecule binding. Indeed,
druggable pockets are usually deeper, with complex shapes and high
enclosures. The first putative pocket
(site 2 hereafter) identified by both programs over the RBD corresponded
to the region delimited by the two main helixes α1 and α2
of the RBD ( A). This cleft flanked by the two α helixes is composed of
many hydrophobic amino acids including Phe338, Phe342, Phe374, Leu468,
and Tyr365, which eventually could accommodate lipophilic ligands.
In this pocket, there is also an Asn343 residue, which presumably
is attached to a complex glycan chain in vivo.
,
 The presence of this complex sugar could exert a crucial effect
in the binding process of ligands by shielding the unoccupied pocket
or, in contrast, enclosing it once a ligand is bound.
 A second potential drug-binding pocket (pocket
2; site 3 hereinafter)
was detected by both programs, forming a narrow cavity spanning residues
458–479 ( A) close to the RBM ridge (residues 471–491). This region
is formed by several coils and loops, so high mobility in this region
is expected as can be deduced by the study of b-factors in the crystal
structure (PDB ID: 6M0J). This fact, in conjunction with the
high cavity exposure, could represent a drawback for small-molecule
binding. Nonetheless, this pocket presents a higher content of polar
amino acids compared with those observed in site 1, including, among
them, Arg457, Lys458, and Glu471, three charged residues that could
act as anchor points to establish strong intermolecular interactions.
During our MD simulation studies, we identified a possible third
pocket (site 4 hereinafter, B) that was not present at the starting 3D geometry.
This pocket was reported as a linoleic-acid binding region, as aforementioned. However, during the initial mapping of the RBD,
neither SiteMap nor DoGSiteScorer identified this cavity as a druggable
binding pocket. This fact may be due to the 3D geometry employed for
the computational analysis, which was obtained from the X-ray structure
corresponding to PDB entry 6M0J (see ).
Using a snapshot from this conformation, only DoGSiteScorer was able
to detect the pocket, with a good druggability index (0.8), pointing
to the interest of this region as a possible drug-binding pocket.
This cavity, termed site 4, was considered for subsequent virtual
screening studies.
Finally, to confirm the accessibility of
these sites for virtual
screening, we analyzed their location within the context of the whole
spike protein. To this aim, we superimposed our pockets onto the full,
glycosylated structure of the S protein in complex with hACE2, obtained
from the CHARMM-GUI Archive (COVID-19 Proteins Library) (Figure S1). This analysis confirmed that despite
the complex glycan shield, all three pockets remain accessible to
the small-molecule ligand, thus confirming their interest for virtual
screening.

## Virtual Screening of Drug Libraries and MD Simulations
Considering the data obtained by our previous analysis, we decided
to carry out an in silico or virtual screening (VS)
campaign aimed at discovering potential binders to the RBD, which
eventually could be used as antivirals. As drug development is a long
way for a wide health emergency, drug repurposing approaches arise
as excellent strategies in drug discovery. Thus, we employed our customized in-house library of up to 2951 compounds, which collects
several approved drugs as well as vitamins, and other interesting
bioactive molecules in use. VS was performed
using Glide and FlexX, focusing on the three identified pockets during
RBD mapping as well as in the PPI RBD/ACE2 interface ( , Tables S1 and S2). Given that docking approaches and their associated
scores are inherently limited by a simple and static representation
of the receptor–ligand binding phenomenon, we decided to refine
the binding modes generated by extensive molecular dynamics simulations
(MD). The resulting RDB–ligand complexes, obtained from virtual
screening, were submitted to two 1 μs replicas of unbiased all-atom
molecular dynamics simulations in order to study the stability inside
the proposed binding site and to explore possible conformational changes
in the RBD. The drugs finally selected for MD simulations in complex
with the S protein RBD are listed in Figure S2 and Table S3.
 

## Virtual Screening in Site 1
The RBM comprises the region
that participates in the recognition and binding with hACE2. This
interface is a protein–protein interaction that has been extensively
explored by computational methodologies before but without providing
accurate experimental support of the proposed hits.
,,
 Only a few recent works report small molecules
that target the RBD (and/or ACE2) and could act as protein–protein
interaction disruptors.
,
 Considering this, targeting
this region of RBD by drug-like molecules seems to be difficult. In
an initial docking analysis, Glide led to 29 hit candidates with scores
ranging from −5.274 to −7.733 kcal/mol ( and Table S1) and FlexX led to 29 best solutions with estimated affinity
in the micromolar range (Table S2). Among
the screened drugs, no coincidences were found (Table S4).
Visual inspection of docked poses revealed
that Glide tended to score better polar and charged molecules rather
than FlexX. We also noticed the presence of some cofactors, nucleosides,
and sugars among the proposed hits, which were discarded, as they
are not interesting molecules as drug repurposing candidates. Poses
tended to distribute along the RBM, without a clear pattern of interactions
or a common binding mode. In light of these observations, we selected
as candidates for MD simulations three compounds, fingolimod, cefamandole,
and desferrioxamine B, because they presented high docking scores
and targeted an extended surface over site 1. MD simulations were
analyzed by means of RMSD monitoring and visual inspection (residence
time, Table S3, RMSD site 1), revealing
that the three molecules abandoned the binding site 1. Cefamandole
is an antibiotic that has shown low antiviral effect but without reporting
a RBD-mediated mechanism. This is in
accordance with our simulation, where it escaped easily from site
1 (see Table S3, residence time) despite
being one of the top-scoring molecules. Remarkably, in the case of
fingolimod, during one of the replicas, the molecule ended up bound
to site 2, once it has abandoned the initial binding site after 215
ns, until the end of the simulation (see RMSD in Figure S3). Therefore, from the screening at site 1, no small
molecule was selected for in vitro testing.

## Virtual Screening in Site 2
Docked scores obtained
here were higher than those for site 1 for both docking procedures,
suggesting a better (predicted) druggability of site 2 (Tables S1 and S2). Given that the α2 helix
is an important glycosylation site,
,
 we discarded
docked results obtained by Glide where the ligand was interacting
with Asn343: FAD, cefalonium, octreotide, and ocphyl. No coincidence
molecules between Glide and FlexX were found in this second search;
however, a few chemotypes were identified (Table S5). Several β-lactamic antibiotics were selected by
Glide (cefalonium, cefonicid, cefoxitin), while FlexX chose adrenergic
drugs like salmeterol or betaxolol. Interestingly, FlexX identified
fingolimod as a site 2 binder, reinforcing our previous observations
arising from the MD simulation on site 1. We realized that FlexX also
selected calcifediol as a putative binder and other vitamin D metabolites
below the top 29 poses. This fact was particularly remarkable because
several studies have reported that calcifediol and vitamin D metabolites
may improve COVID-19 outcomes and patient perspectives by decreasing
the acute respiratory distress syndrome.
−

 However, to
the best of our knowledge, no specific target has been suggested for
these compounds, and our results might point at the spike protein
RBD as one possible target. After analysis and visual inspection of
the docked results from both VS protocols, several candidates were
selected for MD simulations of RBD/ligand complexes in site 2 (Table S3): banzel, nabumetone, catechin, hesperetin,
calcifediol, ergocalciferol, fingolimod, betaxolol, and salmeterol.
After the MD simulations, eight of the nine hit compounds selected
remained inside site 2 although experiencing some fluctuations depending
on the compound (see the RMSD in Figure S4). Except for salmeterol, fingolimod, and vitamin D metabolites,
all compounds exhibited more than one differentiated binding mode,
different from the starting docked pose, shifting alongside the hydrophobic
cleft. Ligand binding is mainly led by π-stacking interactions
with aromatic side chains of Phe338, Phe342, Phe374, and Trp436, as
well as van der Waals interactions with hydrophobic amino acids ( ). Some compounds
establish occasional hydrogen bonds during simulations, especially
with Asp264 backbone atoms and Ser371 side chain. Fingolimod, salmeterol,
calcifediol, and ergocalciferol showed the most stable binding modes
across the MD simulation according to RMSD values and visual inspection.
 In light of these observations for site 2, we decided
to get a
better insight into the role that Asn343 glycan could play in the
recognition between RBD and our hits. The sugar shielding role over
the SARS-CoV-2 S protein has been extensively studied by means of
experimental and computational approaches so far.
,,
 This glycosidic coating protects pathogens
from immune response and may act as a shield for those drugs targeting
this protein. Moreover, works from Amaro et al. have proved that glycans
stabilize the open conformations of the RBD, and Asn343 glycan seems
to be directly implicated in the pathway for the spike opening process.
,
 Taking all of these observations in mind, first, we visualized the
MD trajectories generated, deposited in the COVID-19 Molecular Structure
and Therapeutics Hub and the CHARMM-GUI Archive-COVID-19 Proteins
Library of open-state S protein.
,
 We observed
that Asn343 sugars here simulated exhibited great mobility, interacting
with nearby residues, overall considerably hindering the accessibility
to site 2.
We simulated the RBD attached to a complex glycan
in Asn343, as
previously described in other works.
,
 Along the
simulation, this branched oligosaccharide partially occludes the entry
of site two in both our replicas. However, also partially accessible
conformations able to bind small molecules in this pocket were observed.
Furthermore, it is important to consider that, in the context of a
fully glycosylated S protein, this glycan interacts with the neighboring
glycans and adjacent RBD on the trimeric protein, as has been demonstrated
by studies of Amaro,
,
 so the real accessibility to
this site may be even higher, especially in the closed-state S protein.
Additionally, it is important to consider that there is a high variety
and complexity in the glycosylation patterns present in the virus
envelope, varying the possible outcomes and modeling approaches. In
order to study the influence of the binding of a small molecule, we
performed MD simulations of the glycosylated RBD (glyRBD) in complex
with calcifediol, one of our screened drugs with more stable binding
modes. Similar to the complex with the RBD, calcifediol remained stable
inside the glyRBD site 2. However, in this case, we observed higher
fluctuations in RMSD values ( ), in part due to weak van der Waals interactions established
with the CH groups present in the carbohydrate units attached to Asn343,
and occasional hydrogen bonds that destabilize calcifediol inside
the pocket. This simulation was set as a proof of concept, and its
results may suggest that, despite the presence of a glycosylation
site near site 2 in RBD, ligand binding may be allowed. Based on all
of these findings, we decided to select for in vitro screenings, all molecules that have remained bound to the RBD in
our simulations.
 

## Virtual Screening in Site 3
This cavity is allocated
in a neighboring region to the receptor binding ridge, and it is highly
accessible in the open state of the S protein ( and S1). The
predicted scoring values obtained by Glide and FlexX were worse compared
with site 2 and had a similar tendency for site 1 (Tables S1 and S2). Among the 29 hits proposed by both docking
programs (Table S6), no coincidences were
found; however, more polar ligands were proposed for this site. This
may reflect the fact that in site 3 there is an important content
of charged amino acids such as Lys462, Glu465, Arg466, and Asp467
as well as other polar residues, given the high solvent exposure surface
in this region. These results may suggest a lower druggability for
this pocket in comparison to site 2. In any case, three molecules
were finally selected for further studies by means of MD simulations
of the corresponding RBD/ligand complexes: iohexol, methoxamine, and
glafenine.
The latter unbound from site 3 easily after a few
nanoseconds in both replicas; however, iohexol and methoxamine exhibited
intermediate behavior. Thus, in one simulation for each candidate,
compounds liberated from the binding site easily, but in the second
replica both remained bound to the RBD for a long time (see RMSD in Figure S5). In this case, compounds shifted away
from the binding site to the neighboring region of the receptor binding
ridge, exploring more stabilizing interactions. Nevertheless, these
compounds finally broke their contact with the RBD and unbound from
its surface. The observations arising from the MD simulations are
in good accordance with the docking-predicted binding energy for this
region, suggesting poor expectations for modulation by small molecules
in this site, and supported by the lack of stable binding modes inside
the pocket during MD. Given that, we did not select any candidate
for in vitro testing from the results generated herein
for site 3.

## Virtual Screening in Site 4
As aforementioned, from
the analysis of our MD simulations, we observed the existence of site
4 and it was experimentally reported during our investigations. We performed docking calculations (top-ranked
screened molecules in Table S7) with favorable
predicted energy binding ranges (depicted in Tables S1 and S2), considerably higher than those obtained at sites
1 and 3, and only comparable to site 2 predictions. Indeed, SeeSAR
estimated picomolar activity for top-ranked solutions, while Glide
docking scores improved up to −3 kcal/mol compared to values
obtained in the second-ranked docked solutions in site 2. This result
was also supported by the presence of fatty acid ligands in this pocket,
as experimentally determined by cryo-EM (PDB IDs: 6ZB5 and 6ZB4).
On the other
hand, in this case, both docking tools found some shared molecules
in the top-ranked molecules like famprofazone, flupentixol, and fulvestrant.
Docking with FlexX, also predicted as putative binder vitamin D3 (cholecalciferol),
was selected for further studies due to the interest of vitamin D
in SARS-CoV-2 treatment as already stated. After careful visual inspection
of docking results, we also selected oxyphenomium, sertindole, trazodone,
antrafenine, and toremifene for MD simulations.
Trajectories
generated showed moderately stable complexes between
the RBD and proposed ligands in both replicas (see RMSD Figure S6). In addition, different binding modes
were observed for most ligands, but all remained bound to the protein
during the simulation time ( ). Molecules are stabilized by an extensive network
of van der waals and π–π interactions with residues
present in this site (Tyr365, Tyr369, Phe374, Phe377, Tyr380), as
well as by CH–π interactions, in a manner similar to
that of eicosanoic acid (PDB ID: 6ZB5). Despite
transient hydrogen bonds between polar groups and RBD backbone atoms,
which could be observed in some cases, stabilization in this pocket
is provided mainly by hydrophobic interactions.
 Considering that the proposed candidates showed
stable protein–ligand
complexes in our MD simulations, we purchased all of the selected
candidates except antrafenine (not commercially available) to carry
out biophysical binding assays and in vitro experiments.

## Biophysical Studies of the Binding to S Protein
The
compounds identified by virtual screening followed by molecular dynamics
as potential binders to the RBD were tested in binding assays to the
recombinantly produced RBD of the spike protein, as the key region
responsible for the initial interaction with the ACE2 receptor, as
well as the S protein (S:HexaPro) from both the Wuhan-Hu-1 and Omicron
BA.1 variants, as indicated. The recombinant proteins were expressed
using a baculovirus/insect cell system, which is crucial for proper
glycosylation since both the spike protein and its RBD are glycosylated
in the native viral context. The interaction tests included thermal
shift assays (thermofluor) for detection of the binding, followed
by microscale thermophoresis (MST) to determine not only the binding
of the ligands to the RBD or S protein but also to determine if any
of them hampers the interaction of these SARS-CoV-2 proteins with
ACE2.

 A illustrates Thermofluor results showing the SYPRO Orange fluorescence
profiles of the RBDWuhan in the absence of any ligands,
along with observed curve shift toward lower temperatures revealing
binders among the ten tested compounds, added at 0.5 mM concentration.
In these assays, protein unfolding is monitored by tracking the fluorescence
increase as the temperature of the solution is gradually increased
at a constant rate. Ligand binding can influence the thermal stability
of the protein, which is detected through changes in the fluorescence
profile, quantified by shifts in the melting temperature (T
m), the temperature at which fluorescence reaches
50% of its maximum change. The shift in T
m, either in the sense of stabilization or destabilization, is considered
an indicator of the binding of the compound to the molecule. It is
important to note that only compounds dissolved in DMSO were included
in this analysis. Among these, flupentixol, fulvestrant, and sertindole
exhibited intrinsic fluorescence in the absence of protein, making
it impossible to analyze them using this method. B presents a similar analysis
for the S protein, while C,D shows for the Wuhan-Hu-1 variant protein targets
the differences in T
m values compared
to the ligand-free protein. Significant shifts in thermal stability
were observed for two compoundsfingolimod (compound 7) and
toremifene (compound 15)affecting both the RBD and S proteins
of the Wuhan-Hu-1 variant. For the other compounds (except for iofendylate
in the Spike protein, compound 5), there was little to no change in
the thermal stability of the RBD and S proteins, indicating that most
tested compounds did not significantly bind. However, the data suggests
a potential binding interaction for toremifene and, more notably,
fingolimod with both the RBD and S proteins.
 We also conducted thermofluor assays using the
RBD of the Omicron
BA.1 variant in the presence of the selected compounds to assess whether
binding behaviors differed when applied to the Omicron BA.1 variant
( E). The assays
revealed a decrease in the thermal stability of the Omicron BA.1 RBD
compared to the Wuhan-Hu-1 RBD. Despite this, the results for both
variants upon compound addition were quite similar. As with the Wuhan-Hu-1
RBD, fingolimod and, to a lesser extent, toremifene caused significant
shifts in the thermal stability of the Omicron BA.1 RBD ( F).
Since fingolimod
induced the largest shift in T
m for both
the RBD and Spike proteins of the Wuhan-Hu-1
and Omicron BA.1 variants, we further examined the concentration-dependent
effects of fingolimod on the RBD of both variants as well as on the
Spike protein of the Wuhan-Hu-1 variant. The T
m shifts induced by fingolimod were consistent across all concentrations
tested for both variants ( ).
 These findings indicate that two compounds, fingolimod
and, to
a lesser degree, toremifene, interact with the RBD of both the Wuhan-Hu-1
and Omicron BA.1 variants and, as expected, with the complete S protein
(tested with the Wuhan-Hu variant), triggering significant shifts
in thermal stability. These shifts in thermal stability do not damage
the architecture of the proteins, as judged by negative-stain electron
microscopy of spikes incubated in the presence of 500 μM fingolimod
(Figure S7).
To corroborate these
thermofluor results, we performed additional
compound-binding assays using microscale thermophoresis (MST). MST
showed that only fingolimod, toremifene, famprofazone, cholecalciferol,
and oxyphenomium (the last three not tested in Thermofluor assays)
showed binding affinities to RBDWuhan below 1 mM (K
D values 36, 51, 115, 315, and 416 μM,
respectively; ). For the rest of the compounds, either we did not detect binding
or the adjustment indicated K
D values
higher than 1 mM that could not be determined because of limitations
such as solubility of the compound and highest concentration of the
solvent, which ideally should be less than 5%. MST with protein SWuhan confirmed that the lowest K
D values were obtained with fingolimod, toremifene, cholecalciferol,
famprofazione, and oxyphenomium (K
D values
18, 26, 64, 88, and 92 μM, respectively; ), although with this protein, we could also
determine K
D values for another 5 compounds
within the range of 481–927 μM ( ).
 Likewise, the compounds were also subjected to the
same tests with
MST for the Omicron BA.1 variant proteins. We observed that the affinity
for all of the compounds was lower than for the corresponding Wuhan-Hu-1
variant proteins ( ). However, the best binding compounds to both the RBD and spike
remained fingolimod and toremifene (K
D values ranging from 56 to 193 μM). The other compounds that
bound to the RBD of the Wuhan-Hu-1 variant also bound to the RBD and
S proteins of the Omicron BA.1 variant, although with reduced affinity
( ), whereas
those showing no binding to the RBD Wuhan-Hu-1 variant also did not
bind the RBD or spike of the Omicron BA.1 variant, except salmeterol
(compound 8, ), which was found to bind with low but measurable affinity to both
the SWuhan and SOmicron proteins, while the
corresponding K
D values for the isolated
RBDs exceeded 1000 μM and thus would not be measured ( ).
MST assays
were also employed for testing whether the compounds
that were bound to the target proteins interfered with the binding
of these proteins to the recombinantly expressed ACE2 receptor protein
(the monomeric soluble catalytic domain of ACE2). gives results for these assays
for all of the compounds tested. Many of the compounds exhibited some
degree of interference with ACE2-RBD or ACE2-Spike complex formation
( ).
 Among the four proteins tested here in these assays,
SOmicron was the one exhibiting the highest affinity for
ACE2 ( ). Perhaps
because of this,
results with this protein proved to be best to monitor binding interference
of the compounds with the ACE2 receptor. Figure S8A strongly suggests for SOmicron that such interference
grossly parallels the affinity of the compound for SOmicron. Indeed, the shape of the curve fitting to these results corresponded
to the one expected for competitive inhibition of ACE2-binding by
the compounds that were bound to the S protein (Figure S8). As we also found that there was good correlation
between the K
D values for binding of the
compounds to the SWuhan and SOmicron proteins
(Figure S8B), we hypothesized that more
global evidence of the relatedness between the affinity of the compounds
for the four ACE2-binding proteins tested here and the ability to
interfere with ACE2 binding to the same proteins could be obtained
if all of the results on interference of each compound with the binding
to ACE2 of the four proteins could be pooled together. We did that
by determining for each protein the quotient of K
D
ACE2 in the presence of 0.5 mM of each compound
versus K
D
ACE2 in the absence
of the compound ( ). Then, we determined for each compound the means of these quotients
for the four proteins. Figure S8C represents
the results of this calculation, showing larger relative increases
in K
D for ACE2 by compounds that globally
bind more strongly to the four ACE2-binding proteins (see legend to Figure S8 for further details). It is interesting
that these compounds were shown computationally to bind to either
site 2 or site 4, regions that are spatially distant from the ACE2-binding
interface and thus unlikely to directly compete with ACE2, suggesting
indirect competition via induction of conformational changes on the
S protein.

## SARS-CoV-2 Variants: Molecular Modeling Discussion
Considering the results obtained by MST discussed above, we were
prompted to model the interaction between the best ligand, fingolimod,
and the RBD from the Omicron variant. Since the beginning of the pandemic,
the ability of the virus to mutate has resulted in the emergence and
spread of a number of genomic variants. With more than one million SARS-CoV-2 sequences identified up to
date, Delta and Omicron were two variants of interest due to their
impact on transmissibility and infectivity according to the WHO. Point mutations are distributed alongside the
whole spike protein but in the case of Delta variant, two different
mutations are located in the RBD, while up to 15 different substitutions
are found in Omicron RBD. For the Delta
virus, two characterized mutations L452R and T478K are neighboring
the RBM without being implicated in the four proposed sites mentioned
above. A different scenario was found for the Omicron variant, with
ten mutations affecting RBM or site 1. Despite the fact that we do
not propose any molecule to target this region, this mutational susceptibility
along the protein–protein interaction surface could have difficulty
binding potential broad-spectrum drugs against SARS-CoV-2 variants.
We have also noticed some mutations affecting site 2: G339D, S371L,
S373P, and S375F. Despite the remarkable number of residues affected
for this small pocket, three of these substitutions lead to an increment
in the hydrophobic nature of this cavity according to the Eisenberg
scale and thus could hinder the union
of polar or charged ligands. Since the binding mode and interaction
of our selected hits for this site are governed mainly by hydrophobic
interactions, no significant impact is expected in the behavior between
the original Wuhan and Omicron variant. To support this statement,
we selected fingolimod, which elicited the best binding affinity for
this site, to undertake MD simulations of the RBD-ligand complexes
(see Figure S9). As expected, the molecule
remained bound to site 2 during both simulation replicas, maintaining
the aliphatic tail immersed in the pocket, while the polar head fluctuated
by occasional ionic interaction between the positively charged ammonium
group and the carboxylate from Asp339. Overall, these simulations
suggest that fingolimod can bind to both the ancestral Wuhan-Hu-1
and Omicron variants with similar affinity in site 2, in good agreement
with the experimental results discussed above. Nevertheless, a systematic
binding free energy analysis across distinct sites and variants would
be required to rigorously assess and further elucidate these observations.

## Biological Studies of the Antiviral Activity of Selected Drugs
Targeting S Protein
To validate the ability of the compounds
to block SARS-CoV-2 entry, a pseudotype virus assay was employed.
Briefly, vesicular stomatitis virus encoding GFP in place of its native
entry protein G was produced in cells expressing the SARS-CoV-2 Wuhan
S protein (VSVΔG-SWh). During budding, the virus
is coated with the S protein, which can mediate entry into subsequent
cells in a manner that faithfully recapitulates the native virus.
Various concentrations of calcifediol, cholecalciferol, camprofazone,
fingolimod, and oxyphenonium were evaluated for both reduction of
viral entry and cellular toxicity in VeroE6 cells ( ). Cholecalciferol, famprofazone,
and fingolimod showed antiviral activity in the absence of toxicity
( ). On the
other hand, antiviral activity could not be separated from toxicity
(calcifediol) or could not be observed (oxyphenonium). The 50% concentration
that reduces viral infection or cell viability can be found in .
 To validate the ability of the compounds to block
genuine SARS-CoV-2
and work in multiple cell lines, we infected human lung A549 cells
expressing hACE2 or VeroE6 expressing the entry cofactor TMPRSS2 (VeroE6-TMPRSS2)
with SARS-CoV-2 and evaluated virus production after 24 h. A single
concentration (20 μM) of each compound was utilized and remdesivir
was included as a positive control. As expected, remdesivir reduced
viral replication significantly across both cell lines (p < 0.001 by t test on log-transformed data; B). In A549-ACE2 cells, both famprofazone
and fingolimod resulted in a statistically significant reduction of
virus production (p < 0.05 and p < 0.01 by t test on log-transformed data, respectively),
while in VeroE6-TMPRSS2, significant reduction was observed only for
fingolimod (p < 0.001 by t test
on log-transformed data).
Finally, as fingolimod showed promising
antiviral activity in two
different cell lines, we assessed the ability of the drug to inhibit
infection by VSV pseudotyped with SARS-CoV-2 Wuhan, Delta, and Omicron
BA.1 Spike, as well as that of the more distantly related SARS-CoV-1.
A dose-dependent reduction was observed in all cases with similar
50% inhibitory concentrations ( C,D), supporting the general ability of
fingolimod to block viral infection of this family. This result seems
particularly of interest since fingolimod is a first-line drug to
treat patients with multiple sclerosis, an immunological disorder,
who were prone to suffer worse outcomes during COVID-19. Indeed, a
clinical trial has been reported that provides preliminary evidence
that fingolimod may be helpful in reducing readmission rates in moderate
to severe COVID-19 patients.

## Conclusions
The SARS-CoV-2 outbreak has highlighted
the urgent need for a broad
range of therapeutics to combat this and future pandemics. In this
context, in silico approaches, including drug repurposing
strategies for generic drugs, emerge as a highly advantageous strategy
to reevaluate existing marketed therapeutics, including antivirals.
Despite the vast number of in silico studies targeting
the Spike protein and focusing on the receptor binding domain (RBD),
the intricate topology of this motif represents a challenging target
for drug-binding. We have investigated four distinct binding sites
on the RBD using docking and all-atom molecular dynamics simulations,
and our findings indicate that only sites 2 and 4 are suitable for
drug-binding. Moreover, we combined our computational results with
biophysical studies and proved that some of the candidates present
moderate affinity against the recombinant RBD protein. Cellular assays
demonstrated the inhibitory activity on virus replication, with fingolimod
showing the most promising results, with micromolar antiviral activity
similar to famprofazone and vitamin D analogues cholecalciferol and
calcifediol. Our research contributes to establishing the mechanism
of action for fingolimod as an anti-SARS-CoV-2 agent and to progress
in the knowledge of the Spike protein modulation for the finding of
new drug-like molecules to control COVID-19 disease.

## Experimental Section

## Molecular Modeling

## SARS-CoV-2 RBD Protein Preparation
In this work, we
used two different structures of the RBD to perform molecular modeling
studies. First, the coordinates of the X-ray crystal structure of
RBD from SARS-CoV-2 spike protein bound to human ACE2 were retrieved
from PDB ID: 6M0J (chain E). For our initial purposes, N-acetylglucosamine bound to Asn343 was removed from the
6M0J 3D structure. As the starting structure for virtual screening
on site 4, we chose RBD bound to linoleic-acid structure (PDB: 6ZB5). In this case, we retrieved the whole structure of SARS-CoV-2
Spike protein, and the RBD spanning from residues Thr333 to Gly526
was extracted from Chain A using Chimera. The resulting RBDs were
then aligned in Chimera to the RBD 6M0J structure, with an overall
root-mean-square deviation of 0.809 Å for Cα atoms. Both
RBD proteins were prepared using the Protein Preparation Wizard included
in Maestro (Schrödinger Release 2020-2: Maestro, Schrödinger,
LLC, New York, NY (2020)). All ligands and solvent molecules were
removed, hydrogen atoms and bond orders were assigned as well as protonation
states at pH 7.4. The N- and C-termini
of RBD were acetylated and amidated respectively to avoid artificially
charged termini.
To prepare the glycan-bound structure of RBD,
the Glycan Reader & Modeler tool was used to generate initial
3D geometries. The prepared RBD structure
from the starting coordinates of 6M0J was uploaded to CHARM-GUI then, a glycan chain according to the glycan
patterns previously described and modeled in the literature was attached
to Asn343 (Figure S10)
,

sequence:bDGlcNAc(1→2)aDMan(1→6)[bDGlcNAc(1→2)aDMan(1→3)]bDMan(1→4)bDGlcNAc(1→4)[aLFuc(1→6)]bDGlcNAc(1→)→Asn343

## Pocket Analysis
To map the RBD surface, two tools were
selected: SiteMap and DoGSiteScorer. The latter is a grid-based method that combines
a vector machine model, while SiteMap uses an algorithm to determine
the likeliness of a site point to contribute to tight protein–ligand
interactions. The prepared RBD (PDB ID: 6M0J) was uploaded to
the Protein plus web server for pocket detection with DoGSiteScorer
(https://proteins.plus/).
Site 4 was characterized in the same way using a snapshot taken from
molecular dynamics production after 120 ns. We considered only those
pockets with an appropriate size (more than 10 amino acids) identified by both softwares and with the highest
scores (simple score >0.1 and Dscore >0.5, ).
 

## Docking and Virtual Screening
Our in-house library
of generic drugs was selected to carry out virtual screening campaigns.
The database was prepared with LigPrep module in order to generate
energy-minimized 3D geometries by using OPLS 3 force field, plausible
tautomers, stereoisomers, and protonation/ionization states at pH
7 ± 2 trough Epik.

For virtual
screening, Glide,
,
 implemented in Maestro, was selected
as the first engine for docking. Prior to the docking step, four different
receptor grids were generated, centered in sites 1, 2, 3 (refined
structure from PDB: 6M0J), and 4 (refined structure from PDB: 6ZB5) previously identified on the RBD. Afterward,
the virtual screening workflow implemented in maestro was chosen with
two consequent different filters. The first stage of the virtual screening
protocol encompassed the HTVS mode, in which up to 10% of best-scored
molecules were selected for the next virtual screening stage. In the
second step, SP (standard precision mode), the 10% of best poses,
29 different candidates were retained and selected for a thorough
visual inspection, while the rest of the docking parameters were set
as default.
As a second virtual screening tool, FlexX engine through the SeeSAR app interface (SeeSAR
version 10.0; BioSolveIT
GmbH, Sankt Augustin, Germany, 2020, https://www.biosolveit.de/SeeSAR) was selected to perform a consensus docking approach. For each
molecule in the prepared library, poses were generated in the four
different sites and then, predicted binding energy HyDE was calculated to rank all of the poses thus
obtained. We selected the same number of top solutions as for Glide
for further visual inspection except for site 4, in which we selected
all candidates with an estimated affinity under the nanomolar range.

## Molecular Dynamics Simulations
All-atom classical MD
simulations of the RBD apo, RBD-glicosilated, and RBD-ligand bound
complexes were performed using the AMBERff14sb, GLYCAM_06j-1, and GAFF2 to describe proteins, glycans, and small molecules,
respectively. All relevant disulfide bonds detected in the PDB as
well as glycosidic linkages were specified as covalent connectivity.
Antechamber program was used to calculate ligand atomic partial charges
according to the AM1-BCC method. tLEaP
program of AmberTools 16 was used to prepare the models for MD simulations. All systems were solvated in a truncated octahedral
box of TIP3P water box leaving a minimum margin of 10 Å around
the protein structure. Sodium and chloride
ions were added until reaching a neutral net charge using the Li/Merz
ion parameters. The MD preparation protocol was adapted from previous
works, briefly several steps of energy minimization were performed:
first to reorient all hydrogen and water molecules maintaining solute
atoms restrained with a force constant of 5 kcal mol–1 Å–2 in 5000 steps of steepest descent, followed
by side chain minimization for 4000 steps. Then, the whole system
was minimized by performing 5000 steeps of steepest descent and 2500
of conjugated gradients. Afterward, the system was heated to 298 K
for 100 ps applying positional restraint to Cα atoms of 2 kcal
mol–1 Å–2. Then, the density
was adjusted at 1 bat for 300 ps, maintaining the same positional
restraints. Finally, 1 ns of NPT equilibration at 298 K and 1 bar
was performed with the unrestrained systems. Molecular dynamics production
was performed using a time step of 2.0 fs and applying SHAKE algorithm
to all hydrogen bonds. Temperature control
(298 K) was performed by means of Langevin dynamics, and pressure
control was accomplished by coupling the system to a Berendsen barostat
reference pressure of 1 atm. Periodic boundary conditions were applied
and the particle mesh Ewald algorithm was used to compute long-range
electrostatic interactions with a cutoff of 12 Å. Coordinates were stored in a trajectory file
every 100 ps. The simulations were run in 50 ns blocks with coordinates
of all atoms saved every 100 ps. Then, all files were concatenated
and saved to a new trajectory every 5 snapshots to generate a whole
solvated trajectory as well as a “dry” trajectory with
all of the snapshots created during the production. At least two replicas
of MD production were carried out for each system by means of the
GPU-accelerated PMEMD engine implemented in AMBER. MD production simulations were run in the HPC Marconi100
using a Tesla V100-SXM2-16GB graphics card, yielding an average performance
of 185 ns/day.
Trajectory analysis was performed with MDTraj, MDanalysis, and
numpy Python libraries using the coordinates
at frame 0 as a reference for alignment and analysis. Graphs were
generated using Matplotlib Python module, while figures were generated via PyMOL (https://pymol.org), VMD, and UCSF
ChimeraX.

## Biophysical Studies

## Site-Directed Mutagenesis and Protein Production
Plasmid
pFastBac-Dual including the coding sequences for the SARS-CoV-2 RBD
domain (residues Arg319–Phe541; Wuhan variant) in frame with
an N-terminal gp67 signal peptide for secretion and a C-terminal 6×
His tag for purification was used to produce RBD essentially as reported, by using the Bac-to-Bac Baculovirus Expression
System (Invitrogen). Also on the plasmid described, the [S:G339D +
S:S371L + S:S373P + S:S375F + S:S375F + S:K417N + S:N440K + S:G446S
+ S:S477N + S:T478K + S:E484A + S:Q493R + S:G496S + S:Q498R + S:N501Y
+ S:Y505H] substitutions were generated (Proteogenix) to produce the
B.1.1.529.1­(BA.1) Omicron variant of the RBD. The correctness of the
constructs, the presence of the desired mutations, and the absence
of unwanted mutations were corroborated by Sanger sequencing.
The N-terminal peptidase domain of human ACE2 (residues
Ser19–Asp615; hACE2) and the S:D614G variant of SARS-CoV-2
protein S ectodomain (residues 15–1213)
,
 were also produced in insect cells, using the plasmids and procedures
described already. SARS-CoV-2 RBD (Wuhan or Omicron BA.1 variants)
was purified as reported for SARS-CoV-2 protein S.

In preparation for both thermofluor and thermophoresis
assays,
we generated the highly stable SpikeWuhan HexaPro, following the methods described elsewhere.
,

## Thermal Shift Assays
The thermal stability of SARS-CoV-2
RBD (Wuhan and Omicron BA.1 variants) and S protein (HexaPro) in the
presence of selected compounds was evaluated using thermofluor assays, performed in sealed microwell plates as previously
reported.
,
 Of all the compounds used in this study,
only those dissolved in DMSO were used in this assay. These compounds
were added at a final concentration of 500 μM to a 20 μL
solution containing 0.7 μM RBD (0.017 mg/mL) or S (0.1 mg/mL)
in 10 mM HEPES pH 7.2 and 0.15 M NaCl. After a 10 min incubation at
24 °C (room temperature), a 1:1000 dilution of SYPRO Orange (Invitrogen,
Carlsbad, CA) was added. All assays (including those in the absence
of compounds) were done in the presence of 5% DMSO. Additional controls
measuring the intrinsic fluorescence of each compound in the absence
of proteins were also carried out, and the signal obtained was subtracted
from the total fluorescence signal of the protein in the presence
of that compound. Experiments at final concentrations of fingolimod
ranging from 100 to 500 μM were also done for RBD and spike
proteins, as described above for 0.5 mM.
Fluorescence increase,
reflecting protein unfolding, was monitored using a real-time PCR
instrument (Applied Biosystems 7500 model, Thermo Fisher Scientific,
Alcobendas, Madrid, Spain) by exciting SYPRO Orange at 488 nm and
measuring emission at 610 nm as the temperature increased at a constant
rate of 1 °C per minute. Each assay consisted of three replicate
wells for each data point and was repeated at least twice on different
days. GraphPad Prism 8 (GraphPad Software, San Diego, CA) was used
for curve fitting, plot generation, and numerical analysis.

## Microscale Thermophoresis (MST)
His-tagged SARS-CoV-2
RBD (Wuhan or Omicron) and S:HexaPro or SOmicron proteins
were labeled using His-Tag Labeling Kit RED-tris-NTA (NanoTemper Technologies)
according to the manufacturer’s instructions. Briefly, and
following our previously reported procedure, equal volumes of 200 nM target protein and 100 nM of dye solution
were mixed and incubated for 30 min at room temperature followed by
centrifugation at 10,000 rpm for 10 min. Both labeled RBD and Spike
proteins were used at a final concentration of 50 nM. The assays were
carried out in PBS pH 7.1 supplemented with 0.05% Tween-20. For the
measurement of the binding affinity, a 16-point 2-fold dilution series
(ranging from 5 mM to 0.15 μM) of the compound at 5% final DMSO
concentration in the assay buffer was mixed with labeled proteins
(1:1). Similarly, for the competition assays, each of the compounds
was incubated at a final concentration of 500 μM with a mixture
containing the target proteins and hACE2 protein at concentrations
ranging from 5 μM to 0.15 nM in the same buffer. The mixture
was incubated at room temperature before filling it in the Monolith
Capillaries (MO-K022 NanoTemper Technologies), and MST measurements
were performed on a Monolith NT.115 (NanoTemper Technologies). The
results were analyzed using M.O. Affinity Analysis software (NanoTemper
Technologies) as prescribed. All of the
measurements were done in triplicates.

## Negative-Stain Electron Microscopy
Spike complex (0.05
mg/mL S:D614G + 500 μM compound) was applied to a glow-discharged
carbon-coated copper homemade grid for 30 s. The drop was removed
using blotting paper, and the adsorbed proteins were negatively stained
by applying three consecutive drops of 0.5% uranyl acetate and removing
each drop with filter paper. Micrographs were collected on an Hitachi
HT7800 microscope operated at 100 kV (Figure S7).

## Biological Assays
VeroE6-TMPRSS2 (Catalog No. JCRB1819,
Japanese Collection of Research Bioresources), VeroE6 (kindly provided
by Dr. Luis Enjuanes, CNB–CSIC, Spain), and A549-Ace2-TMPRSS2
(Catalog No. a549-hace2tpsa, Invivogen) were cultured in DMEM high
glucose, with glutamine, 10% FBS, and 1% penicillin/streptomycin.
Selection media containing 1 mg/mL G418 (Catalog No. A1720, Sigma)
or puromycin (0.50 μg/mL) and hygromycin (300 μg/mL) were
included for culturing VeroE6-TMPRSS2 and A549-Ace2-TMPRSS2, respectively.
Resazurin (CAS 62758-13-8) was purchased from Sigma-Aldrich (Catalog
R7107) and dissolved in PBS. Antiviral assays were performed as previously
described. Briefly, the ability of the
compounds to block viral entry into cells was assessed using a GFP-expressing
vesicular stomatitis virus pseudotyped with the S protein of the Wuhan-Hu-1
SARS-CoV-2 strain, Delta, Omicron BA.1, and SARS-CoV-1, generated
as previously described. Initial antiviral
testing was performed by incubating cells with the indicated compound
concentrations, followed by the addition of 500–1000 focus-forming
units of pseudotyped VSV. Following 16 h, the GFP signal in each well
was quantified using a live-cell microscope (Incucyte SX5, Sartorius)
and standardized to the average fluorescence observed in mock-treated
wells. Subsequently, cell viability was evaluated by a resazurin reduction
assay (Alamar Blue), adding resazurin to each well at a final concentration
of 44 μM, incubating for 2 h at 37 °C, and reading fluorescence
on a Tecan Spark microplate reader with an excitation of 535 nm and
emission of 595 nm. The R drc package (version 3.0-1) was used to
calculate 50% effective concentration (EC50) via a three-parameter
log–logistic regression model (LL.3 model). Evaluation of antiviral
activity against SARS-CoV-2 variant encoding the D614G S mutation
was performed at the Biosafety Level 3 (BSL-3) facility of the Fundación
para Fomento de Investigación Sanitaria y Biomédica
(FISABIO) in Valencia, Spain, as previously described.

## Supplementary Material

## Acknowledgments
Funding for this project was provided by grants from the European
Commission NextGenerationEU fund (EU 2020/2094) through CSIC’s
Global Health Platform (PTI Salud Global), Crue-CSIC-Santander Fondo
Supera Covid-19 “BlockAce”, and CSIC Grant (CSIC-COV19-082)
to S.M.-S., R.G., V.R., A.M., and J.-L.L. J.G.-M. and S.M.-S. gratefully
acknowledge BioSolveIT for providing a one-year SeeSAR license during
the Scientific Challenge Summer 2020. Grants PID2020-113588RB-I00
and PID2023-152271NB-I00 to S.M.-S. and PID2020-120322RB-C21 to V.R.,
funded by the Spanish Ministry for Science and Innovation, are also
gratefully acknowledged. Partnership for Advanced Computing in Europe
AISBL PRACE COVID-19-26 to S.M.-S. is also gratefully acknowledged.
The authors thank M. L. López-Redondo for the negative-stain
microscopy analysis of spikes in the presence of compounds and to
the IBV-Covid19-Pipeline
,
 for producing some
of the reagents used in the in vitro binding assays.

The Supporting Information
is available free of charge at https://pubs.acs.org/doi/10.1021/acsomega.5c05175.
Summary of docking results; extended information on
MD simulations; ZINC codes and drug name of top-ranked molecules from
virtual screening; 2D chemical structure of top ranked drugs; RMSD
plots of MD simulations; electron micrographs; and schematic representation
of the polysaccharide chain attached to Asn343 (PDF)

The
authors declare no
competing financial interest.

## References
 

## Associated Data

## Supplementary Materials