822acssdJournal of Medicinal ChemistryJ Med ChemPMC1177063211770632117706323949509710.1021/acs.jmedchem.4c02010A Target Class Ligandability Evaluation of WD40 Repeat-Containing
Proteins
AcklooSuzanne LiFengling SzewczykMagda SeitovaAlmagul LoppnauPeter ZengHong XuJin AhmadShabbir ArnautovaYelena A BaghaieA J BeldarSerap BolotokovaAlbina CentrellaPaolo A ChauIrene ClarkMatthew A CuozzoJohn W Dehghani-TaftiSaba DischJeremy S DongAiping DumasAntoine FengJianwen A GhiabiPegah GibsonElisa GilmerJustin GoldmanBrian GreenStuart R GuiéMarie-Aude GuilingerJohn P HarmsNathan HerasymenkoOleksandra HoulistonScott HutchinsonAshley KearnesSteven KeefeAnthony D KimaniSerah W KramerTrevor KuteraMaria KwakHaejin A LentoCristina LiYanjun LiuJenny LoupJoachim MachadoRaquel A C MulhernChristopher J PerveenSumera RighettoGermanna L RileyPatrick ShresthaSuman SigelEric A SilvaMadhushika SintchakMichael D SlakmanBelinda L TaylorRhys D ThompsonJames TorngWen UnderkofflerCarl von RechenbergMoritz WalshRyan T WatsonIan WilsonDerek J WolfEsther YadavManisha YazdiAliakbar K ZhangJunyi ZhangYing SanthakumarVijayaratnam EdwardsAled M Barsyte-LovejoyDalia SchapiraMatthieu BrownPeter J HalabelianLevon ArrowsmithCheryl H 1Structural
Genomics Consortium, University of Toronto, 101 College St., Toronto, ON M5G
1L7, Canada2Google, 1600 Amphitheatre Parkway, Mountain View, California 94043, United States3ZebiAI Inc., 100 Beaver St., Waltham, Massachusetts 02435, United States4X-Chem Inc., 100 Beaver St., Waltham, Massachusetts 02435, United States5Relay Therapeutics, 399 Binney St., Cambridge, Massachusetts 02139, United States6Princess
Margaret Cancer Centre, University of Toronto, Toronto, ON M5G 2M9, Canada7Civetta
Therapeutics, 10 Wilson
Rd., Cambridge, Massachusetts 02138, United States8Department
of Chemistry, York University, Toronto, ON M3J 1P3, Canada9Department
of Chemistry, University of Toronto, Toronto, ON M5S 3H6, Canada10Department
of Pharmacology and Toxicology, University
of Toronto, Toronto, ON M5S 1A8, Canada*Email: Cheryl.Arrowsmith@uhn.ca.
*Email: l.halabelian@utoronto.ca.
411202468210921092–11122812025© 2024 The Authors. Published by American
Chemical SocietyPermits the broadest form of re-use including for commercial purposes, provided that author attribution and integrity are maintained (https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/).See the article with doi: 10.1021/10.1021/acs.jmedchem.4c03091.

## Abstract
 Target class-focused drug discovery has a strong track record in
pharmaceutical research, yet public domain data indicate that many
members of protein families remain unliganded. Here we present a systematic
approach to scale up the discovery and characterization of small molecule
ligands for the WD40 repeat (WDR) protein family. We developed a comprehensive
suite of protocols for protein production, crystallography, and biophysical,
biochemical, and cellular assays. A pilot hit-finding campaign using
DNA-encoded chemical library selection followed by machine learning
(DEL-ML) to predict ligands from virtual libraries yielded first-in-class,
drug-like ligands for 7 of the 16 WDR domains screened, thus demonstrating
the broader ligandability of WDRs. This study establishes a template
for evaluation of protein family wide ligandability and provides an
extensive resource of WDR protein biochemical and chemical tools,
knowledge, and protocols to discover potential therapeutics for this
highly disease-relevant, but underexplored target class.

statusreleaseddisplay-pdfyesis-in-collection-domainyesis-olfnois-manuscriptnois-preprintnois-journal-matternois-scannednois-retractednoReceived 2024 Aug 22; Accepted 2024 Oct 18; Revised 2024 Oct 8; Collection date 2025 Jan 23.

## Introduction
WD40 Repeat (WDR) proteins comprise one of the largest protein
families, with ∼349 WDR encoding genes in the human genome.
WDRs are generally understudied (Figure S1a, ) though many have strong genetic
links to human diseases and are involved in a wide variety of cellular
processes including epigenetics, ubiquitin signaling, DNA repair,
RNA splicing, and immune system signaling. This family harbors more “essential genes” in cancer
than any other protein family (Figure S1b, ), and is also involved in many neurological and inflammatory diseases.
Despite the strong links to disease and unlike other large target
classes such as GPCRs or kinases, the WDR family is largely unexplored
with respect to drug discovery.
The WDR domain is a protein–protein interaction (PPI) module
often acting as a substrate recognition or scaffolding subunit within
larger multiprotein complexes. , , WDR domains all have a canonical donut shape comprising 7–9
β-propellers; each β-propeller contains the namesake
40-residue WD (tryptophan-aspartate) repeat sequence ( a). Although WDRs have been
shown to mediate PPIs through many surfaces of their conserved fold,
the central pocket is frequently involved in key functional interactions
with peptide regions of partner proteins such as degrons or the recognition
of post-translational modifications. Furthermore, some WDRs also bind
nucleic acids. , 
 Interestingly, neither the outer surface of the WDR donut, nor
the residues lining the central pocket are conserved across the WDR
family ( , Figure S1c). With the exception of a few very closely related subfamilies,
e.g., the coronins, plexins, and semaphorins (Figure S1c), WDRs are only conserved in their protein fold
but not in their functional interaction sites. Nevertheless, the central
pocket often has the appropriate size and physicochemical properties
for potent binding to drug-like small molecules. We were among the
first to demonstrate that it is possible to disrupt PPIs of WDR proteins
with drug-like small molecules that compete with or enhance binding
of native interacting proteins or peptides. For example, antagonists
of WDR5 can disrupt its interaction with Mixed Lineage Leukemia (MLL)
histone methyltransferase (Figure S2a),
thereby abrogating MLL function to suppress growth in leukemia and
breast cancer. − Similarly, small molecule antagonism of the central pocket of EED
(Figure S2b), a WDR subunit of the polycomb
repression complex 2 (PRC2), disrupts binding of PRC2-stimulatory
proteins with concomitant inhibition of PRC2 catalytic activity. , 
There is growing interest in the ligand discovery for WDRs from
the context of degrader modalities. For example, DCAF1 − and DCAF11 are substrate recognition
subunits and DDB1 is an adaptor protein for the Cullin-RING ubiquitin
ligase complex. , WDR ligands can also act as activators,
for example by “locking in” a native binding partner
via a molecular glue mechanism such as for BTRC E3 ligase and β-Catenin (Figure S2c). Small
molecule ligands have also been reported to bind (in pockets) on the
outer surface of some WDRs, such as the CDC20 E3 ligase (Figure S2d), but such ligands are of lower potency. 
Notwithstanding these exciting results over the past decade or
so, the vast majority of WDR proteins are both understudied in terms
of their biological function (Figure S1a, b), and unexplored with respect to small molecule antagonism. We hypothesized
that the WDR protein family harbors many more druggable members, and
set out to test this in the context of Target 2035, a global initiative
to develop pharmacological tools for all human proteins. − We were particularly interested in developing scalable hit-finding
approaches that could be applied broadly to other target families.
To this end, we chose DEL-ML, a high-throughput
screening strategy proven for several well-validated target classes, − which overcomes many practical liabilities of off-DNA synthesis
of “traditional” DEL selection approaches. 
Our results indicate that many understudied WDR proteins are indeed
ligandable with drug-like small molecules and that DEL-ML has broad
applicability across the diverse, nonconserved WDR binding pockets
( c, ). Our data, methods and related reagents
comprise a significant resource to the community that will enable
the development of pharmacological tools for WDR proteins to further
explore their biology, interaction networks, and therapeutic potential.

## Results and Discussion

## WDRs Readily Purify at Scale with Crystallization-Level Quality
To choose a test set of WDR proteins, we considered proteins that
were both strongly linked to diseases such as cancer (Figure S1b), as well as those that were not well
characterized, including many for which recombinant protein or experimentally
determined 3D structures have not been reported ( ). A total of 259 WDR proteins—more than half
the 349-member WDR family—were selected for recombinant expression
and purification ( ).
Previous experience in our group suggested
that recombinant expression of human WDR domains in a Baculovirus
Expression Vector System (BEVS) was often more successful than expression
in E. coli. We therefore designed,
on average, two expression constructs for each of the WDRs and subcloned
these for baculovirus-mediated expression in Sf9 cells. Because of
conservation of the overall WDR fold, we were able to readily predict
the domain boundaries, including the frequent addition of helices
or small loops and folded regions internally or at the immediate termini,
using homology modeling; this initial phase of the project predated
the release of AlphaFold. − Of the 259 proteins tested for
expression, 95 were purified at scale with at least one affinity tag
and 24 with a luminescent tag for cellular target engagement assays
( b, ).
Quality control of the recombinant protein included using SDS-PAGE
and mass spectrometry to confirm purity (>90%) and the expected molecular
weight, respectively. Finally, differential scanning fluorimetry (DSF)
( ) was performed to ensure that
each purified protein was stable and folded in the absence of its
interaction partner(s). These data showed that a large proportion
of WDR domains can be produced in isolation for further study—including
many that are central components of large macromolecular complexes.
Protein crystallization was attempted for select WDRs that had sufficient
yields to set up at least one 96-well crystallization tray and homogeneous
elution profiles on size exclusion chromatography. Overall, 14 apo
WDR structures were generated to support structure-guided drug discovery
efforts ( b, Tables S6, S7). The protocols for expressing,
purifying and crystallizing the apo WDR domains greatly facilitated
the rapid characterization of ligands. 
Upon release of the AlphaFold structure database, we analyzed the electrostatics and central pocket ligandability
of all 349 human WDR-containing proteins with predicted structures.
The use of AlphaFold predictions to map electrostatics and ligandable
pockets in WDRs was supported by our observation that less than 1.3
Å backbone RMSD separates the predicted WDR structures of UTP15
or EIF2A and their subsequently released crystal structures (PDB IDs: 7RUO, 8DYS, Tables S7c, S7d). Overall, about
half of the central pockets were predicted to be ligandable (drug-like density (DLID) > 0, d, ), which we believe is a conservative estimate considering
that pockets are sometimes occluded in the absence of ligands. For
example, the central pocket of the apo structure of EED is occluded
by several side chains which are displaced by binding of drug-like
small molecule ligands. The diversity
in shape and electrostatics of the central pocket was striking. , In fact, it was previously shown that structural diversity is observed
even between two WDR binding sites targeted by the same endogenous
ligand. For example, an arginine occupies the structurally dissimilar
central pockets of the epigenetic regulators WDR5 and RBBP4 yet WDR5 ligands do not bind to RBBP4. This analysis
suggests that the discovery of selective ligands for a given WDR protein
of interest is quite feasible.

## Many WDRs Are Ligandable
In order to assess WDR domain
ligandability, we sought a methodology that could be readily implemented
across the WDR family with high throughput and under approximately
the same conditions. We chose DEL-ML, originally described by McCloskey
and colleagues and recently by others, − , as it makes use of our high-quality
WDR proteins and avoids the need for off-DNA synthetic chemistry post-selection.
We selected 15 N-terminally biotin- or his-tagged WDRs that had no
reported small molecule ligands at the start of this program ( b). We also included
WDR5 as a positive (family class) control, as it is druggable and
has elicited clinical interest in the context of treating leukemias. , , For comparison we also included
two non-WDR, methyllysine binding domains known to be ligandable;
the PWWP , domain of DNMT3A and the triple Tudor domain
(TTD) of SETDB1. , 

## Overview of the Hit-Finding Workflow
The DEL deck used
for each of the screens reported here comprised between nineteen and
sixty-five libraries depending upon the screen. Each library was synthesized
independently by applying a split-and-pool methodology to enact a
specific chemical scheme with a specific set of building blocks. This approach allows many thousands of building
blocks to be reacted with each other in a combinatorial manner to
access multiple billions of diverse and distinct compounds. This diverse set of encoded compounds comprises
common structural motifs optimized for small molecule drug discovery.
Screening of the DEL deck was accomplished by the affinity-mediated
selection of a mixture of libraries. Captured targets and associated
library members were stringently washed under native conditions. This
was followed by the recovery of retained library members by the thermal
denaturation of the target. After two cycles of selection and recovery,
library members’ DNA tags were amplified by PCR and sequenced
to generate a minimum of one million reads per library per condition.
After parallel selection outputs were sequenced, normalized, amplification
duplicates removed, sequence identifiers translated back into chemical
and condition identifiers, and the statistical significance of all
building block combinations calculated in all conditions, the quantity
and quality of the enriched compounds was assessed. Featurized structural
information of enriched building block combinations resulting from
each of these selections formed the Positive Training Examples (PTEs)
and input for training and evaluating machine-learned models (Figure S3a, ). Trained models were then used
to predict the likelihood of binding to commercially available compounds
from large, made-on-demand, or physical libraries such as Enamine
REAL and Mcule databases. Top scoring compounds were selected by a directed sphere
exclusion clustering method to generate a diverse set of molecules
to purchase. All predictions comprise chemical templates that are
readily amenable to structure–activity exploration and optimization
(Table S11).
For each of the 16 WDRs, between 33 and 200 predicted compounds
were purchased depending on the number of overall predictions for
the specific target, the ability of the predictions to be synthesized
with > 90% purity, and in-stock availability ( e, f, Table S11). Thus, a total of ∼3000 compounds were purchased for testing
in orthogonal assays. Predicted ligands for an additional two targets
(CDC40 and SMU1) were not purchased, although their SMILES are listed
in Table S11 as a reference. All hit-finding
statistics are based on 16 WDRs ( d–f).

## Ligand Profiling and Binding Characterization
Prior
to binding assays, each compound was evaluated for solubility and
aggregation up to 200 μM by dynamic light scattering (DLS), − to identify potential sources of assay interference. Soluble compounds
were assayed for binding to their predicted targets using a variety
of biophysical and biochemical methods. For this, we chose surface
plasmon resonance (SPR) as the primary assay for hit validation, as
it is a generic, well-developed method for detecting small-molecule
interactions with a protein immobilized on a biosensor chip via an
affinity tag. We found that most WDRs are readily assayed by SPR under
a limited set of standard buffer conditions ( ). SPR has good throughput and can be run in screening mode
for many compounds or in dose–response mode to determine the
affinity of individual compounds (Table S11).
In a similar approach to McCloskey and colleagues, we compared the extent to which the predictions
are structurally similar to the PTEs (Figure S3b). Fingerprint similarities were calculated using 1024-bit ECFP6
fingerprints, and Tanimoto distances were calculated between the predictions
and PTEs used to train each model. Fingerprint similarities are reported
in Table S11 for the most similar PTE
to each prediction, as well as to the average fingerprint similarity
of the top ten most similar PTEs to the prediction. As observed by
McCloskey et al., the most potent hits
(annotated by a plus sign in Figure S3b) are structurally dissimilar relative to the most similar PTE. Among
the hits discovered in this study, only the primary hit for DCAF1
is structurally similar (with a Tanimoto similarity of 0.81) to the
closest PTE.
We subsequently employed X-ray crystallography to characterize
the binding site of protein–ligand complexes ( ). In some cases, the binding site of the ligand
could also be identified by a peptide displacement assay using fluorescence
polarization (FP), or hydrogen–deuterium exchange mass spectrometry
(HDX-MS). In the remaining sections,
we discuss each hit discovered by DEL-ML, and then evaluate the submicromolar
hit for WDR5 in nanoBRET and CETSA cellular target engagement assays ( ).

## Hit Expansion of a Primary Hit for DCAF1
The primary
hit discovered in this study and its medicinal chemistry optimization
to a nanomolar ligand has been published. Independently, SAR optimization was attempted by using computational
methods. The GCNN model that was used to select the primary set of
ligands ( e)
was used to search for, and prioritize analogs in virtual libraries.
An additional 547 compounds were purchased (annotated as Round 2 in Table S11) and tested. Eighteen compounds bind
with KD values ≤ 50 μM, and
14 are discussed here ( ).
 The (S)-enantiomer of phenylpropanamide (compounds 1–5) tolerates several R2 moieties. For
example, para-chlorophenyl (1), ortho-fluorophenyl (2), 2,6-difluorophenyl
(3), cyclohexyl (4), and ortho-chlorophenyl (5) are relatively equipotent. However,
unmodified phenyl (6) and para-fluorophenyl
(7) are not well-tolerated. Propanamide in R1 (e.g., 2, 3, 5) may be replaced by two-
or three-carbon amines with either chirality (8–10), but can only be replaced by ethanol (11)
when in combination with para-chlorophenyl in R1
(11 relative to 12). The core pyrazole (A) may be replaced by pyrrole (B), e.g., 3 and 13, but both cores better tolerate R2 with ortho- (2, 13) rather than para-fluorophenyl
(7, 14).
Interestingly, contemporaneous with our studies, novel ligands for DCAF1 were discovered using computational
screening methods and HTS. Both reported ligands bind closer to the outer
surface of the central pocket (PDB ID: 7SSE, 8OGA) and taken together with these results
indicate that DCAF1 is a fairly druggable WDR.

## WDR91 Small Molecule Ligands Bind in a Unique Pocket Relative
to a Native Binding Partner RAB7A
DEL-ML hit-finding for
WDR91 led to the discovery of MR45279 with a KD value of 6 μM (PDB ID: 8SHJ), and subsequently to a covalent analog
MR46654 (PDB ID: 8T55). Unlike the hits discovered for DCAF1, MR45279 and MR46654 bind in a side pocket nestled
between two β-propeller blades located at the bottom face of
the WDR domain (Figure S4). A recent structure
(PDB ID: 8KB8) of WDR91 and GTP-bound RAB7A illustrates that the latter also binds
at the bottom face of WDR91 but at a unique site relative to the small
molecule ligands (Figure S4). Importantly, MR45279 demonstrates that side
pockets, which sometimes serve as additional,
functional interaction sites in WDRs (Figure S2d), can also be targeted by small molecules with good affinity.

## A Novel Chemotype Was Discovered for the Highly Druggable WDR5
Of 64 predicted ligands for WDR5, nine had SPR KD values less than 100 μM (Table S11). Two of the most potent compounds are racemates
featuring an imidazole and/or tetrahydrobenzothiophene or pyridine.
The most potent ligand MR43378 (KD value
of 241 nM) was subjected to chiral separation and subsequent testing
by SPR showed that the S-enantiomer (MR44397) had
a KD value of 69 nM ( a, b).
 A suite of orthogonal assays, including DSF, FP, and BLI, confirmed
potent binding ( , S5). MR44397 substantially stabilized
WDR5 as measured by DSF (Figure S5a) and
displaced two central pocket-binding peptides (histone H3 and MLL-WIN
peptides) with Kdisp of 1 μM, and 4 μM, respectively ( c). Importantly,
MR44397 did not displace an RBBP5 peptide (aa 371–380), which
binds on a surface outside the central pocket of WDR5 ( c). To gain structural insights into the binding mode of the compound,
we determined the cocrystal structure of MR44397 in complex with WDR5,
referred to here as WDR5-MR44397 ( ). The compound occupies the central pocket of WDR5 ( d), which is in agreement with
the FP displacement data ( c). These data clearly demonstrate a new chemically
tractable series for WDR5, which modulates functional protein interactions
of the target.

## WDR12 Ligand Binds at the Top of the Central Pocket
For WDR12, we tested 530 predicted ligands, for which 39 showed dose–response
binding (with KD < 100 μM) by
SPR. Interestingly, the majority of these binders shared structural
features including methyl sulfonamides or methyl sulfones, biaryl
or aryl cyclohexyl ethers, providing limited SAR (Table S11). MR40903 is the highest affinity ligand (KD value of 18 μM) which harbors a fluorine
atom which, when replaced with chlorine yielded MR44915 with slightly
better affinity (KD value of 4 μM, a–c). Dose–response
binding of MR40903 was confirmed using 19F-NMR ( d), while HDX-MS confirmed binding of the more potent MR44915
( e, S6). HDX-MS of WDR12 in the presence of MR44915
revealed regions around the central pocket (shaded in blue) that were
protected from deuterium uptake. Moreover, these protected regions
included three peptides on the “top” of the WDR fold
that point toward the central pocket ( e, S6). These
data suggest that MR44915 likely binds near the top of the “donut”.
 

## Two Chemotypes for LRRK2 Were Confirmed by Ligand Observed 19F-NMR
First-in-class ligands for the WDR domain
of LRRK2 were discovered. Of ∼70 predicted compounds tested
for LRRK2, two hits with unique chemotypes were identified ( ). Both compounds
bind in a dose-dependent manner, but the level of binding is notably
less than ideal (Table S11). DR02380 binds
to LRRK2 with an estimated KD value of
4 μM with 20% binding ( a, Table S11). Taking advantage
of the trifluoromethyl group, we used 19F-NMR as an orthogonal
method to confirm binding ( b). The second chemotype, DR02034 ( c, d), has an estimated KD value of 11 μM with ≥30% binding
from both the original batch and the repurchased solid, respectively
(Table S11). Binding of DR02034 was confirmed
using 19F NMR and a fluorophenyl analog DR02244 ( e, f).
 

## Hit-Finding for the Remaining WDRs
We discovered very
weak binders for RFWD3, and ATG16L1 but no binders for nine WDRs.
For RFWD3, there were four compounds (from 211 screened) which showed
dose–response binding, but only one with a KD value < 50 μM (Table S11). For ATG16L1 there was only one compound (out of 129) for which
dose–response binding yielded a KD value of 44 μM (Table S11). Binding
of each compound to their respective target was confirmed from solid
material but not by an orthogonal method. The discovery of small molecule
binders may indicate some degree of ligandability for both RFWD3 and
ATG16L1.

## Histone “Reader” Domains Are Also Amenable to
Hit-Finding by DEL-ML
We have previously shown that PWWP , and tandem Tudor domains are druggable. Further, these PWWP ligands
have been used as chemical starting points for degrader modalities. , DNMT3A is a DNA methyltransferase that is essential for establishing
and maintaining DNA methylation patterns. Its PWWP domain binds methylated
histone marks, guiding DNMT3A to specific genomic locations. , Of 90 predicted ligands for DNMT3A, 3 have KD values < 20 μM. The three ligands have a diethylamino
moiety which may mimic methyllysine ( , Table S11).
Binding of MT34329 and MT34335 to DNMT3A-PWWP was confirmed by measuring
NMR chemical shift perturbations of amide resonances in 1H-15N HSQC spectra of a uniformly 15N-labeled
PWWP domain ( b, d, S7). In
the presence of MT34329 or MT34335 (at 5:1 compound to protein ratios),
broadening and/or shifting was observed in a subset of the PWWP resonances
including several of the tryptophan side chain protons ( b, d).
 The SETDB1 TTD recognizes lysine methylation and acetylation marks
on histone H3, and has several reported
ligands. , Here we first tested 68 predicted ligands
using an FP-based peptide displacement assay. In a displacement assay
with FITC-labeled H3K9me2K14Ac, 20 compounds reduced the polarization
signal by more than 60% indicating partial displacement (Table S11). These potential ligands were then
tested in dose–response by SPR, where six compounds had KD values ranging from 24 to 200 μM. The
most potent hit is MR40983 (a racemate) with a KD value of 24 μM ( a, Table S11).
 Using these preliminary data, compounds were selected from Enamine
REAL in an attempt to explore the SAR (Table S11). The resulting set of 107 compounds was tested in a similar
approach; first in a peptide displacement assay and then by SPR. Three
hits, MR43625, MR43615, MR43579, were identified with the most potent
MR43625 (a racemate) having a KD value
of 12 μM ( a, Table S11). MR43625 was cocrystallized
with SETDB1-TTD (PDB ID: 8UWP) which shows MR43625 binding at the interface between
the Tudor domains TD2 and TD3 by inserting one diethylamino moiety
into each of the aromatic cages of TD2 and TD3. Further, there appears
to be a better fit to the (S)-enantiomer ( b). To confirm this
observation, the enantiomers were procured and tested by SPR. MR46747
(the (S)-enantiomer of MR43625) binds with a KD value of 4 μM ( c) while the (R)-enantiomer
of MR43625 binds with a KD value of 70
μM (Table S11). Additional profiling
shows that MR46747 displaces H3K9me2K14Ac with a Kdisp value of 36 μM ( d), again demonstrating the discovery of
a novel ligand that can displace a native peptide interaction partner.

## The Discovered Hits Are Selective
On average, the members
of the WDR protein family have low (≤20%) sequence homology
( , Figure S1c). Nevertheless, we thought that assessing the selectivity would
add a valuable dimension to the study. We created a selectivity panel
comprising the targets for which we discovered at least one hit with KD values ≤ 20 μM. We use SPR to
evaluate the level of binding of each hit (at 50 μM) to each
protein. Selectivity is reported as normalized percent binding from
three SPR experiments.
The hits for WDR5, DCAF1, WDR12, and
WDR91 are highly selective for their intended targets ( ). The LRRK2 hits are selective
when measured in dose–response binding mode ( ) but had consistently lower
binding levels (Table S11). This lower
percent binding may be due to the apparent poorer overall solubility
of these compounds (Table S11). At 50
μM, MT34329 binds to both DNMT3A and DCAF1. However, in a dose–response
experiment the affinity of MT34329 for DNMT3A-PWWP (KD value of 4 μM, a) is 10-fold more potent relative to DCAF1
(KD value of 44 μM, Figure S8).
 With cell-free characterization of compound affinity, binding mode,
and a measure of selectivity in hand, we describe cellular assays
to evaluate putative PPI antagonists.

## Cellular Assays to Test Compound Activity
An important
step in the drug discovery process is confirming the target engagement
of a small molecule in a native cellular environment. To develop specific
cellular assays for individual WDR proteins we utilized the NanoLuc
Luciferase (NL) technology, including HiBiT Cellular Thermal Shift
Assay (HiBiT CETSA), NanoBRET-based tracer assays, as well as PPI
NanoBRET assays. Below we describe the
suite of cell assays developed for WDRs and provide examples demonstrating
target engagement by WDR5 ligands ( ).
 To measure the effect of small molecule binding on protein thermal
stability, we used a split NanoLuc reporter system (HiBiT CETSA). , In this assay, the target protein, which is fused to the 11 amino
acid HiBiT tag, is overexpressed in cells which are then subjected
to a thermal challenge followed by complementation with LgBIT comprising
the remainder of the NanoLuc enzyme, thus allowing the level of soluble
protein to be quantified from the resulting luminescence signal ( a). As shown in b, the newly discovered
ligand MR44397 and the chemical probe OICR-9429 thermally stabilized
exogenously expressed HiBiT-WDR5 in HEK293T cells, indicating cellular
permeability and binding to WDR5.
To assess the suitability of this assay for the wider collection
of WDR proteins we first compared our systematic DSF data on WDR protein
melting temperatures (Tm) ( ) and the Tms for several HiBiT-tagged WDR proteins transfected in HEK293T cells
( ) relative to those predicted
in the Meltome database. This comparison
indicates a reasonable agreement between endogenous protein Tm and transfected HiBit-tagged WDR protein Tm. For example, RBBP5 has a high (∼60
°C) Tm in the Meltome, HiBit CETSA,
and DSF ( ). Since temperatures
above 60–65 °C can impact cellular permeability, the method
is not suitable for proteins with high melting temperatures. RBBP4,
RBBP5, WDR41, or WDR82 are examples of such WDR proteins ( ). In other cases, compound binding
did not result in protein stabilization of the full-length protein,
making the HiBiT CETSA assay not suitable for cellular target engagement.
This problem may be resolved by the utilization of targeted domains
instead of full-length proteins. For example, OICR-8268 potently stabilized
the DCAF1-WD40 domain in DSF and HiBiT CETSA assays but not full-length
DCAF1. 
Another way to measure target engagement in cells is a tracer-based
NanoBRET assay using bioluminescence resonance energy transfer (BRET)
from NL to a fluorescent tracer molecule. In this assay, the endogenously tagged or exogenously expressed
NL-tagged protein of interest acts as an energy donor in the presence
of the furimazine substrate, and a cell-permeable small molecule ligand
of the target protein covalently conjugated to the fluorescent dye
(tracer) acts as an energy acceptor ( c). The competition of the test compound
with the tracer for binding to the protein of interest results in
a decrease in NanoBRET signal between the protein and a tracer and
allows the determination of cellular permeability, apparent binding
affinity, and residence time of the test compound in intact as well
as permeabilized cells. As an example,
the IC50 determination in the tracer NanoBRET assay is
demonstrated using the WDR5 tracer ( d). Both MR44397
and the chemical probe OICR-9429 decreased the NanoBRET ratio in a
concentration-dependent manner with different potencies. This assay
confirmed cellular permeability and target engagement of MR44397 with
an IC50 of 1.7 μM.
In cases where the WDR protein has a known interaction partner
that is expected to compete with the ligand of interest, cellular
activity and target engagement can be tested with a PPI NanoBRET assay. , In the PPI NanoBRET assay, one of the proteins of interest is tagged
with NL (energy donor), and the other protein of interest is tagged
with HaloTag (HT) that binds covalently to a fluorescent chloroalkane
ligand and acts as the BRET acceptor if the two proteins are in close
proximity ( e). Besides the measurement of the interactions between full-length
proteins, the assay can be modified to measure the BRET ratio between
short peptides or isolated domains. An
advantage of using individual domains is that the NL and HT tags are
likely to be closer upon protein interaction with a resultant higher
BRET signal compared with larger full-length proteins where the tags
may be more distal to the interaction site.
 f shows
the PPI NanoBRET assay for the WDR5-Histone H3 interaction competed
with MR44397, and the chemical probe OICR-9429. Although both compounds
bind to the central pocket of WDR5 and displace the H3 peptide in
vitro ( ), only
the OICR-9429, which is 20 times more potent than MR44397 in the tracer
NanoBRET assay ( d) was able to decrease the NanoBRET ratio. This result exemplifies
our observations that, in general, potent (submicromolar) compounds
are required to observe robust disruption of a PPI.
We have developed several additional PPI NanoBRET assays for WDRs
which will be useful as potent ligands are developed in the future
( ). If possible, to further validate
the assay and determine the assay window, we also utilized genetic
mutations in donor or acceptor proteins known or predicted to disrupt
the interaction. For example, a previously published R29D mutation
within CORO1A resulted in a decrease
in NanoBRET ratio with ACTB by 50% and a double mutation predicted
from a cocrystal structure of FBXW7 (R465E, R505E) completely abolished
the NanoBRET signal with Cyclin E1 ( ). 

## Conclusions
In the field of drug discovery and development of chemical biology
tools, the initial hit-finding phase can often be long, tedious, and
particularly prone to experimental artifacts. Although all assays
suffer to some extent from these issues, a robust and generalizable
hit-finding strategy, starting with high-quality protein and that
can be executed at scale, will be highly enabling for many applications
in medicine and chemical biology. We applied a DEL-ML hit-finding
strategy to 16 WDRs with a range of druggability scores ( b–d), and two non-WDRs with ligandable PPI domains
as reference points.
To our knowledge, this is the first time that a large cohort of
proteins from a single protein class was subjected to hit-finding
(by DEL-ML) in a systematic and coordinated manner. Computational
druggability analysis using AlphaFold models of over 300 human WDR
proteins suggested that ∼50% of WDRs are indeed ligandable.
This is likely a conservative estimate considering that cryptic pockets
are often hidden in apo WDR structures (Figure S2, ). It is worth noting that coverage of chemical space,
as well as the hit-finding approach, will invariably influence whether
small molecule ligands are discovered for WDRs (or any member of any
protein family).
We did not observe a trend between the theoretical and experimental
druggability of the central pocket. From the druggability score ( d, ), we expected central pocket ligands to have been
discovered for all WDRs with DLID > 0. If we consider the targets
in Figure S2, WDR5, EED and CDC20 have
DLID values > 0, while BTRC has a DLID value < 0. Nevertheless,
there are public domain ligands that bind near to the central pocket
for WDR5, EED and BTRC but none are reported for CDC20. For the latter,
the only public domain ligand (apcin) binds in a side pocket (Figure S2d). We report novel, selective hits
for previously unliganded WDRs, of which DCAF1 and LRRK2 are predicted
to be below the “ligandable threshold” ( d, ). More surprisingly, the DCAF1 ligand binds deep in the
central pocket (PDB ID: 7UFV). Additionally, we discovered central pocket ligands
for WDR12 and WDR5 (both with DLID scores > 0), but only side pocket
ligands for WDR91 which is predicted to have the most druggable central
pocket of the 16 WDRs ( d, ). Our discovery of ligands
for almost half of the tested WDR domains clearly demonstrates their
druggability and the promise of the DEL-ML approach for this family.
With the exception of WDR5 we did not systematically explore whether
our new ligands could modulate native protein function in cell-free
systems (such as displacement assays) or in cell-based assays because
our primary focus was primarily on assessing ligandability and hit-finding.
However, it is quite likely that potent ligands in the central pocket
of the WDR would modulate key PPI functions. Moreover, even ligands
that are not able to modulate a PPI are nevertheless highly valuable
starting points for developing proximity-based pharmacological agents,
such as PROTACs and molecular glues. Notably, many WDRs function as
substrate binding modules of E3 ligases to recruit substrates for
polyubiquitylation and degradation by the proteasome. This includes most substrate binding domains of the Cullin
4 E3 ligase family, , the FBXW class of Cullin 1 and
7 E3 ligase families such as FBXW5, FBXW7, and some non-Cullin E3
ligases such as RFWD2 and RFWD3. Additionally, several other WDR proteins
such as WDR5, EED and WDR12 interact
with DDB1, which is itself a WDR domain-containing substrate adaptor
of the CUL4 E3 ligases. Therefore, new small molecule ligands that
bind to WDR domain-containing E3 ligases may expand the repertoire
of E3 ligases available for PROTAC development. 

## Significance
This work was inspired by the Target 2035 initiative to discover
pharmacological modulators for the human proteome. , This “dream” was expressed 14 years ago by Crews who
called for new chemical biology methodologies to target the “undruggable
proteome” with small, drug-like molecules to enable proximity-mediated
drug discovery. Much progress has been
made since 2010, including the development of DEL-ML and other computationally
supported methods. However, there is still a long way to go. Here we provide a roadmap for the rapid and
systematic assessment of ligandability across protein families. This
target-focused approach requires the large-scale production of high-quality
protein, crystallography, hit-finding, and orthogonal confirmation
of binding. Indeed, we have purified 95 WDRs at scale with at least
one affinity tag, solved 21 3D structures, discovered at least one
hit for each of seven targets, and developed 24 cellular target engagement
assays. The ensemble of resources presented here will further enable
exploration of the unliganded WDR protein family. More importantly,
it is a blueprint for target-focused ligand discovery for the wider
human proteome.

## Experimental Section

## Informatics and Druggability
Using InterPro IDs: IPR001680
IPR036322 IPR015943 as the search query, a list of 349 WDR domain
proteins and the number of publications and the number of articles
associating each protein with specific disease areas were sourced
from chembioport.thesgc.org, which extracts data from the NCBI’s gene2pubmed database
( ). The amino acid sequence of each WDR domain protein was sourced from
UniProt and a multiple sequence alignment (MSA) was generated using
ICM-Pro 3.9–3a (Molsoft, San Diego). The data collected and
MSA were then used to generate annotated phylogenetic trees using
iTOL v6.
AlphaFold V2.0 models for each of the 349 WDR proteins
( ) were downloaded from https://alphafold.ebi.ac.uk/. , Structures were unavailable for eight proteins
(UniProt IDs: P50851, Q5T4S7, Q6ZNJ1, Q6ZS81, Q8IZQ1, Q8NFP9, Q9H799, and Q99698) and thus were excluded from the analysis. After visual inspection,
six proteins were excluded from further analysis due to the lack of
a complete “donut”-shaped domain (UniProt IDs: P18583, P55735, O75460, Q76MJ5, Q9NZJ5, and Q96EE3). When multiple
WDR domains were found in a protein, they were all analyzed. Each
WDR domain was subjected to the ICMPocketFinder algorithm using ICM-Pro
3.9–3a (Molsoft, San Diego) to predict the location of potential
pockets and to obtain the drug-like density (DLID) score. The domain was then superimposed with a canonical
WDR structure (WDR5, PDB ID: 4QL1) with 4 dummy atoms placed down the middle of the
central pocket. The DLID value of the pocket with the smallest distance
to any of these 4 atoms was reported as the druggability index for
the central pocket. For proteins with multiple WDR domains, the highest
DLID score was reported. Proper superimposition was confirmed through
visual inspection. To assess the predictive confidence of the pocket,
the number of residues within 5Å from the pocket with an AlphaFold
confidence score (pLDDT) < 70 were reported. DLID scores for pockets
where no such residues are found are expected to be more reliable.

## Biotechnology
Individual expression clones are detailed
in and are available from Addgene.
Protein expression and purification summaries are detailed in and deposited in Zenodo. 

## Structural Biology
Twenty-one high resolution structures
have been deposited in the PDB ( ). The data collection and refinement statistics are given in .

## DNA Encoded Chemical Library Selection
Affinity mediated
selections were made from pools ranging from 19 to 65 DNA-encoded
libraries. For each His6-tagged target,
the DEL deck was combined with the protein, and incubation occurred
in solution prior to capture on the IMAC matrix; for biotinylated
targets, the target was captured on the streptavidin matrix prior
to blocking with biotin and the subsequent introduction of the DEL
deck ( ). For each target an additional
selection condition containing no target was performed in parallel
to identify matrix binders. For some targets an additional selection
condition containing target protein with additive, e.g., a competitor,
was performed in parallel ( ).
For each IMAC selection (no target, target, or target with competitor),
purified protein was preincubated for 30 min with or without additive
with the DEL deck (40 μM) for 1 h in a volume of 60 μL
in 1× selection buffer, and then a separate ME200 tip (Phynexus)
containing appropriate affinity matrix was prewashed three times in
200 μL of fresh 1× selection buffer. Each selection was
separately captured with 20 passages over the ME200 tip over 0.5 h.
The bound protein and associated library members were captured on
the ME200 tip and washed eight times with 200 μL of fresh 1×
selection buffer. Bound library members were eluted by incubating
the ME200 tip with 60 μL of 1× fresh selection buffer at
85 °C for 5 min. The elution was incubated with 20 passages over
a fresh, prewashed ME200 tip containing the appropriate affinity matrix
to remove any eluted protein. The selection process was run for a
second time using the eluate of the first selection in place of the
input DNA-encoded library and using an appropriate fresh target or
no target.
For streptavidin matrix selections (no target, target, or target
with competitor), purified protein was preincubated for 30 min with
or without additive in a volume of 60 μL in 1× selection
buffer. A separate ME200 tip (Phynexus) containing the affinity matrix
was prewashed three times in 200 μL of fresh 1× selection
buffer. Proteins were captured with 20 passages over the ME200 tip
for a total of 0.5 h. The bound protein captured on the ME200 tip
was washed two times with 200 μL of fresh 1× selection
buffer (with 50 μM biotin), and then the DEL deck (40 μM)
was introduced in a volume of 60 μL in 1× selection buffer
with or without additive was passaged over the ME200tip 40 times over
the period of an hour. ME200 tips were then washed eight times with
200 μL of fresh 1× selection buffer. Bound library members
were then eluted by incubation with 60 μL of 1× fresh selection
buffer at 85 °C for 5 min. The elution was then subjected to
20 passages over a fresh, prewashed ME200 tip containing an appropriate
affinity matrix to remove any eluted protein. The selection process
was run for a second time using the eluate of the first selection
round in place of the input DNA-encoded library and using appropriate
fresh target or no target. 1x Selection Buffer, also referred to as
Cytoplasmic Selection Buffer (CSB), is comprised of 20 mM HEPES, 134
mM KOAc, 8 mM NaOAc, 4 mM NaCl, 0.8 mM Mg(OAc)2, 0.02%
Tween-20, 1 mgmL–1 Sheared Salmon Sperm DNA, 5 mM
Imidazole, 1 mM TCEP, pH 7.2.
For both IMAC and Streptavidin matrix selections, the eluate of
the second round of selection was PCR amplified and sequenced. Sequence data were parsed, error-containing
sequences were disregarded, amplification duplicates were removed,
and building block and chemical scheme encodings were decoded and
reported along with associated calculated statistical parameters.
The immobilization efficiency of proteins during selection experiments
was determined by SDS-PAGE. Input sample is identical with the initial
solution containing protein in 60 μL of 1× selection buffer
prior to capture with 20 passages over the ME200 tip. Flow-through
sample is the solution containing protein in 60 μL of 1×
selection buffer after capture with 20 passages over the ME200 tip
from selection. Resin sample is the resin removed from the ME200 tip
and mixed to resuspension in 60 μL of 1× selection buffer.
All proteins demonstrated ≥ 80% purity and ≥50% fraction
of input protein immobilized (Figure S9).

## ML Models Generated Using Random Forest
For the random
forest models ( ), disynthons were
classified into two groups: “non-hits” (label = 0) and
either “hits” or “competitive hits” (label
= 1), depending on whether the selection experiment included a condition
with a competitive binder. Thirty models were trained with one million
negative examples randomly sampled from the “non-hits”
and 90% randomly sampled from the “hits” or “competitive
hits” as positive examples to make up the training set for
each model. 10% of this total set of examples was held out as a test
set and was not seen during training. The positive (label = 1) examples
were oversampled by including them twice during the training for each
model. Each molecule in the training and test sets was featurized
using the Morgan fingerprint algorithm as implemented in the RDKit
cheminformatics package with radius = 2 and bit count = 1024. The models were trained using the RandomForestClassifier
class in the scikit-learn Python package. Nondefault hyperparameters for the models included n_estimators
= 2000 and min_samples_split = 5. Of the thirty trained models, the
model with the highest accuracy on the test set was chosen for inference
on commercial catalogs.

## ML Models Generated Using GCNN
The GCNN model in this
study ( ) is based on that in McCloskey
et al., with several improvements referred
to as GCNN V1, V2 and V2.1. We elaborate on all 3 versions below.

## Label Assignment for ML
DNA Encoded Libraries molecules
were aggregated into disynthons and enrichment values were calculated
following the approach detailed in McCloskey et al. Subsequently, each disynthon was assigned to one of five
distinct classes: competitive hit, noncompetitive hit, promiscuous
binder, matrix binder, or nonhit. For
targets where a competitor molecule was incubated during a DEL affinity
screen, the positive training examples for machine learning were designated
as the “competitive hit” class. For the targets without
competitor molecules, a target hit class replaced both competitive
hit and noncompetitive hit classes, resulting in four instead of five
classes.
GCNN V1 adopted the model from McCloskey
et al. with the following updates: (1)
The model training was migrated from CPU to tensor processing units
(TPU) to take advantage of TPU’s strength in synchronous training.
(2) In addition to ensembling the cross-validation fold models as
described in McCloskey et al., we implemented
two extra levels of model ensembling to improve overall reliability:
(a) We used TPU-supported graph partitioning for manual model parallelism,
training 8 models with independently randomized weight initialization
on individual TPU cores. The ensembled prediction is the median of
prediction scores from these 8 models. (b) We further replicated the
full training process 3 times, and the final prediction score is the
median of predictions from the 3 runs, each with 8 TPU model replicas,
and the cross-validation fold models.
GCNN V2 built upon GCNN V1 with the following key
improvements: (1) Instead of using the maximum ROC-AUC we utilized
the top_100_actives metric. This metric counts the number of active
examples within the top 100 ranked predictions for the hit class.
After training models for each cross-validation fold, we selected
the checkpoint weights with the highest top_100_actives score on the
tuning set. (2) Along with changing the model selection metric, we
also updated training hyperparameters: (a) Learning rate was increased
from 0.0006 to 0.1. (b) Training steps were increased from 30,000
to 1,000,000, with checkpoints saved every 100,000 steps instead of
every 3,000 steps.
GCNN V2.1 is an ensemble model combining the predictions
from GCNN V2 and a molecular-fingerprint-based deep neural network
(DNN). The fingerprint DNN architecture consists of 2 fully connected
layers of sizes (2000, 100) with rectified linear activation function
(ReLU) and the input features are 2048-bit Morgan Fingerprint with
radius of 3 (ECFP6_2048). The ensemble procedure involves first retrieving
the top 100,000 compounds using the GCNN V2 model predictions, and
then filtering out 50% of these compounds based on the lower DNN prediction
scores, and from the remaining 50,000 compounds, following the same
protocol of property filtering and diversity selection, ranked by
GCNN V2 predictions, to select the compounds for purchase and testing.

## ML Models Generated Using ArtemisAI
Where the model
type is specified as “ArtemisIAI” ( ), the DEL selection data were featurized in a range
of different formats, and each format was then used to build a collection
of models. These models were evaluated and, based on performance,
included in a model ensemble used to score commercial catalogs compounds.
A diverse set of the highest scoring compounds was ordered and assayed.

## DEL-ML-Driven Hit Expansion
For promising hit compounds
like those found for WDR12, DCAF1, and WDR91, we performed automated
hit expansion using the GCNN model to search for and prioritize analogs
of the initial hit. The search was performed in the large Enamine
REAL library of 1.9 billion commercially available compounds, avoiding
expensive bespoke synthesis. First, we identified analogs from the
Enamine REAL library with ECFP6 Tanimoto similarity above a threshold
to the original hit. We then used the GCNN prediction score to rank
these compounds. To balance exploiting structural similarity and exploring
diversity, we also applied DISE selection with a 0.2 radius cutoff
to increase analog diversity.

## Computationally Based Hit Expansion
The EnamineReal
commercially available structural space most similar to the 4 initial
DCAF1 hits (Tanimoto Score > 0.35 using ECFP6, ∼87 thousand
compounds) was docked (ICM and OpenEye ORION platform) in the X-Ray
structure and compounds with high docking scores were ordered and
assayed. A similarity set was also selected from the highest docking
scores (ICM and OpenEye ORION platform) from a 10 M random sampling
of EnamineReal. Lastly, a 3D shape-based ROCS hit expansion search
(Openeye ORION platform) of the 4 original hits was conducted and
a set of compounds with good shape complementarity (Tanimoto combo
score > 1.4) to the original hits was ordered and assayed.

## Compound Purity
All reported compounds have a purity
of at least 95% at 254 nm (Figure S10).
The purity of the compounds was determined by using a liquid chromatograph
equipped with a diode array and a mass spectrometer detector (Waters
Acquity SQD mass spectrometer).

## Surface Plasmon Resonance (SPR)
The binding affinity
of compounds was assessed by SPR (Biacore T200 or Biacore 8K, Cytiva
Inc.) as previously described. SPR running
conditions ( ) vary slightly, depending
on the specific compounds and protein targets.

## Differential Scanning Fluorimetry (DSF)
WDR5 was diluted
to 0.1 mg/mL in buffer (100 mM HEPES, 100 mM NaCl, pH 7.5) in the
presence of 5 × SYPRO Orange dye (Life Technologies, S-6650)
and serially titrated MR44397 (up to 200 μM) in a total volume
of 20 μL in a white polypropylene 384-well plate (Axygen, #UC500).
DSF was performed in a Light Cycler 480 II (Roche Applied Science,
Penzberg, Germany) using a 4 °C/min temperature gradient from
20 to 95 °C. Data points were collected at 1 °C intervals.
DSF data was fitted to a Boltzmann sigmoid function and Tm values were determined as previously described. 

## Fluorescence Polarization (FP) Assay
WDR5 (H3 1–15
FP: 300 nM, WIN and RBBP5 FP: 5 μM) was incubated with 40 nM
of fluorescent FITC labeled peptide-H3 1–15, -WIN (GSARAEVHLRKS)
or - RBBP5 (371–380 aa, EDEEVDVTSV) in the presence or absence
of serial titration of MR44397 (up to 100 μM) for 30 min at
ambient temperature, and fluorescence polarization was then measured
and analyzed as previously described. 
SETDB1 TTD (197–403) 5 μM was incubated with
40 nM of 5′ FITC- H3K9me2K14ac (1–25) with serially
diluted MR46747 compound at 200 μM top concentration (12 points
3-fold dilution). Final DMSO in the reaction mixture was maintained
at 2%. Following a brief spin down and incubation for 30 min at room
temperature fluorescence polarization ratio measurements were obtained
as reported previously. 

## Biolayer Interferometry (BLI) Assay
The BLI assay was
used to evaluate the binding kinetics of MR44397 against WDR5. All
assays were run on the same Octet Red96 instrument at 25 °C while
being shaken at 1000 rpm. BLI assay buffer consists of 0.1% BSA in
10 mM HEPES, pH 7.4, 150 mM NaCl, 0.05% Tween 20, 3 mM EDTA. Antibiotin
super streptavidin (SSA) biosensors (part no: 18–5057, FORTÉBIO,
Fremont, California, United States) were loaded into the columns of
a biosensor holding plate and prehydrated in BLI assay buffer for
10 min. Black 96-well microplates were loaded with 200 μL per
well. Following a 60-s equilibration step with antibiotin super streptavidin
(SSA) biosensors in buffer, biotinylated WDR5 was loaded for 300 s.
The SSA were then moved into wells in the following sequence: (i)
a baseline step with fresh assay buffer for 60 s, (ii) MR44397 for
a 60 s association step, and (iii) assay buffer for a 120 s dissociation
step. Binding curves from the association and dissociation steps were
fitted using a 1:1 binding model to determine KD values using the Octet Data Acquisition software.

## Dynamic Light Scattering (DLS)
The solubility of compounds
was estimated by DLS that directly measures compound aggregates and
laser power in solution. Compounds were serially diluted directly
from DMSO stocks, then diluted 50x into filtered HBS-E (20 mM HEPES
pH 7.4, 150 mM NaCl, 3 mM EDTA) for analysis by DLS (DynaPro DLS Plate
Reader III, Wyatt Technology, USA) as previously described. The solubility is listed alongside binding data
in .

## Nuclear Magnetic Resonance (NMR) Spectroscopy
All spectra
were collected at 298K on a Bruker AvanceIII spectrometer, operating
at 600 MHz, and equipped with a QCI probe. The binding of fluorinated
compounds was assayed by looking for the broadening and/or perturbation
of 19F resonances in 1D spectra upon addition of LRKK2
(at protein to compound ratios of 0.5:1 to 4:1) in PBS buffer (pH7.4,
137 mM NaCl, 2.7 mM KCl, 10 mM Na2HPO4, 1.8
mM KH2PO4, and with 5% D2O). Two
to four thousand transients were collected with an acquisition period
of 0.2 s, over a sweep width of 150 ppm, a relaxation delay of 1.5
s, and using 90° pulses centered at −120 ppm. The concentrations
of the compounds in both reference and protein-compound mixtures were
5–10 μM. TFA (20 μM) was added as an internal standard
for referencing. Prior to Fourier transformation, an exponential window
function was applied (lb = 1 to 3) to the FID. 1H-15N HSQC spectra of 15N-labeled DNMT3A-PWWP were
acquired to confirm the interaction of compounds by looking for the
perturbation of amide resonances. The concentration of the labeled
construct was 100 μM, and buffered in 50 mM Tris pH 7.5, 250
mM NaCl, 5% Glycerol, and 1 mM DTT containing 2.5% DMSO; compounds
were at 500 μM. 128 indirect FIDs were acquired with 96 transients
collected over a 32 ppm 15N sweep width. Squared cosine
window functions were applied in both dimensions prior to the Fourier
transformation. Spectral processing was performed at the workstation
using the software Topspin3.5.

## Hydrogen–Deuterium Exchange Mass Spectrometry
HDX-MS was performed as previously described using the PAL3 Autosampler
(CTC Analytics AG) coupled to an M-Class UPLC (Waters Corp., U.K.)
and SELECT SERIES Cyclic IMS Mass Spectrometer (Waters Corp., U.K.)
in HDMSe mode. Briefly, samples (5 μM
WDR12 or 5 μM WDR12 + 100 μM MR44915) were labeled (10
mM Phosphate Buffer pD 7.4, 150 mM NaCl) at 20 °C for 0, 1, 10,
30, and 60 min. The HDX reaction was then quenched (100 mM Phosphate
Buffer, pH 2.5) at 0 °C for 1 min prior to proteolysis (Enzymate
BEH Pepsin column, Waters Corp., U.K.), desalting (ACQUITY UPLC BEH
C18 VanGuard Precolumn, Waters Corp., U.K.), and reverse-phase separation
(ACQUITY UPLC BEH C18 Column, Waters Corp., U.K.). Data processing
was conducted using ProteinLynx Global Server 3.0.3. and DynamX 3.0
(Waters Corp., U.K.), and visualization was done using PyMol 2.5.0
(Schrodinger, LLC). For a cumulative ΔHDX-MS peptide signal
to be considered statistically significant, it must have exceeded
the cumulative propagated error (2 σ, n ≥
2).

## NanoBRET-based Protein–Protein Interaction (PPI)
A detailed protocol was recently published. Briefly, HEK293T cells were seeded in 96-well white plates (4 ×
104 cells/well, Corning) and cotransfected with C-terminally
NL-tagged WDR5 (0.001 μg/well) and C-terminally HT-tagged histone
H3 (0.1 μg/well) or N-terminally NL-tagged WDR5 (0.001 μg/well),
C-terminally HT-tagged RBBP5 (0.03 μg/well), and empty vector
(0.07 μg/well) using XtremeGene HP transfection reagent, following
manufacturers’ instructions. The next day the medium was replaced
with DMEM (no phenol red) supplemented with 4% FBS, 100 U/mL penicillin,
100 μg/mL streptomycin, ±1000-fold diluted HaloTag NanoBRET
618 Ligand (Promega) and incubated with indicated compound concentrations
or DMSO control for 4 h. Next, 100-fold diluted NanoBRET Nano-Glo
Substrate (Promega) was added, and donor emission at 450 nm and acceptor
emission at 618 nm were read within 10 min of substrate addition using
a ClarioStar plate reader (Mandel Scientific). The NanoBRET ratio
was determined by subtracting 618/460 (acceptor/donor) signal from
cells without NanoBRET 618 HaloTag Ligand x 1000 from 618/460 signal
from cells with NanoBRET 618 Ligand x 1000.

## Cellular Interaction between Small Molecules and Proteins

## NanoLuciferase-Based Cellular Thermal Shift Assay
A
protocol was recently published. Briefly,
HEK293T cells were seeded in 6-well white plates (8 × 105 cells/well, Corning) and transfected with N-terminally HiBiT-tagged
WDR5 (0.2 μg/well) and empty vector (1.8 μg/well) using
XtremeGene HP transfection reagent, following manufacturers’
instructions. The next day cells were trypsinized and resuspended
in optiMEM (no phenol red, Gibco) at the density of 2 × 105 cells/mL. After compound addition (50 μM of MR44397
and 20 μM of OICR-9429) or DMSO, the cells were aliquoted in
a 96-well PCR plate (one well per intended temperature, 50 μL),
covered with breathable film and incubated for 1 h at 37 °C 5%
CO2. Next, cells were heated in the VerityPro thermocycler
(Thermo Fisher Scientific) as follows: 1 min at 22 °C and 3 min
at the indicated temperature gradient, followed by a cooling step
to chill samples to RT (22 °C). Next, 50 μL of lytic buffer
was added (2% NP-40, protease inhibitors (Roche), 0.2 μM LargeBiT
(produced in house) in optiMEM (no phenol red)). After 10 min incubation
at RT, 25 μL/well of 100-fold diluted NanoBRET Nano-Glo Substrate
(Promega) was added and transferred to 384-well white plates in quadruplicates
(20 μL/well). The luminescence signal was read in a ClarioStar
plate reader (Mandel Scientific). Data were fitted to obtain apparent Tagg values using the nonlinear curve fit (e.g.,
Boltzmann Sigmoid equation) using GraphPad Prism software.

## Tracer-Based NanoBRET Assay
HEK293T cells were plated
in a 6-well plate (8 × 105 cells/well) and transfected
with 0.2 μg of N-terminally NL-tagged WDR5 vector and 1.8 μg
of empty vector using XtremeGene HP transfection reagent, following
manufacturer’s instructions. The next day cells were trypsinized
and resuspended in optiMEM (no phenol red) at 2 × 105 cells/mL density with 1 μM of WDR5 tracer. Compound serial dilutions were prepared in DMSO and added
to the cells. Cells were transferred to 384-well low-binding white
plates (20 μL/well, Corning) in quadruplicates. After 2 h, 5
μL/well NanoBRET Nano-Glo Substrate (Promega) and Extracellular
NanoLuc Inhibitor (Promega) diluted in optiMEM (no phenol red) 100-fold
and 300-fold, respectively, was added. The donor emission at 450 nm
and acceptor emission at 618 nm were read immediately after substrate
addition and shaking of the plate for 20 s using a ClarioStar plate
reader (Mandel Scientific). NanoBRET ratios were calculated by subtracting
the mean of the 610 nm/460 nm signal from cells without tracer ×
1000 from the 610 nm/460 nm signal from cells with tracer × 1000.
Data were fitted to obtain IC50 values using the nonlinear
curve fit using GraphPad Prism software.

## Experimental Procedure of 1-Acetyl-N-((2-(2-chlorophenoxy)pyridin-4-yl)methyl)indoline-5-sulfonamide
MR44915

## Reaction Scheme
 

## Step-1: Synthesis of 2-(2-Chlorophenoxy) isonicotinonitrile
(Int-3)
 To a mixture of 2-bromoisonicotinonitrile (Int-1) (0.2
g, 1.09 mmol, 1.0 equiv) and 2-chlorophenol (Int-2) (0.2
g, 1.63 mmol, 1.5 equiv) in N, N-dimethylformamide
(2 mL), were added potassium carbonate (0.23 g, 1.63 mmol, 1.5 equiv)
and copper powder (0.04 g, 0.655 mmol, 0.2 equiv), and the mixture
was stirred for 3 h at 110 °C. The reaction mixture was poured
into water and extracted with ethyl acetate dried over sodium sulfate
and concentrated under reduced pressure to give the crude compound,
which was purified by column chromatography (SiO2, ethyl
acetate:hexanes = 1:10 to 2:10) to give 2-(2-chlorophenoxy) isonicotinonitrile (Int-3) (0.17 g, yield: 67.63%) as a brown solid.
LC-MS: m/z = 232.8 [M +
2H]2+.

## Step-2: Synthesis of (2-(2-Chlorophenoxy) pyridin-4-yl) methanamine
(Int-4)
 To a solution of 2-(2-chlorophenoxy) isonicotinonitrile
(Int-3) (0.17 g, 0.737 mmol, 1.0 equiv) in ethanol (11.2
mL) in an autoclave under a nitrogen atmosphere were added aqueous
ammonia (1.1 mL) and Raney nickel (0.2 g) and the mixture stirred
under 250 psi pressure of hydrogen for 5 h. The reaction mixture was
filtered through a Celite pad, and the filtrate was concentrated under
reduced pressure to give crude product (2-(2-chlorophenoxy) pyridin-4-yl)
methanamine (Int-4) (0.16 g, yield: 92.50%) as a brown
solid, which was used in the next step without further purification.
LC-MS: m/z = 235.0
[M + H]+.

## Step-3: Synthesis of 1-Acetyl-N-((2-(2-chlorophenoxy)pyridin-4-yl)methyl)indoline-5-sulfonamide
MR44915
 To a cooled to solution (0 °C) of (2-(2-chlorophenoxy) pyridin-4-yl)
methanamine (Int-4) (0.16 g, 0.68 mmol, 1.0 equiv) in
dichloromethane (3.2 mL), triethylamine (0.2 g, 2.04 mmol, 3.0 equiv)
and 1-acetylindoline-5-sulfonyl chloride (Int-5) (0.23
g, 0.88 mmol, 1.3 equiv) were added. The mixture was then stirred
for 1 h at room temperature. The reaction mixture was poured into
water, extracted with dichloromethane, dried over sodium sulfate,
and concentrated under reduced pressure to give the crude compound
which was purified by column chromatography using (SiO2, ethyl acetate:hexanes = 2:10 to 4:10) to give 1-acetyl-N-((2-(2-chlorophenoxy) pyridin-4-yl) methyl) indoline-5-sulfonamide (MR44915) (0.07 g, yield: 22.40%) as a white solid.
LC-MS: m/z = 458.0
[M + H]+.
1H NMR (400 MHz, DMSO-d6) δ 8.23 (s, 1H), 8.16 (d, J = 8.8 Hz, 1H), 7.99 (d, J = 5.2
Hz, 1H), 7.62 – 7.39 (m, 3H), 7.41 (t, J = 7.8 Hz, 1H), 7.31–
7.23 (m, 2H), 7.04 (d, J = 5.3 Hz, 1H), 6.97 (s, 1H), 4.17 (t, J =
8.7 Hz, 2H), 4.09 (d, J = 6.3 Hz, 2H), 3.19 (t, J = 6.5 Hz, 2H), 2.21
(s, 3H).
13C NMR (101 MHz, DMSO-d6) δ 170.22, 163.04, 152.23, 149.77, 146.71, 134.91, 133.58,
130.81, 128.97, 127.03, 124.74, 123.77, 118.49, 115.75, 109.41, 49.16,
45.25, 27.52, 24.60

## Acknowledgments
The authors acknowledge Dr. Brian Wilson for determining
the purity of the compounds presented in the main body of the manuscript,
and Dr. Drashti Thumar for synthesizing the chlorine analog MR44915.
The Structural Genomics Consortium is a registered charity (no: 1097737)
that receives funds from Bayer AG, Boehringer Ingelheim, Bristol Myers
Squibb, Genentech, Genome Canada through Ontario Genomics Institute
[OGI-196], EU/EFPIA/OICR/McGill/KTH/Diamond Innovative Medicines Initiative
2 Joint Undertaking [EUbOPEN grant 875510], Janssen, Merck KGaA (aka
EMD in Canada and US), Pfizer, and Takeda. We thank the staff at the
Northeastern Collaborative Access Team, which is funded by the National
Institute of General Medical Sciences from the National Institutes
of Health (P30 GM124165). The Eiger 16M detector on the 24-ID-E beamline
is funded by an NIH-ORIP HEI grant (S10OD021527). This research used
resources of the Advanced Photon Source, a U.S. Department of Energy
(DOE) Office of Science user facility operated for the DOE Office
of Science by Argonne National Laboratory under contract no. DE-AC02-06CH11357.

## Glossary

## Abbreviations
BLIBiolayer Interferometry
DELDNA Encoded Chemical
Library
DEL-MLDNA
Encoded Chemical Library followed by Machine Learning
DLIDdrug-like density
DSFDifferential Scanning
Fluorimetry
FPFluorescence
Polarization
GCNNGraph Convolutional Neural Network
HDXHydrogen–Deuterium eXchange
HTSHigh-Throughput Screening
MLMachine Learning
NanoBRETNanoLuciferase
Bioluminescence Resonance Energy Transfer
NMRNuclear Magnetic Resonance
PPIProtein–Protein Interaction
PROTACProteolysis
Targeting Chimera
SPRSurface Plasmon Resonance
Tmmelting temperature
WDRTryptophan-Aspartate
Repeat.

## Data Availability Statement
Experimental
3D protein structure coordinates are deposited in the Protein Data
Bank under accession codes: 6N31, 6PBG, 6VYC, 7KLJ, 7KQQ, 7KYX, 7M3X, 7MT1, 7RUO, 7STY, 7SUL, 7UFV, 8D30, 8D41, 8DYS, 8F8E, 8SHJ, 8T5I, 8T55, 8UWP, 8W3V. Authors will release
the atomic coordinates upon article publication. Protein expression
clones have been deposited to Addgene (and are listed in Table S3 as reference). Purification protocols
and associated data for all WDR proteins manufactured are deposited. Any additional information required to reanalyze
the data reported in this paper is available from the lead author
upon request.

## Supporting Information Available
The Supporting Information is
available free of charge at https://pubs.acs.org/doi/10.1021/acs.jmedchem.4c02010.
Figure S1 illustrates PubMed-extracted
research activity on WDRs, and an illustration of the sequence identity
of WDR containing proteins (the raw data for Figure S1 is in Tables
S1 and S2); Figure S2 illustrates the ligand-bound, 3D
structures of four WDR proteins in the literature (from before we
started the project); Figure S3 gives some background
on the DEL selections; It also provides some metrics on the binding
affinity of the ligands and their similarity to the DEL selections; Figure S4 shows an overlay of a new 3D structure for WDR91
and RAB7A with our structures with small molecule ligands; Figure
S5 has additional binding data for the WDR5 small molecule
ligand; Figure S6 shows more detailed data on HDX-MS
of WDR12 in the presence of a small molecule ligand; Figure
S7 shows the full 1H-15N HSQC spectra that relates to ; Figure S8 shows a dose–response SPR experiment of MT34329 binding to
DCAF1-WDR; Figure S9 shows examples of the quality control
for capturing proteins on solid phase matrix before DEL selections; Figure S10 shows the LC-UV/MS as a measure of quality control
of small molecules; Table S6 lists the apo and ligand-bound
3D structures generated during this project; Table S7 relates to Table S6 and contains the related data collection and
refinement statistics (PDF)
Tables S1 and S2 comprise
the data used to generate the illustrations in Figure S1 (XLSX) (CSV)
Table S3 lists all constructs deposited
to Addgene (XLSX)
Table S4 gives a brief overview of protein
purification (with details in ref ( ), DOI: 10.5281/zenodo.10655441) (XLSX)
Table S5 lists buffer conditions for SPR
and melting temperatures for 30 WDRs (XLSX)
Table S8 lists the DLID scores and relates
to d (XLSX)
Table S9 lists conditions for DEL selections
(XLSX)
Table S10 relates to the ML models used
to generate the predictions (XLSX)
Table S11 comprises the Molecular Formula
Strings of each predicted compound, the associated binding and solubility
data (CSV)
Table S12 lists cellular melting temperatures
and the nanoBiT reagents (XLSX)
Table S13 lists the nanoBRET assay components
(XLSX)
Full wwPDB X-ray Structure Validation Report (PDF)

## Author Contributions
AME, CHA:
Concept, Leadership, and Funding acquisition; AS, AH, EG, HZ, MK,
MSilva, MYPG, PL, YL: Protein manufacturing; ADong, GLR, LH, SAhmad,
SB, SK, SS: Structural biology; MvR, JPG, JWC, RDT: Selection Design
and Analysis; ADK, JPG, MAC, PAC, RDT, YZ: DNA-Encoded Chemical Library
Synthesis and Selection; ADumas, AJB, BG, BLS, CJM, CM, CU, ES, IW,
JAF, JD, JG, JL, JT, JX led GCNN model application and development;
JZ, MAG, NH, PR, SK, TK, WT, YA, YZ: Machine-Learning and Compound
Design; AB, AKY, AL, CL, DJW, EW, FL, GLR, HAK, IC, JL, MDS, MSilva,
OH, PJB, RTW, SAckloo, SAhmad, SB, SDT, SG, SH, SP, VS: Biophysical
assays; MSzewczyk, RACM: Cell Assays; PJB, SAckloo: Project Management;
ADK, AME, CHA, DB-L, JAF, JWC, LH, MAC, MAG, MSchapira, PAC, YZ: Supervision;
CHA, and All: Writing, Reviewing, Editing.

The authors
declare the following competing financial interest(s): BLS, BG, JSD,
JZ, JWC, MvR, PR, SK, and TK are current or past employees and shareholders
of Relay Therapeutics.

## Supplementary Material
jm4c02010_si_001.pdf
jm4c02010_si_002.xlsx
jm4c02010_si_003.csv
jm4c02010_si_004.xlsx
jm4c02010_si_005.xlsx
jm4c02010_si_006.xlsx
jm4c02010_si_007.xlsx
jm4c02010_si_008.xlsx
jm4c02010_si_009.xlsx
jm4c02010_si_010.csv
jm4c02010_si_011.xlsx
jm4c02010_si_012.xlsx
jm4c02010_si_013.pdf

## References
 

## Associated Data

## Supplementary Materials
jm4c02010_si_001.pdf
jm4c02010_si_002.xlsx
jm4c02010_si_003.csv
jm4c02010_si_004.xlsx
jm4c02010_si_005.xlsx
jm4c02010_si_006.xlsx
jm4c02010_si_007.xlsx
jm4c02010_si_008.xlsx
jm4c02010_si_009.xlsx
jm4c02010_si_010.csv
jm4c02010_si_011.xlsx
jm4c02010_si_012.xlsx
jm4c02010_si_013.pdf

## Data Availability Statement
Experimental
3D protein structure coordinates are deposited in the Protein Data
Bank under accession codes: 6N31, 6PBG, 6VYC, 7KLJ, 7KQQ, 7KYX, 7M3X, 7MT1, 7RUO, 7STY, 7SUL, 7UFV, 8D30, 8D41, 8DYS, 8F8E, 8SHJ, 8T5I, 8T55, 8UWP, 8W3V. Authors will release
the atomic coordinates upon article publication. Protein expression
clones have been deposited to Addgene (and are listed in Table S3 as reference). Purification protocols
and associated data for all WDR proteins manufactured are deposited. Any additional information required to reanalyze
the data reported in this paper is available from the lead author
upon request.