pmcJ Pharm AnalJ Pharm Anal3328jpaJournal of Pharmaceutical Analysis2095-17792214-0883Xi'an Jiaotong UniversityPMC12305578PMC12305578.112305578123055784073503110.1016/j.jpha.2024.101182S2095-1779(24)00279-X1011821Original ArticleEffect of cholesterol on distribution, cell uptake, and protein corona of lipid microspheres at sites of cardiovascular inflammatory injury
LiLingyan WuXingjie GuoQianqian WangYu'e HeZhiyong ZhangGuangqiong LiuShaobo ShuLiping GajendranBabu ChenYingchen_ying@gmc.edu.cn ShenXiangchunsxc@gmc.edu.cn TaoLingtaoling@gmc.edu.cn aState Key Laboratory of Functions and Applications of Medicinal Plants, School of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Guizhou Medical University, Guiyang, 561113, ChinabThe High Efficacy Application of Natural Medicinal Resources Engineering Center of Guizhou Province and The High Educational Key Laboratory of Guizhou Province for Natural Medicinal Pharmacology and Druggability, School of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Guizhou Medical University, Guiyang, 561113, ChinacKey Laboratory of Optimal Utilization of Natural Medicine Resources (The Union Key Laboratory of Guiyang City-Guizhou Medical University), School of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Guizhou Medical University, Guiyang, 561113, ChinadSchool of Basic Medicine, Guizhou Medical University, Guiyang, 561113, China⁎Corresponding author. State Key Laboratory of Functions and Applications of Medicinal Plants & School of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Guizhou Medical University, Guiyang, 561113, China. taoling@gmc.edu.cn⁎⁎Corresponding author. State Key Laboratory of Functions and Applications of Medicinal Plants & School of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Guizhou Medical University, Guiyang, 561113, China. sxc@gmc.edu.cn⁎⁎⁎Corresponding author. State Key Laboratory of Functions and Applications of Medicinal Plants & School of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Guizhou Medical University, Guiyang, 561113, China. chen_ying@gmc.edu.cn7202503120251574935541011821472024312202429122024030120252907202530072025© 2025 The Author(s)2025https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/).Cholesterol (CH) plays a crucial role in enhancing the membrane stability of drug delivery systems (DDS). However, its association with conditions such as hyperlipidemia often leads to criticism, overshadowing its influence on the biological effects of formulations. In this study, we reevaluated the delivery effect of CH using widely applied lipid microspheres (LM) as a model DDS. We conducted comprehensive investigations into the impact of CH on the distribution, cell uptake, and protein corona (PC) of LM at sites of cardiovascular inflammatory injury. The results demonstrated that moderate CH promoted the accumulation of LM at inflamed cardiac and vascular sites without exacerbating damage while partially mitigating pathological damage. Then, the slow cellular uptake rate observed for CH@LM contributed to a prolonged duration of drug efficacy. Network pharmacology and molecular docking analyses revealed that CH depended on LM and exerted its biological effects by modulating peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor gamma (PPAR-γ) expression in vascular endothelial cells and estrogen receptor alpha (ERα) protein levels in myocardial cells, thereby enhancing LM uptake at cardiovascular inflammation sites. Proteomics analysis unveiled a serum adsorption pattern for CH@LM under inflammatory conditions showing significant adsorption with CH metabolism-related apolipoprotein family members such as apolipoprotein A-V (Apoa5); this may be a major contributing factor to their prolonged circulation in vivo and explains why CH enhances the distribution of LM at cardiovascular inflammatory injury sites. It should be noted that changes in cell types and physiological environments can also influence the biological behavior of formulations. The findings enhance the conceptualization of CH and LM delivery, providing novel strategies for investigating prescription factors' bioactivity.

## Graphical abstract
 

## Highlights
•Moderate CH can enhance the uptake and targeting efficacy of LM.
•Network pharmacology has assisted in unraveling the delivery effects of CH.
•Cell type and physiological environment can affect the biological behavior of LM.
•This study provides a promising new approach to elucidate the effect of CH on LM.

## Keywords
Biological effectsCellular kineticsCholesterolInflammationNetwork pharmacologyProteomicspmc-status-qastatus0pmc-status-liveyespmc-status-embargonopmc-status-releasedyespmc-prop-open-accessyespmc-prop-olfnopmc-prop-manuscriptnopmc-prop-legally-suppressednopmc-prop-has-pdfyespmc-prop-has-supplementyespmc-prop-pdf-onlynopmc-prop-suppress-copyrightnopmc-prop-is-real-versionnopmc-prop-is-scanned-articlenopmc-prop-preprintnopmc-prop-in-epmcyes1

## Introduction
In recent years, there has been a growing interest in reevaluating the mechanism of action of materials extensively employed in targeted drug delivery systems (TDDS) [ ]. For instance, polyethylene glycol (PEG), which has been widely studied and applied for over three decades, is regarded as one of the most successful strategies for mitigating immunogenicity, enhancing stability, and prolonging the circulation time of nanocarriers. However, the discovery of the accelerated blood clearance (ABC) phenomenon has prompted extensive research to investigate its effects. It has been observed that repeated injections of straight-chain PEG-modified liposomes trigger ABC and hinder the uptake of liposomes by target cells, thereby impeding nuclear escape within cells for pH-sensitive liposomes [ ]. Consequently, Ibrahim et al. [ ] have implemented measures such as utilizing alternative materials to replace PEG and employing degradable or branched PEG with varying molecular weights to mitigate the occurrence of the ABC phenomenon. However, Liu et al. [ ] discovered that linear PEGylated vectors specifically induce immune memory in Kupffer cells, and the first induction of enhanced memory promotes increased phagocytosis of PEGylated vectors by Kupffer cells in the liver, elucidating the mechanism behind the ABC phenomenon of PEGylated vectors. Boehnke et al. [ ] used the high-throughput screening method nanoPRISM to reveal the interrelationship between characteristics of nanomaterials such as poly(lactic-co-glycolic acid) (PLGA) and liposomes and cellular internalization, pointing out the important influence of formulation factors on delivery efficacy. Zhang et al. [ ] discovered and utilized different nanomaterials to induce autophagy-regulated cell fate for tumor diagnosis and treatment. Shao et al. [ ] reported that polymeric sulfur urea dendrimers have tumor-targeting delivery effects and can exert inherent anticancer activity through non-cytotoxic pathways, avoiding side effects caused by cytotoxins. In conclusion, a more comprehensive understanding of the impact and mechanisms of widely used materials is beneficial for advancing rational design processes for nanocarriers, making personalized nanomedicine possible.
Through comprehensive research on the uptake mechanism of the smallest living organism, “cell”, for TDDS, as well as intracellular dynamics and release kinetics, it is possible to provide a more accurate explanation and prediction of the in vivo TDDS process and its influencing factors. This has significant implications for selecting, developing, and clinically applying TDDS under various diseases, making it a focal point of investigation [ ]. Simultaneously, Xiao et al. [ ] have demonstrated that upon entering a physiological environment, nanomaterials rapidly adsorb biomacromolecules such as proteins to form a nanomaterial-protein corona (PC) system. This phenomenon alters the nanomaterial's size and interface composition while imparting new biological characteristics. These characteristics encompass signal transduction, dynamics, transport, and accumulation toxicity, thereby influencing the biological properties of nanomaterials [ ]. Consequently, gaining an in-depth understanding of carrier surface PCs' characteristics and influences plays a crucial role in regulation in vivo.
Cardiovascular disease (CVD) is a leading global cause of mortality, and endothelial dysfunction occurs early in CVD development and persists throughout its pathological progression. Inflammation is the immune system's response to infection and injury. Failure to resolve inflammation promptly can lead to chronic diseases, which damage host tissues and organ function [ ]. Inflammatory damage serves as the initiating factor and key link for endothelial dysfunction, subsequently causing symptoms such as abnormal vascular tension and thrombus formation, ultimately leading to various CVDs including hypertension, atherosclerosis, coronary heart disease, vascular damage associated with type 2 diabetes mellitus, and even malignant events [ ]. When chronic inflammation necessitates long-term medication use, TDDS that effectively inhibit systemic side effects become particularly important. In recent reports, TDDS have been developed and extensively employed for treating inflammatory diseases while garnering attention. Similarly, conducting TDDS research targeting sites of myocardial and vascular inflammatory damage holds significant importance in enhancing the efficacy of cardiovascular drugs [ ]. LM is a stable dispersed system composed of a lipid oil matrix, encapsulated by a monolayer of phospholipids with an average particle size of around 200 nm, ranging from 100 to 600 nm. Due to its exceptional physicochemical properties and low toxicity, LM is an excellent carrier for lipophilic drugs, particularly anti-inflammatory agents [ ]. Also, owing to their structural resemblance to chylomicrons, LM exhibits a strong affinity for vascular walls (including capillaries), facilitating transportation to sites of vascular damage. They can be internalized by endothelial cells or smooth muscle cells through endocytosis. This passive TDDS, exemplified by propranolol LM, offers significant advantages in selectively accumulating at sites of cardiovascular endothelial injury [ ]. In contemporary pharmaceutical research, cholesterol (CH) plays a pivotal role in self-assembled membrane structures as a membrane stabilizer owing to its exceptional biocompatibility [ ]. CH also exhibits excellent performance as a water/oil (W/O) emulsifier and can serve as a valuable co-emulsifier in O/W emulsions [ ]. Teng et al. [ ] introduced CH into an improved larotaxel LM preparation process to address issues related to chemical instability. They confirmed that hydrophilic groups derived from CH were closely associated with phospholipid molecules, impeding the leakage of larotaxel, and limiting its hydrolysis. This finding demonstrated that incorporating CH into LM was a favorable modification at the formulation level. Nagata et al. [ ] have reported that the inclusion of CH can facilitate cellular uptake of TDDS and enhance their targeting ability towards lesion sites; Li et al. [ ] revealed that reducing the content of CH in TDDS could prevent passive phagocytosis by macrophages during transportation, leading to improved targeting efficiency at specific sites. These findings indicate that high levels of CH exert promoting effects on uptake. However, CH often faces criticism due to its association with hyperlipidemia and other related issues; therefore, exploring alternatives to CH has garnered attention [ ], and until recently, the pivotal role of CH in cellular uptake has been consistently disregarded [ ]. Actually, in normal physiological conditions, CH is the predominant sterol molecule in mammalian organisms. It plays a fundamental constituent of cell membranes and interacts with neighboring lipid molecules to regulate membrane rigidity, fluidity, and permeability. CH can also bind to transmembrane proteins to maintain or alter their conformation [ ]. Also, CH plays a role in covalently modifying the Hedgehog and its downstream protein, Smoothened, to ensure proper embryonic development [ ]. Abnormalities in CH metabolism is closely associated with CVDs. Therefore, maintaining the balance of CH levels within the body is necessary for overall health while ensuring proper distribution within cells remains indispensable for normal bodily functions [ ].
Based on current limitations in fully deciphering the intricate composition of PC, this study initially employed LM containing CH (CH@LM) without incubated PC to investigate the impact of CH on LM (i.e., CH@LM) in repairing lipopolysaccharide (LPS)-induced inflammation damage in myocardial and thoracic aortic vascular tissues and cells. Additionally, we examined the uptake and elimination kinetics, uptake mechanisms, and intracellular lipid droplet accumulation in rat cardiomyocytes (H9c2) and human umbilical vein endothelial cells (HUVECs). Network pharmacology and molecular docking techniques were used to explore potential mechanisms for variations in uptake rates between CH@LM in H9c2 cells and HUVECs. Finally, by focusing on the distribution of CH@LM within inflamed mice and zebrafish, along with its targeting efficiency towards myocardial and thoracic aortic blood vessels, this study investigated the characteristics of PCs influenced by inflammatory factors present in mouse serum (MS). The aim was to elucidate the impact of widely used CH on LM's behavior within organisms and provide insights for optimizing prescription design and clinical application, as illustrated in . 

2

## Materials and methods
2.1

## Materials
Soybean phospholipid (for injection) was purchased from Shanghai Taiwei Pharmaceutical Corp., Ltd. (Shanghai, China). Long-chain triglycerides (LCT) (for injection) were purchased from Zhejiang Tianyushan Medicated Oil Co., Ltd. (Quzhou, China). Medium-chain triglycerides (MCT) were purchased from Liaoning Shinsun Pharmaceutical Co., Ltd. (Tieling, China). CH was purchased from Sinopharm Chemical Reagent Co., Ltd. (Shanghai, China). Glycerol (for injection) was purchased from Zhejiang Suichang Huikang Pharmaceutical Co., Ltd. (Lishui, China). Polyoxyl 15 hydroxystearate (HS15) was purchased from BASF SE (Ludwigshafen, Germany). Sodium oleate was purchased from Shanghai Yuanye Bio-Technology Co., Ltd. (Shanghai, China). LPS was purchased from Sigma-Aldrich (St. Louis, MO, USA). Roswell Park Memorial Institute-1640 (RPMI-1640) medium, Dulbecco's modified Eagle's medium (DMEM) high glucose medium, penicillin-streptomycin (PS), and trypsin were purchased from Gibco (Grand Island, NY, USA). Streptomycin/penicillin and fetal bovine serum (FBS) were purchased from Wisent Biotechnology (Nanjing) Co., Ltd. (Nanjing, China). Coumarin 6 (C6) was purchased from TCI (Shanghai) Development Co., Ltd. (Shanghai, China). Methyl thiazolyl tetrazolium (MTT), 4′,6-diamidino-2-phenylindole (DAPI), phosphate-buffered saline (PBS), and oil red O stain kit (for cell culture) was purchased from Beijing Solarbio Science & Technology Co., Ltd. (Beijing, China). Chlorpromazine, nystatin, methyl-β-cyclodextrin (M-β-CD), amiloride, and N-[5-(4-bromobenzylidene)-4-oxo-4,5-dihydro-1,3-thiazol-2-yl] naphthalene-1-sulfonamide (Pitstop2) were purchased from MedChemExpress (Monmouth Junction, NJ, USA). 1,1′-Dioctadecyl-3,3,3′,3′-tetramethylindotricarbocyanine iodide (Dir) was purchased from PerkinElmer, Inc. (Waltham, MA, USA). Tricaine methanesulfonate was purchased from Shanghai Aladdin Biochemical Technology Co., Ltd. (Shanghai, China). GW9662, rosiglitazone, and methylpiperidino pyrazole (MPP) were purchased from MedChemExpress, Coomassie brilliant blue staining solution was purchased from Beyotime Biotech Inc. (Shanghai, China), peroxisome proliferator activated receptor gamma (PPAR-γ) antibody (60127-1-lg) was purchased from Proteintech Group, Inc. (Wuhan, China), and cell lysate, bicinchoninic acid assay (BCA) kit, and sodium dodecyl sulfate-polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis (SDS-PAGE) gel preparation kit were purchased from Beijing Solarbio Science & Technology Co., Ltd.. Sepharose CL-4B was procured from Beijing Ruida Henghui Science & Technology Development Co., Ltd. (Beijing, China). The remaining reagents and chemicals are all analytical grade (AR).

2.2

## Measurements
LM and CH@LM were prepared by a two-step emulsification method using a high-speed shear (T18 digital ULTRA-TURRAX; IKA Works GmbH & Co., Staufen, Germany) and a high-pressure homogenizer (AH-BASIC; ATS Engineering Inc., Cambridge, Canada), and the absorbance and fluorescence intensity of the samples were recorded by a multimode microplate reader (Varioskan LUX; Thermo Fisher Scientific Inc., Waltham, MA, USA). The hydration diameter and surface ζ potential of the lipid microspheres (LM) were analyzed by a laser particle size analyzer (NanoBrook 173Plus; Brookhaven Instruments Corporation, Billerica, MA, USA). The morphology of LM in the dry state was viewed by transmission electron microscopy (TEM) (Talos L120C G2; Thermo Fisher Scientific Inc., Billerica, MA, USA) at an accelerating voltage of 120 kV. The oil red O staining images were captured by an inverted microscope (XDS-2B; Nikon Corporation, Tokyo, Japan). Hematoxylin-eosin (H&E) staining images of tissues were captured using an upright microscope (DM500; Leica Microsystems GmbH, Wetzlar, Germany). Images of immunohistochemical analysis were captured using a microscope (ECLIPSE E100; Nikon Corporation). Flow cytometry analysis was performed by a NovoCyte flow cytometer (NovoCyte 3008, ACEA Biosciences, Inc., San Diego, CA, USA), and data were collected for 1.0 × 104 gating events for each experiment. Fluorescence images were captured by a fluorescence inverted microscope (Dmi 8; Leica Camera AG, Stuttgart, Germany). Fluorescence images of isolated tissues were captured by IVIS Lumina Series III (PerkinElmer, Inc.) at predetermined time points. The zebrafish images were captured by a research stereomicroscope (Nikon SMZ25; Nikon Corporation). Normal and inflammatory serum were measured using an automated biochemical analyzer system (Chemray 240; Rayto Life and Analytical Sciences Co., Ltd., Guangzhou, China). The absorbance of the fraction was measured using a micro ultraviolet (UV)-visible spectrophotometer (Q5000; Quawell Technology Inc., San Jose, CA, USA). The samples of proteomics were loaded onto an injection column (Acclaim PepMap100, 100 μm × 2 cm, nanoViper C18; Thermo Fisher Scientific Inc.) via an autosampler, and efficient separation was achieved using an analytical column (EASY column, 10 cm × 75 μm, i.d., 3 μm particle size, C18-A2; Thermo Fisher Scientific Inc.).

2.3

## Cell
The H9c2 cells (Procell CL-00089) were purchased from Wuhan Procell Life Science & Technology Co., Ltd. (Wuhan, China). H9c2 cells were cultured in DMEM, supplemented with 10% FBS and 1% PS. HUVECs were obtained from the American Type Culture Collection Center (ATCC) for typical cultures (CRL-1730, ATCC, Manassas, VA, USA). HUVECs were cultured in RPMI-1640 medium, supplemented with 10% FBS and 1% PS. The cells were incubated at 37 °C in a humidified incubator containing 5% CO2.

2.4

## Animal
The Kunming strain mice (male, weighing 20 ± 2 g) were obtained from the Experimental Animal Center of Guizhou Medical University (Guiyang, China) (Animal Experiment License No.: SYXK(Gui)2023-0002). The wild-type Tübingen strain zebrafish was provided by the National and Local Joint Engineering Laboratory for Cellular Engineering Pharmaceutical Technology at Guizhou Medical University (Animal Experiment License No.: SYXK(Gui)2023-0002). All experimental procedures were conducted in strict accordance with the guidelines outlined in the ‘Principles of Laboratory Animal Care’ (National Institutes of Health (NIH)), and approved by the Animal Welfare Committee of Guizhou Medical University (Approval No.: 2100182), adhering to ethical standards for animal experimentation.

2.5

## Preparation of LM and CH@LM
According to the literature and previous laboratory findings [ ], LM and CH@LM were prepared using a two-step emulsification method. In brief, the oil phase of LM or CH@LM consisted of 2.5% (m/v) LCT, 7.5% (m/v) MCT, 0.76% (m/v) soybean phospholipid, and either 0% or 0.38% (m/v) CH dosage, respectively. The oil phase was dissolved through sonication at a temperature of 35 °C. The aqueous phase consisted of 0.60% (m/v) sodium oleate, 0.40% (m/v) HS15, and 2.30% (m/v) glycerol, and Milli-Q water was added to achieve a total volume of 50 mL. The aqueous phase was mixed by magnetic stirring at 35 °C, while the oil phase was gradually injected into it using a 10 mL syringe under an ice bath, followed by high-speed shearing (10,000 rpm) for 7 min to obtain an emulsion. After emulsion preparation, the pH was adjusted to 7.0, followed by high-pressure homogenization for 11 min (pressure: 867 bar) to obtain LM and CH@LM, respectively. The concentration of LM is calculated in terms of the oil phase (i.e., LCT, MCT, and total phospholipid mass concentration), with an LM concentration of 1.076 × 105 μg/mL. C6 or Dir solutions were added to the dissolved oil phase and mixed by rotation, resulting in final concentrations of 20 μg/mL for C6&LM and C6&CH@LM, or 0.125 mg/mL for Dir&LM and Dir&CH@LM.

2.6

## Characterization of the pharmacological properties
2.6.1

## Physical appearance
The LM and CH@LM samples were visually observed for their dispersion characteristics in Milli-Q water under natural lighting conditions to determine the presence of the Tyndall effect under the irradiation of a laser beam (wavelength of 630 ± 10 nm).

2.6.2

## Morphology
The internal morphology of the samples was characterized using TEM. 10 μL of LM and CH@LM solution were dropped on carbon-coated copper grids with a mesh size of 300, respectively. Then, the samples were negatively stained for 10 min. Excess liquid was removed using filter papers, and the grids were air-dried at room temperature before being observed and imaged under a TEM at an accelerating voltage of 120 kV. All samples remained unstained.

2.6.3

## Determination of particle size, polydispersity index (PDI), and surface zeta potential
The particle size, PDI, and surface zeta potential of LM, CH@LM, C6&LM, and C6&CH@LM in water were determined at 25 °C using a Brookhaven laser particle size analyzer (Brookhaven Instruments Corporation).

2.6.4

## In vitro release experiments
The in vitro release behavior of C6 from C6&LM and C6&CH@LM was investigated using a dynamic dialysis method in an isotonic PBS solution (pH 7.4). A total of 1 mL of C6&LM or C6&CH@LM (with a final concentration of 20,000 ng/mL for C6) were loaded into dialysis bags with a molecular weight cut-off (MWCO) of 1 kD, respectively. The dialysis bags were immersed in 80 mL of isotonic PBS and stirred at 37 °C. At predetermined time intervals (1, 2, 4, 6, 8, 12, and 24 h), PBS buffer (1 mL each) was collected and changed periodically. The collected PBS buffer was filtered through a microfiltration membrane with a pore size of 0.22 μm and was analyzed using a multifunctional fluorescence enzyme immunoassay reader to measure the fluorescence intensity (λex = 488 nm, λem = 525 nm). The cumulative in vitro release percentage was calculated to generate in vitro release curves.

2.7

## MTT assay
The harvested H9c2 cells were seeded in a 96-well plate, each well containing a total volume of 200 μL. Once the cell confluency reached 80% after being cultured in an incubator, the original culture medium was discarded. The control group was treated with a blank basic DMEM medium, while the other wells were supplemented with LM, CH@LM, C6&LM, and C6&CH@LM with different concentrations, respectively. The final concentrations ranged from 2.1 to 269 μg/mL (containing 0.0390625%–0.25% sample, n = 3). After being cultured for 24 h, each well was treated with 20 μL of MTT solution (5 mg/mL), followed by discarding the supernatant and adding 150 μL of dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO) per well. The optical density (OD) value at a wavelength of 490 nm was measured using a microplate reader (Varioskan LUX; Thermo Fisher Scientific Inc.), and the cell viability was calculated as follows: cell viability (%) = ODSample/ODControl × 100. The same procedure was performed for the MTT assay on HUVECs.

2.8

## Oil red O staining
H9c2 cells in the logarithmic growth phase were seeded in 12-well plates and cultured until reaching 70% confluency. Subsequently, the original medium was discarded and they were exposed to black basic DMEM medium, LM (low dose (L), 134.5 μg/mL and high dose (H), 269 μg/mL), CH@LM (L, 134.5 μg/mL and H, 269 μg/mL), C6&LM (L, 134.5 μg/mL and H, 269 μg/mL), and C6&CH@LM (L, 134.5 μg/mL and H, 269 μg/mL) solutions for 24 h, respectively. After incubation, the drug-containing medium was removed and washed with PBS. The cells were then fixed with 4% paraformaldehyde for 30 min. Following this, isopropanol was discarded after 5 min and oil red O solution was added for 15 min. Then the stained cells were washed with 60% isopropanol for 1 min, followed by Milli-Q water (RM-220 Laboratory Ultrapure Water Machine, Sichuan Water Treatment Equipment Co., Ltd, Chengdu, China) before being counterstained using a hematoxylin staining solution for 30 s. The staining solution was washed off with PBS before observation under an inverted microscope (XDS-2B, Nikon Corporation) where photographs were taken. The same procedure was applied when performing oil red O staining analysis on HUVECs.

2.9

## Analysis of the influence on pathological lesions
2.9.1

## Immunofluorescence
The H9c2 cells were seeded in a 24-well plate and cultured at 37 °C with 5% CO2 until reaching a confluency of 70%. The experimental groups consisted of a control group (blank basic DMEM medium group), LPS model group, LPS + LM-L group (134.5 μg/mL), LPS + LM-H group (269 μg/mL), LPS + CH@LM-L group (134.5 mg/mL), and LPS + CH@LM-H group (269 mg/mL). After pre-treatment with the respective sample concentrations for 1.5 h, LPS (1 μg/mL) was added to continue the treatment for another 8 h. Subsequently, the culture medium was discarded and the cells were washed twice with PBS. Cells were then fixed with 4% paraformaldehyde for 20 min followed by PBS wash to remove residual liquid. Permeabilization was achieved using 0.2% Triton-100 for 10 min. A blocking solution was applied for 30 min before adding the primary antibody and incubating overnight at 4 °C. After removing the primary antibody and washing twice with PBS, fluorescent secondary antibodies were evenly added to each well in the dark and incubated at room temperature for 1 h. The secondary antibodies were then removed, followed by washing with PBS before being stained with DAPI dye for 15 min. The anti-fading reagent was added to each well before capturing images using a fluorescence microscope in the dark. Vascular cell adhesion molecule 1 (VCAM-1) immunofluorescence images of HUVECs were obtained utilizing the same methodologies.

2.9.2

## H&E
Kunming mice, all male, weighing 20 ± 2 g, were adaptively fed for one week before being randomly divided into eight groups: control group (saline), LPS group, LPS + LM-L and LPS + LM-H groups (dose of 26.9 and 53.8 mg/kg), LPS + CH@LM-L and LPS + CH@LM-H groups (dose of 26.9 and 53.8 mg/kg). The administration volume was 100 μL/20 g (n = 3). The control and LPS group mice received intravenous injections of physiological saline through the tail vein, while the remaining groups were administered with corresponding samples via the tail vein. The administrations were performed once every other day, and 12 h before the third administration. LPS was injected intraperitoneally at a dose of 10 mg/kg. After 12 h, the third administration was performed. Euthanasia of mice was conducted by cervical dislocation, after which the mice's cardiac and thoracic aortas were extracted. These tissues were fixed in 4% paraformaldehyde for 24 h before undergoing dehydration, embedding, sectioning, deparaffinization, and staining with H&E. Following dehydration in ethanol solutions and clearing in xylene solution, a neutral mounting medium was used to seal the sections. The slides were imaged using an upright microscope.

2.9.3

## Immunohistochemistry
Immunohistochemical analysis of VCAM-1 was conducted on the cardiac and thoracic aorta based on Section 2.9.2, and the groups were the same as in Section 2.9.2. Briefly, after extracting the cardiac and thoracic aorta, paraffin sections were dewaxed and rehydrated, followed by antigen retrieval in a microwave for 8 min, followed by cooling down for 8 min and heating for 7 min. Subsequently, endogenous peroxidase activity was blocked and the tissue regions were incubated with diluted primary antibody against VCAM-1 (1:1000) for 1 h and stored at 4 °C overnight. Finally, species-specific secondary antibodies labeled with horseradish peroxidase (HRP) were evenly applied onto the tissue regions and incubated at 25 °C for 50 min. After completing 3,3′-diaminobenzidine (DAB) staining, nuclear counterstaining was performed using hematoxylin before dehydration and mounting treatment. Images were captured using a microscope (ECLIPSE E100, Nikon Corporation).

2.10

## Flow cytometry for cell uptake and uptake inhibition
The harvested H9c2 cells were seeded in 12-well plates and cultured until reaching a cell confluency of 70%. Subsequently, the cells were exposed to LPS (1 μg/mL) for 24 h at 37 °C. After carefully removing the culture solution from the well plates, the cells were washed with PBS. Then, the C6&LM and C6&CH@LM suspension was added at a concentration of 269 μg/mL ([C6] = 50 ng/mL). The LM uptake was monitored at different time points within 24 h to reconstruct the uptake kinetics. To investigate uptake kinetics at different concentrations, C6&LM and C6&CH@LM solutions were added with varying concentrations, and the uptake was monitored after 4 h incubation. Additionally, after a 4-h incubation period, the C6&LM and C6&CH@LM solutions was removed, and the uptake was monitored at various time points over a span of 24 h for the analysis of clearance kinetics. For uptake inhibition experiments, LPS-induced H9c2 cells were pretreated with various uptake inhibitors (50 μM chlorpromazine, 1 μg/mL nystatin, 10 mM sodium azide, 10 μg/mL M-β-CD, 50 μM amiloride, and 30 μM Pitstop 2) and incubated at 37 °C for 30 min. The C6&LM and C6&CH@LM suspension at a concentration of 269 μg/mL to assess uptake after 4 h, respectively. The same procedures as above were performed on HUVECs.
To analyze the uptake of LM and CH@LM using flow cytometry, the supernatant of the medium was discarded, followed by washes with cold PBS. Subsequently, the cells were digested using 0.25% trypsin and harvested in 1.5 mL tubes. After centrifugation at 1,000 g for 5 min, the supernatant was aspirated, and the cells were resuspended in 0.5 mL of PBS. The fluorescence intensity of C6 in the cells was excited with the 488 nm laser and detected with the fluorescein isothiocyanate (FITC) channel. For flow cytometry analysis, cells were separated from debris and artifacts using forward and sideward scatter. Subsequently, this cell population was assessed based on its fluorescent properties, including the percentage of gated fluorescent events and the median fluorescent intensity (MFI).

2.11

## Fluorescence microscopy analysis of cell uptake
The harvested H9c2 cells were seeded in 12-well plates and cultured until reaching a confluency of 70%. Subsequently, the cells were exposed to LPS (1 μg/mL) for 24 h at 37 °C. After that, the medium was discarded and each well was loaded with 1 mL of the following solutions: black basic DMEM medium, LPS + C6&LM, and LPS + C6&CH@LM. After being incubated for 1 or 4 h, the medium was discarded and each well was washed three times with PBS before being fixed with 4% paraformaldehyde for 10 min. Subsequently, the cells were stained by DAPI. After PBS wash, cells were observed under a fluorescence microscope (Dmi 8; Leica Camera AG, Stuttgart, Germany). The same procedure was applied for the analysis of HUVECs.

2.12

## Network pharmacology, molecular docking, and experimental validation
2.12.1

## Potential targets of CH and targets associated with myocarditis and vascular inflammation
Potential targets of CH were collected by searching PubChem, SwissTargetPrediction, and UniProt database. In the DisGeNET database (https://www.disgenet.org/search), target information on myocarditis and vascular inflammation was retrieved using the keywords 'myocarditis' and ‘vascular inflammation’ respectively. The UniProt database was applied to obtain standardized gene names for these targets. After eliminating duplicates, the targets were mapped to human genes utilizing the Search Tool for the Retrieval of Interacting Genes/Proteins (STRING) database (http://string-db.org/). Cytoscape was used to calculate the degree values for CH targets.

2.12.2

## Drawing of Venn diagram and construction of protein-protein interaction (PPI) network
The integration of targets for CH with targets for myocarditis and vascular inflammation is conducted separately, followed by the identification of overlapping targets. Subsequently, an online plotting platform (http://bioinformatics.psb.ugent.be/webtools/Venn/) was used to generate Venn diagrams. Then, the targets were analyzed using the STRING database, and PPI network analysis was conducted with a medium confidence score of 0.400.

2.12.3

## Gene Ontology (GO) enrichment analysis and Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG) pathway enrichment analysis
To comprehensively investigate the biological processes (BP), cellular components (CC), molecular functions (MF), and signaling pathways associated with CH to myocarditis and vascular inflammation, we utilized the R studio tool for GO functional enrichment analysis and KEGG pathway analysis (https://www.kegg.jp/) on the common targets identified from the interaction between CH targets and targets related to myocarditis and vascular inflammation. The enriched targets were ranked based on their level of enrichment.

2.12.4

## The molecular docking of CH with essential core targets
The binding ability between CH and key targets was validated through molecular docking using AutoDock Vina software. Initially, the protein crystal structures of each target were downloaded from the Protein Data Bank (PDB) database (PDB ID: estrogen receptor alpha (ERα) (7uj8), ERβ (2jj3), peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor alpha (PPAR-α) (5hyk), and peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor gamma (PPAR-γ) (1zeo)), and their original ligands were separated from the proteins using pymol. After removing water molecules, they were saved individually. Subsequently, hydrogen and charge were added to each protein structure using AutoDockTool, and they were saved in PDBQ format for subsequent docking analysis. The target receptor underwent preprocessing with a predicted model involving dehydrogenation, amino acid modification, energy optimization, and force field parameter adjustment. Ligand structures obtained from PubChem (https://pubchem.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/) were selected based on low energy conformations for docking with the target component structure. After docking, the affinity (kcal/mol) value after docking represented their binding ability; lower affinity indicated a more stable binding between the ligand and receptor. Finally, the PLIP v2.3.0 online analysis website (https://plip-tool.biotec.tu-dresden.de/plip-web/plip/index) was utilized to analyze the interaction mode of the receptor-ligand complex and export pse format files for visualization analysis by pymol software.

2.12.5

## Experiment validation
HUVECs in the logarithmic growth phase were seeded at a density of 1 × 106 cells per well in cell culture dishes and were incubated at 37 °C with 5% CO2 for 24 h. After removing the original culture medium, the cells were treated with black basic RPMI-1640 medium, LPS, control + GW9662 (20 μM), LPS + rosiglitazone (20 μM), LPS + rosiglitazone + LM (20 μM), LPS + rosiglitazone + CH@LM (20 μM), LPS + CH, LPS + oil phase, LPS + LM, and LPS + CH@LM, respectively. Following treatment, cell lysis buffer was added to lyse the cells, which were centrifuged at 4 °C for 20 min at a speed of 12,000 g. The supernatant protein solution was collected after centrifugation and was quantified using the BCA method. Western blotting was performed to detect the expression levels of PPAR-γ protein in each group.
HUVECs in the logarithmic growth phase were seeded at a density of 2 × 105 cells/well in a six-well plate and incubated at 37 °C with 5% CO2 for 24 h. Subsequently, the original culture medium was discarded, and the cells were subjected to different treatments as per assigned groups (control (black basic RPMI-1640 medium), control + LM + GW9662 (20 μM), control + CH@LM + GW9662 (20 μM), control + LM, control + CH@LM, LPS, LPS + LM, LPS + CH@LM, LPS + LM + rosiglitazone (20 μM), and LPS + CH@LM + rosiglitazone (20 μM)). The six-well plate was incubated for an additional 4 h at 37 °C. After removing the culture medium, the cells were washed thrice with PBS and digested using a trypsin solution containing 0.25% trypsin for 2 min. Subsequently, the cells were resuspended in tubes containing 0.5 mL of PBS and analyzed using a flow cytometer to measure C6 fluorescence intensity within HUVECs. The same methodology was employed to assess C6 fluorescence intensity within H9c2 across all experimental groups (control (black basic RPMI-1640 medium), LPS, LPS + LM, LPS + CH@LM, LPS + CH@LM + MPP (20 μM), and LPS + CH@LM + MPP (20 μM)).

2.13

## The in vivo imaging of small animals
For in vivo experiments, mice were randomly divided into three groups: Dir, Dir&LM, and Dir&CH@LM groups. Following intraperitoneal injection of LPS (10 mg/kg, 12 h) to induce an inflammatory injury model, Dir&LM and Dir&CH@LM (50 μL/20 g) were administered via the tail vein. The same doses of Dir were administered to the mice in the Dir group. Fluorescence imaging (λex = 750 nm; λem = 785 nm) was performed on the dissected cardiac, liver, spleen, lung, kidneys, brain, and thoracic aorta at 1, 6, 12, and 24 h post-administration (n = 3).

2.14

## Zebrafish biodistribution
2.14.1

## The toxicity assay
The toxicity of LM and CH@LM was assessed using stereoscopic microscopy, followed by photography, while simultaneously documenting the survival rate. Briefly, zebrafish larvae with suppressed melanin production at 3 days post-fertilization (dpf) were randomly divided into seven groups (n = 10). The fish were anesthetized using a buffered tricaine solution. Subsequently, they were intravenously injected via the caudal vein plexus with different concentrations of LM and CH@LM (i.e., 5.38, 10.76, and 21.52 mg/mL). The injection volume was set at 2 nL. The control group was also included, receiving an equivalent volume of PBS solution. At 48 h post-injection, the survival rate (%) of zebrafish was determined by calculating as follows: survival rate = (number of surviving fish/total number of fish) × 100%.

2.14.2

## In vivo biodistribution of zebrafish
The zebrafish inflammation model was successfully established by injecting 0.5 mg/mL of LPS into the yolk sac, followed by a 12-h incubation period [ ]. Furthermore, stereoscopic microscopy was employed to observe and document the LPS group after establishing the inflammation model. Subsequently, the zebrafish were divided into two groups (C6&LM and C6&CH@LM, n = 3), and injected with C6&LM and C6&CH@LM solutions (10.76 mg/mL), respectively. At 0.5, 1, 3, 6, 12, 24, and 48 h post-injection, the zebrafish were anesthetized and immobilized on an agarose support for in vivo imaging using stereoscopic fluorescence microscopy. ImageJ software was utilized to perform a quantitative analysis of fluorescence intensity.

2.15

## Preparation and characterization of PC
2.15.1

## Serum collection from mice
The whole blood samples were collected from mice and allowed to stand at room temperature for 1 h. Subsequently, the samples were centrifuged at 3,000 rpm for 10 min to obtain normal MS. Inflammation was induced in mice following the method described in Section 2.13, and inflammatory MS (iMS) was obtained using the same procedure. Levels of total CH (CHO), triglycerides (TG), high-density lipoprotein CH (HDL-C), low-density lipoprotein CH (LDL-C), lactate dehydrogenase (LDH), and creatine kinase (CK) in MS and iMS were measured using an automated biochemical analyzer system (n = 3). The required serum was randomly sampled from pre-collected samples.

2.15.2

## Preparation and separation of PC
To conduct an in vitro analysis of PC, CH@LM was mixed with MS and iMS at a volume ratio of 1:3 and incubated on a temperature-controlled shaker for 1 h (37 °C, 150 rpm) to obtain PC complexes of CH@LM (MS-CH@LM and iMS-CH@LM). MS, iMS, and CH@LM were also included to investigate the adsorption patterns between serum proteins and CH@LM. Size exclusion chromatography used a pre-equilibrated Sepharose CL-4B gel filtration column (30 cm × 10 mm) with PBS (pH 7.4) to separate samples containing PCs. A total elution volume of 15 mL (30 fractions) was collected, and the absorbance at 280 nm was measured using a microUV-visible spectrophotometer (Q5000; Quawell Technology Inc.) to determine the elution curve of proteins. Only the fractions containing the PCs were selected for further experiments and were quantified using a BCA assay kit. These samples were subsequently subjected to electrophoresis on a 12% SDS-PAGE gel (constant voltage, 180 V and duration, 45 min), followed by gel staining with Coomassie blue R-250 for protein bands visualization. Unless otherwise specified, all subsequent experiments were conducted using samples separated via size exclusion chromatography.

2.15.3

## Characterization of PC
For sample preparation, 10 μL of CH@LM, MS-CH@LM, and iMS-CH@LM were deposited onto a carbon-supported copper grid with 300 mesh. Following being stained for 10 min, excess liquid was removed by gently blotting with filter paper and was air-dried at room temperature. Subsequently, the morphological characteristics were examined using a TEM instrument. A Brookhaven laser particle size analyzer (Brookhaven Instruments Corporation) was applied to determine the particle size distribution of each dispersed sample in Millipore water at 25 °C.

2.16

## Analysis of PC composition
2.16.1

## Sample preparation and preprocessing for proteinomics
According to the protocol described in Section 2.15, samples MS, iMS, MS-CH@LM, and iMS-CH@LM (n = 3) were prepared. Following the depletion of high-abundance proteins, protein extraction from the samples was performed. Protein quantification was carried out utilizing the BCA method. Subsequently, an appropriate amount of protein was extracted from each sample and subjected to trypsin digestion employing the filter-aided sample preparation technique [ ]. The resulting peptide segments were desalted using a C18 cartridge and were reconstituted in a solution containing 0.1% formic acid for peptide quantification at OD280.

2.16.2

## Data acquisition by liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry
Each sample was separated using the Easy-nLC system (10 cm × 75 μm, i.d., 3 μm particle size, C18-A2; Thermo Fisher Scientific Inc.) at a nanoliter flow rate. Buffer solution A consisted of a 0.1% formic acid aqueous solution, while buffer solution B was 84% acetonitrile aqueous solution with 0.1% formic acid. The chromatographic column was equilibrated with 95% buffer A, and the samples were loaded onto an injection column via an autosampler. Subsequently, efficient separation was achieved using an analytical column with a 300 nL/min flow rate. After chromatographic separation, the samples were analyzed in positive ionization mode with an ion source voltage set to 1.5 kV. The analyses utilized time-of-flight (TOF) technology within a mass spectrometry scan range of m/z values from 100 to 1700. Data acquisition was performed in parallel accumulation serial fragmentation (PASEF) mode; after acquiring one primary spectrum, ten PASEF scans were conducted for precursor ions within each cycle time of approximately 1.17 s. To avoid redundant scanning of precursor ions in secondary spectra with charge states ranging from 0 to +5 inclusive, a dynamic exclusion time of approximately 24 s was implemented.

2.16.3

## Protein identification and quantitative analysis
The MaxQuant software (version 1.6.14) [ ] was utilized for database searching and quantitative analysis, employing the Swissport_Mus_Musculus_17144_20230103 protein sequence database. Trypsin was selected as the enzyme for digestion, allowing a maximum of two missed cleavage sites. Carbamidomethylation (C) was considered as a fixed modification, while oxidation (M) was a variable modification. During the database search, the first search pre-indexed precursor ion mass tolerance was set to ±20 ppm, the main search precursor ion mass tolerance was set to ±6 ppm, and the tolerance for fragment ions was set to 20 ppm. The reverse database pattern was employed for calculating the false discovery rate (FDR) calculation, which has common contaminant protein sequences. A total FDR requirement of ≤0.01 was applied for peptide and protein identification. Protein quantification relied on unique peptides and razor peptides, with a chromatographic alignment time window of 2 min being established. Relative quantification of identified proteins involved determining peak areas (area), representing the sum of all unique peptide areas mapped to the proteome. Each identified protein and its area value underwent protein mass normalization and represented relative protein abundance using the label-free quantitation (LFQ) method that necessitated a minimum ratio count of 1. Following protein identification in individual samples, a Venn diagram is employed to assess the degree of protein overlap across different sample groups.

2.16.4

## Significantly differential expressed proteins (SDEPs) analysis
For SDEPs screening, a fold change (FC) > 2-fold (indicating upregulation greater than 2-fold or downregulation less than 0.50-fold) and P < 0.05 (Student's t-test) were employed as criteria to determine the number of upregulated and downregulated proteins when comparing different groups. In the comparison between “presence vs. absence”, a filtering criterion was applied, where at least half or more of the samples in one group have non-empty values, while all data in the other group are empty. This selection criterion determines the number of proteins included for volcano plots and clustering analysis by excluding those that do not meet this criterion. These proteins, with the SDEPs mentioned above, underwent additional bioinformatics functional analysis. The results are presented in a bar graph format, with proteins exhibiting FC greater than 10 highlighted using darker colors. Volcano plots are generated based on FC and P-value (Student's t-test) as criteria for comparing protein expression between groups. Quantitative information of the SDEPs is normalized to the (−1,1) range before conducting hierarchical clustering analysis using a complex heat map R package (R version 3.4). Both sample and protein expression levels serve as dimensions for classification using the Euclidean distance algorithm and the average linkage method to generate a hierarchical cluster heatmap for protein clustering analysis. The expression levels of SDEPs across various samples are standardized using the z-score method and depicted in the heatmap using distinct color gradients. In this representation, red denotes upregulated proteins, blue signifies downregulated proteins, while gray areas indicate proteins lacking quantitative information.

2.16.5

## Bioinformatics analysis of SDEPs
The CELLO method (http://cello.life.nctu.edu.tw/) was employed to predict the subcellular localization of SEDPs. This approach utilizes a machine learning technique known as multi-class Support Vector Machine (SVM) to model protein sequence data from publicly available databases that encompass comprehensive information on subcellular localization. Protein domain analysis was conducted using the Pfam database and the InterProScan software package, enabling thorough scans of sequences against the InterPro database for functional characterization of SDEPs sequences and their structural domain annotation in the Pfam database. GO annotation of SDEPs was performed using Blast2GO, which involved sequence alignment (blast), extraction of GO terms (mapping), and GO annotation (annotation). Additionally, InterProScan annotations were incorporated to enhance annotation accuracy. KEGG Automatic Annotation Server (KAAS) software was used for the KEGG pathway annotation of SDEPs. Fisher's exact test was applied to perform enrichment analysis for GO annotation, KEGG pathway, and domain annotation of the SDEPs. Based on data retrieved from STRING databases, a comprehensive search for both direct and indirect interactions among SDEPs was conducted.

2.17

## Statistical analysis
The data were analyzed using GraphPad Prism (version 8.0.2). Quantitative results were presented as means ± standard deviation (SD). Comparisons between two groups were assessed using a two-tailed Student's t-test, and the differences among multiple groups were evaluated using one-way analysis of variance (ANOVA) analysis coupled with Bonferroni's multiple comparisons post hoc analysis. Statistical significance was defined as P < 0.05.

3

## Results and discussion
3.1

## Evaluation of pharmaceutical properties
LM and CH@LM were prepared using a two-step emulsification method involving high-speed shearing and high-pressure homogenization. C6 was added to the oil phase for labeling LM and CH@LM. The staining results suggested that LM, CH@LM, C6&LM, and C6&CH@LM were all of the O/W type, and the addition of C6 did not change the emulsion type ( ). Digital photographs showed that both LM and CH@LM exhibited a light blue milky appearance in the water while maintaining clarity ( A). Under laser irradiation, they displayed the Tyndall effect, indicating successful preparation of the emulsions ( B). TEM observations revealed that both LM and CH@LM had spherical shapes and consistent particle sizes ( C and D). And the results demonstrated uniform particle size distribution for all prepared samples including LM, CH@LM, C6&LM, and C6&CH@LM ( E). The hydration diameters of LM and CH@LM were 150 ± 2.38 nm and 147.73 ± 0.81 nm ( F), the PDI of LM and CH@LM were around 0.2 ( G), and their zeta potentials were −31.2 ± 0.52 mV and −30.85 ± 1.34 mV, respectively ( H). These findings indicated that CH addition did not significantly affect the LM's particle size or surface zeta potential. Then, incorporating fluorescent dyes did not alter the characteristics of the formulation. Dynamic dialysis experiments investigated the release behavior of C6 when loaded into LM in vitro using PBS buffer solution for 36 h. It was found that less than 5% of C6 leaked out during this time ( I). This suggests that both LM and CH@LM effectively encapsulated the lipophilic model drug C6 while maintaining relative stability during circulation in vivo without rapid leakage issues, simultaneously allowing tracking of their behavior inside or outside by utilizing fluorescence from C6 as an indicator. 

3.2

## Evaluation of cellular toxicity
The MTT method was used to analyze the cytotoxicity of LM, CH@LM, C6&LM, and C6&CH@LM at various concentrations. The results demonstrated that neither LM nor CH@LM significantly impeded the cell viability of H9c2 cells at a concentration of 269 μg/mL ( ). This concentration was deemed safe and exhibited favorable biocompatibility. Moreover, all tested formulations (i.e., LM, CH@LM, C6&LM, and C6&CH@LM) did not exhibit noteworthy inhibition or toxicity on HUVECs across different concentrations ( ). Oil red O staining results revealed that there were no discernible alterations in cellular morphology or lipid accumulation observed in both H9c2 cells ( ) and HUVECs ( ) compared to the control group, when CH was introduced to LM at a concentration of 134.5 and 269 μg/mL. These findings suggest that the appropriate inclusion of CH does not exacerbate lipid accumulation induced by LM on cells and validate its suitability for subsequent experiments.

3.3

## Analysis of the influence on pathological lesions
3.3.1

## Analysis of cell immunofluorescence
In this experiment, the expression of VCAM-1 in H9c2 cells and HUVECs was detected using the immunofluorescence method. The results showed that after 8 h of treatment with LPS (1 μg/mL), the fluorescence signal in the LPS group was significantly elevated compared to the control group, indicating a significant upregulation of VCAM-1 expression. However, all pre-treated groups with LM-L, LM-H, CH@LM-L, and CH@LM-H exhibited a noticeable reduction in VCAM-1 fluorescence signal after treatment compared to the LPS group, showing similar values as the control group. This suggested that LM-L, LM-H, CH@LM-L, and CH@LM-H all possess certain alleviating effects on LPS-induced inflammatory damage in cells, with higher doses showing better efficacy than lower doses ( ). This may be attributed to beneficial components present in LM such as phospholipids and unsaturated fatty acids known for their CVD benefits. Additionally, clinically used nutritional lipid emulsions can provide energy for critically ill patients [ ]. The immunofluorescence results for VCAM-1 indicated that LM carriers have anti-inflammatory properties and provide experimental validation for their clinical application as carriers. Furthermore, there is little difference between LM and CH@LM regarding their impact on VCAM-1; even small amounts of CH can promote uptake without affecting efficacy. Thus, low-dose CH@LM can achieve synergistic enhancement while reducing toxicity.

3.3.2

## Histological analysis of mice using H&E staining and immunohistochemistry
Following the prescribed dosing regimen ( ), cardiac and thoracic aorta samples were collected from each group of mice, processed into tissue pathology sections, and subsequently subjected to H&E staining and VCAM-1 immunohistochemical analysis. The results ( ) demonstrated that the myocardial fibers in the control group exhibited a well-organized and tightly packed arrangement, with distinct nuclei. Compared to the control group, the LPS group displayed widened interstitial spaces between myocardial fibers, partial dissolution of myocardial cytoplasm, localized infiltration of inflammatory cells, dilated capillaries, and a significant increase in VCAM-1 positive area under microscopic examination ( ). Due to LPS-induced injury, both LM intervention groups (LM-H) and CH@LM intervention groups (CH@LM-L and CH@LM-H) showed an orderly and compact arrangement of myocardial fibers, LM-L presented widened gaps between myocardial fibers, LM-H and CH@LM-H exhibited dilated capillaries, and no other notable pathological alterations were observed. Compared to LPS treatment alone, VCAM-1 expression was downregulated to a level like that of the control group with slightly enhanced effects observed at higher doses than lower doses. Adding of CH improved the efficacy of LM treatment compared to using different doses of LM alone.
Meanwhile, in the H&E staining of thoracic aorta results ( ), intact blood vessel walls with a wavy pattern were observed in the control group. In contrast, the LPS group exhibited signs of fibrous degeneration in the outer layer of blood vessels, partial thickening and cystic dilation of blood vessel walls, and endothelial damage. Additionally, there was a significant upregulation in VCAM-1 expression. Following interventions on top of LPS-induced injury, minimal differences in improvement were observed among the various treatment groups. Furthermore, VCAM-1 expression was downregulated to levels comparable to those in the control group, with slightly superior effects observed at higher doses compared to lower doses ( ).
Overall, the findings suggested that both LM and CH@LM exhibited a discernible impact on mitigating inflammatory damage, with enhanced treatment efficacy observed in CH addition compared to other groups. This phenomenon may be attributed to the supplementary effect of CH in facilitating fatty acid uptake, enabling the myocardium to utilize lipids as an energy source. As a metabolically demanding organ, the heart relies predominantly on beta-oxidation of free fatty acids (FFAs) for 60%–90% of its energy requirements, while glucose, lactate, ketones, and other sources contribute only 10%–40%. Unlike other cells, cardiac tissue exhibits a limited capacity for endogenous fatty acid synthesis; instead, it primarily depends on myocardial cells actively acquiring circulating FFAs, rendering it a unique “lipid-absorbing cell” [ , ]. Consequently, we also observed superior amelioration in myocardial pathology compared to blood vessels afflicted with inflammatory damage.

3.4

## Differences in cellular uptake and mechanism
The flow cytometry and fluorescence microscopy results demonstrated that both LM and CH@LM were rapidly internalized by inflammatory-damaged H9c2 cells within the initial 2 h. Subsequently, the rate of uptake gradually decelerated between 2 and 8 h. However, the fluorescence intensity remained constant without significant decay up to 24 h. Furthermore, an enhanced cellular uptake was observed when CH was incorporated into CH@LM. Nevertheless, this notable difference only became evident after 24 h ( A). Evaluation of simultaneous uptake at different concentrations revealed concentration-dependent internalization for both LM and CH@LM in a non-linear manner ( B). C6-labeled LM and CH@LM exposed H9c2 cells were utilized to assess fluorescence intensity over distinct time intervals for pharmacokinetic curve fitting as well as calculation of pharmacokinetic parameters. The results ( C and ) demonstrate the area under the curve from time zero to infinity (AUC0−∞) of CH@LM is 1.10 times greater than that of LM alone. The mean retention time (MRT) was 60.07 ± 0.32 h for LM and 56.89 ± 0.29 h for CH@LM. The removal rate of LM was 0.03 ± 0.24 ng/a.u./h, whereas the removal rate was 0.02 ± 0.19 ng/a.u./h for CH@LM. The LM half-life (t1/2) was found in 42.3 ± 0.35 h and 39.29 ± 0.33 h for CH@LM. The findings indicated that CH promotes cell internalization and reduces the MRT and t1/2 of CH@LM compared to LM alone. Upon cellular entry, fluorescence primarily localized in the cytoplasm, which aligns with flow cytometry results and provides visual confirmation ( D). To elucidate the uptake mechanisms of LM and CH@LM, we employed various pathway inhibitors for meticulous investigation. The results indicate the differences in the uptake mechanisms of LM and CH@LM, as depicted in E and . 
In HUVECs subjected to inflammatory damage, both LM and CH@LM exhibited concentration-dependent and time-dependent uptake kinetics like those observed in H9c2 cells ( F). However, in HUVECs, changes in uptake curves were more pronounced at different concentrations ( G); both rates were faster compared to H9c2 cells but consistent with the overall area under curve values observed in HUVECs. Furthermore, the MRT and t1/2 were lower than those observed in HUVECs ( H and ). Similar to H9c2 cells, upon cellular internalization, the fluorescence predominantly localizes within the cytoplasmic compartment of HUVECs. The observed results across various time points and concentrations are in concordance with those obtained through flow cytometry analysis, thereby providing visual confirmation ( I). And the results demonstrate noticeable disparities in the uptake mechanisms of LM and CH@LM among different cell types, indicating that specific cell types influence the cellular uptake pathways of LM and CH@LM, as illustrated in J and . 

3.5

## Elucidate the mechanism underlying the delivery of CH through network pharmacology, molecular docking, and experimental validation
According to the analysis of multiple databases (SwissTargetPrediction and DisGeNET), 55 targets for CH were identified ( ), along with 204 targets related to myocarditis ( ). The Venn diagram analysis revealed 3 common targets (excluding degree = 0) shared between CH and myocarditis (estrogen receptor 1 (ESR1), ESR2, and peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor alpha (PPARA)), indicating the consistent core importance of these targets ( A and B). These shared targets ranked high in CH target networks and myocarditis target networks based on degree values ( ). Additionally, the findings are supported by literature research using keywords such as PPAR-α, ERα, ERβ corresponding to gene names, along with CH-related or myocarditis-related terms, which further validates the credibility of these targets. The GO enrichment results for common targets of CH and myocarditis are depicted in C. The findings suggested that the identified genes primarily participate in transcription coactivator binding, nuclear receptor activity, and nuclear steroid receptor activity. Moreover, the main CC involved protein-DNA complexes, euchromatin regions, and transcription preinitiation complexes. Furthermore, the primary BP response to steroid hormone, intracellular receptor signaling pathway, cellular response to steroid hormone stimulus, hormone-mediated signaling pathway, and steroid hormone-mediated signaling pathway. Using the R studio tool, we performed KEGG pathway enrichment analysis on the three intersecting targets ( D). The results revealed that CH's interaction with myocardial inflammation involves five main pathways, and based on the literature analysis, it is highly likely that CH exerts its anti-inflammatory effects through the estrogen signaling pathway [ ], possibly mediated by ESα, ESβ, and PPAR-α proteins with consistent core degrees. Based on these findings, some scholars propose the deorphanization of estrogen-related receptor alpha (ERRα) and its classification as a CH receptor [ ]. Validated the inhibitory effect of the ER pathway on the binding of transcription factor PPAR-α to downstream regulatory genes, David's team conducted chromatin immunoprecipitation-sequencing (ChIP-seq) experiments, and the results revealed that when only the PPAR-α agonist was added, approximately 17,500 DNA binding sites were regulated by PPAR-α. However, this number decreased by almost half when ERα was simultaneously activated. Coactivation of ERβ further reduced the number of DNA binding sites under PPAR-α regulation to about one-third. KEGG gene enrichment analysis demonstrated that most of the PPAR-α target genes inhibited by activation of the ER are associated with cellular metabolism, particularly fatty acid oxidation metabolism [ ]. This indicates that through inhibition of transcription factor PPAR-α activity on fatty acid oxidation-related genes, the ER pathway indeed plays a significant role in regulating cellular metabolism. Additionally, research suggests that tamoxifen activates PPAR-α via its interaction with ERα [ ]. Conversely, acute inflammation induced the upregulation of ER [ ], which may explain the higher levels of CH in the CH@LM group compared to LM. This activation of ERα could hinder the binding between transcription factor PPAR-α and its downstream regulatory genes, decrease PPAR-α's ability to export CH, and an increase its influx, ultimately leading to increased internalization of CH@LM. 
According to the analysis of multiple databases, 268 targets associated with vascular inflammation were identified. The Venn diagram analysis revealed 4 common targets (excluding degree = 0) shared between CH and vascular inflammation (PPARG, ESR2, ESR1, and PPARD), indicating the consistent core importance of these targets. Cytoscape's degree value analysis indicated that PPARG is the most central gene in terms of core importance followed by ESR2 and ESR1. However, less correlation was observed with PPARD ( E and F). These shared targets ranked high in CH target networks and vascular inflammation target networks based on degree values ( ). Additionally, the involvement of these targets in CH-related or vascular inflammation-related terms is supported by literature research using keywords such as PPAR-γ, ERα, ERβ, and PPAR-δ, which corresponding to gene names. This further validate the credibility of these targets. The GO enrichment results for common targets of CH and vascular inflammation are depicted in G. The findings suggested that the identified CH genes associated with vascular inflammation primarily participate in the functions of nuclear receptor activity and ligand-activated transcription factor activity. The main CC includes euchromatin and the transcription preinitiation complex. The major BP involves steroid hormone-mediated signaling pathway and intracellular receptor signaling pathway. The KEGG pathway enrichment analysis was performed to identify four intersecting targets and visualized the results in H. The analysis revealed six main pathways involved in the interaction between CH and vascular inflammation, which was highly likely that CH exerts its effects on inflammation through the PPAR signaling pathway and estrogen signaling pathway according to published literature, primarily mediated by PPAR-γ protein followed by ESα and ESβ proteins. Under normal conditions, PPAR-γ promoted fatty acid uptake, triglyceride formation, and storage in lipid droplets to enhance insulin sensitivity and glucose metabolism [ ]. When activated, PPAR-γ competitively inhibits inflammatory signal pathways and the generation of inflammatory mediators to suppress inflammatory responses; however, under inflammatory conditions, all PPAR signal pathways exhibit significant inhibitory effects [ ], which may be a major contributing factor to an increased influx of CH@LM containing external CH under vascular inflammation.
The results obtained from molecular docking experiments demonstrate a binding energy lower than −5, indicating a strong binding potential between CH and key core genes PPARA, PPARG, ESR1, and ESR2 ( I–L). The experimental validation results suggest that in the context of LPS-induced inflammatory damage, the expression of PPAR-γ protein is markedly reduced. Subsequent administration of a PPAR-γ agonist ameliorates this downregulation, thereby normalizing the enhanced uptake of CH@LM by HUVECs. Conversely, in the absence of inflammation, treatment with a PPAR-γ inhibitor diminishes PPAR-γ expression, leading to an increased uptake of LM that mirrors the level observed with CH@LM ( M–O). Moreover, in cardiomyocytes H9c2 exposed to LPS-induced inflammation, the uptake of LM is elevated upon the addition of an ERα agonist, aligning with the uptake levels of CH@LM ( P). Collectively, these findings corroborate the network pharmacology predictions regarding the modulatory role of CH on the delivery efficacy of CH@LM, with experimental evidence providing robust support. Additionally, the unchanged protein expression in the presence of an individual oil phase or CH alone suggests that the enhanced uptake attributable to CH is intricately linked to its reliance on LM. And our additional research findings indicated that CH exhibited strong binding ability to both oil phases and emulsifiers within LM [ ], which could explain why it enhances LM uptake by exerting membrane stabilization. The integration of network pharmacology, molecular docking, and experimental validation significantly enhances our understanding of the underlying delivery mechanism of CH.

3.6

## Biodistribution of LM and CH@LM in mice
Dir&LM and Dir&CH@LM were intravenously administered to mice with inflammation via the tail vein. In vivo imaging of small animals was used to observe the biodistribution of LM and CH@LM in LPS-induced inflammatory injury mice, while control group was treated with an equivalent dose of free Dir. The results demonstrated that both LM and CH@LM exhibited significantly enhanced accumulation in the cardiac within 24 h compared to the Dir group, and statistical differences were only observed for LM at 1 h. Moreover, CH@LM displayed stronger fluorescence signals in the cardiac than LM within 6 h, indicating that CH addition augmented the accumulation of LM at sites of cardiac inflammation ( A and B). Furthermore, there was a significant increment in fluorescence signals from CH@LM in the thoracic aorta within 6 h compared to the Dir group. This trend surpassed that observed for LM at 1 h and persisted until 24 h. Additionally, both groups showed peak fluorescence signals in the cardiac and thoracic aorta at 1 h which did not align with cellular uptake peaks, suggesting potential sustained-release effects of both LM and CH@LM at target sites ( B and C). Due to the structural similarity with chylomicrons, LM exhibited a strong affinity towards vascular walls (including capillaries) and could accumulate at sites of cardiac and vascular inflammatory injury while being internalized by cells [ ]. The incorporation of CH further enhanced targeting ability and cellular uptake efficiency. In addition to the cardiac and thoracic aorta, the distribution of LM in other ex vivo organs may be attributed to its passive targeting as a pharmaceutical agent ( D and E). 

3.7

## Biodistribution of LM and CH@LM in zebrafish
This study employed zebrafish as a model organism to investigate the toxicity and biodistribution of LM and CH@LM. To determine appropriate dosages for administration, we initially assessed the toxicity of LM and CH@LM on zebrafish. The results demonstrated that microinjection at mass concentrations of 5.38 and 10.76 mg/mL respectively did not induce significant toxic effects on zebrafish compared to the control group during the entire observation period of 48 h. No apparent morphological abnormalities were observed in zebrafish through observation using stereomicroscope, suggesting that LM and CH@LM exhibit negligible toxicity towards zebrafish ( A). However, both LM and CH@LM respectively displayed mortality rates of 86.67% and 90% at concentrations below 21.52 mg/mL, which significantly differed from those observed in the control group (P < 0.05). This suggested that concentrations lower than 21.52 mg/mL did not exert substantial influence on the survival rate or morphology of zebrafish when exposed to LM or CH@LM; thus, confirming their safety profile for subsequent experiments was selected with a mass concentration of 10.76 mg/mL ( B). To establish a zebrafish inflammation model, we observed and recorded the morphological and behavioral differences between the LPS microinjection group (12 h post-injection at 3 dpf) and the control group. Our results demonstrated that zebrafish larvae injected with 2 nL of LPS (0.5 mg/mL) into the yolk sac exhibited cone bending, cardiac hemorrhage, pericardial swelling, and yolk sac wrinkling under a fluorescence stereomicroscope after 12 h. These findings confirm successful construction of the zebrafish LPS inflammation model ( C). To investigate the biodistribution of LM and CH@LM in zebrafish under LPS-induced inflammatory injury, C6&LM ([LM] = 10.76 mg/mL and [C6] = 2000 ng/mL) and C6&CH@LM ([CH@LM] = 10.76 mg/mL, [CH] = 0.38 mg/mL, and [C6] = 2000 ng/mL) were microinjected into the caudal vein plexus of inflamed zebrafish (3 dpf). Real-time fluorescence images were captured at various time points. The results demonstrated rapid distribution of both LM and CH@LM throughout all body tissues and organs of zebrafish within 0.5 h post-injection, with significant accumulation observed in the brain, liver, lungs, heart, and blood vessels; particularly prominent fluorescence signals were detected in the cardiac region. Then, noticeable fluorescence accumulation was observed at vascular sites marked by red boxes indicating sustained presence of the formulation at sites of rough vascular inflammation injury ( D). At 0.5 and 1 h post-injection, CH@LM exhibited significantly higher overall fluorescence intensity compared to LM (P < 0.05) ( E). Pharmacokinetic parameters calculated based on total fluorescence intensity using ImageJ revealed that AUC0−∞ for CH@LM was 1.15 times higher than that for LM. Moreover, C6&CH@LM showed greater distribution at the site of vascular injury compared to C6&LM within 8 h post-injection with prolonged retention time ( ). This may be attributed to the effect of CH in CH@LM on lipoprotein binding which promotes hepatic uptake of emulsion, leading to increased accumulation at inflammatory injury sites [ ]. However, this result is inconsistent with cellular pharmacokinetics where formulation targeting is rapid but cellular uptake is slower. The CH addition has differential effects on LM at microscopic and macroscopic levels. During the 12-h observation period, a significant decline in fluorescence signal was observed, exhibiting a t1/2 as 12.12 h for LM and 11.76 h for CH@LM. By the end of the 24-h mark, fluorescence signal predominantly accumulated in the urogenital region, while at 48 h, complete clearance of the formulation was essentially achieved. 

3.8

## Four-dimensional (4D) label-free proteomics reveals differences in the adsorption pattern of CH@LM serum proteins during inflammatory conditions
3.8.1

## Formation, separation, and characterization of PC
Due to the ability of nanomaterials to adsorb various biomolecules upon entering the bloodstream, with serum proteins being particularly significant, we selected Kunming strain MS widely employed in pharmacology and toxicology research for conducting in vitro investigations on PCs formation. To ensure the quality of MS and iMS obtained, a fully automated biochemical analyzer was used to detect blood lipids and myocardial enzyme spectrum after obtaining MS. As shown in A, after LPS intervention, serum TG, CHO, LDL-C, and LDH levels significantly increased while HDL-C and CK levels decreased significantly. These results indicate that a successful LPS-induced mouse inflammation injury model has been established and the obtained serum can be used for subsequent experiments. 
The size exclusion chromatography analysis results in B demonstrated the presence of corresponding elution peaks between fractions 10–13 for CH@LM, MS-CH@LM, and iMS-CH@LM, while free MS and iMS do not exhibit any corresponding peaks. This observation suggests that fractions 10–13 represent formulation peaks, with the iMS-CH@LM peak slightly higher than CH@LM and MS-CH@LM. The MS and MS-CH@LM show consistent elution peaks between fractions 14–25, as well as iMS and iMS-CH@LM, indicating that these fractions correspond to elution peaks of free serum. These findings confirm the successful incubation of MS-CH@LM and iMS-CH@LM with distinct separation of formulation peaks from the iMS peak. Fractions 10–13 were collected as MS-CH@LM and iMS-CH@LM for subsequent analysis. Furthermore, a comparison of their Coomassie brilliant blue staining results after elution ( C) indicated that both MS-CH@LM and I iMS-CH@LM still exhibited bands on the gel strip after washing steps compared to CH@LM ( ); this confirms successful incubation and demonstrates the applicability of size exclusion chromatography for separating PCs in this experiment. DLS and TEM analyses revealed an increase in size by approximately 26 nm after co-incubation with MS for CH@LM, while co-incubation with iMS resulted in an increase of around 20 nm in particle size. TEM images displayed the presence of a PC layer on CH@LM, suggesting initial formation of a PC ( D–F).

3.8.2

## Protein identification, quantification, and differential analysis
The results suggested that the secondary spectra, peptides, and protein quantities can be accurately discerned utilizing the 4D-label-free technology ( ). Moreover, all identified peptide segments exhibited concentrations within a mass deviation of 10 ppm, further validating the accuracy and reliability of the identification results ( ). Subsequently, we conducted an in-depth analysis of the spectrum data using the rigorous analytical tool Andromeda and obtained scores for each spectrum. As depicted in , andromeda scores were highly favorable with more than 88.26% of peptide segments scoring above 60 points, and a median score of 111.98 for peptide segments. In qualitative analysis each set of label-free data adhered to screening criteria such as peptide FDR ≤ 0.01 and protein FDR ≤ 0.01, combined with statistical results indicating excellent peptide segment scores, it demonstrates that the MS experimental data possesses high quality.
After conducting a comprehensive plot analysis, we identified 637 proteins that are shared among MS, iMS, MS-CH@LM, and iMS-CH@LM ( A). This observation suggested that most serum proteins remained unchanged after contacting CH@LM. However, certain proteins exhibit differential expression in terms of their presence or absence. These discrepancies may be attributed to the inflammatory microenvironment and the physicochemical properties of the formulation itself. To further investigate intergroup variations, we performed differential screening on our experimental results, focusing specifically on two primary comparisons: iMS-CH@LM vs. iMS and iMS-CH@LM vs. MS-CH@LM. According to the results depicted in B, 214 proteins were significantly upregulated after being treated by CH@LM compared to iMS (FC > 2), including 34 proteins highly significantly upregulated (FC > 10). Conversely, 191 proteins were significantly downregulated in iMS-CH@LM (FC < 0.5), with 70 proteins being highly significantly upregulated (FC < 0.1). Comparing the iMS-CH@LM group with the MS-CH@LM group indicated that under inflammatory conditions and compared to PCs formed under normal circumstances, the composition of the PC layer in iMS-CH@LM showed significant upregulation in 165 proteins (52 proteins being highly significant upregulated) while experiencing downregulation in 122 proteins (10 proteins being highly significant downregulated). The results of cluster analysis ( C and D) demonstrate the adsorption pattern of CH@LM serum proteins during inflammatory conditions as mentioned above, revealing high within-group similarity in terms of data patterns while indicating low between-group similarity, thus effectively differentiating samples from distinct groups. By employing an FC > 2 and a P < 0.05 (Student's t-test) as screening criteria, SDEPs were able to effectively discriminate between comparison groups. This suggests that differential expression screening can accurately reflect the impact of biological treatments on samples. Moreover, functional analysis based on differential analysis outcomes can unveil the influence of the inflammatory microenvironment and formulation properties on protein adsorption patterns in serum samples. 
By integrating the volcano plots ( E and F), a clear distribution of significant differences between the comparison groups can be observed. In contrast to the iMS-CH@LM vs. iMS group, the iMS-CH@LM vs. MS-CH@LM group demonstrates a higher abundance of significantly upregulated proteins and relatively fewer downregulated proteins. These findings suggest that inflammation is primarily responsible for differential PCs formed under inflammatory conditions compared to normal conditions, as alterations in the physiological environment can influence CH@LM's serum protein adsorption pattern. According to the comparison group iMS-CH@LM vs. iMS, it is evident that CH@LM exhibits a significant reduction in immunoglobulin adsorption under inflammatory conditions. Further analysis with MS-CH@LM reveals a substantial increase in cluster of differentiation 14 (CD14) and serum amyloid protein adsorption, while serine protease inhibitor adsorption decreases significantly. Consequently, nanocarriers enriched with opsonins tend to accumulate in the liver and spleen, whereas carriers rich in dysopsonins typically exhibit prolonged circulation time. Current research endeavored to selectively retain proteins that promote extended blood circulation of carriers by constructing dysopsonin-rich PCs [ ]. However, solely relying on partial upregulation/downregulation expression profiles fails to comprehensively elucidate CH@LM's specific mechanisms underlying its targeting ability, increased circulation time, enhanced uptake, etc., thereby impeding a comprehensive description of CH@LM's characteristic adsorption pattern. For that, PPI clustering analysis graphs were generated to visually represent the differential upregulation and downregulation of proteins in each comparison group. Our analysis based on node data and line thickness revealed that the iMS-CH@LM group exhibited a significant decrease in serine protease inhibitor superfamily proteins ( G) compared to the iMS group, while there was a notable increase in apolipoproteins such as apolipoprotein A-V (Apoa5, FC > 10) ( H). These findings suggest that CH@LM reduces the adsorption of serine protease inhibitor superfamily proteins in an inflammatory environment and significantly enhances the adsorption of apolipoproteins. When comparing the iMS-CH@LM vs. MS-CH@LM groups, it was observed that compared to the MS-CH@LM group, there was a considerable downregulation of serine protease inhibitor superfamily proteins ( I) and a substantial upregulation of proteasome-related proteins ( J) in the iMS-CH@LM group. The combination of these two comparisons (iMS-CH@LM vs. MS-CH@LM and iMS-CH@LM vs. iMS) suggests that the formulation characteristics of CH@LM itself exert an influence on protein adsorption. CH@LM possesses a structure like lipoproteins, primarily composed of lipids and CH, which effectively facilitates apolipoprotein adsorption, providing insights for its development as a biomimetic lipoprotein. Lipoprotein adsorption aids in enriching formulations at sites of inflammation injury and prolongs their circulation time [ ]. This elucidated that LM and CH@LM were enriched within cardiovascular systems during studies on mice and zebrafish distribution; furthermore, it may also contribute to the long-term retention of LM and CH@LM in vivo. To an extent, these proteomic results could explain why CH@LM exhibits superior targeting ability and uptake efficiency under inflammatory conditions.

3.8.3

## Bioinformatics analysis
To comprehensively explore the functions of SDEPs, we conducted subcellular localization, domain enrichment, GO enrichment, and KEGG enrichment analyses. Our analysis of protein distribution in various organelles revealed that in the iMS-CH@LM vs. iMS comparison group ( ), SDEPs were mainly localized in the extracellular matrix, cytoplasm, and nucleus. They were also distributed to a lesser extent in the plasma membrane and mitochondria with smaller proportions found in lysosomes, endoplasmic reticulum, Golgi apparatus, cellular skeleton, as well as peroxisomes. In contrast, in the iMS-CH@LM vs. MS-CH@LM comparison group ( ), SDEPs were primarily localized in the cytoplasm, extracellular matrix, and nucleus while being minimally located in lysosomes, endoplasmic reticulum, Golgi apparatus, and cellular skeleton but also distributed to a lesser extent in mitochondria and plasma membrane. Therefore, the functional locations where SDEPs exert their effects are generally consistent between the iMS-CH@LM vs. iMS and iMS-CH@LM vs. MS-CH@LM comparison groups.
Based on the enrichment analysis of proteins and significant differences observed in , the main SDEPs in the iMS-CH@LM vs. iMS treated group belong to the Ras family, lipocalin/cytosolic fatty-acid binding protein family, and serine protease inhibitor. In contrast, the main SDEPs in the iMS-CH@LM vs. MS-CH@LM treated group consist of the calponin homology domain, fibrinogen beta and gamma chains' C-terminal globular domain, and PCI domain, which represented a collection of related helical hairpin structural domains with a “winged helix” subdomain at its C terminus responsible for forming multi-subunit complexes with other PCI domains. Notably, distinct differences were observed in the structural domains of SDEPs between the iMS-CH@LM vs. iMS and iMS-CH@LM vs. MS-CH@LM comparison groups. These findings align with our PPI interaction clustering analysis results, further validating their high credibility.
GO enrichment analysis revealed that alterations in the physiological environment can influence the protein composition of the PC, as well as the potential MF, BP, and CC, thereby exerting influence on the biological characteristics of formulations ( ).
The KEGG enrichment analysis revealed significant enrichment of pathways involving downregulated and upregulated SDEPs in the iMS-CH@LM vs. iMS and iMS-CH@LM vs. MS-CH@LM comparison groups. Following a comprehensive analysis of pathway information and literature review, we specifically focused on pathways that are more closely linked to cardiovascular inflammation injury. In the iMS-CH@LM vs. iMS comparison group, it was observed that iMS-CH@LM exhibited significant adsorption of proteins involved in CH metabolism, while downregulating proteins related to renin-angiotensin system and the Janus kinase-signal transducer and activator of transcription (JAK-STAT) pathway ( A). In iMS-CH@LM vs. MS-CH@LM comparison group, iMS-CH@LM exhibited significant adsorption of proteins related to interleukin-17 (IL-17) signaling pathway, tricarboxylic acid cycle (TCA) cycle, and mitophagy-animal pathway, while downregulating the inflammatory mediator regulation of transient receptor potential (TRP) channels pathway commonly associated with pathological features of inflammation-induced damage caused by TRP channels ( B). To elucidate the pathways associated with the relevant proteins, we have generated protein-pathway diagrams ( C–F). Furthermore, specific enrichment of certain types of upregulated proteins has been investigated in the field of PC research, making them potential targets for active targeting modification of formulations [ ]. Therefore, we analyzed significantly enriched KEGG pathways of upregulated and downregulated proteins but chose to focus only on those most relevant to our research, aiming to provide valuable references for future studies. The key KEGG diagrams illustrating the CH metabolism pathway and IL-17 signaling pathway are presented in G and H respectively [ , , ]. Our findings demonstrate that iMS-CH@LM exhibits significant adsorption of proteins involved in CH metabolism, particularly those belonging to the apolipoprotein family such as Apoa5. This observation is consistent with our PPI clustering analysis results suggesting that PCs predominantly bind apolipoprotein family proteins under inflammatory conditions. Moreover, while the PC formed under inflammatory conditions adsorbs inflammation-associated proteins compared to that formed under normal serum incubation, it significantly upregulates proteins involved in promoting inflammation-induced damage repair compared to iMS alone. These findings may provide a plausible explanation for the effect of moderate addition of CH on pathological lesions, cell uptake, and distribution of LM at sites of cardiovascular inflammatory injury. 

4

## Conclusion
In this study, we re-evaluated the pharmaceutical properties and biological effects of CH, a commonly used membrane stabilizer in pharmacology, using LM as a model. Our results demonstrated that CH addition enhanced the cellular uptake efficiency of LM in H9c2 cells and HUVECs under inflammatory conditions, thereby improving related pathological conditions. The moderate use of combined CH with the oil phase exhibited excellent safety performance in pharmaceutical applications. Different cell types influenced the uptake pattern; overall, results showed rapid targeting and slow uptake. Notably, CH@LM displayed more pronounced effects, suggesting its potential as a targeted sustained-release drug delivery carrier for chronic diseases. Network pharmacology and molecular docking results revealed that the addition of CH may regulate PPAR-γ and ER-α expression to affect LM uptake in inflamed H9c2 cells and HUVECs respectively; however, this biological effect depended on the overall formulation of LM to exert its promoting uptake function. The findings from the study investigating the biological distribution of CH@LM in mice with inflammatory injury and model organism zebrafish suggest that CH addition can enhance LM enrichment at sites of cardiovascular inflammation. Following confirmation of the pharmacological significance of CH supplementation, 4D label-free proteomics technology was employed to elucidate the adsorption mode characteristics of CH@LM in serum proteins (iMS) obtained from inflamed mice. The results demonstrate that under inflammatory conditions, CH@LM significantly adsorbs apolipoprotein family members such as Apoa5 involved in CH metabolism, thereby prolonging their circulation time in vivo and exhibiting dynamic behavior characterized by rapid targeting and slow uptake. This phenomenon enhances LM's distribution at sites of cardiovascular inflammation and mitigates inflammatory damage. Notably, the changes in the physiological environment can influence the formulation's biological behavior. The results further elucidate potential reasons for the enrichment and enhanced uptake ability of CH@LM at sites of cardiovascular inflammation.
In summary, this study elucidated the mechanism of action and potential clinical application value of the CH in DDS through a systematic experimental design and comprehensive analysis. By employing techniques such as zebrafish models, network pharmacology, molecular docking, and proteomics to assess the effect of CH on the distribution, uptake, and PC of LM at sites of cardiovascular inflammation injury, our findings have significantly enhanced our understanding of the biological effects of CH and LM. This provides valuable experimental references for exploring CH's prescription performance, optimizing LM formulation design, and promoting their rational clinical application. Techniques like network pharmacology and molecular docking showed great importance in investigating the impact of incorporating pharmaceutical excipient CH on the delivery efficiency of nano-delivery system LM in cardiac and vascular inflammation. Furthermore, it offers a novel strategy for studying the biological effects of formulations. The utilization of network pharmacology and molecular docking technology has significantly contributed to further research on the potential mechanisms underlying LM intake in CH. However, conducting additional studies that build upon this foundation could yield more significant findings. Analyzing the composition data of PCs may provide opportunities for investigating targeted mechanisms related to vascular inflammation biomarkers and optimizing prescriptions in future research endeavors. Moreover, exploring how proteins are absorbed by CH@LM during inflammatory states could inform the design and application of LM while uncovering new prospects.

## CRediT authorship contribution statement
Lingyan Li: Writing – review & editing, Writing – original draft, Visualization, Software, Methodology, Investigation, Formal analysis, Data curation, Conceptualization. Xingjie Wu: Writing – review & editing, Methodology, Formal analysis. Qianqian Guo: Resources, Methodology. Yu'e Wang: Methodology. Zhiyong He: Methodology, Funding acquisition. Guangqiong Zhang: Methodology. Shaobo Liu: Methodology. Liping Shu: Methodology. Babu Gajendran: Writing – review & editing. Ying Chen: Writing – review & editing, Funding acquisition. Xiangchun Shen: Resources, Funding acquisition. Ling Tao: Writing – review & editing, Supervision, Project administration, Funding acquisition, Conceptualization.

## Declaration of competing interest
The authors declare that there are no conflicts of interest.

 Appendix A

## Supplementary data
The following are the Supplementary data to this article:

## Multimedia component 1
Multimedia component 1

## Multimedia component 2
Multimedia component 2

## Multimedia component 3
Multimedia component 3 

## Acknowledgments
This study was supported by the 10.13039/501100001809National Natural Science Foundation of China (Grant Nos.: 82260827 and U1812403-4-4), the Guizhou Provincial Science and Technology Projects, China (Grant Nos.: [2020]1Z069, ZK [2022]380, and ZK [2023]303), the Cultivation Project of National Natural Science Foundation of Guizhou Medical University, China (Grant No.: 20NSP050), the Guizhou Provincial Scientific and Technologic Innovation Base, China (Grant No.: [2023]003), the High-level Innovation Talents of Guizhou Province, China (Grant No.: GCC[2023]048), and the Startup Fund for High-Level Talent Research at Guizhou Medical University, China (Grant No.: 26242020107). We thank the National Joint Local Engineering Laboratory of Guizhou Medical University for cell engineering and biomedicine techniques as well as Guizhou Province Key Laboratory of Regenerative Medicine of Guizhou Medical University and Key Laboratory of Adult Stem Cell Translational Research of Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences for providing the support of the zebrafish experiment platform. and Graphical abstract were drawn by using Figdraw (https://www.figdraw.com).
Peer review under responsibility of Xi'an Jiaotong University.
Appendix ASupplementary data to this article can be found online at https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jpha.2024.101182.