pmcNeurotherapeuticsNeurotherapeutics1472neurotherNeurotherapeutics1933-72131878-7479ElsevierPMC12418425PMC12418425.112418425124184254030716610.1016/j.neurot.2025.e00600S1878-7479(25)00078-9e006001Original ArticleNovel chlorine-containing curcumin analogue CAK06 promotes neuroprotection and rapid antidepressant through Nrf2-induced anti-inflammatory and antioxidant effects
ChenTao YinSuyu YueRuxu PiChao ZuoYing JiangYongqiang ZhengWenwu JiangJun YangYan ChuShifeng LiuKezhikingzliu@163.com WeiYumengweiyumeng@swmu.edu.cn ZhaoLingzhaoling@swmu.edu.cn aKey Laboratory of Medical Electrophysiology, Ministry of Education, School of Pharmacy, Southwest Medical University, Luzhou, 646000, PR ChinabLuzhou Key Laboratory of Traditional Chinese Medicine for Chronic Diseases Jointly Built by Sichuan and Chongqing, The Affiliated Traditional Chinese Medicine Hospital, Southwest Medical University, Luzhou, Sichuan, 646000, PR ChinacCentral Nervous System Drug Key Laboratory of Sichuan Province, School of Pharmacy, Southwest Medical University, Luzhou, Sichuan, 646000, PR ChinadDepartment of Psychiatry, Fundamental and Clinical Research on Mental Disorders Key Laboratory of Luzhou, The Affiliated Hospital, Southwest Medical University, Luzhou, Sichuan, 646000, PR ChinaePharmacy Department, Chongqing Emergency Medical Center, Chongqing University Central Hospital, Chongqing 400014, ChinafDepartment of Comprehensive Medicine, The Affiliated Traditional Chinese Medicine Hospital, Southwest Medical University, Luzhou, Sichuan, 646000, PR ChinagDepartment of Cardiology, The Affiliated Hospital of Southwest Medical University, Luzhou, Sichuan, 646000, ChinahDepartment of Thyroid Surgery, The Affiliated Hospital, Southwest Medical University, Luzhou, Sichuan, 646000, PR ChinaiState Key Laboratory of Bioactive Substances and Functions of Natural Medicines, Institute of Materia Medica & Neuroscience Center, Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences and Peking Union Medical College, Beijing, 100050, China⁎Corresponding authors. kingzliu@163.comweiyumeng@swmu.edu.cnzhaoling@swmu.edu.cn1These authors contributed equally to this work.
720252942025224496556e0060016220257420251842025290420251009202514032026© 2025 The Author(s)2025https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/).Currently, conventional antidepressants are often limited by poor efficacy and delayed onset, and there is an urgent need for the development of rapid acting antidepressant alternatives. The aim of this study was to develop novel antidepressants with a rapid onset of action by inhibiting inflammation and oxidative stress. A series of chlorine-containing curcumin analogues were designed and synthesized. Among them, compound CAK06 exhibited the highest potency and most robust antidepressant activity, as demonstrated through ABTS free radical ion scavenging assays, relative proliferation rate measurements, and both hydrogen peroxide and corticosterone injury models. In the lipopolysaccharide-induced BV2 cell stress model, treatment with CAK06 resulted in a 69 ​% decrease in nitric oxide levels and a 52 ​% reduction in the fluorescence intensity of reactive oxygen species compared to the model group. qRT-PCR results showed that CAK06 upregulated the expression of anti-inflammatory and antioxidant genes while downregulating the expression of pro-inflammatory genes. In the CUMS depression model, CAK06 exerted rapid antidepressant effects after 14 days of oral administration. Notably, after 28 days, CAK06 produced a more pronounced improvement in depression-like behaviors compared to the widely used antidepressant fluoxetine. Mechanistically, molecular docking, Western blot, and Elisa results indicated that CAK06 may alleviate oxidative stress, inflammatory responses, and enhance synaptic plasticity in CUMS mice via the Nrf2-HO-1/BDNF-TrkB pathway. These results suggest that the new compound CAK06 exhibits rapid antidepressant effects, positioning it as a promising novel antidepressant candidate.

## Graphical abstract
 

## Keywords
DepressionNeuroprotectionOxidative stressCurcumin analoguespmc-status-qastatus0pmc-status-liveyespmc-status-embargonopmc-status-releasedyespmc-prop-open-accessyespmc-prop-olfnopmc-prop-manuscriptnopmc-prop-legally-suppressednopmc-prop-has-pdfyespmc-prop-has-supplementnopmc-prop-pdf-onlynopmc-prop-suppress-copyrightnopmc-prop-is-real-versionnopmc-prop-is-scanned-articlenopmc-prop-preprintnopmc-prop-in-epmcyespmc-license-refCC BY-NC-ND

## Abbreviations
ABTS2, 2′-azino-bis(3-ethylbenzothiazoline-6-sulfonic acid)
ALPalkaline phosphatase
ALTalanine aminotransferase
ASTaspartate aminotransferase
CORTcorticosterone
CUcurcumin
CUMSchronic unpredictable mild stress
Elisaenzyme-linked immunosorbent assays
Flufluoxetine
FSTforced swim test
HPLChigh performance lipid chromatograph
IC50half maximal inhibitory concentration
MCACsMonocarbonyl CU analogues
MTTmonotetrazolium
OFTopen field test
PBSphosphate buffer saline
RSDrelative standard deviation

## Introduction
Major depressive disorder (MDD) is a common mental disorder [ , ]. According to the latest Global Burden of Disease report [ ], MDD ranked as the second leading cause of years lived with disability (YLDs) worldwide between 2010 and 2021. Moreover, aside from anxiety disorders and diabetes, MDD has experienced the largest increase in age-standardized disability-adjusted life years (DALY) rates, placing a significant burden on families and society. Currently, the most widely used prescription drugs for treating depression are based on the monoaminergic hypothesis. However, these therapies are characterized by delayed onset of action (typically requiring 4–8 weeks of continuous administration) and limited efficacy, with response rates reported in only 30–40 ​% of patients. Additionally, long-term use can cause gastrointestinal, cardiovascular, and other side effects [ , , ]. Therefore, it is particularly necessary to develop a new antidepressant drug with high safety and high therapeutic responses.
MDD is pathophysiologically associated with brain dysfunction, disrupted neuronal plasticity, neuronal atrophy, and dendritic spine pruning, primarily due to oxidative stress (OS) [ , ]. The hypothesis that increased production of reactive oxygen species (ROS) and depletion of antioxidant defenses lead to structural changes in the brain is known as the “oxidative stress hypothesis of depressive disorders” [ , ]. OS in the brain regulates neuronal and extra-neuronal signaling; excessive accumulation of ROS can cause neuroinflammation, dendritic spine loss, and cell death. ROS generated by inflammatory cells initiate intracellular signaling that leads to the expression of pro-inflammatory cytokines and chemokines [ , ]. The antioxidant system comprises many enzymes, such as catalase (CAT), superoxide dismutase (SOD), glutathione (GSH), and the lipid peroxidation product malondialdehyde (MDA), which play key roles in regulating oxidative stress [ ]. Antioxidant production is mainly controlled by the nuclear transcription factor erythroid 2–related factor 2 (Nrf2), which is typically anchored in the cytoplasm by Kelch-like ECH-associated protein 1 (Keap1). In response to oxidative stress stimuli, Nrf2 detaches from Keap1 and translocates to the nucleus, modulates the cellular redox milieu including heme oxygenase-1 (HO-1), quinone oxidoreductase 1 (NQO-1), and superoxide dismutase 2 (SOD-2). By altering the cellular redox state and regulating the activity of transcription factors, kinases, and phosphatases involved in neural development and synaptic plasticity—including NMDA receptor subunits—Nrf2 activation ultimately leads to the relief of depressive symptoms [ , , , , ].
Natural polyphenols are noteworthy due to their pleiotropic effects, favorable safety profiles, significant anti-inflammatory and antioxidant properties, and ability to modulate synaptic plasticity [ ]. Over the past 10 years, our team has focused on researching potent analogues of curcumin (CU) for antidepressant treatment [ , , ]. CU, the principal bioactive polyphenol component of turmeric, possesses anti-inflammatory, antioxidant, synaptic plasticity modulation, and neuroprotective properties. Several randomized clinical trials have confirmed the anti-anxiety and antidepressant effects of CU [ , ]. The therapeutic effects of CU may involve the role of brain-derived neurotrophic factor (BDNF) in activating tropomyosin receptor kinase B (TrkB) [ , ]. Following CU treatment, the pathologically elevated levels of corticosterone (CORT) and the downregulated of BDNF, serotonin (5-HT), and other hippocampal markers observed in animals with depression-like behaviors were effectively restored [ ]. CU prevents oxidative damage by inducing Nrf2-mediated cellular defense mechanisms, producing protective responses against both exogenous and endogenous damage [ , ]. Genetic depletion of Nrf2 in the brain result in sexually dimorphic impairments of hippocampal BDNF expression, altered emotional behavior, and dysfunction of the hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal (HPA) axis [ ]. Additionally, Nrf2 deficiency induces iron overload by upregulating transferrin receptor (TfR) and downregulating ferritin light chain (FtL), leading to BDNF-mediated synaptic damage in the hippocampus [ ]. CU can covalent modification of Keap1 through Michael addition involving the ketene function or activate Nrf2 after oxidation to electrophilic quinone [ ]. It induces Nrf2-dependent expression of phase II and antioxidant enzymes—such as HO-1, glutathione S-transferase, and aldose reductase—by regulating Nrf2 nuclear translocation and overexpression, and augmentation the BDNF-TrkB signaling pathway, ultimately improving depression-like behavior [ , , ].
However, due to the instability, insolubility, and poor bioavailability of CU, pharmaceutical development strategies have focused to address these issues through the development of CU analogues [ ]. Monocarbonyl CU analogues (MCACs) exhibit superior chemical stability and pharmacokinetic profiles, and the phenolic hydroxyl group on the benzene ring is crucial for their scavenging activity [ ]. The instability of CU is attributed to the β-diketone moiety in its structure; both the β-diketone group and the two methoxy groups on the benzene ring are not only responsible for its molecular pharmacological activity but are also important sites for structural modification [ ]. Our previous research has confirmed that compounds in which the β-diketone side chain of CU is incorporating a piperidinone moiety show stronger antioxidant and antidepressant potential [ ]. However, the pharmacological properties of these compounds still need improvement, and the onset time of the drug needs to be shortened. Therefore, it is necessary to systematic expansion the library of new CU analogues to enhance our understanding of the structure–activity relationship (SAR) of CU's antidepressant effects and ultimately find safe, effective, and rapidly acting antidepressant drugs.
In this study, we designed a series of novel chlorine-containing CU analogues. Among these compounds, CAK06 exhibited the most pharmacologically efficacious and superior antioxidant capacity and neuroprotective effects, as demonstrated by ABTS free radical scavenging assays, relative proliferation rate measurements, and both hydrogen peroxide and corticosterone-induced injury models. To preliminarily explore the mechanism of CAK06's antidepressant actions, we employed qRT-PCR, Elisa, Western blotting, fluorescence staining, and molecular docking techniques.

## Material and Methods

## Materials
All compounds are >98 ​% pure by HPLC analysis. Reagents and solvents were purchased from commercial sources without further purification. The reaction process was monitored by thin layer chromatography (TLC) on silica gel plates and observed by UV light. The final compounds were purified by recrystallization. Chemical purity analysis was performed by high performance liquid chromatography (HPLC) with mobile phase A (MeCN) and mobile phase B (H2O ​+ ​0.16 ​% Et3N) as mobile phases (35 ​% mobile phase A) at a flow rate of 1.0 ​mL/min for 10 ​min on a C18 column. Nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) spectra were obtained by a 400 ​MHz Bruker NMR spectrometer. All compounds were also analyzed by high-resolution precision mass spectrometry (HRMS) using a mass spectrometer equipped with an electrospray ionization (ESI) detector. The following is the serial number and manufacturer of the kit used: alanine aminotransferase (ALT) kit, changchun huili biotech co.,ltd, C073-c; aspartate aminotransferase (AST) kit, changchun huili biotech co.,ltd, C072-c; alkaline phosphatase (ALP) kit, changchun huili biotech co.,ltd, C003-f; MDA kit, nanjing jiancheng bioengineering institute, A003-1-2; total antioxidant capacity (T-AOC) kit, nanjing jiancheng bioengineering institute, A015-2-1; total superoxide dismutase (T-SOD) kit, nanjing jiancheng bioengineering institute, A001-1-1; glutathione peroxidase (GSH-PX) kit, nanjing jiancheng bioengineering institute, A005-1-2; Mouse IL-1 Elisa kit, bioswamp, MU30369; NO kit, Beyotime, S0021S; ROS kit, Beyotime, S0033S.

## Antioxidant activity test
The antioxidant activity of CU analogues was determined by ABTS method. Gradient concentrations of compound solutions were configured, while gradient concentrations of ascorbic acid (Vit C) and CU solutions were configured as positive control. Take 450 ​μL of ABTS working solution in a 1.5 ​mL EP tube, add 150 ​μL of the gradient solution of each group of drugs, and react for 20 ​min away from light, then take 150 ​μL of the reaction solution in a 96-well plate, and measure the absorbance with an enzyme meter, and set up three replicate wells for each concentration, with an equal volume of anhydrous ethanol for the blank control group.

## Cytotoxicity evaluation
The toxicity of each drug to PC12, BV2 and L02 ​cells was determined by MTT colorimetric assay. Cells were resuscitated with DMEM high-sucrose medium containing 10 ​% fetal bovine serum and cultured in a 37 ​°C 5 ​% CO2 cell incubator, and when they grew to logarithmic growth stage, they were inoculated into 96-well plates and cultured in adherence for 24 ​h. 100 ​μL of the drug solution of each compound at the corresponding gradient concentration (60, 30, 15, 7.5, 3.75 ​μM) was added to each well, and then cultured in the incubator for 24 or 48 ​h. After the cells were cultured, they were treated with DMSO and DMSO. MTT 20 ​μL was added to continue incubation for 4 ​h. The upper solution was discarded, DMSO 150 ​μL was added to dissolve the blue-violet crystals, and the cell viability was detected by enzyme labeling instrument after shaking for 10 ​min and graded according to the cytotoxicity criteria. The relevant calculation formula was as follows:Cellproliferationrate(%)=[Aexperimentalgroup-AblankgroupAcontrolgroup-Ablankgroup]×100%

## H2O2-induced oxidative damage model of PC12 ​cells
Take the logarithmic growth stage cells, inoculated in 96-well plate, cells adhered to the wall growth for 24 ​h, set up blank control group, H2O2 model group, CAK01 group, CAK02 group, CAK03 group, CAK04 group, CAK05 group, CAK06 group, CAK07 group, positive drug fluoxetine (Flu) control group and CU group. 100 ​μL of blank complete medium was added to the blank control group, 100 ​μL of complete medium containing H2O2 was added to the H2O2 model group, and complete medium with concentrations of 3.75, 7.5, 15, 30, and 60 ​μM drug mixed with H2O2 was added to the drug administration group. After incubation in the incubator for 24 ​h, the cells were treated and the relative proliferation rate was calculated in the manner under 2.3.

## CORT-induced PC12 ​cells injury model
Take the logarithmic growth stage cells, inoculated in 96-well plate, cells adhering to the wall growth for 24 ​h, set up blank control group, CORT model group, CAK01 group, CAK02 group, CAK03 group, CAK04 group, CAK05 group, CAK06 group, CAK07 group, positive drug Flu control group and CU group. 100 ​μL of blank complete medium was added to the blank control group, 100 ​μL of complete medium containing CORT was added to the CORT model group, and complete medium with concentrations of 3.75, 7.5, 15, 30, and 60 ​μM drug mixed with CORT was added to the drug administration group. After incubation in the incubator for 24 ​h, the cells were treated and the relative proliferation rate was calculated in the manner under 2.3.

## Stress model of BV2 cells induced by LPS
When BV2 cells grew to logarithmic growth phase, they were inoculated in 6-well plates and cultured for 24 ​h. Then the original medium was replaced with high (10 ​μM), medium (5 ​μM), and low (1 ​μM) concentrations of high glucose medium mixed with CAK06 and LPS, respectively, and three replicate wells were set in each group. After 12 ​h of intervention, the relevant indexes were measured according to the instructions of NO kit and ROS kit.

## Antidepressant effect of CAK06 in vivo

## Animal grouping and administration
In this experiment, C57BL/6J mice, weighing 18 ​g ​± ​2 ​g and 4 weeks old, male, were purchased from Chongqing Tengxin Science and Technology Experimental Animal Co., Ltd., and their feeding environment was clean, with stable temperature (25 ​± ​2 ​°C) and humidity (40–60 ​%). All mice diets were gamma-irradiated to achieve sterile-grade quality, while drinking water and bedding materials underwent autoclaving. The approval number of animal ethics in Southwest Medical University is: 20230309-008. After the Chronic Unpredictable Mild Stress Model (CUMS) model was successfully established, the depression-like mice were divided into a blank control group, a CUMS group, a Flu group, a CAK06 low-dose group, and a CAK06 high-dose group, with five mice in each group. Mice in the Flu group were given 10 ​mg/kg of Flu, mice in the CAK06 low-dose group were given 10 ​mg/kg of CAK06, mice in the CAK06 high-dose group were given 20 ​mg/kg of CAK06 by oral gavage, and mice in the blank control group and the CUMS group were given the same volume of pure water. Mice were administered once a day for 28 days. Behavioral evaluation of mice was performed on the 14th and 28th day of administration. After behavioral evaluation, all mice were anesthetized via intraperitoneal injection of pentobarbital sodium. They were then euthanized by cervical dislocation, followed by determination of relevant biochemical indices.

## Chronic Unpredictable Mild Stress Model
Newly purchased mice were acclimatized and fed for one week, and then divided into blank group and CUMS model group. Mice in the blank group were fed normally. Mice in the model group were given 1–2 unpredictable behavioral stimuli every day. The stimulation methods were as follows: fasting for 24 ​h; water fasting for 24 ​h; noise stimulation for 2 ​h; vigorously shaking the mouse cage box for 10 ​min; forcing the mice to swim for 5 ​min in ice water, 5 ​min in hot water, suspending the mice upside down for 8 ​min, confining the mice for 4 ​h in 50 ​mL centrifugal tubes; electroshocking the mice for 2 ​min, and continuous light exposure for 48 ​h, and continuous darkness exposure for 48 ​h. Ensure that homogeneous stimuli are not performed consecutively, with a model construction period of 42 days.

## Forced swimming test (FST)
The device used in this experiment was a transparent glass cylinder of 18 ​cm height and 8 ​cm radius, filled with water at 25 ​°C and 10 ​cm depth. The mice were gently placed in the glass cylinder and the timing was started. The total duration of the experiment was recorded as 6 ​min, and the first 1 ​min of the mice's adaptation to the environment of the device was excluded from the analysis. At the end of the experiment, the mice were removed and their fur was blow-dried. The time that the mice remained stationary was recorded and analyzed using VisuTrack software, and the criterion was that the mice did not struggle vigorously in the water, and only occasional slight limb movements were made to maintain body balance.

## Open-field test (OFT)
The experiment was conducted in a quiet and closed room to exclude interference from environmental factors, and the experimental setup was a 50 ​cm ​× ​50 ​cm ​× ​40 ​cm top-opening test box with a solid black body and a white bottom. The mice are placed in the box, and the total distance traveled in the box and the total distance traveled in the central area within 5 ​min of placement are recorded and analyzed using VisuTrack software.

## Sucrose preference test (SPT)
A water bottle containing drinking water and a 2 ​% sucrose solution was placed on the left and right side of the cage box of mice reared in a single cage. During the acclimatization phase, the two water bottles were placed for 6 ​h and their positions were changed once, and the drinking bottles were removed at h 12, followed by water fasting for 12 ​h. For the formal test, the water bottles containing drinking water and 2 ​% sucrose aqueous solution were weighed beforehand, and similarly, the position of the water bottles was changed once at the time point of h 6, and the water bottles were removed and weighed individually at the time point of h 12 and the mice were calculated for the sugar-water preference rate (Sucrose Preference Rate):SucrosePreferenceRate(%)=SucrosewaterconsumptionWaterconsumption+Sucrosewaterconsumption×100%

## Detection of biomarkers of oxidative stress
MDA content, T-AOC, T-SOD activity, and GSH-PX activity were determined according to the instructions of each kit.

## Elisa
At the end of drug administration in mice, whole blood was taken by ophthalmoplegia. After blood coagulation at room temperature, the samples are centrifuged at 2–8 ​°C, 2500 ​rpm for 10 ​min. The resulting supernatant is then collected, labeled, and stored at −80 ​°C to avoid repeated freeze-thaw cycles. Prior to analysis, serum samples stored at −80 ​°C should undergo gradient thawing to minimize precipitation formation. Then, according to the instructions of the Elisa kit manufacturer, the IL-1β standards and samples were added into the wells, subsequently, biotinylated detection antibody and streptavidin-HPR also were added into the wells, and the antibody--antigen-antibody-enzyme complex was formed. After washing, the TMB substrate solution was added, and the solution color changed to blue. Finally, the sulphuric acid was added to stop the enzymatic reaction with a color change to yellow. The absorbance of each reaction hole was detected at 450 ​nm by a multifunctional enzyme-labeled instrument, and the concentration of IL-1β in serum samples was determined by the established standard curve.

## qRT-PCR
BV2 cells were co-cultured with CAK06 and LPS for 12 ​h. Then the culture supernatant was discarded and the cells were washed with PBS for 3 times, and the cells were lysed by adding 1 ​mL of TRIzol Reagent to each well, followed by total RNA extraction and quantification according to the RNA Extraction Kit instructions according to the steps. Subsequently, RNA reverse transcription and product amplification were performed according to Takara instructions. Finally, the Ct value was calculated and analyzed according to the measured Ct value.

## Western blot
Proteins were extracted by referring to the protein extraction kit instructions. Briefly, hippocampal tissue samples were taken, washed with pre-cooled PBS buffer to remove blood stains and other possible impurities, and then the tissue blocks were cut into pieces and ground and homogenized with a homogenizer, and after homogenization was complete, the homogenate was transferred to a centrifuge tube, and the lysate was added, and then the lysis solution was added, and then the tube was ice-bath for about 30 ​min, and then blown with a pipette gun during the ice-bath to ensure that the lysis was complete, and then the tissue was centrifuged at 4 ​°C for 10 ​min with a flow of 12,000 ​g. The supernatant was collected, which was the total protein. The protein concentration was determined according to the instructions of BCA protein quantification kit. During the formal experiment, primary antibodies were applied at the following dilutions: Nrf2 (1:1000), HO-1 (1:1000), BDNF (1:2000), TrkB (1:2000), and β-actin (1:10,000). The corresponding secondary antibody was used at a 1:40,000 dilution. The samples of each group were incubated with the primary and secondary antibodies of the proteins to be measured in accordance with the standard operation of protein determination, and then the membranes were washed for several times, then the membranes were spread onto the exposure plate and exposed with luminescent liquid for exposure imaging, and the obtained bands were analyzed in gray scale by Image J, and the relative expressions of the proteins of each group were finally obtained.

## Hematoxylin and eosin staining
After mice were executed at the end of drug administration, hippocampal tissues were removed on ice and fixed with 10 ​% paraformaldehyde fixative. The tissues were dehydrated, paraffin-embedded and tissue sectioned for measurement. After the sections were dewaxed to water, they were stained with hematoxylin for 3 ​min, washed with water, differentiated by 1 ​% hydrochloric acid in alcohol, washed with water, and returned to blue by 1 ​% ammonia in aqueous solution, washed with water. The sections were then stained in 85 ​% alcohol for 5 ​min, 95 ​% alcohol for 5 ​min, anhydrous ethanol for 5 ​min, and eosin stain for 2 ​min, and finally dehydrated and sealed, and the images were captured using a digital section scanner.

## Molecular docking
The binding ability of CAK06 to Nrf2 was analyzed using molecular docking technique. The 2D structure of CAK06 was constructed in ChemDraw and converted to 3D format using Chem 3D. Nrf2 (PDB ID: 7k2f) was obtained from Protein Data Bank (http://www.rcsb.org). After the proteins were removed from water and ligands and hydrogenated, molecular docking was performed using Autodock Vina software. The docking results were subsequently visualized using Pymol.

## Statistical analysis
Data for each group are expressed as mean ​± ​standard deviation ( ​± ​s) and were analyzed for significance using Graphpad prism 8.0. Comparisons between two groups were made using t-test, and comparisons between multiple groups were made using one-way ANOVA.

## Results and Discussion

## Chemistry
The synthetic route for the preparation of the target compounds (CA1–CA8, and CAK01-CAK07) is shown in . Commercially available 3,5-dichloro-4-hydroxybenzaldehyde was used as the starting material. An aldol condensation reaction was carried out with different piperidone alkylates to generate the target compounds CAK01–CAK04. Similarly, 3-chloro-4-hydroxy-5-methoxybenzaldehyde, purchased from a commercial source, underwent aldol condensation with various piperidone alkylates to produce target compounds CAK05–CAK07. The syntheses of compounds CA1–CA8 can be referred to in our group's previous studies [ ]. 

## SAR studies for the cytoprotection of curcumin analogs
Numerous studies have revealed that MCACs exhibit higher stability and bioavailability, and that the phenolic hydroxyl group is essential for scavenging activity. The instability of CU can be traced back to the β-diketone portion of its structure, where both the β-diketone moiety and the two methoxy groups on the benzene ring are not only responsible for the molecule's pharmacological activity but are also important sites for structural modification [ ]. Our group previously synthesized a series of compounds by substituting the β-diketone side chain of CU with piperidone. Among these compounds, CA6 and CA7, which have a 4-hydroxy-3,5-dimethylphenyl group as the distal ring, were studied. CA7, with an N-isopropyl side chain, demonstrated stronger cytotoxicity. Compound CA8 was prepared by methoxylating the methyl group of the side chain on the bicyclic ring based on the structure of CA7. Cytotoxicity evaluations showed that CA8 was the most cytotoxic, while CA6 and CA7 had lower toxicity to cells, which may be attributed to their common structure—the 4-hydroxy-3,5-dimethylphenyl group.
Methoxy substitution likely reduces the electron density of the benzene ring, thereby attenuating its aromaticity. This electronic perturbation may abolish the selectivity of the isopropyl-ketone ring system, rendering CA8 more cytotoxic while concurrently enhancing its aqueous solubility. In the central nervous system (CNS), drug safety on cells is of particular importance due to the widely recognized non-renewable nature of neurons. The damaging effects of drugs on nerve cells are one of the major reasons for the failure of many drug developments [ , ]. Pre-screening by our group revealed that compound CA6 has stronger cytoprotective activity, antioxidant capacity, and antidepressant potential [ ]. However, its druggability profile and onset of action still need improvement. It has been shown that methyl, methoxy, and chloro-substituted analogues on the phenolic ring of CU significantly enhance antioxidant capacity and antidepressant efficacy [ ]. Therefore, based on our previous structural modifications of CU and related literature, we aimed to improve the cytotoxicity and aqueous solubility of the compounds.
We endeavored to synthesize CAK01 by introducing 3,5-dichloro substitution at the 3- and 5-positions of the benzene ring based on the structure of CA6. CAK02, CAK03, and CAK04 were obtained by alkyl substitution of the 4-piperidinone moiety of CAK01. Our findings indicated that the cytotoxicity of the compounds increased as the length of the substituted alkyl chain on the 4-piperidinone moiety of CAK01 increased. Additionally, introducing chlorine at the 3-position and a methoxy group at the 5-position on the benzene rings at both ends of CA6 yielded CAK06. Alkyl substitution on the 4-piperidinone moiety of CAK06 produced CAK05 and CAK07. Consistently, we found that the compounds became more cytotoxic as the length of the alkyl chain substituents on the 4-piperidinone moiety of CAK06 increased. In summary, regarding toxicity: 1) Compounds with 3-methoxy substitutions on the benzene ring exhibited greater toxicity than those with 3-chloro substitutions; compounds with 5-methoxy substitutions were approximately equivalent in toxicity to those with 3,5-dichloro substitutions. 2) The secondary amine within the 4 - piperidinone moiety might serve as an active site that enhances the compound's toxicity. Moreover, the cytotoxicity shows a positive correlation with the increasing chain length of the substituted alkyl group. In terms of solubility: 1) Methoxy substitution significantly enhances solubility, with 3-methoxy substitution resulting in higher solubility than 3-chloro substitution, whereas 5-methoxy substitution yields greater solubility than 3,5-dichloro substitution. 2) Solubility decreases as the chain length of the secondary amine-substituted alkyl group on the 4-piperidinone increases.

## The ability of each compound to trap ABTS oxygen radicals
We analyzed the scavenging ability of each compound against ABTS+ radicals using the ABTS method to evaluate their antioxidant activity [ ]. As shown in and , the ability of each compound to scavenge ABTS radicals increased with higher drug concentrations. Compared with the IC50 value of the antioxidant vitamin C (54.54 ​μg/mL), compounds CAK03 (46.56 ​μg/mL) and CAK06 (44.95 ​μg/mL) exhibited stronger antioxidant capacity, while CAK04 (57.78 ​μg/mL) was comparable to vitamin C. Notably, CAK03 and CAK06 were more effective antioxidants than curcumin (CU), which had an IC50 value of 165.00 ​μg/mL. Almost all the synthesized compounds demonstrated stronger free radical scavenging ability than CU. 

## Cytotoxicity evaluation
The safety of drugs acting on the CNS requires rigorous consideration. A compound with a wider range of safe concentrations poses fewer therapeutic pitfalls when applied centrally, making it a more promising drug candidate. PC12 cells, derived from rat adrenal medullary pheochromocytoma, are commonly used for CNS drug safety and bioactivity evaluations [ , ]. The effects of each compound on PC12 ​cells are shown in and . After 48 ​h of exposure to 60 ​μM of compound CAK03, the relative growth rate of PC12 ​cells was reduced to 30.33 ​± ​6.54 ​%. At other time points and concentrations, PC12 ​cell activity remained good. Compound CAK05 had a greater effect on PC12 ​cell viability: after 24 ​h at 7.5 ​μM, viability decreased to 68.98 ​± ​2.27 ​%; at 3.75 ​μM for 48 ​h, viability decreased to 61.38 ​± ​0.91 ​%. Compound CAK07 was also more toxic, reducing cell viability to 60.78 ​± ​0.55 ​% at 15 ​μM after 24 ​h and to 46.41 ​± ​0.69 ​% at 7.5 ​μM after 48 ​h. CU reduced PC12 ​cell viability by 21.8 ​% at a concentration of 30 ​μM. In contrast, compounds CAK01, CAK02, CAK04, and CAK06 showed no significant cytotoxicity against PC12 ​cells at all time points and concentrations, indicating a favorable safety profile. 
Comparing these data with CU reveals that CAK01 and CAK03 (with bis-chlorine substitutions on both benzene rings) and CAK06 (with monochlorine substitutions on each of the two benzene rings) demonstrate higher cellular safety. Structural analysis suggests that chlorine substitutions at both the 3- and 5-positions on the benzene ring confer a better safety profile than substitutions only at the 3-position. Additionally, the cytotoxicity of the compounds increases significantly with the length of alkyl substitutions on the side-chain piperidinone.
BV2 microglia, a murine-derived neuroglial cell line, modulate central inflammation and interact strongly with neuronal cells [ ]. The effects of each compound on BV2 cells are shown in and . Among them, CAK06 showed no significant cytotoxicity against BV2 cells at all time points and concentrations, indicating good safety. 
L02 ​cells, which are normal human hepatocytes, are commonly used to evaluate the hepatotoxicity of drugs at the cellular level [ ]. The effects of each compound on L02 ​cells are shown in and . Compounds CAK01, CAK02, and CAK06 showed no significant cytotoxicity against L02 ​cells at all time points and concentrations, demonstrating a good safety profile. 
In summary, the combined evaluation of cell activity showed that CAK06 had the best cell safety among the tested compounds.

## Results of H2O2-induced oxidative damage model screening of PC12 ​cells
Hydrogen peroxide (H2O2), as an exogenous stimulus, can cause cells to produce large amounts of ROS when co-cultured, eventually leading to apoptosis. Preliminary evaluation of potential antidepressant drugs can be performed by determining the appropriate H2O2 concentration for modeling oxidative stress and then co-culturing with the drugs [ ]. PC12 cells were co-cultured with varying concentrations of the drug (3.75, 7.5, 15, 30, and 60 ​μM) and 585.8 ​μM ​H2O2 for 24 ​h. The positive control group received Flu and CU at the same concentrations, and the results of the drug activity screening are shown in . 
Compared to the H2O2 injury model group, Flu at a concentration of 7.5 ​μM significantly increased cell survival to 41.92 ​± ​0.66 ​%, while CU increased cell survival to 50.96 ​± ​1.61 ​%. Compounds CAK01, CAK02, CAK03, and CAK04 significantly increased cell survival in a concentration-dependent manner at concentrations of 30 ​μM or less. Among these, CAK04 was the most effective, increasing the relative cell proliferation rate to 52.12 ​± ​0.88 ​% at a concentration of 30 ​μM. However, at higher concentrations, cell viability was reduced, probably due to the drug's own cytotoxicity. CAK05 did not show any potential for restoring cellular activity in this model. CAK06 exhibited a time- and concentration-dependent cytoprotective effect, elevating the cell proliferation rate to 73.91 ​± ​0.69 ​% at the highest concentration of 60 ​μM. CAK07 also showed some cytoprotective effect at a concentration of 7.5 ​μM, but higher concentrations led to inhibition of cell growth, likely due to the drug's toxicity. Overall, CAK06 exhibited a more significant protective effect on oxidative stress-injured PC12 ​cells compared to Flu and CU.

## Screening results of CORT-induced PC12 ​cell injury modeling
Activation of the HPA axis promotes energy metabolism and improves cognitive function by releasing CORT. However, when the body is under chronic stress for an extended period, the HPA axis becomes dysfunctional, leading to the accumulation of large amounts of CORT. This excess CORT ultimately triggers psychiatric disorders such as anxiety and depression [ , ]. At the cellular level, CORT can induce apoptosis when co-cultured with cells. To preliminarily evaluate drugs with potential antidepressant activity, an appropriate concentration of CORT is used to model stress-induced damage, followed by co-culturing with the drugs. PC12 cells were co-cultured with varying concentrations of the drug (3.75, 7.5, 15, 30, and 60 ​μM) and 514.6 ​μM of CORT for 24 ​h. The control group received the same concentrations of Flu and CU. The results of the drug activity screening are shown in . 
In the CORT injury model group, the relative cell proliferation rate was reduced to 55.48 ​± ​1.16 ​%. The Flu and CU groups did not restore cell viability within the tested concentration range; instead, they further inhibited cell growth due to their inherent drug toxicity. Similarly, compounds CAK01, CAK02, CAK04, CAK05, and CAK07 failed to restore cell activity in this model. In contrast, compound CAK03 significantly increased the relative cell proliferation rate to 59.15 ​± ​0.51 ​% and 59.92 ​± ​1.53 ​% at drug concentrations of 15 ​μM and 60 ​μM, respectively. Compound CAK06 exhibited time-dependent and concentration-dependent cytoprotective effects, significantly increasing the cell proliferation rate to 66.95 ​± ​0.97 ​% at the highest concentration of 60 ​μM. Overall, CAK06 demonstrated the most significant protective effect on CORT-injured PC12 ​cells.
Following comprehensive analysis of the model screening results (Sections 2.5 and 2.6) and preliminary characterization of physicochemical properties, cytotoxic activity, and structure-activity relationships, compound CAK06 was identified as the most promising candidate. Thus, CAK06 was selected for subsequent in vitro and in vivo evaluations to validate its therapeutic potential and unravel its molecular mechanism of action.

## Potency of CAK06 for induction of Nrf2
The antidepressant effect of CU is believed to be closely associated with its anti-inflammatory and antioxidant effects resulting from the activation of Nrf2 [ , , ]. To determine whether compound CAK06 has similar potency in inducing Nrf2, we first predicted its binding mode to the Nrf2 protein using molecular docking; the results are shown in . The magnitude of the binding energy reflects the strength of the affinity: typically, a binding energy less than −5 ​kcal/mol indicates binding ability, and less than −7 ​kcal/mol indicates strong binding ability. The binding energy of CAK06 to Nrf2 was calculated to be −10.0 ​kcal/mol, indicating that CAK06 has a strong binding affinity for Nrf2. The binding stability primarily depends on the formation of hydrogen bonds with amino acid residues GLU-582, VAL-606, and GLY-367 in the protein's active site. 
To further assess the ability of CAK06 to induce Nrf2 translocation from the cytoplasm to the nucleus and promote Nrf2 expression, we performed Western blot analysis on lipopolysaccharide (LPS)-treated BV2 cells following CAK06 intervention. The results are presented in B and C. Under LPS-induced stress in BV2 cells, Nrf2 expression was significantly downregulated in the model group compared to the control group. However, after treatment with CAK06, Nrf2 protein expression was significantly upregulated. These findings suggest that CAK06 may play a role in inducing Nrf2 nuclear translocation.

## CAK06 inhibits LPS-induced microglia stress
Under chronic stress and strain, organisms accumulate large amounts of oxidative substances and inflammatory factors, leading to low mood and depression-like symptoms. LPS is a pro-inflammatory substance that induces increases in cellular inflammatory factors, accumulation of ROS, and release of NO [ , ]. BV2 microglial cells play a crucial role in regulating central immuno-inflammation. By establishing a model of LPS-induced microglial stress, we can evaluate the effects of compound CAK06 on neuroinflammation and oxidative stress regulation.
BV2 cells were co-cultured with 1 ​μg/mL LPS and varying concentrations of CAK06 (1, 5, and 10 ​μM) for 12 and 24 ​h, respectively. The results of the assays are shown in . In the LPS model group, BV2 microglial cells released a large amount of NO due to external stimulation, with absorbance increasing rapidly from 0.080 in the blank group to 0.153 ​at 12 ​h. After intervention with high, medium, and low doses of CAK06, the absorbance decreased to 0.099, 0.119, and 0.145, respectively, indicating that CAK06 effectively reduced toxic NO levels and protected the cells. 
At 24 ​h, the modeling effect of the LPS model group was not as pronounced as at 12 ​h, possibly due to the degradation of LPS and the drug metabolism. There was no significant difference between the low-dose CAK06 group and the model group, but significant improvements were observed in the medium- and high-dose groups. In the measurement of ROS, after 12 ​h of LPS treatment, the intracellular ROS fluorescence intensity in the model group increased significantly. Following intervention with high, medium, and low doses of CAK06, the fluorescence intensity decreased in a concentration-dependent manner.
The effect of CAK06 on the expression of inflammation- and oxidative stress-related genes was subsequently examined, with results presented in . Treatment with LPS rapidly induced the transcription of pro-inflammatory genes such as IL-1β, IL-6, and TNF-α in microglia, while suppressing the expression of the antioxidant gene Nrf2 and the anti-inflammatory gene IL-4 [ , , ]. Administration of CAK06 at concentrations of 1 ​μM and 10 ​μM during co-culture effectively reversed the expression of pro-inflammatory genes and promoted the expression of anti-inflammatory and antioxidant genes in a significant, concentration-dependent manner, with the effects becoming more pronounced at higher concentrations. 
Notably, LPS treatment did not uniformly downregulate all antioxidant genes. Specifically, HO-1 expression was markedly upregulated following LPS stimulation, likely due to immunoregulatory feedback mechanisms or adaptive cellular responses. Strikingly, CAK06 intervention further potentiated HO-1 induction in a dose-dependent manner, suggesting that CAK06 may exert robust anti-inflammatory and antioxidative effects through Nrf2-mediated HO-1 activation, thereby attenuating LPS-induced neuroinflammation in microglial cells [ ].

## CAK06 rapidly improves depression-like behavior in CUMS mice
The CUMS model is a classical animal model widely used to induce depression-like behavior in mice for the pharmacodynamic evaluation of antidepressant drugs [ ]. Successfully constructed model mice exhibit depression-like symptoms such as loss of interest in surroundings, decreased activity, and anhedonia. In rodent models, the first-line antidepressant Flu is conventionally administered at a daily oral dose of 10 ​mg/kg for 28 consecutive days. To validate the in vivo antidepressant efficacy of CAK06 relative to Flu, an isodose group (10 ​mg/kg CAK06) was initially established. Additionally, based on in vitro data demonstrating CAK06's non-cytotoxic profile even at pharmacologically elevated concentrations and its enhanced antidepressant potential, a higher 20 ​mg/kg dose group was incorporated. After 28 days of daily oral administration, the behavioral test of mice was carried out.
After establishing the CUMS model, mice were administered compound CAK06 and Flu orally via gavage. Following 14 days of administration, the mice underwent forced swimming, open field, and sugar-water preference assays. The results are presented in . In the forced swimming test experiment, the Flu group did not show significant improvement in depression-like symptoms. In contrast, mice treated with 10 ​mg/kg CAK06 showed a significant reduction in immobility time and increased overall activity (185.40 ​± ​23.09 ​s vs. 221.00 ​± ​21.53 ​s, P ​< ​0.05). At a higher dose of 20 ​mg/kg, CAK06 further reduced immobility time (142.60 ​± ​28.97 ​s vs. 221.00 ​± ​21.53 ​s, P ​< ​0.01), indicating dose-dependent antidepressant effects. 
In the open field test, the 20 ​mg/kg CAK06 group exhibited a significant increase in overall activity and exploratory behavior. The total distance traveled by mice in the 20 ​mg/kg CAK06 group was significantly longer (994.97 ​± ​321.61 ​cm vs. 456.95 ​± ​314.81 ​cm, P ​< ​0.05).
In the measurement of sugar and water preference, neither the Flu group nor the low-dose CAK06 group (10 ​mg/kg) showed a significant increase in sugar-water preference. The high-dose CAK06 group (20 ​mg/kg) significantly increased sugar-water preference (70.49 ​± ​3.66 ​% vs. 59.58 ​± ​2.25 ​%, P ​< ​0.001). Additionally, model mice exhibited poor activity and unkempt fur, whereas the high-dose CAK06 group showed noticeable improvement in these physical signs. These results suggest that CAK06 has a dose-dependent antidepressant effect with a rapid onset of action, demonstrating significant efficacy by the 14th day of treatment.
After 28 days of administration, behavioral assessments were conducted again, with results shown in . Compared to the model group, mice treated with 10 ​mg/kg CAK06 showed a significant increase in the total distance traveled (868.90 ​± ​280.97 ​cm vs. 327.22 ​± ​161.39 ​cm, P ​< ​0.01). The 20 ​mg/kg CAK06 group exhibited an even greater increase in distance traveled (1336.66 ​± ​264.87 ​cm vs. 327.22 ​± ​161.39 ​cm, P ​< ​0.01). The Flu group also showed considerable improvement, with total distance traveled increasing to 705.43 ​± ​159.14 ​cm, comparable to the low-dose CAK06 group.
In the FST, all dosing groups showed a significant increase in the desire to struggle for movement compared to the CUMS model group. Immobility time decreased to 130.42 ​± ​59.96 ​s in the Flu group, 114.86 ​± ​84.07 ​s in the low-dose CAK06 group, and 54.44 ​± ​53.38 ​s in the high-dose CAK06 group. In the test of sugar-water preference, all dosing groups significantly improved sugar-water intake in depression-like mice. Sugar-water preference rates were 61.36 ​± ​2.18 ​% in the model group, 69.08 ​± ​1.86 ​% in the Flu group, 70.62 ​± ​2.33 ​% in the low-dose CAK06 group, and 77.42 ​± ​2.77 ​% in the high-dose CAK06 group.
Combining the results of behavioral tests and morphological observations, CAK06 demonstrated a faster onset of action, producing rapid antidepressant effects by day 14. After 28 days of administration: Mice in all dosing groups showed improvement in depression-like symptoms. The low-dose CAK06 group exhibited antidepressant effects comparable to the Flu group. The high-dose CAK06 group showed the most significant antidepressant efficacy. Notably, the maximum clinical recommended dose of Flu (10 ​mg/kg). Long-term overdose may lead to the continuous increase of blood drug concentration, increase the metabolic burden of the body and increase the risk of toxicity. In contrast, CAK06 demonstrated superior cellular safety at doses exceeding those of Flu. Additionally, the results of behavioral tests show that CAK06 has a concentration-dependent antidepressant effect.

## CAK06 regulates inflammation and oxidative stress in CUMS mice
To further elucidate the mechanism by which compound CAK06 exerts its antidepressant effects, we measured several serum biomarkers in mice. Specifically, the serum levels of interleukin-1 beta (IL-1β) were quantified using Elisa kits. Additionally, we assessed the serum levels of MDA, T-AOC, T-SOD activity, and GSH-PX activity using respective assay kits. The results are presented in . 
In the CUMS model group, mice exhibited a significant release of inflammatory factors due to severe depressive symptoms. This was accompanied by a marked decrease in the activities of various antioxidant molecules and enzymes, as well as an increase in cytotoxic substances such as MDA. These adverse effects were notably alleviated following drug administration in each treatment group [ ]. Among the treatment groups, both the low-dose (CAK06 low) and high-dose (CAK06 high) CAK06 groups demonstrated superior efficacy in reducing the release of IL-1β, MDA, and enhancing T-AOC and GSH-PX levels compared to the Flu group. Additionally, the effects of CAK06 on T-AOC were comparable to those observed in the Flu group. Overall, the reduction in inflammation and oxidative stress markers in the Flu group was less pronounced than in the CAK06-treated groups. These results are consistent with our cellular assessment. Inflammation and oxidative stress have been proved to be closely related to the pathogenesis of depression. Excessive secretion of inflammatory mediators can reduce the synaptic availability of monoamine neurotransmitters, make glucocorticoid level regulation disorder and induce neuronal apoptosis, and increase the probability of depression. Many studies have successfully improved the state of depression by reducing neuroinflammation and oxidative stress. Consistent with these studies, our results show that CAK06 has strong anti-inflammatory and antioxidant abilities, which may be the key to its antidepressant effect.

## CAK06 upregulates hippocampal Nrf2 and BDNF expression in CUMS mice
Building upon our previous exploratory experiments, we measured the levels of antioxidant and synaptic plasticity-related proteins—Nrf2, HO-1, BDNF, and TrkB—in the hippocampus. The results of the protein immunoblotting assays are presented in . Nrf2 and HO-1 are key proteins in the classical antioxidant pathway. Compound CAK06 may exert a powerful antioxidant and anti-inflammatory effect by modulating the Nrf2-HO-1 axis, subsequently promoting the expression of downstream synaptic signaling proteins. This modulation can enhance synaptic plasticity, restore synaptic signaling, and ultimately produce antidepressant effects [ ]. 
Notably, the expression of these proteins also increased in the Flu group. The levels of synaptic plasticity-related proteins in the Flu group were comparable to or even superior to those in the CAK06 low-dose group. Since the restoration of synaptic plasticity is closely related to the improvement of depressive symptoms, the enhancement of synaptic protein expression may contribute to the observed behavioral improvements. This aligns with the behavioral experiment results, where the antidepressant effect of the CAK06 low-dose group was similar to that of the Flu group [ , ]. Regarding the regulation of antioxidant-related proteins, Nrf2 and HO-1, the CAK06 group exhibited higher expression levels compared to the Flu group at low doses. This suggests that the antioxidant effect of CAK06 is superior to that of Flu. In conclusion, compound CAK06 may exert potent and rapid-acting antidepressant effects by activating Nrf2, thereby promoting the expression of antioxidant enzymes and synaptic plasticity-related proteins.

## Safety evaluation after CAK06 administration
To assess the safety of compound CAK06, mice were euthanized 28 days after drug administration. Tissue pathology was analyzed using hematoxylin and eosin (HE) staining, with the results presented in . In the stained tissue sections, cell nuclei appeared blue, and the cytoplasm appeared red. The histological examination revealed that tissues from all groups exhibited normal morphology, indicating no significant pathological changes. 
Given that the liver is the primary organ for drug metabolism, evaluating hepatotoxicity is particularly important. Therefore, we measured the biochemical indices of ALT, AST, and ALP in the plasma samples of each group of mice. The results are shown in . There were no significant differences in ALP, ALT, or AST levels among the different groups of mice, indicating that compound CAK06 did not induce hepatotoxicity. These safety evaluations confirmed that compound CAK06 has a favorable safety profile, with no observable histopathological abnormalities or significant changes in key liver enzymes. These findings support the potential of CAK06 as a safe and effective antidepressant candidate. 
Collectively, this study successfully designed, synthesized, and characterized a novel series of CU-based analogs as potential rapid-acting antidepressants. Structural modifications of CU not only improved its drug-like properties and reduced cytotoxicity but also potentiated Nrf2 induction, thereby providing valuable insights into the SAR governing its cytoprotective and antidepressant effects. Among the synthesized compounds, CAK06 demonstrated robust and rapid antidepressant-like effects in a CUMS mouse model, significantly ameliorating depressive phenotypes within two weeks of administration. Mechanistic investigations using molecular docking, fluorescence staining, Western blot, and Elisa assays revealed that CAK06 may mitigates oxidative stress and inflammatory responses while enhancing synaptic plasticity in CUMS-induced depression via the Nrf2-HO-1/BDNF-TrkB signaling axis. Notably, chronic administration of CAK06 did not induce observable organ damage or systemic toxicity in mice, highlighting its favorable safety profile. These findings provide a solid foundation for future development of novel Nrf2-targeted CU analogs aimed at producing safe and rapid-acting antidepressant therapies. However, our study has several limitations that warrant attention. First, while we have demonstrated that CAK06 exhibits robust antidepressant efficacy and probed its potential mechanistic underpinnings, the precise molecular targets and sites of action remain undefined and require further identification. At the same time, although CAK06 demonstrates significantly improved solubility compared to curcumin, future structural modifications could further refine its pharmacological profile, underscoring the necessity for comprehensive in vitro screening and pharmacokinetic evaluations in subsequent investigations.

## Author Contributions
All authors made a significant contribution to the work reported, and agree to be accountable for all aspects of the work.

## Funding
This study was supported by the 10.13039/501100001809National Natural Science Foundation of China (No. 82474105), 10.13039/501100018542Sichuan Natural Science Foundation (No. 2024NSFSC0049, 2024NSFSC0625), Sichuan Science and Technology Program (No. 2022YFS0627, 2022YFS0607), the Key R&D Project of 10.13039/501100019971Luzhou-Southwest Medical University (No. 2023LZXNYDHZ002, 2024LZXNYDJ009), the Cooperation Projects of Sichuan Credit Pharmaceutical CO., Ltd., Central Nervous System Drug Key Laboratory of 10.13039/100012542Sichuan Province (No. 210027-01SZ, 200017-01SZ, 230007-01SZ, 230008-01SZ), the Chongqing Traditional Chinese Medicine Inheritance and Innovation Team Construction Project “Traditional Chinese Medicine New Drug and Safety Research Inheritance and Innovation Team" (No. 2022-8), Chongqing medical scientific research project (Joint project of Chongqing Health Commission and Science and Technology Bureau, No. 2025QNXM019), Luzhou Science and Technology Plan Project (No. 2023JYJ034, 2023JYJ022, 2022-SYF-85).

## Declaration of competing interest
The authors declare no conflict of interest.