pmcTumour Virus ResTumour Virus Res4013tvrTumour Virus Research2666-6790ElsevierPMC11733058PMC11733058.111733058117330583970904510.1016/j.tvr.2024.200309S2666-6790(24)00033-82003091Review ArticleDrugs and drug targets for the treatment of HPV-positive cervical cancer
BurmeisterCarly A.KhanSaif F.PrinceSharonsharon.prince@uct.ac.za Department of Human Biology, Faculty of Health Sciences, University of Cape Town, Observatory, 7925, Cape Town, South Africa⁎Corresponding author. sharon.prince@uct.ac.za62025191220241947793720030930920241712202417122024191220241501202528012025© 2024 The Authors. Published by Elsevier B.V.2024https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/).Cervical cancer is primarily driven by persistent infection with high-risk human papillomavirus (HPV) strains and remains a significant global health challenge, particularly in low- and middle-income countries where late-stage diagnoses is common. While vaccination and screening programs have reduced incidence rates, the need for novel and more effacacious and cost-effective therapeutic options is therefore critical especially for advanced cervical cancer. This review highlights several key advances in the understanding of HPV-induced carcinogenesis and the development of therapeutic strategies over the past five years. Important areas of focus include the role of HPV oncoproteins E5, E6 and E7 in modulating signalling pathways, treatment strategies for precancerous lesions, the potential of natural compounds to target cervical cancer cells, and the emergence of immunotherapies, checkpoint inhibitors, antibody-drug conjugates, and novel drug combinations to treat cervical cancer. Additionally, lifestyle recommendations and the integration of natural supplements are discussed for their potential to enhance treatment efficacy and improve patient outcomes. The developments reported in this review underscore the evolving landscape of cervical cancer treatment and the need for continued research to validate and integrate these emerging therapies into clinical practice.

## Keywords
Cervical cancerViral inductionTargeted therapyNatural compundsImmunotherapypmc-status-qastatus0pmc-status-liveyespmc-status-embargonopmc-status-releasedyespmc-prop-open-accessyespmc-prop-olfnopmc-prop-manuscriptnopmc-prop-legally-suppressednopmc-prop-has-pdfyespmc-prop-has-supplementnopmc-prop-pdf-onlynopmc-prop-suppress-copyrightnopmc-prop-is-real-versionnopmc-prop-is-scanned-articlenopmc-prop-preprintnopmc-prop-in-epmcyespmc-license-refCC BY-NC-ND1

## Introduction
Cervical cancer remains a significant global health challenge in which persistent infection with high-risk strains of the human papillomavirus (HPV) is a major causative factor. Indeed, the virus-induced transformation, particularly by the HPV oncoproteins E6 and E7, plays a critical role in the development and progression of cervical cancer. Although cervical cancer is largely preventable through education, vaccination, and screening, access to these resources is limited in low- and middle-income countries (LMICs). As a result, many women in LMICs present with advanced-stage disease, which significantly reduces therapeutic options and consequently survival rates. This is especially pertinent for women living with HIV, who are at higher risk of HPV infection and cervical cancer development. Although promising new strategies have emerged, they still have limitations and the drug development landscape for HPV-positive cervical cancer is rapidly evolving [ ]. Indeed, progress in understanding the molecular mechanisms underpinning HPV-induced transformation and the identification of novel biomarkers have paved the way for the development of targeted, alternative and complementary therapies. The integration of these kinds of therapies into clinical practice have the potential to improve prognosis and survival rates for patients with HPV-positive cervical cancer. Continued research and clinical trials are essential to validate these therapies and explore their full potential. This review therefore aims to highlight the key molecular drivers of HPV-positive cervical cancer as well as several promising therapeutic options investigated over the past five years, with consideration to how Human Immunodeficiency Virus (HIV) infection influences disease progression and treatment responses.

2

## HPV-INDUCED cervical cancer development and progression
HPV is the key aetiological agent responsible for driving the progression of cervical cancer. The HPV genome is composed of the late (L) genes L1 and L2 and the early (E) genes including E1, E2, E5, E6 and E7 and together they drive the ability of HPV to infect host cells, replicate, and, in the case of high-risk HPV types, contribute to cancer development [ ]. L1 and L2, encode the structural proteins of the virus, with L1 forming the major capsid protein and L2 assisting in viral particle assembly and genome encapsulation. The L1 protein is also primarily responsible for immunogenicity and serves as the target for the prophylactic HPV vaccines, Gardasil and Cervarix [ , ]. Whereas E1 and E2, encode proteins that play roles in viral DNA replication, transcriptional regulation and genome modulation [ ], E6 and E7, encode proteins that are involved in the regulation of the viral replication cycle and are the oncogenic proteins which are essential for HPV-induced carcinogenesis. E2 represses the expression of E6 and E7 and the integrity of the E2 gene is crucial for regulating the expression of these two oncogenes. Indeed, once HPV establishes a persistent infection, it often integrates into the host genome which disrupts the E2 gene, and this leads to E6 and E7 expression which causes malignant transformation of infected cells [ ]. However, some cases of cervical cancer develop without viral DNA integration, where the HPV genome remains in its episomal form and the E2 genes are intact [ , ]. Intact E2 genes can therefore indicate a non-integrated, episomal form of HPV DNA, which is typically associated with a better prognosis. Research continues to reveal the significance of L1 and E2 in therapeutic strategies and infection risk assessment, with recent studies showing that the methylation status of the L1 and E2 genes can predict patient responses to treatments such as the anti-viral, cidofovir, and the toll-like receptor 7 (TLR7) agonist, imiquimod. Indeed, patients with high methylation levels of both HPV16 L1 and E2 demonstrated a greater likelihood of responding to cidofovir treatment. Conversely, patients with low methylation of either HPV16 L1 or E2, including those with absent methylation, were more likely to respond to imiquimod [ ].
At a molecular level, E5, E6, and E7 play crucial roles in cervical cancer by manipulating host cell mechanisms ( ). For example, E5 promotes tumorigenesis by interacting with various growth factor receptors, preventing apoptosis, and facilitating immune evasion [ ]. Indeed, E5 activates the MAPK/ERK pathway which phosphorylates and stabilizes VEGF levels which drives angiogenesis and promotes tumour growth and metastasis [ , , ]. However, upon HPV integration, the E5 coding sequence is often lost, and this shifts the responsibility of HPV-driven carcinogenesis to E6 and E7 which inhibit several key host tumour suppressors. The most well characterised mechanisms involve the degradation of p53 by E6, and the binding and inactivation of pRB by E7. This leads to the evasion of apoptosis, deregulation of the cell cycle, and uncontrolled cell proliferation [ ]. 
E6 and E7 also activate several host oncogenic signalling pathways to induce the development of cervical cancer [ ]. For example, the PI3K/AKT pathway which regulates cervical cancer cell proliferation, migration, angiogenesis and survival is activated by both E6 and E7 and the WNT and Notch pathways are activated by E6 [ , , , , ]. E6 has also been shown to inactivate PTEN which leads to an increase in pAKT levels leading to the promotion of cell proliferation [ ]. Furthermore, HPV-16 E6 sustains the activation of receptor tyrosine kinases (TKs) such as EGFR, and insulin receptor beta, which further stimulates the PI3K/AKT pathway [ ]. Additionally, E6 activates mTOR, a downstream target of AKT, through the E6/E6AP-induced degradation of TSC2, an mTOR inhibitor [ , ]. E6 was also shown to upregulate Nurr1 expression which enhances cancer stem cell self-renewal, cervical carcinogenesis, and radioresistance. This was found to be through the ability of Nurr1 to activate the MEK/ERK and PI3K/Akt/mTOR signalling cascades which makes Nurr1 a potential early biomarker for cervical cancer [ ]. The Wnt/β-catenin signalling pathway plays a role in cervical cancer proliferation, migration and invasion and is associated with cervical cancer metastasis and recurrence and E6 has been shown to prevent β-catenin degradation and to promote its nuclear accumulation through its interaction with E6AP [ , ].
E7 was also shown to cooperate with the Ras signalling pathway to prevent cell cycle arrest by altering the Raf/AKT/p21Cip1 signalling axis. In normal cells, the activation of the Raf pathway induces cellular arrest through nuclear accumulation of p21Cip1, a cell cycle inhibitor. In cervical cancer cells, E7 upregulates AKT activity which prevents the nuclear accumulation of p21Cip1 and consequently bypasses Raf-induced growth arrest [ ]. Through a similar mechanism, E7 also increases the cytoplasmic localization of p27Kip1 by increasing AKT activity. This results in the downregulation of the cytoskeletal regulator, RhoA, in an Akt-dependent manner leading to an increase in cervical cancer cell metastasis [ ].
Interestingly, reports have indicated that the 5′ end of the HPV16 long coding region contains a potential STAT3 binding site, which mediates the upregulation of E6 and E7 and may be crucial in cervical cancer [ ]. Moreover, other studies have demonstrated the presence of STAT3 in cervical cancer stem cells [ , ]. Together these findings provide evidence that STAT3 may play a significant role in viral gene expression and HPV16-mediated carcinogenesis [ , ]. Furthermore, the epithelial to mesenchymal (EMT) switch is critical for the development of cervical cancer and has been shown to be driven by E6/E7 through their ability to activate the TGF-β1 pathway [ ]. Supporting their role in EMT transition, E6/E7 enhance invasive cancer potential by upregulating transcription factors such as SLUG, SNAIL, and TWIST which are considered master regulators of EMT. Indeed, these transcription factors upregulate mesenchymal markers such as N-cadherin and repress the expression of E-cadherin, a cell adhesion molecule leading to the breakdown of epithelial cell-cell adhesion and promoting metastasis [ ]. More recently, the oncogenic T-box transcription factor TBX3 was shown to be overexpressed in precancerous and invasive HPV-positive cervical cancer and to interact and cooperate with E6 and E7 to drive cervical cancer cell proliferation and migration [ ]. This is significant because TBX3 is frequently overexpressed in a wide range of carcinomas and sarcomas where it promotes several oncogenic phenotypes, and it has been biologically validated as a therapeutic target to treat these cancers [ ].
In summary, HPV-driven alterations in cell signalling factors not only contribute to cervical cancer progression but also present multiple therapeutic avenues to treat cervical cancer.

3

## Treatment of cervical intraepithelial neoplasia precancerous lesions
Cervical precancerous lesions, known as cervical intraepithelial neoplasia (CIN), represent a spectrum of changes caused by persistent infection with high-risk HPVs. Depending on the degree of dysplasia of the infected cervical epithelia, these lesions are classified as CIN1 (mild dysplasia), CIN2 (moderate dysplasia), and CIN3 (severe dysplasia to carcinoma in situ). The progression of these lesions to invasive cervical cancer is a significant concern, but it can take several years which provides a crucial window for detection and intervention [ , ]. The standard-of-care treatment for CIN 2/3 lesions primarily involve surgical intervention, which targets the cervical transformation zone [ ]. This includes ablative procedures such as cryotherapy, thermal ablation, and laser therapy ( A), and excisional techniques which involve removing 1 to 3 cm of cervical tissue, such as loop electrosurgical excision procedure (LEEP) or cold knife cone (CKC) ( B). Interestingly, results from a controlled screen and treat trial suggested that thermal ablation was associated with fewer side effects and that patients preferred it over cryotherapy [ ]. Another study showed that compared to LEEP, thermal ablation was associated with reduced pain and women had significantly improved sexual function [ ]. Thermal ablation should therefore be considered a primary route of surgical intervention to treat cervical precancerous lesions. Indeed, a pilot study in a cohort of South African women investigated a screen and treat approach in which visual inspection of their cervixes was performed after application of acetic acid (VIA) and precancerous lesions identified were ablated. The study found that VIA triage failed to detect some cases of precancerous lesions as well as resulted in overtreatment of women. Consideration should therefore be given to the treatment algorithm to reduce missed cases and overtreatment. It is, however, worth noting that both screening and treatment retention were high (92 %), indicating good engagement in the program and demonstrating the feasibility of implementing a screening and treatment algorithm in a single visit. Lastly, the same study confirmed that HPV prevalence was notably higher in women living with HIV, reinforcing the importance of tailored screening strategies for this population [ ]. 
While excisional treatments generally have a high success rate and few immediate post-procedure risks, such as bleeding, infection, and pain, there are important long-term risks to consider, particularly for those of childbearing age. Furthermore, while surgery is highly effective for most patients, there is a 5–16 % chance of recurrence within five years following an excisional procedure, with most recurrences occurring within the first two years [ , ]. In individuals at high risk, such as those living with HIV in LMICs, the recurrence rate can be as high as 19–37 % [ ]. Recent studies on the management of CIN2 have shed light on the complexities of treatment choices which highlights the importance of patient-centred approaches. Indeed, women's preferences in treatment strategies are crucial for effective management and outcomes, as detailed in a qualitative analysis of a randomized experimental study [ ].
There have also been some advances with non-surgical treatment options for cervical precancerous lesions such as the use of the TLR7 agonist, imiquimod, and Trichloroacetic Acid (TCA) as well as photodynamic therapy (PDT) and therapeutic vaccines ( C and D). Imiquimod ( C) is an example of an immune modulating drug that has been explored as a non-invasive, topical treatment of genital warts, vulvar/vaginal dysplasia, and cervical precancerous lesions including high-grade squamous intraepithelial lesions (HSIL) [ , ]. By activating the TLR7 receptor, imiquimod enhances the innate immune response by increasing cytokines like interferon α, IL-6, and TNF-α. A recent systematic review and metanalysis highlighted that imiquimod treatment resulted in improved histological regression (≤CIN 1) in 55 % of patients, compared to 29 % histological regression seen in the placebo group. However, it is important to note that surgical treatment remained superior with 93 % of patients showing regression to ≤ CIN 1 [ ]. While the efficacy of surgery remains superior to imiquimod, the non-invasive nature of imiquimod makes it a valuable option for patients intending to minimize the risks and complications associated with surgical or ablative procedures. Additionally, imiquimod can be used as a neoadjuvant or in combination with surgery, potentially enhancing immune responses and reducing the extent of surgical intervention required. Imiquimod does, however, have some logistical delivery challenges and tolerability issues which may limit its use in some cervical cancer patients. For example, as a topical treatment it sometimes has poor skin permeation which can lead to local toxicities and consequently skin irritation and when it does permeate the skin, it can result in systemic flu-like symptoms. Furthermore, it requires regular and precise application which can compromise patient compliance [ , ].
A randomized clinical trial explored the efficacy and tolerability of a single versus double application of 85 % TCA ( C) for treating CIN [ ]. The aim was to determine if more frequent applications could enhance treatment outcomes without increasing side effects. A second application of topical 85 % TCA did not appear to enhance the treatment response for CIN compared to a single dose. Given the absence of significant side effects and the potential for improved outcomes, further studies with larger sample sizes and increasing applications to more than two are recommended.
Another study compared 5-aminolevulinic acid PDT (ALA-PDT) ( C) to CO2 laser treatment for managing low-grade vaginal intraepithelial neoplasia (VAIN1) [ ]. ALA-PDT uses a localizing photosensitizer (ALA) followed by light activation (PDT) to destroy abnormal cells, whereas CO2 laser treatment uses a CO2 laser beam to vaporize abnormal cervical tissue. While, compared to radical surgery, CO2 laser is safer, more effective and fertility-preserving, ALA-PDT offers increased specificity and lower risk of damaging surrounding healthy tissue than CO2 laser for treating VAIN1. However, further research to determine the long-term effects of ALA-PDT on VAIN1 is needed. Another study compared the efficacy of ALA-PDT in low-grade squamous intraepithelial lesions (LSIL) against other treatments such as nocardia rubra cell wall skeleton (Nr-CWS), an immune booster used to treat cervical precancerous lesions and persistent HPV infection [ ]. The results showed that both ALA-PDT and Nr-CWS had similar effects and offered a viable, minimally invasive treatment for cervical LSIL with high-risk HPV. Furthermore, while conization is a well-established method for physical removal of severe intraepithelial lesions, fluorescence-assisted systemic PDT mediated by chlorin e6 was explored as an alternative. Results suggested that, compared to conization, systemic PDT was a non-surgical, less invasive option to target abnormal cells and reduced physical trauma and recovery time [ ]. These comparative studies are instrumental in refining the management of cervical precancerous conditions, offering insights into the benefits and drawbacks of each method to tailor treatment choices to patient needs, preferences, and specific medical contexts.
Finally, therapeutic vaccines that stimulate an immune response to specifically target HPV-infected cells in the cervix are advancing the treatment landscape for precancerous cervical lesions ( D). For example, early-phase clinical trials of DNA vaccines like VB10.16 which targets HPV16 and pNGVL4a-Sig/E7(detox)/HSP70 which targets the HPV16 E7 have shown that they have potential to induce an immune response specifically against HPV-infected cells. Indeed, early results from a phase I/IIa trial show that the VB10.16 vaccine enhances the ability of the immune system to target and eliminate HPV16-positive CIN2/3 [ ]. This suggests that the VB10.16 vaccine may offer a non-surgical treatment option to prevent cervical cancer progression. The pNGVL4a-Sig/E7(detox)/HSP70 vaccine on the other hand is being evaluated for its safety and efficacy in treating various grades of CIN associated with HPV16, including less severe dysplasia (LSIL/CIN1) or atypical squamous cells [ ]. The inclusion of heat shock protein 70 (HSP70) in the pNGVL4a-Sig/E7(detox)/HSP70 vaccine is important as it helps with folding and transporting proteins across membranes within the cell, which can enhance the overall immune response against the targeted HPV antigens. Another therapeutic vaccine is TA-CIN, which targets HPV E6, E7 and L2 [ ]. TA-CIN is a protein vaccine which aims to provide protection against more oncogenic HPV types than just HPV16. Each of these vaccines represents a unique approach to stimulating an immune response that specifically targets HPV-infected cells in the cervix, potentially halting the progression of precancerous lesions.
In summary, each of the treatments discussed above represents a unique approach to halting the progression of precancerous lesions. However, given that the various surgical techniques are associated with disease recurrence and the risks of infertility, miscarriage, premature delivery and rupture of membranes, it may be prudent to use the non-surgical approaches described above to complement or replace surgery.

4

## Treatment and management of cervical cancer
4.1

## HIV/AIDS treatments
HIV-positive women are 6 times more likely to develop cervical cancer due to compromised immune systems [ ]. Indeed, clearance of HPV infection takes significantly longer in HIV-positive women (689 days) compared to HIV-negative women (403 days) and the efficacy of HPV vaccines are diminished in HIV-positive women with lower CD4 counts [ ]. In addition, although the introduction of antiretroviral therapy (ART) has improved overall survival and reduced the incidence of other AIDS-defining cancers such as Kaposi's sarcoma and non-Hodgkin lymphoma, its impact on cervical cancer rates have not been as significant [ , ]. However, an in vitro study has reported that treatment of the HPV16-positive CaSki cells and HPV16-positive epithelial precancer cells (NIKS16) with four protease inhibitor drugs (lopinavir, ritonavir, nelfinavir, and saquinavir), currently used to treat HIV/AIDS, significantly and selectively depleted E6 and E7 and displayed potent anti-cervical cancer activity [ ]. Understanding the complex interplay between HIV and cervical cancer is clearly important and it may be worth testing the potential of HIV/AIDS drugs to treat patients with HPV-related cervical cancer. These insights will be crucial for developing effective interventions that can mitigate HIV- and HPV-related diseases in regions where both HIV and HPV infections are high.

4.2

## Natural compounds
The investigation of natural compounds for the treatment of cancer has unveiled a variety of agents with potent anticancer properties which offer new and complementary therapeutic options for the treatment of HPV-positive cervical cancer. These natural products range from glycolytic inhibitors to compounds targeting specific signalling molecules and have shown considerable promise in preclinical settings. summarizes some of the key natural compounds that have been reported on in the past three years for their anti-cervical cancer activity, and these examples will be the focus of this section. 
Natural products that function as glycolytic inhibitors for cervical cancer treatment are important given the Warburg effect, where cancer cells exhibit increased glycolysis, even in the presence of oxygen [ , ]. Natural compounds that target key glycolytic enzymes such as hexokinase, phosphofructokinase, and pyruvate kinase, offer a strategy to selectively impair cancer cell growth and survival [ ]. One such compound is resveratrol, a polyphenol found in grapes, blueberries, and red wine known for its antioxidant, anti-inflammatory and anticancer properties [ , , ]. Importantly, resveratrol was shown to downregulate the glycolytic enzymes hexokinase-2, pyruvate kinase M2, and lactate dehydrogenase A in breast, cervical, liver, bladder, oesophageal, prostate, brain, lung, skin, gastric, colon and head and neck cancers. This resulted in a reduction of cellular energy production, which is critical for the proliferation and survival of cancer cells [ ]. In cervical cancer, resveratrol has emerged as a promising chemopreventive agent largely due to its ability to inhibit the oncogenic activity of high-risk HPV E6 and E7, leading to increased p53 levels and reduced phosphorylated pRb [ ]. This promoted cell cycle arrest at the G1/S phase and apoptosis in HPV-positive cervical cancer cells. Resveratrol also induced apoptosis through the activation of caspases and the upregulation of pro-apoptotic proteins like Bax, while downregulating anti-apoptotic proteins such as Bcl-2 and Bcl-XL [ ]. It also triggered autophagy in cervical cancer cell lines by increasing lysosomal permeability [ ]. Beyond its effects on viral proteins, apoptosis, and autophagy, resveratrol inhibited key molecular pathways, such as EGFR, VEGFR, PKC, JNK, ERK, NF-kB, and STAT3, which are critical for cancer cell proliferation and survival. Furthermore, animal studies have shown that resveratrol treatment significantly reduced tumour volume and weight in mice bearing ectopic xenografted cervical cancer tumours [ ]. Moreover, several resveratrol analogues have been developed and some, for example oxyresveratrol, exhibit greater anticancer effects than the parent compound [ ]. A recent study found that oxyresveratrol inhibited the phosphorylation of AKT and GSK-3β, leading to a reduction in the expression of the anti-apoptotic protein MCL-1 and an induction in apoptosis. In addition, oxyresveratrol treatment decreased cell proliferation, in part by suppressing nuclear ki-67 expression, and migration of cervical cancer cells [ ]. While resveratrol exhibits promising anticancer properties, it is important to note that its low specificity may affect its safety profile. Indeed, high doses of resveratrol and its prolonged use have been linked to side effects such as gastrointestinal disturbances [ , , ]. This highlights the need for strategies to improve the delivery and therapeutic index of resveratrol.
Bergenin is an isocoumarin found in various plant species which has also shown promising activity against cervical cancer cells. A study by Chauhan et al. (2024) demonstrated that bergenin significantly reduced the viability of cervical cancer cells and caused typical apoptotic changes such as cell shrinkage and fragmentation [ ]. Proteomic analysis revealed that bergenin treatment downregulated key pathways involved in inflammation, interleukin secretion, angiogenesis, and cell proliferation, such as p38 MAPK, EGFR signalling, JAK-STAT, and histone H1 replication. Conversely, it activated pathways associated with tumour suppression and the stress response, including the p53 pathway, TGF-β signalling, acetylcholine receptor activity, and oxidative stress response. Bergenin also inhibited cervical cancer cell migration, invasion and metastasis by reducing the levels of the mesenchymal markers N-cadherin and vimentin, the metastasis-related proteins MMP-9 and galectin-3 and increasing expression of the epithelial marker E-cadherin [ ].
Traditional Chinese Medicine (TCM) encompasses a diverse range of natural compounds extracted from herbs and plants, with unique benefits for cancer treatment. Indeed, treatment with these extracts have been associated with symptom relief, reduced recurrence risk post-surgery, mitigation of toxic side effects and resistance related to radiation and chemotherapy and enhanced anti-tumour effects and safety profile. Additionally, TCM has been shown to enhance the quality of a patient's life and can therefore be considered a viable alternative to current therapies [ ]. Plant extracts such as puerarin, glycyrrhizin and curcumin, are key compounds that are often included in the category of TCM and are currently being explored to treat cervical cancer [ , , , , ]. Indeed, a study reported that puerarin, an isoflavonoid monomer isolated from the leguminous plant Pueraria lobate, targets multiple signalling pathways in HPV-positive HeLa cervical cancer cells [ ]. Findings from this study showed that puerarin effectively inhibited cell proliferation, induced apoptosis, and enhanced the expression of caspase-3/9 and Bax proteins partly by inhibiting the PI3K/Akt/mTOR signalling pathway [ ]. Results from another study showed that puerarin inhibited HPV E6 mRNA expression while increasing p53, Bcl-2, and E2F-1 mRNA expression, leading to a S-phase cell cycle arrest [ ]. These findings suggest that puerarin has potential to treat cervical cancer, though further studies are needed to clarify its anticancer mechanisms [ , ].
Glycyrrhizin is a triterpenoid isolated from the root of the Glycyrrhiza glabra liquorice plants [ ]. A study on glycyrrhizin demonstrated that it exhibits strong anticancer and pro-apoptotic effects in HPV-positive CaSki cervical cancer cells. Indeed, it increased chromatin condensation and caspase-3/8/9 activity, as well as elevated ROS levels and caused mitochondrial dysfunction. This led to both intrinsic and extrinsic apoptosis in these cells. Additionally, glycyrrhizin downregulated the Notch signalling pathway by inhibiting Notch-1, Jagged-1, and Hes-1, resulting in cell cycle arrest at the G0/G1 phase and suppression of cyclin D1 and CDK4 expression. The study further revealed that glycyrrhizin decreased the expression of HPV oncoproteins E6 and E7, which restored p53 levels [ ]. It is worth noting that glycyrrhizin may cause side effects such as hypertension and electrolyte imbalances and it is therefore important that optimization studies are performed [ , ].
Curcumin, the active ingredient of the turmeric plant, also exhibits anticancer properties through the modulation of multiple cellular pathways, including those involved in apoptosis and cell cycle regulation. Curcumin is also frequently used in TCM and is renowned for its potent anti-inflammatory, antioxidant, and wide range of anticancer effects. Specifically, curcumin interferes with cancer cell signalling molecules such as NF-κB, Wnt/β-catenin, and PI3K/Akt in several cancers and has therefore garnered increasing attention as a potential anticancer agent [ ]. Several studies have assessed the anticancer effects of curcumin in cervical cancer and have reported on its mechanism of action. Indeed, a study that examined the effect of curcumin on HeLa and CaSki cells showed that curcumin directly targets the HPV E6 protein, inhibiting cell proliferation and inducing apoptosis [ ]. Curcumin also impacts the JAK/STAT pathway, which influences cell growth and immune response, and the MAPK/ERK pathway, which plays a key role in cell proliferation and survival. Curcumin further modulates apoptotic pathways by activating caspase-3 and -9 and induces oxidative stress responses that contribute to cancer cell death. This broad mechanism of action makes curcumin a versatile anti-cervical cancer treatment candidate. A recent review consolidated the extensive research on curcumin in cervical cancer and discussed both the therapeutic potential and the challenges it faces [ ]. One of the critical challenges highlighted is the low bioavailability of curcumin, a limitation common to most natural compounds, which limits their effectiveness as therapeutic agents. Therefore, various strategies, have been proposed to overcome this limitation and to fully harness the potential of natural products in cervical cancer treatment. One such strategy has been to combine them with conventional therapies. For example, natural glycolytic inhibitors have been combined with traditional chemotherapeutic agents and have resulted in synergistic effects and in some cases, a reduction of side effects [ ]. Indeed, a study explored the synergistic effects of norcantharidin, a derivative of the natural compound cantharidin, in combination with fluorouracil (5-FU) to treat cervical cancer [ ]. The study first utilized network pharmacology and molecular docking to predict the potential targets and mechanisms of action of norcantharidin in combination with 5-FU. Subsequently, they explored the efficacy of the combination in cervical cancer cell lines. The results showed that combining norcantharidin and 5-FU significantly enhanced apoptosis compared to either agent alone which suggests that their combination may be a promising treatment approach [ ].
To overcome the challenges of using natural products for anticancer activity, such as low bioavailability, solubility, and potential toxicity, innovative solutions such as nanoparticle delivery systems and structural modifications of natural compounds have been proposed. For example, a study explored the nanoformulation of Epigallocatechin-3-Gallate (EGCG), a major catechin in green tea noted for its anti-inflammatory, antioxidant, and anticancer properties [ ]. It functions by modulating several important oncogenic pathways, including the inhibition of NF-kB, activation of apoptotic pathways, and interference with molecular events in cancer cell proliferation and metastasis. The encapsulation of EGCG in nanoparticles improved its cellular uptake, stability, and sustained release, enhancing its therapeutic effectiveness against cervical cancer cells. Furthermore, compared to EGCG on its own, nanoformulated EGCG showed superior anticancer activity in vitro and in vivo. Indeed, it demonstrated prolonged circulation time and targeted delivery, which significantly reduced tumour size. This approach not only underscores the potential of EGCG as a viable therapeutic agent in treating cervical cancer but also highlights the potential advantages of using nanotechnology in cervical cancer therapy [ ].
The above studies offer insight into how both traditional and novel compounds from natural sources have the potential to influence the treatment landscape of HPV-positive cervical cancer, particularly through the induction of apoptosis, inhibition of proliferation and the inhibition of important oncogenic cellular pathways. Recommendations for future research is for more clinical trials to be undertaken to validate the efficacy and safety of natural products, to improve their formulations and their combinations to treat cervical cancer.

4.3

## Targeted therapies
Targeted therapy represents a form of precision medicine which inhibits only biological pathways that are critical for tumour growth and survival and thus it overcomes the indiscriminate effects of conventional therapies. In cervical cancer, advancements in molecular profiling have identified key therapeutic targets such as tissue factor that is involved in angiogenesis and overexpressed on the cell surface of cervical cancer cells, HER2, and factors involved in angiogenesis. This section highlights current efforts to bring these targeted treatments from the laboratory to the bedside.
A study investigated the use of tisotumab vedotin, an antibody-drug conjugate which consists of a monoclonal antibody against tissue factor and monomethyl auristatin E (MMAE), a potent inhibitor of cell division for the treatment of cervical cancer [ , ]. By combining the targeting capabilities of an antibody with the cancer-killing action of a cytotoxic drug, tisotumab vedotin delivers potent chemotherapy directly to cancer cells, minimizing damage to normal tissues. A clinical trial of tisotumab vedotin as second- or third-line therapy for recurrent cervical cancer showed that it demonstrated significant anti-tumour activity with manageable side effects and thus offered a promising therapeutic option in cases where conventional chemotherapy may no longer be effective [ ]. Tisotumab vedotin was also tested in combination with carboplatin, pembrolizumab and bevacizumab (innovaTV 205/GOG-3024/ENGOT-cx8) to evaluate whether these combinations could enhance treatment efficacy against recurrent and metastatic cervical cancer [ ]. The findings indicated that, when used in conjunction with carboplatin, pembrolizumab or bevacizumab, tisotumab vedotin could significantly improve treatment outcomes. The integration of tisotumab vedotin with other therapies opens new avenues for comprehensive treatment approaches, providing hope for improved survival and quality of life for patients with advanced cervical cancer. It is, therefore, unsurprising that the US Food and Drug administration (FDA) have approved tisotumab vedotin-tftv for the treatment of recurrent and metastatic cervical cancer [ ].
Neratinib, an irreversible pan-HER tyrosine kinase inhibitor (TKI), is another treatment that has been explored in a phase II SUMMIT basket trial [ ]. Somatic mutations in HER2 have been found across multiple solid tumours, including approximately 3–6% of cervical cancers, and they are linked to poor clinical outcomes [ , ]. In cervical cancer, neratinib has been effective in reducing tumour growth and inhibiting proliferation in HER2-mutant cell lines and preclinical models. The phase II SUMMIT trial was conducted to evaluate the safety and effectiveness of neratinib in patients with HER2-mutant metastatic cervical cancer. Neratinib treatment resulted in sustained responses and effective disease control in patients which highlighted the importance of incorporating tumour genomic profiling in the management of advanced or recurrent cases [ ]. These studies demonstrate a strategic shift towards more personalized, effective, and targeted therapies in cervical cancer, leveraging both innovative drug formulations and novel therapeutic combinations to potentially improve patient outcomes.

4.4

## Immunotherapeutics
Immunotherapy has the potential to tailor and enhance treatment options for cervical cancer based on individual patient profiles and specific tumour characteristics. The immune system naturally defends against cancer through mechanisms such as cell cycle checkpoints and immune surveillance, which identify and destroy emerging tumour cells [ ]. During immune surveillance, abnormal proteins on the surface of cancer cells are recognized as antigens, triggering an immune response. However, many tumours evade this defence and suppress immune activity by activating immune checkpoints. Indeed, tumours express immune checkpoint proteins that bind to inhibitory receptors on cytotoxic T-cells, such as cytotoxic T-lymphocyte antigen 4 (CTLA-4) and programmed cell death 1 (PD-1). This inactivates these immune cells and prevents them from attacking the cancer. Immune checkpoint inhibitors therefore represent a promising class of immunotherapeutic approaches that have been explored in cervical cancer. A recent scientometric analysis of immunotherapy in cervical cancer, including immune checkpoint inhibitors, underscores the increasing research interest and clinical trials focused on this treatment approach [ ]. Some of the recent key studies and clinical trials that emphasize the potential and progress of immunotherapeutic approaches in managing HPV-positive cervical cancer are discussed below and summarised in . 
Anticancer vaccines can enhance cancer patient immunity by expanding and activating tumour-specific T cells and several recent reviews have described therapeutic vaccine approaches for cervical cancer [ , , , ]. An example is ISA101, which has successfully completed a Phase I/II trial (NCT02128126) and has entered further clinical development. ISA101 contains synthetic HPV16 E6 and E7 peptides and triggers an immune response when dendritic cells capture these peptides and present antigens to specific CD4+ and CD8+ T cells [ , ]. Recent vaccines have been explored that build on the success of vaccines like ISA101. This includes BVAC-C, a B cell- and monocyte-based immunotherapeutic vaccine transfected with recombinant HPV E6/E7, which showed good tolerance in a phase I trial for HPV-positive recurrent cervical cancer. A phase IIa study was therefore carried out to evaluate its antitumour efficacy in patients with recurrent HPV16- or 18-positive cervical cancer following platinum-based chemotherapy. Findings from this trial showed promising efficacy and an acceptable safety profile. All patients exhibited inflammatory cytokine responses (IFN-γ or TNF-α) and robust E6/E7-specific T cell responses following vaccination, which correlated with their clinical outcomes. This suggests that BVAC-C could be a viable option for patients with recurrent or refractory HPV-positive cervical cancer [ ]. Another vaccine of interest is the Universal Cancer Peptides vaccine (UCPVax), a telomerase CD4 TH1-inducer. Preclinical studies have shown that TH1 CD4 T cells, which secrete cytokines usually associated with inflammation, play a crucial role in maintaining and directing CD8+ T-cell responses [ ]. The activation of CD4+ T-helper cell responses has attracted significant attention in the field of cancer immunotherapy in which potent immunogenic CD4 epitopes, known as UCPs, were derived from telomerase reverse transcriptase (TERT) [ ]. TERT is expressed in all cancer types studied which makes it a clinically significant target for cancer vaccines. Furthermore, previous clinical trials have shown that the induction of anti-hTERT immunity was strongly associated with improved survival in patients with advanced squamous anal cancer [ ].
Current clinical trials have shown that only a portion of cancer patients (20–40 %) benefit from treatment with immune checkpoint inhibitors and that fewer than 20 % of cervical cancer patients respond to anti-PD-1 monotherapy [ ]. Several strategies have therefore been explored to improve the therapeutic responses to immune checkpoint inhibitors. These include the identification of (1) additional immune checkpoint proteins which may be targeted together to avoid immune escape, (2) the composition of the microbiome which could be modulated to allow for improved immune infiltration and (3) immunotherapeutic, chemotherapeutic or targeted drugs that can be used in combination with immune checkpoint inhibitors [ , , ]. For example, clinical studies have demonstrated that combining ISA101 with immune checkpoint inhibitors, such as nivolumab, enhances therapeutic efficacy. Indeed, a phase II trial reported an overall response rate of 33 % in patients with incurable HPV16-positive cancers when treated with ISA101 and nivolumab, with responses correlating to vaccine-induced T-cell activity [ ]. Additionally, a key proof-of-concept study is currently assessing the efficacy and safety of combining UCPVax with the anti-PD-L1 immunotherapy atezolizumab in HPV-positive cancers [ ]. The study aims to confirm their synergistic effects and establish a foundation for future combination therapies in clinical trials, in which objective response rates are expected to exceed 45 %. Atezolizumab has also been combined with bevacizumab, another monoclonal antibody, as well as with chemotherapy (cisplatin, carboplatin and paclitaxel) in the BEATcc trial for metastatic, persistent, or recurrent cervical cancer [ ]. This regimen improved progression-free (PFS) and overall survival (OS) compared to chemotherapy alone, with manageable adverse effects.
Recurrent or metastatic cervical cancer patients have limited treatment options after platinum-containing treatment and therefore, targeted immunotherapies such as SHR-1701, nivolumab, sintilimab, and anlotinib, could provide alternative treatments. A phase I study investigated SHR-1701, a bifunctional fusion protein that targets PD-L1 and TGFβ, in patients with recurrent or metastatic cervical cancer during or after platinum-based therapy [ ]. Results showed that SHR-1701 exhibited encouraging antitumour activity with acceptable safety [ ]. Studies on nivolumab, a monoclonal antibody that specifically inhibits PD-1, in advanced and recurrent cervical cancer demonstrated variations in response rates and survival outcomes. This is likely due to differences in the cervical cancer stage of the patient, differences in the dosage and intervals of treatment, and PD-L1 status [ ]. The safety profile of nivolumab was generally favourable, and Rodrigues et al. showed that it had promising outcomes in overall response rate (ORR) and PFS [ ]. It has therefore been suggested that nivolumab would be effective in combination therapies. The recent CheckMate 358 phase I/II trial investigated nivolumab with or without iIpilimumab, a CTLA-4 monoclonal antibody, in recurrent or metastatic cervical cancer [ ]. Findings from this trial demonstrated promising antitumour activity, durable responses and a manageable safety profile with this dual immunotherapy. Another phase II trial revealed that the combination of sintilimab, a selective anti–PD-1 monoclonal antibody, with anlotinib, a multi-kinase inhibitor was an effective and safe second-line or later treatment option in PD-L1–positive recurrent or metastatic cervical cancer patients who have not responded to prior chemotherapy [ ].
Current therapies for cervical cancer, including radical hysterectomy, chemoradiation, and chemotherapy, often result in permanent damage to reproductive organs, significantly limiting fertility for young patients. Furthermore, chemotherapy, especially when combined with radiation, can induce ovarian failure and damage the uterus, further reducing the likelihood of future pregnancies [ , , ]. Combining immunotherapies with conventional chemotherapies therefore aims to enhance the effectiveness of chemotherapeutic agents by leveraging the ability of the immune system to target cancer cells more precisely. A phase II study is currently evaluating the combination of AK104, a novel PD-1/CTLA-4 bispecific antibody, with nab-paclitaxel and carboplatin as neoadjuvant therapy (NCT06209294) [ ]. Preliminary indication is that this combination has the potential to preserve fertility in young patients with stage IB2-IB3 cervical cancer. Another phase II study investigated the combination of the PD-1/CTLA-4 bispecific monoclonal antibody, cadonilimab, with paclitaxel, cisplatin or carboplatin (COMPASSION-13), and bevacizumab, as a first-line treatment in recurrent or metastatic cervical cancer [ ]. The combination of these chemotherapy drugs with cadonilimab showed enhanced antitumour activity and a favourable safety profile, and a phase III confirmatory clinical trial is ongoing (NCT04982237). A phase II trial (NACI study) also investigated the anti-PD-1 immune checkpoint inhibitor, camrelizumab, in combination with cisplatin plus nab-paclitaxel for locally advanced cervical cancer [ ]. Results from this trial showed high response rates and manageable toxicity, indicating that this approach has potential as an effective treatment strategy.
Chemoradiotherapy alone has several limitations in treating cervical cancer, particularly in advanced or recurrent cases. While it can effectively shrink tumours and control local disease, chemoradiotherapy does not always address distant metastases or micro-metastatic disease, and some cervical cancers develop resistance to chemoradiotherapy [ , ]. Cervical cancer is also often associated with immune evasion mechanisms and therefore targeting the immune system with immunotherapy in combination with chemoradiotherapy has been proposed as a more effective approach. Indeed, chemoradiotherapy has been combined with pembrolizumab, a PD-1 inhibitor, in newly diagnosed, high-risk, locally advanced cervical cancer (ENGOT-cx11/GOG-3047/KEYNOTE-A18) [ ]. This combination significantly improved survival outcomes and disease control, with tolerable side effects. Pembrolizumab has also been explored in combination with current chemotherapy agents. For example, a phase III trial assessed health-related quality of life with pembrolizumab or placebo, plus paclitaxel, cisplatin or carboplatin, with or without bevacizumab (KEYNOTE-826). The results demonstrated that pembrolizumab significantly improved PFS and OS compared to placebo in patients with persistent, recurrent, or metastatic cervical cancer undergoing platinum-based chemotherapy, with or without bevacizumab. Furthermore, the safety profile of the combination therapy aligned with the established safety profiles of the individual agents [ , ]. Finally, a chemo-immunotherapy combination consisting of paclitaxel-carboplatin with or without nintedanib, a small molecule tyrosine kinase/angiokinase inhibitor, was explored in a randomized phase II BGOG/ENGOT-cx1 study. This combination was investigated in first-line recurrent or advanced cervical cancer and results suggested that the addition of nintedanib prolonged PFS in these patients [ ].
Adoptive cell therapy (ACT) has also demonstrated encouraging outcomes in cancer research and is currently being explored for its use in cervical cancer. There are two main ACT techniques: one involves using naturally occurring tumour-infiltrating lymphocytes (TILs) isolated from the tumour, while the other involves genetically engineering T-cells to recognize tumour antigens through either natural T-cell receptors or chimeric antigen receptors (CARs) [ ]. Previous studies have suggested that factors such as serum cytokine levels, tumour mutation burden, immune checkpoints, and the composition of infiltrating immune cells can influence the effectiveness of TIL-based ACT [ , , , , , ]. A phase I study on adjuvant immunotherapy using autologous TILs in locally advanced cervical cancer demonstrated significant immune activation and antitumour responses and were well-tolerated [ ]. This trial also examined the relationship between clinical response and baseline immune-related biomarkers. The findings also indicated that low levels of immune-suppressive factors like TOX and Foxp3, along with high infiltration of lymphocytes and elevated baseline inflammatory cytokines, may predict a positive response to auto-TIL treatment [ ]. However, further validation in larger studies with rigorous statistical analysis is needed.
Collectively, the above recent studies highlight the diverse and evolving landscape of immunotherapies and their combinations in treating HPV-positive cervical cancer. The strategies described demonstrate promising clinical outcomes and manageable safety profiles.

5

## Lifestyle recommendations
As we consider the management of cervical cancer, it is crucial to focus on lifestyle factors, ranging from diet and physical activity to smoking cessation, that can support treatment efficacy and potentially lower the risk of cancer development and progression [ , ]. This will allow for a comprehensive approach to cancer care and are discussed below.
Research has shown that engaging in regular physical activity can help boost the immune system, reduce inflammation, and improve overall health. This makes it a vital lifestyle strategy with the potential to optimize cancer treatment outcomes and maintain well-being during therapy [ , ]. Indeed, physical exercise has been shown to mitigate common side effects of cancer therapies, enhance survival rates, and reduce the likelihood of cancer relapse. Physical fitness, particularly prior to surgery, is crucial, as it is associated with fewer peri-operative complications and faster recovery [ ]. There is also increasing evidence to support the role of exercise in improving responses to various cancer treatments including chemotherapy and immunotherapy. Implementing exercise directly into treatment settings is being explored, though more research and proactive implementation is needed to establish this practice widely [ ]. Furthermore, incorporating smoking cessation into the lifestyle recommendations for patients undergoing cervical cancer treatment or post-treatment has shown significant benefits [ ]. A systematic review and meta-analysis confirmed the association of cigarette smoking with cervical cancer development and showed that this association rose sharply with smoking intensity (number of cigarettes and years of smoking) and decreased after smoking cessation [ ]. Considering these findings, countries have adopted smoking cessation intervention strategies, such as Motivation and Problem Solving (MAPS). A randomized controlled trial showed that this intervention and structured support in conjunction with standard treatment led to a greater than two-fold increase in smoking abstinence among survivors of CIN and cervical cancer at 12 months [ ]. Moreover, studies comparing in-clinic to online recruitment methods for smoking cessation trials suggest that both approaches effectively engage participants, though each has unique benefits regarding reach and retention [ ]. This indicates that providing flexible cessation program options could be key to accommodating the diverse needs and preferences of cervical cancer survivors. This is particularly important as a descriptive study found that cervical cancer survivors smoked cigarettes at a significantly higher rate than women in the general population [ ]. Additional trials that investigate similar interventions to those described above are needed to further improve the long-term health of cervical cancer patients and survivors.
A well-balanced, nutrient-rich diet is crucial in cancer prevention, treatment, and recovery. Recent research emphasizes the crucial role of dietary antioxidants, including vitamins A, C, E, folate and carotenoids, in preventing cervical cancer and slowing its progression [ ]. Indeed, vitamin A, including its precursor carotenoids like beta-carotene, lutein, and lycopene, are found in foods such as carrots, spinach, and tomatoes, among others, and helps reduce oxidative stress and protect cells from damage. Studies show a 10 % reduction in HPV infection risk with adequate intake of vitamin A [ , , ]. Carotenoids are plant pigments responsible for the bright yellow, red, and orange colours in many fruits and vegetables. There are over 600 types of carotenoids, some of which can be converted into vitamin A in the body. Carotenoids such as lutein and lycopene are associated with significantly lower HPV persistence as well as inhibition of CIN3 development [ , , , ]. Vitamins C and E found in citrus fruits, bell peppers, almonds, and spinach, offer further protection by neutralizing free radicals and preventing oxidative DNA damage. This has been shown to reduce the risk of CIN and to promote the clearance of HPV [ , ]. Lastly, folate, found in leafy greens, legumes, citrus fruits, and fortified cereals, is essential for DNA synthesis and repair. It plays a crucial role in reducing the risk of HPV infection and preventing the progression to cervical cancer [ , , ]. Together, these studies collectively advocate for a diet enriched with beneficial antioxidants found in many kinds of fruits, vegetables, nuts, and seeds which form a comprehensive defence against the development and progression of cervical cancer.
A study found that greater vegetable intake was associated with a 54 % reduction in the risk of HPV persistence [ ]. In China, studies on onion-related vegetables and legumes also demonstrated a notable reduction in the risk of CIN [ ]. Similarly, the intake of fresh vegetables was consistently shown to have protective effects against the progression from HPV infection to more advanced stages of cervical disease [ ]. Furthermore, nutrients from cruciferous vegetables, particularly isothiocyanates, carotenoids, and flavonoids, were demonstrated to have a substantial impact on cancer-preventive pathways involving p53 [ ]. For example, sulforaphane, found in broccoli, cabbage, and brussels sprouts, induced p53 activation and consequently the expression of its target genes such as p21 and Bax. This led to cell cycle arrest and apoptosis which are essential for inhibiting tumour growth. These vegetable-derived compounds not only activated p53 but also influenced associated pathways like ERK and PI3K/Akt. Fruit consumption has comparable benefits to vegetables. For instance, Mediterranean diets rich in fruits, fats and oils are associated with a decreased risk of high-risk HPV infections, and higher intake of specific fruits like oranges has also been linked to reduced risk of SILs [ , ].
Vitamin D plays a critical role in promoting calcium absorption, ensuring proper bone mineralization, and supporting bone growth and remodelling by osteoblasts and osteoclasts. Beyond bone health, vitamin D also modulates cell growth, immune function, and reduces inflammation [ ]. Studies support the potential benefits of vitamin D in cervical health where it has been shown to alleviate clinical and metabolic symptoms in patients with HPV infection [ ]. A 2010 case–control study in Japan found that higher vitamin D intake reduced the risk of cervical neoplasia [ ]. Another study found that vitamin D deficiency was more common in HPV-positive patients compared to HPV-negative ones, suggesting that low levels may contribute to persistent HPV infections and CIN development [ , ]. Omega-3 fatty acids, primarily found in fish oils, is another nutrient that modulates inflammation and immune responses. Recent studies have explored the role of omega-3 as a supplemental treatment for cervical cancer. One study found that omega-3 supplementation helped maintain nutritional status and improved the quality of skeletal muscle in cervical cancer patients undergoing chemoradiotherapy. This also led to a significant reduction in treatment-related toxicity [ ]. Additionally, the anti-inflammatory properties of omega-3 fatty acids were shown to play a critical role in managing cancer-related complications, such as cachexia and inflammation [ ]. Consistent with this, omega-3s have been studied as an adjuvant therapy to alleviate the adverse effects of antineoplastic treatments which was shown to improve the quality of life for breast cancer patients [ ]. These findings highlight the versatile role that omega-3 fatty acids can play in supporting cancer treatment [ ].
Probiotics can also be pivotal in cervical cancer management by boosting immune functions, maintaining a healthy vaginal microbiome, and lowering the likelihood of secondary infections. They can help preserve vaginal health during treatments with among others, antibiotics and radiotherapy, possibly alleviating side effects such as Radiation Induced Diarrhea (RID). Additional studies are required to fully exploit the anticancer potential of probiotics to enhance or substitute traditional cancer therapies [ , ]. Digestive enzyme supplements also play an important role in aiding nutrient absorption, especially in patients with impaired digestion which result from cancer treatments [ ]. These enzymes help the body extract essential nutrients from food, supporting healing and overall function. While enzymes in general do not directly target tumours when taken with meals, studies suggest that proteolytic enzymes, such as those found in cruciferous vegetables, may reach systemic circulation and exhibit anti-tumour activity. Research has shown their potential to reduce metastasis, improve survival rates in animal models, and to alleviate side effects of cancer therapies like radiation [ ].
Natural supplements such as vitamin D, omega-3 fatty acids, probiotics, and digestive enzymes can support the treatment and management of HPV-positive cervical cancer. However, it is important to consult healthcare professionals before starting any new treatments or supplements to ensure they are appropriate and safe in the context of existing medical treatments.

6

## Conclusions
In conclusion, HPV-positive cervical cancer continues to be a significant global health burden, particularly in LMICs where most patients are diagnosed with advanced stage disease and treatment options are limited. There are many reasons for this including the high burden of HIV and limited access to vaccination and early screening. Despite advances in preventive measures, treatment options for advanced cervical cancer remain limited, necessitating the development of more effective and accessible therapies. This review discusses the key molecular mechanisms driving HPV-induced cervical carcinogenesis, and how the treatment landscape for HPV-positive cervical cancer has evolved significantly over the past few years. The potential of recent therapeutic approaches such as immunotherapies, antibody-drug conjugates, and natural compounds in clinical and preclinical settings are described. Additionally, the role of natural supplements, such as vitamin D, omega-3 fatty acids, probiotics, and digestive enzymes, offer supportive therapies that may enhance treatment efficacy and improve patient outcomes by targeting inflammation, immune modulation, and nutrient absorption. Lifestyle modifications, such as improved nutrition and regular physical activity, further complement these treatments, emphasizing a holistic approach to cervical cancer care. Continued research and clinical validation are essential to integrate these therapies into standard clinical practice. Looking ahead, the future of cervical cancer treatment will likely involve a more personalized approach, incorporating molecular diagnostics to tailor therapies based on individual patient profiles. Developing cost-effective, accessible treatments, especially for resource-limited settings, remains a critical goal to reduce the global burden of cervical cancer and improve survival outcomes.

## CRediT authorship contribution statement
Carly A. Burmeister: Writing – review & editing, Writing – original draft, Conceptualization. Saif F. Khan: Writing – review & editing, Writing – original draft. Sharon Prince: Writing – review & editing, Writing – original draft, Conceptualization.

## Declaration of competing interest
The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper.

 

## Data availability
No data was used for the research described in the article.

## Acknowledgements
 , in this manuscript were created using BioRender (https://biorender.com/) as part of the Academic License. Prof. Prince gratefully acknowledges and thank theUniversity of Capetown under the UCT Vision 2030 Grand Challenges Programme, the National Research Foundation of South Africa under a Competitive Programme for Rated Researchers, the International Centre for Genetic Engineering and Biotechnology (ICGEB) under a Collaborative Research Programme, the South African Medical Research Council (SAMRC) under a Self-Initiated Research Grant for financial support as well as through the SAMRC Gynaecological Cancer Research Centre (GCRC). The views and opinions expressed are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily represent the official views of the SAMRC and other funders.