pmcMol Syst BiolMol Syst Biol387molsystbiolMSBMolecular Systems Biology1744-4292Nature Publishing GroupPMC10698507PMC10698507.110698507106985073803196010.15252/msb.202211462MSB2022114621ArticleArticlesIntegrated systems biology approach identifies gene targets for endothelial dysfunction
Iguaracy Pinheiro‐de‐Sousa et al
Pinheiro‐de‐SousaIguaracyhttps://orcid.org/0000-0002-3956-3279 Fonseca‐AlanizMiriam Helenahttps://orcid.org/0000-0003-2358-9463 GiudiceGirolamohttps://orcid.org/0000-0002-5359-8208 ValadãoIuri Cordeiro ModestiaSilvestre Massimo MattioliSarah Vianahttps://orcid.org/0000-0002-4323-1613 JuniorRicardo Rosahttps://orcid.org/0000-0001-5059-5952 ZalmasLykourgos‐Panagiotis FangYun PetsalakiEvangeliahttps://orcid.org/0000-0002-8294-2995 petsalaki@ebi.ac.ukKriegerJosé Eduardohttps://orcid.org/0000-0001-5464-1792 j.krieger@hc.fm.usp.br

1

Laboratory of Genetics and Molecular Cardiology
Heart Institute (InCor)/University of São Paulo Medical School
São Paulo
Brazil

2

European Molecular Biology Laboratory
European Bioinformatics Institute
Hinxton
UK

3

Department of Biophysics and Pharmacology
Institute of Biosciences of Botucatu, Universidade Estadual Paulista
Botucatu
Brazil

4

Wellcome Trust Sanger Institute, Wellcome Trust Genome Campus
Cambridge
UK

5

Open Targets, Wellcome Genome Campus
Cambridge
UK

6

Department of Medicine
University of Chicago
Chicago
IL
USA

*
Corresponding author. Tel: +44 1223 492665; E‐mail: petsalaki@ebi.ac.uk

Corresponding author. Tel: +55 11 2661 5022; E‐mail: j.krieger@hc.fm.usp.br

†
These authors contributed equally to this work
30112023122023191245043310.1002/msb.v19.12e11462
20102023
18112022
23102023
301120230712202308032024© 2023 The Authors. Published under the terms of the CC BY 4.0 licensehttps://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/This is an open access article under the terms of the http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/ License, which permits use, distribution and reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited.

## Abstract
Endothelial dysfunction (ED) is critical in the development and progression of cardiovascular (CV) disorders, yet effective therapeutic targets for ED remain elusive due to limited understanding of its underlying molecular mechanisms. To address this gap, we employed a systems biology approach to identify potential targets for ED. Our study combined multi omics data integration, with siRNA screening, high content imaging and network analysis to prioritise key ED genes and identify a pro‐ and anti‐ED network. We found 26 genes that, upon silencing, exacerbated the ED phenotypes tested, and network propagation identified a pro‐ED network enriched in functions associated with inflammatory responses. Conversely, 31 genes ameliorated ED phenotypes, pointing to potential ED targets, and the respective anti‐ED network was enriched in hypoxia, angiogenesis and cancer‐related processes. An independent screen with 17 drugs found general agreement with the trends from our siRNA screen and further highlighted DUSP1, IL6 and CCL2 as potential candidates for targeting ED. Overall, our results demonstrate the potential of integrated system biology approaches in discovering disease‐specific candidate drug targets for endothelial dysfunction.

Multi‐omics data integration, genetic and pharmacological perturbations, and network analysis on endothelial cells are combined to identify endothelial dysfunction network signatures and prioritise candidate therapeutic targets. 

data integrationdrug targetsendothelial dysfunctionnetwork analysissystems biology

## Subject Categories
Cardiovascular SystemMolecular Biology of DiseasePharmacology & Drug DiscoveryCNPq
10.13039/501100003593309179/2013‐0Conselho Nacional de Desenvolvimento Cientifico e Tecnologico (CNPq)INCT‐465586/2014‐7Coordination for the Improvement of Higher Education Personnel
10.13039/501100002322CAPES 88882.328126/2019‐01European Molecular Biology Laboratory‐ European Bioinformatics InstituteSao Paulo Research FoundationFAPESP‐INCT‐20214/50889‐72013/17368‐0Unrestricted grant from FOXCONN Brazil We then performed differential expression analysis to identify differentially expressed genes (DEGs) among the different stimuli. Principal component analysis and hierarchical clustering revealed two major groups of stimuli: one group including IL‐1β, TNF‐α and OSS, and the other group including LSS, static basal control, and OxPAPC (Figs  and ). For our analysis, we compared OSS to LSS instead of static controls due to data availability, whereas IL‐1β, TNF‐α and OxPAPC treatments were compared to their respective static controls. We identified 578 DEGs (OSS), 928 DEGs (IL‐1β), 594 DEGs (TNF‐α), and 186 DEGs (OxPAPC) in the respective cardiovascular risk factor models. Among these, we selected only those genes that were annotated to the 6,630 identified peaks, resulting in a set of 356 DEGs (Fig  ). These genes were found to be enriched in known processes associated with ED, including inflammatory pathways (e.g., cytokine production, cell‐adhesion molecules and leukocyte chemotaxis), oxidative stress and regulation of angiogenesis and vasculature development (Fig  ).
To further improve our confidence in our identified ED genes, we filtered the 356 DEGs identified above, keeping only those regulated by TFs predicted to bind the identified peaks from the epigenetic data. Specifically, we identified key TFs that were relevant to the stimuli and their downstream DEGs by performing de novo motif enrichment analysis at the 6,630 identified peaks. We discovered seven significantly enriched motifs and predicted 29 TFs that were likely to bind to these motifs (P < 0.05, Fig  ; ). The most significant TFs identified were Foxd3 (P = 3.3e‐06), IRF1 (P = 1.4e‐06), TLX1: NFIC (P = 1.4e‐05), and SP1 (P = 1.6919e‐06) (Fig  ). We then considered only the TF‐DEG interactions supported by the TRRUST database and present at the 6,630 enhancer‐like regions (Han et al,  ). This resulted in the identification of 100 genes, including 46 TFs and 54 non‐TFs (Fig  and Dataset  ). Notably, NFKB1 and RELA, which are associated with the inflammatory response (Mussbacher et al, ), were found to regulate the largest number of downstream DEGs. Furthermore, NFKB1 was upregulated in the IL‐1β and TNF‐α conditions compared to their basal controls.
Overall, our analysis provides a set of ED genes that serve as the foundation for constructing ED disease networks and identifying key node genes that have the potential to be therapeutic targets for cardiovascular diseases. Out of the 100 identified ED genes, 81 were upregulated, 5 were downregulated, and 14, all of which were TFs enriched in the motifs found in the overlapping peaks, were not found to be significantly differentially expressed. Subsequent analyses in this study focused on the 81 upregulated genes, to identify potential targets that can be inhibited to gain insights on the gene rewiring adaptation associated with ED and to treat ED.

## 
In vitro
siRNA screen finds 83% of ED genes to have an effect on an ED phenotype
We next induced ED by co‐stimulating endothelial cells (ECs) with IL‐1β and OxPAPC ( ) and investigated the impact of 81 upregulated genes on three well‐known surrogate markers associated with ED: increased inflammation, ROS production, cell permeability and cell viability (Fig  ). Inflammation and ROS production play crucial roles in the initiation and progression of ED (Xu et al,  ). Inflamed ECs express various key molecules, including chemokines, interferons and inflammatory markers like intercellular adhesion molecule‐1 (ICAM1), which contribute to monocyte adhesion and plaque growth (Xu et al,  ). Additionally, the loss of endothelial barrier integrity and increased permeability have been associated with reduced VE‐cadherin membrane‐localised expression (Chan et al,  ).
 We performed a siRNA screen using high‐content imaging in HAECs stimulated with IL‐1β (10 ng/ml) and OxPAPC (50 μg/ml) to induce the ED phenotype (Birukov et al,  ; Du et al,  ), and quantified the changes in nuclei counts by DAPI staining, as well as essential readouts for ED, namely general ROS levels, ICAM1 and VE‐cadherin protein expression (Figs  and ; Dataset  ; ).
 Nuclei counts demonstrate that several genes are essential for the ECs survival under the IL‐1β & OxPAPC pathological stimuli (Fig  ). Knockdown of 52 genes resulted in significant changes in nuclei counts, with 47 increasing cell death (top genes were NRA42, FOS, TRAF1, HGF and SLC7A5), and 5 decreasing it (JUNB, SALL4, NOX4, VEGFA and FOSB). To investigate whether the increased cell death associated with some genes was dependent on the pathological chemical stimuli, we performed a cell viability assay (calcein and ethidium staining) for HAEC transfected with each of the 81 siRNA without the IL‐1β and OxPAPC stimuli. None of the genes appeared to be essential in the absence of the pathological stimuli, suggesting their specific relevance to cell survival and function in the context of endothelial dysfunction (Fig  ).
Knockdown of 38 genes significantly modulated ICAM1 protein expression, with 25 genes increasing ICAM1 staining (top hits HGF, FOS, SLC7A5, NR4A2 and TRAF1), while 13 genes decreased ICAM1 expression (top hits CSF2, NR4A3, ST6GAL1, UPP1 and VEGFA) compared to our control cells transfected with scrambled siRNA in the same conditions (Figs  , and ). Knockdown of 23 genes modulated ROS production, among which 13 increased ROS production (top hits were TRAF1, SLC7A5, FOS, HGF and NR4A2), and 10 had an antioxidant effect (top genes were JUNB, HEY1, SOCS1, NR4A3 and MAFG) (Figs  , and ). Knockdown of 21 genes significantly modulated VE‐cadherin membrane staining, with 20 of them decreasing its expression (top hits were TRAF1, SLC7A5, FOS, HGF and NR4A2), and one gene increasing VE‐cadherin staining (LDLR) (Figs  , and ). In summary, 68 of the 81 genes had a significant impact on at least one of the ED readouts when their gene expression was silenced.
Next, to integrate the results of our experiments, we performed an aggregated rank analysis (Kolde et al,  ) using the Z‐score values of their readouts for each gene (Fig  ; ). By combining the four readouts, ICAM1, ROS, VE‐cadherin and nuclei counts (cell death), we generated two ranked lists: the “pro‐endothelial dysfunction (pro‐ED)” list includes 26 genes that when knocked down significantly exacerbate the ED phenotypes tested (Fig  ), with TRAF1, FOS, HGF, SLC75A and NR4A2 being the top hits. The “anti‐endothelial dysfunction (anti‐ED)” list consists of 31 genes that significantly ameliorate the ED phenotypes (Fig  ), with JUNB, NR4A3, SALL4, CSF2 and HEY1 being the top hits.

## Network propagation reveals an ED network that is enriched in DEGs from human ECs located at human atherosclerotic plaques
The pro‐ and anti‐ED genes that we identified provide putative targets and genes that can be important for endothelial cells adaptation to the pathological stimuli. These lists of genes, however, do not give us information regarding the relationships between them or their functional context. To gain better insights into the processes that are associated with cell survival during ED and the disease phenotype, we employed a network analysis strategy. Specifically, we used the respective 26 and 31 pro‐ and anti‐ED knockdown genes and the random‐walk‐with‐restart (RWR) algorithm (Tong et al, ) on a human protein interaction network (Kerrien et al, ; Hornbeck et al,  ; Türei et al,  ; Surdo et al,  ) to generate network signatures associated with these two EC phenotypes ( ). The resulting pro‐ and anti‐ ED, and combined ED network signatures comprise 176, 167, and 216 nodes and 224, 268 and 317 edges, respectively (Figs  , and ; Dataset  ).
 To validate the relevance of our combined ED network in an in vivo context, we re‐analysed three single‐cell RNA sequencing (scRNA‐seq) datasets obtained from human atherosclerotic vasculature (Wirka et al,  ; Alsaigh et al,  ; Jones et al,  ) (Fig  ). Specifically, we compared two datasets obtained from atherosclerotic plaques to those derived from vasculature without plaques (Fig  ). ECs were further categorised (Fig  ), and differential expression analysis between ECs from plaques and normal vasculature identified 705 DEGs (526 upregulated and 179 downregulated, Dataset  ). Among the 526 upregulated DEGs, were several well‐established genes associated with atherosclerosis plaques, such as matrix Gla protein (Herrmann et al,  ), VIM (Shi et al,  ), and B2M (Shi et al,  ) (Fig  ). We found that 14 out of our 81 ED genes were also upregulated in ECs derived from atherosclerotic plaque in vivo samples, with 10 of them (Fig  ) from the anti‐ED group, including RHOB, SOD2, EGR1 and JUNB (Fig  and Dataset  ).
 We found that the DEGs within ECs from plaques were significantly enriched within our combined and anti‐ED gene networks (P < 0.02 and P < 0.0005 respectively) but not our pro‐ED gene network (P = 0.171) when compared to the background human protein interaction network, as determined by the hypergeometric test (Fig  ). This enrichment supports the relevance of our ED disease gene networks in the in vivo condition, particularly within the context of atherosclerotic vasculature, and our hypothesis that the pro‐ED network represents network adaptation rather than being causal for the disease phenotype.
Looking at the combined ED network (Fig  ) we find that the genes form a relatively interconnected network indicating that there is crosstalk between the processes related to cell adaptation and survival in ED and those associated causally with the disease phenotypes.
 Next, we compared the pro‐ and anti‐ED networks to better understand their respective properties. In terms of network topology, the pro‐ED network has a lower clustering coefficient of 0.058, suggesting that the network rewiring associated with survival and adaptation in ED conditions is less interconnected and includes more distinct sub‐clusters (Fig  ). For example, the pro‐ED network includes a large cluster of genes associated with the inflammatory response, such as PF4, CXCL12, CCL11 among several other chemokines, and another cluster comprising genes involved in extracellular matrix components and endothelial cell adhesion mediated by integrins like ITGAV, VTN, ITGB3 and ITGB8 during inflammation (Gao et al,  ; Aman & Margadant,  ). In contrast, the anti‐ED network is characterised by a highly interconnected module (clustering coefficient = 0.151), with most of its central hubs belonging to the Activator Protein‐1 (AP‐1) family of transcription factors, such as JUN, ATF, BATF and MAF proteins (Fig  ). JUNB, FOSB, MAFG and ATF3 all presented a protective effect in ECs under pathological stimuli when silenced (Fig  ).
Comparing the semantic similarity between the genes in the pro‐ and anti‐ED network indeed shows that the pro‐ED network comprises more functionally diverse genes (Wilcoxon rank test P‐value < 0.0005; Fig  ). However, classic functional enrichment analysis shows that the pro‐ED network is mostly enriched in inflammatory pathways, whereas the anti‐ED network is more enriched in gene regulation, angiogenesis, hypoxia and some low level of inflammation pathways (Fig  ). The difference likely arises because the genes in the pro‐ED network seem to have more specific functions compared to those in the anti‐ED one, which seems to be associated with more processes and pathways, leading to enrichment of more diverse processes overall (Fig  ). The network boosted the signal for the mentioned pathways when comparing to initial list of pro‐ and anti‐ED genes (Fig  ).
Both networks demonstrate similar enrichment terms for cardiovascular phenotypes, such as cardiovascular diseases and atherosclerosis, in the context of disease‐enriched terms (Fig  ). However, the nodes within the anti‐ED network seem to exhibit a higher enrichment in non‐direct cardiovascular phenotypes, including cancer diseases, asthma or degenerative polyarthritis, with the latter being the top enriched term for the anti‐ED nodes (Fig  ).
Finally, we mapped the targets of known drugs for cardiovascular diseases (CVDs) on both pro‐ and anti‐ED networks (Dataset  ), to see if there are any differences in the way these networks are targeted in the clinic. We identified 18 and 17 target genes for pro‐ED and anti‐ED, respectively, including ITGAV, SERPINE1, PLAU and NFKB1, which we found to be essential for ECs during dysfunction (Dataset  ). This is consistent with our disease enrichment analysis, which found similar enrichment for CVDs for both networks (Fig  ). However, anti‐ED nodes are also substantially more enriched for drugs and diseases not related to CVD, likely due to their pleiotropic functions (Fig  ).

## Independent drug screen corroborates findings and provides additional support for ED targets
As an independent validation of the findings from the siRNA screen, we conducted our phenotypic experiment using drug perturbations instead of siRNA. To identify potential drugs targeting genes among our 81 ED genes, we utilised the ChEMBL and OpenTargets databases (Willighagen et al,  ; Ochoa et al,  ) and selected 17 drugs based on their low Kd/Ki/IC50 values, physicochemical properties (Zhu et al,  ), the assay and cell type used in determining their Kd/Ki/IC50, and their commercial availability ( ). These drugs were chosen irrespective of the results from the siRNA screen (Table  and Dataset  ).
Before proceeding with the imaging experiment, we confirmed that neither the selected drugs nor the dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO) vehicle control exhibited cytotoxicity compared to our death control, where cells were starved for 24 h (Fig  ). Subsequently, we replicated the imaging experiment described above, using two concentrations of the drugs (10−6 and 10−8 M) under pathological stimuli conditions (Figs  and ).
 We treated HAECs with IL‐1β and OxPAPC as above and used atorvastatin (5 μM) as a positive drug control. Atorvastatin is widely used in patients at high risk of CVD due to its beneficial effects on endothelial function (Fig  ) (Stancu & Sima,  ; Oesterle et al,  ). Atorvastatin demonstrated its expected antioxidant effect by suppressing ROS levels but did not modify ICAM1 expression, and significantly decreased VE‐cadherin and nuclei counts compared to the pathological stimulus alone (Fig  ). Regarding nuclei counts, inhibitors of STAT5A (10−6 M) and CXCR4 reduced the number of cells, while several other inhibitors prevented the cell death compared to IL‐1β and OxPAPC treated cells (Figs  and ).
The drugs were mapped to its targets (Fig  and Table  ). Drug treatment with AMD‐070 hydrochloride, an inhibitor of CXCR4 suppressed IL‐1β and OxPAPC‐induced ICAM1 expression, while inhibitors of STAT5A (PD 180970), JUN (curcumin) and NQO1 (dicoumarol), increased ICAM1 staining (Figs  and ). The VE‐cadherin marker was significantly decreased when ITGAV (cilengitide), STAT5A (PD 180970), RIPK2 (capresla), JUN (curcumin), NAMPT (daporinad) and CXCR4 (AMD‐070) were targeted, while targeting DUSP1 (CHEMBL6026) and IL6 (prednisolone) increased VE‐cadherin staining (Figs  and ).
Molidustat, a drug targeting EGLN3, displayed significant effects on three out of four ED phenotypes, suppressing IL‐1β and OxPAPC‐induced ICAM1 expression (Figs  and ) and ROS production (Figs  and ) and increasing VE‐cadherin staining (Figs  and ). These results did not align with the effects obtained with siRNA knockdown of EGLN3 during our screen, where no significant effect was observed in any phenotype. Due to the well‐described multi‐target effect of molidustat for all PHD family members (Xie et al,  ), we hypothesised that molidustat might be exerting its protective effect through targeting one of the other PHD family members, EGLN1 or EGLN2. After confirming that the drug was functioning as expected in terms of stabilisation of HIF‐1α and that IL‐1β and OxPAPC did not change the HIF‐1α protein content ( ; Appendix Fig  A–C; Appelhoffl et al,  ; Luo et al,  ; Xie et al,  ), we performed a knockdown with siRNA for all the members of the PHD family, EGLN1, EGLN2 and EGLN3 increasing the number of biological replicates to 12, to increase our statistical power to detect effects (Appendix Fig  D and E). Interestingly, the effect of the drug was not recapitulated, and, on the contrary, both EGLN1 and EGLN3 knockdown increased ROS, with EGLN1 knockdown also increasing ICAM1, in HAEC cells treated with IL‐1β and OxPAPC (Appendix Fig  D and E). We therefore hypothesise that either combinatorial inhibition of the PHD family proteins would be needed to reveal the full molidustat phenotype, or molidustat is functioning through alternative and unknown targets (Ivan & Kaelin,  ). In the future, more detailed experiments are needed to understand the mechanisms underlying molidustat's protective effect in ECs.
To summarise the results of the drug screen, we once more performed an aggregated rank analysis (Fig  ). Overall, among the drugs tested, those targeting STAT5A, ITGAV, RIPK2, IL6 and DUSP1 corroborate the results from the siRNA screen for all tested phenotypes, with STAT5A, ITGAV, and RIPK2 presenting a pro‐ED phenotype, and IL6 and DUSP1 presenting an anti‐ED phenotype when inhibited with a drug (Figs  and ). Targeting CCL2 also showed a significant anti‐ED effect in the drug screen, whereas in the siRNA screen it had narrowly missed the significance cut off. Our independent drug screen, therefore, provides additional support for IL6, DUSP1 and CCL2 as potential targets for ED (Fig  ).

## Discussion
Endothelial dysfunction (ED) is a critical feature of cardiovascular disease (CVD), and research has established that individuals with impaired endothelium have a higher risk of experiencing cardiovascular events, such as heart attacks or strokes (Schächinger et al,  ; Gokce et al,  ; Matsuzawa et al,  ). Despite this fact, most drugs developed for treating CVD, including atherosclerosis or hypertension, have not been specifically designed to target ED (Daiber et al,  ; Hennigs et al,  ; Libby,  ).
In our study, we aimed to illuminate the molecular basis for ED and identify potential targets for therapeutic intervention. We identified 26 (pro‐ED) genes that exacerbate ED, and 31 (anti‐ED) genes that ameliorate ED when silenced. These findings allowed us to extract pro‐ED and anti‐ED network signatures, supported by in vivo analysis of scRNA‐seq data in the context of atherosclerotic vasculature. The pro‐ED network was enriched in inflammatory pathways and the anti‐ED network was enriched in gene regulation, angiogenesis, and other cardiovascular and non‐cardiovascular processes.
Endothelial gene expression is influenced hierarchically by various cardiovascular risk factors (Pinheiro‐de‐Sousa et al,  ). Given the complex nature of ED's underlying pathophysiology, we hypothesised that identifying commonly deregulated genes associated with multiple surrogate risk factors would enhance the chances of successfully targeting ED. Since ED is a phenotypic outcome that is common to diverse environmental pressures (e.g. OSS, inflammation or oxidised lipids), we postulated that the changes they induce in the epigenome, reflecting the cell state, and that are associated with ED, should at least partially overlap. We, therefore, decided to focus on the epigenetic omics layer, concentrating on the common chromatin regions affected by all the diverse conditions and subsequently overlapping the associated differentially expressed genes, to improve our chances of identifying relevant ED genes. This approach indeed improved the signal‐to‐noise ratio, allowing us to prioritise a large number of genes (83% of the 81) with an effect on at least one of the ED phenotypes tested. However, we acknowledge that this analysis may have missed more understudied genes and transcription factors that are not well annotated. Our network propagation strategy to expand the pro‐ and anti‐ED genes and identify the respective processes and network signatures partially addresses this issue by integrating genes not directly related to the identified transcription factors in the multi‐omics integration step. However, it may still miss understudied genes from entirely different processes. Similarly, as most drugs tend to inhibit protein function and we aimed to identify targets for ED, we only focused on upregulated ED genes. Future studies should consider expanding the approach to include all differentially expressed genes, allowing the identification of additional potential targets, and gaining condition‐specific insights.
Our approach allowed us to identify contrasting responses to the ED readouts of genes from the same family. Taking the AP‐1 family for example, FOS presented a pro‐ED phenotype when silenced, while all the other members of its family, such as JUN, JUNB, FOS, FOSB and ATF3 presented an anti‐ED phenotype. AP‐1 family members are known to exert broad effects on ECs, including inflammatory response modulation, regulation of angiogenesis, vascular remodelling, and oxidative stress (Yoshitomi et al,  ). For example, our top anti‐ED hit, JUNB, is implicated in angiogenesis and is induced by VEGF (Jia et al,  ; Yoshitomi et al,  ). VEGF stimulates NF‐kB‐dependent inflammatory gene expression to mediate its inflammatory effects (Kim et al,  ; Jia et al,  ), which explains our findings that JUNB knockdown suppressed ICAM1, presented an antioxidant effect, and increased cell viability. Another example of paralogs with opposite effects is NR4A2 and 3 (Fig  ). NR4A3 is well‐annotated with roles in metabolism and inflammation, and the proliferation, maintenance and differentiation of many cell types, including e.g. vascular smooth muscle (Martínez‐González et al,  ). NR4A2, on the other hand, is not as well‐annotated, with its predicted function in the Uniprot database (Català‐Solsona et al,  ) being related to the differentiation and maintenance of meso‐diencephalic dopaminergic (mdDA) neurons (Messmer et al,  ). We found NR4A2 to be essential in EC cells under the pathological stimuli and to increase ICAM1 expression upon knockdown, suggesting a potential compensatory mechanism for NR4A3 deregulation in ECs.
Another interesting observation was that the pro‐ED network, representing molecular process rewiring as an adaptation to the environmental conditions and ED, comprises more specialised genes involved in more varied cell processes than the anti‐ED network. In contrast, the anti‐ED network, representing deregulated processes more likely to be causal and therefore better targets, comprises more functionally similar genes, albeit with pleiotropic functions (Fig  ). This suggests that the cell adaptation for survival and maintaining functionality is more systemic and precise than causal deregulation. While most studies identifying causal disease genes are based on genetics (Liu & Montgomery,  ; Ochoa et al,  ), our study combining genetic perturbations with functional readouts and network analysis can distinguish deregulated from adapted networks and processes as opposed to individual genes and can provide functional information and insight into the molecular basis of the disease, further improving target prioritisation.
Moreover, we demonstrated that the commonly used practice of identifying deregulated genes in disease omics datasets and then considering them as putative targets may have a major drawback that it might result in erroneous targeting of non‐causal processes, potentially exacerbating the disease phenotype. For example, we found 18 drugs that are used to treat cardiovascular diseases that overlap with the pro‐ED network, raising concerns about their suitability as therapeutic options.
Our independent drug screen for 17 among the 81 genes generally corroborated the results of the siRNA screen. We found that the results from drugs targeting IL6, DUSP1, and CCL2 also agreed with the results from the siRNA screen (albeit CCL2 marginally missing the significance cut off in the siRNA screen results) (Fig  ). This orthogonal support makes them particularly attractive as targets for ED. In terms of drug repurposing opportunities, at present, the glucocorticoid prednisolone (targeting IL6) is used for many inflammatory diseases (Coutinho & Chapman,  ). However, due to its association with elevated CVD risk upon chronic or excessive use (MacLeod et al,  ), it may not be suitable for repurposing as a therapeutic agent for heart disease. Instead, ziltivekimab, an IL‐6 ligand inhibitor (Ridker & Rane,  ), could be a more promising alternative for repurposing, considering the protective effect of silencing IL6 on ECs. DUSP1, a crucial regulator of MAPK signalling pathways (Wang et al,  ), has shown promise as a combination target in the context of cancer progression (Liu et al,  ). The compound we used for DUSP1 is still in too early tests to be considered for repurposing at present, but it would be worth considering it in the future if it proves to be safe. Finally, CCL2 has a vast literature supporting its role in inflammation and is also considered a target for atherosclerosis (Soehnlein & Libby,  ). Therefore, the drug used here INCB3344/CCL2 (Shin et al,  ) might be a suitable candidate for repurposing. Molidustat, an inhibitor of the EGLN protein family, demonstrated both antioxidant and anti‐inflammatory effects, making it a promising candidate for drug repurposing. EGLN3/PHD3 functions by hydroxylating proline residues to stabilise proteins like HIF‐1α and prevent their degradation (Appelhoffl et al,  ). Several studies have associated HIF‐1α with lower levels of ROS in myocardial ischemia–reperfusion injuries (Vogler et al,  ; Neckář et al,  ) and ED (Rahtu‐Korpela et al,  ; Abe et al,  ). However, the molidustat‐based results were not reproduced by silencing the EGLN protein family members. This suggests that combinatorial silencing of these proteins is required, or an alternative mechanism of action of molidustat might be involved. More in‐depth investigation is outside the scope of this manuscript but could be worthwhile in the future.
Overall, our findings highlight the potential of integrating omics datasets from diverse conditions and employing network analysis and in vitro genetic and pharmacologic validation, to identify networks relevant to common phenotypes like ED, distinguish causal from adaptive processes, and prioritise targets for therapeutic modulation of these phenotypes. While these networks may not comprehensively represent the molecular processes underlying such a complex disease, they are highly enriched in relevant genes, providing a strong foundation for target identification.

## Materials and Methods

## Reagents and Tools table

 

## Methods and Protocols

## Datasets
To identify the ED genes, we integrated publicly available RNA‐Seq, H3K27ac ChIP‐Seq, and ATAC‐Seq datasets (GSE89970, GSE112340) from cells HAECs. In the GSE112340 dataset (Data ref: Krause et al,  ), data from HAECs was acquired either in static conditions or after 24‐h unidirectional or disturbed flows. In the GSE89970 (Data ref: Hogan et al,  ), HAECs were subjected to inflammatory cytokines TNF‐α (10 ng/ml), IL‐1B (10 ng/ml) or OxPAPC (40 μg/ml) for 4 h.

## 
ATAC‐seq and ChIP‐seq analysis
For the ChIP‐seq and ATAC‐seq data, we used the pre‐processed hg19‐aligned data using Bowtie2 (Langmead & Salzberg,  ). Peaks were identified using the MACS2 tool (Kim & Dekker,  ). The BED files from multiple replicates were compiled through consensus voting (https://ro‐che.info/articles/2018‐07‐11‐chip‐seq‐consensus), where the peaks considered were the overlapping peaks between replicates (packages in R, rtracklayer and GenomicRanges) (Lawrence et al,  , ). ATAC‐Seq and ChIP‐Seq consensus peaks were identified and annotated using the ChIPSeeker R package (Yu et al,  ).
We integrated the ChIP‐seq and ATAC‐seq data by identifying all the peaks that overlap in all conditions using the ChIPpeakAnno R package (Zhu et al,  ). We used the findOverlappingPeaks() function, which uses as input the consensus peaks identified previously for each condition. We considered two peaks overlapping when one resided entirely within the second one. We identified transcriptionally active regions by applying the findOverlappingPeaks() function to centre the ChiP peaks onto the open chromatin ATAC peaks regions. Thus, this final merged BED peak file contained regions common to all stimuli and regions of open chromatin and active enhancers.

## Motif enrichment analysis
For de novo motif enrichment, we used rGADEM and MotIV (R packages) to predict active TFs from the merged BED peak file containing a 200 bp sequence. The rGADEM package combines a genetic algorithm (GA) with an expectation‐maximisation (EM) algorithm to identify the statistically significant motifs. We considered the motifs whose scores reached the significance threshold of E < 0.05. Then, we used MotIV, the JASPAR database (Castro‐Mondragon et al,  ), and the motifs identified by rGADEM to identify the TFs. The motifMatch() provided the TFs alignment to the input motifs and their P‐value. We kept all TFs statistically significant (P < 0.05).

## 
RNA‐seq analysis and TF‐DEGs associations
The RNA‐seq samples were subjected to fastQC quality control, where the sequences were trimmed by 13 bp to create the SAM files, later converted to BAM and aligned to hg19 using HTSeq2 (Putri et al,  ). Principal component analysis, batch effect correction, and differential expression analysis were performed using the DESeq2 R package (Love et al,  ) accounting for the batches within datasets. We applied the rlog transformation to the normalised counts to improve the distances and clustering for the PCA and hierarchical clustering‐based visualisation methods. For the PCA analysis, we utilised the DESeq2 package using as directly input the rlog object. By default, the function uses the top 500 most variable genes for the analysis, which is the number of genes used for the PCA and hierarchical clustering of the samples.
Differential expression analysis was performed for each condition (IL‐1β, TNF‐α and OxPAPC) compared to static baseline control, while OSS was compared to LSS. We consider as DEGs those with an adjusted P < 0.05 and |log2Foldchange| > 1.5. Using the merged BED peak from the ChIP and ATAC overlapping peaks and their annotated genes, we filtered by identifying which DEGs were present in those peaks. We used the TRRUST database (version 2) (Han et al,  ) to map the TFs identified to their previously published transcription targets. We considered only the TFs and DEGs whose interactions were supported by published evidence (Fig  ).

## 
siRNA library design
Commercially available siRNAs (Dharmacon/Horizon Discovery) were used to knockdown each of the 81 prioritised genes. To reduce off target effects and guarantee higher efficiency in silencing each target, we used their SMARTpool technology that combines 4 individual siRNAs for each gene target (ON‐TARGET plus siRNA).

## 
ChEMBL and OpenTargets drug selection
We used the OpenTargets (Ochoa et al,  ) and ChEMBL (Willighagen et al,  ) databases to identify potent known inhibitors/antagonists for prioritised targets above. ZINC database (Irwin et al,  ) was used to confirm the molecule structure and vendors. Each target had a list of active compounds with increasing values of Kd/Ki ‐ or IC50 if Kd/Ki data was not available. The active compound with the lowest Kd/Ki/IC50 was then checked for assay data quality (assay type, cell type), physicochemical properties (log P and molecular weight) (Zhu et al,  ) and commercial availability (Sterling & Irwin,  ). The target of each drug was identified primarily using the ChEMBL 26 database, ZINC database (Irwin et al,  ) and DrugBank.

## Cell culture and ED induction
Human aortic endothelial cells were purchased from Gibco. They were cultured in medium EGM‐2 (LONZA), incubated at 37°C and 5% CO2. All experiments were performed between passages four and seven. Cells were tested for mycoplasma contamination (Young et al,  ). To recapitulate at least partially the epigenetic overlapped regions identified in this study, we cultivate the HAEC under IL‐1β (10 ng/ml, Peprotech) and OxPAPC (50 μg/ml, Hycult Biotech) stimuli.

## 
siRNA transfection
siRNA was transfected into HAECs using a standard reverse transfection. Transfection mixes were prepared with lipofectamine RNAiMAX (ThermoFisher Scientific) and siRNA against the target genes (25 nM), or scrambled control siRNA (25 nM) diluted in Opti‐MEM (Gibco), according to the manufacturer's instructions. Cells were seeded into 96‐well plates (3 × 104 cells per well) pre‐coated with gelatin 0.1%, and 20 min later we added the transfection complex to each well. Cells were incubated at 37°C for 6 h. Then we added an additional volume of fresh regular culture medium.

## Viability assay
Human aortic endothelial cells were tested for cell viability 72 h after the siRNA transfection protocol and after 48 h treatment with the 17 inhibitory or antagonistic molecules at 10−6 and 10−8 M concentrations. We used the LIVE/DEAD Viability/Cytotoxicity kit (ThermoFisher Scientific) for this assay. At the end of both incubation time, the medium was carefully removed, and the fluorescent probes were added to react with live (calcein‐AM, 2 μM, Ex/Em 494/517) and dead (ethidium homodimer‐1, 4 μM Ex/Em 528/617) cells, with a cell nucleus marker (Hoechst 33342 8.1 μM – Ex/Em 361/486) (ThermoFisher Scientific) diluted in phosphate‐buffered saline (PBS). The probes were incubated for 30 min at room temperature and then removed. Finally, cells were maintained in PBS for image acquisition with the EVOS M7000 Image system (ThermoFisher Scientific). Nine pictures were taken per well at 10× magnification. We used HAECs stimulated with DMSO (at the same proportion of the highest dose 10−6 M of the molecules, Sigma‐Aldrich) as basal control for drugs. As a positive death control for the drug screening, cells were cultured in a starving medium for 24 h. For the siRNA, we used siPLK1 to induce EC cell death. The cell death index (ethidium and calcein index) was calculated by counting the number of positive‐staining cells divided by the total number of Hoechst‐positive cells multiplied by 100.

## 
siRNA screening
After 48 h of the transfection protocol, the medium of HAECs in the 96‐well plate was carefully removed and IL‐1β (10 ng/ml, Peprotech) and OxPAPC (50 μg/ml, Hycult Biotech) were added to the medium. We used as an additional control HAECs transfected with scrambled control siRNA at complete medium without IL‐1β and OxPAPC. After 24 h, the cells were incubated with the CM‐H2DCFDA probe (5 μM, ThermoFisher Scientific) for 30 min at 37°C to evaluate the generation of ROS. Then, the cells were fixed with 4% PFA for 15 min at room temperature. CM‐H2DCFDA fluorescence intensity was analysed at an excitation wavelength of 492–495 and an emission wavelength of 517–527 nm.

## Drug screening
Human aortic endothelial cells were plated in 96‐well plates (3 × 104 cells per well) for drug screening. We pre‐treated the cells with 17 drugs diluted in a complete culture medium (EGM2) at 10−6 and 10−8 M for 2 h. Then, we added IL‐1β (10 ng/ml, Peprotech) and OxPAPC (50 μg/ml, Hycult Biotech) to the medium. HAECs were cultured for 50 h (2 h pre‐treatment with drugs + 48 h with drugs and stimulation with IL‐1β and OxPAPC). We used as baseline controls HAECs at complete medium without DMSO, with DMSO (same proportion of drugs at 10−6 M, Sigma‐Aldrich), and with IL‐1β and OxPAPC (without drugs). As an additional control (not in the wells treated with drug), before following up with the immunofluorescence assay, we used Forbol 12‐miristato‐13‐acetato (PMA, 10 μM, Sigma‐Aldrich) and H2O2 (200 μM, Sigma‐Aldrich) for 1 h before the end of the incubation period to stimulate ROS production. We used atorvastatin (5 μM, Sigma‐Aldrich) to compare with the molecules tested. We followed the same approach, 2 h pre‐treatment with atorvastatin (5 μM), followed by 48‐h stimulation with IL‐1β and OxPAPC.
After the end of the experiment, the cells were incubated with CM‐H2DCFDA (5 μM, ThermoFisher Scientific) and MitoSox (5 μM, ThermoFisher Scientific) for 30 min at 37°C to evaluate ROS generation. The cells were fixed with 4% Paraformaldehyde (PFA, Sigma‐Aldrich) in PBS for 15 min at room temperature. Mitosox fluorescence intensity was analysed at an excitation wavelength of 5,105 and an emission wavelength of 580 nm.

## Immunofluorescence and high‐content screening analyses
We followed the immunofluorescence protocol with permeabilisation for 1 h with Triton X‐100 (0.1% in PBS, Sigma‐Aldrich), blocking with bovine serum albumin (BSA, 5% in PBS, Sigma‐Aldrich) for 1 h at room temperature and incubation with the anti‐ICAM1 antibody (Cell Signalling#62133/1:200), anti‐VE‐cadherin antibody (Cell Signalling#2500/1:200) and anti‐CD62E/E‐selectin antibody (Abcam#ab18991/1:100) at 4°C overnight. After that, we washed with PBS (2×) and followed the incubation with DAPI (1 mg/ml, ThermoFisher Scientific) and with the fluorescent secondary antibodies (goat‐anti rabbit and goat anti‐mouse Alexa Fluor, ThermoFisher Scientific, 1:500). Finally, we performed two more washes with PBS, and the cells were kept in PBS for image acquisition.

## Image acquisition and analysis
We used an EVOS M7000 Image system (ThermoFisher Scientific). Images were obtained at 10× magnification, with 9–12 images per well. After the acquisition, the raw images were analysed using CellProfiler (Carpenter et al,  ) software. The image analysis pipeline included both runStardist and runCellpose modules to more accurately segment nuclei and cells, respectively. Standard parameters were used for the runStardist module, while flow threshold was set to 0.4 and object diameter was set to 60 for the runCellpose module. Next, we quantified the signal intensity of multiple markers for the identified cells. We considered the median intensity for CM‐H2DCFDA, and MitoSox, the median edge intensity (EDGE) for ICAM‐1, and VE‐cadherin, and cytoplasmic staining for VE‐cadherin. We considered the ratio of median EDGE intensity/ median cytoplasm intensity for VE‐cadherin membrane location. We considered the median intensity of each well. We also used the EDGE for ICAM‐1 to calculate the eccentricity as the parameter to measure cell morphology. Parameters measured in addition to the intensity signal included cell area, length and circularity using the ICAM‐1 marker.

## Image statistical analysis
We performed the normalisation of the median intensities of CM‐H2DCFDA, ICAM1, VE‐cadherin and nuclei counts quantified using CellProfiler (McQuin et al,  ), with controls [normalised values = median intensity value/mean (median intensity control samples)] to normalise the median intensity of each well's values within each plate. We did this for both screenings, using siRNA scramble IL1B&OxPAPC or IL1B&OxPAPC plus vehicle (DMSO) as controls. Then, to consider the plate‐to‐plate variation, we computed the Z‐score for all plates by subtracting the mean and dividing by the standard deviation of all samples. Bootstrapping, a resampling technique, was employed to assess the robustness and reliability of the Z‐score values obtained from comparing controls (IL1B&OXPAPC) with siRNA‐treated cells. This method is particularly useful for our unbalanced samples, which have 8 times more controls compared to our treated sample sizes. We performed 1,000 times the resampling of the IL1B&OXPAPC (sample size = 8) and performed 1,000 times the multiple pairwise comparisons with the Wilcoxon test, where we compared all conditions versus IL‐1B&OxPAPC controls. We considered the median P‐value < 0.05 for significant hits.

## Protein extraction, Western blot and analysis
Human aortic endothelial cells were plated in 12‐well plates (2 × 105 cells per well) for protein extraction. We treated cells with IL‐1β (10 ng/ml) and OxPAPC (50 μg/ml), Molidustat with a range of doses from 10−8 M to 100 × 10−6 M or Cobalt Chloride (CoCl2, 300 μM) for 48 h. Cells were lysed in RIPA lysis buffer (Millipore) containing protease and phosphatase inhibitors (Sigma‐Aldrich) and proteins quantified using a BCA protein assay kit (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Equivalent amounts of proteins were solubilised in sample buffer (0.5% SDS, 10% glycerol, 0.05% bromophenol blue, 50 mM dithiothreitol, 50 mM Tris, pH 6) and subjected to sodium dodecyl sulfate‐polyacrylamide (SDS/PAGE) gel electrophoresis. After electrophoresis, the proteins were transferred to polyvinylidene fluoride (PVDF) membranes (Millipore). The membranes were first incubated in blocking solution (5% BSA and 0.1% Tween 20 in tris‐buffered saline, pH 7.4) for 1 h at room temperature, followed by incubation for 16–18 h in primary antibody against HIF‐1ɑ (Cell Signalling #36169/ 1:500) diluted in blocking solution at 4°C. Membranes were also incubated with primary antibodies specific for GAPDH (Abcam#ab22555/1:2,000) as an internal control (housekeeping). After incubation for 1 h at room temperature with a secondary antibody conjugated to horseradish peroxidase (ThermoFisher Scientific#G‐21234/1:2,000), the bound primary antibody was detected using a chemiluminescent image analyser (ImageQuant LAS 4000 mini, GE Healthcare), and images were quantified by densitometry using ImageJ (Schneider et al,  ). All the full‐size Western blots are shown in Appendix Fig  .

## 
RNA extraction, qPCR and analysis
Human aortic endothelial cells were plated in 12‐well plates (2 × 105 cells per well) for RNA extraction. We treated cells with Molidustat (10−8 and 10−6 M) or Cobalt Chloride (CoCl2, 300 μM) for 48 h. HAECs were lysed with 1 ml of TRIzol Reagent (ThermoFisher Scientific), and the total RNA was extracted according to the manufacturer's instructions. After extraction and purification, RNA was reverse transcribed using SuperScript IV Reverse Transcriptase (ThermoFisher Scientific). Real‐time PCR was performed using QuantiTect SYBR green PCR kit (Qiagen) with the QuantStudio 12 K Flex system (ThermoFisher Scientific). We used Cyclophilin Ct values to normalise ΔCt. The variation in gene expression between samples was calculated using the ΔΔCt method.
The following primers were used (5′ to 3′): ALDO A Forward: ACACTCTACCAGAAGGCGGA, Reverse: CCAACCCTTGGGTGGTAGTC; LDHA Forward: GTGTGCCTGTATGGAGTGGAA, Reverse: CAACCACCTGCTTGTGAACC; CXCR4 Forward: GGAGGGGATCAGTATATACACTTCA, Reverse: TGATGGAGTAGATGGTGGGC; NOS3 Forward: GCACAGTTACCAGCTAGCCA, Reverse: GCCGGGGACAGGAAATAGTT; Cyclophilin Forward: CATTTGGTGCAAGGGTCACA; Reverse: TCTGCTGTCTTTGGGACCTTGTC.

## Statistical analysis
For qPCR and Western blot, we used Student's t‐test or one‐way analysis of variance, followed by the Benjamini–Hochberg (BH) post hoc test. We analysed variance using Kruskal‐Wallis ranks for nonparametric values, followed by the Wilcoxon test for multiple comparisons. Differences were significant when P < 0.05. For all statistical analyses, we used R software (version 4.1.0). All the experiments were performed at least two times (one biological replicate for each time) with 1–8 technical replicates. Outliers were removed based on the Z‐score methods with an absolute value of 3.

## Aggregated rank analysis
We used the R packages RobustRankAggreg (Kolde et al,  ) to integrate the rankings obtained from the in vitro experiments based on the Z‐score (image data analysis) of the 4 phenotypes tested: ICAM1 expression, ROS intensity, VE‐cadherin expression and nuclei counts, and generated an overall ranking of the 81 KO genes. To generate the pro‐ED ranking, we reorder the Z‐score values of ICAM1 and ROS, from highest to lowest value, and for VE‐cadherin and nuclei counts, from lowest to highest values. For the anti‐ED ranking, we reversed the orders. We repeated the same analysis for the drug screening results. These packages implement a robust rank aggregation method that combines multiple rankings into a consensus ranking. The top‐ranked genes in the list were considered the most important in terms of their combined values across the different analyses. A null model was employed to determine the statistical significance of gene rankings. The simplest null model assumed that all genes were non‐informative and generated randomly ordered gene lists. This null model corresponded to a permutation test, where the in vitro measurements were randomly assigned before the aggregation analysis step. This analysis allowed us to assess the robustness of the rankings and identify ED genes that were significantly different from random.

## 
scRNAseq data analysis
To scRNAseq data for the orthogonal validation of the endothelial dysfunction (ED) disease network in vivo consisted of two atherosclerosis lesion datasets and one Tabula sapiens control dataset (Data ref: Wirka et al,  ; Data ref: Alsaigh et al,  ; Data ref: Jones et al,  ). Firstly, we integrated the three datasets using the R package Seurat version 3.2.292. Here, we applied a method for integrating the datasets called canonical correlation analysis (CCA) (Hardoon et al,  ). CCA identifies shared sources of variation between the conditions/groups. The 3,000 most variant genes from each sample were used for this analysis. This step aligns the cells using the greatest shared sources of variation. The shared highly variable genes are used because they are most likely to represent the genes distinguishing different cell types present. Next, we identify anchors or mutual nearest neighbours (MNNs) across datasets: MNNs can be thought of as “best buddies.” For each cell in one condition, the closest neighbour in the other condition is identified based on gene expression values. Anchors and their corresponding scores are used to transform the cell expression values, allowing for the integration of the conditions/datasets. The transformation of each cell uses a weighted average of the two cells of each anchor across anchors of the datasets. The weights are determined by the cell similarity score (distance between cell and k nearest anchors) and anchor scores, ensuring that cells in the same neighbourhood have similar correction values. If cell types are present in one dataset but not the other, they will still appear as separate sample‐specific clusters. This approach allowed us to cluster all the ECs independently of the vascular region which we considered each location as a different batch.
For further analysis, we applied data pre‐processing steps, including filtering out cells expressing fewer than 200 genes and genes expressed in fewer than three cells. We also excluded cells with unique gene counts over 2,500 or less than 200. Cells with over 5% mitochondrial genes, indicating poor quality, were removed. Principal component analysis (PCA) was then performed on the scaled data for dimensionality reduction. To refine the cell grouping, we used the FindNeighbors() and FindClusters() functions on the PCA space, calculating Euclidean distances between cells to iteratively group cells with similar expression patterns. The resulting clusters were visualised using UMAP. We identified cluster markers using the FindMarkers() function, which compared each cluster against all others through differential expression analysis. We selected gene markers with a P‐value ≤ 0.05 and an average |log2Foldchange| ≥ 0.25. The top cell markers were manually used to annotate each cell type. The differential expression analysis for the ECs considered as disease condition the two atherosclerotic datasets compared to the control Tabula sapiens vasculature without plaque lesion. We selected the DEGs with a P‐adjusted value ≤ 0.05 and an average |log2Foldchange| ≥ 0.5.

## Network analysis

## Empirical network and random network generation
The human protein–protein interaction network (PIN) on which the network propagation was performed was downloaded from IntAct (release 234, last update May 2021) (Kerrien et al,  ; Orchard et al,  ). Kinase‐kinase and kinase‐substrate relationships from PhosphoSitePlus (last updated May 2021) (Hornbeck et al,  ), OmniPath (last release May 2021) (Türei et al,  ) and SIGNOR 2.0 (Surdo et al,  ) (last release May 2021) (Surdo et al,  ) were included into the PIN. Only proteins annotated in Swiss‐Prot (UniProt Consortium,  ) and with at least one GO term (Thomas et al,  ) (last release May 2021) were retained. The final PIN comprised 16,407 nodes and 238,035 edges. PIN edge weights were modelled according to the Topological Clustering Semantic Similarity (Jain & Bader,  ) and calculated using the Semantic Measure Library (Harispe et al,  ). To associate a P‐value to each network node, we generated 1,000 random networks with the configuration model available in the igraph library (method = vl). Because the configuration model creates new random interactions, the edge weights were updated accordingly.
Each network was corrected for the hub bias according to the following equation:
wij=wijdidj
where Wij indicates the edge weight (i.e., semantic similarity) and di and dj represent the weighted degree of node i and node j.

## Empirical network propagation
We employed the RWR algorithm (Tong et al,  ) through the personalised PageRank function available with python igraph (http://igraph.org). We ran RWR using as seed nodes anti‐ED genes (31 seed nodes in total), pro‐ED genes (26 seed nodes in total) and both anti‐ED and pro‐ED all together (57 seed nodes in total) respectively to mimic the effect of each categories of ED on the PIN. To each seed node we associated the value extracted from the aggregated rank analysis to rank the importance of each seed during the propagation. To assess the significance of the nodes, we repeated the procedure above using the same partition but against the 1,000 random networks generated (see “empirical and random network generation”). We then estimated the P‐value for each node of the PIN and each partition separately using the following formula:
P‐value=1−I|RWRempirical>RWRrandom1,000
where I is the indicator function, and RWR

empirical
 and RWR

random
 refer to the RWR scores assigned to the empirical PIN and the random networks, respectively. Only nodes with a P < 0.01 were selected and isolated nodes were discarded.

## Enrichment analysis
We performed an enrichment analysis of BP for the 356 DEGs, differentially expressed in at least one condition under the common 6,630 peaks and the 176, and 167 nodes representing the pro‐ and anti‐ED disease network using the clusterProfiler package (Yu et al,  ). We used over‐representation analysis (Boyle et al, ) to identify biological processes from GO and Disease enriched terms from DisGeNET (Piñero et al,  ) associated with these nodes. Next, for both networks we performed a Drug Target Set Enrichment Analysis (DTSEA), using the respective R package (Su et al,  ), to identify the available drugs and diseases according to each network. We performed semantic similarity analysis among the nodes of each network and compared their distribution by Wilcoxon test. For the pro‐ and anti‐ED, and combined network, we performed a hypergeometric test to confirm whether our networks were enriched in ECs from atherosclerotic plaques. We considered the significance cut‐off of the enrichments to be P < 0.05.

## Author contributions

Iguaracy Pinheiro‐de‐Sousa: Conceptualization; data curation; formal analysis; validation; methodology; writing – original draft; writing – review and editing. Miriam Helena Fonseca‐Alaniz: Validation; methodology; writing – review and editing. Girolamo Giudice: Formal analysis; methodology; writing – original draft; writing – review and editing. Iuri Cordeiro Valadão: Validation; methodology. Silvestre Massimo Modestia: Validation. Sarah Viana Mattioli: Validation. Ricardo Rosa Junior: Formal analysis. Lykourgos‐Panagiotis Zalmas: Validation. Yun Fang: Data curation. Evangelia Petsalaki: Conceptualization; resources; supervision; funding acquisition; methodology; project administration; writing – review and editing. José Eduardo Krieger: Conceptualization; resources; supervision; funding acquisition; project administration; writing – review and editing.

## Disclosure and competing interests statement
The authors declare that they have no conflict of interest.

## Supporting information
Appendix
Click here for additional data file.
Expanded View Figures PDF
Click here for additional data file.
Table EV1
Click here for additional data file.
Dataset EV1
Click here for additional data file.
Dataset EV2
Click here for additional data file.
Dataset EV3
Click here for additional data file.
Dataset EV4
Click here for additional data file.
Dataset EV5
Click here for additional data file.
Dataset EV6
Click here for additional data file.
Source Data for Expanded View and Appendix
Click here for additional data file.
PDF+
Click here for additional data file.
Source Data for Figure 1
Click here for additional data file.
Source Data for Figure 2
Click here for additional data file.
Source Data for Figure 3
Click here for additional data file.
Source Data for Figure 4
Click here for additional data file.

## Acknowledgements
IPS received a fellowship from the Coordenação de Aperfeiçoamento de Pessoal de Nível Superior (CAPES 88882.328126/2019‐01) to visit EMBL‐EBI. JEK is supported by grants from the Fundação de Amparo à Pesquisa do Estado de São Paulo (FAPESP‐INCT—20214/50889‐7 and 2013/17368‐0); Unrestricted grant from FOXCONN Brazil; and the Conselho Nacional de Desenvolvimento Científico e Tecnológico (CNPq, INCT 465586/2014‐7 and 309179/2013‐0). EP, GG and IPS were supported by funding provided by EMBL‐EBI. Open Access funding enabled and organized by Projekt DEAL.

## Data availability
All data and analysis results are available as EV datasets, Source Data. Source Data for EV and Appendix Figures are available in Biostudies: S‐BSST1216 (https://www.ebi.ac.uk/biostudies/studies/S‐BSST1216). Raw images can be found in Biostudies: S‐BIAD862 (https://www.ebi.ac.uk/biostudies/studies/S‐BIAD862). The code used in this study for the network analysis is available in https://zenodo.org/record/8215467.

 Reviewer Report