822acssdJournal of Proteome ResearchJ Proteome ResPMC1024330610243306102433063699511410.1021/acs.jproteome.2c00790CRISPRi-Mediated
Silencing of Burkholderia O-Linked
Glycosylation Systems Enables the Depletion of Glycosylation
Yet Results in Modest Proteome Impacts
LewisJessica
M ScottNichollas E 1Department of Microbiology and Immunology, University of Melbourne at the Peter Doherty Institute
for Infection and Immunity, Melbourne 3000, Australia*Email: Nichollas.scott@unimelb.edu.au.
303202322617621762–17783032024© 2023 The Authors. Published by American Chemical SocietyPermits non-commercial access and re-use, provided that author attribution and integrity are maintained; but does not permit creation of adaptations or other derivative works (https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/).

## Abstract
 The process of O-linked
protein glycosylation is highly conserved
across the Burkholderia genus and mediated
by the oligosaccharyltransferase PglL. While our understanding of Burkholderia glycoproteomes has increased in recent
years, little is known about how Burkholderia species respond to modulations in glycosylation. Utilizing CRISPR
interference (CRISPRi), we explored the impact of silencing of O-linked
glycosylation across four species of Burkholderia; Burkholderia cenocepacia K56-2, Burkholderia diffusa MSMB375, Burkholderia
multivorans ATCC17616, and Burkholderia
thailandensis E264. Proteomic and glycoproteomic analyses
revealed that while CRISPRi enabled inducible silencing of PglL, this
did not abolish glycosylation, nor recapitulate phenotypes such as
proteome changes or alterations in motility that are associated with
glycosylation null strains, despite inhibition of glycosylation by
nearly 90%. Importantly, this work also demonstrated that CRISPRi
induction with high levels of rhamnose leads to extensive impacts
on the Burkholderia proteomes, which
without appropriate controls mask the impacts specifically driven
by CRISPRi guides. Combined, this work revealed that while CRISPRi
allows the modulation of O-linked glycosylation with reductions up
to 90% at a phenotypic and proteome levels, Burkholderia appears to demonstrate a robust tolerance to fluctuations in glycosylation
capacity.
Keywords: glycosylation, Burkholderia cenocepacia, Burkholderia, post-translational
modifications, proteomics, CRISPRi, PglL

statusreleaseddisplay-pdfyesis-in-collection-domainyesis-olfnois-manuscriptnois-preprintnois-journal-matternois-scannednois-retractednoReceived 2022 Dec 4; Collection date 2023 Jun 2.

## Introduction
Glycosylation,
the enzymatic addition of glycans to proteins, is
an important post-translational modification observed across all domains
of life. − While once thought to be rare within bacterial systems,
this class of modifications is increasingly recognized as a widespread
phenomenon demonstrated to play important
roles in regulating protein translation, , antimicrobial
efflux, , and protein stability. , Over
the last two decades, significant progress has been made in the identification
of the enzymes responsible for glycosylation, revealing a diverse
array of enzymes that are responsible for ligating glycans to bacterial
proteins. , Across these enzymes, protein glycosylation
has been observed to occur via two broad approaches: (I) the direct
transfer of monosaccharides by glycosyltransferases to acceptor proteins
and (II) the transfer of oligosaccharides en bloc from undecaprenyl phosphate lipid carriers to acceptor proteins
by oligosaccharyltransferases. The PglL
enzymes represent one of the largest families of oligosaccharyltransferases and have been confirmed to mediate O-linked
glycosylation across a range of bacteria including Acinetobacter, , Francisella, Pseudomonas, − Neisseria, − Ralstonia, and Burkholderia species. − While early studies
sought to confirm the activity of PglL enzymes using heterogeneous
expression systems − or proteomic approaches, , , , recent studies
have focused on expanding our understanding of their enzymatic capacities.
These recent studies have demonstrated that PglL oligosaccharyltransferases
can possess unique targeting ranges − as well as diverse glycan
tolerances, , yet little insights have been
gained about the functional roles of these glycosylation systems within
the bacterial species that possess them or the conserved properties
of these enzymes across genera.
Across the Burkholderia genus, O-linked
glycosylation is highly conserved. , Within Burkholderia cenocepacia, the most well-characterized Burkholderia glycoproteome to date, over 100 proteins
are targeted for glycosylation, , , making this one of the largest known bacterial glycoproteomes. Within Burkholderia species, glycosylation has been shown
to be mediated by two non-genetically linked components, the O-linked
glycosylation cluster (ogc) responsible for the biosynthesis
of the trisaccharide β-Gal-(1,3)−α-GalNAc-(1,3)−β-GalNAc and the O-linked oligosaccharyltransferase PglL,
responsible for the en bloc transfer of glycans to
glycoproteins. , Additionally, the O-linked trisaccharide
is also observed to be succinylated across species, − yet the mechanisms
behind this modification are currently unknown. Loss of O-linked glycosylation
within Burkholderia species results
in dramatic changes in virulence-associated attributes within B. cenocepacia, , Burkholderia thailandensis, and Burkholderia
pseudomallei. While these
observations support the importance of O-linked glycosylation, the
specific functional roles of the glycoproteome are unclear. Proteomic
analysis has demonstrated that the loss of glycosylation within B. cenocepacia by the disruption of ogc or pglL results in hundreds of proteomic changes,
yet the scale of proteomic alterations has represented a challenge
for understanding the cause of the reduction in virulence. Furthermore, comparative glycoproteomic analysis
has revealed that while many glycoproteins are conserved across species,
most have no known assigned functions, further hampering our understanding of the potential role of glycosylation
across the Burkholderia genus. One
way to bridge this gap in our understanding of Burkholderia glycoproteomes is to elucidate shared defects and or glycoproteins
impacted by the loss of glycosylation across this genus. However,
there is a paucity of genetic approaches for creating mutants in many Burkholderia species, limiting the use of comparative
proteomics to understand the impact of glycosylation across this genus.
While a range of molecular tools have been developed for the Burkholderia genus to allow mutagenesis, , protein expression from plasmids, , and the inducible
expression of genes using promoter replacements, these tools are not universally compatible with many Burkholderia species recalcitrant to the incorporation
of foreign DNA. This recalcitrant nature
to genetic manipulation hampers the study of diverse Burkholderia species and makes the analysis of conserved
processes across this genus challenging. A potential solution to this
issue is the use of emerging genetic tools such as CRISPR interference
(CRISPRi) systems, which have been demonstrated to allow the assessment
of bacterial gene functions in an orthogonal manner to mutagenesis. A key advantage of these tools is the ability
to assess gene functions in strains/species that have been genetically
intractable to standard mutagenesis, illustrated by the recent work
of Rousset et al. demonstrating the ability of CRISPRi to assess gene
essentiality across a diverse panel of pathogenic and environmental Escherichia coli strains. With the recent development of a CRISPRi system optimized for the Burkholderia genus, this
molecular tool provides a new way to assess gene functions within Burkholderia species. Utilizing a rhamnose-inducible
nuclease-inactivated variant of Streptococcus pyogenes Cas9 (dCas9) that is readily able to be chromosomally integrated
via a mini-CTX system, this molecular
tool enables the targeted-silencing of Burkholderia genes by the introduction of guide RNA (gRNA) on a broad-host plasmid,
targeting the desired gene. By inducing
the expression of dCas9, this system has been demonstrated to enable
the tuneable silencing of Burkholderia genes, with phenotypic assessments supporting the potent silencing
even with modest levels of dCas9 induction. These recent tools provide a novel system to explore conserved Burkholderia processes, such as glycosylation, in
a titratable and scalable manner.
Within this work, we set out
to assess the potential of CRISPRi
to improve our understanding of O-linked glycosylation across the Burkholderia genus. Taking advantage of the Burkholderia optimized CRISPRi system, we introduced CTX:rha-dCas9 into four Burkholderia species (B. cenocepacia K56-2, Burkholderia diffusa MSMB375, Burkholderia multivorans ATCC17616, and B. thailandensis E264) and explored the impact of
CRISPRi silencing on pglL using proteomic and glycoproteomic
approaches. We demonstrate that CRISPRi silencing allows robust reductions
in PglL levels, yet find that this does not completely abolish glycosylation.
Comparison of a glycosylation null strain (ΔpglL) to glycosylation-silenced strains of B. cenocepacia revealed that only a small proportion of alterations observed within
this glycosylation null strain are recapitulated within the silenced
strains. Despite reducing glycosylation by nearly 90% in the glycosylation-silenced
strain, some phenotypes associated with the loss of glycosylation,
such as alterations in motility, were not impacted. Across the Burkholderia genus, we observed that despite the
robust reduction in PglL levels, glycosylation is still detectible,
and relatively few conserved alterations within the proteomes are
identified across Burkholderia species.
Combined this work confirms that glycosylation levels can be altered
using CRISPRi, yet this does not allow complete silencing of glycosylation
and that modest levels of glycosylation appear sufficient to prevent
the proteomic impacts previously reported in glycosylation null strains.

## Methods

## Strains
and Growth Conditions
All strains and plasmids
used within this study are listed in Supporting Information Tables 1 and 2. Bacterial strains for proteomic
analysis were grown overnight at 37 °C in Luria Bertani broth
medium (OXOID) shaken at 180 rpm. For the generation of CTX:rha-dCas9
strains and/or the selection of strains containing sgRNA, plasmid
strains were cultured on 1% l-agar, supplemented with the
required antibiotics at a final concentration of 50 μg/mL trimethoprim
for E. coli, 100 μg/mL for B. cenocepacia, 20 μg/mL tetracycline for E. coli, 150 μg/mL for B. cenocepacia, and 50 μg/mL kanamycin for E. coli. Ampicillin was used at 100 μg/mL and polymyxin B at 25 μg/mL
for triparental mating to select against donor and helper E. coli strains, as previously described. Induction of dCas9 within Burkholderia strains was undertaken by the addition of l-rhamnose (final
concentration of either 0.1% or 1% for proteomic analysis and 0.01,
0.025, 0.05, 0.1, and 1% for Western analysis) when required. Antibiotics
were purchased from Thermo Fisher Scientific while all other chemicals,
unless otherwise stated, were provided by Sigma-Aldrich.

## CRISPRi sgRNA
Plasmid Generation
All primers used within
this study are listed in Supporting Information Table 3. To simplify the incorporation of guide RNA sequences into
the pSCB2-gRNA plasmid, the blue chromoprotein amilCP( ) was amplified from the
plasmid pUS250 using the primers Nsco_0449 and Nsco_0450 and inserted
between the gRNA promotor and gRNA scaffold of pSCB2-gRNA (amplified
with primers 1092 and 1093) via Gibson assembly using NEBuilder HiFi DNA Assembly Master Mix (NEB) and
then transformed into chemically competent E. coli pir2 cells, as previously described. CRISPRi sgRNA guides were designed to target the 5′ of the pglL gene across all four Burkholderia species. DNA sequences corresponding to 200 bp preceding the start
of the target gene (corresponding to the promotor regions) and the
first 400 bp within the target gene were searched using the “guide
RNA design for CRISPRi in bacteria” function of CRISPRi (https://crispr-browser.pasteur.cloud/guide-rna-design) and up to four guides with the best predicted activity score and at least three mismatches to non-pglL sequences within the chromosome selected for cloning.
These 20 bp guide sequences were incorporated into the 5′ region
of the guide RNA (gRNA) scaffold 5′-GTTTTAGAGCTAGAAATAGCAAGTTAAAATAAGGC-3′
allowing the introduction of guides into pSCB2-blue-sgRNA by inverse
PCR using primer 1092, as previously described. Plasmids were amplified with Q5 DNA polymerase (NEB) and
circularized with KLD Enzyme Mix (NEB) according to the manufacturer’s
instruction and then introduced into chemically competent E. coli. Guide incorporation into pSCB2-gRNA was
confirmed in non-blue colonies by PCR using the oligos Nsco_0409 and
848 as well as Sanger Sequencing (Australian Genome Research Facility,
Melbourne, Australia).

## Conjugation and Transformation of Burkholderia Species
The dCas9 cassette
and CRISPRi guide plasmids were
introduced to B. thailandensis, B. cenocepacia, and B. diffusa via triparental mating using the pRK2013
helper plasmid. Conjugations were allowed
to proceed for 16 h and then transconjugants selected with tetracycline
or trimethoprim for the integration of the CTX:rha-dCas9 cassette
and CRISPRi sgRNA guide plasmids, respectively. For B. multivorans, plasmids were introduced via electroporation
as previously described. Briefly, mid-exponential B. multivorans cells were pelleted (4 °C, 2800g, 10 min), washed three times with ice-cold transformation
buffer (10 mM MOPS buffer, pH 7.0, 10% glycerol), and resuspended
in cold transformation buffer. The cells were incubated with the plasmid
DNA on ice for 10 min, transferred to a pre-chilled 2 mm gap electroporation
cuvette (Bio-Rad), and electroporated using the Ec2 setting of the
MicroPulser electroporator (Bio-Rad). Following electroporation, cells
were recovered in Super Optimal Broth (2% w/v tryptone, 0.5% w/v yeast
extract, 10 mM NaCl, 2.5 mM KCl, and 10 mM MgCl2) for 1
h, 37 °C, and transformants were selected on l-agar
supplemented with tetracycline or trimethoprim as above. Bacterial
transformants and transconjugants were screened by colony PCR using
1× GoTaq Green Master Mix (Promega), 0.5 mM of each oligonucleotide,
5% DMSO, and colonies added directly to the reaction mixture. The
integration of pAH-CTX1-rha-dCas9 into Burkholderia strains was confirmed using the CTX-internal oligo (Nsco_0376) in
combination with a strain-specific oligo flanking the attB integration site (1008 for B. cenocepacia, 1168 for B. thailandensis, Nsco_0489
for B. diffusa, and Nsco_0496 for B. multivorans).

## Western Blotting
Cells were harvested following 16
h growth with increasing concentrations of rhamnose (0–1%;
stationary phase, OD600nm 1.5), resuspended in 1×
sodium dodecyl sulfate (SDS)-PAGE sample buffer, boiled for 10 min,
and then run on a NuPAGE 4–12% Bis-Tris gradient polyacrylamide
gel (Invitrogen) in MES buffer (Life Technologies). Proteins were
transferred to a nitrocellulose membrane using the iBlot 2 Western
transfer system (Life Technologies) and blocked for 1 h in 5% skim
milk in TBST (Tris-buffered saline with 0.1% Tween 20). The membranes
were incubated with monoclonal mouse α-Histidine tag primary
antibody (1:1000; AD1.1.10, Bio-Rad) overnight, 4 °C, washed
with TBST, and then incubated with horseradish peroxidase (HRP)-conjugated
α-mouse (1:5000; NEF82200-1EA, PerkinElmer) for 1 h, room temperature.
Proteins were detected using the Clarity Western ECL Substrate kit
(Bio-Rad) and images obtained using an Amersham imager 600 (GE Healthcare
Life Sciences). Membranes were Stripped with Restore Plus Stripping
Buffer for 10 min before being re-blocked in 5% skim milk in TBST
and probed with α-E. coli RNA
polymerase primary antibody (1:5000; 4RA2, Neoclone) followed by HRP-conjugated
α-mouse and imaged as above. All antibodies were diluted in
TBS-T with 1% bovine serum albumin (Sigma-Aldrich). Raw uncropped
and protein marker associated Western blotting images are provided
within Supporting Information Figure 9.

## Swimming Motility Assays
Motility assays were performed
with 0.3% l-agar as previously described with minor modifications. Briefly, 20% sterile rhamnose
or an equivalent volume of sterile water was added to molten 0.3% l-agar media for a final concentration of 0.1% rhamnose, 20
mL of aliquoted into 9 mm Petri dishes, and plates dried briefly once
set. The dried plates were inoculated with 1 μL of stationary
phase cultures standardized to an OD600nm of 1.0 (paired
inoculation of plates with and without rhamnose), and plates were
incubated at 37 °C for 24 h. Following incubation, the diameter
of turbidity was measured, and plates were imaged.

## Whole-Cell
Proteomics
Cell pellets were prepared in
biological triplicate or quadruplicate from stationary phase overnight
cultures (OD600nm 1.5), from paired cultures grown in the
presence or absence of l-rhamnose. Cell pellets were washed
with ice-cold PBS (4 °C, 10,000g) then resuspended
in 4% sodium deoxycholate, 100 mM Tris pH 8.5, and boiled at 95 °C
with shaking (2000 rpm; Eppendorf ThermoMixer) for 10 min. Following
the initial lysis, the samples were rested on ice for 10 min and then
boiled again for an additional 10 min. Proteins were quantified using
bicinchoninic acid (BCA) assay (Thermo Fisher Scientific) and 50 μg
of protein reduced and alkylated with 10 mM Tris 2-carboxyethyl phosphine
hydrochloride (TCEP; Thermo Fisher Scientific) and 40 mM 2-chloroacetamide
(CAA; Sigma-Aldrich) for 30 min at 45 °C in the dark with shaking
(500 rpm; Eppendorf ThermoMixer). Proteins were digested with 1:100
(wt/wt) sequencing grade trypsin (SOLu-Trypsin, Sigma-Aldrich) for
16 h at 37 °C with shaking (500 rpm; Eppendorf ThermoMixer).
Following digestion, samples were mixed with 1.25 volumes of 100%
isopropanol and then acidified with 0.115 volumes of 10% trifluoracetic
acid (TFA) (final concentration of 50% isopropanol and 1% TFA), before
being cleaned up with Styrene-divinylbenzene-reverse phase sulfonate
(SBD-RPS; Empore) stage tips, as previously described. − Briefly, three frits of SDB-RPS were excised from a 47 mm2 SBD-RPS membrane using a 14 G blunt needle and loaded into a 200
μL tip. The SBD-RPS columns were conditioned using 150 μL
of acetonitrile, followed by 150 μL of 30% methanol, 1% TFA,
and then equilibrated with 150 μL of 90% isopropanol, 1% TFA.
Samples were loaded onto equilibrated columns in a tip spinner by centrifugation at 1000g for
5 min at room temperature. The SDB-RPS columns were washed with 150
μL of 90% isopropanol, 1% TFA, followed by 150 μL of 1%
TFA by centrifugation at 1000g for 5 min. Peptides
were eluted with 150 μL of 5% ammonium hydroxide, 80% acetonitrile,
dried by vacuum centrifugation, and stored at −20 °C.

## Glycoproteomic Sample Preparation
Cell pellets were
prepared in biological quadruplicate from stationary phase overnight
cultures (OD600nm 1.5) from paired cultures grown in the
presence or absence of l-rhamnose. Cell pellets were washed
with ice-cold PBS (4 °C, 10,000g), resuspended
in 4% SDS, 100 mM Tris pH 8.5, 10 mM dithiothreitol, and boiled at
95 °C for 10 min with shaking (2000 rpm; Eppendorf ThermoMixer).
Protein concentrations were quantified using BCA assay (Thermo Fisher
Scientific) and 1 mg of protein precipitated by mixing with 4×
volume of ice-cold acetone and incubating overnight at −20
°C. Protein samples were then pelleted at 0 °C, 4000g, 10 min and the acetone discarded. The samples were resuspended
in 100 μL of water and 400 μL of ice-cold acetone added
with the sample incubated for a further 4 h at −20 °C.
Following this final precipitation, proteins were pelleted at 0 °C
as above, the acetone discarded, and the samples were dried briefly
at 70 °C to remove residual acetone. Proteins were resuspended
in 6 M urea, 2 M thiourea in 100 mM Tris (pH 8.5), followed by reduction
with 10 mM TCEP and alkylation with 40 mM CAA. Following a 1 h incubation
at 25 °C, the urea/thiourea was diluted 1/4 with 100 mM Tris,
pH 8.5 containing trypsin [1:100 (wt/wt), Promega] and digested for
16 h at 25 °C. Following digestion, peptides were acidified with
formic acid to a final concentration of 1%, and peptides were extracted
using 50 mg of Sep-Pak tC18 columns (Waters corporation). Columns
were conditioned with Buffer B (0.1% formic acid and 80% acetonitrile)
and equilibrated with Buffer A* (0.1% TFA, 2% acetonitrile), before
samples were loaded and washed twice with Buffer A*. Peptides were
eluted with Buffer B, and 4% (∼40 μg) of this elution
collected as an input control for the glycopeptide enrichments. The
peptide and input control samples were dried in a vacuum centrifuge
and stored at −20 °C.
Glycopeptides were enriched
from whole cell proteome digests using zwitterionic hydrophilic interaction
liquid chromatography (ZIC-HILIC), as previously described. , , Briefly, 500 μg of purified
peptide was resuspended to a final concentration of 4 μg/μL
in ZIC-HILIC loading/wash buffer (80% acetonitrile, 1% TFA) and ZIC-HILIC
tips prepared by loading ZIC-HILIC material (10 μm ZIC-HILIC
resin, Millipore), suspended in 50% acetonitrile, onto a C8 frit (C8;
Empore) in a 200 μL tip. The ZIC-HILIC material was conditioned
with 20 bed volumes (100 μL) of 0.1% TFA, followed by 95% acetonitrile,
and then 100 μL of ZIC-HILIC loading/wash buffer twice. Peptides
were loaded onto the ZIC-HILIC column, and non-glycosylated peptides
were removed by washing three times with 150 μL of ZIC-HILIC
loading/wash buffer. The glycopeptides were eluted twice with 100
μL of 0.1% TFA and then dried in a vacuum centrifuge and stored
at −20 °C.

## Data-Independent Acquisition LC–MS
Analysis
Proteome samples were re-suspended in Buffer A*
and separated using
a Ultimate 3000 UPLC (Thermo Fisher Scientific) with a two-column
chromatography setup composed of a PepMap100 C18 20 mm × 75 μm
trap and a PepMap C18 500 mm × 75 μm analytical column
(Thermo Fisher Scientific) or a Vanquish Neo (Thermo Fisher Scientific)
using a single column chromatography set up composed of a ACQUITY
UPLC Peptide BEH C18 Column (300 Å, 1.7 μm, 1 mm ×
100 mm, Waters Corporation). All data-independent acquisition (DIA)
experiments were collected on a Orbitrap Exploris 480 (Thermo Fisher
Scientific) with the analysis of B. cenocepacia CTX:rha-dCas9 in response to 0.1% rhamnose undertaken using microflow-based
proteomics using the Vanquish Neo at 50 μL/min. For microflow-based
proteomics, samples were loaded directly onto the ACQUITY column for
1 min at 50 μL/min with Buffer A (0.1% formic acid, 2% DMSO)
coupled directly to the Orbitrap 480 and the buffer composition altered
from 2% Buffer B (0.1% formic acid, 77.9% acetonitrile, and 2% DMSO)
to 26% B over 90 min, then from 26% B to 99% B over 2 min, and then
was held at 99% B for 1 min. For all other DIA experiments, samples
were concentrated onto a trap column at 5 μL/min for 6 min with
Buffer A, then infused into the Orbitrap 480 at 300 nL/min via the
analytical column. 90 min analytical runs were undertaken by altering
the buffer composition from 2% Buffer B to 28% B over 75 min, then
from 25% B to 40% B over 4 min, and then from 40% B to 80% B over
1 min. The composition was held at 80% B for 3 min and then dropped
to 2% B over 1 min before being held at 2% B for another 6 min. The
Orbitrap 480 Mass Spectrometer was operated in a data-independent
mode automatically switching between the acquisition of a single Orbitrap
MS scan (350–951 m/z, maximal
injection time of 50 ms, an automated gain control (AGC) set to a
maximum of 250% and a resolution of 120k) and the collection of 16 m/z DIA windows between 350 and 951 m/z (200–2000 m/z, NCE 28%, maximal injection time of 54 ms, a
AGC set to 2000%, and a resolution of 30k).

## Data-Dependent Acquisition
LC–MS Analysis
Proteome
and glycoproteome samples were re-suspended in Buffer A* and separated
using Ultimate 3000 UPLCs (Thermo Fisher Scientific) equipped with
two-column chromatography setups composed of PepMap100 C18 20 mm ×
75 μm traps and PepMap C18 500 mm × 75 μm analytical
columns (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Samples were concentrated onto
the trap columns at 5 μL/min for 5 min with Buffer A (0.1% formic
acid, 2% DMSO) and then infused into either a Orbitrap Fusion Lumos
Tribrid Mass Spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific), an Orbitrap
Fusion Eclipse Tribrid Mass Spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific),
or a Orbitrap 480 at 300 nL/min via the analytical columns using Dionex
Ultimate 3000 UPLCs (Thermo Fisher Scientific; Specific instrumentation
used for the acquisition of each data set provided in Supporting Information Table 4). 125 min analytical
runs were undertaken by altering the buffer composition from 2% Buffer
B (0.1% formic acid, 77.9% acetonitrile, 2% DMSO) to 28% B over 95
min, then from 22% B to 45% B over 10 min, and then from 45% B to
80% B over 2 min. The composition was held at 80% B for 3 min and
then dropped to 2% B over 5 min before being held at 2% B for another
10 min. Each mass spectrometer was operated in a data-dependent mode
automatically switching between the acquisition of a single Orbitrap
MS scan (400–1600 m/z, maximal
injection time of 50 ms, an AGC set to a maximum of 1 × 106 ions and a resolution of 120k) every 3 s and Orbitrap MS/MS
HCD scans of precursors (using the “Auto” mass range
setting, a NCE of 28–32%, maximal injection time of 60–80
ms, an AGC set to a maximum of 250% and a resolution of 30k).

## Proteomic
Data Analysis
Data-dependent acquisition
(DDA) experiments were searched with FragPipe version 15 or version
18 − using the Label Free Quantification-Match-Between-Runs (LFQ-MBR)
workflow allowing the variable modification of oxidation of methionine
and N-terminal acetylation as well as a fixed modification of Carbamidomethylated
cystines in addition to the following modifications: MBR ion false
discovery rate (FDR) modified to 0.001, the inclusion of the Burkholderia glycans as variable modifications on
serine residues (masses of 568.21156 and 668.22761 Da, respectively).
The resulting data sets were filtered using the default FragPipe parameters
of 1% peptide/protein level FDR, and it should be noted a glycan-level
FDR was not utilized. DIA experiments were searched using Spectronaut
(Biognosys, Switzerland) versions 15 and 16 using default search parameters
including oxidation of methionine and N-terminal acetylation as well
as a fixed modification of Carbamidomethylated cystines with the
following modifications: protein LFQ method set to MaxLFQ, single
hit proteins excluded, and major and minor group top N unselected.
DDA and DIA data sets were searched against protein databases with
DIA analysis undertaken using directDIA within Spectronaut. The B. cenocepacia K56-2 data sets were searched against
the B. cenocepacia strain J2315 proteome
(Uniprot accession: UP000001035) supplemented with the K56-2 Valvano
proteome (NCBI accession: GCA_014357995.1),
the B. diffusa MSMB375 data sets were
searched against the B. diffusa MSMB375
proteome (Burkholderia Genome Database, Strain number: 2966), the B.
multivorans ATCC17616 data sets were searched against
the B. multivorans ATCC17616 proteome
(Uniprot accession: UP000008815), and the B. thailandensis E264 data sets were searched against the B. thailandensis E264 proteome (Uniprot accession: UP000001930). Data outputs from
FragPipe and Spectronaut were processed using Perseus (version 1.6.0.7); for FragPipe LFQ outputs, missing values were
imputed based on the total observed protein intensities with a range
of 0.3 σ and a downshift of 2.3 σ. For DIA samples, imputation
was completed through Global Imputing in Spectronaut. Statistical
analysis was undertaken in Perseus using two-tailed unpaired T-tests. Matching of protein homologs between Burkholderia strains was undertaken using PATRIC,
the bacterial bioinformatics database and analysis resource. 

## Data Visualization
Visualization
of proteomic and motility
data was undertaken using R for Windows (version 4.2.1) in RStudio
(version 2022.02.3). The motility data were visualized using base
R with the following packages: reshape2, tidyverse, and ggpattern. The full
proteomic analysis scripts are included in the PRIDE submissions.

## Data Availability
Mass spectrometry data (RAW files,
FragPipe outputs, Spectronaut experiment files, R Markdown scripts,
and output tables) have been deposited into the PRIDE ProteomeXchange
repository. , All PRIDE accession numbers,
descriptions of the associated experiment, and experiment type (DIA
or DDA) are provided within Supporting Information Table 4.

## Results

## CRISPRi Enables the Silencing
of Glycosylation within B. cenocepacia
To assess the potential of
CRISPRi to silence glycosylation, we constructed a B. cenocepacia strain harboring CTX:Rha-dCas9, and
four gRNA plasmids containing CRISPRi guides predicted to have optimal
on-target activity within the promoter
and 5′ region of the oligosaccharyltransferase pglL (BCAL0960, A). The ability of these guides to reduce the expression of pglL was assessed via DDA-based proteomics, revealing that
CRISPRi leads to the reduction of PglL to below detectible levels
using 1% rhamnose ( B, Supporting Information Table S1). Despite this marked reduction of PglL, glycopeptides were readily
detected across all targeted samples, with guide A resulting in less
inhibition of glycosylation than guides B to D ( C, Supporting Information Table S2). Due to the similarity in efficiency between guide
B and D, guide C was selected for use in subsequent experiments, herein
referred to as pglLBC. While the proteomic measurements support the inhibition of glycosylation
to further assess the ability of CRISPRi to mimic the loss of glycosylation,
two previously published phenotypes associated with B. cenocepacia ΔpglL were
assessed, the loss of BCAL1086 in the absence of glycosylation, and reduced motility. The introduction of CTX:Rha-dCas9 and the pglLBC guide plasmid into K56-2 containing a chromosomally
his6-tagged glycoprotein BCAL1086 revealed the loss of
BCAL1086 in a rhamnose dose-dependent manner, consistent with our
previous observation of the destabilization of this protein in the
absence of glycosylation ( D). In contrast, motility assays
revealed that the silencing of pglL (induced pglLBC sample) resulted in no
statistical difference in motility compared to the induced nontarget
sample, while an induced fliF (BCAL0525) guide robustly
inhibited motility ( E), as previously reported. Taken
together, these results demonstrate that CRISPRi silencing enables
the reduction of PglL and subsequent glycosylation levels, yet the
phenotypes only partially match what is observed following the complete
loss of glycosylation.
 

## Glycosylation Silencing Only Partially Mimics Proteome Changes
Observed in B. cenocepacia ΔpglL
To further understand the degree to which
CRISPRi knockdown mirrors the proteomic impacts observed in the glycosylation
null strain, we utilized DIA-based analysis and compared the proteomes
of CRISPRi-silenced pglL (CTX:Rha-dCas9 containing
the pglLBC guide plasmid),
CRISPRi controls (CTX:Rha-dCas9 containing the non-target guide or
guideless plasmid ), ΔpglL (containing the guideless plasmid), and wild-type (containing the
guideless plasmid) strains with and without 0.1% rhamnose ( , Supporting Information Table S3). A total of 3630 proteins were identified
across biological replicates, with >95% of proteins quantified
with
>2 precursors (Supporting Information Figure
1). Principal component analysis revealed that pglLBC silencing resulted in only modest
proteomic effects compared to ΔpglL under induced
conditions ( A), despite robust pglL silencing ( B). While PglL levels are reduced
below limits of detection, it is important to note that this does
not mean pglL is absent from these silenced strains. To understand
the similarities between the proteome changes observed within groups,
defined as proteins with a fold-change ± 1-fold (log2) and a −log10(p-value) > 2.0,
we examined the overlap in protein changes between CRISPRi-silenced pglL vs CRISPRi controls and ΔpglL vs wild-type under both induced and non-induced conditions ( C). Strikingly, comparisons
between ΔpglL and wild-type samples in the
presence and/or absence of rhamnose, denoted in purple (225 proteins)
revealed hundreds of unique alterations that were absent in the CRISPRi
comparisons. Only 17 proteins (denoted in magenta) were selectively
altered in response to CRISPRi-silenced pglL compared
to CRISPRi controls and were also observed within the ΔpglL samples (Supporting Information Figure 2), with several proteins in the pglLBC samples showing divergent responses to
the ΔpglL strain. This small overlap between
the CRISPRi-silenced pglL and ΔpglL proteome changes suggests that despite the robust reduction of PglL
to below the levels of detection, this results in only minor alterations
in the B. cenocepacia proteome.
 To assess if CRISPRi silencing
could be improved to more authentically
mimic the proteome changes observed within the glycosylation null
strain ΔpglL, we increased the induction of
dCas9 to 1% rhamnose and assessed the proteomic impacts using DIA-based
analysis ( ,
Supporting Information Table S4). A total
of 3717 proteins were identified across biological replicates with
>95% of proteins quantified with >2 precursors and biological
groups,
demonstrating clustering based on PCA as well as Pearson correlation
analysis (Supporting Information Figure
3). Comparing the CRISPRi-silenced (pglLBC guide) vs the CRISPRi control (non-target guide)
samples with a fold-change of at least ± 1-fold (log2) and a −log10(p-value) > 2.0
revealed an increase in the proteome alterations observed in response
to induction; from 70 proteins in the non-induced samples to 137 proteins
in the induced samples, A. Despite this increase in the observed alterations, the
overlap of proteins altered within ΔpglL vs
wild-type (with or without rhamnose) compared to the pglLBC vs non-target guides with induction
was still modest (27 proteins denoted in magenta, A). Visualization of these
changes across biological replicates demonstrate the silencing of pglL results in protein alterations mirroring those seen
between ΔpglL including alterations in PglL
(BCAL0960, denoted as bold, B), BCAL1093, BCAM1423, BCAL1917, BCAL2974, BCAL0624,
and BCAL1086 (denoted in blue) previously reported to undergo alterations, yet highlights that many alterations observed
in the CRISPRi strains appeared as a result of induction with 1% rhamnose
within the CTX:Rha-dCas9 and are unrelated to the silencing mediated
by the pglLBc guide.
Analysis of the impact of induction with 1% rhamnose supports that
within the CTX:Rha-dCas9 and ΔpglL backgrounds,
the addition of 1% rhamnose results in multiple changes in the proteome
compared to wild-type ( C). Thus, increasing rhamnose induction does improve the overlap
within the protein changes seen between ΔpglL vs wild-type compared to the pglLBC vs non-target guides, yet demonstrates that 1% rhamnose leads
to notable proteomic changes. Thus, rhamnose-induced changes require
the use of both the non-target CRISPRi control and the examination
of both induced and non-induced conditions to enable the identification
of alterations driven by silencing of glycosylation.
 

## Reduction of PglL Levels
Impact the Extent and Density of Glycosylation
Events within the B. cenocepacia Glycoproteome
While proteomic analysis supports that CRISPRi silencing reduces
PglL levels, to further quantify the impact on glycosylation we examined
the glycoproteome using ZIC-HILIC glycopeptide enrichment at 0.1% ( A,B, Supporting Information Tables S5 and S6) and 1% ( C,D, Supporting Information Tables S7 and S8)
rhamnose. Enriched glycopeptides were analyzed using DDA and, consistent
with our DIA proteomic observations, we found that induction with
0.1% rhamnose resulted in a milder reduction in total glycosylation
(∼60% reduction in summed ion intensity of glycopeptides, A) compared to 1%
rhamnose induction (84% reduction in summed ion intensity of glycopeptides, C). Protein-level
analysis of the input controls using DDA confirmed the expression
of dCas9 and loss of PglL in a pglLBC guide-dependent manner ( B,D). These findings are consistent with our observation
at 0.1% rhamnose ( B,C), suggesting that even with reductions of PglL below the
limit of detection, glycosylation was not abolished. To further understand
how the loss of glycosylation impacts the glycoproteome, we examined
the distribution of glycosylation observed on glycopeptides with 1%
rhamnose induction ( A). The reduction in glycosylation resulted in both a decrease
in the total number of unique glycopeptides identified and reductions
in the density of glycosylation events observed on peptides, resulting
in the almost complete loss of multiply glycosylated peptides ( B–G). Consistent
with this, we observe multiple examples where triply and doubly glycosylated
peptides are observed in lower glycosylation states in response to
the silencing of PglL, independent of changes in the glycoprotein
levels (Supporting Information Figure 4).
These observations support that glycosylation silencing reduces the
total level of glycosylation within the B. cenocepacia glycoproteome and shifts the distribution of glycosylation events
on proteins toward lower glycosylated states.
 

## Silencing PglL Reduces
but Does Not Inhibit O-Linked Glycosylation
across Burkholderia Species
The observation that even when PglL is undetectable in B. cenocepacia glycosylation persists supports that
even minimal levels of PglL are sufficient to allow glycosylation.
As glycosylation is a conserved feature of the Burkholderia genus, , we questioned if this persistence of glycosylation
following pglL-silencing is observed across Burkholderia species. To assess this, we selected
three species of Burkholderia; B. diffusa MSMB375, B. multivorans ATCC17616, and B. thailandensis E264
and generated CTX:Rha-dCas9 derivatives to enable the silencing of pglL. As with B. cenocepacia, guides were designed within the promoter and 5′ region of
the oligosaccharyltransferase pglL, and the effect
of CRISPRi-mediated knockdown assessed using DDA-based analysis. All pglL guides examined across all strains allowed the reduction
of PglL to below the limit of detection and reduced the detectible
number and abundances, based on summed ion intensity of glycopeptides
in a guide-dependent manner (Supporting Information Figure 5, Supporting Information Table S9). To quantify the reduction in glycosylation, a single guide from
each species was selected and ZIC-HILIC enrichment undertaken comparing
the abundance of glycosylation observed with pglL guides compared to the non-target guide, with and without induction.
The total abundance of glycosylation was reduced in a pglL guide and rhamnose-dependent manner ( A,C,E, Supporting Information Tables 10–12) with proteome analysis confirming
the reduction of PglL ( B,D,F, Supporting Information Tables 13–15) across each species. As with B. cenocepacia, silencing of pglL leads to a reduction in glycosylation
density and the loss of multiply glycosylated peptides (Supporting Information Figure 6). Importantly,
PglL levels appear predominately silenced to below the limits of detection
within these species (Supporting Information Figure 7). These findings support that while CRISPRi allows robust
reductions in PglL protein levels, residual protein glycosylation
is readily observed.
 

## Comparison of Proteomic Impacts of PglL Silencing
across Burkholderia Species
Finally, to better
quantify the impact of CRISPRi silencing of glycosylation across Burkholderia species, we utilized DIA-based analysis.
Across these Burkholderia proteomes,
3191, 3155, and 3063 proteins were identified within B. diffusa, B. multivorans, and B. thailandensis, respectively,
with biological groups demonstrating clustering based on PCA and Pearson
correlation analysis (Supporting Information Figure 8, Supporting Information Tables 16–18). Across the Burkholderia species,
we found that only a subset of observed protein changes can be attributed
solely to the reduction of glycosylation ( A–C, denoted in magenta). These observations
support that similar to B. cenocepacia, induction with 1% rhamnose leads to multiple protein alterations,
requiring the use of both non-target and induction controls to identify
impacts associated directly with the target of CRISPRi silencing.
Despite this, across all species alterations driven by pglL CRISPRi silencing were observed, yet these impacts were modest,
leading to only 6, 10, and 40 pglL-dependent proteome
changes in B. diffusa, B. multivorans, and B. thailandensis, respectively ( D–F). As with DDA analysis, DIA confirmed the reduction in
PglL levels in response to CRISPRi silencing ( D–F, denoted in bold) as well as revealed
alterations within homologs of proteins observed to be altered in
response to pglL silencing within B. cenocepacia ( B) such as BCAL1093, BCAL1917, and BCAL1086
( D–F,
denoted in blue). Combined these results support that while CRISPRi
does allow the suppression of PglL across Burkholderia species, the overall proteome impacts of glycosylation silencing
is modest, and only a subset of protein alterations observed in B. cenocepacia appears mirrored in other species.
 

## Discussion
Within
this work, we explore the use of CRISPRi to allow the modulation
of O-linked protein glycosylation within multiple Burkholderia species. By generating four CRISPRi-enabled Burkholderia species containing the Burkholderia-optimized dCas9 gene (CTX:Rha-dCas9), we demonstrate
that CRISPRi readily allows the reduction of PglL levels, even reducing
the protein to below the limits of detection using DIA-based analysis,
yet find that this does not abolish glycosylation. Furthermore, we
find that even with reductions in glycosylation of nearly 90%, we
observe only a modest impact on the proteomes across these Burkholderia species at stationary phase growth conditions.
Comparisons between B. cenocepacia ΔpglL and a pglL guide-silenced strain revealed
that while robust reductions in PglL levels can be observed following
silencing at even modest levels of rhamnose induction (0.1%, B, B & A), silencing at these levels
poorly mimics the proteomic impacts observed in ΔpglL ( A,C). While
the titratable nature of CTX:Rha-dCas9 does allow increased CRISPRi
silencing at elevated levels of rhamnose, such as 1%, this level of
the induction agent results in significant proteome impacts across
the Burkholderia genus. Interestingly,
using 1% rhamnose induction, we also noted multiple proteome alterations
within strains possessing the non-target guide ( C). While designed to lack homology to the B. cenocepacia K56-2 genome, this observation suggest that this guide likely possesses off-target
activities that may only become apparent at high levels of induction,
a phenomena which was recently noted in bacterial CRISPRi guide libraries. These observations demonstrate that while growth
may not be impacted with high rhamnose levels, as demonstrated previously, these conditions result in numerous proteomic
impacts even with guides predicted to have no homology to the target
genome, requiring careful consideration and appropriate controls to
enable the dissection of desired proteomic changes from those driven
solely by rhamnose or unexpected guide effects.
While rhamnose
inducible systems are considered tightly repressed
in Burkholderia species, , this study highlights that low levels of dCas9 expression are observable
even in the absence of induction ( and ). Most notably,
we find this leakiness appears to result in a detectible reduction
in PglL levels in B. multivorans and B. thailandensis even without induction (Supporting Information Figure 7). The observation
of a partial reduction in PglL levels in the absence of induction
supports that, in the context of CRISPRi, this rhamnose inducible
systems should be considered leaky. Interestingly, despite the observation
of a partial knockdown of PglL levels in B. multivorans and B. thailandensis, we find no
detectible impact on glycosylation levels ( A,C). This highlights that the potential
of protein levels to be reduced even without induction should be considered
when utilizing CRISPRi within the Burkholderia genus. Within other bacterial species, it has been demonstrated
that many genes can be sensitive to even small alterations in protein
levels mediated by CRISPRi. For example,
within Bacillus subtilis CRISPRi-mediated
reductions in the levels of essential genes revealed that even modest
changes (∼2-fold reduction in transcript levels) resulted in
alterations in growth, cell shape, and colony size. Our observation that despite robust reductions in PglL
levels and dramatic alterations in the glycoproteome within these
species, little impact is observed on proteome levels, which support
that alterations in glycosylation capacity are well tolerated across
the Burkholderia genus.
While
many bacterial glycosylation studies have explored the proteomic
impacts of abolishing glycosylation using mutagenesis, , , , , , few studies
have used CRISPRi silencing to modulate glycosylation, and importantly, no study has explored the impact
of silencing on glycosylation levels. Our observation that glycosylation
persists even with silencing of PglL below the limits of detection
supports the notion that within Burkholderia species, even low levels of oligosaccharyltransferase capacity maybe
sufficient to prevent the defects observed in glycosylation mutants.
Within bacterial physiology, excess enzyme capacity (also known as
enzymatic overcapacity) is thought to convey a fitness benefit to
changing environments and the ability
to ensure stability against fluctuations in transcript expression. Our previous findings that glycosylation is
required for resistance to stress is
consistent with this concept and suggests that glycosylating proteins
in response to rapidly changing conditions may be beneficial for Burkholderia species. Using CRISPRi, the link between
enzymatic capacity and the perturbations of protein levels has been
experimentally explored, supporting that the buffering capacity provided
by enzymatic overcapacity does improve the responsiveness to changing
conditions. , This work highlights that while
CRISPRi is increasingly being utilized to validate phenotypes, it
is important to note that mutagenesis and CRISPRi knockdowns are complementary,
rather than equivalent approaches to probe protein functions. Recently,
it was highlighted within B. cenocepacia that O-linked glycosylation appears to impact antibiotic resistance,
with transposon mutants demonstrating altered susceptibility to several
antibiotics, yet validation of these observations using CRISPRi knockdowns
of pglL failed to recapitulate this phenotype. Our observations here reconcile these findings
and provide a rationale for why CRISPRi silencing of pglL does not mirror the phenotypes of ΔpglL strains
and reveals that Burkholderia O-linked
glycosylation possesses a previously unrecognized level of robustness.
In addition to CRISPRi providing a titratable way to explore gene
functions, it is also increasingly utilized
to assess protein druggability. It has
been argued that proteins demonstrating highly deleterious effects
upon CRISPRi-silencing are likely ideal targets for drug development. − With this concept in mind, our findings that pglL CRISPRi silencing does not result in the proteomic or phenotypic
effects observed in B. cenocepacia ΔpglL support that PglL is likely a sub-optimal target for
drug development. Our observation that glycosylation silencing leads
to few proteomic effects, even at high levels of rhamnose induction,
highlights that even with undetectable levels of the protein within
a cell, a near wild-type-like proteome is observed under laboratory
conditions. This resistance of O-linked glycosylation to perturbation
further highlights the poor druggability characteristics of PglL as
it suggests that even if a highly specific and potent agent was developed,
any residual level of PglL activity may be sufficient to compensate
for the majority loss of the protein. Therefore, based on these results,
PglL is likely a poor target for future drug development.
In
summary, this work furthers our understanding of the utility
of CRISPRi for understanding bacterial system biology and highlights
the resistance of Burkholderia O-linked
glycosylation to perturbations. This work contributes to a growing
body of studies that demonstrate for enzymatic processes, such as
glycosylation, simply reducing enzyme levels, even below the limits
of detection, can be insufficient to result in the abolishment of
a biological process. Our identification that O-linked glycosylation
levels can be modulated, yet the proteome does not mirror the large
alterations previously observed within glycosylation null strains
suggests that reductions in glycosylation capacity are well tolerated
in the Burkholderia species and conditions
examined in this work. The high levels of glycosylation robustness
following silencing of PglL to undetectable levels supports that PglL
possesses poor druggable characteristics and may not be an ideal anti-virulence
target. Finally, this work demonstrates how glycoproteomics, proteomics,
and CRISPRi can be integrated to explore aspects of bacterial physiology,
revealing an unexpected level of robustness within bacterial glycosylation.

## Acknowledgments
N.E.S. is supported by an Australian
Research Council
Future Fellowship (FT200100270), an ARC Discovery Project grant (DP210100362),
and a NHMRC Ideas grant (2018980). We thank the Melbourne Mass Spectrometry
and Proteomics Facility of The Bio21 Molecular Science and Biotechnology
Institute for access to MS instrumentation. We thank Dr Nicholas Coleman
for sharing the plasmid pUS250.

## Supporting Information Available
The Supporting Information is
available free of charge at https://pubs.acs.org/doi/10.1021/acs.jproteome.2c00790.
Strain list, plasmid
list, primer list, PRIDE accession
information of proteomic experiments: all proteomic data set associated
with this work including the instrument the data set acquired on and
Pride Reviewer login detail, DIA proteomic analysis of B. cenocepacia CTX:rha-dCas9 in response to 0.1%
rhamnose induction, Pearson correlation analysis revealing samples
have high correlation (>0.90) across all replicates, proteomic
coverage
across replicates revealing >95% of proteins identified with greater
than two precursors, heat map of protein alterations shared between
the CRISPRi-mediated pglL-knockdown and pglL-knockout strains at 0.1% rhamnose, 17 proteins selectively altered
in response to CRISPRi-silenced pglL compared to
CRISPRi controls and observed within the ΔpglL samples, DIA proteomic analysis of B. cenocepacia CTX:rha-dCas9 in response to 1% rhamnose induction, PCA of biological
replicates, Pearson correlation analysis revealing samples have high
correlation (>0.90) across all replicates, proteomic coverage across
replicates revealing >95% of proteins identified with greater than
two precursors, analysis of PglL levels across biological groups confirming
the selective inhibition of PglL in response to CRISPRi silencing,
glycopeptide enrichment revealing a downshift in glycosylation states
of glycopeptides in B. cenocepacia CTX:rha-dCas9
in response to 1% rhamnose induction, heatmap of glycopeptides from
glycoproteins BCAM2680, BCAL1917, and BCAL0738 revealing alterations
within glycopeptides in the CRISPRi pglL-silenced
strain with imputed values denoted in gray, protein levels of BCAM2680,
BCAL1917, and BCAL0738 not dramatically affected by their altered
glycopeptide levels in the glycopeptide enrichment input controls,
validation of CRISPRi pglL guide-mediated silencing
of PglL across B. thailandensis, B. multivorans and B. diffusa harboring CTX:rha-dCas9, DDA analysis of CRISPRi guides confirming
the modulation of PglL and the alteration in glycosylation levels
based on the summed ion intensity as well as the number of glycopeptides
identified across all guides tested, delta mass plots of B. thailandensis, B. multivorans, and B. diffusa containing CTX:rha-dCas9-identified
glycopeptides; delta mass plots demonstrating the density of glycosylation
observed on glycopeptides reduced in response to CRISPRi silencing
of PglL with 1% rhamnose across all Burkholderia species based on the summed ion intensity of observed glycopeptides
as well as the number of glycopeptides identified; DDA analysis of
PglL levels across B. thailandensis, B. multivorans, and B. diffusa containing CTX:rha-dCas9 confirming the
selective inhibition of PglL levels in the glycopeptide enrichment
input controls; in response to CRISPRi silencing, reduced PglL levels
with partial inhibition also observed without induction; DIA proteomic
analysis of B. diffusa, B. thailandensis, and B. multivorans containing CTX:rha-dCAS9 in response to 1% rhamnose induction; PCA
of biological groups; Pearson correlation analysis revealing samples
with high correlation (>0.90) across all replicates; uncropped
Western
blotting images; and uncropped ECL and membrane images for all Western
blotting (PDF)
DDA protein-level analysis of B. cenocepacia CTX:rha-dCas9 containing sgRNA plasmids harboring the B. cenocepaciapglL-targeted guides
(pglLBC) and the non-target
guide; MSFragger search results for protein-level analysis of biological
replicates (n = 3) and Perseus processed data; for
each identified protein, log2 LFQ protein values, T-test information including the −log10(p-value), difference in the mean between the groups,
and multiple hypothesis corrected p-values (permutation-based
false discovery rate of 0.05); and categorical information associated
with protein accessions, gene name, and GO terms in addition to both
imputed and non-imputed LFQ values (XLSX)
DDA peptide-level analysis of B. cenocepacia CTX:rha-dCas9 containing sgRNA plasmids
harboring the B. cenocepaciapglL-targeted guides
(pglLBC) and the non-target
guide; MSFragger peptide-level search outputs of all peptides identified
across biological replicates (n = 3); peptide sequences,
charge states, probabilities, modification status as well as the peptide-spectrum
matches (PSM) spectral counts and intensities for identified peptides;
and MS-Stats outputs for the observed ion intensity of glycopeptides
for each unique glycopeptide (XLSX)
DIA protein-level analysis of B. cenocepacia CTX:rha-dCas9 containing sgRNA plasmids
harboring pglLBC, non-target
guide, or guideless sgRNA,
compared to ΔpglL and wild-type containing
the guideless plasmids in response to induction with 0.1% rhamnose;
Spectronaut search results for protein-level analysis across all biological
replicates (n = 3) and the Perseus processed data;
for each identified protein, log2 LFQ protein values, T-test information including the −log10(p-value), difference in the mean between the groups,
and multiple hypothesis corrected p-values (permutation-based
false discovery rate of 0.05); and categorical information associated
with protein accessions, gene name, and GO terms in addition to if
proteins identified by a single PSM and the total number of PSMs assigned
for each protein within each replicate (XLSX)
DIA protein-level analysis of B. cenocepacia CTX:rha-dCas9 containing sgRNA plasmids
harboring pglLBC, non-target
guide, or guideless sgRNA,
compared to ΔpglL and wild-type containing
the guideless plasmids in response to induction with 1% rhamnose;
Spectronaut search results for protein-level analysis across all biological
replicates (n = 4) and Perseus processed data set;
for each identified protein, log2 LFQ protein values, T-test information including the −log10(p-value), difference in the mean between the groups,
and multiple hypothesis corrected p-values (permutation-based
false discovery rate of 0.05); and categorical information associated
with protein accessions, gene name, and GO terms in addition to if
proteins were identified by a single PSM as well as the total number
of PSMs assigned for each protein within each replicate (XLSX)
DDA peptide-level
analysis of ZIC-HILIC-enriched glycopeptides
from B. cenocepacia CTX:rha-dCas9 containing
sgRNA plasmids harboring pglLBC or the guideless sgRNA in response to 0.1% rhamnose induction;
MSFragger peptide-level search outputs of all peptides identified
across biological replicates (n = 4); for identified
peptides, peptide sequences, charge states, probabilities, as well
as the PSM spectral counts as intensities; and for each unique glycopeptide,
MS-Stats outputs for the observed ion intensity of glycopeptides (XLSX)
DDA protein-level
analysis of input controls used for
ZIC-HILIC glycopeptide enrichment from B. cenocepacia CTX:rha-dCas9 containing sgRNA plasmids harboring pglLBC or the guideless sgRNA in response
to 0.1% rhamnose induction; MSFragger search results for protein-level
analysis of biological replicates (n = 4) and Perseus
processed data set; for each identified protein, log2 LFQ
protein values, T-test information including the
−log10(p-value), difference in
the mean between the groups, and multiple hypothesis corrected p-values (permutation-based false discovery rate of 0.05)
in addition to both imputed and non-imputed LFQ values (XLSX)
DDA peptide-level
analysis of ZIC-HILIC-enriched glycopeptides
from B. cenocepacia CTX:rha-dCas9 containing
sgRNA plasmids harboring pglLBC or the non-target guide in response to 1% rhamnose induction;
MSFragger peptide-level search outputs of all peptides identified
across biological replicates (n = 4); for identified
peptides, peptide sequences, charge states, probabilities, and the
PSM spectral counts as intensities; and for each unique glycopeptide,
MS-Stats outputs for the observed ion intensity of glycopeptides (XLSX)
DDA protein-level
analysis of input controls used for
ZIC-HILIC glycopeptide enrichment from B. cenocepacia CTX:rha-dCas9 containing sgRNA plasmids harboring pglLBC or the non-target guide in response
to 1% rhamnose induction; MSFragger search results for protein-level
analysis of biological replicates (n = 4) and Perseus
processed data set; for each identified protein, log2 LFQ
protein values, T-test information including the
−log10(p-value), difference in
the mean between the groups, and multiple hypothesis corrected p-values (permutation-based false discovery rate of 0.05)
in addition to both imputed and non-imputed LFQ values (XLSX)
DDA protein-
and glycopeptide-level analysis of B. thailandensis, B. multivorans, and B. diffusa containing CTX:rha-dCas9
and pglL targeting sgRNA plasmids as well as the
non-target control plasmid; MSFragger search results for the protein-level
analysis of biological replicates (n = 3) and Perseus
processed data sets for each strain; for each identified protein,
log2 LFQ protein values, T-test information including
the −log10(p-value), difference
in the mean between the groups, and multiple hypothesis corrected p-values (permutation-based false discovery rate of 0.05);
protein accessions, gene names, and GO terms in addition to both imputed
and non-imputed LFQ values; and for glycopeptide analysis, MS-Stats
outputs with the observed ion intensity and number of glycopeptides
identified across samples (XLSX)
DDA peptide-level analysis of ZIC-HILIC-enriched
glycopeptides
from B. multivorans CTX:rha-dCas9 containing
sgRNA plasmids harboring pglLBM or the non-target guide in response to induction with 1% rhamnose;
MSFragger peptide-level search outputs of all peptides identified
across biological replicates (n = 4); for identified
peptides, peptide sequences, charge states, probabilities, as well
as the PSM spectral counts and intensities; and for glycopeptide analysis,
MS-Stats outputs with the observed ion intensity and number of glycopeptides
identified across samples (XLSX)
DDA peptide-level analysis of ZIC-HILIC-enriched
glycopeptides
from B. diffusa CTX:rha-dCas9 containing
sgRNA plasmids harboring pglLBD or the non-target guide in response to induction with 1% rhamnose;
MSFragger peptide-level search outputs of all peptides identified
across biological replicates (n = 4); for identified
peptides, peptide sequences, charge states, probabilities, as well
as the PSM spectral counts and intensities; and for glycopeptide analysis,
MS-Stats outputs with the observed ion intensity and number of glycopeptides
identified across samples (XLSX)
DDA peptide-level analysis of ZIC-HILIC-enriched
glycopeptides
from B. thailandensis CTX:rha-dCas9
containing sgRNA plasmids harboring pglLBT or the non-target guide in response to induction
with 1% rhamnose; MSFragger peptide-level search outputs of all peptides
identified across biological replicates (n = 4);
for identified peptides, peptide sequences, charge states, probabilities,
as well as the PSM spectral counts and intensities; and for glycopeptide
analysis, MS-Stats outputs with the observed ion intensity and number
of glycopeptides identified across samples (XLSX)
DDA protein-level analysis of input
controls used for
ZIC-HILIC glycopeptide enrichment from B. multivorans CTX:rha-dCas9 containing sgRNA plasmids harboring pglLBM or the non-target guide in response
to induction with 1% rhamnose; MSFragger search results for protein-level
analysis of biological replicates (n = 4) and Perseus
processed data set; for each identified protein, log2 LFQ
protein values, T-test information including the
−log10(p-value), difference in
the mean between the groups, and multiple hypothesis corrected p-values (permutation-based false discovery rate of 0.05)
in addition to both imputed and non-imputed LFQ values (XLSX)
DDA protein-level
analysis of input controls used for
ZIC-HILIC glycopeptide enrichment from B. diffusa CTX:rha-dCas9 containing sgRNA plasmids harboring pglLBD or the non-target guide in response
to induction with 1% rhamnose; MSFragger search results for protein-level
analysis of biological replicates (n = 4) and Perseus
processed data set; for each identified protein, log2 LFQ
protein values, T-test information including the
−log10(p-value), difference in
the mean between the groups, and multiple hypothesis corrected p-values (permutation-based false discovery rate of 0.05)
in addition to both imputed and non-imputed LFQ values (XLSX)
DDA protein-level
analysis of input controls used for
ZIC-HILIC glycopeptide enrichment from B. thailandensis CTX:rha-dCas9 containing sgRNA plasmids harboring pglLBT or the non-target guide in response
to induction with 1% rhamnose; MSFragger search results for protein-level
analysis of biological replicates (n = 4) and Perseus
processed data set; for each identified protein, log2 LFQ
protein values, T-test information including the
−log10(p-value), difference in
the mean between the groups, and multiple hypothesis corrected p-values (permutation-based false discovery rate of 0.05)
in addition to both imputed and non-imputed LFQ values (XLSX)
DIA protein-level
analysis of B. diffusa CTX:rha-dCas9
containing sgRNA plasmids harboring pglLBD or non-target guide in response to
1% rhamnose induction; Spectronaut search results for protein-level
analysis and Perseus processed data set of biological replicates (n = 4) of each strain; for each identified protein, log2 LFQ protein values, T-test information including
the −log10(p-value), difference
in the mean between the groups, and multiple hypothesis corrected p-value (permutation-based false discovery rate of 0.05);
and categorical information associated with protein accessions, gene
names, and GO terms (XLSX)
DIA protein-level analysis of B. multivorans CTX:rha-dCas9 containing sgRNA plasmids harboring pglLBM or non-target guide in response to
1% rhamnose induction; Perseus processed Spectronaut search results
for protein-level analysis of biological replicates (n = 4) of each strain; for each identified protein, log2 LFQ protein values, T-test information including
the −log10(p-value), difference
in the mean between the groups, and multiple hypothesis corrected p-value (permutation-based false discovery rate of 0.05);
and categorical information associated with protein accessions, gene
names, and GO terms (XLSX)
DIA protein-level analysis of B. thailandensis CTX:rha-dCas9 containing sgRNA plasmids harboring pglLBT or non-target guide in response to
1% rhamnose induction; Perseus processed Spectronaut search results
for protein-level analysis of biological replicates (n = 4) of each strain; for each identified protein, log2 LFQ protein values, T-test information including
the −log10(p-value), difference
in the mean between the groups, and multiple hypothesis corrected p-value (permutation-based false discovery rate of 0.05);
and categorical information associated with protein accessions, gene
names, and GO terms (XLSX)

The
authors declare no
competing financial interest.

## Supplementary Material
pr2c00790_si_001.pdf
pr2c00790_si_002.xlsx
pr2c00790_si_003.xlsx
pr2c00790_si_004.xlsx
pr2c00790_si_005.xlsx
pr2c00790_si_006.xlsx
pr2c00790_si_007.xlsx
pr2c00790_si_008.xlsx
pr2c00790_si_009.xlsx
pr2c00790_si_010.xlsx
pr2c00790_si_011.xlsx
pr2c00790_si_012.xlsx
pr2c00790_si_013.xlsx
pr2c00790_si_014.xlsx
pr2c00790_si_015.xlsx
pr2c00790_si_016.xlsx
pr2c00790_si_017.xlsx
pr2c00790_si_018.xlsx
pr2c00790_si_019.xlsx

## References
 

## Associated Data

## Supplementary Materials
pr2c00790_si_001.pdf
pr2c00790_si_002.xlsx
pr2c00790_si_003.xlsx
pr2c00790_si_004.xlsx
pr2c00790_si_005.xlsx
pr2c00790_si_006.xlsx
pr2c00790_si_007.xlsx
pr2c00790_si_008.xlsx
pr2c00790_si_009.xlsx
pr2c00790_si_010.xlsx
pr2c00790_si_011.xlsx
pr2c00790_si_012.xlsx
pr2c00790_si_013.xlsx
pr2c00790_si_014.xlsx
pr2c00790_si_015.xlsx
pr2c00790_si_016.xlsx
pr2c00790_si_017.xlsx
pr2c00790_si_018.xlsx
pr2c00790_si_019.xlsx

## Data Availability Statement
Mass spectrometry data (RAW files,
FragPipe outputs, Spectronaut experiment files, R Markdown scripts,
and output tables) have been deposited into the PRIDE ProteomeXchange
repository. , All PRIDE accession numbers,
descriptions of the associated experiment, and experiment type (DIA
or DDA) are provided within Supporting Information Table 4.