pmcRev Cardiovasc Med4614revcardmedRCMReviews in Cardiovascular Medicine1530-65502153-8174IMR PressPMC11266790PMC11266790.111266790112667903907670710.31083/j.rcm2408226S1530-6550(23)01005-01ReviewA Review of Therapeutic Strategies against Cardiac Fibrosis: From Classical Pharmacology to Novel Molecular, Epigenetic, and Biotechnological Approaches
FlorisErica CozzolinoClaudia MarconiSangar TonicelloFabiana PicchioVittorio PaganoFrancesca ChimentiIsotta isotta.chimenti@uniroma1.itPierceGrant N.Academic Editor
1Department of Medical Surgical Sciences and Biotechnologies, Sapienza University, 04100 Latina, Italy

2Institute of Biochemistry and Cell Biology, National Council of Research (IBBC-CNR), 00015 Monterotondo, Italy

3Mediterranea Cardiocentro, 80122 Napoli, Italy
*Correspondence: isotta.chimenti@uniroma1.it (Isotta Chimenti)†These authors contributed equally.
882023820232484672142262222023642023652023080820232907202430072024Copyright: © 2023 The Author(s). Published by IMR Press.2023https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/This is an open access article under the CC BY 4.0 license.
Cardiovascular diseases are the first cause of death worldwide, with a heavy 
social and economic impact. They include a wide range of pathological conditions, 
among which cardiac fibrosis represents a common pathogenetic hallmark. The 
fibrotic process is driven by cardiac mesenchymal stromal cells, namely 
fibroblasts, which become activated, proliferate, and differentiate into 
myofibroblasts in response to several stimuli, in the end secreting extracellular 
matrix proteins, and mediating cardiac tissue remodelling and stiffening. A 
specific therapy for the exclusive treatment of cardiac fibrosis is still 
lacking. Given the growing quest for reducing the burden of cardiovascular 
diseases, there is increasing interest in the search for new effective 
anti-fibrotic therapies. In this review, we will briefly summarize the limited 
pharmacological therapies known to act, at least in part, against cardiac 
fibrosis. Then we will present novel potential active molecules, molecular 
targets, and biotechnological approaches emerged in the last decade, as possible 
future therapeutic strategies for cardiac fibrosis, with a specific focus on 
targeting fibroblast activation and function.

cardiac fibrosiscardiac remodelingbiological therapiescardiac fibroblastscardiac stromal cellsnon-coding RNAsRNA-therapeuticsprecision medicineSapienza University of RomeRM12117A805ED2FDSapienza University of RomeRG11916B85CDBF76Italian Health MinistryRG1221816BC8E766Regione LazioA0375-2020-36621Sapienza University of RomeAR12218167E8FA71IC is supported by grants # RM12117A805ED2FD and # RG11916B85CDBF76 from Sapienza University of Rome, and by grant # RG1221816BC8E766 from the Italian Health Ministry. FP is supported by Grant # A0375-2020-36621 from Regione Lazio (POR-FESR 2014-2021). EF is supported by grant # AR12218167E8FA71 from Sapienza University of Rome.pmc-status-qastatus0pmc-status-liveyespmc-status-embargonopmc-status-releasedyespmc-prop-open-accessyespmc-prop-olfnopmc-prop-manuscriptnopmc-prop-legally-suppressednopmc-prop-has-pdfyespmc-prop-has-supplementnopmc-prop-pdf-onlynopmc-prop-suppress-copyrightnopmc-prop-is-real-versionnopmc-prop-is-scanned-articlenopmc-prop-preprintnopmc-prop-in-epmcyespmc-license-refCC BY

## 1. Introduction
Heart disease is a leading cause of death worldwide and its prevalence is 
expected to increase in the next decades [ , , ], representing a heavy social and 
economic burden globally. Cardiac fibrosis is one of the key underlying 
pathogenetic mechanisms of many chronic cardiac diseases, and its therapeutic 
management remains an unmet clinical need [ ].
The fibrotic process develops either acutely as a circumscribed scar due for 
example to acute ischemia and cell death, or in the interstitium as a continuum 
positive feedback of multiple attempts for repair reactions. In this case, it 
evolves into a chronic degenerative/inflammatory response with an increasing 
number of mesenchymal stromal cells turning into activated cardiac fibroblasts 
(CFs). Under physiological conditions, most stromal cells (including CFs) are 
static, but when an injury occurs, CFs become activated, proliferate, and then 
secrete a large amount of collagen fibers, leading to extra-cellular matrix (ECM) 
resorption and deposition [ ]. These phenomena will progressively increase 
myocardial stiffness, hamper myocardial conduction, reduce the efficiency of the 
cardiac muscle contraction, all of which will ultimately lead to heart failure 
[ , ].
At present, there is no specific treatment targeting exclusively myocardial 
fibrosis. The increasing quest for novel effective drugs against fibrosis and 
remodelling respond to international research priorities for the development of 
precision and personalized medicine approaches to chronic non-communicable 
diseases in the aging population, which could reduce the cardiovascular disease 
burden effectively. Indeed, novel efficient anti-fibrotic drugs may reduce the 
cost of surgical-clinical interventions and of standard life-long medication, as 
well as the incidence and average time of hospitalization.
In this review, we will provide a brief overview of the current medications 
known to interfere, at least in part, with the mechanisms of cardiac mesenchymal 
and fibroblast activation and function. Then we will present a selection of novel 
potentially active molecules, whose mechanism of action is not necessarily fully 
elucidated yet, together with a review of novel possible molecular targets in CF 
activation. We will also present a selection of epigenetic pathways and 
non-coding RNAs known to interfere directly with fibroblast differentiation. 
Finally, we will present some examples of biological and biotechnological 
approaches (e.g., direct reprogramming, T-cell immunotherapy) that have been 
recently described against cardiac fibrosis.

## 2. Consolidated Pharmacological Targets

## 2.1 The Renin-Angiotensin-Aldosterone System 
Cardiac fibrosis development is directly associated with the activation of the 
renin-angiotensin-aldosterone system (RAAS) [ ]. The progression of cardiac 
dysfunction reduces renal perfusion, so the juxtaglomerular apparatus starts to 
release renin [ ]. The consequence of this release is an increment of the 
angiotensin II level produced by the angiotensin-converting enzyme (ACE). For a 
long time, angiotensin II has been considered the principal promoter of cardiac 
fibrosis [ ]. In fact, angiotensin II directly drives numerous myofibroblast 
functions such as, cell proliferation and migration, transforming growth factor beta (TGF- ) release, and 
ECM synthesis through stimulation of the angiotensin II type 1 receptor (AT1R) 
[ , , , ]. The anti-fibrotic mechanisms triggered by RAAS inhibition have been 
widely described in the literature through animal studies, together with the 
direct role of angiotensin II infusion in enhancing cardiac fibrosis in rodents 
[ ]. To date, ACE inhibitors and AT1R antagonists represent the mainstay therapy 
in heart failure patients. They act in multiple ways by reducing ECM production 
and cardiac hypertrophy, as demonstrated both in cell culture and animal models 
[ , , ]. Nonetheless, it was demonstrated that the specific activation of AT1R 
in cardiomyocytes has only a minimal impact on cardiac hypertrophy, suggesting a 
main role of this receptor in cardiac non-myocytic cells [ ].
Aldosterone is a steroid hormone produced by adrenal cortex under stimulation of 
angiotensin II [ ]. It is a transcriptional regulator and is responsible for 
upregulating pro-fibrotic genes. Aldosterone and angiotensin II work together by 
activating the mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK) pathway in cardiomyocytes [ , ], as well as in CFs [ , ]. 
Interestingly, aldosterone can exert its profibrotic effect also when angiotensin 
II is inactivated, suggesting its independent role in promoting fibrosis [ ]. 
There are two drugs—spironolactone and eplerenone—which have revealed 
potential antifibrotic effects clinically. They are receptor antagonists of the 
mineralocorticoid family, blocking aldosterone signaling. Zannad et al. 
[ ] verified the serum level reduction of fibrosis markers and collagen 
synthesis after spironolactone treatment. More data on their specific effect on 
CFs is needed, though.

## 2.2 Beta-Adrenergic Signaling
Pharmacological approaches for the treatment of cardiac fibrosis include 
targeting the adrenergic receptor system, as well. This neurohormonal pathway 
contributes to the maintenance of cardiovascular homeostasis through the release 
of norepinephrine, a neurotransmitter that binds to both type 
adrenergic receptors ( -ARs) on the peripheral vasculature, or type 
 1 adrenergic receptors ( 1-ARs) mostly on cardiomyocytes, with positive 
inotropic and chronotropic effects [ ]. However, under chronic pathological 
conditions, continuous activation of ARs in the heart leads to maladaptive 
effects, such as adverse remodelling of cardiac tissue. In these cases, one of 
the most effective therapies to prevent heart failure is the blockade of 
 1-ARs on cardiomyocytes through -blockers drugs [ , , ], which 
have a well-established and consolidated efficacy. Beta-1 adrenergic signaling, 
though, has been shown to exert a direct effect also on human cardiac mesenchymal 
stromal cells, increasing gene expression of fibrotic markers such as 
collagen type I alpha 1 (COL1A1) and thymus cell antigen 1 (THY1). Indeed, the cells isolated from patients 
undergoing treatment with -blockers displayed reduced expression of 
markers of fibrotic activation, and a less fibrotic epigenetic profile, compared 
to cells derived from patients not following a -blockers therapy regimen 
[ ].
Other types of -ARs are expressed in cardiac non-myocytes, which play 
different roles. In detail, CFs mainly express 2-ARs, but their role in 
cardiac fibrosis pathways is still debated. Studies performed over the last 
decade have reported conflicting results, showing both pro- and anti-fibrotic 
responses [ ]. Several studies have demonstrated that the activation of the 
 2-AR signalling in CFs inhibits the production of collagens and the 
transition to myofibroblasts, even under pro-fibrotic stimuli [ , , ]. Other 
anti-fibrotic interventions have focused on the enhancement of the 2-AR 
signalling pathway via inhibiting the G protein-coupled receptor kinase 2 (GRK2), which phosphorylates 
the receptor leading to its desensitization. Different works [ , , ] have also 
described that the fibroblast-specific inhibition of GRK2 could prevent cardiac 
fibrosis and dysfunction in animal models of heart failure. Nonetheless, 
 2-ARs have been shown to increase DNA synthesis, proliferation, and 
production of pro-fibrotic interleukin 6 (IL-6) in isolated rat and human CFs 
[ , , ]. Conversely, specific 2-blockade in human mesenchymal stromal 
cells could reduce THY1 and COL1A1 expression, and the release 
of several pro-inflammatory cytokines [ ]. Further studies are required on this 
pathway to understand the reasons for these conflicting results and hopefully 
reach a consensus.
Besides 1- and 2-ARs, a third type of adrenergic receptor is 
expressed in cardiac tissue, namely the 3-AR, whose levels are low in 
healthy hearts, but become up-regulated under pathological conditions with 
anti-fibrotic effects [ ]. The potential advantage of fibrosis targeting through 
 3-AR-based approaches is that these receptors cannot be phosphorylated 
by GRKs, thus being resistant to desensitization [ ]. Several studies have 
demonstrated the beneficial effects of 3-AR agonists on preventing 
myocardial fibrosis in animal models of myocardial infarction (MI) and pressure 
overload [ , ]. Interestingly, a 3-AR-selective agonist, Mirabegron, 
has already obtained food and drug administration (FDA) approval for the treatment of overactive bladder, and it 
is now under assessment for the treatment of hypertensive structural heart 
disease [ ].

## 3. Novel Potential Active Molecules
Many molecules have been described in the literature as able to directly act on 
cardiac stromal cells and fibroblasts, reducing fibrotic activation and features. 
In some cases, the signalling pathways involved have been defined, although for 
many of them detailed insights on signal transduction and molecular mechanisms 
are still lacking or incomplete (Table , Ref. 
[ , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , ]). Nonetheless, they represent an 
important starting point for further validation and translational studies.
 

## 3.1 Natural Compounds and Nutraceuticals
Some active molecules occur naturally in food and could be used in clinics due 
to the wide range of pharmacological effects.
Vinpocetine is derived from a natural plant alkaloid and is used as a dietary 
supplement. It appears to act through an IkappaB kinase (IKK)-dependent pathway, attenuating CF 
activation and ECM synthesis, independently from small mothers against decapentaplegic (SMAD) phosphorylation or 
activation [ , ]. Moreover, both in vitro and in vivo, it 
targets cyclic nucleotide phosphodiesterase 1 (PDE1), whose expression is 
up-regulated in the heart under RAAS and beta-adrenergic stimulation [ , ]. 
Vinpocetine could also act through IKK with anti-inflammatory effects because of 
its role in nuclear factor kappa B (NF- B) activation [ ], suggesting the potential to 
contribute to anti-remodelling effects [ ].
Concerning cyclic nucleotide PDEs as promising targets for the modulation of the 
fibrotic process, the PDE1A form has been identified as a key regulator of 
fibroblast activation and ECM remodelling in the heart [ ]. This isoform was 
found to be specifically enhanced in activated myofibroblasts both in 
vitro upon angiotensin II and TGF- stimulation, and in vivo in 
mouse, rat, and human fibrotic hearts. Miller et al. [ ] demonstrated 
that the PDE1-selective inhibitor IC86340 reduces activation, ECM deposition, and 
the expression of pro-fibrotic genes in rat CFs, as well as the levels of alpha 
smooth muscle actin ( -SMA), collagen I, and plasminogen activator 
inhibitor I (PAI-I) levels, all markers of cardiac fibrosis. In vivo, 
isoproterenol-induced interstitial fibrosis was attenuated upon PDE1A inhibition 
in mouse hearts [ ]. Another PDE family member involved in pathological cardiac 
remodelling is PDE10A, identified by Chen and colleagues [ ] as abnormally 
expressed in human and mouse failing hearts, as well as in murine CFs stimulated 
with TGF- . Cardiac remodelling and fibrosis in angiotensin-infused mice 
were attenuated by specific inhibition of PDE10A through the administration of 
the selective inhibitor TP-10 [ ]. Interestingly, PDE10A is an already known 
safe druggable target, since several PDE10A inhibitors have already passed phase 
I clinical trials in humans for the treatment of schizophrenia [ , ] and 
Huntington’s disease [ , ].
Berberine is derived from a natural plant alkaloid able of targeting the 
insulin-like growth factor I receptor (IGF-1R). IGF-1 is an important mediator of 
cardiac hypertrophy, but its continuous expression in the myocardium contributes 
to pathological remodelling and interstitial fibrosis [ ]. The IGF-1R is 
upregulated in CFs isolated from diabetic hearts, characterized by overexpression 
of matrix metalloproteinase matrix metallopeptidase-2 (MMP-2) and matrix metallopeptidase-9 (MMP-9), -SMA, and collagen I. The 
long-term treatment with berberine has demonstrated its capacity to downregulate 
IGF-1R and all its downstream effects in a diabetic rat model [ ].
Naringenin, a flavonoid present in citrus fruits, exerts a cardioprotective 
effect by suppressing extracellular signal-regulated kinase (ERK), c-Jun N-terminal kinase (JNK), and phosphatidylinositol3-kinase/protein kinase B (PI3K/Akt) signalling pathways. In 
vitro, naringenin caused the inhibition of TGF- -induced proliferation 
and collagen production in CFs, partly mediated by arresting DNA synthesis at 
G0/G1 [ ]. A recent study proposed a further mechanism targeting cardiac 
fibrosis through naringenin. In this work, it suppresses the expression of 
profibrotic proteins such as collagen I, collagen III, and -SMA by 
inactivating the SMAD3 signalling pathway in angiotensin-stimulated mouse CFs. In 
addition, naringenin acts as a SMAD3-inhibitor, and was shown to reduce the 
proliferation and ECM production by CFs in rats with hypertension-induced atrial 
fibrosis [ ]. 

Piperlongumine is another alkaloid that is naturally isolated from the long 
pepper piper, and it has been proposed as a potential natural compound for the 
clinical treatment of cardiac hypertrophy and fibrosis. Angiotensin-induced 
expression of profibrotic proteins in neonatal CFs was significantly decreased by 
piperlongumine treatment, reducing the expression of Krüppel-like factor 4 
(KLF4), and its recruitment to the promoter regions of the pro-fibrotic cytokines 
TGF- and connective tissue growth factor (CTGF). Like many other 
therapeutic strategies, the effects of piperlongumine are not restricted to 
non-myocytes. In fact, treatment with piperlongumine exerted also an 
anti-hypertrophic effect in neonatal rat cardiomyocytes by reducing the 
phosphorylation of Akt, thereby preserving the level of Forkhead box 
transcription factor O1 (FoxO1) [ ]. The FoxO protein family, in fact, plays an 
important role in various biological processes such as metabolism, apoptosis and 
oxidative stress [ ], blunting pathological hypertrophy through the inhibition 
of the calcineurin/nuclear factor of activated T-cells (NFAT) pathway [ ]. Thus, piperlongumine could be considered as 
a preventive strategy, as well.
Curcumin is a spice-derived pigment, widely studied as an anti-cancer, 
anti-oxidant, and anti-inflammatory agent [ , ]. Recently, it was investigated 
also as a modulator of cardiac fibrosis. Hsu and colleagues [ ] reported 
reduction of TGF- in mice with MI treated with curcumin, describing 
modulation of sirtuin1 (SIRT1) activity. SIRT1 is a conserved histone deacetylase involved 
in various biological processes [ ]. Recently, several pieces of evidence 
support the role of SIRT1 in cardiac fibrosis, as well [ ]. Treatment with 
curcumin led to the activation of SIRT1 and to the decrement of metalloproteases 
2 and 9, and collagen I and III levels in angiotensin-treated CFs [ ]. Moreover, 
curcumin affected macrophage-fibroblast crosstalk in a mouse model of MI, 
reducing pro-inflammatory signalling by macrophages. In turn, IL-18 expression 
and secretion by CFs were reduced, as well as the activation of the 
TGF- -p-SMAD2/3 network [ ]. Other studies have highlighted how curcumin 
also increases SMAD7, which is a direct inhibitor of SMAD2/3 phosphorylation and 
a disruptor of the SMAD-complex formation [ ], further leading to the 
attenuation of pro-fibrotic TGF- signalling [ ].
A recent study reported the ability of curcumin to also modulate autophagy. In 
this case, it inhibited mammalian target of rapamycin (mTOR) signalling thus enhancing the autophagic process. 
Consequently, all pro-fibrotic markers such as procollagen I and III in rat 
hearts treated with isoprenaline were reversed by curcumin administration [ ]. 
However, whether this in vivo effect was due to direct or indirect 
mechanisms has not been defined yet.
The disaccharide trehalose—derived from myocytes—is known to be a natural 
activator of autophagy. It has shown protective effects on the heart [ ], and 
can specifically enhance autophagy also in resident cardiac mesenchymal stromal 
cells [ ] promoting anti-fibrotic responses. Autophagy boosting in these cells 
can reduce the expression of markers of activated fibroblasts, and preserve a 
less pro-fibrotic and pro-inflammatory paracrine function. When cells are exposed 
to metabolic stress, which is a main mediator of myocardial fibrosis, trehalose 
treatment also increased pro-angiogenic effects of cardiac mesenchymal stromal 
cells [ ]. This effect has been also confirmed in human cells derived from 
diabetic patients, where the enhancement of autophagy by trehalose, combined with 
oxidative stress reduction by nitrogen oxides (NOX)-inhibitors, may contribute to reducing fibrotic 
activation and specification of primitive stromal cells [ ].
A recent study by Schimmel et al. [ ] has identified fifteen 
substances with antiproliferative effects in human CFs by high-throughput natural 
compound library screening. The validation by multiple in vitro fibrosis 
assays and selection by stringent algorithms have identified the steroid bufalin 
and the alkaloid lycorine as potentially effective antifibrotic molecules. Both 
were assayed for suppression of collagen I and matrix components production in 
activated fibroblasts, and the most significant effects were mediated by bufalin 
[ ].

## 3.2 Synthetic Drugs and Peptides
Dapagliflozin is a sodium-glucose Cotransporter-2 (SGLT2) inhibitor. SGLT2 is 
involved in the pathogenetic mechanisms of diabetes by increasing the risk of 
cardiovascular disorders, such as MI, stroke, and heart failure [ ]. The 
development of diabetic cardiomyopathy is caused by functional and metabolic 
changes that occur in the myocardium at multiple levels [ ]. In the last years, 
studies have shown how SGLT2 inhibitors exhibit cardiovascular safety and 
benefits [ ]. Dapagliflozin blocks glucose resorption in the proximal tubule of 
the kidney and promotes glucosuria [ , , ], but it also mediates antifibrotic 
effects in an AMPK -dependent manner. The AMPK activity 
reduction has been observed in failing human and animal hearts, and it correlates 
to cardiac fibrosis [ , ]. At the molecular level, it was shown that 
AMPK activation mediated by dapagliflozin inhibits the up-regulation of 
the TGF- /SMAD pathway detected in diabetic hearts, reducing 
proliferation, activation, and collagen production of CFs when stimulated with 
high glucose [ ].
MCC950 is a selective inhibitor of the inflammasome complex NOD-like receptor family pyrin domain containing 3 (NLRP3), that has been 
proposed to reverse transverse aortic constriction (TAC)-induced cardiac 
remodelling. It is known that the prevention of myocardial remodelling is 
possible by suppressing the expression or activation of NLRP3 before TAC surgery 
[ ]. Zhao et al. [ ] have reported that NLRP3 activation promotes 
pathological cardiac remodelling due to pressure overload in a mouse model, 
whereas MCC950 treatment significantly attenuated fibrosis. Specifically, it 
reduced -SMA levels, blocked the TGF- /SMAD4 pathway, and 
reduced cardiac inflammation, and macrophage infiltration. At the same time, 
MCC950 reduced calcineurin expression and MAPK activation, affecting and 
attenuating cardiac hypertrophy both around peripheral blood vessels and in the 
myocardial interstitium [ ]. The action of MCC950 is exerted also on the 
microenvironment by inhibiting the release of inflammatory factors IL-18 and 
IL-1 . This evidence was studied in vivo on MCC950-treated 
post-MI mice, and the marked reduction of collagen I, collagen III, and 
 -SMA levels was clear. The reduction of inflammatory cell infiltration 
was shown by the expression of cleaved IL-1 and IL-18 decrement. These 
findings confirm the multi-pathway action of this drug in opposing cardiac 
fibrosis, partly mediated by suppressing the microenvironment inflammation [ ].
A new strategy proposed to prevent the development of cardiac fibrosis is the 
intervention on ECM protein polymerization. Specifically, the small peptide pUR4, 
a fibronectin polymerization inhibitor, has been tested in mouse models of 
ischemia/reperfusion (I/R) injury to attenuate pathological remodelling, tissue 
fibrosis, and cardiac dysfunction. In vitro, pUR4 administration to 
murine and human myofibroblasts led to a reduction of cell proliferation and 
migration, as well as ECM protein deposition, thus ameliorating pathological 
features [ ].
A recent study aimed to demonstrate how pharmacological interference with 
mechano-sensing cues could oppose stromal cell activation and myofibroblast 
differentiation. Indeed, mechano-sensing signalling due to myocardial stiffening 
plays a key role in remodelling progression. In particular, the shuttling of the 
main Hippo transcriptional component, the YAP (Yes-associated protein)/TAZ 
(transcriptional coactivator with PDZ-binding motif) complex, exerts homeostatic 
control of cardiac matrix, and a specific function in myocardial remodelling 
after injury [ , ]. Garoffolo et al. [ ] tested treatment with 
Verteporfin, a drug known to prevent the association of the YAP/TAZ complex with 
their cognate transcription factors TEA domain transcription factors (TEADs), on human fibroblasts activation and 
differentiation. The results revealed prevention of the fibrotic process by 
significant downregulation of more than half of the genes induced by 
TGF- exposure. Verteporfin was also tested in vivo in mice with 
permanent cardiac ischemia, significantly reducing indexes of fibrosis and 
morphometric remodelling [ ]. In addition, Francisco and colleagues [ ] have 
demonstrated that YAP activation in CFs triggers cell proliferation and 
expression of pro-fibrotic genes through the myocardin related transcription factor A (MRTF-A) transcriptional coactivator. 
Inducing YAP deletion in fibroblasts also prevented myofibroblast transition, and 
the development of cardiac fibrosis and dysfunction in mouse models. These 
findings further emphasize the potential of targeting YAP as a strategy for 
anti-fibrotic therapies [ ].
It is worth mentioning that the expanding knowledge on the mechanism of action 
of commonly prescribed drugs may represent a starting point as repurposing 
strategy towards cardiac fibrosis. Statins are the most common drugs used to 
inhibit cholesterol biosynthesis. Recently, several studies have demonstrated 
their capability of exerting other beneficial effects on cardiovascular diseases 
[ , ]. Specifically, atorvastatin was studied as a potential drug to ameliorate 
cardiac fibrosis. It was used to treat CFs in vitro and achieved 
reduction of Heat Shock Protein 47 (HSP47) levels. Indeed, HSP47 is a collagen 
specific molecular chaperon, normally induced by TGF- . In vivo, 
treated Dahl salt-sensitive rats showed indexes of cardiac fibrosis reduction 
associated with improvement of diastolic function after atorvastatin 
administration [ ].

## 4. New Possible Molecular Targets
Besides the discovery and testing of novel molecules with one or more known 
targets, in the last decades many studies have focused on the identification of 
new potential molecular targets for cardiac fibrosis (Fig. ), yet in the absence 
of known modulators.
 Osteoglycin (OGN) is a small leucine-rich proteoglycan secreted in the ECM, 
whose role in the fibrotic process is still debated. OGN was found to be 
overexpressed in the heart of patients with hypertensive [ ] and ischemic 
disease [ ]. In 2018, Zuo et al. [ ] identified OGN as a negative 
regulator of cardiac fibrosis in response to chronic hypertension-induced injury. 
Angiotensin II infusion in OGN deficient (OGN-/-) mice revealed increased 
interstitial fibrosis and diastolic dysfunction. Accordingly, in vitro 
angiotensin II treatment on OGN-/- CFs led to enhanced cell proliferation and 
migration via activation of the epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) signalling, while OGN overexpression had the 
opposite effect. Specifically, the authors demonstrated that in physiological 
conditions OGN attenuates cardiac fibrosis binding to lysophosphatidic acid 3 
(LPA3), thus preventing the activation of the Rho-dependent EGFR/ERK signalling, 
which induces fibroblast proliferation and migration [ ].
Another interesting modulator of cardiac fibrosis is the nuclear receptor Nur77. 
It is involved in stress responses in different cell types [ , , ], and it seems 
to play a dual role in the fibrotic process in heart tissue. A study by 
Medzikovic et al. [ ] highlighted how Nur77 promoted CF 
differentiation into myofibroblasts. Conversely, its knockdown led to a reduction 
of myofibroblast marker expression and ECM proteins production, as well as 
decreased proliferation and wound healing capacity in rat cells stimulated with 
isoproterenol or TGF- . On the other hand, authors showed that Nur77 in 
cardiomyocytes prevented these cells from releasing paracrine factors involved in 
the fibroblast-to-myofibroblast transition, thus counteracting also indirectly 
the fibrotic response in the myocardium through intercellular communication 
[ ].
Among the factors that take part in the fibrotic process, it is worth mentioning 
fine regulation of fibrosis-related gene expression carried out by the 
N6-methyladenosine transferase methyltransferase-like 3 (METTL3) at the post-transcriptional level. METTL3 
is the catalytic subunit of the methyltransferase complex which mediates mRNA 
methylation [ , , ]. Recently, Li et al. [ ] discovered the role of 
METTL3 as a promoter of CF activation and ECM remodelling in the process of 
MI-induced fibrosis. Specifically, METTL3 exerted its pro-fibrotic properties via 
tuning the m6A modification of mRNAs encoding collagens and factors of the 
TGF /SMAD pathway [ ]. METTL3 silencing significantly reduced the 
levels of collagens in a mouse model of coronary artery ligation, as well as 
proliferation and myofibroblast transition of TGF -stimulated CFs 
in vitro.
In 2019, delta-like homolog 1 (Dlk1), a member of the epidermal growth factor 
(EGF)-like family involved in the control of cell differentiation [ ], has been 
identified as a key anti-fibrotic factor in the heart. In detail, authors found 
that Dlk1 negatively regulated fibroblast-to-myofibroblast differentiation 
through the activation of miR-370, which in turn inhibited the TGF- 
receptor 2 signalling pathway in these cells. Indeed, Dlk1-null mice exhibited 
alteration of ECM composition, with increased collagen deposition, as well as 
cardiac dysfunction. In addition, Dlk1-null CFs showed hyperactivation of 
TGF /SMAD3 signalling and myofibroblast differentiation. Since Dlk1 
expression was significantly reduced in fibrotic tissues from both human ischemic 
patients and infarcted pigs, Rodriguez and colleagues [ ] hypothesized the 
potential positive targeting of this molecule for the treatment of cardiac 
fibrosis characterized by aberrant TGF -signalling activation.
Another factor whose pro-fibrotic activity has been recently uncovered is 
erythropoietin-producing hepatoma interactor B2 (EphrinB2), a cell surface 
transmembrane ligand ubiquitously expressed in mammals, mediating organ-specific 
regulation of the fibrotic process [ , ]. Increased expression of EphrinB2 
has been detected in human and mouse hearts with severe cardiac fibrosis. 
In vivo silencing of EphrinB2 led to the attenuation of cardiac fibrosis 
and improvement of cardiac function, while its overexpression in CFs mediated 
myofibroblast differentiation and activation in vitro. In detail, 
EphrinB2 exerted its pro-fibrotic effects mainly via activating the signal transducer and activator of transcription 3 (STAT3) 
signalling in CFs, and promoting the interaction between STAT3 and SMAD3, thus 
inducing the fibrotic response [ ]. Given this evidence, EphrinB2 could be 
considered as another promising candidate target against cardiac fibrosis.
Recently, a previously unknown anti-fibrotic activity of flavin-containing 
monooxygenase 2 (FMO2) has been characterized by Ni et al. [ ]. FMO2 is 
an enzyme with nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide hydrogen/flavin adenine dinucleotide (NADH/FAD)-dependent activity, whose expression was found 
specifically enriched in CFs, but not in cardiomyocytes, and significantly 
down-regulated upon cardiac injury in rats, mice, and non-human primates. FMO2 
silencing in rat hearts induced spontaneous fibrosis and altered cardiac 
function; in contrast, induction of FMO2 expression in infarcted rat and monkey 
hearts attenuated pathological remodelling and cardiac dysfunction. Authors 
demonstrated that FMO2 inhibited SMAD2/3 activation through an enzymatic 
activity-independent way: mechanistically, FMO2 was found to bind to cytochrome 
P450 superfamily 2J3 (CYP2J3), thus preventing the interaction of the latter with 
SMURF2, an E3 ubiquitin ligase, which selectively mediates the 
proteasome-dependent degradation of phosphorylated SMAD2/3 in the nucleus [ ]. 
Thus, FMO2 inhibits TGF -signalling in CFs through a conserved mechanism 
in human cells, paving the way for new therapeutic opportunities for cardiac 
fibrosis [ ].
The Wnt/ -catenin signalling pathway plays a consolidated role in the 
fibrotic process by promoting the activation of CFs [ , , ]. Xiang and 
colleagues [ ] have investigated the effect of inducible -catenin loss 
in CFs in mice undergoing TAC. Fibroblast-specific -catenin depletion in 
this system revealed reduced interstitial fibrosis, improved cardiac function, as 
well as lower levels of cardiomyocyte hypertrophy. Although -catenin 
loss did not affect the number of activated and differentiated CFs, the 
expression of many pro-fibrotic genes, such as COL1A1, 
collagen type III alpha 1 (COL3A1), periostin (POSTN), was significantly 
reduced [ ]. Given its many roles in physiology and pathology, though, also 
related to epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition, targeting of this pathway for 
cardiac fibrosis will have to be highly organ-specific to avoid potential side 
effects.
Vainio et al. [ ] has explored the effects of monoclonal antibody 
(mAb) therapy against connective tissue growth factor (CTGF), whose increased 
expression has been correlated with fibrotic diseases of virtually every human 
organ [ ], including the heart [ ]. CTGF-mAb administration in a mouse model 
of MI resulted in reduced cardiac fibrosis and hypertrophy, as well as increased 
survival and left ventricular function. Heart tissue also showed increased 
expression of genes associated with developmental and repair processes, and 
reduction of inflammatory and fibrotic genes. Mechanistically, CTGF-mAb treatment 
on human CFs in vitro attenuated the expression and production of 
 -SMA and collagen I following TGF- stimulation, through the 
activation of the JNK2 pathway [ ].
A new interesting potential target for the treatment of cardiac fibrosis has 
been identified by Schafer and colleagues [ ]. In this study, RNA-sequencing 
analysis of human CFs stimulated in vitro with TGF- identified 
interleukin 11 (IL-11) expression as the most positively correlated response 
during myofibroblast differentiation, while IL-11 levels in healthy tissues and 
cells were found to be unaffected [ , ]. Authors found that IL-11 and its 
receptor IL11RA were expressed specifically in CFs in a mouse model of fibrotic 
heart. They demonstrated that IL-11 binds to soluble receptor IL11RA and mediates 
trans-signalling on other CFs. This promotes an autocrine effect which induces 
the production of fibrogenic proteins in an ERK-dependent way. In vivo 
overexpression of IL-11 was shown to induce cardiac fibrosis, while its depletion 
had a protective effect. Given this evidence, IL-11 could represent a promising 
target for new anti-fibrotic therapies [ ].

## 5. Epigenetic Approaches
In the search for new potential therapeutic targets against cardiac fibrosis, 
the field of epigenetic approaches opens the possibility of fine tuning the 
activation and the progression of the fibrotic process. In the wide scenario of 
epigenetic regulators and non-coding RNAs, we briefly present examples of 
potential targets recently identified for therapeutic intervention in this 
pathological condition, focusing on those with proven specific activity in CFs.

## 5.1 Histone Modifications
In recent years, numerous studies have suggested that epigenetic regulation, 
including histone methylation, has extensive roles in fibrosis [ ]. Wang 
et al. [ ] studied how the lysine demethylase 5B (KDM5B), a histone 
H3K4me2/me3 demethylase, can affect the pathophysiological events in cardiac 
fibrosis. Initially, they demonstrated KDM5B upregulation in CFs in response to 
pathological stress. Secondly, it was proposed the molecular mechanism through 
which KDM5B exerts its action: it demethylates the activated H3K4me2/3 
modification bounding the activating transcription factor 3 (Atf3) promoter, 
inhibiting its expression. In the literature [ ] Atf3 is considered an 
antifibrotic regulator of cardiac fibrosis, and its suppression is correlated 
with the activation of TGF- signalling. Finally, the authors prevented 
the fibroblast transition into myofibroblast by inhibiting KDM5B in 
vitro and in vivo, thus proposing KDM5B as possible candidate target to 
ameliorate cardiac fibrosis and remodelling [ ].
Another fundamental epigenetic modulation is histone acetylation/deacetylation, 
that enhances or opposes the accessibility of transcriptional factors, 
respectively. It is known that small molecules acting as histone deacetylase 
(HDAC) inhibitors play a role in the attenuation of cardiac remodelling and 
fibrosis [ ]. Nural-Guvener et al. [ ] proposed a strategy through 
selective class I-HDAC inhibition against CFs activation. In particular, they 
treated cluster of differentiation 90-positive (CD90+) CFs in vitro with mocetinostat (an HDAC inhibitor), 
showing reduction of collagen III and -SMA. Moreover, they demonstrated 
the efficacy of selective class I-HDACs inhibition in reducing fibrosis in a 
congestive heart failure animal model, as well as its effect in reversing 
interstitial fibrosis and improving cardiac function after MI [ ].
In a previous study, it was demonstrated that a group of epigenetic reader 
molecules called bromodomain and extra-terminal (BET) acetyl-lysine binding 
proteins, play a crucial role in regulating pathological fibrosis [ ]. In 
particular, Stratton and Bagchi et al. [ ] identified by 
RNA-sequencing the bromodomain-containing protein 4 (BRD4) involvement in cardiac fibrosis promoting the activation 
of quiescent CFs into Periostin (Postn)-positive cells. The authors validated the 
pro-fibrotic role of BRD4 using the BET bromodomains inhibitor JQ1. Specifically, 
cultured primary adult rat ventricular fibroblasts stimulated with TGF- 
in the presence of JQ1 showed reduced expression of fibrotic markers, such as 
 -SMA [ ]. Moreover, mice were treated with the JQ1 inhibitor after 
transverse aortic constriction, and the transcriptomic profiling of the CFs 
isolated from the hearts suggested a significant downregulation of Postn mRNA 
expression.

## 5.2 Long Non-Coding RNAs
The pivotal regulatory role of non-coding RNAs (ncRNAs) in every biological 
process is well established and consolidated, and so it is for the process of 
cardiac fibrosis. In the last years, many ncRNAs, mainly microRNAs (miRNAs), long 
non-coding RNAs (lncRNAs) and more recently also circular RNAs (circRNAs), have 
been discovered as fine tuners of cardiac fibrosis, paving the way to their 
therapeutic targeting. Indeed RNA-targeting therapeutics have a high potential 
for the treatment of several diseases.
LncRNAs contribute to cardiac diseases, including fibrosis. One of the first 
lncRNAs reported to be dysregulated during chronic cardiac remodelling is the 
Maternally Expressed Gene 3 (Meg3), which was found specifically expressed in CFs 
and downregulated during late cardiac remodelling in mouse hearts after TAC 
[ ]. Meg3 was known to act as a transcriptional regulator of gene expression, 
recruiting and guiding chromatin remodelling complexes to target sites [ , ]. 
In 2017, it was identified as a regulator of the expression of the 
fibrosis-related gene matrix metalloproteinase-2 (MMP2) in CFs through the 
recruitment of p53, this latter induced by TGF- signalling; moreover, 
Meg3 silencing in vivo after TAC decreased myocardial fibrosis and 
improved diastolic function, thus revealing a new potential target for the 
prevention of pathological remodelling in heart diseases [ ].
In 2019 Hao et al. [ ] identified the lncRNA AK137033, named Safe 
(Sfrp2 antisense as fibrosis enhancer), specifically enriched in the nuclei of 
CFs. Its expression resulted up-regulated upon both MI induction in mouse hearts 
and TGF- treatment of CFs in vitro. Safe silencing in CFs also 
prevented cell proliferation, myofibroblast differentiation, and ECM proteins 
secretion. In addition, in vivo knockdown of this lncRNA in a mouse 
model of MI reduced the infarcted area and cardiac fibrosis, leading to the 
improvement of cardiac function. Safe was found to exert its pro-fibrotic effect 
mainly via inducing the expression of its neighbouring protein-coding gene secreted freezled related protein 2 (Sfrp2), 
which was proven to synergically act with Safe and the RNA-binding protein HuR in 
the induction of fibrosis-related genes in CFs [ ].
The Nuclear Enriched Abundant Transcript 1 (NEAT1) is a lncRNA involved in 
cancer and some fibrosis-related diseases. Its expression was found elevated in 
patients with heart failure. Neat1 acts as a pro-fibrotic lncRNA, by inducing 
Smad7 promoter methylation through recruitment of enhancer of zeste homologue 2 (EZH2). Silencing of NEAT11 
significantly alleviated the progression of cardiac fibrosis and dysfunction in a 
mouse model of heart failure, while overexpression of Neat1 had the opposite 
effect. This suggests that NEAT11 could be a good candidate for targeted 
antisense therapy [ ].
The scaffold attachment factor B interacting lncRNA (SAIL) was shown to be 
reduced in cardiac fibrotic tissue and activated CFs. In vitro 
overexpression of SAIL decreased proliferation and collagen production of CFs, 
and could alleviate cardiac fibrosis in a mouse model of cardiac fibrosis due to 
MI. SAIL blocks the access of the scaffold attachment factor B (SAFB) to RNA pol 
II and reduces the transcription of fibrosis-related genes. The human conserved 
fragment of SAIL (hSAIL) could also suppress the proliferation and collagen 
production of human CFs [ ].
The lncRNA taurine upregulation gene 1 (TUG1) was found to be overexpressed 
after MI, and this correlated with reduced levels of miiR-133b in rat models of 
myocardial fibrosis. Also, angiotensin-treated cardiac myofibroblasts revealed 
increased expression of TUG1. In addition, TUG1 knockdown prevented myofibroblast 
activation, while its overexpression increased cell proliferation and collagen 
production. Authors proved TUG1 could act as a sponge against miR133b in CFs, 
thus promoting the expression of CTGF, a target of miR133b. On the basis of this 
evidence, the axis TUG1/miR133b/CTGF could be a new potential target for the 
treatment of cardiac fibrosis [ ].

## 5.3 Micro-RNAs
Several miRNAs play a central role in the regulation of cardiac fibrosis. MiR-21 
is highly expressed in cardiac cells, preferentially in non-myocytes, and it is 
known to be up-regulated and involved in the development of cardiac fibrosis, 
mainly promoting the activation of the ERK-MAPK pathway in CFs [ ]. MiR-21 
inhibition has been already proven effective for the prevention of cardiac 
fibrosis and dysfunction in small animal models of heart injury [ , ]. 
Recently, Hinkel et al. [ ] have tested the feasibility and 
anti-fibrotic efficacy of miR-21 silencing also in large animal models of heart 
failure, laying the foundation for potential applications in humans. In detail, 
the local, intracoronary delivery of locked nucleic acid (LNA)-antimiR-21 in pig hearts after I/R 
injury led to a reduction of adverse myocardial remodelling, associated with 
decreased fibroblast proliferation and macrophage infiltration, as well as 
improvement of cardiac function [ ]. 

A critical miRNA in cardiac fibrosis is miR-125b, which has been proven to be 
necessary and sufficient for fibroblast-to-myofibroblast transition. MiR-125b 
expression was found to be enhanced in failing human hearts and in various animal 
models of cardiac fibrosis, as well as in CFs stimulated with TGF- . 
Mechanistically, miR-125b targets the 3′-UTR of Apelin, a repressor of the 
fibrogenic pathway acting on the angiotensin II/TGF- axis, thus 
promoting myofibroblast differentiation and activation. Indeed, in vivo 
miR-125b silencing through LNA delivery caused the attenuation of 
angiotensin-induced interstitial fibrosis in murine hearts [ ]. In addition, 
also p53 was found to be a target of miR-125b, which induced in this way 
fibroblast proliferation. An in-depth analysis also revealed that miR-125b was at 
the centre stage of the fibrosis signalling, regulating many other related 
pathways, therefore representing a valid new potential target for anti-fibrotic 
therapies.
Another regulator of fibroblast-to-myofibroblast transition was identified in 
miR-146b-5p, which is overexpressed in the blood of patients with myocardial 
ischemia, and in the heart of mice with MI. Interestingly, miR-146b-5p is 
up-regulated in CFs, endothelial cells, and macrophages by hypoxia-induced NF- B, 
independently from the classical TGF- pathway, thus driving the switch 
toward a myofibroblast phenotype. In vivo treatment with miR-146b-5p 
antagomir markedly reduced cardiac fibrosis and improved myocardial function in 
both murine and porcine models of MI [ ].
In contrast, a miRNA with anti-fibrotic properties with a potential therapeutic 
application is miR-101. This miRNA was found to be down-regulated in the 
peri-infarct area of rats undergoing coronary artery ligation, as well as in CFs 
stimulated with angiotensin II. On the contrary, in vitro overexpression 
of miR-101 suppressed fibroblast proliferation and ECM remodelling protein 
production, mainly targeting c-Fos, a downstream factor of the TGF- 
signalling. The induction of miR-101 overexpression in vivo in 
post-infarct rat hearts remarkably alleviated interstitial fibrosis and improved 
cardiac performance [ ].

## 5.4 Circular RNAs
Circular RNAs have been involved in the progression of both cancer and 
cardiovascular diseases. Given their peculiar secondary structure, with a 
covalent link bridging each end of the linear RNA which is converted into its 
circular form, circular RNAs are the most stable RNAs. This feature makes them 
optimal targets in RNA therapeutics.
In a rat model of post-ischemic myocardial fibrosis, circHNRNPH1 expression was 
found increased specifically in CFs. The expression of circHNRNPH1 could restrict 
the differentiation of CFs into myofibroblasts by de-repressing TGF- 
signalling. The anti-fibrotic action of circHNRNPH1 is exerted through sponging 
miR-216-5p. This allows SMAD7 de-repression and the degradation of TGF- 
receptor 1. Given the role of circHNRNPH1 in the TGF- -mediated CF 
activation, this circRNA could be used to design new therapies for cardiac 
fibrosis linked to all cardiovascular diseases [ ].
Similarly, circNFIB (which is conserved un humans) was found to be decreased in 
mouse cardiac samples post-MI, and its overexpression could attenuate CF 
proliferation [ ]. Its action is dependent on TGF- stimulation, and is 
mediated by the ability to sponge miR-433. circNFIB showed an anti-fibrotic 
effect both in vivo and in vitro on CFs, thus making it another 
good candidate for RNA-based anti-fibrotic therapies.
The circHIPK3 expression markedly increased in CFs and heart tissues in a 
mechanism mediated by TGF- , and initiated by treatment with angiotensin 
II. Homeodomain-Interacting Protein Kinase 3 (CircHIPK3) was shown to promote CF proliferation, migration, and subsequent 
tissue fibrosis by sponging miR-29b-3p. This determined upregulating of its 
target genes actin alpha 2 (ACTA2), COL1A1 and COL3A1. The silencing 
of circHIPK3 attenuates CFs activation by inhibiting proliferation, migration, 
and -SMA expression. Interestingly, a synergistic action of miR-29 
overexpression and circHIPK3 silencing showed anti-fibrotic effects in 
vivo [ ].
A recent study on patients with cardiac hypertrophy showed a significant 
decrease in yet another circRNA, that is the circYap isoform [ ]. In a mouse model of 
hypertrophy, the expression of circYap was negatively correlated with the 
expression of fibrosis genes. The restoration of circYap via ectopic expression 
improved heart function and cardiac fibrosis in a pressure-overload mouse model 
of hypertrophy. CircYap expression could directly affect both survival and cell 
morphology of fibroblasts in vitro [ ].
Finally, the circ_LAS1L was found to be down-regulated in acute MI patients and 
CFs in another clinical study. The circ_LAS1L functional role is to sponge 
miR-125b, thereby de-repressing this miRNA target genes involved in activation, 
proliferation, and migration of CFs [ ].

## 6. Biotechnological Strategies
The continuous advancements in medical and biotechnological research have led to 
the development of innovative approaches based on biological and biotechnological 
therapies designed to counteract cardiac fibrosis. They include the use of 
biological non-cellular products, in situ reprogramming strategies, and 
immunotherapy approaches.

## 6.1 Exosomes
Several adult cell populations have been studied as therapeutic and/or 
regenerative products for the injured heart, including selected resident cardiac 
mesenchymal populations. Cardiosphere-Derived Cells (CDCs) have been shown to 
have beneficial effects, mainly through a protective paracrine action [ , ], 
mediated in part by the release of extracellular membrane vesicles (EMVs), such 
as exosomes [ ]. Human and rat dermal fibroblasts were treated with 
cardiosphere-derived EMVs (CSp-EMV) and then injected into rat hearts subjected 
to left anterior descending artery ligation [ ]. In vitro treated 
fibroblasts displayed a less fibrotic phenotype, with significantly reduced 
levels of fibroblast specific protein 1 (FSP1) and discoidin domain receptor 2 
(DDR2), and showed increased secretion of pro-angiogenic factors, such as 
stromal-cell derived factor 1 (SDF-1) and vascular endothelial growth factor 
(VEGF). Moreover, they exerted pro-angiogenic and anti-apoptotic effects 
in vitro. The in vivo administration of exosome-primed 
fibroblasts attenuated adverse remodelling, reduced the infarct area, and 
enhanced cardiac function. Authors speculated this therapeutic activity could be 
due to the specific profile of miRNAs carried by the EMV, since a similar effect 
on cardiomyocytes was previously proven for exosomes from CDCs [ ]. This is an 
interesting example of a biological product directly influencing the functional 
phenotype of fibroblasts, with a relevant therapeutic outcome.
Recently, also the curative effect of exosomes derived from cortical bone stem 
cells (CBSCs) has been tested in murine models of I/R injury. CBSCs were already 
proven to exert beneficial effects, in terms of decreased scar size and improved 
cardiac function, when injected in mouse and pig models of MI [ ]. The same 
effects were recapitulated in I/R mouse hearts where CBSC-derived exosomes 
(CBSC-dEXOs) were administered, highlighting their key role in mediating 
cardio-protection [ ]. Mechanistically, in vitro treatment of CFs with 
CBSC-dEXOs decreased the expression of pro-fibrotic genes, such as collagen I, 
collagen III, and MMP2, even to a greater extent than whole CBSC-conditioned 
medium from which the exosomes were isolated. In addition, CBSC-dEXOs were also 
proven to significantly reduce CF activation induced by TGF- . After 
analyzing the RNA content of CBSC-dEXOs, the authors suggested that this 
anti-fibrotic role could be exerted by small non-coding RNAs, mainly miRNAs: in 
fact, they caused the downregulation of ncRNAs implicated in ribosome stability 
and protein translation of factors necessary for the fibroblast-to-myofibroblast 
transition.

## 6.2 Direct Reprogramming
Cardiac regeneration aims at restoring functional cells that have been lost in 
the damaged heart. A therapeutic option to recover lost cardiomyocytes is the 
direct reprogramming of fibroblasts into cardiomyocytes through genetic tools or 
small molecules. This strategy could be also viewed as a way of simultaneously 
replacing potentially fibrotic cells with new parenchymal cells, thus 
representing also an anti-fibrotic approach. Several strategies have been 
proposed for the delivery of direct reprogramming factors in recent years, and we 
briefly summarize a selection based on artificial vectors/carriers.
Mónica P. A. Ferreira et al. [ ], developed a functionalized 
spermine-modified dextran-based (AcDXSp) nanoparticle that allows the release of 
two molecules—CHIR99021 and SB431542—capable of inducing fibroblast 
reprogramming. Further functionalization of the nanoparticles with atrial natriuretic peptide (ANP) allowed 
tropism towards cardiac cells [ ]. Specifically, AcDXSP nanoparticles were 
incubated with non-myocytes, and the effect of the release of the active 
molecules was confirmed. In fact, the administration of CHIR99021 significantly 
enhanced -catenin stabilization, increasing its levels in both cytoplasm 
and nucleus. Instead, the release of SB431542 (a TGF- inhibitor) 
prevented the intracellular translocation of SMAD3 to the nucleus, and inhibited 
its phosphorylation by anaplastic lymphoma kinase (ALK) [ ]. This evidence thus supported the efficacy of 
this nanoparticle-based system for the direct reprogramming of fibroblasts into 
cardiomyocytes as a potential cardiac therapy [ ].
Poly (lactic-co-glycolic acid) (PLGA)-polyethyleneimine (PEI) nanocarriers 
encapsulated with microRNAs represents a low-toxicity system to induce the direct 
reprogramming of cardiac human fibroblasts into cardiomyocyte-like cells. These 
nanoparticles were loaded with miR-1 and miR-133a, that initiate and drive muscle 
development and differentiation [ , ]. Direct fibroblasts reprogramming was 
evaluated by the expression of markers such as cardiac troponins and 
 -actinin, confirming this strategy as a valid method for in 
vivo delivery and fibroblast targeting [ ].
Qiaozi Wang et al. [ ] have developed another non-viral system to 
reprogram CFs in situ, by coating neutrophil-mimicking membranes on mesoporous 
silicon nanoparticles (MSNs) with the FH peptide, and loading them with miR-1, 
-133, -208, and -499 (miR-Combo). Homing of the nanoparticle to the injured heart 
was achieved by the natural inflammation-homing capacity brought by neutrophil 
membranes, while the FH peptide’s high affinity to tenascin-C (TN-C), 
specifically expressed by CFs in the injured hearts, granted cell tropism. This 
study reported the intravenous injection of the nanoparticles loaded with the 
miR-combo in a mouse model of myocardial I/R, and evaluated the efficient in situ 
reprogramming of CFs into cardiomyocyte-like cells. Despite low rates of 
reprogramming, this strategy of delivering showed nonetheless an improvement in 
cardiac function, and attenuation of fibrosis in vivo [ ].

## 6.3 CAR-T
Recently an innovative strategy based on chimeric antigen receptor T-cells 
(CAR-T) was proposed as an additional method to reduce cardiac fibrosis. The gene 
signature of CFs derived from healthy versus diseased human hearts were analysed, 
and fibroblast activation protein (FAP) was found as a specific marker of 
activated fibroblasts which is not expressed in cardiomyocytes. The study 
suggested that the adoptive transfer of antigen specific CD8+ T cells targeting 
the FAP protein can lead to partial removal of activated CFs in vivo, 
with significant reduction of cardiac fibrosis and restoration of function after 
injury in mice [ ]. Joel G Rurik et al. [ ] developed a therapeutic 
approach to generate transient CAR-T cells directly in vivo by 
delivering modified messenger RNA (mRNA) in T cell–targeted lipid nanoparticles 
(LNPs). Specifically, they injected CD5-targeted LNPs in a mouse model of heart 
failure, favouring the delivery of modified mRNA encoding for CAR in T 
lymphocytes, thus producing CAR-T cells in vivo. The transient CAR-T 
cells generated were specific for the FAP protein, so their action reduced the 
abundance of activated fibroblasts and consequently fibrosis, also restoring 
cardiac function after injury [ ].

## 7. Conclusions
The quest for novel therapeutic strategies against cardiac fibrosis has taken 
multiple promising directions, that have provided encouraging preclinical data in 
recent years. A key obstacle in finding one good therapeutic option for treatment 
of myocardial fibrosis is represented by the complexity of the signalling network 
involved in the activation of repair mechanisms, which includes responses to 
surrounding stress and cell death signals, as well as the powerful crosstalk with 
the immune cells compartment. Therefore, any novel therapeutic approach will have 
to deal with, and possibly overcome, all the opposing signals in the 
microenvironment of the injured myocardium, making the quest quite complex. 
Moreover, different aetiologies and/or pathogenetic stimuli may be differentially 
sensitive to the same strategy, therefore future studies will have to define also 
the specifics of the population of potential target patients. Finally, given 
these many levels of complexity, future developments of therapies might work best 
with a synergistic approach, where multiple pathways are targeted by the same 
molecule or by combined treatments.

## Acknowledgment
Not applicable.
Publisher’s Note: IMR Press stays neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional affiliations.

## Author Contributions
EF, CC, SM, FT performed bibliographic search and manuscript drafting. EF and CC 
prepared the figures. SM and FT prepared the table. VP, FP and IC participated 
conception and design, drafted the manuscript, and revised it critically for 
important intellectual content. All authors have read and agreed to the published 
version of the manuscript. All authors have participated sufficiently in the work 
and agreed to be accountable for all aspects of the work.

## Ethics Approval and Consent to Participate
Not applicable.

## Funding
IC is supported by grants # RM12117A805ED2FD and # RG11916B85CDBF76 from 
Sapienza University of Rome, and by grant # RG1221816BC8E766 from the Italian 
Health Ministry. FP is supported by Grant # A0375-2020-36621 from Regione Lazio 
(POR-FESR 2014-2021). EF is supported by grant # AR12218167E8FA71 from Sapienza 
University of Rome.

## Conflict of Interest
The authors declare no conflict of interest.