pmceBioMedicineEBioMedicine2749ebiomeBioMedicine2352-3964ElsevierPMC11334830PMC11334830.111334830113348303909810810.1016/j.ebiom.2024.105268S2352-3964(24)00304-91052681ArticlesNR4A3 prevents diabetes induced atrial cardiomyopathy by maintaining mitochondrial energy metabolism and reducing oxidative stress
PengHong YuanJiali WangZhengshuai MoBinfeng WangYihui WangYuepengwangyuepeng@xinhuamed.com.cn WangQunshanwangqunshan@xinhuamed.com.cn aDepartment of Cardiology, Xinhua Hospital, Shanghai Jiao Tong University School of Medicine, Shanghai, 200092, ChinabThe Department of Radiology, Shanghai General Hospital, Shanghai Jiaotong University School of Medicine, Shanghai, China∗Corresponding author. wangqunshan@xinhuamed.com.cn∗∗Corresponding author. No.1665 Kongjiang Road, Yangpu District, Shanghai, 200092, China. wangyuepeng@xinhuamed.com.cncContributed equally to this work.
8202403820241064675531052682112202318720242372024030820242008202429082024© 2024 The Authors2024https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/).

## Summary

## Background
Atrial cardiomyopathy (ACM) is responsible for atrial fibrillation (AF) and thromboembolic events. Diabetes mellitus (DM) is an important risk factor for ACM. However, the potential mechanism between ACM and DM remains elusive.

## Methods
Atrial tissue samples were obtained from patients diagnosed with AF or sinus rhythm (SR) to assess alterations in NR4A3 expression, and then two distinct animal models were generated by subjecting Nr4a3−/− mice and WT mice to a high-fat diet (HFD) and Streptozotocin (STZ), while db/db mice were administered AAV9-Nr4a3 or AAV9-ctrl. Subsequently, in vivo and in vitro experiments were conducted to assess the impact of NR4A3 on diabetes-induced atrial remodeling through electrophysiological, biological, and histological analyses. RNA sequencing (RNA-seq) and metabolomics analysis were employed to unravel the downstream mechanisms.

## Findings
The expression of NR4A3 was significantly decreased in atrial tissues of both AF patients and diabetic mice compared to their respective control groups. NR4A3 deficiency exacerbated atrial hypertrophy and atrial fibrosis, and increased susceptibility to pacing-induced AF. Conversely, overexpression of NR4A3 alleviated atrial structural remodeling and reduced AF induction rate. Mechanistically, we confirmed that NR4A3 improves mitochondrial energy metabolism and reduces oxidative stress injury by preserving the transcriptional expression of Sdha, thereby exerting a protective influence on atrial remodeling induced by diabetes.

## Interpretation
Our data confirm that NR4A3 plays a protective role in atrial remodeling caused by diabetes, so it may be a new target for treating ACM.

## Funding
This study was supported by the major research program of 10.13039/501100001809National Natural Science Foundation of China (NSFC) No: 82370316 (to Q-S. W.), No. 81974041 (to Y-P. W.), and No. 82270447 (to Y-P. W.) and Fundation of 10.13039/501100008750Shanghai Hospital Development Center (No. SHDC2022CRD044 to Q-S. W.).

## Keywords
Atrial cardiomyopathyAtrial fibrillationNR4A3MitochondriaEnergy metabolismOxidative stresspmc-status-qastatus0pmc-status-liveyespmc-status-embargonopmc-status-releasedyespmc-prop-open-accessyespmc-prop-olfnopmc-prop-manuscriptnopmc-prop-legally-suppressednopmc-prop-has-pdfyespmc-prop-has-supplementyespmc-prop-pdf-onlynopmc-prop-suppress-copyrightnopmc-prop-is-real-versionnopmc-prop-is-scanned-articlenopmc-prop-preprintnopmc-prop-in-epmcyespmc-license-refCC BY-NC-ND

## Research in context

## Evidence before this study

1.Atrial cardiomyopathy (ACM) is a concept that describes a precursor state to atrial fibrillation (AF) and stroke that is gaining clinical and research interest.
2.AF is the cardiac manifestation of DM.
3.The NR4A subfamily participates as a transcription factor in various signaling pathways, including cell apoptosis, inflammation, energy metabolism, mitochondrial function.

## Added value of this study

1.NR4A3 is a highly expressed gene in atria and showed significantly lower expression in the atrial tissues of AF patients and diabetic animal models.
2.Upregulation of NR4A3 can significantly alleviate the increase of atrial hypertrophy, fibrosis and AF induction caused by diabetes, while downregulation of NR4A3 can aggravate the above atrial remodeling.
3.Mechanistically, the decrease of NR4A3 directly leads to the transcription reduction of Sdha, which seriously affects mitochondrial ATP production and increases oxidative stress, leading to atrial hypertrophy, atrial fibrosis, and electrical remodeling.

## Implications of all the available evidence
NR4A3 is a novel inhibitor and may be a potential therapeutic target for ACM.

## Introduction
Atrial cardiomyopathy (ACM) refers to ‘Any complex of structural, architectural, contractile or electrophysiological changes affecting the atria with the potential to produce clinically-relevant manifestations’. It has increasingly attracted clinical and research interest, and can be regarded as a precursor state of atrial fibrillation (AF) and stroke. , , AF itself can be seen as electrical remodeling in ACM, and it can also induce progressive structural and functional alterations in the atrium, such as myocardial hypertrophy, ion channel dysfunction, and loss of rhythm control, thereby exacerbating ACM. Therefore, AF and ACM have a complementary and inseparable relationship. However, we are far from fully understand the mechanisms and treatments of ACM.
Diabetes, hypertension, old age and heart failure can aggravate ACM. Diabetes, being one of the most prevalent chronic diseases, stands out as an independent risk factor for AF. The risk of AF increases by approximately 40% in patients with diabetes, and those with AF and diabetes experience significantly higher rates of hospitalization, cardiovascular disease mortality, and all-cause mortality. Existing studies demonstrate that diabetes can enhance susceptibility to AF through various mechanisms, including atrial structural remodeling, electrical remodeling, electromechanical remodeling, autonomic nerve remodeling, inflammation and oxidative stress. 
The Excitation–contraction coupling and electrical conduction in atrial cardiomyocytes require substantial adenosine triphosphate (ATP) support. Numerous studies have corroborated that impediments in mitochondrial energy generation in atrial myocytes can lead to atrial remodeling, thereby facilitating the onset of arrhythmias, including AF. , Moreover, when compared to patients with SR, a decline in the expression of multiple tricarboxylic acid (TCA) cycle key enzymes, such as aconitate hydratase, citrate synthase and malate dehydrogenase, has been observed in patients with AF. Additionally, functional impairments in mitochondrial electron transport chain (ETC) complexes I and II have been observed not only in isolated AF patients but also in those with the concomitant presence of diabetes mellitus. , The clearance of reactive oxygen species (ROS) relies on the participation of various key enzymes in the TCA cycle, such as Nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide (NADH) and nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide phosphate (NADPH). Consequently, a decrease in the turnover rate of the TCA cycle results in a pronounced increase in ROS production, thereby further promoting atrial remodeling. , It is also evident that AF is associated with heightened oxidative stress. 
The NR4A subfamily (Nuclear receptors of the subfamily 4) belongs to the nuclear receptor family, which acts as transcription factors with members including NR4A1 (also known as NUR77), NR4A2 (NURR1), and NR4A3 (NOR1) and can rapidly respond to various stimuli, such as growth factors and hormones. , All these three receptors share a common structure, including a ligand-independent activation function (AF)-1 transactivation domain, a ligand-dependent AF-2 transactivation domain and a DNA-binding domain (DBD). The DBD domains of these receptors exhibit 90%–95% homology and can bind to a NBRE (Nerve growth Factor [NGFI-B] Response Element) consisting of an octameric sequence (consensus sequence AAAGGTCA) null elements as monomers or Nur-Response Element (NuRE) composed of two inverted NBREs spaced by a limited number of nucleotides as homodimers or heterodimers. The high degree of homology on DBD ensures consistent functions within the NR4A family, although their activities are also influenced by transcriptional levels and post-transcriptional modifications. Research on NR4A1 and NR4A2 in the heart is extensive, covering various aspects such as cardiac hypertrophy, cardiac fibrosis, myocardial infarction, cardiac mitochondrial function, and inflammation, with heterogeneous results across studies. , However, the role of NR4A3 in the heart is poorly understood. Studies have reported a significant reduction in the RNA expression of NR4A3 in the right atrial appendages of clinical AF patients and rapid atrial pacing pigs. , According to the UK Biobank database, all 87 mutations in Homo sapiens Nr4a3 are significantly associated with AF. For instance, single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) such as rs753694307, rs750275548, and rs779838192 in the NR4A3 gene are all notably correlated with the risk of AF. Furthermore, overexpression of NR4A3 in muscles can enhance the TCA cycle and intermediate contents of electronic respiratory chain conduction, including isocitrate dehydrogenase 3 (IDH3), fumarate dehydrogenase (FH), and ATP synthesis F1 α (ATP5a1). 
Here, our study revealed for the first time that NR4A3 is highly expressed in the atrium and had a protective effect on ACM induced by diabetes. We found that NR4A3 markedly reduced in atrial tissue samples of AF patients and diabetic mice. Mechanistically, NR4A3 deficiency aggravates atrial remodeling by promoting mitochondrial energy metabolism dysfunction and oxidative stress injury via inhibiting SDHA transcription level.

## Methods

## Ethics
This study was approved by the Human Research Ethics Committee of Xinhua Hospital of SJTUSM, Shanghai (Approval ID: XHEC-F-2023-073). All male mice experiments were conducted in compliance with both the Guide for the Animal Care and Use Committee of Xinhua Hospital (Approval ID: XHEC-F-2023-073) and the NIH Guide for the Care and Use of Laboratory Animals and the ARRIVE guidelines. Atrial appendage samples were obtained from patients with AF who required surgery, Normal sinus rhythm (SR) samples were taken from patients who presented without a history of AF in previous physical examinations. Inclusion criteria for patients with AF were as follows: (1) aged between 18 and 85 years, regardless of gender; (2) diagnosed with AF via surface electrocardiography (ECG), intracardiac ECG, or 24-h Holter monitoring, without restriction on subtype; (3) requiring surgical cardiac intervention. Exclusion criteria for both AF and SR patients included: (1) Patients with congestive heart failure (New York Heart Association (NYHA) class ≥III); (2) left ventricular ejection fraction (LVEF) <30%; (3) hypertension; (4) cardiomyopathy; (5) pulmonary arterial diseases; (6) hepatic or renal dysfunction; (7) other severe comorbidities with a life expectancy of less than 2 years. Patient characteristics are listed in . All AF patients and control SR patients included signed informed consent forms.
The entire experiment used male C57BL/6J background mice, and male db/db mice and control db/m mice. All mice were raised in the SPF Animal Experimental Center of Xinhua Hospital under constant humidity (40–60%) and temperature (22–25 °C). The light/dark cycle alternates every 12 h and mice were fed normal diet (ND) or high-fat diet (HFD) according to experimental needs.

## Construction of type 2 diabetes mellitus (T2DM) models
We constructed two types of T2DM models. For the first one, we directly used the db/db mice as a spontaneous T2DM model, which were derived from the autosomal recessive inheritance of C57BL/KsJ inbreeding strain. Due to the infertility of homozygous db/db mice, the mutation gene misty, related to coat color, was introduced into the population to maintain the db mutation. Offspring from heterozygous mating have three phenotypes: 1/4 are black obese mice, designated as db/db, used for experiments; 1/2 are black lean mice, designated as db/m, used for further breeding or experimental controls; and 1/4 are gray lean mice, designated as m/m, and can be discarded. So we chose db/m mice as the control group. At the 24th week, the mice underwent relevant vivo tests and then sacrificed. We also fed C57BL/6J background mice a high-fat diet (HFD, 60% fat of total kcal, D12492, Dyets, USA) and injected with low doses of streptozotocin (STZ, V900890, Sigma–Aldrich, St. Louis, MO, USA) to establish the second T2DM model. Specifically, 8-week-old C57BL/6J mice were fed a HFD; After 12 weeks of continuous feeding, the mice were administered intraperitoneally low-dose STZ (40 mg/kg dissolved in 0.1 mol/l citrate buffer (pH 4.5, C1013, Solarbio, Beijing, China)) for 3 consecutive days, followed by another 4 weeks of HFD for a total of 16 weeks. The control C57BL/6J mice were given a normal diet (ND, 1010001, Xietong Pharmaceutical Bio-engineering, Jiangsu, China) and an equal amount of citrate buffer was administered intraperitoneally at the same week. Animals with fasting blood glucose exceeds 16.7 mmol/l were considered diabetic. The specific method involved transferring the mice to clean cages and initiating a 16-h fasting period starting at 5:00 PM on the day prior to the experiment, continuing until 9:00 AM the next day (with access to water ad libitum during fasting). Mice were then gently removed from their cages and placed on a wire grid. Approximately 1–2 mm of the mouse tail tip was clipped using scissors, and gentle pressure was applied to the tail to collect a drop of blood. Fasting blood glucose levels were measured using a glucometer, with the measured value considered as the fasting glucose level at 0 min. Care was taken to handle the mice gently to minimize distress.

## Nr4a3 global knockout (Nr4a3-KO/Nr4a3−/−) mice
CRISPR/Cas9 technology was used to generate NR4A3 knockout mice. According to the structure of Nr4a3 gene, exon3-exon7 of Nr4a3-201 (ENSMUST00000030025.9) transcript is recommended as the knockout region. The Nr4a3 gene-sgRNA expression vector was constructed using pUC57 sgRNA (51132, Addgene) as the skeleton vector. The product was then mixed with the Cas9 expression vector pST1374 Cas9 (# 44758, Addgene) and injected into the eggs of C57BL/6J female mice using the FemtoJet 5247 microinjection system. The fertilized eggs were then transplanted into the uterus of surrogate mice. F0 generation mice were obtained approximately 19–21 days after pregnancy. Approximately 2 weeks after birth, the tail tissues of the mice were cut for DNA identification. The schematic diagram of Nr4a3-KO mice construction and identification primers are displayed in the . Then, 8-week-old Nr4a3-KO mice were fed HFD and injected with STZ to construct a T2DM model. Nr4a3-KO mice given ND and injected with citrate buffer were used as the control group. The specific method is shown in the above.

## AAV9-Nr4a3 overexpression and AAV9-Sdha overexpression mice
The cTNT promoter-driven adeno-associated viruses 9 (AAV9) encoding Nr4a3 (AAV9-cTNT-Nr4a3) or Sdha (AAV9-cTNT-Sdha) were designed to co-express a non-fused GFP protein or a flag label and supplied by Co. OBIO scientific service (Shanghai, China). db/db mice (8-week-old) or db/m mice (8-week-old) were injected with AAV9-cTNT-Nr4a3 or AAV9-cTNT-Ctrl by tail vein at a dose of 5 × 1011 virus genomes (v.g.) per mouse for 16 weeks. Nr4a3−/− mice (8-week-old) treated with ND or HFD + STZ for 16 weeks were injected with AAV9-cTNT-Sdha or AAV9-cTNT-Ctrl by tail vein at a dose of 5 × 1011 virus genomes (v.g.) per mouse.

## Intraperitoneal glucose tolerance test (IPGTT) and insulin tolerance test (ITT)
IPGTT:On the day before the experiment, mice were transferred to clean cages and fasted for 16 h from 5:00 PM until 9:00 AM the next day, with access to water during the fasting period. At 9:00 AM, the glucose tolerance test commenced. Fasting blood glucose levels were measured using a glucometer and test strips (GA-3, Sannuo biosensor Co. Ltd) with the values at 0 min considered as baseline. After allowing the mice to stabilize briefly, a 20% glucose solution (2 g glucose/kg body weight) was administered via intraperitoneal injection, and timing began upon completion of injection. Blood glucose levels of each mouse were measured at 15, 30, 60, 90, and 120 min following the injection. As for the ITT, mice were transferred to clean cages and fasted for 6 h from 9:00 AM to 3:00 PM. They had access to water during the fasting period. At 3:00 PM, the insulin tolerance test began. Fasting blood glucose levels were measured using a glucometer and test strips, with values at 0 min considered as baseline. After acclimation, insulin was administered via intraperitoneal injection (0.75 U/kg), and timing started immediately after injection. Blood glucose levels of each mouse were measured at 15, 30, 60, and 90 min following the injection.

## Culture and treatment of HL-1 atrial cardiomyocytes
Mouse HL-1 atrial cardiomyocytes (CVCL_0303) were selected for in vitro cell experiments. HL-1 cells were maintained in 5.5 mmol/l glucose Dulbecco Modified Eagle Medium (DMEM, ctrl group, G4521, Servicebio, Wuhan, China) or 30 mmol/l high glucose DMEM (glu group, G4517, Servicebio, Wuhan, China) supplemented with 10% fetal bovine Serum (FBS, 10099, Gibco, USA), penicillin (100 U/ml), and streptomycin (100 μg/ml) for a period of 48 h. Recombinant lentivirus overexpressing the Nr4a3 gene or carrying shNr4a3 were constructed by Co. OBIO scientific service (Shanghai, China), and then transfected into HL-1 cells cultured with high or low glucose DMEM to overexpress or knock down Nr4a3. The specific method is to add a suitable MOI (Multiplicity of Infection) (MOI = (viral titer × viral volume)/number of cells) lentivirus to HL-1 cells cultured with serum free DMEM for 6–8 h, and continue to culture for 12 h, then switch to 10% FBS medium for further 48 h.

## Isolation of adult atrial cardiomyocytes
Adult atrial cardiomyocytes were isolated using collagenase digestion, as previously described. In brief, mice were given intraperitoneal injection of heparin for anticoagulation. After 10 min, the mouse hearts were cut and the ascending and arched parts of the aorta were preserved. The aortas were retrograde ligated on a Langendorff device, and the hearts were digested using enzymatic digestion for 15–20 min. Then, the atria of the mouse were cut and placed in a centrifuge tube containing preserved buffer. The pieces were cut and gently blown with a straw to disperse them into individual cardiomyocytes.

## Echocardiography
Echocardiography was performed every 4 weeks to evaluate atrial size. Specifically, The VEVO 3100 echography device (VisualSonics, Toronto, Canada) with high-frequency (30 MHz) linear ultrasonic transducer was used to perform B mode and M mode tests in mice under continuous inhalation of 1% isoflurane. The mice were placed in a supine position on a platform with the transducer placed on the heart position, and the detection level is basically parallel to the line from the right sternoclavicular joint to the left nipple to obtain the Parasternal Long-Axis View. Adjusted the transducer direction appropriately, fully exposed the size of the left atrium, and then measured the left atrial area. Meanwhile, the left ventricular ejection fractions (LVEF) and the left ventricular fractional shortening (LVFS) were also calculated ( ).

## Whole cell patch-clamp
Atrial action potential (AP) in freshly isolated adult atrial cardiomyocytes were measured at room temperature (22–25 °C). The pipette solution containing: 110 mM potassium gluconate, 5 mM NaCl, 10 mM KCl, 0.5 mM EGTA, 10 mM Hepes, 5 mM MgATP, 0.2 mM cAMP, pH adjusted to 7.2 with KOH, and the external solution containing: 134 mM NaCl, 5.4 mM KCl, 1 mM MgCl2, 2 mM CaCl2, 10 mM Hepes, 10 mM glucose, pH adjusted to 7.4 with NaOH. AP was stimulated by a train of suprathreshold depolarizing pulses, which was evoked at a frequency of 1Hz and AP duration measured at 90% repolarization (APD90) was measured in the indicated groups.

## AF induction detection
Mice were anesthetized with 1% isoflurane and fixed on the operating platform. Next, the neck structures were separated to expose the external jugular vein, then the Millar catheter (1.1F, 8E, 1 mm, AD Instrument, USA) was inserted into the right atrium through the external jugular vein for electrophysiological stimulation. When significant atrial waves were observed, pacing was stimulated using this catheter. Adjusting the programmable stimulator to output a continuous fast stimulus, which consisted of 800 stimuli with a stimulus wave width of 2 ms and a stimulus circumference of 30 ms. Successful AF induction was defined as pacing-induced irregular atrial rhythm persisting more than 1 s. Burst stimulation was performed 10 times per mouse, and the proportion of successful AF induction times to a total of 10 stimuli represents the induction rate of each mouse. The duration and induction rate of AF were calculated.

## Histological analysis
Mouse atrial tissue paraffin sections for Masson staining and WGA staining to evaluate the degree of atrial fibrosis and the size of atrial cardiomyocytes. Specifically, mice atria were taken and fixed in 10% formalin and then paraffin-embedded mice atria were cut into 5 μm sections. After that, the paraffin sections were stained with Masson's trichrome staining to measure fibrotic areas, which calculates the collagen volume fraction (CVF), representing the percentage of collagen-positive blue-stained area relative to the total tissue area. Fibrotic area was quantified using ImageJ software by importing the images, adjusting the image type, and setting a threshold to include as much of the blue-stained area as possible without excessive inclusion of other tissue components. Fibrotic proportion was then calculated by measuring the area of blue staining. In addition, paraffin sections were also stained with Wheat Germ Agglutinin (WGA) and the cross-sectional areas of atrial cardiomyocytes were measured. Specifically, the cross-sectional area of cardiomyocytes was measured using ImageJ software. Five measurement regions were selected for each sample, with each region containing approximately several hundred cardiomyocytes. Images were imported into the ImageJ software, and a scale bar was set based on the ruler length. After adjusting the image type and threshold to enhance cell edges, the areas of the largest and smallest cells within the selected regions were measured. By utilizing the “analyze particles” function, the cross-sectional area of all cells within the selected regions could be calculated, and the average was determined. This process was repeated for the remaining regions, and the average of all regions represented the cross-sectional area of cardiomyocytes for one sample.
Simultaneously, liver tissue and inguinal white adipose tissue (WAT) were collected from each group of mice. The tissues were fixed in 10% formaldehyde, then paraffin-embedded mice liver and WAT were cut into 5 μm sections. Subsequently, the tissue sections were stained with hematoxylin and eosin (H&E). The overall characteristics of the tissues were observed under low magnification microscopy, followed by the observation and collection of images of representative regions.

## Immunohistochemical staining
The paraffin slices were soaked in xylene solution for dewaxing, then hydrated in anhydrous ethanol of different concentrations, and rinsed three times in PBS solution for 5 min each time. Subsequently, slices were punctured with 0.3% triton and antigen retrieved with sodium citrate buffer (PH6.0). After PBS rinsing, 3% H2O2 was added for 20 min, then blocked with 5% BSA.NR4A3 primary antibody (1:150, NBP2-46246, NOVUS, USA) was added and incubated overnight at 4 °C. The next day, after PBST rinsing, HRP polyclonal rabbit anti-mouse IgG was added and incubated at room temperature (RT) for 1 h. Re-staining with hematoxylin 30s and rinsing 5 min with ddH2O. After dehydration, the slices were sealed with a sealing cement.

## Immunofluorescence staining
Immunofluorescence staining was performed on both atrial paraffin slices and HL-1 cardiomyocytes. For paraffin slices, the steps of dewaxing, antigen retrieve, and addition of primary antibodies were similar to those of Immunohistochemical staining. HL-1 cardiomyocytes were grown on coverslips, after PBS rinsing, they were fixed in 10% formalin for 15 min, then punctured with 0.3% triton and blocked with 5% BSA. After that, primary antibodies were added and incubated overnight at 4 °C. The next day, after PBST rinsing, anti-mouse Alexa Fluor or anti-rabbit Alexa Fluor were added and incubated at RT for 1 h. The slices and coverslips were sealed with a sealing cement. All antibodies used in this study were listed in . All antibodies were validated by Immunofluorescence staining, confirming their specificity and functionality.

## Transmission electron microscopy (TEM)
Mice atrial tissues were harvested and fixed a mixture of 0.8% potassium ferrocyanide and 2% osmium tetroxide in a 0.1 mol/l sodium cacodylate buffer for 2 h. The samples were dehydrated in different grades of ethanol and then embedded in spur resin and sectioned with a glass knife on a Leica EM UC7 ultramicrotome. The sections were stained with uranyl acetate and lead citrate, and observed using a Hitachi H-7800 transmission electron microscopy (TEM; Hitachi High-Technologies Europe GmbH).

## Mitochondrial isolation
Fresh atrial tissue was dissected immediately after sacrifice and manually homogenized in isolation buffer (75 mM sucrose, 225 mM mannitol, 2 mM HEPES, 1 mM EGTA, 4 mg/ml BSA, and 1.6 mg/ml protease, pH 7.4) for 14 min using a Teflon pestle. The homogenate was centrifuged at 480 g for 5 min, and the supernatant was subsequently centrifuged at 7700 g for 10 min to obtain a pellet containing intact mitochondria. This pellet was washed twice in mitochondrial suspension solution (MSS; 75 mM sucrose, 225 mM mannitol, 2 mM HEPES, pH 7.4), centrifuged at 7700 g for 5 min, and resuspended in 150 μl of MSS.

## Mitochondrial respiration assay
HL-1 myocytes transfected with lentivirus carrying shNr4a3 or ctrl lentivirus cultured in low glucose (5.5 mmol/l) or high glucose (30 mmol/l) were seeded onto a Seahorse XF96 Cell Culture Microplate (Agilent, USA) at a density of 1 × 104 cells/well, and then incubated overnight in a 37 °C, 5% CO2 incubator to adhere to the wall. The next day, mitochondrial oxygen consumption rate (OCR) was detected using the Seahorse XF96 Analyzer (Agilent, USA). During the detection process, oligomycin, carbonyl cyanide 4-(trifluoromethoxy) phenylhydrazone (FCCP), and rotenone and antimycin A (R/A) were sequentially added to measure basal respiration, maximum respiration, and proton leakage rate etc.

## Seahorse XF assay
Mitochondria were isolated from atrial tissues of indicated groups, and protein concentration was determined using the Bradford method (Bio-Rad, Hercules, CA, USA). The average yield of intact mitochondria was approximately 5–8 μg protein per milligram of atrial tissue. The sensor cartridge was hydrated overnight at 37 °C and calibrated before data collection. Isolated mitochondria (8 μg/well for complex I and 6 μg/well for complex II) in mitochondrial assay solution 2 (MAS; 70 mM sucrose, 220 mM mannitol, 5 mM MgCl₂, 5 mM KH₂PO₄, 2 mM HEPES, 1 mM EGTA, 0.2% fatty acid-free BSA, pH 7.4) were loaded into a 24-well plate and centrifuged (2000 g, 20 min, 4 °C). MAS containing respiratory substrates pyruvate/malate (10 mM/5 mM) or succinate/rotenone (5 mM/2 μm) was added to 24 wells, and the plate was incubated at 37 °C for 8 min before being loaded into the XF24 analyzer (Agilent, USA). Mitochondria were supplied with either pyruvate/malate (10 mM/5 mM) or succinate/rotenone (5 mM/2 μm) as substrates. Basal (state 2) respiration was measured before the injection of ADP (4 mM) to induce maximal state 3 respiration. State 4o respiration was measured after oligomycin (316 nM) injection, and state 3 μ (maximal uncoupled) respiration was measured after carbonyl cyanide 4-(trifluoromethoxy)phenylhydrazone (FCCP, 4 μm) injection. Antimycin A (4 μm) was injected at the end of the assay to inhibit mitochondrial respiration and provide a background reading.

## Mitochondria isolation, mitochondrial complex activity assay, and H2O2 production assay
Mitochondria were isolated from the atrial tissues of each mouse group using a mitochondrial extraction kit (EX2620, Solarbio, China). Subsequently, the activities of Complex I, II and III of isolated mitochondria were measured by using the Complex I Enzyme Activity Microplate Assay Kit (ab109721, Abcam, UK), Complex II Enzyme Activity Microplate Assay (ab109908, Abcam, UK) and the Mitochondrial Complex III Activity Assay Kit (MAK360, Sigma–Aldrich, USA) according to the manufacturer's instructions, and the production of mitochondrial H2O2 was also measured (A22188, Invitrogen, USA).

## Lactic acid assay
Lactic acid assay kit (A019-2-1, Nanjing Jiancheng Bioengineering Institute, China) was used to measure lactic acid levels of HL-1 cells and atrial samples. In brief, added lysate buffer to HL-1 cells or atrial tissue samples for lysis and then added 1 ml enzyme working buffer and 0.2 ml chromogenic solution to 0.02 ml samples, 0.02 ml ddH2O, or 0.02 ml standard solution, separately. Mixed the solution and reacted in a 37 °C water for 10 min, then added 2 ml termination solution to each sample and measured the absorbance value at 530 nm using an Agilent BioTek Synergy H4 Hybrid Microplate Reader (Agilent Technologies, USA).

## Oxidative stress detection
Reactive oxygen species (ROS) in Atrial tissue of each group was detected by Dihydroethidium (DHE) statining (50102ES25, Yeasen Biotechnology, China). Specifically, Fresh atrial tissue was quickly frozen and cut into 5 μm sections. Then, the frozen heart sections were incubated with DHE (5 μm) in a 37 °C incubator for 1 h. After incubation, fluorescent images were observed using an Olympus FV1000 LSCM (Olympus, Japan).

## TdT-mediated dUTP nick end-labelling (TUNEL) staining
The apoptosis of atrial tissue in each group was detected by TUNEL statining. Specifically, Fresh atrial tissue was quickly frozen and cut into 5 μm sections. Then, the frozen heart sections were incubated with the TUNEL Apoptosis Detection Kit (40308ES20, Yeasen Biotechnology, China) for 1 h at 37 °C. After incubation, fluorescent images were observed using an Olympus FV1000 LSCM (Olympus, Japan).

## Mitochondrial membrane potential assay
Mitochondrial membrane potential (Δψm) was assessed using the JC-1 assay kit (C2006, Beyotime Biotechnology, China) according to the manufacturer's instructions. When the mitochondrial membrane potential is normal, it exhibits red fluorescence, while when the membrane potential decreases, green fluorescence increases. Therefore, the ratio of red fluorescence to green fluorescence can represent the degree of membrane potential damage. HL-1 cells and isolated adult atrial myocytes were incubated with JC-1 staining solution in a 37 °C incubator for 20 min. After incubation, rinsed twice with wash buffer. JC-1 fluorescence was measured using an Olympus FV1000 LSCM (Olympus, Japan).

## Mitochondrial Superoxide assay
Mitochondrial Superoxide was assessed using the MitoSOX Red Mitochondrial Superoxide Indicator (40778ES50, Yeasen Biotechnology, China) according to the manufacturer's instructions. HL-1 cells and isolated adult atrial myocytes were incubated with 5 μm MitoSOX Red Mitochondrial Superoxide Indicator and 200 nM MitoTracker® Green FM (40742ES50, Yeasen Biotechnology, China) in a 37 °C incubator for 15 min, after incubation, rinsed twice with wash buffer. The mitochondrial ROS-mediated fluorescence was measured using an Olympus FV1000 LSCM (Olympus, Japan).

## Cut&Tag assay
Cut&Tag was performed using Hieff NGS® G-Type In-Situ DNA Binding Profiling Library Prep Kit for Illumina® (12598ES12, Yeasen Biotechnology, China) according to the manufacturer's instruction. Neonatal mouse cardiomyocytes (NMCMs) were harvested and counted, then 1,000,000 cells were collected and centrifuged at 600 g, room temperature (RT) for 3 min. After removing the supernatant, added cell buffer for resuspension. Added ConA beads to cell suspension, rotated and mixed for 5–10 min on a rotating instrument, then placed them on a magnetic rack for 2 min. After removing the supernatant, added NR4A3 primary antibody (2 μg/500 μg of total protein, sc-393902, Santa-Cruz, USA) or mouse control IgG (AC011, ABclonal, China) and incubated on a rotator for 2 h at RT. Then added the secondary antibody (Goat anti-mouse IgG H&L, ab6701, abcam, USA) and incubated on a rotator for 1 h at RT. Next, the magnetic beads that combined the primary and secondary antibodies were rotated and incubated with pA/G-Transposame Mix at RT for 1 h. Then, an activating buffer was added for another 1 h, followed by the addition of Terminate Solution and Protein K and incubated at 55 °C for 30 min. Finally, added DNA Incubate Spike in mix and DNA Selection Beads at RT for 5 min, and clear the Beads with 80% ethanol. Prepared the PCR reaction system and amplified in T100TM Thermal Cycler (1861096, Bio-Rad, USA). Then verified the results by agarose gel electrophoresis experiments or Quantitative real-time PCR experiments. All primers used in this study were listed in .

## Dual-luciferase reporter assay
HEK293T cells were seeded in 12-well plates and co-transfected with human pcDNA3.1- NR4A3 plasmids and Renilla luciferase reporter plasmids and different kinds of Firefly luciferase reporter plasmids encoding promoters (human pGL3 basic-SDHA promoter, human pGL3 basic-COX5a promoter, truncated human pGL3 basic-SDHA promoter, mutant truncated human pGL3 basic-SDHA promoter). After 48 h of transfection, 300 μl of lysate was added to each well and placed on ice for 5 min. The Cell lysates were collected and centrifuged at 10000–16000 rpm, 4 °C for 1 min. Added 20ul supernatants to each well of 96-Well White Opaque Plates. Then added 100 μl firefly luciferase reaction solution and 100 μl Renilla luciferase reaction solution to each well in sequence, shake the plates and mixed to detect the activity of firefly luciferase and Renilla luciferase by Centro LB960 Microplate luminometer.

## Western Blot analysis
Proteins were extracted from atrial tissue or HL-1 cells with RIPA buffer containing protease inhibitor and the concentration were quantified with BCA Protein Quantification Kit BCA (20201ES76, Yeasen Biotechnology, China). Equivalent protein samples (20–30 μg of protein/Sample) were electrophoretically separated by using SDS-PAGE (7.5%, 10%, 12.5%, 15%, PG111-PG114, Epizyme, China), and then transferred to PVDF membrane (IPFL00005, Millipore, Billerica, MA, USA). The PVDF membrane was blocked skim milk in TBST for 1 h at RT, then rinsed with TBST, and incubated overnight with a primary antibody at 4 °C. Incubated the secondary HRP-conjugated antibodies at RT for 1 h on the second day. protein signals were detected by ChemiDoc MP Imaging System (Bio-Rad, Hercules, CA, USA) and all antibodies used in this study were listed in . All antibodies were validated by Western Blot, confirming their specificity and functionality.

## Quantitative real-time PCR (qPCR)
Total RNA was extracted from atrial tissue or HL-1 cells using TRIzol (Takara, Japan). After RNA extraction, gel electrophoresis was conducted to assess its integrity. By using the Prime Script TMRT Reagent Kit (Takara, Japan), complementary DNA was synthesized from 1000 ng total RNA. The amplifications were carried out with Hieff® qPCR SYBR Green Master Mix (Low Rox Plus).
(11202ES08, Yeasen, China) using QuantStudio™ 3 Real-Time PCR System (A28567, Thermo Fisher Scientific, USA) and normalized to beta-actin. All primers used in this study were listed in .

## RNA sequencing and metabolomics analysis
For RNA Sequencing analysis, atrial tissue from mice were analyzed at Haplox Biotechnology (Jiangxi, China), Original FASTQ data have been deposited into the Sequence Read Archive database under the accession number PRJNA1050020. For non-targeted metabolomics analysis, atrial tissue from mice were analyzed at BioNovoGene (Suzhou, China). The metabolomics data were deposited in MetaboLights under accession number MTBLS9135.

## Statistics analysis
All experimental data were presented as mean ± SD, and all data were verified for Normality by using Shapiro Wilk test. In all clinical and animal experiments, the variable “N” utilized for statistical analysis represented the count of subjects or animals within each specific condition. The determination of sample size was guided by power analysis and conformed to the principles of the 3Rs. Randomization and blinding procedures were applied to both group assignment and outcome assessment of the samples. No exclusions of experimental units or data points were implemented during the analysis for each experimental group. For data that passed the Normality distribution test, standard student t-test was used for two group comparisons, while one-way ANOVA test was used for multiple group comparisons. For data did not pass the Normality distribution test, Using Mann Whitney test for non-parametric statistical analysis of two group comparisons groups; Multiple group comparisons were conducted using Kruskal Wallis test and Dunn test. P values < 0.05 were proved to be statistically significant. GraphPad Prism 9 and Adobe Illustrator software were utilized for graphing.

## Role of funders
The funders played no role in study design, data collection, data analyses, interpretation, or writing of report.

## Results

## NR4A3 expression is decreased in atrial tissues from patients with AF and T2DM models
We performed RNA-seq analysis on the atrial tissues from HFD + STZ induced T2DM mice and WT mice, revealing a substantial decrease in the expression of the NR4A subfamily (NR4A1, NR4A2, NR4A3) in diabetic mice ( A). We then examined the RNA levels of these three genes in the atria of WT mice and found that NR4A1 had the highest expression, followed by NR4A3, while NR4A2 had the lowest expression in the atria ( ). Subsequently, we compared the expression levels of these three genes in atrial and ventricular tissues from C57BL/6J mice. The NR4A family's expression in the atrium surpassed that in the ventricle, with NR4A3 exhibiting the most pronounced difference ( B–D and ). Further confirmation demonstrated that Nr4a3 protein expression notably decreased in atrial tissue from patients with AF compared to patients with SR ( E and F), while the protein levels of Nr4a1 and Nr4a2 showed no significant statistical difference ( ). Consequently, we aimed to explore the role of NR4A3 in atrial remodeling induced by diabetes. 
We constructed two types of T2DM models (db/db model and HFD + STZ model). As HFD feeding is a common modeling method for various disease models including non-alcoholic fatty liver disease (NAFLD) and obesity, we further investigated the associated phenotypic changes in the liver, WAT, and pancreatic islets of T2DM mice treated with HFD + STZ. We observed significant hepatic steatosis in T2DM mice as indicated by H&E staining of the liver, while H&E staining of WAT revealed markedly enlarged adipocytes ( ). Serum levels of metabolic markers including alanine aminotransferase (ALT), aspartate aminotransferase (AST), triglycerides (TG) and total cholesterol (TC) also suggested hepatic dysfunction and elevated blood lipid levels in T2DM mice ( ). Subsequently, we further evaluated IPGTT and ITT in both groups of mice. Experimental results indicated impaired glucose tolerance and insulin resistance in T2DM mice ( ).
Next, we confirmed through immunohistochemistry, qPCR, and Western blot experiments that NR4A3 was significantly reduced in expression at both mRNA and protein levels in the T2DM models ( G–N and ). In vitro model, we cultured HL-1 mouse atrial cardiomyocytes in low glucose (ctrl group, 5.5 mmol/l glucose) or high glucose (glu group, 30 mmol/l glucose) for 48 h, followed by total RNA and protein extraction. We found that the mRNA and protein levels of NR4A3 cultured in high glucose were significantly downregulated by using qPCR and immunoblotting ( ). Immunofluorescence staining of the cardiomyocyte marker a-actinin and NR4A3 in isolated adult atrial cardiomyocytes and HL-1 cells suggested that NR4A3 expression is distributed throughout the entire cardiomyocyte, particularly in the nucleus. However, its expression was significantly reduced in T2DM and high glucose models ( ).

## NR4A3 deficiency aggravates atrial structural remodeling in HFD + STZ treated mice
We constructed NR4A3 global knockout (Nr4a3-KO) mice, and the construction strategy along with knockout efficiency were shown in . To investigate the impact of NR4A3 on atrial remodeling induced by diabetes, we subjected WT mice and Nr4a3-KO mice to either a normal diet (ND) or a high-fat diet combined with streptozotocin (HFD + STZ) for 16 weeks. The weight of WT and Nr4a3-KO mice treated with HFD + STZ significantly increased compared to those on ND ( ). Additionally, there were no significant differences in blood glucose between Nr4a3- KO mice and WT mice under either ND or HFD + STZ treatment. However, both WT and Nr4a3-KO mice exhibited fasting blood glucose levels exceeding 16.7 mmol/l under HFD + STZ treatment ( ).
After 16 weeks of HFD feed and low-dose STZ treatment, the left atrial weight/total body weight ratio (LAW/TBW) of Nr4a3-KO mice was significantly higher than in the WT group ( A and E). Echocardiography also demonstrated a significantly increase in the left atrial area of Nr4a3-KO mice compared to WT mice under HFD + STZ treatment ( B and F). Masson staining confirmed that NR4A3 deficiency aggravated HFD + STZ induced atrial fibrosis ( C and G). Furthermore, Nr4a3-KO mice showed a larger cross-sectional area of atrial cardiomyocytes than WT mice under HFD + STZ treatment, as indicated by WGA staining ( D and H). However, no significant differences in LAW/TBW, left atrial area, atrial fibrosis, and the cross-sectional area of atrial cardiomyocytes were observed between Nr4a3-KO mice and WT mice under ND treatment ( A–H). The absence of NR4A3 further increased the expression of ANP, COL1A1, and COL3A1 in the atrial tissue of HFD + STZ-treated T2DM mice, indicating exacerbated atrial hypertrophy and atrial fibrosis ( I–M). Overall, HFD + STZ treatment caused atrial hypertrophy and atrial fibrosis in C57BL/6J mice, and NR4A3 deficiency aggravated atrial remodeling induced by diabetes. 

## NR4A3 inhibits diabetes induced atrial structural remodeling
We constructed AAV9-cTNT-Nr4a3 and control AAV9-cTNT-Ctrl virus, and then injected into db/m mice or db/db mice at 8 weeks via tail vein for 16 weeks to further clarify the effect of NR4A3 on atrial remodeling induced by diabetes. The construction diagram and overexpression efficiency were shown in . The weight and fasting blood glucose in db/db mice injected with AAV9-cTNT-Nr4a3 or control virus both increased significantly from the 4th week ( ).
We also evaluated the phenotypic changes in the liver, WAT, and pancreas of db/db or db/m mice injected with AAV9-cTNT-Nr4a3 or control virus using experimental methods including HE staining, serum metabolic index detection, IPGTT, and ITT. The results indicated significant hepatic steatosis in db/db mice, with markedly enlarged adipocytes and increased serum metabolic indices ALT, AST, TG, and TC compared to db/m mice ( ). Additionally, there was evident impaired glucose tolerance and insulin resistance ( ). However, overexpression of NR4A3 either in db/m mice or in db/db mice showed no apparent changes in the aforementioned phenotypes ( ).
Next, we found that overexpressing NR4A3 in db/m mice did not yield any significant alterations in the LAW/TBW ratio, left atrial area, atrial fibrosis and cross-sectional area of atrial cardiomyocytes compared to ctrl db/m mice ( A–H). In contrast, upregulation of NR4A3 in db/db mice significantly attenuated the LAW/TBW ratio, left atrial area, atrial fibrosis, cross-sectional area of atrial cardiomyocytes when compared to db/db mice carrying AAV9-Ctrl ( A–H), Simultaneously, Western blot analysis validated the protein levels of ANP, COL1A1, and COL3A1. In db/m mice, overexpression of NR4A3 showed no significant effect on ANP, COL1A1, and COL3A1. However, in db/db mice, overexpression of NR4A3 resulted in a significant decrease in ANP, COL1A1, and COL3A1 expression ( I–M). Consequently, our findings confirmed that overexpression of NR4A3 can alleviate atrial fibrosis and cardiomyocyte hypertrophy in db/db mice. 
We also briefly assessed the impact of NR4A3 on inflammation in the atrial tissue of diabetic mice by examining the expression changes of IL-1β, IL-6, and TNF-α at the protein level ( ). The results indicated a mild elevation of IL-6 and TNF-α levels in both diabetic models. However, overexpression of NR4A3 mitigated the levels of IL-6 and TNF-α in db/db mice, while knockout of NR4A3 exacerbated the levels of IL-6 and TNF-α in the atrial tissue of HFD + STZ-treated T2DM mice. The expression changes of IL-1β were not significantly observed in the diabetic models. Our results indicated that overexpression of NR4A3 can attenuate the inflammation in diabetic mice.

## Atrial NR4A3 expression level is inversely proportional to the susceptibility to diabetes induced AF
We furtherly assessed the effect of NR4A3 on electrical remodeling in diabetic mice. Action potentials (APs) in isolated adult atrial cardiomyocytes from db/m or db/db mice injected with AAV9-Nr4a3 or AAV9-Ctrl were measured. We found that action potential duration (APD) was significantly prolonged in db/db mice compared to db/m mice. Notably, the overexpression of NR4A3 in db/db mice exhibited a trend towards shortening APD, although it did not reach statistical significance ( A and B). Subsequently, we assessed the protein expression of ATP2A2 (SERCA2), a pivotal gene in calcium handling, in db/db mice injected with AAV9-Nr4a3 or AAV9-Ctrl, finding no significant difference ( ). Further detection the mRNA expression of ion channel genes related to AF revealed no significant changes in cav1.2, while Kcnq1 and Slc8a1 were significantly elevated ( ). The absence of a statistically significant difference in APD following NR4A3 overexpression in db/db mice suggested an unclear regulatory effect on ion channels. 
In intracardiac stimulation experiments, NR4A3 deficiency exacerbated the induction rate of AF in mice subjected to HFD + STZ ( C and E), with no significant alteration in the duration of AF ( C and F). Conversely, the induction rate of AF in db/db + AAV9-Nr4a3 mice were significantly reduced compared to db/db + AAV9-Ctrl mice ( D and G), with no significant alteration in the duration of AF ( D and H). In summary, NR4A3 upregulation attenuate the susceptibility to diabetes induced AF.

## NR4A3 alleviates atrial mitochondrial energy metabolism dysfunction caused by diabetes
To elucidate the specific mechanism of NR4A3 involved in regulating atrial remodeling induced by diabetes, we performed RNA-sequencing (RNA-seq) analysis on atrial samples obtained from db/db mice injected with AAV9-cTNT-Ctrl or AAV9-cTNT-Nr4a3. Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG) functional enrichment analysis indicated that NR4A3-regulated genes were predominantly enriched in various types of cardiomyopathy and metabolic related pathways. Notably, the metabolic pathway exhibited the highest abundance among the enriched genes, and every cardiomyopathy pathway contained a distinct number of metabolic-related genes ( A). Consequently, we postulated that the energy metabolism pathway might constitute a plausible mechanism. Subsequently, we further performed non-targeted metabolomics analysis on the atrial tissues from db/db mice injected with AAV9-cTNT-Nr4a3 or AAV9-cTNT-Ctrl. According to the KEGG functional enrichment analysis, we found that the metabolic substances regulated by NR4A3 were enriched in pathways such as carbon metabolism, oxidative metabolism, citrate cycle, and pyruvate metabolism ( B). 
Based on the RNA seq and metabolomics analysis, we hypothesized that NR4A3 plays a role in diabetes induced atrial remodeling by modulating the energy metabolism of atrial tissue. Therefore, we detected the morphology and function of atrial mitochondria. The TEM results revealed a trend of decreased mitochondrial area and increased mitochondrial number per unit area in the atrial tissue of db/db mice compared to db/m mice, although this trend did not reach statistical significance ( C, E and F). Similarly, after overexpressing NR4A3, there were no significant differences observed in mitochondrial area and number either in db/db mice or in db/m mice ( C, E and F). However, it was evident from the TEM results that mitochondrial damage was most severe in db/db mice, characterized by pronounced mitochondrial vacuolization. Interestingly, the degree of mitochondrial vacuolization was partially alleviated in db/db mice overexpressing NR4A3 ( C and G). Tunel staining in the atria of db/m or db/db mice injected with AAV9-Nr4a3 or AAV9-Ctrl confirmed that apoptosis in db/db mice could be inhibited by maintaining the expression level of NR4A3 ( D and H).
Subsequently, we analysed the respiration in isolated mitochondria from db/m or db/db mice after injection with AAV9-Nr4a3 or control virus. Mitochondrial OCR was measured by seahorse XF analysis, The results indicated that there was no significant change in OCR among the groups with complex I substrates, pyruvate/malate ( I and J). However, with complex II substrates, succinate, the OCR was significantly reduced in the db/db group, while overexpression of Nr4a3 resulted in a marked improvement in OCR ( K and L). These findings suggested that Nr4a3 affects respiation in atrial mitochondria of db/db mice, specifically targeting mitochondrial complex II.
Next, we extracted mitochondria from atrial tissues of db/m and db/db mice after overexpression of NR4A3 or control virus. We then measured the activities of mitochondrial complexes I, II, and III ( ). The results indicated that the activities of complexes I, II, and III in the atrial mitochondria of db/db mice were significantly reduced compared to those in db/m mice. However, following NR4A3 overexpression, only the activity of complex II showed a significant increase, while the activities of complexes I and III did not show notable changes. These results suggest that, consistent with mitochondrial OCR results ( I–l), NR4A3 overexpression can alleviate the decline in complex II function observed in db/db mice.
Furthermore, we transfected HL-1 cardiomyocytes with lentivirus overexpressing or knocking down NR4A3, validating the transfection efficiency at the RNA and protein levels ( ). Subsequent measurement of mitochondrial oxygen consumption rate (OCR) in HL-1 cells transfected with lentivirus carrying shNr4a3 or ctrl virus and cultured in low glucose (ctrl group, 5.5 mmol/l) or high glucose (glu croup, 30 mmol/l) revealed that NR4A3 knockdown exacerbated mitochondrial OCR dysfunction in cells exposed to high glucose ( M–P).
We also evaluated serum lactate levels in addition to atrial tissue lactate concentrations in both db/db and db/m mice. Concurrently, we examined lactate production in the culture medium and within HL-1 cells. We found that the serum and atrial tissue lactate levels in db/db mice were significantly increased compared to db/m mice, while there was no significant difference in lactate production after overexpression of NR4A3 ( ). Similarly, under high glucose treatment, lactate content in both the culture medium and HL-1 cells exhibited a significant increase, with no appreciable difference in lactate content after NR4A3 knockdown ( ).

## NR4A3 inhibits diabetes induced mitochondrial oxidative stress
Dihydroethidium (DHE) staining indicated that overexpression NR4A3 in db/m mice had no significant difference in reactive oxygen species (ROS) generation. In contrast, there was a notable increase in ROS production in db/db mice compared to db/m mice. However, the upregulation of NR4A3 mitigated the extent of ROS in db/db mice ( A and B). Subsequently, the protein level of SOD2, a key enzyme in oxidative stress regulation, were assessed. The results demonstrated a significant increase in SOD2 level in db/db mice. Interestingly, the elevated expression of NR4A3 in db/db mice attenuated the SOD2 protein level, as depicted in C and D. 
To evaluate mitochondrial membrane potential, the JC-1 assay was performed. The extent of membrane potential damage in db/db mice was significantly higher than that in db/m mice. However, overexpression of NR4A3 in db/db mice ameliorated the degree of damage ( E and F). Additionally, in vitro experiments demonstrated that overexpression of NR4A3 restored mitochondrial membrane potential damage in HL-1 cells exposed to high glucose ( G and H). Under a regimen of HFD and STZ treatment, Nr4a3-KO mice exhibited more pronounced membrane potential damage compared to WT mice, as presented in .
Mitochondrial oxidative stress was assessed using the MitoSOX Red Mitochondrial Superoxide Indicator, with Mitotracker Green used to label mitochondria. The upregulation of atrial NR4A3 attenuated mitochondrial oxidative stress in db/db mice ( I and J). Similarly, mitochondrial oxidative stress in HL-1 cells treated with high glucose was mitigated upon upregulating NR4A3 ( K and L). Moreover, NR4A3 deficiency exacerbated mitochondrial oxidative stress in mice treated with HFD + STZ ( ).
Finally, we further assessed mitochondrial H2O2 production in atrial tissues of db/m and db/db mice injected with AAV9-Nr4a3 or AAV9-Ctrl. The results indicated that mitochondrial H2O2 production was significantly increased in the atrial tissues of db/db mice compared to db/m mice. However, this increase was significantly alleviated by NR4A3 overexpression ( ).

## NR4A3 exerts an impact on mitochondrial energy metabolism by regulating the transcriptional regulation of Sdha
To elucidate the specific mechanism by which NR4A3 regulates mitochondrial energy metabolism, we conducted a comprehensive analysis, screening for genes exhibiting significant alterations in the pyruvate metabolism pathway, TCA cycle, and oxidative phosphorylation pathway through RNA-seq ( A). Additionally, the non-targeted metabolomics analysis was employed to screen for metabolites associated with these pathways, revealing predominantly upregulated levels in the NR4A3 overexpression group ( B). 
Subsequent examination of protein levels for genes implicated in the metabolic pathways—identified through RNA seq and metabolomics analysis—revealed that the protein level of the pyruvate metabolism pathway's key enzyme, pyruvate dehydrogenase E1 subunit alpha 1 (PDHA1), remained insignificantly changed ( C and ). However, phosphorylation of PDHA1 was significantly elevated in the atrial tissue of db/db mice compared to db/m mice, and NR4A3 overexpression alleviated this phosphorylation level ( C and ). Further investigations demonstrated that Pyruvate Dehydrogenase Kinase 4 (PDK4), responsible for promoting PDHA1 phosphorylation, exhibited no significant changes ( C and ). Conversely, Pyruvate Dehydrogenase Phosphatase Catalytic Subunit 1 (PDP1), responsible for dephosphorylating PDHA1, experienced a reduction in db/db mice when compared to db/m mice, with upregulated NR4A3 resulting in increased PDP1 expression ( C and D). Protein-level confirmation also indicated that maintaining NR4A3 inhibited the reduction of succinate dehydrogenase complex flavoprotein subunit A (SDHA) ( C and E) and cytochrome c oxidase subunit 5a (COX5a) ( C and F) in the atrial tissue of db/db mice. Consistency in protein levels of PDP1, SDHA, and COX5a with NR4A3 expression changes was further validated in Nr4a3-KO mice and HL-1 cells overexpressing NR4A3 ( ).
Given NR4A3's role as a transcription factor, Cut&Tag assay using neonatal mouse cardiomyocytes (NMCMs) was performed to identify potential NR4A3 response elements in the promoter regions of Pdp1, Sdha, and Cox5a. Agarose gel electrophoresis was conducted on the Cut&Tag product amplified by PCR, revealing an absence of discernible fragments within the Ppd1 promoter region. Conversely, the fragment indicating the Cox5a promoter region was larger and had heterobands. Notably, the Sdha promoter region exhibited distinct band falling within the anticipated range ( G). Subsequently, qPCR detection on the Cut&Tag product indicated a significant increase in predicted Sdha promoter, whereas predicted Cox5a promoter showed no significant increase ( ). Consequently, we hypothesized that NR4A3 binds to the Sdha promoter region.
To validate this hypothesis, dual-luciferase reporter assays were performed to identify the specific NR4A3 response element in the human Sdha promoter region. Initially, complete human Sdha and Cox5a promoter region plasmids were transfected with the human pcDNA3.1-Nr4a3 plasmid into HEK293 cells. The dual-luciferase reporter assay revealed a noteworthy increase in relative luminescence (RLU) only in the Sdha group, with no significant changes in the Cox5a group ( H). This reaffirmed NR4A3's binding specificity to the Sdha promoter region. Utilizing a database of transcription factor binding profiles-JASPAR (https://jaspar.genereg.net), We identified one predicted binding region of NR4A1 to the Sdha promoter and three predicted binding regions of NR4A2 to the Sdha promoter. Considering the high conservation of the NR4A family DBD, we integrated the predicted sites and constructed truncated Sdha promoter regions with a size of 250 bp. Specific construction diagrams were illustrated in I and . Dual-luciferase reporter assay results using the truncated constructs indicated a significant increase in RLU in the R3 region, confirming the binding site of NR4A3 to Sdha promoter is within the R3 region, with one predicted sequence (AAAGTCAC) also situated in this region ( I).
Consequently, we proceeded to construct the plasmid for the identified sequence and the plasmid for the mutated sequence (AAAAAAAC) for Dual-luciferase reporter assay. The results confirmed a significant increase in RLU for the identified sequence, while the RLU of the mutated sequence exhibited no significant difference ( J). Therefore, the identified sequence represents the specific NR4A3 response element to the Sdha promoter.
In HL-1 cells, we reaffirmed that NR4A3 indeed regulate the transcription of Sdha. This indicates that the mRNA levels of Sdha exhibit a direct correlation with the fluctuations in NR4A3 expression, increasing and decreasing accordingly ( K and L). Subsequently, immunofluorescence analysis revealed that, under HFD and STZ treatment, the expression level of SDHA was significantly reduced in Nr4a3−/− mice compared to WT mice ( M and N). Finally, we examined the expression of the SDHA protein in atrial tissue samples from patients with AF or SR. The results revealed a decrease of SDHA expression in AF patients ( ). These findings collectively demonstrated that NR4A3 regulates the transcriptional expression of SDHA, thereby influencing mitochondrial homeostasis.

## SDHA overexpression attenuates atrial remodeling in diabetic Nr4a3-KO mice
Given SDHA's pivotal role in NR4A3-mediated regulation of diabetes-induced ACM, Nr4a3-KO mice at 8 weeks received injections of AAV9 vectors overexpressing SDHA or a control, followed by treatment with either ND or HFD + STZ for 16 weeks. The overexpression efficiency of SDHA was shown in . Our findings indicated that the upregulation of SDHA inhibits the remodeling of LAW/TBW, left atrial size, atrial fibrosis, cross-sectional area of atrial cardiomyocytes and susceptibility to pacing-induced AF in diabetic mice induced by NR4A3 deficiency ( A–K). TEM indicated that overexpression of SDHA did not significantly alter the size and quantity of mitochondria in diabetic Nr4a3-KO mice ( L–N). However, it markedly alleviated mitochondrial damage ( L and O), accompanied by a significant improvement in ATP production ( P). 

## Discussion
The atrium, a vital component of the heart, comprises diverse cellular elements, including myocardial cells, fibroblasts, and endothelial cells. , In addition to the role of ventricular filling, it also participates in the composition of the cardiac conduction system. , Under pathological stimuli, the atria exhibit prompt and extensive responses, characterized by hypertrophy and systolic dysfunction of atrial myocytes, arrhythmic alterations in ion channel and transport protein functions of myocardial cells, and proliferation of atrial fibroblasts—collectively referred to as ACM. , 
ACM is responsible for AF and thromboembolic events originating from the heart, thereby significantly elevating the risk of heart failure, ischemic stroke, and morbidity and mortality in patients. , Despite expanding knowledge on ACM in recent years, a practical working definition and clear diagnostic criteria remain elusive. Therefore, our study represents the first attempt to explore the effect and potential mechanism of NR4A3 on diabetes induced ACM. The expression of NR4A3 in diabetic atrial tissues was dramatically decreased. Upregulation of NR4A3 can significantly alleviate the increase of left atrial area, cardiomyocyte hypertrophy and fibrosis caused by diabetes. Additionally, our study found the expression of NR4A3 was significantly downregulated in the atrial tissue of clinical AF patients, and the lack of NR4A3 promoted the induction rate of AF in diabetic mice. We also tested relevant inflammatory indicators, the results suggested that atrial inflammation in diabetic mice is elevated, and the elevated inflammatory factors may activate downstream signaling pathways such as NF-κB to promote atrial fibrosis. Overexpression of N4RA3 can alleviate inflammation in diabetic mice, thereby alleviating atrial remodeling. These results suggested that NR4A3 may have a protective effect on diabetes induced ACM.
ACM contributes to the progression of AF, and AF concurrently serves as a marker of electrical remodeling in ACM. Notably, AF represents the cardiac manifestation of DM. , The oxidative stress, mitochondrial dysfunction, inflammation and growth factor accumulation caused by diabetes lead to atrial fibrosis, stiffness, diastolic dysfunction and atrial hypertrophy. , Additionally, diabetes induces abnormal atrial conduction and gap junction contraction, resulting in electrical remodeling and electromechanical remodeling. , Metabolic stress, such as mitochondrial dysfunction, caused by diabetes further leads to the dysfunction of sarcoplasmic reticulum Ca2+ uptake (via SERCA2) and SR Ca2+ release (via the ryanodine receptor RyR2). ATP reduction also influences the maintenance of normal ion channel function, including L-type calcium channels (ICa.L), Na+-Ca2+-exchanger (NCX1), culminating in increased Late INa and intracellular calcium overload. , Studies have consistently demonstrated that glucose metabolism and TCA cycle are decreased in AF patients. , Mitochondrial metabolism disorders and oxidative stress are important mechanisms in both ACM and DM. 
The NR4A subfamily has been validated to significantly regulate the expression of energy metabolism related genes, such as enolase 3 (ENO3), pyruvate kinase isozyme type M (PKM) and isocitrate dehydrogenase 3 (IDH3) , and it is also involved in the regulation of cardiac metabolic diseases. The role of NR4A1 in metabolic cardiovascular diseases has been extensively studied. For example, Fibroblast growth factor 1 variant (FGF1ΔHBS) improves mitochondrial homeostasis and oxidative stress damage by inhibiting the expression of NR4A1, thereby playing a protective role in diabetes induced atrial remodeling. Kalistatin/Serpina3c promotes the acetylation of NR4A1, inhibiting ENO1 transcription, resulting in reduced glycolysis and protection against cardiac fibrosis after myocardial infarction (MI). NR4A2 was also reported to be associated with metabolic cardiac disease, with Moxonidine alleviating myocardial apoptosis and autophagy disorders caused by metabolic syndrome through the restoration NR4A2 levels. NR4A3, acting as a transcription factor in various signaling pathways, including cell apoptosis, inflammation, energy metabolism, and mitochondrial function, , has received relatively limited attention compared to NR4A1 and NR4A2 in cardiac diseases. However, it has been established that NR4A3 suppresses post–MI inflammation responses, alleviates doxorubicin-induced cardiac stress, and plays a role in cardiac hypertrophy. , , NR4A3 has also been proven to participate in energy metabolism. In C2C12 myoblasts, knocking down NR4A3 attenuates the expression of genes that control lipid oxidation, pyruvate use and ATP production. Overexpression of NR4A3 in 3T3-L1 adipocytes promotes the recruitment of GLUT4 transporters to the plasma membrane, thereby increasing glucose metabolism. In rodent models of obesity and diabetic, NR4A3 expression is reduced in skeletal muscle. Our study confirmed that NR4A3 is highly enriched in atrium. Therefore, we explored the role of NR4A3 in ACM, and confirmed that maintaining NR4A3 expression improves atrial ATP production and mitigates oxidative stress injury, thereby alleviating atrial structural remodeling.
Mitochondrial ATP production relies on the coordinated action of both the TCA cycle and oxidative phosphorylation acting through the ETC. Key enzymes in the TCA cycle, including Pdha1, Pcb, Aco2, Cs, Idh3a, Ogdh, Sdha, and Mdh2, play crucial roles in this process. Notably, succinate dehydrogenase (SDH), a heterotetrameric complex composed of SDHA, SDHB, SDHC, and SDHD, not only catalyzes the oxidation of succinate to fumarate in the TCA cycle but also functions as a component of the ETC, specifically known as complex II. This complex couples electrons to ubiquinone in the respiratory chain. , The nuclear-encoded mammalian SDH harbors covalently-linked FAD in SDHA (flavoprotein subunit). Due to SDH's pivotal role in both the TCA cycle and oxidative phosphorylation, any disruption in its expression can lead to significant energy imbalances accompanied by increased ROS production. Additionally, it can result in succinate accumulation, which promotes DNA methylation and induces inflammatory cascades. Therefore, SDHA deficiency can promote atrial fibrosis and atrial hypertrophy both from a metabolic perspective and through pathways beyond metabolism. Clinical evidence also indicates a significant decrease and functional impairment in mitochondrial complex II in patients with AF compared to non-AF patients. , , Additionally, mutations in SDH can cause lethal cardiomyopathy, with most cases manifesting in infancy or early childhood. Clinical examinations often reveal significant cardiomegaly or hypertrophic cardiomyopathy, accompanied by severe heart failure. Genetic sequencing consistently indicates SDH mutations, while biopsies suggest deficiencies in mitochondrial complex II. , 
NR4A3, functioning as a transcription factor, regulates the transcription of various disease-related genes. However, there has been no prior report on the involvement of NR4A3 in the regulation of SDHA. In this study, we present the novel finding that NR4A3 indeed regulates the transcription of SDHA. We elucidated the specific NR4A3 response element in the SDHA promoter region through Cut&Tag assays and dual luciferase-reporter assays. Additionally, overexpression of SDHA in Nr4a3−/− diabetic mice demonstrated a mitigating effect on atrial remodeling, providing valuable insights into the potential therapeutic role of NR4A3 in diabetic atrial pathology.
There are mutual interactions among various organs within the body, with multiple factors capable of causing multi-organ dysfunction. For instance, metabolic risk factors such as obesity, insulin resistance, abnormal blood glucose levels and dyslipidemia often cluster together and are major risk factors for cardiovascular diseases (CVD), T2DM and NAFLD. 
Multiple studies have confirmed that NAFLD and obesity can increase the risk of AF. , They can cause metabolic disturbances, including increased insulin resistance and cardiac lipotoxicity, leading to atrial remodeling. Additionally, through the release of inflammatory cytokines and increased oxidative stress, NAFLD and obesity can also lead to atrial fibrosis, LA enlargement, electrical remodeling, and autonomic remodeling. , Similarly, research has also shown that NAFLD and obesity can lead to an increase in epicardial adipose tissue volume and thickness, releasing adipokines that act on atrial tissue through paracrine effects, leading to atrial remodeling. , 
NR4A3 has been reported to participate in the regulation of functions in multiple metabolic organs, including the liver, pancreas, and adipose tissue. To minimize the mutual interactions between systems, we utilized the AAV9 vector with cTNT promoter for overexpressing NR4A3. Subsequently, we assessed the morphology and function of pancreatic islets, liver, and adipose tissue. The results confirmed that the effects of NR4A3 overexpression were solely concentrated in the heart. Thus, the protective effects of NR4A3 against diabetes-induced atrial remodeling stem from its direct actions on the heart itself.
However, in Nr4a3-KO mice, we were unable to completely eliminate the potential interactions between systems. Nevertheless, the overall findings confirmed that the lack of NR4A3 exacerbates diabetes induced atrial dysfunction. This limitation was acknowledged in the “Limitations” section.
There are several limitations in this study. Firstly, the precise mechanisms driving NR4A3 downregulation in diabetes-induced ACM remain unclear, warranting additional experiments to unravel this aspect. Secondly, further investigations are imperative to elucidate the impact of NR4A3 on atrial electrophysiology, encompassing aspects such as calcium handling, L-type calcium current (ICa.L), sodium current (INa), potassium current (IK), and sodium-calcium exchanger (NCX). Thirdly, to validate the effect of NR4A3 on atrial remodeling, additional studies involving atrial cardiomyocyte-specific Nr4a3 knockout mice are indispensable. Lastly, the number of atrial tissue samples collected from patients with AF and SR was limited in our study. Further expansion of the sample size, particularly from patients combined with DM, is necessary.
In summary ( ), our results confirmed for the first time that the decrease of NR4A3 in diabetic atria directly leads to the transcription downregulation of SDHA. This downregulation significantly impacts mitochondrial ATP production, escalating oxidative stress and culminating in atrial hypertrophy, fibrosis, and electrical remodeling. Notably, elevating SDHA levels mitigates the atrial remodeling induced by NR4A3 deficiency. Taken together, these findings reveal the pivotal role of NR4A3 in diabetes induced ACM, providing a new potential therapeutic target for atrial myopathy. 

## Contributors
HP, JLY, YHW, YPW and QSW proposed conception and designed the study. HP and JLY, MBF, ZSW performed experiments, analyzed and interpreted data. HP, JLY and MBF recruited and collected the human atrial samples for analysis. HP drafted the manuscript and JLY and YHW wrote part of methods and results. YPW critically revised the manuscript. QSW critically revised and finalized the manuscript. The order of the co–first authors was decided by the time spent and scientific contribution to the paper. HP and JLY contributed equally to this work. All authors read and approved the final version of the manuscript.

## Data sharing statement
The data for this study are available upon reasonable request to the corresponding author. The expanded data are shown in supplemental material. For RNA Sequencing analysis, Original FASTQ data have been deposited into the Sequence Read Archive database under the accession number PRJNA1050020. For non-targeted metabolomics analysis, the metabolomics data were deposited in MetaboLights under accession number MTBLS9135.

## Declaration of generative AI and AI-assisted technologies in the writing process
During the preparation of this work the authors used ChatGPT in order to improve the grammar of the manuscript. After using this service, the authors reviewed and edited the content as needed and take full responsibility for the content of the publication.

## Declaration of interests
The authors have declared that no conflict of interest exists.

 Appendix A

## Supplementary data

## Supplementary Tables and Figs

## Full unedited gel

## Acknowledgements
This study was supported by the major research program of 10.13039/501100001809National Natural Science Foundation of China (NSFC) No: 82370316(to Q-S. W.), No. 81974041 (to Y-P. W.), and No. 82270447 (to Y-P. W.) and Fundation of 10.13039/501100008750Shanghai Hospital Development Center (No. SHDC2022CRD044 to Q-S. W.).
Appendix ASupplementary data related to this article can be found at https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ebiom.2024.105268.