822acssdJournal of Chemical Information and ModelingJ Chem Inf ModelPMC1155867211558672115586723941950010.1021/acs.jcim.4c01435Exploration of
Cryptic Pockets Using Enhanced Sampling
Along Normal Modes: A Case Study of KRAS G12D
VithaniNeha ZhangShe ThompsonJeffrey P PatelLara A DemidovAlex XiaJunchao BalaeffAlexander MentesAhmet ArnautovaYelena A KohlmannAnna LawsonJ David NichollsAnthony SkillmanA Geoffrey LeBardDavid N †OpenEye,
Cadence Molecular Sciences, Santa Fe, New Mexico 87508, United States‡Black
Diamond Therapeutics, Cambridge, Massachusetts 02142, United States§Mirati
Therapeutics, Inc., San Diego, California 92121, United States*E-mail: david.lebard@eyesopen.com.
17102024642182588258–827314112024© 2024 The Authors. Published by American Chemical SocietyPermits non-commercial access and re-use, provided that author attribution and integrity are maintained; but does not permit creation of adaptations or other derivative works (https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/).

## Abstract
 Identification of
cryptic pockets has the potential to
open new
therapeutic opportunities by discovering ligand binding sites that
remain hidden in static apo structures of a target protein. Moreover,
allosteric cryptic pockets can become valuable for designing target-selective
ligands when the natural ligand binding sites are conserved in variants
of a protein. For example, before an allosteric cryptic pocket was
discovered, KRAS was considered undruggable due to its smooth surface
and conservation of the GDP/GTP binding pocket across the wild type
and oncogenic isoforms. Recent identification of the Switch-II cryptic
pocket in the KRASG12C mutant and FDA approval of anticancer
drugs targeting this site underscores the importance of cryptic pockets
in solving pharmaceutical challenges. Here, we present a newly developed
approach for the exploration of cryptic pockets using weighted ensemble
molecular dynamics simulations with inherent normal modes as progress
coordinates applied to the wild type KRAS and the G12D mutant. We
performed extensive all-atomic simulations (>400 μs) with
and
without several cosolvents (xenon, ethanol, benzene), and analyzed
trajectories using three distinct methods to search for potential
binding pockets. These methods have been applied as a proof-of-concept
to KRAS and have shown they can predict known cryptic binding sites.
Furthermore, we performed ligand-binding simulations of a known inhibitor
(MRTX1133) to shed light on the nature of cryptic pockets in KRASG12D and the role of conformational selection vs induced-fit
mechanism in the formation of these cryptic pockets.

statusreleaseddisplay-pdfyesis-in-collection-domainyesis-olfnois-manuscriptnois-preprintnois-journal-matternois-scannednois-retractednoReceived 2024 Aug 9; Accepted 2024 Oct 3; Revised 2024 Oct 3; Collection date 2024 Nov 11.

## Introduction
Knowledge of potential ligand binding
sites is a prerequisite for
structure-based drug discovery. Conformational sampling of a protein
may reveal transiently open yet still druggable binding sites, which
otherwise remain hidden in a static experimental structure of an apo
protein. Such binding sites, aptly termed cryptic pockets, not only open drug discovery opportunities in proteins long considered
undruggable but can also reveal new allosteric sites in targets with
known orthosteric ligands. Thus, cryptic pocket identification can
expand the repertoire of druggable sites as well as targetable proteins
for therapeutic development. Furthermore, orthosteric sites can be
difficult to target due to their high affinity for the natural substrates,
and, if targeted, have an increased risk of off-target effects due
to the conservation of the pocket sequence among functionally similar
proteins. Identification of allosteric cryptic pockets has proven
critical in the design of selective inhibitors against challenging
cancer targets, − including several oncogenic mutants of the Kirsten Rat Sarcoma virus
oncogene protein (KRAS). 
KRAS belongs
to a family of related GTPases that are involved in
the RAS-MAPK signaling pathway, which is essential for cell proliferation,
differentiation, and survival. Because of this deep embedding within
the cell cycle, gain-of-function mutations in KRAS account for ∼14%
of all human cancers. Of those mutations, 80% are single base substitutions
at codon 12 that encodes for glycine in the WT KRAS gene. , KRAS has picomolar affinity for its canonical ligands GTP/GDP, so
developing a competitive inhibitor targeting the orthosteric site
has not been a viable strategy for drug discovery. , The
small size and flat surface of KRAS poses additional hurdles for allosteric
inhibitor design. As a result, KRAS remained an elusive target for
anticancer therapeutics since its discovery in the late 1960s. 
A breakthrough occurred from a covalent
fragment screening study
conducted by the Shokat lab in 2013, which suggested the presence
of an allosteric cryptic pocket in KRASG12C near the Switch-II
region. Building on Shokat’s original
discovery, selective anticancer therapies targeting the Switch-II
cryptic pocket in oncogenic mutants (KRASG12C and KRASG12D) have been developed ( B). These include FDA-approved covalent drugs
for KRASG12C from Amgen (Sotorasib) and Mirati Therapeutics (Adagrasib), a noncovalent inhibitor for KRASG12D from Mirati
Therapeutics in Phase I clinical trials (MRTX1133), as well as a recently developed high affinity pan-KRAS
noncovalent inhibitor (BI-2865) developed in collaboration between
Boehringer Ingelheim and the Lito lab (see Table S1 for a detailed list of
known inhibitors). An additional cryptic pocket that forms between
the Switch-I and Switch-II regions ( C) has also been discovered by two independent
fragment screening studies. , Inhibitors targeting
this Switch-I/II pocket have been designed to inhibit SOS-mediated
activation of KRAS and HRAS (see Table S2 for a detailed list). − Another pocket, A59, was also recently reported in
the vicinity of Switch-I/II regions for which a crystal structure
of the inhibitor-bound complex is not available. The aforementioned acceleration of anticancer drug discovery
targeting KRAS is a testimony to the significance of allosteric (cryptic)
pocket detection in structure-based drug design.
 Advancements in KRAS inhibitor design illustrate
how cryptic pocket
identification can be a crucial step in the drug discovery process.
However, finding cryptic pockets remains largely serendipitous, since
such sites can only be detected experimentally by solving a protein
structure in the presence of a bound ligand or fragment(s). Without a priori knowledge of a potential set of ligands to screen,
cryptic pocket detection requires the exploration of a vast amount
of protein conformational space to reveal potential binding sites.
Molecular dynamics (MD) simulations have been shown to be a powerful
computational tool for such conformational exploration. However, the
formation of cryptic pockets can occur over microseconds or longer
time scales that are largely inaccessible to unbiased all-atom MD
simulations. While long time scale MD simulations have been used for
cryptic pocket detection, , enhanced sampling methods
such as replica-exchange and unbiased
goal-oriented adaptive simulations can
be more efficient for accelerating conformational searches. Weighted
Ensemble , (WE) MD simulations are another methodology
that can be used to efficiently enhance conformational sampling along
a (progress) coordinate that abstractly defines the mechanism of cryptic
pocket opening. In fact, a WE MD algorithm (SubPEx) has already been
developed to generate unique, equilibrium-like conformations of subpockets
of known cryptic sites. In SubPEx, WE
progress coordinates are defined using the preexisting knowledge of
the location and composition of the pocket of interest. Such information
is not available for the prospective study of cryptic pockets in previously
unexplored proteins.
Since the location and structural dynamics
associated with cryptic
pocket opening is typically unknown from a static (X-ray/CryoEM/Alphafold)
structure, it is challenging to choose a general-purpose progress
coordinate that could enhance such motion. All proteins have access
to a well-defined spectrum of collective motions called intrinsic
dynamics. Such protein motions often involve domain movements and/or
allosteric changes in conformations. These dynamics can be estimated
using normal mode analysis (NMA), therefore one could imagine using
a NMA approach , to analytically estimate the
motion associated with pocket opening. While a conformational ensemble
generated by projecting protein structures along selected normal modes
has been previously used for cryptic pocket searching, this strategy may not succeed in sampling cryptic
pocket formation that occurs on time scales of microseconds or longer.
In fact, methods already exist like MDeNM that use normal modes to
accelerate sampling of such rare events by biasing simulations along
the slowest protein modes through injections of kinetic energy into
these coordinates. Alternatively, one
might prefer to use normal modes to accelerate sampling without perturbing
the underlying thermodynamics or kinetics. By sampling the global
dynamics instead of localized motion at a specific cryptic site, our
work demonstrates how to use normal modes as a generalized progress
coordinate for WE simulations in an unbiased way to facilitate large-scale
conformational changes that may reveal cryptic pockets or other potentially
interesting conformational states.
Mixed-solvent MD simulations
can also be performed to enable the
identification of potential ligand binding sites. While structural fluctuations from neat solvent simulations
may reveal open (sub)pockets, mixed-solvent simulations provide two
additional insights: (1) occupancy and residence times of a cosolvent
may be interpreted as a measure of potential druggability of a given
site, and (2) cosolvent binding at a subpocket can possibly induce
protein conformational changes that expedite cryptic pocket formation
through an induced-fit mechanism. Commonly used cosolvents include
benzene, ethanol, acetone, acetonitrile, and other small organic molecules. − 
The drug-likeness of such probe molecules make them suitable
cosolvents,
however, their favored binding modes and binding site specificity
determined by their size and chemical features (i.e., shape, electrostatics)
can bias the outcome of cryptic pocket identification. To circumvent
this problem, we decided to use xenon as cosolvent due to its small
size, fast diffusion in water, and tendency to occupy hydrophobic
sites in a nonspecific manner. − While this may appear to be an unconventional choice for cryptic
pocket detection, xenon has been used in structural studies to locate
buried hydrophobic cavities. − And though xenon is a chemically
inert gas, evidence suggests that its binding to both cytosolic and
membrane proteins is responsible for its pharmacological action as
a general anesthetic, − , and neuroprotective agent. , Xenon also inhibits both NDMA and AMPA receptors, it appears to
act on several ion channels such as the neuronal nicotinic acetylcholine
(nACh) , and 5-hydroxytryptamine type 3 (5-HT3) receptors, and has also been
shown to activate potassium channels including the two-pore domain
potassium channel (TREK-1) and the plasmalemmal
ATP-sensitive channel (KATP). In fact, in a crystallographic study, xenon was shown to occupy
diverse ligand-binding sites including a solvent-accessible substrate
binding site. Although the exact mechanistic
details are somewhat mysterious for all receptors, it is well-known
that xenon acts on a diverse set of pharmacologically relevant targets
by binding to the proteins directly and shifting their conformational
distribution. Considering the clinical
significance, high diffusion rate in solution, and ability to alter
the conformational landscape of large proteins, we believe xenon might
make a reasonable generic probe of cryptic sites within any protein
complex, including KRAS.
In addition to the challenge of conformational
sampling, the detection
of cryptic pockets from the massive simulation data generated requires
yet another sophisticated computational approach. The exposon
analysis method developed by the Bowman lab performs this
task by finding groups of residues that undergo collective changes
in their solvent exposure leading to closing and opening of cryptic
pockets. Another popular method for cryptic
pocket detection using mixed-solvent MD simulations, termed probe map analysis, − , involves the assessment of cosolvent
occupancy and binding free energy on a protein surface. In this work,
we combine both exposon and probe map analysis methods and propose
a new algorithm for cosolvent binding detection inspired by the exposon
methodology called dynamic probe binding analysis. This new analysis method predicts cryptic pockets by observing
the collective binding behavior of cosolvent/probe molecules.
Here, we use exposon, dynamic probe binding, and probe map analysis
methods together to analyze over 400 μs of WE trajectory data
generated in neat water, two cosolvents, and in the presence of a
highly potent drug-like molecule to identify cryptic pockets in KRASG12D. The simulation and analysis protocols proposed here uncovered
two known ligand binding sites including the only pocket targeted
by the two mutant-selective FDA approved drugs. To gain deeper insight
into the nature of cryptic pocket formation in KRASG12D, we also performed direct WE-based simulations of MRTX1133 binding
to tease out the nature of how the Switch-II pocket is formed. These
simulations allow us to describe the mechanism of Switch-II pocket
formation (conformational sampling vs induced fit) in KRASG12D using a shape and electrostatics-based comparison of the active
site residues. Although pocket conformations sampled in our simulations
may not perfectly match the reported crystal structure of a KRASG12D-inhibitor complex, the results presented here suggest
that an induced-fit mechanism likely plays a dominant role in Switch-II
pocket formation.
The cryptic pocket detection pipelines discussed
in this work provide
a framework for the automated identification of potential ligand binding
sites using a combination of WE MD and physics-based analysis methods.
Further, our MRTX1133-binding simulations of KRASG12D shed
light on the challenges of predicting the mechanisms of cryptic pocket
formation, which may entail an induced-fit mechanism in the presence
of a specific compound to adopt precise ligand-pocket conformations.

## Methods

## System
Preparation and MD Propagation
All protein systems
were initially prepared by the OpenEye Spruce Toolkit, which takes as input a static X-ray structure
and symmetry expands the biological unit from the asymmetric unit,
adds hydrogens and other missing pieces of a protein, and generates
a set of favorable protomeric/tautomeric states based on an optimization
of the global hydrogen bond network. The MDOrion floes in the Orion
cloud computing platform were then used
to take the Spruce-prepared protein structure and ready it for downstream
simulation in the following automated fashion. First, the protein
was solvated in a cubic box of TIP3P water that extended 10 Å from the protein in every dimension. Then,
enough Na+ or Cl– ions were added to
neutralize the system, and an additional 150 mM NaCl was added to
match physiological salt concentrations. Inside the MDOrion floes,
PACKMOL was used to create initial positional
configurations of the multicomponent systems. For the mixed solvent
simulations (xenon, ethanol, benzene), an additional 150 mM of cosolvent/probe
molecules were added randomly to the solution phase and equilibrated
using an otherwise standard protocol.
Systems were parametrized
using the AMBER14SB force field for the
protein, while molecular ligands were treated with OpenFF 2.0.0. Parameters for xenon, which only consist of
Lennard-Jones force-field term (σ = 0.4063 nm, ε = 2.35
kJ/mol), were taken from available computational studies. , 
To perform ligand binding simulations, conformations of MRTX1133
were first generated using the Omega Toolkit. Then, the top conformer was taken, randomly oriented, and randomly
placed within a 10 Å radius of the center of mass of the protein.
The MDOrion floes were then used to solvate the system in a similar
manner as the other systems.
To equilibrate the systems, the
following protocol was followed.
First, the system energy was minimized using the L-BFGS algorithm
with a convergence criterion of 2.4 kcal/mol. The position of KRAS,
GDP, and any cosolvent/probe molecules were harmonically restrained
to their initial positions with a 2.0 kcal/(mol Å2) force constant in the NVT ensemble to warm up the system for 10
ps. The restraints were gradually released over the course of 50 ps
in the NPT ensemble. Following this equilibration, the systems were
further simulated for 5 ns in the NPT ensemble to generate the required
basis states for downstream WE simulations. All NPT MD simulations
were propagated using the OpenMM 7.7 engine with constant pressure and temperature using a stochastic (Langevin)
integrator with the friction coefficient set to 1.0 ps–1. The simulations were weakly coupled to a heat bath at 310 K, while
constant pressure was maintained at 1 atm by weakly coupling to a
Monte Carlo barostat every 0.5 ps. Short-ranged nonbonded interactions
were cut off at a 10 Å radius, and the smooth Particle Mesh Ewald
method was used for treating long ranged
electrostatics. A 2 fs time step was enabled by using the Constant
Constraint Matrix Approximation (CCMA) and SETTLE algorithms to constrain
bond lengths between heavy atoms and hydrogens.
Trajectory analysis
was handled by a combination of OpenEye’s
OEChem and Spruce, and MDTraj. DeepTime was used for building of Markov states models.

## The WE Path Sampling Strategy
MD simulation time scales
are limited by the system size, force field representation, integration
algorithm, MD software implementation, and hardware used for the simulations.
Time scales for MD simulations run on conventional hardware using
highly optimized software reach into the microsecond time scale for
all-atom force fields, which is orders of magnitude faster than biological
rare events like the Switch-II pocket opening in KRAS. , The WE method is an unbiased rare event sampling technique that
can overcome large energetic barriers and sample extremely long molecular
time scales in a short amount of physical time. It acts as a “statistical
ratchet” on a user-defined “progress coordinate”
that tracks advancement along any physical observable. 
To enhance the sampling of KRAS conformational
states, a set of replicated MD simulations (or “walkers”)
are run for a short time in parallel, where each individual walker
is associated with a probability (or “weight”) that
is tracked. After each round of MD propagation, a resampling procedure
is carried out in which trajectories in underoccupied regions of progress
coordinate space (“bins”) are up-sampled by splitting, while those in overoccupied bins are down-sampled
by merging. Splitting involves replicating a trajectory
and distributing its weight evenly among the replicas, while merging
involves eliminating a trajectory and adding its weight to a surviving
trajectory. After many iterations of both the dynamics propagation
and resampling through splitting and merging, a large ensemble of
weighted trajectories is generated. In this study, dynamics were propagated
for 100 ps for every walker in each iteration.
WE resampling
was performed for 500 iterations for each simulation
setup outlined in . Since the WE algorithm tracks both the walkers and weights transitioning
between bins as the system evolves over time, one may accurately estimate
kinetics and weighted populations (thermodynamics) along any conceivable
reaction variable. A major advantage of WE MD is that it can be run
on conventional hardware. With a reasonable choice of progress coordinate,
walker allocation, and binning procedure, can significantly reduce
simulation cost of sampling rare events relative to brute force MD.
The WE strategy has already been proven as powerful technique for
understanding mechanistic aspects in other areas of drug discovery
research including protein–ligand unbinding, protein folding and unfolding, protein–protein binding, passive permeability of drug-like molecules, SARS-CoV-2 spike protein activation, and PROTAC ternary complex prediction. Here, we apply the WE path sampling to understand
several aspects of cryptic pocket opening in KRASG12D.
 

## Normal Mode Analysis of KRAS
In
this work, we use an anisotropic network model (ANM) , to calculate the normal modes for the KRAS protein. First, a static
reference protein is prepared using the procedure described above.
We chose the KRASWT structure from PDB ID: 4OBE( ) as the reference. After preparation, the ANM is constructed
from all Cα atoms (representing the positions of the residues)
using ProDy, from which a set of normal
modes can be derived from the Hessian matrix (3N ×
3N, given N residues) of a simple
harmonic approximation to the inter-Cα potential. The eigenvalues
(λ) of the Hessian matrix are the square of the vibrational
frequencies of the normal modes. Typically, there are six zero eigenvalues
corresponding to modes for rigid body translation and rotation. For
the remaining 3N – 6 intramolecular modes,
the relationship between the mode frequency (ω), amplitude (A), and associated energy (E) is expressed
as
 Therefore, given a unit of input energy,
the displacement along a slow mode tends to have a greater amplitude
than a faster mode. Or equivalently, given the same amplitude, the
displacement along a slow mode requires less energy than that of a
fast mode. Because of this, the inverse eigenvalue (λ–1), which is referred to as the mode variance, is
often used to represent the energy cost of deformations along the
given mode. Fractional variance (ρ) measures
the fraction of the total variance explained by a given mode, which
is defined as (for the i-th mode):
 Note that the denominator is the trace
of the (pseudo)inverse Hessian,
which is effectively the summation of all mode variances. We sort
the modes by their corresponding eigenvalue and preserve the top 20
(slowest modes) for inspection. Each eigenvector of the Hessian is
the mode shape that takes the form of (Δx1,Δy1,Δz1,···,ΔxN,ΔyN,ΔzN), where
Δxi,Δyi,Δzi are the displacement of the i-th Cα atoms in the three dimensions along the given
mode. Since the eigenvectors are normalized, the magnitude of the
displacement of Cα atoms is relative.
Although the low
frequency modes describe large-amplitude motion,
such motion could still be unproductive for searching pockets across
an entire protein landscape. For instance, the slowest modes of a
protein could be confined to loop motion and would not necessarily be the most efficient motions for a global
search of cryptic pockets across an entire protein surface. Therefore,
a metric is needed that can encode the amount of the protein involved
in each mode, and here we use the mode collectivity( ) as that metric. Mode collectivity is
defined as
 Where ui,n is the
norm of the displacement vector, (Δxn,Δyn,Δzn), of
the n-th Cα atom from the i-th eigenvector. κ is bounded between N–1 and 1, where in the most extreme cases, κ = N–1 when only a single atom is moving,
and k = 1 when all atoms are moving with the exact
same amplitude along the given mode. Intuitively, the collectivity
indicates the effective portion of the atoms participating in the
movement along a given mode. From the top 20 slowest modes, we typically
chose the most collective mode(s) for guiding protein sampling (see
below).

## Progress Coordinate Definitions Used in WE Simulations of KRAS

## Normal
Mode Analysis Progress Coordinate
To realistically
enhance the sampling of protein motion within a WE simulation, a progress
coordinate can be constructed to measure evolution along a set of
one or more normal mode vectors of a protein. Thus, for each WE iteration,
dynamics are propagated using MD, then the deformation vector, δ,
of the current conformation is calculated with respect to the reference
structure. Finally, a projection of the deformation vector (δ)
is made onto the reference modes (V), which is effectively
a dot product of the two:
 where V is a matrix of eigenvectors
as columns. The normal mode progress coordinates, v, are the projection of the current simulation state onto the selected
normal modes.

## Ligand RMSD Progress Coordinate
An RMSD-based progress
coordinate was defined to track the relative position and orientation
of MRTX1133 binding to KRASG12D, which uses the X-ray crystal structure
with PDB ID: 7RPZ( ) as a reference. To perform the RMSD
calculation, first the reference and simulation proteins were overlaid
by superposing the Cα atoms using Spruce. The same translation vector and rotation matrix were applied
to MRTX1133 from the simulation to bring it into the same frame of
reference as the protein. Finally, an in-place RMSD was measured between
the heavy atoms in the reference and simulation MRTX1133 structures
using OEChem. This in-place RMSD of MRTX1133
after protein alignment is what is referred to as Ligand RMSD in this
work.

## Log of Ligand RMSD Progress Coordinate
This coordinate
is a simple log-transformation of the previously discussed Ligand
RMSD progress coordinate, which was used to improve sampling of bound
MRTX1133 poses at low-Ligand RMSD values.

## Ligand Distance Progress
Coordinate
Another progress
coordinate which tracks the relative distance between the KRAS-bound
and unbound MRTX1133 conformers was calculated in a similar manner
as the Ligand RMSD progress coordinate described above. First, the
reference protein (PDB ID: 7RPZ) was used for alignment to the simulation protein
using Spruce, and the same transformation
was applied to the simulation copy of MRTX1133. After alignment, the
in-place center of mass (COM) position was calculated for both the
reference and simulation structures using OEChem. The COM distance between the reference and simulation MRTX1133
structures is what we refer to in this work as the Ligand
Distance progress coordinate.

## SiteHopper Similarity Progress
Coordinate
A SiteHopper-based
progress coordinate has been defined to monitor the combination of
the shape and color (pseudoelectrostatic) similarity of the Switch-II
pocket from a simulation frame relative to the pocket formed in the
X-ray structure of MRTX1133-bound KRASG12D. To calculate
the similarity, first a reference SiteHopper patch is defined from the KRASG12D binding site of
MRTX1133 within the Switch-II pocket (PDB ID: 7RPZ). Then, a separate
SiteHopper patch was defined for each frame in the WE simulations
using the residues lining the MRTX1133 binding pocket. Finally, a
SiteHopper overlay was performed for each frame in the simulations
using the OpenEye Spruce Toolkit to maximize
the shape and color features of two patches of the simulation frame
and reference protein structure. The resulting similarity of the active
site of 7RPZ is referred to as SiteHopper similarity in this work and represents the 3D shape and pseudoelectrostatic
similarity of the simulation Switch-II pocket relative to the reference.

## WE Simulations of KRAS
All WE simulations were carried
out under equilibrium conditions using the Python API of the WESTPA
2.0 toolkit, which has been built into
a series of publicly available workflows in the Small Molecule Discovery
Suite of the Orion platform. Single-
or multidimensional progress coordinates were sampled using the minimal
adaptive binning scheme (MAB) in the
bulk region of coordinate space, with single fixed bins near the edges
to prevent wasteful sampling outside the areas of interest. Each simulation
progressed for 500 iterations of WE resampling, corresponding to a
maximum continuous (nonequilibrium) trajectory of 50 ns for a given
replica, which required on average ∼5 days to complete using
∼100 GPUs in Orion. The aggregate amount of trajectory data
generated from all KRAS simulations totaled 414 μs, which varied
individually for a given simulation depending on the number and physical
nature of the progress coordinates that were employed. A detailed
description of all WE simulations, including the solvent conditions,
the progress coordinates that were used, as well as the aggregate
simulation time is listed in .

## Markov State Model Construction from KRAS
Trajectory Data
For the mutual information analysis needed
for both the exposon and dynamic probe binding
analysis methods, we constructed a Markov State Model (MSM)
from the WE trajectories
for each protein simulation to generate a network representation of
its free energy landscape. First, clustering was performed on the
conformations sampled by the simulation based on the similarity in
the per-residue solvent accessible surface area (SASA) or residue-co-solvent distance vectors. The per-residue SASA was computed
using the Gaussian OEArea method available in the ZAP toolkit. , The protein residue-co-solvent distances were computed
using MDTraj. After clustering the conformations, transitional probabilities
scaled by the statistical weight (i.e., WE simulation weight) of each
conformation was computed between each pair of clusters. A MSM was
built from the transition probability matrix using Maximum likelihood
estimator implemented in Deeptime. The
stationary distribution of cluster populations was calculated as the
eigenvector of the transition probability matrix with an eigenvalue
of one. The MSM-derived cluster populations were used while computing
weighted mutual information describing correlated changes in solvent
exposure or cosolvent binding for every pair of residues.

## Exposon Analysis
To find pockets in KRAS, we used the
exposon analysis pipeline developed by the Bowman lab. This analysis begins with measuring the mutual
information (MI(X,Y)) of solvent
exposure for every pair of residues using the following equation:
 Here, X and Y correspond
to a pair of residues, and x and y are their solvent exposure states, i.e.,
buried or exposed, where the value of x and y is 0 for buried and 1 for solvent exposed. p(x) and p(y) are
the probabilities of residues X and Y being in either a buried or exposed state. These probabilities are
taken from the MSM-derived population of each Markov state. A matrix
of residue–residue mutual information is built by computing
pairwise mutual information on solvent exposure. From this matrix,
groups of residues with strong correlation in solvent exposure changes
(high mutual information) among themselves, as well as weaker correlations
with the remaining residues, are identified using an affinity propagation
clustering algorithm. Each group of residues
with highly cooperative changes in solvent exposure is termed an exposon. 

## Dynamic Probe
Binding Analysis
To find pockets in KRAS
based on a cooperative change in cosolvent binding behavior, which
we hypothesize should mimic characteristics of induced-fit pocket
opening, we used the mutual information on xenon binding to every
residue in a protein. This idea was inspired by the exposon analysis
method discussed above and is termed dynamic probe binding. In this method, instead of measuring solvent exposure state of
a given residue, the probability of xenon (cosolvent) binding a given
residue was used to compute mutual information. A residue is either
bound or unbound to xenon, and this classification is used to compute
the mutation information on binding, MI(X,Y), for every pair of residues X and Y. Probabilities p(x) and p(y) of residues X and Y being in bound/unbound states were computed from the MSM-derived
population of each cluster as described above for exposon analysis.
Using an affinity propagation clustering algorithm, residues that show cooperative changes in xenon binding
behavior were grouped together to find potential ligand binding pockets.

## Probe Map Analysis
To identify potentially high affinity
cryptic pockets and provide an estimate of the free energy, probe map analysis was performed. In this analysis method,
the population of xenon atoms is calculated on a protein surface relative
to those in bulk water, which is a surrogate for a pocket free energy.
A 3D grid was generated over entire protein–solvent box for
each WE simulation frame. Occupancies of xenon atoms within 1 Å3 grid cells were calculated from the clusters that were obtained
by clustering trajectory data based on similarity of residue-co-solvent distances. The grid occupancies were weighted
by an MSM-derived population of each cluster, and smoothing was applied
by averaging each grid-cell occupancy with the occupancy of all its
face-, vertex-, and edge-centered neighboring cells (26 neighbors
in total). The smoothed grid occupancies (Ni) were converted into free energies using the following
relation:
 Here, N0 is the
expected grid occupancy of xenon in the bulk solvent, which
is set to a uniform distribution of 150 mM to mimic the simulation
setup. To identify high-affinity binding sites, grid cells with free
energies greater than −2.5 kcal/mol were filtered out. The
remaining high-affinity grid cells were clustered using the DBSCAN
clustering method as implemented in the
scikit-learn python package. The maximum
distance between two grid-cells to be considered neighbors for the
DBSCAN clustering was set to 3 Å.

## Results and Discussion

## Exploration
of Cryptic Pocket Opening Using WE MD Driven by
Normal Modes as Progress Coordinates
To explore structural
dynamics of KRASG12D that could reveal pocket formation,
we performed WE MD simulations using progress coordinates that encode
information about the conformational landscape of the protein. Since
an unbiased, comprehensive search of cryptic pockets requires an exploration
of global dynamics in the protein of interest, we first performed
NMA to determine orthogonal modes that describe directions along which
the largest structural fluctuations would occur at equilibrium. According
to the equipartition theorem, movements along modes with the lowest
frequency (slowest modes) possess the largest amplitude on average.
Therefore, such modes tend to describe large-scale fluctuations of
the protein. In addition, the energy
landscape is the least steep along these slowest modes, so using them
as progress coordinates to guide simulations would allow the system
to move out of the local energy minimum more easily to explore a larger,
yet still equilibrium-like conformational space, and therefore help
enhance the sampling along relevant protein motions.
Normal
modes can be readily estimated by elastic network models (ENMs) based
on a 3D protein structure and contain a coarse representation of the
intrinsic molecular motion. , ENMs use a network
of harmonic oscillators to represent the protein’s complex
intramolecular interactions. The ENM representation can be scaled
to any coarseness, and here we adopt a classical setup where each
node (oscillator) in the network represents a protein residue, and
each edge (spring) represents the interaction between two residues.
Such an approximation significantly reduces the number of parameters
that describe modes of protein motion typically inaccessible from
more detailed models that require atomistic force fields, and yet
ENM models still yield results in reasonable agreement with various
experimental data. However, there is
one caveat with simply using the slowest ENM modes as the progress
coordinate to guide the sampling. While the slowest ENM modes, i.e.,
those with high fractional variance ( D), often exhibit collective protein behavior,
they could be dominated by the motions of free loops, protein termini,
or even disordered regions, which is a known artifact of the simple
harmonic approximation adopted by the network model. So, to identify
slow yet meaningful modes that describe collective protein motion,
we also calculate a measure called collectivity for each mode to provide a quantitative assessment of how
much of the protein structure is significantly influenced by a particular
mode ( E). In
this work, we employed a commonly used ENM called ANM (see section) to calculate the normal modes for
the KRAS structure.
 To guide the protein motion in
a collective and
meaningful way,
we used a projection of either the top one or two most collective
of the slowest normal modes as a progress coordinate in our WE simulations
(see and ; see Figure S3 for the progress of the simulations
along each progress coordinate). We find that this kind of enhanced
protein simulation procedure is a convenient way to lower the exponentially
large computational cost of simulating the motion directly using brute
force MD without adding any bias to the Hamiltonian. For this study,
we selected modes 14 and 15 for a global search of cryptic pockets
in KRAS. While these modes only describe a very small portion (<2%)
of the overall dynamics of the protein ( D), they are effective in guiding rare event
sampling for a cryptic pocket search (see results below). Nevertheless,
one could imagine picking slower modes with larger variances at the
cost of mode collectivity.
The selection of normal modes for
guiding WE simulations could
potentially impact the efficiency of sampling certain protein conformations,
which in turn could influence the ability of given cryptic pocket
to open during simulations. As an example, if large conformational
changes localized to a specific region of a protein are essential
for cryptic pocket formation, then picking the most collective mode
with relatively low variance in the region of interest could limit
the degree to which cryptic pocket formation would be observed in
WE simulations. In such cases, a normal mode with a high variance
for the residues of interest (as indicated by large mode vector amplitudes
on a given region; see ) might be more effective at sampling dynamics associated
with a specific cryptic pocket involving those residues. Therefore,
to assess the effect of normal mode selection, we also performed binding
simulations of MRTX1133 using either a (Log-) Ligand RMSD or Ligand
distance coordinate, along with normal modes that more directly sample
the slow dynamics of Switch-I and Switch-II regions that surround
known cryptic pockets in KRAS (see Figure S3 for the progress of simulations along each of these progress coordinates).
While mode 12 is neither the most collective nor shows the highest
overall structural variance, it has the largest mode vector amplitudes
on Switch-I/II residues that could be important for cryptic pocket
formation in that region. The collectivity of slow modes may also
be improved all together by ignoring less ordered regions of the protein. However, the automatic determination of which
subdomain of the protein structure should be highlighted or masked-off
for ENM construction to sample local pocket (de)formation is beyond
the scope of this study.
Another limitation of normal modes
derived from ENMs is that they
are only accurate in the vicinity of energy minima because of the
underlying harmonic assumption. As a result, other hybrid MD simulation
methods that use normal modes as biasing forces require constant relaxation
of the conformations and recalculation of the normal modes during
simulation (see ref. ( ) for a review of such methods). In contrast, no external forces are
applied to the protein molecules in our WE simulations, and the normal
modes only serve as coordinates to measure how much the protein conformations
are deformed from a reference point along the directions specified
by the mode vectors. Nonetheless, as a future direction, we could
improve the efficiency of the normal modes we use as progress coordinate
for conformations in distant regions of the energy landscape in a
few ways. For instance, we could either: 1) trace and update the normal
modes at nonstationary positions using a technique called normal mode
following, or 2) run a second simulation
with normal modes resolved using essential dynamics analysis techniques,
such as principal component analysis (PCA) or time-lagged independent
component analysis (tICA), based on conformations generated by the
first ENM mode simulation.
To facilitate the identification
of potential cryptic pockets that
require an induced-fit mechanism to open, we also performed WE simulations
with the normal mode coordinates discussed above in the presence of
xenon at a low concentration (150 mM) as a probe ligand.

## Automated Search
of Potential Binding Sites from Weighted Ensemble
Trajectories
To detect potential sites where a pocket could
open due to conformational fluctuations, we employed three different
approaches: (1) exposon analysis, (2) dynamic probe-binding analysis,
and (3) probe map analysis, where the latter two analysis methods
require simulations with a (xenon) cosolvent.
The exposon analysis
method identifies a potential cryptic pocket as a group of residues
that undergo cooperative changes in their solvent exposure due to
fluctuations in the protein conformation. Through these collective changes in their solvent exposure, the
exposon residues are anticipated to uncover a potential binding site.
Here, we applied the exposon method to analyze WE simulations of a
KRASG12D:GDP complex to see which, if any, cryptic pockets
would be predicted (see for details).
Exposon analysis of KRASG12D revealed several sites that
could be druggable. One of the sites identified by the exposon methodology
is lined with residues that form the Switch-II cryptic pocket where
MRTX1133 and other inhibitors of KRAS bind (see A). Since an exposon predicts cryptic pocket
opening entirely based on the change in solvent exposure, pocket-forming
residues that do not undergo correlated changes are not detected.
For this reason, a few pocket lining residues that do not experience
collective solvent exposure changes, since they are either continuously
buried or solvent exposed, are not included in the exposon that predicts
the (cryptic) Switch-II site.
 In general, exposon analysis is well-suited for
finding potentially
druggable cryptic pockets that exist through conformational selection
of a subset of metastable conformations of an apo protein. However,
if an induced-fit mechanism plays a central role in pocket formation,
this approach would likely be unsuccessful, especially if simulations
are performed in the absence of drug-like fragments or probe molecules.
Another limitation of exposon analysis is that it does not provide
insight into the possible binding affinity of the detected sites since
changes in solvent exposure have no strong correlation with the potential
affinity of a pocket. In this work, which is inspired by the exposon
methodology, we suggest an alternative approach to overcome such limitations
by simulating a biomolecule in the presence of a cosolvent. Our method
for finding cryptic sites, termed dynamic probe-binding, defines a potential binding pocket as a group of residues that
show cooperative changes in cosolvent binding behavior (see section for the theoretical background).
In this study, we performed mixed solvent simulations with 150 mM
xenon as a probe/cosolvent to identify cryptic pockets. Dynamic probe-binding
analysis detects multiple potential cryptic pockets that open from
either a conformationally selected or an induced-fit mechanism. Indeed,
the exposon and dynamic probe-binding analysis methods predict complementary
residues present near the known MRTX-1133 binding site within the
Switch-II pocket ( C). Intriguingly, we find that Tyr71 appears to adopt either
an inward- or outward-facing conformation depending on the closed
or open state of the pocket, respectively, from both the exposon and
dynamic probe binding methods ( B).
The exposon and dynamic probe-binding analysis
methods are conceptually
similar since they both aim to identify cryptic pockets by measuring
cooperative changes in the protein environment, either through their
solvent exposure or cosolvent binding behavior. Thus, these methods
can be useful for finding pockets that transiently open during MD
simulations. However, a pocket that quickly opens during a simulation
and remains open by stably binding a probe molecule could go undetected.
To identify pocket forming residues of this kind, which possibly include
high affinity binding sites, we used the probe map analysis method to classify cryptic pockets by their computed probe-binding
free energy on a 3D grid. Here, the 3D grid is used to find patches
of protein surfaces that stably bind probe molecules by comparing
the grid occupancy to that of the bulk solvent. This method has been
employed with an organic cosolvent used as a probe to find potential
drug-binding pockets in several proteins. , , , Here, we analyzed
several water-xenon mixed solvent simulations performed with the WE
path sampling strategy to find high occupancy xenon-binding sites.
To compute xenon occupancy on the protein surface, we first clustered
protein conformations based on the similarities in their residue-xenon
distance vectors and built a MSM from these clusters to derive equilibrium
populations of each cluster. Next, we calculated a xenon-binding free
energy from MSM-weighted occupancy of xenon atoms within 1 Å3 cell of a grid placed over the simulation box. To find high
occupancy/affinity xenon-binding sites, all grid points with binding
free energy greater than −2.5 kcal/mol were filtered out. This
resulted in 8 high affinity xenon-binding clusters that could include
potential druggable sites. Among these, 4 clusters overlapped with
known KRAS-inhibitor binding pockets. Xenon-binding cluster-1 overlaps
with C7-naphthyl group of MRTX1133 and Adagrasib, both of which occupy
a deep hydrophobic subpocket in the Switch-II binding site ( B). Notably, the
functional group at the C7 position of lead compound of MRTX1133 was
targeted to improve potency during the optimization campaign. Xenon-binding cluster-2 in the vicinity of cluster-1
was found to overlap with the Switch-I/II pocket which has been identified
to bind small hydrophobic molecules in a series of crystal structures. , In fact, one of the analogs of MRTX1133 (Compound 15) was also found
to occupy this pocket in a crystal structure (PDB ID: 7RT1) ( B). Additionally, in the cocrystal
structure of MRTX1133 analog Compound 15 (PDB ID: 7RT1, B), two copies of the inhibitor
are bound with the first in the expected Switch-II site, and the second
in the secondary Switch-I/II site. This site in KRAS is also a part
of the binding interface with SOS1 protein which activates KRAS through
nucleotide exchange. Thus, one might
wonder if it is possible probe map analysis could also predict likely
protein–protein interaction interfaces. Interestingly, both
xenon-binding cluster-1 and −2 are also surrounded by the exposon
residues discussed above suggesting that the changes in the solvent
exposure of those residues could be associated with the formation
of two adjacent pockets ( C). Another set of xenon-binding clusters in the vicinity
of cluster-1 were found to overlap with a peptide inhibitor-binding
site observed in a crystal structure of KRASG12D-peptide
inhibitor complex (PDB ID: 5XCO). Overall, with the use
of xenon as a probe, we were able to locate three known inhibitor
binding sites in KRAS mutants. Given that each of these sites have
distinct residue composition and bind a diverse set of molecules,
xenon appears to be a reasonable general probe for finding cryptic
(allosteric) sites in a short period of simulation time. While other
xenon-binding clusters do not coincide with any known inhibitor biding
sites, it is likely that those sites could represent potential druggable
pockets that remain to be explored.
 

## Role of Induced-Fit vs Conformational Selection
Mechanism in
the Formation of Cryptic Pockets in KRASG12D
Following
the detection of the Switch-II site in KRAS using both the exposon
and probe binding analysis methods, we sought to gain a deeper insight
into the formation of the pocket that remained hidden for so many
decades. It should be noted that the ability to sample Switch-II pocket
conformations depends entirely on the mechanism of its formation.
If the Switch-II pocket forms via a conformational selection mechanism,
only a small subset of protein conformations that could accommodate
a ligand due to the exact shape and electrostatic complementarity
will be present in the full protein ensemble. , In this case, one would expect the sampling of the open conformation
to be the rate limiting step. On the contrary, if the Switch-II pocket
forms through an induced-fit mechanism, then the productivity of a
protein–ligand collision is not dependent on the protein being
in an open protein conformation, which is not sampled in the absence
of the ligand. , Because the right ligand will
always induce binding to any protein in solution, the induced conformational
change of the protein would instead limit the kon. Thus, one could potentially resolve the mechanistic details
through a carefully designed set of experiments investigating the
kinetics of protein–ligand binding. While a population shift
of holo-like structure in the presence of the probe and the ligand
molecules can suggest the mechanism of ligand binding, kinetic studies
monitoring the flux of ligand binding and conformational changes are
required to conclude the contribution of induced-fit mechanism and
conformational selection in different conditions. − In this work, we analyzed the population shift of holo-like conformations
in the presence and absence of the probe or the ligand molecules.
To obtain a computational perspective on the formation mechanism
of the Switch-II pocket, i.e., conformational selection vs induced-fit,
we performed SiteHopper analysis of all WE simulations of the WT and
G12D isoforms of KRAS, both in neat water and in the presence of several
cosolvents. This analysis compares the shape and electrostatics of
the Switch-II pocket conformations formed in simulation against a
previously solved crystal structure of KRASG12D bound to
a high affinity small molecule inhibitor (MRTX1133). If Switch-II
pocket opening is due to conformational selection of the protein ensemble,
one would expect a high SiteHopper similarity in neat water with little
dependence on the chemistry of any probe molecules. However, if the
induced-fit mechanism dominates Switch-II pocket opening, one would
expect a low similarity in neat water, with a progressively increasing
similarity as the probe molecule tends toward MRTX1133.
WE simulations
were performed on the WT and G12D isoforms of KRAS
in the presence of xenon, ethanol, benzene, and MRTX1133 as probe
molecules. The SiteHopper similarity analysis shows that KRAS in the
presence of cosolvents adopts Switch-II pocket conformations that
are more like the MRTX-1133-bound structure than simulations performed
without any molecular probe (see A). Notably, the SiteHopper similarity score
distribution in xenon-water mixed solvent simulations shows a higher
pocket similarity, and a higher probability (lower “free energy”)
of similarity, compared to the simulations performed in the presence
of either ethanol or benzene as probe molecules. However, MRTX1133-binding
simulations had the highest probability (lowest “free energy”)
of obtaining a high SiteHopper similarity score, and reached the highest
similarity value overall, which means the Switch-II pocket more closely
resembles the crystal structure when MRTX1133 is present compared
to other chemical probes used in this study. Taken as a whole, the
SiteHopper similarity analysis suggests the induced-fit mechanism
strongly contributes to Switch-II pocket formation, and it also supports
the idea of using xenon as a probe for finding potential allosteric
sites as well as uncovering druggable pockets that require an induced-fit
mechanism to open.
 Additionally, the MRTX1133-binding simulations
performed using
two different sets of normal modes to guide the simulations suggest
that sampling of druggable conformations is not dramatically affected
by the choice of normal mode as the WE progress coordinate. As discussed
in the previous section, sampling along ANM mode 12 would capture
slow dynamics of the Switch-II region that lines the binding pocket
( ). One might
anticipate an enhancement of the pocket formation with the use of
ANM mode 12 compared to ANM mode 14 as a progress coordinate in the
MRTX1133-binding simulation. Mode 12 captures Switch-II pocket motion
more directly whereas mode 14 is more global/collective. However,
our SiteHopper analysis of those simulations does not show any significant
difference in the distribution of druggable conformations with the
choice of normal modes as progress coordinates. This implies that
normal modes that embody global dynamics of a protein could be sufficient
for sampling the local dynamics associated with cryptic pocket formation.
To further understand the extent of backbone and side chain sampling
associated with pocket formation (Figure S1), we also performed RMSD analysis of the pocket forming residues
using the MRTX1133-bound structure as the reference. The comparison
of the RMSD distributions of WE simulations show that binding-site
residues adopt backbone conformations that resemble the inhibitor-bound
crystal structure (i.e., low RMSD) in all simulations including those
in neat water (Figure S1a). On the contrary,
all-atom RMSD of the binding-site residues computed with respect to
the inhibitor-bound crystal structure indicate that sampling of druggable
side-chain orientations of the binding-site residues only improves
in the presence of probe molecules, where maximum improvement of side
chain orientations is seen when MRTX1133 was present in the simulation
setup (Figure S1b). Interestingly, we do
not notice a strong correlation between the binding site similarity
of the MRTX1133-bound structures and the distance between the MRTX1133
and the binding site. If the opening of Switch-II pocket binding only
involves an induced-fit mechanism, one would expect the binding site
residues to adopt more druggable conformations when MRTX1133 approaches
the binding residues. However, our correlated analysis of binding
site residue RMSD and the COM distance of MRTX1133 to its binding
pocket location does not show such correlations (Figure S2). In the ligand-bound conformations sampled in our
MRTX1133-binding simulations with various progress coordinates, we
find that that these conformations deviate by more than 3.7 Å
compared to the crystal structure ( B–D). It is not clear if our MRTX1133-binding
simulations fail to fully capture the complete binding process, or
if the conformational selection mechanism plays a larger role in active
site reorientation and the exact conformations simply were not sampled.
Interestingly, the normal mode chosen to directly enhance sampling
in the Switch-I/II region (ANM 12) was less effective at finding the
correct MRTX1133 binding pose and active site backbone conformation
compared to the more collective mode (ANM 14) ( B,C). This result suggests that global protein
motion may be at least partially involved in Switch-II pocket formation,
and perhaps always in other cryptic pocket formations as well, which
emphasizes the potential utility of using the most collective normal
mode as a of general-purpose progress coordinate for protein sampling.
Additionally, using a log-transformation of the Ligand RMSD was also
useful at finding a reasonably close MRTX1133 binding pose (<4
Å) (see E). Considering the issues finding the correct protein backbone and
ligand pose, longer simulations may be required to obtain quantitative
pathway (kinetic) and population (thermodynamic) information on binding
MRTX1133 to Switch-II.

## Conclusions
With over 400 μs
of atomistic WE
simulations of KRAS, we
were able to show that the projection along normal modes can be a
practical progress coordinate for quickly exploring protein conformational
landscapes in the absence of knowing the precise motion connecting
the ensemble of states. We also present a method for detecting induced-fit
cryptic pocket opening by using xenon as a generic chemical probe.
In addition, we demonstrate the use of three physics-based methods
for the automated detection of potential cryptic pockets from the
enormous conformational ensemble generated by normal mode-driven WE
simulations. All three analysis methods retrospectively predict cryptic
pockets in KRAS that have been reported by experimental studies. One
of the predicted cryptic sites, the Switch-II pocket, binds the only
two FDA approved drugs for KRAS, Adagrasib and Sotorasib. The sampling
approach presented in this study for cryptic pocket searching could
be extended to investigate other biologically and pharmacologically
relevant rare events. With fine-tuning, the analysis methods presented
here could also be used to detect cryptic sites in other complexes,
including at protein–protein or protein-nucleic acid interfaces
that have become targets for modern therapeutics like degraders and
molecular glues. In this way, normal modes might prove to be a useful
progress coordinates for path sampling of generic biomolecular dynamics,
especially when the desired (druggable) conformation of the target
is unknown. Overall, this work introduces a new framework that uses
xenon as probes for cryptic pocket search and ENM-derived normal modes
as effective progress coordinates when the location and the nature
of dynamics associated with a cryptic pocket formation which is almost
always the case. Our future work will be directed toward validating
this framework for prediction of cryptic pockets in diverse proteins
including those formed at protein–protein interfaces.

## Acknowledgments
The authors would like to thank Eric Manas (Treeline
Biosciences) for recommending probe map analysis, Ivet Bahar (Stonybrook
University) for the inspiration to combine NMA with WE simulations,
Greg Bowman for inspiration to use exposon analysis for cryptic pocket
detection, Lillian Chong (University of Pittsburgh) for her helpful
feedback on WE simulations, John Russo (Oregon Health and Science
University) for his contribution to Markov State Modeling of WE simulations.
We also thank Qing Cao, Suhani Nagpal, Agnes Huang, David Stevens,
and Allison Maresh from OpenEye, Cadence Molecular Sciences for testing
the NMA-based WE simulation and cryptic pocket detection software.

## Glossary

## Abbreviations
ANMAnisotropic
network model
ENMElastic network model
KRASKristen Rat Sarcoma Virus oncogene
protein
RASRat
Sarcoma Virus
MSMMarkov state model
WEWeighted Ensemble

## Data Availability Statement
Supplementary
data has been provided to reproduce this study that include the initial
structures of the GDP-bound WT and mutant KRAS proteins (in PDB format)
and all structures of chemical probes (as SMILES strings). Weighted
Ensemble simulations were performed using the WESTPA toolkit (https://github.com/westpa/westpa.) with the OpenMM MD engine (https://openmm.org/) as the dynamics propagator; both toolkits are openly available.
Small molecule conformer generation for chemical probes was performed
with the commercially available OpenEye Omega Toolkit. Initial protein
structure preparation including the G12D mutation was performed with
the commercially available OpenEye Spruce Toolkit, while initial MD
system construction was made with the freely available PACKMOL (https://m3g.github.io/packmol). Protein force-field parameters were taken from the openly available
Amber14SB force field (https://ambermd.org). Force-field parameters for small organic molecules were taken
from the openly available OpenFF-2.0.0 (Sage) (https://github.com/openforcefield/openff-forcefields/releases/tag/2.0.0). Force-field parameters for xenon were taken from a study published
by Warr et al. Analysis of molecular
dynamics simulation trajectories were performed using the commercially
available OpenEye OEChem and Zap Toolkits. Academic licenses are also
freely available for all OpenEye Toolkits including Spruce, Omega,
OEChem and Zap Toolkits used in this study. (https://www.eyesopen.com/academic-licensing, https://www.eyesopen.com/customer-software-download). All simulation
and analysis data from this study are stored on Orion and will be
shared upon request due to the enormous file sizes of the aggregate
trajectories. OpenEye Cryptic Pocket Detection Floes, which automates
both the simulation and analysis presented in this study, are available
on the academic stack of Orion that is also available upon request.

## Supporting Information Available
The Supporting Information
is
available free of charge at https://pubs.acs.org/doi/10.1021/acs.jcim.4c01435.
List of PDB structures
of KRAS in complex with inhibitors
targeting the cryptic pockets. Free energy surfaces for ligand binding
simulations. Trajectory evolution of weighted ensemble molecular dynamics
simulations (PDF)

## Author Contributions
# N.V. and S.Z. are cofirst authors.

The authors
declare the following competing financial interest(s): N.V., S.Z.,
J.P.T, L.A.P, A.D., J.X., A.N., A.G.S., and D.N.L. are current or
former employees of OpenEye, Cadence Molecular Sciences. A.M., Y.A.A,
and A.K. are former employees of Black Diamond Therapeutics. J.D.L.
is a former employee of Mirati Therapeutics, Inc.

## Supplementary Material
ci4c01435_si_001.pdf

## References
 

## Associated Data

## Supplementary Materials
ci4c01435_si_001.pdf

## Data Availability Statement
Supplementary
data has been provided to reproduce this study that include the initial
structures of the GDP-bound WT and mutant KRAS proteins (in PDB format)
and all structures of chemical probes (as SMILES strings). Weighted
Ensemble simulations were performed using the WESTPA toolkit (https://github.com/westpa/westpa.) with the OpenMM MD engine (https://openmm.org/) as the dynamics propagator; both toolkits are openly available.
Small molecule conformer generation for chemical probes was performed
with the commercially available OpenEye Omega Toolkit. Initial protein
structure preparation including the G12D mutation was performed with
the commercially available OpenEye Spruce Toolkit, while initial MD
system construction was made with the freely available PACKMOL (https://m3g.github.io/packmol). Protein force-field parameters were taken from the openly available
Amber14SB force field (https://ambermd.org). Force-field parameters for small organic molecules were taken
from the openly available OpenFF-2.0.0 (Sage) (https://github.com/openforcefield/openff-forcefields/releases/tag/2.0.0). Force-field parameters for xenon were taken from a study published
by Warr et al. Analysis of molecular
dynamics simulation trajectories were performed using the commercially
available OpenEye OEChem and Zap Toolkits. Academic licenses are also
freely available for all OpenEye Toolkits including Spruce, Omega,
OEChem and Zap Toolkits used in this study. (https://www.eyesopen.com/academic-licensing, https://www.eyesopen.com/customer-software-download). All simulation
and analysis data from this study are stored on Orion and will be
shared upon request due to the enormous file sizes of the aggregate
trajectories. OpenEye Cryptic Pocket Detection Floes, which automates
both the simulation and analysis presented in this study, are available
on the academic stack of Orion that is also available upon request.