822acssdJournal of Medicinal ChemistryJ Med ChemPMC1082347910823479108234793819061510.1021/acs.jmedchem.3c02148First-in-Class
Selenium-Containing Potent Serotonin
Receptor 5-HT6 Agents with a Beneficial Neuroprotective
Profile against Alzheimer’s Disease
PykaPatryk HaberekWawrzyniec WięcekMałgorzata SzymanskaEwa AliWesam CiosAgnieszka Jastrzębska-WięsekMagdalena SatałaGrzegorz PodlewskaSabina Di GiacomoSilvia Di SottoAntonella GarboSabrina KarczTadeusz LambonaChiara MaroccoFrancesco LataczGniewomir Sudoł-TałajSylwia MordylBarbara Głuch-LutwinMonika SiwekAgata Czarnota-ŁydkaKinga GogolaDawid Olejarz-MaciejAgnieszka Wilczyńska-ZawalNatalia Honkisz-OrzechowskaEwelina StarekMałgorzata DąbrowskaMonika Kucwaj-BryszKatarzyna FioravantiRossella NasimMuhammad Jawad HittingerMarius PartykaAnna WesołowskaAnna BattistelliCecilia ZwergelClemens HandzlikJadwiga †Department
of Technology and Biotechnology of Drugs, Jagiellonian University Medical College, Medyczna 9, 30-688 Kraków, Poland‡Division
of Bioorganic Chemistry, School of Pharmacy, Saarland University, Campus B 2.1, D-66123 Saarbrücken, Germany$Doctoral
School of Medical and Health Sciences, Jagiellonian
University Medical College, św. Łazarza 15, 31-530 Kraków, Poland⊥Department
of Clinical Pharmacy, Faculty of Pharmacy, Jagiellonian University Medical College, Medyczna 9, 30-688 Kraków, Poland∥Department
of Medicinal Chemistry, Maj Institute of Pharmacology, Polish Academy of Sciences, Smętna 12, 31-343 Kraków, Poland#Department
of Physiology and Pharmacology “V. Erspamer”, Sapienza University of Rome, Piazzale Aldo Moro 5, 00185 Rome, Italy¶Italian
National Institute of Health (ISS), Viale Regina Elena 299, 00161 Rome, Italy∇Department
of Molecular Medicine, Istituto Pasteur Italia, Fondazione Cenci-Bolognetti, Sapienza University of Rome, Viale Regina Elena 324, 00161 Rome, Italy⊗Department
of Drug Chemistry and Technologies, Sapienza
University of Rome, Piazzale Aldo Moro 5, 00185 Rome, Italy□Department
of Pharmacobiology, Faculty of Pharmacy, Jagiellonian University Medical College, Medyczna 9, 30-688 Kraków, Poland△Department
of Inorganic and Analytical Chemistry, Jagiellonian
University Medical College, Medyczna 9, 30-688 Kraków, Poland○Department
of Drug Discovery, Pharmbiotec gGmbH, Nußkopf 39, 66578 Schiffweiler, Germany▼Department
of Drug Delivery, Pharmbiotec gGmbH, Nußkopf 39, 66578 Schiffweiler, Germany*Email: cecilia.battistelli@uniroma1.it
*Email: clemens.zwergel@uniroma1.it
*Email: j.handzlik@uj.edu.pl
81202467215801580–16103012024© 2024 The Authors. Published by American Chemical SocietyPermits the broadest form of re-use including for commercial purposes, provided that author attribution and integrity are maintained (https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/).

## Abstract
 Alzheimer’s disease (AD) has a complex and not-fully-understood
etiology. Recently, the serotonin receptor 5-HT6 emerged
as a promising target for AD treatment; thus, here a new series of
5-HT6R ligands with a 1,3,5-triazine core and selenoether
linkers was explored. Among them, the 2-naphthyl derivatives exhibited
strong 5-HT6R affinity and selectivity over 5-HT1AR (13–15), 5-HT7R (14 and 15), and 5-HT2AR (13). Compound 15 displayed high selectivity for 5-HT6R over other central nervous system receptors and exhibited
low risk of cardio-, hepato-, and nephrotoxicity and no mutagenicity,
indicating its “drug-like” potential. Compound 15 also demonstrated neuroprotection against rotenone-induced
neurotoxicity as well as antioxidant and glutathione peroxidase (GPx)-like
activity and regulated antioxidant and pro-inflammatory genes and
NRF2 nuclear translocation. In rats, 15 showed satisfying
pharmacokinetics, penetrated the blood–brain barrier, reversed
MK-801-induced memory impairment, and exhibited anxiolytic-like properties. 15’s neuroprotective and procognitive-like effects,
stronger than those of the approved drug donepezil, may pave the way
for the use of selenotriazines to inhibit both causes and symptoms
in AD therapy.

statusreleaseddisplay-pdfyesis-in-collection-domainyesis-olfnois-manuscriptnois-preprintnois-journal-matternois-scannednois-retractednoReceived 2023 Nov 16; Accepted 2023 Dec 14; Revised 2023 Dec 8; Collection date 2024 Jan 25.

## Introduction
Alzheimer’s disease (AD) is a neurodegenerative
disease
affecting mainly elderly people. It is estimated that 50 million people
worldwide are currently affected by this disease, and this number
is estimated to triple by 2050. , AD symptoms usually
start with mild cognitive impairment and memory problems, but the
neuronal damage progresses with time, leading to severe dementia,
aggressiveness, and loss of even the most basic skills, such as swallowing,
eventually leading to death. AD development
also has a substantial impact on the mental health of patients, as
depressive and anxiety disorders are commonly co-occurring. AD leads to a plethora of symptoms such as agitation,
aggression, irritability, apathy, depressive mood, anxiety, psychosis,
and reduced sociability, which are be summarized in the term “behavioral
and psychological symptoms of dementia” (BPSD). Since the very first portrait of a dementia patient, described
by Alois Alzheimer in 1907, researchers
have been trying to shed light on the complex etiology of the disease,
which is not yet completely understood; however, it is known that
both genetic and environmental factors play roles in its development. At the neuronal level, AD is characterized by
an accumulation of amyloid plaques and neurofibrillary tangles, as
well as by degeneration of synapses. Despite
numerous efforts to find a cure for AD, treatment options are still
limited and insufficient. Antidepressants and atypical antipsychotics
possess only a modest efficacy in the treatment of BPSD, with severe
side effects such as cognitive slowing, cardiac arrhythmias, or daytime
sleepiness, which are high-risk factors for geriatric patients; − hence, more specific treatments are necessary. , , The heterogeneity of AD is probably the
main obstacle to an effective and safe treatment, despite the considerable
number of chemical compounds with promising preclinical activity. Only six FDA-approved drugs are currently available
for AD treatment; three of them, galantamine, rivastigmine, and donepezil, are cholinesterase inhibitors. Indeed,
decreased cholinergic neurotransmission in AD patients is linked to
dementia and cognitive impairments, while increased acetylcholinesterase
(AChE) levels were demonstrated to relieve the disease’s symptoms. The approved voltage-dependent, non-competitive
antagonist of the N-methyl-d-aspartate (NMDA)
receptor, memantine, protects neurons from excitotoxicity
caused by elevated glutamate levels. Blockade of NMDA receptors with
memantine is supposed to slow down disease development and is recommended
for patients with moderate to severe symptoms. Unfortunately, both groups of drugs do not improve the
situation of patients significantly while carrying the risk of quite
severe side effects such as renal dysfunction or skin cancer. Recently, two monoclonal antibodies—lecanemab and aducanumab—have received
fast-track approval from the FDA. , Both are supposed
to decompose amyloid plaques; there are some doubts about their efficacy,
but it is still too early to evaluate them reliably. 
As outlined above, current treatment options for
BPSD do not meet
the clinical needs; thus, new well-tolerated target-specific medications
are urgently needed. , 
AD is a disease with a
complex etiology, starting with a shift
in neurotransmitter abundance which, in turn, triggers changes in
the expression and function of certain receptors, finally resulting
in neurodegeneration and aging. Nowadays,
it is well accepted that treatment regimens aiming at only one pathological
process are not enough; therefore, researchers focus on multitarget
drugs. , Currently, the most pursued targets are
cholinesterases, metalloproteinases, monoamine oxidases, and other
proteins/cascades that decrease neuroinflammation, β-amyloid
deposits, or oxidative stress. In the
context of these targets, often a massive accumulation of reactive
oxygen species (ROS) has been observed to cause neuroinflammation
and to result in cytotoxic oxidation, such as lipid peroxidation or
DNA damage, synergistically participating in the onset and progression
of AD and giving rise to neurons’ death. 
In this frame, a central role for the nuclear factor
erythroid
2-related factor 2 (NRF2) has been unveiled. , This protein is an important regulator of cellular antioxidant response,
and upon the increase of ROS production, it translocates into the
nucleus, where it induces the transcription of genes involved in the
antioxidant response. Specifically, it induces the expression of heme
oxygenase-1 (HO-1), quinone oxidoreductase-1 (NQO-1), and superoxide
dismutase (SOD), , but it also reduces the activity
and expression of beta-site amyloid precursor protein cleaving enzyme
1 (BACE1), increasing the production of amyloid-β (Aβ). Thus, NRF2 can be considered as a promising
target to be activated to mitigate AD progression.
In recent
years, the number of studies exploring novel, innovative
targets has rapidly increased. An interesting
representative of such a more and more exploited target is the serotonin
receptor 5-HT6 (5-HT6R), found almost exclusively
in the central nervous system (CNS); thus, targeting this receptor
should carry a low risk of peripheral adverse effects. 5-HT6R was discovered in 1993 as
one of the last members of the serotoninergic system , and has been associated with diverse CNS dysfunctions (e.g., depression
and schizophrenia). − Physiologically, 5-HT6R modulates numerous
neurotransmitter pathways, and the blockade of this receptor leads
to increased cholinergic and glutaminergic neurotransmission; furthermore, it also facilitates the release
of dopamine and norepinephrine in the frontal cortex. Recent preclinical studies have shown that 5-HT6R antagonists and agonists are capable of improving memory impairment
in novel object recognition (NOR), social recognition (SRT), Y-maze
continuous spontaneous alternation (Y-CAT), and Morris water maze
(MWM) tests in rats, − underlining the importance of this target for AD,
while also exhibiting anxiolytic and antidepressant effects. , , Interestingly, both 5-HT6R agonists and antagonists paradoxically exhibited procognitive,
antidepressant, and antianxiety properties. The selective agonists WAY-181187, WAY-208466, and E-6801, − the partial agonist EMDT
386088, and the antagonists SB-271046 and SB-399885 have been extensively studied in preclinical and
clinical settings without reaching approval. , , 
More recently, other 5-HT6R antagonists such as A, B, C, and D ( ) − have been shown to possess a
nanomolar affinity to the target; however, they display a high mutual
similarity due to the presence of an indole-like core and/or sulfonyl
groups; thus, the chemical space in the search for novel 5-HT6R agents needs to be broadened to achieve a potent and selective
action on 5-HT6R with satisfying CNS druggability. 
 Cerlapirdine (SAM-531) showed promising
results in Phase I studies in healthy subjects (NCT00479349, NCT00479700).
However, in Phase II studies in mild to moderate AD patients (NCT00895895),
all three dosage levels (1.5, 3, and 5 mg) were found to be unsatisfactory,
and the study was terminated. Moreover, HEC30654 is a
5-HT6 receptor antagonist with good preclinical results
in cognition tests, and recently its safety, tolerability, and pharmacokinetic
(PK) profile have been evaluated in healthy Chinese subjects with
encouraging data. 
5-HT6R antagonists, in combination with cholinesterase
inhibitors, were tested in clinical trials as a potential therapy
for AD. Two agents, idalopirdine and intepirdine, have reached Phase III of clinical trials yet failed to demonstrate
statistically significant improvement in cognition, − probably due
to the complexity of this disorder that may require a multitarget
approach rather than a single selective one. However, it is still important to design novel molecules in such
a way that their selectivity profile will remain directed toward 5-HT6R over homologous serotonin receptors 5-HT2A, 5-HT1A, and 5-HT7, as a differentiated modulation has
a significant influence on the observed therapeutic effects. For example, masupirdine (SUVN-502) is highly selective for 5-HT6R and has
minimal activity on the 5-HT2A receptor, in contrast with idalopirdine and intepiridine. Masupirdine was developed by Nirogi et al. and
demonstrated positive procognitive effects in various behavioral tests
in animal models. It also modulated glutamate levels and potentiated
the effects of donepezil and memantine. The beneficial effects of
masupirdine on learning and memory may be mediated by the modulation
of cholinergic and/or glutamatergic neurotransmission in relevant
brain regions. Indeed, the results of a Phase II study (NCT02580305)
involving masupirdine in combination with memantine and donepezil
for the treatment of moderate AD highlights that administration of
masupirdine improves cognitive functions and reduces agitation/aggression
scores. , 
Particularly, by merging the structure
of C with a
pyrroloquinoxaline ligand of 5-HT3, Zajdel et al. obtained FPPQ, a dual-acting
5-HT3/5-HT6 antagonist that alleviates symptoms
in psychiatric disorders and has procognitive properties. Staying within the realm of multitarget antagonists,
Grychowska et al.—employing in silico analysis
and cryo-electron microscopy techniques—designed, synthesized,
and evaluated PZ-1922, an innovative triple-acting compound,
as a potential therapy for AD. It demonstrated
notable antagonistic activity at both 5HT6R and 5-HT3R alongside a robust, reversible inhibition of MAO-B. Furthermore,
PZ-1922 exhibited favorable PK properties, and the findings of this
study unequivocally showcased the superiority of PZ-1922 over intepirdine
in terms of its capacity to prevent and mitigate molecular and synaptic
alterations while also effectively modulating neuroinflammatory processes
in the hippocampus of rats subjected to Aβ injections.
Vanda and colleagues developed PZ-1444, a 5-HT6 receptor partial agonist with nanomolar IC50 and Ki values. This
compound showed good PK properties and had procognitive properties,
reversing phencyclidine- and scopolamine-induced memory deficit.
All 5-HT6R ligands tested in vivo had
a positive ionizable center responsible for the key interaction with
serotonin receptors (salt bridge with Asp3.32). Some attempts to develop
atypical non-basic 5-HT6R ligands have been reported in vitro, but their design remains highly challenging. Examples
of this approach are molecules E and F. , 
In recent years, our research group developed a new family
of potent
and selective 5-HT6R ligands with a 1,3,5-triazine
core (I–V, ), which, unlike other known ligands, possess neither
an indole moiety nor a sulfonyl group in their structures. , , − In 2019, Ali
et al. explored applications of different chalcogen linkers in search
of 5-HT6R agents among 1,3,5-triazine derivatives. Particularly, attention should be paid to compounds VI and VII ( ) containing selenoether linkers. Both show
moderate activity toward 5-HT6R with potential for optimization
while being twice as active as the corresponding oxygen analogs, underlining
the increasing importance of seleno compounds in the search for new
therapies for CNS diseases. 
 Indeed, selenium plays various roles in the progression
of some
neurodegenerative diseases such as AD. , It is crucial
for the activity of glutathione peroxidase (GPx), which is responsible
for protecting organisms from oxidative damage; studies show that
supplementation with this element is beneficial for patients with
AD and mild cognitive impairment. The
toxicity of organoselenium compounds strongly depends on the selenium
oxidation state and types of substituents. The most dominant form of selenium in organic compounds is Se(II),
and in this form, compounds present relatively low toxicity, , although in very high doses they may generate ROS and cause thiol
depletion. However, more studies are reporting their antioxidant and
neuroprotective action as well as their
potential use in the treatment of various pathological conditions
spanning cancer and non-cancer disorders. Selenium-containing molecules are primarily recognized for their
physiological role as antioxidants, particularly through a group of
selenoproteins that employ selenocysteine (Sec) residues in their
enzyme active sites to catalyze redox reactions, safeguarding organisms
from oxidative stress. In particular,
selenium-containing compounds are typically classified into three
main categories: inorganic selenium compounds, organic selenium compounds,
and selenoproteins. Typically, the PK
properties of selenium compounds are favorable. Selenium compounds
exhibit increased uptake, particularly by cancer cells, although the
precise mechanism of selective selenium uptake in cancer cells remains
incompletely understood. So far, various
mechanisms have been described. For example, selenide may be transported
by ATPases, while selenite uptake can
be mediated by anion transporters. The
metabolic stability and excretion routes of Se-containing compounds
vary considerably. , , 
Organoselenium compounds exhibit reduced toxicity and enhanced
bioactivity when compared to their inorganic selenium counterparts and are able to act as mimetics of GPx7 that
modulates oxidative stress in the brain. Several studies report neuroprotective and antioxidant properties
of diphenyl diselenide and ebselen. , − The neuroprotective effects of ebselen are related
to its antioxidant properties. The compound reduced malondialdehyde
overproduction and boosted SOD activity in brain tissue during ischemia/reperfusion
(I/R). Ebselen demonstrated protection
against amyloid neurotoxicity and improved cognitive function in AD
by reducing Aβ levels and inhibiting tau protein hyperphosphorylation. , The organic selenide 6-((4-fluorophenyl)selanyl)-9H-purine showed the ability to inhibit AChE in the brain and enhance
memory in a mouse model, underscoring its potential as a treatment
option for AD. Some aromatic diselenides
tested in rodents have been confirmed to improve cognitive performance
without inducing neurotoxic effects. In
particular, p-methoxyphenyl diselenide improved mice’s
memory, protected them against Aβ-induced neurotoxicity, and
inhibited AChE activity in a model of sporadic Alzheimer’s-type
dementia. Similar or even better effects
were observed for selenodihydropyrimidinones, primarily
acting as potent AChE inhibitors, which additionally showed a very
high antioxidant activity through different mechanisms of action , , ( ).
In general, selenium-containing
compounds demonstrate higher biological
activity than their sulfur-containing counterparts. This enhanced
activity is likely attributed to subtle chemical distinctions between
these two elements. , Due to the larger atomic radius
of Se than other chalcogens, more loosely bound outer valence electrons
occur, resulting in enhanced antioxidant properties with stronger electron acceptor and more electrophilic
properties than oxygen or sulfur analogs. Se’s higher polarizability
generally increases the lipophilicity and permeability of drug molecules
and makes it a stronger nucleophile, facilitating its coordination
with metal centers in enzyme catalytic sites. 
Considering all the benefits mentioned above, a new series
of selenoether
derivatives of 1,3,5-triazine has been designed, synthesized,
and evaluated in vitro for 5-HT6R affinity
and neuroprotective action and in vivo in animal
models of CNS diseases.

## Results and Discussion

## Chemistry
The final compounds described in this study
(1–19) were synthesized through a
3–4-step synthesis pathway. The syntheses of 1, 2, 4, 5, 16, 18, and 19 were described previously. , , The synthesis of (4-methyl-1-piperazinyl)biguanide
dihydrochloride ( ) was performed using commercially available 4-methylpiperazine
dihydrochloride and 1-cyanoguanidine, following a previously described
method. Diphenyl diselenide and dibenzyl
diselenide are the only aryl diselenides commercially available, and
the other desired aryl diselenides 20–25 were obtained via the formation of the Grignard reagent by treating
commercial aryl halides with magnesium under inert conditions ( ). The resulting
selenium Grignard reagent easily oxidizes in the presence of air,
leading to a selenium products mixture in which the diselenides are
the predominant species. However, the byproducts in the mixture were
found to be inert to the subsequent reactions; therefore, the obtained
diselenides 20–25 were used as crude
products at the next step.
 The cleavage of diselenides with sodium
borohydride was performed
under an argon atmosphere and led to the in situ formation
of an arylselenide anion, which reacted with an appropriate bromoester.
The syntheses of the 1,3,5-triazine selenium derivatives 1–19 involved the preparation of sodium
methanolate, to which a suitable aryl selenium ester (26–44) and (4-methyl-1-piperazinyl)biguanide
dihydrochloride were added. Condensation reactions were carried out
according to a method described previously, , utilizing purification on flash chromatography, crystallization
from water, or transformation into the corresponding crystalline hydrochloric
salts. Spectral (1H, 13C, 77Se NMR)
and chromatographic (LC/MS) analytical methods confirmed the structures
and purity (>95%) of the final compounds.

## Pharmacology

## The Action on 5-HT6R and 5-HTRs Off-Targets:

## Radioligand Binding and Functional Assays
The whole
series of VI, VII, and 1–19 was investigated to determine their affinities for serotonin receptors,
including the main target 5-HT6R and the off-targets 5-HT1AR, 5-HT2AR, and 5-HT7R, in the radioligand
binding assay (RBA) using the methods described previously. Olanzapine, buspirone, aripiprazole, and clozapine
were used as highly potent reference ligands toward the 6, 1A, 2A,
and 7 serotonin receptor subtypes, respectively ( ). Moreover, a selected chemical
subgroup of the most active 5-HT6R agents (i.e., the naphthyl
derivatives) was examined to determine their intrinsic action in functional
studies using the cAMP measurement assay according to procedures described
before , (details in Figure S4 and Table S3).
 As shown in , most of the tested compounds (VI, VII, 1–16, and 19) displayed
significant submicromolar (Ki < 500 nM) affinities for 5-HT6R and distinct
selectivity over 5-HT1AR and 5-HT7R off-targets.
Most of the compounds (VII, 1–16, 19) were also at least slightly selective
toward 5-HT6R with respect to 5-HT2A receptors,
but the affinity for that off-target was in the submicromolar range
for a majority of the compounds (VI, VII, 2–15, 19).
In more detail, among the series of phenyl derivatives 1–3, it is apparent that an increase in the number
of carbons within the side chain correlates with an increased affinity
for 5-HT6R (Ki = 122, 52, and
33 nM for 1, 2, and 3, respectively)
and, concurrently, an augmented selectivity index (SI) toward 5-HT6/5-HT2A but especially toward 5-HT1AR and 5-HT7R, where the increase of a carbon atom within
the side chain correlates with a 2-fold increase in selectivity. Conversely,
the introduction of a nonlinear entity, such as a dimethyl residue
as in compound 4, exhibits a decline in both affinity
and the associated 5-HT6R SI. A longer chain augmenting
the distance between the selenoether and the triazine core,
as seen for derivative 5, resulted in a drop of activity
and selectivity for 5-HT6R, with Ki = 193 nM and SI < 10 toward both 5-HT1AR and
5-HT2AR. Looking at the derivatives featuring a 2,5-dimethylphenyl
moiety, 6–9 uniformly exhibit favorable
affinity values as well as SIs. Notably, by comparing derivatives
possessing identical R2 side chains ( ), it is evident that derivative 7 surpasses analog 1 (R2 = Et) in affinity
and selectivity. This discernible pattern is most effectively accentuated
by comparing derivatives 4 and 9, which
share the same side chain (R2 = diMe). In this context, 9 demonstrated superior affinity and selectivity compared
to 4. Compound 10 and its halogenated analog 3 demonstrated comparable affinity and selectivity values.
Replacing the phenyl with the naphthyl moiety resulted in the most
promising compounds in our series. In more detail, regarding the 1-naphthyl
compounds, 11, with the small methyl side chain, possesses
an almost 2-fold superior 5-HT6R affinity (Ki = 21 nM) and selectivity over 5-HT1AR, 5-HT2AR, and 5-HT7R when compared to its ethyl counterpart, 12 (Ki = 36 nM). For derivatives
harboring a 2-naphthyl group, 13–15, the affinity for 5-HT6R remains nearly uniform. However,
concerning selectivity, the preeminent derivative emerges to be 13 bearing R2 = Me. Upon considering the other
derivatives, for 6 and 11, featuring a methyl
lateral chain (R2 = Me), a distinct structure–activity
relationship (SAR) is observed, with affinity successively ascending
twice from 2,5-dimethylphenyl (6, Ki = 46 nM) to 1-naphthyl (11, Ki = 21 nM) and culminating in 2-naphthyl (13, Ki = 9 nM), accompanied by corresponding
elevations in 5-HT6R selectivity of 3-fold with respect
to 5-HT1AR (6–13) and
of 4-fold with respect to 5-HT7R (6–11). The exceptions are for the 5-HT6R/5-HT7R selectivity, which regresses almost 2-fold from the 1-naphthyl
derivative 11 (SI > 400) to the 2-naphthyl derivative 13 (SI > 250), and for the 5-HT6R/5-HT2AR selectivity, which decreases about 1.3-fold from the 2,5-dimethylphenyl 6 to both the 1- and 2-naphthyl compounds 11 and 13. For derivatives 1, 7, 12, and 14 characterized by R2 = Et,
a trend is discernible analogous to those reported for derivatives
possessing R2 = Me. Of particular significance, 14 emerges as the most efficacious compound regarding 5-HT6R affinity, with Ki = 8 nM. By evaluating
the selectivities of these ethyl derivatives, it emerges that the
augmentation in binding affinity encountered during the transition
from monoaryl (Ki = 122 and 22 nM for 1 and 7, respectively) to naphthyl derivatives
(Ki = 36 and 8 nM for 12 and 14, respectively) is accompanied by an enhanced selectivity
for 5-HT6R with respect to 5-HT1AR and 5-HT7R receptors, while at the same time selectivity between 5-HT6R/5-HT2AR receptors is diminished. Indeed, by comparing
the phenyl derivative 1 with the naphthyl compound 14, it emerges that the 5-HT6R SI passes from 33
to 288 for 5-HT1AR and from 36 to 638 for 5-HT7R, but for the 5-HT2AR the SI decreases from
8 to 2. For derivatives encompassing a dimethyl substituent on R2 (4, 9, 15), an analogous
overarching pattern is evident, characterized by increased binding
affinity (Ki = 165, 75, and 14 nM for 4, 9, and 15, respectively) and
selectivity toward 5-HT6 and 5-HT7 receptors,
albeit with a corresponding attenuation of selectivity with respect
to 5-HT2A receptors. By comparing the phenyl derivative 4 with the naphthyl compound 15, it can be noticed
that the 5-HT6R SI passes from 17 to 252 for 5-HT1AR and from 31 to 103 for 5-HT7R, but for 5-HT2AR the SI decreases from 4 to 2.5. In contrast, all benzyl derivatives 16–18 exhibit a more than 50-fold loss
in affinity toward the 5-HT6 receptor with respect to the
phenyl derivatives. Notably, derivative 19, featuring
a benzyl entity separated from the 1,3,5-triazine scaffold by
three carbons, experiences a partial restoration in bond affinity,
albeit displaying only a mediocre selectivity. Intriguingly, this
is particularly surprising as the selenophenyl ether 5, maintaining the three-carbon linker of 19 as spacer
from the 1,3,5-triazine scaffold, results in drops of about
2-fold in both affinity and selectivity for 5-HT6R. The
radioligand-based data indicated the naphthyl derivatives 11–15—the most potent chemical subgroup
of the series at 5-HT6R examined—in the low double-digit
or even single-digit nanomolar range; thus, they were selected for
the intrinsic activity assays ( , Figure S4, and Table S3). The data indicate that 11–15 are
potent antagonists of 5-HT6R (Kb in the range of 7.87–3.1 nM), well correlating with their
affinities toward 5-HT6R measured in RBA. Overall, these
results confirmed the general tendency observed for our previous other
5-HT6R triazine ligands, with a majority also presenting
an antagonistic mode of action, , − , with the exception of only a
few halogen-substituted phenyl-thioether derivatives. 

## 5-HT6R Docking Analysis
In order to better
explain the trends of the interactions with 5-HT6R for
the investigated series (VI, VII, 1–19) at a molecular level, docking studies
have been performed. Due to the antagonistic mode of action of the
modeled compounds, the GPCRdb homology model of 5-HT6R , was used, which captures the inactive conformation of the receptor.
At first, 4, 9, and 15, possessing
a dimethyl group in the branching linker and different types of aromatic
moieties (phenyl, 2,5-dimethylphenyl, and β-naphthyl, respectively),
were considered, along with the oxygen (15O) and sulfur
(15S, shown as V in ) analogs of 15 ( ). It can be observed that, within this set of compounds, the sulfur-
and selenium-containing compounds are more active than the oxygen-containing
analog. In addition, modifications of the aromatic moiety led to changes
in 5-HT6R activity in the following order: phenyl <
2,5-dimethylphenyl < β-naphthyl (Ki = 165 nM vs 75 nM vs 14 nM, respectively).
 All analyzed compounds (4, 9, 15, 15O, and 15S) fit well
in the 5-HT6R binding pocket and formed a charge-assisted
hydrogen bond
with aspartic acid from the third transmembrane helix (D3x32 according
to the GPCRdb numbering, Asp106), which is reported in many studies
as essential for the 5-HT6R activity. , − In all studied cases, the triazine
ring is located in the proximity of the phenylalanine cluster (F6x51
(Phe284) and F6x52 (Phe285)), resulting in the formation of the π–π
contacts ( ).
 More detailed analysis of compounds containing
different chalcogens
(15, 15O, 15S) revealed that 15 and 15O adopted similar binding poses ( a), with naphthyl
moieties oriented toward the inner part of the pocket and π–π
interactions with W6x48 (Trp281) and F6x52. The main difference in
the orientations of 15 and 15O is related
to the position of the triazine ring and its substituents. For 15, the amine group attached to triazine faces toward
D3x32, while for 15O, the amine group is oriented in
the opposite direction. As the amine group in 15 acts
as an H-bond donor and takes part in the formation of the additional
hydrogen bond with D3x32, this variation in the position of the amine
group might be crucial for the activity of 15. On the
other hand, the binding pose of 15S is different ( b), and the naphthyl
moiety is oriented toward the outer side of the pocket, with its position
being stabilized by π–π interactions with F5x39
(Phe188). Nevertheless, the positions of the triazine ring and
piperazine are almost identical for 15 and 15S (triazine rings in both cases form π–π
contacts with F6x51), and amine groups attached to this moiety form
hydrogen bonds with D3x32. Having in mind that the 5-HT6R activities of 15 and 15S are similar
(Ki = 14 nM and 11 nM, respectively),
while the activity of 15O is approximately 6 times lower
(Ki = 69 nM), it seems that the formation
of hydrogen bonds by the amine group of triazine ring is more
important for 5-HT6R activity than the orientation of the
aromatic moiety.
The differences in the binding orientation
observed for the three
analogs 15O, 15S, and 15 are
intriguing due to their high structural similarity. Thus, we delved
deeper into this issue by analyzing their mutual overlap and detailed
interactions within the binding pocket (Figures S1 and S2). Although 15 and 15O look
similar at first glance, detailed examination demonstrates that the
amino groups on triazine are directed in two different directions,
which indicates that the compounds are inverted (about 180° in
relation to the other). In 15 and 15S, the
triazine and piperazine positions are much closer, and
the difference starts from the carbon, to which a chalcogen and two
methyl groups are attached. Superimposition of 15O and 15S indicates poses rotated in an even different way than
in the previous two cases. The differences in active conformations
shown in the docking studies have their source in differences in the
sizes and chemical properties of the linker heteroatoms (O, S, Se),
where both the radius of the heteroatom and the dipole moment of the
molecule increase in the order O < S < Se. This differentiation
of properties (O vs S vs Se) gives rise to a variety of intramolecular
interactions, the type (e.g., chalcogen bonds possible for S and Se
but not for O) and the strength of which are crucial for the resulting
conformation of the given molecule (15, 15S, 15O), subsequently conditioning its entry and positioning
in the binding pocket.
In order to confirm the obtained docking
poses and their representativeness
for the compound orientation in the binding site, molecular dynamics
(MD) simulations were carried out for 15 and 15S, using Desmond (length of each simulation: 250 ns); analysis of
changes in the ligand–protein contacts occurring during MD
simulations is visualized in Figure S1. Figures S2 and S3 analyze the presence of interactions
with particular amino acids at a given time. The consistency in the
occurrence of particular contacts during the simulation confirms the
validity of the obtained docking poses.
On the other hand, the
influence of the aromatic moiety on compound
affinity toward 5-HT6R was studied with compounds 4, 9, and 15. Compound 4 ( c) displayed
a pose analogous to that of 15O, with an aromatic ring
oriented toward the inner part of the protein and lack of a hydrogen
bond between the amine group attached to the triazine ring and
D3x32. The weaker 5-HT6R affinity of 4 (Ki = 165 nM vs 69 nM for 15O) might
also be conditioned by its less effective stabilization by π–π
interactions due to the presence of only one aromatic ring instead
of two, as in the case of naphthyl derivatives. Compound 9 adopted a different binding mode ( d), with the triazine ring stabilized
by π–π contacts with F6x51 and F6x52 and the amine
group forming a hydrogen bond with T5x461 (Thr196). The aromatic ring
of the 2,5-dimethylphenyl group is oriented outside of the binding
pocket, yet without the formation of the π–π contact
with F5x39.
Summing up, the main components of the compounds
presented in the
study are as follows: a positive ionizable group (present in the form
of the protonated tertiary amine in the piperazine moiety) forms
the charge-assisted hydrogen bond with D3x32, and an aromatic triazine
ring stabilizes compounds in the binding pocket via π–π
contacts with phenylalanines from the sixth and fifth transmembrane
helices (TM6 and TM5). In addition, for the most potent compounds,
the amine group substituting the triazine ring acts as a hydrogen
bond donor for the charge-assisted contact with D3x32. Finally, a
big aromatic moiety, oriented either toward the inner part of the
pocket, and thus being part of the π–π contact
with W6x48, or to the outer side, making an analogous interaction
with F5x39, also plays a huge role in the provision of high 5-HT6R activity, with the increasing activity being related to
the increasing aromatic surface.
Both experimental and computational
studies indicated the most
favorable 5-HT6R action profile for the 2-naphthyl derivatives, 13–15. These compounds demonstrated particularly
high affinity (Ki < 15 nM), potent
antagonistic activity (Kb < 15 nM),
significant selectivity over 5-HT1AR and 5-HT7R, and potent action on 5-HT2AR (Ki < 50 nM) in the case of 14 and 15, while almost 15-fold 5-HT6R/5-HT2AR selectivity
was noticed for 13.
Thus, the three compounds 13–15 were selected for the subsequent
extended biological assays.

## Neuroprotection

## Neurotoxicity and Neuroprotection in Neuroblastoma SH-SY5Y
The potential toxicity of novel compounds in the search for therapeutics
should always be considered. Neurotoxicity is specific in this respect,
as the normal function of the nervous system, transmitting and processing
signals in the brain, is crucial, and the tested compound should not
affect it. In this study, the human neuroblastoma cell line SH-SY5Y
was used for neurotoxicity evaluation in vitro. The
compounds showed moderate toxicity, with IC50 values in
the range of 40.60–66.10 μM (13 > 15 > 14) ( ), i.e., at a concentration >1000-fold
higher than
the active ones toward 5-HT6R (Ki, Kb, ). Since the compounds have a satisfactory
safety profile and do not exhibit specific toxicity against SH-SY5Y
cells, they can be considered suitable for further studies regarding
their neuroprotective properties.
 To investigate the neuroprotective effect of the compounds,
rotenone,
a toxin that blocks the mitochondrial electron transport chain by
inhibiting complex I, was used; two
methods were applied since rotenone impairs mitochondrial energy metabolism
and increases ROS. The first method is an MTS-based viability assay
(an improved version of MTT). The second method is based on ROS measurement
with 2′,7′-dichlorofluorescin diacetate (2′7′DCFH2-DA). Despite the limitations associated with the use of fluorescent
probes, particularly their lack of specificity for any specific ROS,
this method is sufficient to gain a general understanding of oxidative
stress and potential neuroprotective activity of the compounds of
interest.
The results, shown in , demonstrated that, when SH-SY5Y cells were
pretreated
with the tested compounds, the intracellular level of ROS after 3
h was 1.47 times lower compared to the level induced by rotenone alone.
Treatment with the tested compounds alone did not affect ROS production.
Contrary to the findings of the DCFH2-DA assay, we did
not find such protective activity in the MTS assay. The metabolic
activity of the cells was only slightly higher after pretreatment
with 15 (79% vs 73% for rotenone, where the control is
100%) and the most visible after pretreatment with 13 (86% vs 73%). It is worth noting that the concentration of rotenone
in this study was adjusted based on a dose–response curve of
rotenone, in which a significant increase in ROS level and decrease
in metabolic activity of SH-SY5Y cells in vitro were
observed. Even though our studies examining rotenone-induced toxicity
have employed short-term and relatively high levels of rotenone exposure,
over a lifetime, the patients may have been exposed to the toxins
for several years at relatively low concentrations. 
 Summing up, the results of these assays confirm
the neuroprotective
properties of the tested compounds 13–15, predominantly via inhibition of ROS production and the significantly
lower effect on the metabolic activity of SH-SY5Y cells. The β-naphthyl
dimethyl-branched derivative 15 turned out to be the
relatively most potent neuroprotective agent in these studies. Furthermore,
the trends of the action estimated in both assays suggest that the
neuroprotective mechanisms are related to the antioxidant properties
of 13–15, which require a deeper
insight.

## Antioxidative Mechanisms of Action for 13–15In Vitro

## Total Antioxidant Capacity
In order to estimate the
potential molecular mechanisms of the neuroprotective action found
for 13–15in vitro, the total antioxidant capacity test was performed. To measure the
oxidation power, the reaction with Mo(VI) was used, as described by
Prieto et al. Compounds 13–15 all displayed total antioxidant capacity
with different dose-dependent power, as shown in (Table S4), and the antioxidant potency increased
with concentration. At higher concentrations, the increase for the
tested selenium compounds 13–15 was
much lower compared to the reference ascorbic acid (AA).
 To better illustrate the antioxidative characteristics
of each
compound 13, 14, and 15, the
results expressed as ascorbic acid equivalents (AAE) are shown in . In this way, the
distinct difference of the reductive properties of 15 from those of 13 and 14 at the lower concentrations,
which equalized at about 120 μg/mL, can be seen (for details,
see Table S5).
 In general, 15 turned out to be the relatively most
potent at a lower concentration up to 40 μg/mL, displaying significantly
stronger reductive action than that of reference ascorbic acid (AA)
at their tested concentrations of 10–20 μg/mL, corresponding
at 40 μg/mL, while it was less potent compared to AA at higher
concentrations (80–230 μg/mL). It is worth noting that
antioxidative action of 15 superior to that of AA was
detected at concentration <40 μg/mL (∼ <90
μM), while actions that were neuroprotective in neuroblastoma
and antagonistic for 5-HT6R were found at 10 μM and
15 nM, respectively. Although the concentrations used in the test
did not reach the values corresponding to Ki, the trend of the increasingly favorable AAE for 15 indicates that, with a further decrease in the concentration of 15 (10 μM or less), the antioxidant effect of 15 can still be significant and more potent than that of AA.
This also suggests that antioxidant effects may contribute to the
neuroprotective action confirmed for 15 at 10 μM
in neuroblastoma cells in response to rotenone in neuroprotection
assays ( ).
On the other hand, results of the total antioxidant assays indicate
that the antioxidative action of 15 grows only slightly
with an increase in concentration—conditions which may guarantee
antioxidant effects but showed cytotoxic effects, inhibiting the viability
of neuroblastoma ( ). The IC50 value was estimated based on the MTS assay
that evaluates the toxic effect of the compound, focusing on how it
affects cell viability. The reduced cell viability corresponds to
the reduced capacity of dehydrogenase to transform tetrazolium salt
into formazan. One of the factors that may impair the function of
mitochondrial dehydrogenase is the presence of ROS. The antioxidant
action of 15 allows us to exclude oxidative toxicity
mechanisms caused by this compound. At the cellular level, however,
ROS might act as signaling molecules or cause cell damage. Which of
these roles is undertaken depends on the equilibrium between ROS production
and scavenging. It is worth noting that
high levels of antioxidants (e.g., vitamin C) have been proposed to
create a state of oxidation–antioxidation imbalance that could
disrupt the physiological activities of ROS. , In this frame, the antioxidative capacity of 15, significantly
higher than that of AA at concentrations around toxic levels, may
contribute to the inhibition of viability of the neuroblastoma cell
observed in our neurotoxicity test ( ). Nevertheless, this hypothesis refers to
concentrations significantly higher than the 5-HT6R Ki value.
Thus, the total antioxidant capacity
found for 15 seems
to be promising for potential dual, neuroprotective/antioxidative,
and 5-HT6R antagonistic actions, which may enhance the
therapeutic efficacy desired in the treatment of AD. In the cases
of 13 and 14, the assay also confirmed the
noticeable reductive action, but both compounds were ∼2–3-fold
less potent in comparison to AA along all tested concentrations (10–230
μg/mL).
To conclude, the results of the total antioxidant
capacity assay
confirmed a favorable dose-dependent reductive activity for 13–15, which seems to be the main (bio)chemical
reason for the neuroprotective effects observed in the in
vitro neuroblastoma model. The capacity of the dimethyl-branched
β-naphthyl derivative 15 was especially beneficial
and superior with respect to the other two tested compounds, 13 and 14, due to maintaining the reductive effects
at lower concentrations, closer to the pharmacologically active doses.

## Thiophenol Assay
For a deeper insight into molecular
mechanisms of neuroprotection, the GPx-like activity for the β-naphthyl
Se-ethers 13–15 was tested with a
thiophenol assay, as described by Mouithys-Mickalad et al. All the compounds showed a GPx-like activity,
although with different potency ( , ). Indeed, 15 was the most effective catalyst, showing
a reaction rate (t1/2) 2.5-fold lower
than that of the control, followed by 14 and 13 (reaction rates 2- and 1.3-fold lower with respect to control).
The rate constant (K) values were in agreement with
those of the reaction rate and highlighted the strong effect of 15 ( ).
 Glutathione peroxidases, especially GPx4, are responsible
for protecting
cells from death through ferroptosis, and decreased expression of
these enzymes has been reported in AD patients. Therefore, the GPx-like activity of studied compounds 13–15 suggests that they are capable of
protecting cells from oxidative damage and possibly could decrease
neuronal loss in AD.
The results of the thiophenol assay, in
accordance with those coming
from the total antioxidant capacity test, confirmed the antioxidative
properties of the tested Se-ether triazines 13–15. Thus, due to the chemical properties found for 13–15, they may contribute to miscellaneous molecular
mechanisms responsible for neuroprotective effects, which can be applicable
for potential treatments of neurodegenerative diseases such as AD.
Considering the results of both tests, 15 showed the
most beneficial effects and, therefore, seems to be the most suitable
candidate for further extended pharmacological screening.

## Antioxidant and Pro-inflammatory Gene Expression and NRF2 Localization
Regulated by 15
In line with biochemical data,
a gene expression profile in SH-SY5Y cells upon treatment with 13–15 (and donepezil as reference) at
two different concentrations (1 μM and 10 μM) was examined.
Specifically, the expression of the antioxidant genes HO-1, SOD-1,
and NQO-1 was induced in response to the treatment, while the expression
of nuclear factor kappa B (NFkB, related to cell inflammation) was
impaired. Notably, with respect to 15, also the expression
of BACE1 was impaired ( ).
 These data confirmed that antioxidant and pro-inflammatory
genes
were regulated in response to the tested compounds 13–15 and that their effects are even more evident
with respect to that of donepezil.
Notably, the mRNA expression
of NRF2 was not significantly affected
by the cited compounds, despite the previously shown genes being directly
regulated by the NRF2 pathway. NRF2 reduces oxidative stress in response
to the detection of both ROS and RNS (reactive nitrogen species).
In these conditions, the NRF2 protein translocates from the cytoplasm
into the nucleus, where its binding to the antioxidant response elements
(AREs) regulates the expression of several genes, including the antioxidant
and anti-inflammatory ones. In AD, NRF2 nuclear translocation is impaired
together with synaptic plasticity and memory. 
In line with this knowledge about NRF2, its nuclear
localization
was assessed through a differential protein extraction (nucleus/cytoplasm).
While the NRF2 cytoplasmic abundance was not significantly affected
by the treatment with the tested compounds, NRF2 nuclear expression
is significantly higher in 15-treated cells with respect
to the other compounds and, more interestingly, with respect to donepezil
at the same concentration ( ).
 Therefore, based on these data, 15 is demonstrated
as an inducer of NRF2 nuclear translocation, and this localization
is bona fide related to the observed transcriptional
regulation of antioxidant and anti-inflammatory genes. In conclusion,
this compound should be a potential candidate for novel therapeutic
approaches for neurodegenerative diseases, including AD.

## In Vitro ADME for 13–15

## Permeability
The parallel artificial membrane permeability
assay (PAMPA) was used to quantify the passive diffusion of substances
through synthetic membranes, whose composition has been optimized
to model the permeability behavior of phospholipid-based biomembranes. In the context of the blood–brain barrier
(BBB) permeability, the PAMPA provides insights into how efficiently
compounds can cross the BBB. Compounds demonstrating high permeability
in the PAMPA for BBB are more likely to reach the brain tissue. This
is crucial for drugs targeting neurological disorders and CNS-related
conditions, as effective BBB penetration is necessary for the drug
to exert its therapeutic effects within the brain. By measuring the
rate at which the compound crosses this membrane, researchers can
infer its potential to cross the actual BBB in vivo. As shown in , all tested compounds have an excellent permeability (Pe) with the highest value of 10.54 ± 4.85 for 14. Interestingly, 13 had only a slightly lower Pe value of 7.31 ± 1.94 with a lower retention mass
(14% vs 47%) simultaneously. All test compounds are likely to penetrate
the BBB efficiently, making them promising candidates for drug development
targeting the CNS.
 

## Metabolic Stability
Compounds 13–15 were also investigated to determine their metabolic stability
in a rat liver microsome (rLM) model. Compound 14 showed good metabolic stability above 75%
(14: 77.64%, ). Furthermore, the number of metabolites formed was
as low as three. 13 and 15 proved to be
metabolically unstable in rats (only 53.33% of 13 and
36.72% of 15 remained in the reaction mixture, ). The numbers of
metabolites formed reached two (in case of 15, with one
biotransformation product accounting for the majority in the mixture
analyzed) and three (in case of 13). For comparative
purposes, the AD drug, donepezil, was also tested and exhibited partial
metabolism (75.13% of the parent compound remained in the reaction
mixture). The predicted metabolic pathways indicated demethylation
and N-oxidation, similar to findings already reported
in the literature. 
 Compound 15, the most promising from
a therapeutic
point of view, was additionally tested in human liver microsomes.
The results obtained indicate much better metabolic stability of 15 tested in human than in rLMs, where the compound underwent
only 31% biotransformation, with the formation of numerous (nine)
but negligible metabolites ( ).
Mass spectral analysis supported by in silico data
allowed us to determine the most probable metabolic pathways of the
tested ligands, which are hydroxylation at the naphthyl ring and demethylation
at piperazine (Figures S5–S23).
These studies allowed us to examine the sensitivity of C(sp3)–Se bonds in the oxidative conditions of liver microsomes.
The results of detailed analyses of mass spectra for intact 13–15 and their metabolites (Table S7) indicate high stability along the C(sp3)–Se bonds of the highly active 5-HT6R Se
ligands (13–15) in the oxidative
conditions of liver microsomes, corresponding to potential therapeutic
effects in rats and humans.
In general, the ADME in
vitro results predict
promising PK properties for the β-naphthyl selenoethers 13–15. Such properties, combined with
a low risk of neurotoxicity but comprehensive neuroprotective effects
confirmed in vitro, promote these compounds for advanced
preclinical studies in the search for a drug candidate. In light of
the whole in vitro screening carried out so far,
the dimethyl branched β-naphthyl selenoether 15 demonstrated favorable properties; thus, it was selected for extended in vitro ADME and further in vivo assays
in rats.

## Extended In Vitro ADME for 15

## Clearance in Rat and Human Microsomes
The preliminary
data on metabolic stability in rat and human liver microsomes of 15 encouraged us to conduct more precise research in order
to determine the PK parameters in vitro, such as
intrinsic clearance (CLint) and half-life (t1/2) for 15. The obtained data ( , Figures S20–S23) confirmed higher metabolic stability
of 15 in the presence of human liver microsomes than
in rat ones. The calculated CLint and t1/2 in humans were 3- and 2-fold higher than in rats,
respectively. Higher metabolic stability in humans compared to rats
is generally preferred in drug development. Compounds that are metabolically
stable in humans are less likely to interact with other drugs by interfering
with or inducing drug-metabolizing enzymes, especially from the cytochrome
P450 family. This reduces the potential for adverse drug–drug
interactions, which can be a significant safety concern. Furthermore,
higher metabolic stability in humans helps maintain consistent drug
exposure levels over time. This is critical for achieving the desired
therapeutic effect and for ensuring that patients receive a consistent
and predictable dose of the drug. Last but not least, from the point
of medicinal chemistry, greater metabolic stability in humans can
simplify the drug development process, as it reduces the need for
extensive modifications to enhance stability and predictability in
human subjects. This can lead to faster and more cost-effective drug
development. 
 

## Action on Receptor Off-Targets
Achieving selectivity
across a broader spectrum of receptors contributing to CNS regulation
is a crucial determinant of the pharmacological attributes of the
most promising compound (15) within our series. Thus,
we additionally assessed the activity of 15 against important
CNS receptors, i.e., histamine H3, muscarinic acetylcholine
M1, cannabinoid CB1, α2-adrenergic
(α2-AR), and NMDA receptors. Subsequently, we conducted
RBAs on the aforementioned receptors to rule out the potential for
pharmacological interactions ( ).
 Our investigations, employing a compound concentration
of 1 μM,
revealed negligible impact, with receptor effects falling much below
the 50% threshold and ranging between 0% and 15%. This observation
implies a lack of sufficient action to perform full dose–response
binding assays. Consequently, our findings confirm the significant
selectivity of 15 in its interaction with the 5-HT6R within a broader receptor panel.

## Toxic Effects on HepG2 and HEK-293
In terms of determining
the safety profile of 15 in more detail, hepatotoxic
and nephrotoxic effects of the compound in HepG2 and HEK-293 cell
lines, respectively, were investigated. Our assessments revealed that 15 did not exhibit any hepatotoxic effects across the tested
concentration range (0.1–100 μM) in HepG2 cells, and
similarly, it did not exert any adverse effects on HEK-293 cells within
the concentration range of 0.1–50 μM ( and ). Consequently, based on these findings, 15 can be
considered safe regarding hepatotoxic and nephrotoxic concerns.
 

## hERG Inhibitory Properties
In the next step, 15 was investigated for its hERG inhibitory properties in vitro. In the light of the results obtained, 15 showed moderate potency to inhibit the activity of the hERG channel.
The half-maximal inhibitory concentration (IC50) determined
for 15 in the functional assay using the QPatch automated
patch clamp system was 1.36 ± 0.16 μM ( , Figure S24). Despite the ability to modulate the channel activity
in micromolar concentration, the inhibitory potency for this seleno
compound was still lower in comparison to that of a safe, marketed
drug, verapamil (IC50 hERG = 0.419 ± 0.031 μM),
serving as reference hERG modulator in the current study, which indicates
the relatively good cardiac safety profile of 15.
 

## Mutagenicity Assay
As the last in vitro assay on safety, 15 was tested for potential mutagenic
activity in an Ames test with Salmonella typhimurium strain TA98, which proved its good safety profile ( A). Ames assay was also conducted
for 15 in the presence of rat liver S9 fraction, containing
cytosolic and microsomal enzymes, to verify if metabolic activation
of 15 would induce its mutagenicity. Performed experiments
showed that the metabolites of 15 also do not increase
the mutation rate in the tested S. typhimurium strain
( B). At the
same time, the conducted assay confirmed that the reference mutagen,
2-nitrofluorene, causes a significant increase in the number of shift
mutations in the utilized bacterial strain and that 2-aminoanthracene
requires metabolic activation to gain mutagenic properties.
 

## In Vivo ADMET for 15
The aim of the PK studies was the first assessment of the basic PK
parameters of the tested compound 15 in a representative
species of rodents (rats that are small enough not to require much
compound but large enough for a large volume of blood and organs)
and the determination of their penetration into various organs (heart,
lungs, liver, kidneys), including the target organ (brain). Rats were
administered with 15 at a single dose of 1 mg/kg intraperitoneal
(i.p.), determined in behavioral studies, because this route is most
often used in our laboratory for in vivo screening
of new compounds, with low impact of stress on laboratory rodents.
Compound 15’s mean serum concentration–time
profiles and key PK parameters were calculated using a non-compartmental
approach. shows that 15 administered at a dose of 1 mg/kg i.p.
in male Wistar rats (200–230 g) was rapidly absorbed from the
peritoneal cavity (Tmax = 5 min), whereas Cmax was 35 ng/mL. The area under the concentration–time
curve from the time of dosing to the time of the last measurable concentration
(AUC0–t) for serum was 1404.8 ng·min/mL.
The apparent volume of distribution (Vz/F) during the terminal phase was
54.8 L/kg, and clearance (CL/F) was 32.6 L/h/kg.
The tested compound was characterized by a slow terminal elimination,
resulting in a favorable value for serum elimination half-time (t0.5λz = 69
min, ).
 The tissue distribution of 15 was assessed
at five
different time points (5, 15, 30, 60, and 120 min) after single i.p.
administration at the dose of 1 mg/kg in rats (n =
3–4 per time point). The results are presented in .
 The tissue distribution profiles of 15 reveal that
this compound was rapidly absorbed and readily diffused throughout
all analyzed tissues ( ). Following its i.p. administration, Cmax for 15 was observed in heart, liver, and kidney
tissues at 5 min, in lung tissue at 15 min, and in brain tissue at
20 min post-dosing, after which the concentrations declined markedly
over the next 60–120 min, indicating that the tested compound
does not accumulate substantially in any of the analyzed tissues.
Notably, the concentrations of 15 in brain tissue
were highest, reaching up to 52.94 and 54.87 ng/g after 15 and 30
min, respectively ( ). The concentrations determined in serum at these points
were 2 and 3 times lower, respectively ( ), suggesting that 15 can efficiently
cross the BBB. The compound concentrations under investigation in
the heart tissue were much lower than in the tissues mentioned above.
The calculated tissue-to-serum AUC ratios (Kp) followed the same pattern as the values of Cmax, reaching the highest value for lung tissue and the
lowest for heart tissue ( ).
 The elimination rates of 15 from brain
tissue were
similar to those observed in serum. Exceptions were the kidneys and
heart, where the terminal half-life was shorter than those in serum
and other tissues tested. Similarly, mean residence time (MRT) values
were the shortest in these organs, and the highest values of this
parameter were observed in the lungs ( ). As expected, tissue-to-serum concentration
ratios ( )
were very low for the heart, and the highest values were noted for
the lungs.
 The results of these in vivo studies
allowed us
to extend the knowledge about the ADME properties of 15 initially estimated in vitro. The studied compound 15 demonstrated an excellent permeability, with a Pe value >2-fold higher than that estimated for well-permeable
caffeine ( ).
In accordance with the high permeability found in the PAMPA, the PK
parameters evaluated in vivo indicated rapid absorption
of 15 from the extensive distribution in the peritoneal
cavity (V/F = 54.8 L/kg) ( ).
Furthermore,
the high serum clearance (CL/F =
32.6 L/h/kg) and a mean t0.5λz of 69 min can be observed, surpassing the
clearance rates of other drugs commonly used for AD, such as donepezil
(1 mL/min/kg i.m.), rivastigmine (0.69 mL/min/kg i.m.), and memantine
(211 mL/min/kg p.o.). This suggests that in young male rats, following
single administrations, there is no significant long-term accumulation
of 15. However, it is important to consider that in older
rats, the CL/F of 15 may exhibit a different,
potentially lower value, as confirmed by published data on age-related
PK differences observed with donepezil. Moreover, it is worth noting that multiple doses of 15 could potentially lead to a reduction in CL/F,
as observed in other studies, such as those involving memantine, where
clearance decreased by 1.73-fold after oral administration of multiple
doses. Given that drugs for AD are predominantly
used in older populations and significant PK changes occur with age,
including reductions in renal and hepatic clearance, these findings are essential for a comprehensive understanding
of drug behavior in this context. Beyond age-related differences,
it is substantial to recognize that the clearance of compounds in
rats may vary from that in human patients due to differences in enzymatic
activity. To address the issue of species-dependent clearance for 15, in vitro studies were conducted to assess
clearance (CL and t1/2) in both human
and rat microsomes, as described above. The results of those studies
( ) reveal that
the clearance in the human microsome model is approximately 3 times
slower than that in rat microsomes, offering an encouraging prognosis
for a similar relationship in an in vivo setting.
On the other hand, the volume of distribution of 15 was approximately 82-fold greater than the average volume of rat
total body water (0.67 L/kg), suggesting
that 15 could be extensively distributed in the tissues
and organs with a large degree of tissue binding. The maximum concentration
in rat brain was observed slightly later than in serum and was higher
until the end of the monitoring ( and ). This behavior
may suggest favorable properties of 15 to maintain a
therapeutic concentration longer. In addition, the brain-to-serum
AUC ratio (Kp,brain) is the most widely
used in vivo parameter to classify compounds regarding
CNS distribution, where Kp,brain = 1 is
used as a cutoff. Thus, the Kp,brain = 2.16 for 15 ( ) indicates an excellent
BBB penetration. The confirmed in vivo presence of 15 in brain tissue ( , ) is essential for potential drugs in the treatment of AD,
in particular for those acting via 5-HT6R, which is present
almost exclusively in the CNS. In addition, good penetration into
the brain is crucial for the various neuroprotective mechanisms found
for 15in vitro to translate into the
desired therapeutic effects, i.e., inhibiting neurodegeneration.
According to our preliminary experiments, 15 is mainly
distributed to the most abundant blood-supply tissues, such as lungs,
kidneys, and liver, which implies that the distribution of 15 might depend on the blood flow and perfusion rate of the organ.
These findings may also indicate that 15 is metabolized
and excreted via these organs. According to the concentration–time
profiles examined in liver and kidneys, 15 decreased
more rapidly in kidneys than in liver, which shows that they kidneys
played a more important role ( , ). The relatively high accumulation of compounds in liver
and kidneys could cause a risk of hepato- or nephrotoxic effects,
which seem to be negligible in the case of 15 due to
the in vitro confirmed lack of influence on the viability
of either liver (HepG2) or kidney (HEK-293) cell lines, even at concentrations
as high as 50 μM.
In summary, the comprehensive results
of ADME in vivo in rats, in line with the initial
ADMET studies in vitro, demonstrated favorable PK
properties for 15, which
may be considered a potentially valuable pharmaceutical agent capable
of targeting the CNS with a favorable in vitro safety
profile and satisfactory PK properties after a single i.p. administration.

## In Vivo Behavioral Assays for 15
Based on in vitro data obtained, as well
as the PK assays in vivo, 15 was selected
for in vivo behavioral studies. First, the ability
of 15 to reverse memory impairment was investigated in
the novel object recognition (NOR) test. The NOR test was chosen based
on our earlier studies with triazine ligands of the 5-HT6 receptor. Thus, we investigated
the effect of acute administration of 15 in the NOR test
in rats upon MK-801-induced memory impairment. The induction of cognitive
deficits in animals is considered a valid model approach to study
impairments that occur in humans as, for example, a consequence of
developmental intellectual disabilities, aging, or disease processes. MK-801 (dizocilpine) is an NMDA receptor antagonist
capable of inducing cognitive impairments in rodent models related
to human cognitive deficits associated with CNS disorders such as
dementia and schizophrenia. Cognitive deficits induced by MK-801 can be
antagonized by putative cognition enhancers with a characteristic
pharmacological profile. The 5-HT6 receptor ligands were
shown to ameliorate these deficits, , supporting
the predictive validity of animal models with MK-801-induced cognitive
deficits. The preference of rats to explore the novel object rather
than the familiar object in the T2 session denotes the ability of
the investigated compound, given jointly with 0.1 mg/kg of MK-801,
to reverse MK-801-induced memory impairment in the NOR test. To give
thought to rats’ preference for novel object exploration, the
discrimination index (DI) was used ( ). Compound 15, in a statistically
significant manner, reversed MK-801-induced memory impairment, measured
by DI level, when injected at doses of 0.3 mg/kg and 3 mg/kg. 15, administered at a dose of 1 mg/kg, also reversed MK-801-induced
memory impairments, but the results of DI were not statistically significant
( ). The reference
memory enhancer, donepezil, reversed memory disturbances in the dose
range of 0.3–3 mg/kg, but the statistically significant level
was reached only for the dose of 1 mg/kg ( ). Thus, the desired pharmacological effect
of 15 can be considered more potent than that of donepezil.
 In parallel with the evaluation of DI in the T2
phase in the NOR
test, the total exploratory time of objects in the recognition phase
(T2) was determined after i.p. co-administration of 15 and MK-801 to analyze the impact of the administered compounds on
the exploratory activity of rats. 15, injected with MK-801
(0.1 mg/kg), did not alter the total exploratory activity in T2 ( ). Therefore, the
observed impact on memory processes in the T2 phase of 15 ( ) appears
to be specific, and no disruptive effects related to, e.g., the properties
of hyperlocomotor activity of the compound were observed.
 In the next step, the antidepressant-like properties
were assessed
for 15. In the forced swim test (FST), 15 did not show antidepressant-like activity in the whole dose range
used. We did not observe a shortening of immobility time after treatment
of 15 vs vehicle-treated rats ( ).
 The potential anxiolytic-like activity of 15 was investigated
in the elevated plus-maze (EPM) test. 15 showed anxiolytic-like
properties in the entire range of doses used (0.3, 1, and 3 mg/kg),
but only the dose of 3 mg/kg of 15 was statistically
significant, and the time spent in the open arms and the number of
entries were 10 times and 5 times longer vs the vehicle-treated group,
respectively ( ). However, we cannot firmly conclude that the observed effect is
related to the anxiolytic activity of the dose of 3 mg/kg of 15, although a statistically significant increase in spontaneous
activity was observed, assessed simultaneously with the anxiolytic
properties. Administration of 15 at lower doses (0.3
and 1 mg/kg) did not change the total exploratory activity measured
simultaneously with the anxiolytic activity ( ).
 The results of behavioral studies indicated a significant
potency
of 15, more pronounced than that of donepezil, to reverse
memory disturbances in the NOR test at a dose as low as 0.3 mg/kg,
as well as an anxiolytic-like effect in the EPM test. The procognitive
properties in vivo are most probably associated with
the strong antagonistic action of 15 on 5-HT6R, but also with a satisfying PK profile identified for this compound
both in vivo and in vitro. These
results, together with the impressive neuroprotective effects demonstrated
by 15 in a variety of in vitro assays,
indicate this β-naphthyl dimethyl-branched selenoether-triazine
derivative to be a very promising agent in the search for an innovative
therapy for AD that can fight not only the symptoms but also the causes
of this severe neurodegenerative disease.

## Conclusions
Despite the plethora of preclinical studies
indicating the 5-HT6R agents as very promising to become
novel therapies for AD,
the clinical outcome has yet been disappointing. Considering the complex
etiology of this neurodegenerative disease and the high need for novel,
innovative therapy regimens, the design of compounds with both multidirectional
and unconventional profiles might be the key to a successful approach.
In recent years, our research group developed a new family of potent
and selective 5-HT6R ligands with a 1,3,5-triazine
core which, unlike other known ligands, possess neither an indole
moiety nor a sulfonyl group in their structures. , , − The described triazine-based
derivatives with oxygen or sulfur atoms in their linkers showed rather
moderate 5-HT6R potency and considerable selectivity over
other serotonin receptors, and the most promising ones reduced MK-801-induced
memory impairments in NOR test in rats. In this work, we decided to
combine those interesting results with the potential of selenium organic
compounds to mimic GPx, which can be highly useful in AD treatment. , Although the challenges were high, especially in the area of chemical
synthesis, our efforts turned out to be successful. Hence, by exchanging
the heteroatom in the linker, we designed and characterized first-in-class
selenium-containing 5-HT6R agents (1–19), with particularly highly potent ones (13–15) compelling neuroprotective properties together
with promising pharmacodynamic and pharmacokinetic profiles.
The new compounds 3, 6–15, and 17 were obtained with a 3–4-step synthesis,
in which the most complicated step was to obtain commercially unavailable
diselenide compounds of naphthalene or a substituted benzene moiety.
After unsuccessful attempts using various literature methods, a sophisticated
organometallic chemistry method applying a Grignard reaction, developed
and described by us in this work for the first time, was effective.
The whole series 1–19 was tested
in RBAs, where the compounds presented a wide range of affinities
toward 5-HT6R, with the most potent compounds substituted
with a naphthyl ring reaching Ki values
even below 10 nM. Pharmacological profiles of the most potent 5-HT6R agents, 13–15, were compared
with those of previously described oxygen- and sulfur-containing agents,
proving that the introduction of selenium into the structures of the
ligands is a favorable modification. Selenium-containing ligands turned
out to be 4–6 times more active than the corresponding oxygen-containing
analogs and similarly (for dimethyl branching in the linker) up to
2 times more active (for methyl and ethyl branching in the linker)
when compared to corresponding sulfur-containing analogs. The most
potent subgroup, 13–15, was also
tested for intrinsic activity in the cAMP assay, where they turned
out to be antagonists with highly corresponding values of Ki and Kb. The influence
of chalcogen substitution on activity toward 5-HT6R was
investigated in silico. We performed and described,
to the best of our knowledge, the first docking and MD studies of
seleno compounds to the 5-HT6R, upon a challenging parametrization
of Se. The obtained results showed that, only in sulfur and selenium
derivatives, the amine group attached to triazine is employed
to form hydrogen bonds that are responsible for the stronger, compared
to the O-analog, 5-HT6R affinity observed in vitro. Computer-aided SAR analysis also established that the presence
of the β-naphthyl ring, as in 15, among tested
aromatic moieties is the most beneficial for activity toward 5-HT6R, very likely due to the stronger stabilization via π–π
interactions with the aromatic amino acids abundant in the 5-HT6R binding pocket.
Due to excellent results in the pharmacological
screening, 13–15 were further investigated
for neuroprotective
properties in comprehensive in vitro studies. All
three compounds protected cells from oxidative stress in the neuroblastoma
SH-SY5Y model. They also presented a total antioxidant capacity similar
to that of ascorbic acid at low concentrations, most potent in the
case of 15 at concentrations close to pharmacologically
active doses. Further mechanistic studies underlying antioxidant properties
of the compounds demonstrated that 13–15 regulate antioxidant and pro-inflammatory genes such as NRF2, HO-1,
SOD1, and NQO1 and that their effect is even more evident with respect
to donepezil. Especially the dimethyl-branched 15 occurred
as an inducer of NRF2 nuclear translocation, which may lead to an
increased expression of antioxidant genes. These results further confirm
that the introduction of selenium into the structure of the 5-HT6R triazine ligands broadens their mode of action by
involving numerous mechanisms of antioxidant effects. This is especially
beneficial in the context of searching for innovative therapies for
AD, where oxidative stress plays an essential role in the development
of the disease. The introduction of selenium into our 1,3,5-triazine-based
serotonin-receptor ligands and subsequent optimization toward selective
5-HT6R resulted not only in modulating a single target
(i.e., 5-HT6R) but also in mimicking GPx, which can be
highly useful in AD treatment. , This combination approach
provides a very promising strategy, not reported before, meeting the
polypharmacology criteria, which seem necessary to deal with neurodegenerative
diseases involving several pathophysiological processes. 
In order to determine the drug-likeness
of 13–15in vitro, an assessment of PK properties
was performed. All three compounds presented favorable permeability
in the PAMPA and satisfying metabolic stability in rLMs (13, 14) and hLMs (15) models. 15, as hit structure in this study, was tested for its affinity toward
a broader panel of CNS targets, showing minimal impact (0–15%
at 1 μM) on histamine H3, muscarinic M1, cannabinoid CB1, α2 adrenergic, and
NMDA receptors, indicating a significant selectivity for 5-HT6R. As part of broader safety considerations, 15 was examined in vitro for hERG inhibition, hepatotoxicity
(HepG2), nephrotoxicity (HEK-293), and mutagenic effects (Ames test).
It exhibited moderate hERG inhibition, 3 times weaker than that of
verapamil, as well as no cytotoxicity on HepG2 and HEK-293 cell lines.
Finally, 15 demonstrated safety in an Ames test with S. typhimurium TA98, even in the presence of rat liver S9
fraction, suggesting it has a low risk of mutagenicity.
The
subsequent in vivo data showed that 15 was rapidly absorbed after i.p. administration and extensively
distributed to tissues, including brain. Thus, 15 is
able to cross the BBB, which is vital for therapeutic effects in vivo in AD. Considering the promising ADMET data in vitro and in vivo, 15 was
administered in rats for behavioral studies in vivo. The NOR, EPM, and FST tests indicate its potent procognitive-like
action that was able to significantly hamper the effects of memory
impairment induced by MK-801 at a dose of 15 (0.3 mg/kg)
even lower than that of the donepezil used as control, as well as
anxiolytic-like properties (3 mg/kg).
In summary, the β-naphthyl
dimethyl-branched selenoether-triazine
derivative 15 is a first-in-class selenium-containing,
highly potent 5-HT6R antagonist with very good ADMET properties
and confirmed BBB penetration in vivo, exhibiting
a comprehensive neuroprotection profile combined with a procognitive
activity in rats. The overall favorable data further suggest more
advanced and broader clinical studies for 15, which possesses
considerable potential to become a clinical candidate, possibly bringing
novelty and effectiveness to AD therapy.

## Experimental Section

## Chemistry
1H NMR and 13C NMR
spectra were routinely recorded in DMSO-d6 at 500 and 126 MHz, respectively, in the basic form of final compounds
(except 9, 10, and 15, for
which spectra were recorded for hydrochlorides) on an FT-NMR 500 MHz
JEOL (JNM-ECZR500 RS1 version ECZR) apparatus. 77Se NMR
spectra were recorded in DMSO-d6 at 95
MHz on an FT-NMR 400 MHz Bruker Avance spectrometer. Spectroscopy
was carried out at ambient temperature using the solvent signal as
an internal standard. Chemical shifts in spectra were reported in
parts per million (ppm) on the δ scale with coupling constants
(J) values in Hertz. The UPLC-MS/MS system consisted
of a Waters Acquity Premier (Waters Corp., Milford, MA, USA) coupled
with a Waters Xevo TQ-S Cronos mass spectrometer (electrospray ionization
(ESI) mode). Chromatographic separations were carried out using an
Acquity UPLC BEH (bridged ethylene hybrid) C18 column, 2.1 ×
100 mm, and 1.7 μm particle size, equipped an Acquity UPLC BEH
C18 VanGuard precolumn, 2.1 × 5 mm, and 1.7 μm particle
size. The column was maintained at 40 °C and eluted under gradient
conditions using from 95% to 0% of eluent A over 10 min, at a flow
rate of 0.3 mL min–1. Eluent A: water/formic acid
(0.1%, v/v); eluent B: acetonitrile/formic acid (0.1%, v/v). Chromatograms
were recorded using Waters eλ PDA detector. Spectra were analyzed
in the 200–500 nm range with 1.2 nm resolution and a sampling
rate of 20 points/s. MS detection settings of Waters Xevo TQ-S Cronos
mass spectrometer were as follows: source temperature 150 °C,
desolvation temperature 350 °C, desolvation gas flow rate 600
L h–1, cone gas flow 100 L h–1, capillary potential 3.00 kV, cone potential 30 V. Nitrogen was
used for both nebulizing and drying gas. The data were obtained in
a scan mode ranging from 50 to 1000 m/z in 0.5 s intervals. The data acquisition software was MassLynx V
4.2 (Waters). Melting points were determined on a Buchi 530 melting
point apparatus and are uncorrected. Elemental analysis has been performed
for 3, 6–15, and 17 on a ThermoFisher FlashSmart CNHS/O apparatus (for data
see the Supporting Information). Thin-layer
chromatography (TLC) was performed on Merck silica gel 60 F254 plates,
and the spots were visualized by UV light. All chemicals were purchased
from Merck (Darmstadt, Germany), AlfaAesar/ThermoFisher (Schwerte,
Germany), or Sigma-Aldrich (Schellendorf, Germany), as well as the
analytical-grade solvents. The final compounds 3, 6–15, and 17 possess a purity
>95%, confirmed by 1H and 13C NMR, as well
as
elemental analysis and HPLC.

## General Procedure for the Synthesis of Diselenides 20–25 with Grignard Reaction
Magnesium
(56.5 mmol) was added to a dry flask under inert conditions, then
30 mL of anhydrous THF and 1–2 tiny crystals of iodine were
added. A suitable halobenzene (54 mmol) was dissolved in 30 mL of
anhydrous THF and added dropwise to the reaction flask; then, the
reaction mixture was heated to reflux. After refluxing for 2–5
min, 325-mesh selenium (54 mmol) was slowly added, and the reaction
mixture was stirred at room temperature for 1 h under TLC control
(petroleum ether:ethyl acetate 9:1). Subsequently, ethanol
(15 mL) and 20% ammonium chloride solution (15 mL) were added dropwise,
respectively, and the reaction mixture was stirred in open atmosphere
for 2 h. The mixture was extracted with DCM (4 × 90 mL). Organic
fractions were combined, washed with water, dried over Na2SO4, and evaporated under vacuum. The desirable product
was obtained as a mixture of organic selenium derivatives and used
in the crude form for further synthesis without additional purification.
The selenoether ester intermediates 26–30, 41, 43, and 44 were
prepared as described previously. , , 

## General Procedure for the Synthesis of Selenoether Ester Intermediates 31–40, 42
An appropriate
diaryldiselenide (9 mmol) was dissolved in a 1:1 mixture of water
and THF (50 mL) under nitrogen gas. NaBH4 (45 mmol) was
added. The reaction mixture was stirred at room temperature for around
30 min, and then a solution of suitable bromoester (18 mmol) in THF
(5 mL) was added without opening the reaction apparatus. The reaction
mixture was stirred at room temperature and monitored via TLC (24–48
h). Subsequently, the solution was stirred for further 30 min on air,
and then the reaction mixture was diluted with 50 mL of a saturated
aqueous solution of NH4Cl and extracted with dichloromethane.
The combined organic phases were dried and filtered, and the solvent
was evaporated under reduced pressure to get the product, which was
finally purified using flash chromatography.

## Methyl 2-((2,5-dimethylphenyl)selanyl)propanoate 31
Yellowish oil, yield 55.3%. 1H NMR (500 MHz,
DMSO-d6) δ 7.35 (s, 1H), 7.14 (d, J = 7.7 Hz, 1H), 7.04 (d, J = 7.4 Hz, 1H),
3.88 (q, J = 7.0 Hz, 1H), 3.50 (s, 3H), 2.29 (s,
3H), 2.22 (s, 3H), 1.40 (d, J = 6.9 Hz, 3H) ppm.

## Methyl 2-((2,5-dimethylphenyl)selanyl)butanoate (32)
Yellowish oil, yield 49.7%. 1H NMR (500 MHz,
DMSO-d6) δ 7.34 (s, 1H), 7.13 (d, J = 7.4 Hz, 1H), 7.03 (d, J = 7.4 Hz, 1H),
3.65 (dd, J = 8.6, 6.6 Hz, 1H), 3.50 (s, 3H), 2.29
(s, 3H), 2.22 (s, 3H), 1.80 (q, J = 7.1 Hz, 1H),
1.69 (q, J = 6.8 Hz, 1H), 0.89 (t, J = 7.3 Hz, 3H) ppm.

## Ethyl 2-((2,5-dimethylphenyl)selanyl)pentanoate (33)
Yellowish oil, yield 44.3%. 1H NMR (500 MHz,
DMSO-d6) δ 7.34 (dt, J = 7.2, 3.4 Hz, 1H), 7.11 (dd, J = 11.1, 4.0 Hz,
1H), 7.04–7.01 (m, 1H), 3.97–3.87 (m, 2H), 3.71–3.62
(m, 1H), 2.29 (s, 3H), 2.20 (s, 3H), 1.82–1.71 (m, 1H), 1.68–1.54
(m, 1H), 1.41–1.10 (m, 2H), 1.00 (dd, J =
8.0, 6.2 Hz, 3H), 0.82 (t, J = 7.4 Hz, 3H) ppm.

## Methyl 2-((2,5-dimethylphenyl)selanyl)-2-methylpropanoate (34)
Yellowish oil, yield 61.2%. 1H NMR
(500 MHz, DMSO-d6) δ 7.28 (dd, J = 2.9, 1.6 Hz, 1H), 7.18 (t, J = 5.1
Hz, 1H), 7.12–7.09 (m, 1H), 3.50 (s, 3H), 2.31 (s, 3H), 2.21
(s, 3H), 1.48–1.42 (s, 6H) ppm.

## Ethyl 2-((5-chloro-2-fluorophenyl)selanyl)pentanoate (35)
Yellowish oil, yield 55.6%. 1H NMR
(500 MHz, DMSO-d6) δ 7.57 (dd, J = 5.7, 2.6 Hz, 1H), 7.27 (ddd, J = 8.7,
4.4, 2.6 Hz, 1H), 7.02 (t, 1H), 4.08 (qd, J = 7.1,
2.0 Hz, 2H), 3.72 (dd, J = 8.9, 6.4 Hz, 1H), 1.95–1.70
(m, 2H), 1.48–1.37 (m, 2H), 1.15 (t, J = 7.1
Hz, 3H), 0.92 (t, J = 7.4 Hz, 3H) ppm.

## Methyl 2-(naphthalen-1-ylselanyl)propanoate (36)
Yellowish oil, yield 48.3%. 1H NMR (500 MHz,
DMSO-d6) δ 8.30 (d, J = 8.6 Hz, 1H), 7.95 (d, J = 8.0 Hz, 1H), 7.92 (d, J = 8.0 Hz, 1H), 7.85 (dd, J = 7.2, 0.9
Hz, 1H), 7.60–7.56 (m, 1H), 7.55–7.49 (m, 1H), 7.43
(dd, J = 8.0, 7.4 Hz, 1H), 3.91 (q, J = 6.9 Hz, 1H), 3.37 (s, 3H), 1.38 (d, J = 6.9 Hz,
3H) ppm.

## Methyl 2-(naphthalen-1-ylselanyl)butanoate (37)
Yellowish oil, yield 37.7%. 1H NMR (500 MHz, DMSO-d6) δ 8.29 (d, J = 8.6
Hz, 1H), 7.96 (d, J = 8.2 Hz, 1H), 7.92 (d, J = 8.2 Hz, 1H), 7.85 (d, J = 7.2, Hz,
1H), 7.62–7.58 (m, 1H), 7.56–7.51 (m, 1H), 7.46–7.41
(m, 1H), 3.70 (dd, J = 8.6, 6.6 Hz, 1H), 3.37 (s,
3H), 1.80–1.68 (m, 2H), 0.88 (t, J = 7.3 Hz,
3H) ppm.

## Methyl 2-(naphthalen-2-ylselanyl)propanoate (38)
Yellowish oil, yield 22.0%. 1H NMR (500 MHz,
DMSO-d6) δ 8.11 (s, 1H), 7.92–7.86
(m, 2H), 7.85 (d, J = 8.6, Hz, 1H), 7.56 (dd, J = 8.4, 1,6 Hz, 1H), 7.52–7.47 (m, 2H), 3.92 (q, J = 6.9 Hz, 1H), 3.37 (s, 3H), 1.35 (d, J = 6.9 Hz, 3H) ppm.

## Methyl 2-(naphthalen-2-ylselanyl)butanoate (39)
Yellowish oil, yield 43.9%. 1H NMR (500 MHz, DMSO-d6) δ 8.12 (s, 1H), 7.91–7.85 (m,
2H), 7.83 (d, J = 8.6, Hz, 1H), 7.58 (dd, J = 8.4, 1,6 Hz, 1H), 7.53–7.48 (m, 2H), 3.81 (dd, J = 8.3, 6.6 Hz, 1H), 3.53 (s, 3H), 1.82–1.67 (m,
2H), 1.70 (dt, J = 14.0, 7.0 Hz, 1H), 0.90 (t, J = 7.3 Hz, 3H) ppm.

## Methyl 2-methyl-2-(naphthalen-2-ylselanyl)propanoate (40)
Yellowish oil, yield 53.2%. 1H NMR
(500 MHz, DMSO-d6) δ 8.11 (s, 1H),
7.84–7.80 (m, 2H), 7.76 (d, J = 8.4 Hz, 1H),
7.61 (d, J = 8.4 Hz, 1H), 7.52–7.49 (m, 2H),
3.62 (s, 3H), 1.60 (s, 6H) ppm.

## Methyl 2-(benzylselanyl)propanoate (42)
Yellowish oil, yield 85.0%. 1H NMR (500 MHz, DMSO-d6) δ 7.32 (d, J = 7.1
Hz, 4H), 7.26–7.19 (m, 1H), 3.98 (s, 2H), 3.64 (s, 3H), 3.54
(q, J = 7.1 Hz, 1H), 1.42 (d, J =
7.1 Hz, 3H) ppm.

## General Procedure for the Synthesis of Selenoether Derivatives
of 1,3,5-Triazine 1–19
All
final compounds 1–19 were prepared
as described in ref ( ). Briefly, sodium (8 mmol) was dissolved in 10 mL of absolute methanol,
and then the (4-methyl-1-piperazinyl)biguanide dihydrochloride
(3 mmol) and a suitable carboxylic acid ester-containing Se-ether
(3–5 mmol) were added. The reaction mixture was refluxed for
15–30 h. After cooling to room temperature, the solvent was
evaporated, and the residue was dissolved in water (10 mL), stirred
for 30 min at room temperature, and kept overnight in a refrigerator.
The precipitated triazine product was isolated by filtration
and crystallized from methanol to give the desired final products
as solids in basic form (method A). In case of a lack of desirable
precipitate, the product was extracted with dichloromethane and purified
by flash chromatography (method B).

## 4-(4-Methylpiperazin-1-yl)-6-(1-(phenylselanyl)propyl)-1,3,5-triazin-2-amine
(1)
Prepared according to Ali et al. 

## 4-(4-Methylpiperazin-1-yl)-6-(1-(phenylselanyl)butyl)-1,3,5-triazin-2-amine
(2)
Prepared according to Ali et al. 

## 4-(4-Methylpiperazin-1-yl)-6-(1-(phenylselanyl)pentyl)-1,3,5-triazin-2-amine
(3)
Method B, white solid, yield 18.5%, mp 278–279
°C (hydrochloride). 1H NMR (500 MHz, DMSO-d6) δ 11.76 (s, 1H), 7.54 (m, 2H) 7.41–7.32
(m, 3H), 4.54–4.37 (m, 2H), 4.11 (t, J = 7.5
Hz, 8.5 Hz, 1H), 3.47–3.44 (m, 3H), 3.07 (m, 3H), 2.75 (s,
3H), 2.02 (s, 1H), 1.83 (s, 1H), 1.41–1.23 (m, 6H), 0.82 (t, J = 7.0 Hz, 3H) ppm. 13C NMR (126 MHz, DMSO-d6) δ 161.76, 135.32, 129.16, 128.66, 51.30,
41.91, 40.11, 39.93, 30.92, 29.38, 21.69, 21.60, 13.76, 13.71 ppm. 77Se NMR (95 MHz, DMSO-d6) δ
460.66 ppm. MS (ESI) m/z calcd for
C19H28N6Se [M+H]+ 421.16,
found [M+H]+ 421.27.

## 4-(4-Methylpiperazin-1-yl)-6-(2-(phenylselanyl)propan-2-yl)-1,3,5-triazin-2-amine
(4)
Prepared according to Ali et al. 

## 4-(4-Methylpiperazin-1-yl)-6-(3-(phenylselanyl)propyl)-1,3,5-triazin-2-amine
(5)
Prepared according to Ali et al. 

## 4-(1-((2,5-Dimethylphenyl)selanyl)ethyl)-6-(4-methylpiperazin-1-yl)-1,3,5-triazin-2-amine
(6)
Method B, yellowish solid, yield 28.4%,
mp 107 °C (free base). 1H NMR (500 MHz, DMSO-d6) δ 7.38 (s, 1H), 7.06 (d, J = 7.5 Hz, 1H), 6.95 (d, J = 6.0 Hz, 1H), 6.85–6.7668
(m, 2H), 4.02 (q, J = 7.0 Hz, 3.59 (br s, 4H), 2.24–2.20
(m, 10H), 2.14 (s, 3H), 1.57 (q, J = 6.0 Hz, 7.0
Hz, 6.0 Hz, 3H) ppm. 13C NMR (126 MHz, DMSO-d6) δ 178.56, 167.53, 164.86, 136.79, 135.99, 134.54,
131.23, 130.15, 128.63, 55.46, 55.34, 46.31, 43.40, 42.87, 31.23,
22.19, 20.93, 20.24 ppm. 77Se NMR (95 MHz, DMSO- d6) δ 398.07 ppm. MS (ESI) m/z calcd for C18H26N6Se [M+H]+ 407.15, found [M+H]+ 406.95.

## 4-(1-((2,5-Dimethylphenyl)selanyl)propyl)-6-(4-methylpiperazin-1-yl)-1,3,5-triazin-2-amine
(7)
Method A, yellowish solid, yield 33.3%,
mp 285 °C (hydrochloride). 1H NMR (500 MHz, DMSO-d6) δ 7.37 (s, 1H), 7.04 (d, J = 8.0 Hz, 1H), 6.93 (d, J = 7.75 Hz, 1H), 6.84–6.75
(m, 2H), 3.76 (dd, J = 15.0 Hz, 1H), 3.67–3.57
(m, 4H), 3.13 (s, 1H), 2.24–2.20 (m, 8H), 2.14 (s, 3H), 2.11–2.02
(m, 1H), 1.88–1.80 (m, 1H), 0.84 (t, J = 7.0
Hz, 7.5 Hz, 10.0 Hz, 3H) ppm. 13C NMR (126 MHz, DMSO-d6) δ 177.82, 167.53, 164.87, 136.67, 135.95,
134.38, 131.40, 130.13, 128.53, 54.83, 51.03, 49.13, 46.31, 42.87,
27.22, 22.18, 20.94, 13.32, 12.97 ppm. 77Se NMR (95 MHz,
DMSO- d6) δ 402.05 ppm. MS (ESI) m/z calcd for C19H28N6Se [M+H]+ 421.16, found [M+H]+ 421.21.

## 4-(1-((2,5-Dimethylphenyl)selanyl)butyl)-6-(4-methylpiperazin-1-yl)-1,3,5-triazin-2-amine
(8)
Method B, white solid, yield 7.6%, mp 143–145
°C (free base). 1H NMR (500 MHz, DMSO-d6) δ 7.34 (s, 1H), 7.03 (d, J =
7.5 Hz, 1H), 6.92 (d, J = 8.5 Hz, 1H), 6.79–6.73
(m, 2H), 3.82 (dd, J = 15.0 Hz, 1H), 3.57–3.48
(m, 4H), 2.22–2.18 (m, 10H),, 2.13 (s, 3H), 2.06–1.99
(m, 1H), 1.81–1.74 (m, 1H), 1.32–1.18 (m, 2H), 0.79
(t, J = 7.5 Hz, 7.0 Hz, 3H) ppm. 13C NMR
(126 MHz, DMSO d6) δ 178.02, 167.50, 164.83, 136.66, 135.95,
134.32, 131.34, 130.15, 128.57, 54.78, 49.04, 46.26, 42.83, 36.04,
22.15, 21.45, 20.93, 14.14 ppm. 77Se NMR (95 MHz, DMSO- d6) δ 378.39 ppm. MS (ESI) m/z calcd for C20H30N6Se [M]+ 434.17 found [M]+ 434.96.

## 4-(2-((2,5-Dimethylphenyl)selanyl)propan-2-yl)-6-(4-methylpiperazin-1-yl)-1,3,5-triazin-2-amine
(9)
Method B, white solid, yield 5.5%, mp 265–267
°C (hydrochloride). 1H NMR (500 MHz, D2O) δ 7.15 (d, J = 8.5 Hz, 1H), 7.10 (d, J = 5.75 Hz, 2H), 3.50 (dd, J = 21.5 Hz,
1H), 3.20 (s, 1H), 3.05 (s, 1H), 2.84–2.83 (m, 1H), 2.81 (s,
4H), 2.76 (m, 1H), 2.17 (s, 3H), 2.10 (s, 3H), 1.68 (s, 7H), 1.03
(t, J = 7.0 Hz, 1H) ppm. 13C NMR (126
MHz, DMSO-d6) δ 139.69, 139.40,
135.26, 130.49, 129.65, 128.41, 71.14, 51.53, 48.56, 41.95, 39.84,
39.02, 26.42, 22.38, 20.18, 18.37 ppm. 77Se NMR (95 MHz,
DMSO- d6) δ 402.09 ppm. MS (ESI) m/z calcd for C19H28N6Se [M]+ 420.15, found [M]+ 420.84.

## 4-(1-((5-Chloro-2-fluorophenyl)selanyl)butyl)-6-(4-methylpiperazin-1-yl)-1,3,5-triazin-2-amine
(10)
Method B, yellowish solid, yield 36.1%,
mp 122–124 °C (free base). 1H NMR (500 MHz,
DMSO-d6) δ 11.43 (s, 1H), 7.68 (dd, J = 8.5 Hz, 1H), 7.45 (m, 1H), 7.30 (t, J = 8.5 Hz, 1H), 4.52–4.44 (d, J = 38.0 Hz,
2H), 4.17 (t, J = 7.75 Hz, 7.25 Hz, 1H), 3.43–3.32
(m, 3H), 2.99 (m, 2H), 2.71 (s, 3H), 2.02–1.95 (m, 1H), 1.84–1.77
(m, 1H), 1.40–1.27 (m, 2H), 0.85 (t, J = 7.0
Hz, 7.5 Hz, 5 Hz, 3H) ppm. 13C NMR (126 MHz, DMSO-d6) δ 164.61, 161.20, 159.29, 134.42, 133.51,129.14,
129.11, 117.61, 117.41, 55.47, 52.12, 49.11, 42.52, 35.38, 21.19,
14.20, 14.15, 14.10 ppm. 77Se NMR (95 MHz, DMSO- d6) δ 361.23 ppm. MS (ESI) m/z calcd for C18H24ClFN6Se [M+H]+ 459.10, found [M+H]+ 459.22.

## 4-(4-Methylpiperazin-1-yl)-6-(1-(naphthalen-1-ylselanyl)ethyl)-1,3,5-triazin-2-amine
(11)
Method B, yellowish solid, yield 33.2%,
mp 221–224 °C (hydrochloride). 1H NMR (500
MHz, DMSO-d6) δ 8.29–8.19
(m, 1H), 7.91–7.85 (m, 3H), 7.51–7.47 (m, 2H), 7.40
(t, J = 15.5 Hz, 1H), 6.85–6.75 (m, 2H), 4.06
(q, J = 6.5 Hz, 7.5 Hz, 7.0 Hz, 1H), 3.54–3.34
(m, 4H), 3.13 (s, 1H), 2.25–2.14 (m, 3H), 2.12 (s, 3H), 2.08–2.07
(m, 1H), 1.54 (d, J = 7.0 Hz, 3H) ppm. 13C NMR (126 MHz, DMSO-d6) δ 161.24,
137.86, 137.83, 135.57, 133.99, 131.02, 129.35, 127.57, 127.55, 126.93,
126.91, 126.47, 126.06, 51.67, 42.37, 42.33, 40.43, 38.87, 38.23,
17.55 ppm. 77Se NMR (95 MHz, DMSO-d6) δ 383.19 ppm. MS (ESI) m/z calcd for C20H24N6Se
[M+H]+ 429.13, found [M+H]+ 429.20.

## 4-(4-Methylpiperazin-1-yl)-6-(1-(naphthalen-1-ylselanyl)propyl)-1,3,5-triazin-2-amine
(12)
Method B, yellowish solid, yield 24.0%,
mp 245–247 °C (hydrochloride). 1H NMR (500
MHz, DMSO-d6) δ 8.22–8.20
(m, 1H), 7.90–7.84 (m, 3H), 7.51–7.47 (m, 2H), 7.38
(t, J = 15.5 Hz, 1H), 6.85–6.74 (m, 2H), 3.80
(dd, J = 15.0 Hz, 1H), 3.55 (m, 1H), 3.54–3.50
(m, 1H), 3.41–3.33 (m, 2H), 2.25–2.13 (m, 3H), 2.12
(s, 3H), 2.12–2.00 (m, 2H), 1.90–1.81 (m, 1H), 0.81
(t, J = 7.5 Hz, 7.0 Hz, 3H) ppm. 13C NMR
(126 MHz, DMSO-d6) δ
177.35, 167.50, 164.71, 134.96, 134.78, 134.08, 129.41, 129.36, 129.12,
127.88, 127.21, 126.73, 126.40, 55.46, 54.70, 52.04, 51.44, 46.28,42.73,
27.01, 13.22 ppm. 77Se NMR (95 MHz, DMSO- d6) δ 381.26 ppm. MS (ESI) m/z calcd for C21H26N6Se
[M+H]+ 443.15, found [M+H]+443.14.

## 4-(4-Methylpiperazin-1-yl)-6-(1-(naphthalen-2-ylselanyl)ethyl)-1,3,5-triazin-2-amine
(13)
Method B, yellowish solid, yield 31.2%,
mp 214–215 °C (hydrochloride). 1H NMR (500
MHz, DMSO-d6) δ 8.07 (s, 1H), 7.86–7.81
(m, 2H), 7.78 (d, J = 9.0 Hz, 1H), 7.58 (dd, J = 10.0, 1H), 7.50–7.45 (m, 2H), 6.88–6.78
(m, 2H), 4.20 (q, J = 7.0 Hz, 7.0 Hz, 7.5 Hz, 1H),
3.57–3.51 (m, 6H), 2.15–2.11 (m, 2H), 2.09 (s, 3H),
1.62 (q, J = 6.0 Hz, 7.0 Hz, 5.5 Hz, 3H) ppm. 13C NMR (126 MHz, DMSO-d6) δ
162.15, 135.09, 133.77, 132.92, 128.83, 128.22, 128.13,127.51, 127.30,
125.52, 51.73, 42.43, 40.63, 40.46, 40.29, 40.12, 18.36 ppm. 77Se NMR (95 MHz, DMSO- d6) δ
458.26 ppm. MS (ESI) m/z calcd for
C20H24N6Se [M+H]+ 429.13,
found [M+H]+ 429.27.

## 4-(4-Methylpiperazin-1-yl)-6-(1-(naphthalen-2-ylselanyl)propyl)-1,3,5-triazin-2-amine
(14)
Method B, yellowish solid, yield 43.9%,
203–205 °C (hydrochloride). 1H NMR (500 MHz,
DMSO-d6) δ 8.06 (s, 1H), 7.86–7.80
(m, 2H), 7.77 (d, J = 8.5 Hz, 1H), 7.57 (dd, J = 10.5 Hz, 1H), 7.50–7.44 (m, 2H), 6.87–6.77
(m, 2H), 3.93 (dd, J = 15.0 Hz, 1H), 3.55–3.43
(m, 4H), 2.21–2.09 (m, 3H), 2.08 (s, 3H), 2.07–2.01
(m, 2H), 1.94–1.85 (m, 1H), 0.87 (t, J = 7.5
Hz, 7.0 Hz, 3H) ppm. 13C NMR (126 MHz, DMSO-d6) δ 177.70, 167.53, 164.78, 133.97, 132.46, 132.41,
131.37 128.63, 128.16, 127.80, 127.05, 126.74, 55.46, 54.70, 51.61,
46.25, 42.81, 40.62,27.08, 13.24 ppm. 77Se NMR (95 MHz,
DMSO- d6) δ 458.29 ppm. MS (ESI) m/z calcd for C21H26N6Se [M+H]+ 443.15, found [M+H]+ 443.23.

## 4-(4-methylpiperazin-1-yl)-6-((2-(naphthalen-2-yl)propan-2-yl)selanyl)-1,3,5-triazin-2-amine
(15)
Method B, yellowish solid, yield 18.3%,
mp 244–245 °C (hydrochloride). 1H NMR (500
MHz, DMSO-d6) δ 7.98 (s, 1H), 7.89–7.88
(m, 1H), 7.85–7.83 (m, 1H), 7.77 (d, J = 8.5
Hz, 1H), 7.53–7.47 (m, 2H), 7.48 (dd, J =
10.0 Hz, 1H), 6.75 (s, 2H), 3.54 (s, 2H) 3.30 (s, 4H), 2.20 (t, J
= 5.5 Hz, 5.0 Hz, 1H), 2.13 (s, 1H), 2.06 (s, 3H), 1.63 (s, 6H) ppm. 13C NMR (126 MHz, DMSO-d6) δ
138.04, 134.44, 133.57, 133.30, 128.66, 128.47, 128.21, 128.02, 127.33,
51.74, 42.42, 40.47, 40.30, 40.14 ppm. 77Se NMR (95 MHz,
DMSO- d6) δ 458.23 ppm. MS (ESI) m/z calcd for C21H26N6Se [M+H]+ 443.15, found [M+H]+ 443.27.

## 4-((benzylselanyl)methyl)-6-(4-methylpiperazin-1-yl)-1,3,5-triazin-2-amine
(16)
Prepared according to Ali et al. 

## 4-(1-(benzylselanyl)ethyl)-6-(4-methylpiperazin-1-yl)-1,3,5-triazin-2-amine
(17)
Method B, red solid, yield 13.5%, mp 154–155
°C (free base). 1H NMR (500 MHz, DMSO-d6) δ 11.81 (s, 1H), 8.53–7.87 (m, 1H), 7.36–7.34
(d, J = 7.5 Hz, 2H), 7.30–7.19 (m, 3H), 4.75–4.58
(m, 2H), 4.10 (q, J = 12.0 Hz, 17.0 Hz, 12.0 Hz,
2H) 3.97 (q, J = 7.0 Hz, 2H), 3.52–3.49 (m,
4H), 3.16 (s, 2H), 2.75 (s, 3H), 1.61 (q, J = 7.0
Hz, 3H) ppm. 13C NMR (126 MHz, DMSO-d6) δ 161.78, 138.59, 128.94, 128.81, 128.39, 126.73,
51.30, 48.57, 41.92, 39.92, 39.75, 39.58, 27.65, 17.78 ppm. 77Se NMR (95 MHz, DMSO-d6) δ 428.80
ppm. MS (ESI) m/z calcd for C17H24N6Se [M+H]+ 393.13, found
[M+H]+ 393.17.

## 4-(1-(benzylselanyl)propyl)-6-(4-methylpiperazin-1-yl)-1,3,5-triazin-2-amine
(18)
Prepared according to Ali et al. 

## 4-(3-(benzylselanyl)propyl)-6-(4-methylpiperazin-1-yl)-1,3,5-triazin-2-amine(19)
Prepared according to Ali et al. 

## Molecular Modeling
The 5-HT6R homology model
in its inactive conformation was fetched from the GPCRdb. , The protein was prepared for docking in the Protein Preparation
Wizard (Schrödinger Suite, version 2022-4) with the protonation
states generated for pH 7.4. The preparation of compounds for docking
was carried out in LigPrep (protonation states also generated for
pH 7.4). The docking was carried out using the Induced Fit Docking
panel (binding site centering on the ASP106; D3x32) in extra precision.
The obtained docking poses were visualized in Pymol.

## Neurotoxicity
Human neuroblastoma cell line SH-SY5Y
(ATCC no. CRL-2266) was used for neurotoxicity evaluation. The cells
(8 × 103 cells/100 μL/well) were cultured in
transparent 96-well plates (Nunc) in DMEM/F12 supplemented with 10%
FBS in the presence of DMSO < 0.1%, vehicle control (Veh) or increasing
concentration of 13–15 (0.78 ×
10–6–50 × 10–6 M,
performed as 2-fold serial dilution for dose–response analysis).
The highest concentration tested (50 μM) was due to the solubility
limit of the compounds in the culture medium. Treatment with compounds
was performed for 27 h. After the incubation time, the cell viability
was examined using an MTS-based CellTiter96 AQueous One Solution Cell
Proliferation Assay (Promega, Madison, WI, USA) following the manufacturer’s
protocol. Briefly, 20 μL of MTS solution was pipetted into each
well containing 100 μL of culture or culture medium (negative
control) and incubated at 37 °C for 1 h. The absorbance was measured
at 490 nm using the multimode plate reader Tecan Spark (Tecan, Männedorf,
Switzerland). A reference wavelength of 630 nm was used to subtract
the background. IC50 values were calculated by fitting
a nonlinear regression to a sigmoidal dose–response curve in
GraphPad Prism version 8.0.1.

## Neuroprotection in SH-SY5Y
To investigate the neuroprotective
effect of compounds, two methods were used since rotenone impairs
mitochondrial energy metabolism and increases ROS. The first method
is MTS-based viability assays (an improved version of MTT) commercially
available from PROMEGA. The second method is based on ROS measurement
with 2′,7′-dichlorofluorescein diacetate (2′7′DCFH2-DA).
All treatments (except seeding the cells on the first day) were
carried out with warmed HBSS containing 25 mM HEPES (hereafter referred
to as HBSS), and during the operational steps, the cells were kept
at 37 °C to minimize temperature stress. SH-SY5Y (ATCC no. CRL-2266)
cells (2 × 104 cells/well) were seeded in a black-sided,
clear-bottom 96-well plate (Life Technologies) in DMEM/F12 supplemented
with 10% FBS and cultured for 24 h. On the following day, the medium
was removed from the cells, and they were washed once with HBSS and
treated with the non-fluorescent dye 2′7′ DCFH2-DA (Millipore 287810, final concentration 50 μm, freshly prepared
in warm HBSS) for 45 min. In the following step, the cells were washed
once with HBSS following a 1 h pretreatment with HBSS containing the
tested compounds 13–15 at a concentration
of 10 μM. After that, rotenone was added at concentrations of
32.5 μM or 6.25 μM, and the cells were exposed for 3 h
(ROS assay) or 24 h (MTS assay), respectively. To determine the most
appropriate concentration of rotenone that results in 50% cell death,
we tested various concentrations of rotenone in our preliminary experiments.
Positive control was conducted by incubating the cells alone with
rotenone in an adequate concentration. As a vehicle control, the cells
were incubated in HBSS with 0.1% DMSO. The absorbance (MTS assay)
was measured at 490 nm using the multimode plate reader Tecan Spark
(Tecan, Männedorf, Switzerland). A reference wavelength of
630 nm was used to subtract the background. The fluorescence (2′7′DCFH2-DA
assay) was measured at Ex/Em = 505/550 nm with the same multimode
plate reader.

## Analysis of the Antioxidant Properties

## Total Antioxidant Capacity
The total antioxidant capacity
of compounds was assessed by the phosphomolybdenum method. This method is routinely applied in the laboratory
to screen samples for natural sources of vitamins and powerful antioxidants.
It evaluates both water-soluble and fat-soluble antioxidants (total
antioxidant capacity). The methodology of this study is based on the
reduction of Mo(VI) to Mo(V) by antioxidant compounds, followed by
the formation of a bluish-green phosphate/Mo(V) complex at acidic
pH, with maximum absorption at 695 nm. A 0.1 mL aliquot of the sample
solution in dimethyl sulfoxide (in different concentrations) containing
the reducing compound was combined in an Eppendorf tube with 1.0 mL
of the reagent solution (0.6 M sulfuric acid, 28 mM sodium phosphate,
and 4 mM ammonium molybdate, mixed by volume 1:1:1). The tubes were
capped and incubated in a thermal block at 95 °C for 90 min.
After cooling the samples to room temperature, the absorption of the
solutions was measured at a wavelength of 695 nm using a UV–vis
spectrophotometer relative to the blank. A blank solution containing
1.0 mL of reagent solution and 0.1 mL of dimethyl sulfoxide was incubated
under the same conditions as the rest of the samples. Ascorbic acid
(solutions in dimethyl sulfoxide; the concentration range from 10
to 230 mg per 1 mL) was used as the positive control. For the samples
of the analyzed compounds, the total antioxidant capacity was estimated
as the equivalent of ascorbic acid (AAE) by using the following equation:
 The experiments were carried out in
triplicate, and results are given as the arithmetic mean. The data
in all the experiments were analyzed using Statistica software.

## RNA Extraction, Reverse Transcription, and qPCR
RNAs
were extracted by ReliaPrep RNA Tissue Miniprep System (Promega) and
reverse transcribed with iScriptTM cDNA Synthesis Kit (Bio-Rad Laboratories).
cDNAs were amplified by qPCR reaction using GoTaq qPCR Master Mix
(Promega), as reported in ref ( ). Relative amounts obtained with the 2(−ΔCt) method were normalized with respect to the housekeeping
gene L32. The relative PCR primers’ sequences are reported
in .
 

## Protein Extraction and Western Blot Analysis
For total
protein extract, cells were lysed in Laemmli buffer, while for nuclear
protein isolation, cells were lysed in Lysis Buffer (MgCl2 1.5 mM, KCl 10 mM, Tris-HCl 20 mM pH 7.5, DTT 1 mM) and after 15
strokes with douncer, nuclei and cytoplasm were separated by centrifugation
(1500 RCF, 4 °C, 5 min). Subsequently, the proteins were resolved
on SDS-PAGE and transferred to 0.45 μm nitrocellulose membrane
(162-0115; Bio-Rad Laboratories). The following primary antibodies
were used for immunoblotting: α-NRF2 (ab137550, Abcam), α-GAPDH
(MAB-374, Millipore Corp.), or α-H3 (06755, Millipore Corp.),
the last two used as loading controls (of total and nuclear protein
extracts). The immune complexes were detected with horseradish peroxidase–conjugated
species-specific secondary antiserum α-rabbit 172-1019 and α-mouse
170-6516 (Bio-Rad Laboratories), then by enhanced chemiluminescence
reaction (Bio-Rad Laboratories). Densitometric analysis of protein
expression was performed by using the Fiji ImageJ image processing
package.

## Thiophenol Assay
The glutathione peroxidase (GPx)-like
activity of tested compounds was determined using the thiophenol assay. In more detail, 20 μL of the sample (10
μM) was added to a mixture of H2O2 (90
μL; 37.5 mM) and PhSH in methanolic solution (90 μL; 10
mM). The absorbance increase due to the formation of diphenyldisulfide
(PhSSPh) was monitored for 30 min (25 °C) at 305 nm by using
the Cytation 1 Cell Imaging Multimode Reader (BioTeK Instruments Inc.,
Winooski, VT, USA). The kinetics of the reaction were compared with
the control. Results were expressed as reaction rates, namely the
time taken for 50% completion of the PhSH oxidation to its disulfide
(t1/2) and rate constant (K).

## Statistical Analysis
Data from at least three experiments,
in which each treatment was performed in triplicate, are expressed
as mean ± standard error (SE). The statistical analysis and data
representation were performed by GraphPad Prism (Version 8.00) software
(GraphPad Software, Inc., San Diego, CA, USA). The difference between
treatments was evaluated using a one-way analysis of variance (one-way
ANOVA), followed by Dunnett’s multiple comparison post-test,
and considered statistically significant when a p-value < 0.05 was obtained.

## ADME Studies In Vitro and In Vivo

## Parallel Artificial Membrane Permeability Assay (PAMPA)
To evaluate parallel artificial membrane permeability, a precoated
PAMPA Plate System (Gentest, Corning, Tewksbury, MA, USA) was used
as we described previously. Caffeine
served as the reference compound with high permeability. Concentrations
of the investigated compounds were quantified through liquid chromatography/mass
spectrometry (LC/MS) using a Waters TQ Detector mass spectrometer
(Waters Corp., Milford, MA, USA), employing an internal standard.
The experimentation was replicated thrice to ensure reliability. The
permeability coefficients (Pe) expressed in units
of 10–6 cm/s were computed following the manufacturer’s
provided formula.

## Metabolic Stability
The evaluation of metabolic stability
and metabolic pathways in Phase I involved the incubation of compounds
with rat or human liver microsomes (rLMs) for 120 min at a temperature
of 37 °C, adhering to a previously described protocol. The intrinsic clearance (CLint) and
half-life (t1/2) of 15 were
estimated by incubation in the presence of rat or human liver microsomes.
The disappearance of compound (50 μM) was determined at 5, 15,
30, and 60 min of incubation in 100 mM Tris-HCl buffer (37 °C).
The UPLC/MS Waters ACQUITY TQD system with the TQ detector (Waters,
Milford, MA, USA) analysis with the use of IS allowed for determination
according to the formulas provided by Obach. 
rLMs and hLMs were purchased from (Sigma-Aldrich, St. Louis,
MO, USA). The LC/MS analysis was used as a tool for potential metabolite
determination. The procedure was supported by the in silico prediction of possible metabolic pathways using MetaSite 8.0.1.
Software (Molecular Discovery Ltd., Hertfordshire, UK).

## HepG2 and HEK-293 Toxicity Studies
The in vitro toxicity of 15 was evaluated using hepatoma HepG2 (ATCC HB-8065) and HEK-293 (ATCC CRL-1573). Cells were grown
under the previously described conditions. 15 was incubated in 96-well plates with cells for 72
h in the final concentration range (0.1–100 μM), whereas
the reference DX at 1 μM. The cells’ viability was determined
by CellTiter 96 AQueous Non-Radioactive Cell Proliferation Assay (MTS),
which was purchased from Promega (Madison, WI, USA). The absorbance
was measured using a Spark Cyto microplate reader (Tecan, Männedorf,
Switzerland) at 490 nm. 15 was tested in triplicate.
Data are presented from two independent experiments.

## Instrumentation and Chromatographic Conditions
The in vitro evaluation of metabolic stability was performed
by 120 min incubation of compounds with rat liver microsomes (rLMs)
at 37 °C according to the previously described procedure. , rLMs were provided by (Sigma-Aldrich, St. Louis, MO, USA). Determination
of the most probable structures of 5-HT6R ligands’
metabolites was performed using LC/MS analyses.
The levels of 15 in serum and tissues were measured by a simple and sensitive
reversed-phase high-performance liquid chromatography method with
ultraviolet detection (HPLC/UV). The HPLC analysis was carried out
on a Merck-Hitachi LaChrom Elite series liquid chromatographic system
(Merck-Hitachi, Japan) equipped with an L-2130 pump (Hitachi LaChrom
Elite), L-2300 thermostated column compartment (Hitachi LaChrom Elite),
L-2130 vacuum degasser (Hitachi LaChrom Elite), L-2200 autosampler
(VWR, Darmstadt, Germany), and L-2400 ultraviolet–visible (UV–vis)
detector (Hitachi LaChrom Elite). Data acquisition was controlled
by an EZChrome Elite v. 3.3.2 software (VWR, Darmstadt, Germany) chromatographic
workstation. Chromatographic separation was accomplished on a Supelcosil
LC-PCN (250 mm × 4.6 mm i.d., 5 μm particle size) analytical
column, protected with the Supelcosil LC-PCN guard column (Sigma-Aldrich,
Germany) under isocratic conditions. The mobile phase was a mixture
of potassium dihydrogen phosphate buffer (0.01 M, pH 4.6) filtered
through a 0.22-μm membrane filter (Sigma-Aldrich) with acetonitrile
and methanol (51:9:40, v/v/v). The mobile phase was pumped from the
reservoir to the column at a flow rate of 1 mL/min. Chromatograms
were monitored at 218 nm, and the column temperature was maintained
at 38 °C. The retention times (tR) for 15 and internal standard (IS) were approximately
9.3 and 15.1 min, respectively. The total run time for each sample
analysis was 17 min. The calibration curve of 15 constructed
by plotting the ratio of the analyte to the IS peak area versus the
concentration of analyte was linear in the range of 5–100 ng/mL
in rat serum and 5–100 ng/g in brain and heart homogenates,
5–200 ng/g in liver, kidneys and lungs homogenate with a coefficient
correlation (R) value >0.994 in each case. The
interday
and intraday precision and accuracy of quality control samples, evaluated
in both serum and tissue homogenates, were all within 10%. The lower
limit of quantification was 5 ng/mL in serum and 5 ng/g in all analyzed
tissue homogenates. The mean extraction recoveries were around 87.5%
and 89.2% for serum and tissue homogenates, respectively. The mean
recovery of IS was 88.3%.

## Preparation of Serum and Tissue Samples
All frozen
samples were thawed at room temperature before an extraction process.
Samples of rat serum (0.5 mL) were combined with 10 μL of
the IS (4-(4-methylpiperazin-1-yl)-6-(1-phenoxypropyl)-1,3,5-triazine-2-amine)
methanol solution at 25 ng/mL in a microcentrifuge polypropylene tube
2 mL (Eppendorf). The samples were alkalized with 50 μL of 4
M sodium hydroxide solution, vortex-mixed, and extracted with 1 mL
of ethyl acetate:hexane (30:70, v/v) mixture on a shaker (VXR Vibrax,
IKA, Germany) for 20 min. The samples were then centrifuged (Eppendorf,
Mini Spin Plus, Bionovo, Poland) at 14,000g for 10
min, and the organic layers were transferred into new Eppendorf tubes
(1.5 mL) containing 100 μL of methanol and 0.1 M sulfuric acid
(10:90, v/v) mixture. Then, the samples were shaken and centrifuged
again. Finally, 10–80 μL of each acidic layer was injected
into the HPLC system.
Tissue samples were thawed, weighed (0.2–0.25
g), and homogenized
using a MICCRA D-1 homogenizer (ART Prozess & Labortechnik GmbH
& Co., Germany) in physiological saline (1:4, w/v), after which
10 μL of an IS solution (50 ng/mL) was combined with 500 μL
of each tissue (brain, heart, liver, kidney, and lung) homogenate
sample. These homogenates were then processed and analyzed identically
to serum samples.

## Off-Target Radioligand Binding Studies
10 mM stock
solutions of tested compounds were prepared in DMSO. Each compound
was tested in a screening assay at a final concentration of 1 μM.
Results were expressed as percent inhibition of specific control binding.
Radioligand binding was performed on membranes from CHO-K1 cells,
which were stably transfected with the human muscarinic M1 and histamine H3 receptor. Adrenergic α2 (α2-AR), cannabinoid CB1, and NMDA (MK-801)
receptors were prepared from rat cortex tissue. Binding experiments
were conducted in 96-well microplates, and the reaction mix included
a solution of the test compound, radioligand, and diluted membranes
or the tissue suspension. Specific assay conditions for each target
are shown in . The reaction was terminated by rapid filtration through GF/B or
GF/C filter mate presoaked with 0.3% polyethyleneimine for 30 min.
Ten rapid washes with 200 μL of 50 mM Tris buffer (4 °C,
pH 7.4) were performed using an automated harvester system Harvester-96
MACH III FM (Tomtec). The filter mates were dried at 37 °C in
a forced air fan incubator, and then solid scintillator MeltiLex was
melted on filter mates at 90 °C for 5 min. Radioactivity was
counted in a MicroBeta2 scintillation counter (PerkinElmer) at approximately
30% efficiency.
 

## hERG Inhibition Studies
Electrophysiology experiments
were carried out on a QPatch16X automatic patch clamp platform (Sophion
Bioscience) using previously described methods. The intracellular flow channel of a disposable 16-site
patch chip plate (QPlate 16 Large) was first primed using intracellular
(IC) buffer containing 5.374 mM CaCl2, 1.75 mM MgCl2, 31.25 mM KOH, 10 mM EGTA, 10 mM HEPES, 120 mM KCl, and 4
mM Na2-ATP (pH 7.2, 290 mOsm). CHO cells, stably expressing the human
ERG potassium channel (Kv11.1), were resuspended using robotic system
of QPatch instrument in extracellular Ringer’s solution (EC
= 2 mM CaCl2, 1 mM MgCl2, 10 mM HEPES, 4 mM
KCl, 145 mM NaCl, 10 mM glucose, pH 7.4, 310 mOsm) and applied to
the pipetting wells of QPlates. Gigaseals were formed following the
standard protocol provided by Sophion Bioscience for CHO cells. During
the experiment, cells were kept in a holding potential of −90
mV between the programmed stimulation protocols. Whole-cell potassium
currents were measured in response to repeatedly executed voltage
protocols that constituted of the following steps: brief clamping
to −50 mV (200 ms), subsequent depolarization to 20 mV for
4000 ms, and final repolarization to −50 mV when the outward
tail current was measured for 4000 ms. Reagents were added to the
measurement sites of QPlate in the sequential application protocol,
including the addition of saline and six increasing concentrations
of tested compounds. After each reagent addition, voltage protocols
were executed 10 times every 14 s. The electrophysiological recordings
were analyzed using QPatch Assay Software (v5.0, Sophion Bioscience).
The peak values of the tail currents for the last three voltage protocols
after each vehicle or compound application were averaged, and the
obtained means were taken for further data analysis employing Prism
software (v8.4.3, GraphPad Software). The average current peak values
determined in the presence of particular concentrations of tested
compounds were subject to sigmoidal dose–response curve fitting,
where the bottom plateau parameter was constrained to 0. Respective
IC50 values were then calculated from the obtained sigmoidal
dose–response curves. The final results represent the mean
of three independent experiments carried out on distinct cells.

## Ames Mutagenicity Test
Ames microplate format assay
was performed with S. typhimurium strain TA98, enabling
the detection of frameshift mutations. Bacterial strain, as well as
exposure and indicator medium, were purchased from Xenometrix AG (Allschwil,
Switzerland), and the test was performed following the manufacturer’s
instructions. The mutagenic potential of tested structures was evaluated
by incubating bacteria incapable of producing histidine, with evaluated
compounds for 90 min in exposure medium containing limited amount
of histidine. The occurrence of reversion events to histidine prototrophy
was observed as a growth of bacteria in the indicator medium without
histidine after 48 h of incubation at room temperature. Bacterial
growth in 384-well plates was visualized by the color change of the
medium from violet to yellow due to the addition of pH indicator dye.
The compound was classified as mutagenic if the fold increase in the
number of positive wells over the solvent control baseline (FIB) was
greater than 2.0. The FIB was determined by dividing the mean number
of revertants for the tested compound by the solvent control baseline.
The solvent control baseline was defined as the mean number of positive
wells in the negative control sample, increased by one standard deviation
(SD).
Some experiments were conducted in the presence of rat
liver S9 fraction to simulate the metabolic activation of tested compounds.
The S9 reaction mix for incubation with bacteria and tested compounds
consisted of 30% (v/v) S9 preparation diluted in regeneration buffer
containing 33 mM KCl, 8 mM MgCl2, 5 mM glucose-6-phosphate,
40 mM NADP, and 100 mM NaH2PO4. Rat liver S9
fraction was obtained from male Wistar rats (200–230 g). Livers
were dissected and washed with 0.05 M Tris-HCl buffer (pH 7.4). Organs
were weighed and chopped into small pieces using surgical scissors.
Tissue was then homogenized in 4 vol (w/v) of Tris-HCl buffer at 24,000
rpm for 45 s, using an IKA Ultra-Turrax T18 homogenizer equipped with
S18N-10G dispersing tool (Staufen im Breisgau, Germany) and obtained
homogenate was centrifuged at 9000g for 20 min at
4 °C. The supernatant was collected, and the protein concentration
in the obtained S9 fraction was adjusted to 30 mg/mL by dilution with
an appropriate volume of Tris-HCl buffer.

## Pharmacokinetic Data Analysis
Basic PK parameters of 15 were obtained from non-compartmental analysis through the
Phoenix WinNonlin (8.3 version, Pharsight, Certara Inc., Princeton,
NJ, USA) program. The peak concentration (Cmax) and the time to reach Cmax (Tmax) were obtained directly from individual
concentration–time profiles. The linear trapezoidal rule was
applied to calculate the areas under the concentration–time
curve (AUC) from the time of dosing to the last measured data point
(AUC0–t) or infinity (AUC0–∞). The terminal slope (λz) was
estimated by linear regression, and the terminal half-life (t0.5λz) was
calculated as ln 2/λz. The
clearance (CL/F) was calculated as D/AUC0–∞, and the volume of distribution
based on the terminal phase (Vz/F) was estimated as D/(λz·AUC0–∞), where F is the bioavailability of i.p. administration. The mean
residence time (MRT) was defined as AUMC0–∞/AUC0–∞, where AUMC is the area under the
first moment curve. The tissue-to-serum AUC ratio (Kp) of 15 was calculated by dividing the AUCtissue by the AUCserum. Data are presented as mean
± SD.

## In Vivo Pharmacokinetic Studies (ADME)

## Animals
The experiments were performed on male Wistar
rats (200–230 g) obtained from an accredited animal facility
at the Jagiellonian University Medical College, Poland. The animals
were housed in a group of four in a controlled environment (ambient
temperature 21 ± 2 °C; relative humidity 50–60%;
12-h light/dark cycles (lights on at 8:00)). Standard laboratory food
(LSM-B) and filtered water were freely available. Animals were assigned
randomly to treatment groups. All the experiments were performed by
two observers unaware of the treatment applied between 9:00 and 14:00
on separate groups of animals. Prior to the PK experiments, the rats
fasted for 12 h with free access to water. All animals were used only
once. Procedures involving animals and their care were conducted following
current European Community and Polish legislation on animal experimentation.
Additionally, all efforts were made to minimize animals’ suffering
and to use only the number of animals necessary to produce reliable
scientific data. The experimental protocols and procedures described
were approved by the I Local Ethics Commission in Cracow (no. 309/2019)
and complied with the European Communities Council Directive of 24
November 1986 (86/609/EEC), and were following the 1996 NIH Guide
for the Care and Use of Laboratory Animals.

## Application to a Pharmacokinetic Study in Rats
To assess
the PK profile and tissue penetration of 15, the male
Wistar rats received a single intraperitoneal (i.p.) injection with
this compound dissolved in Tween (vehicle volume 1 mL/kg) at a dose
of 1 mg/kg, determined in behavioral studies. The animals were killed
by decapitation at 5, 15, 30, 60, and 120 min after administration
of 15 (3–4 animals per time point), and blood
samples (approximately 5–6 mL) were collected into tubes. Moreover,
five tissues (i.e., brain, heart, lungs, liver, and kidneys) were
harvested and rinsed with cold saline. Blood was allowed to clot for
15–20 min at room temperature and then centrifuged (2500 rpm
for 10 min). The obtained serum and tissues were stored frozen at
−80 °C until analysis.

## Behavioral Assays In Vivo

## Animals
Male Wistar rats (8 weeks old, weighing 200–260
g) were obtained from an accredited animal facility at the Jagiellonian
University Medical College, Poland. Animals were housed in groups
of four in a controlled environment (ambient temperature 21 ±
2 °C; relative humidity 50–60%; 12-h light/dark cycles
(lights on at 8:00)). Standard laboratory food (LSM-B) and filtered
water were freely available. For 1 week before experiments, animals
were handled to acclimate them to the researchers’ touch to
minimize the stress reaction of animals. Rats were assigned randomly
to treatment groups. All the experiments were performed by two observers
unaware of the treatment applied between 9:00 and 14:00 on separate
groups of animals. All rats were used only once. All compounds were
i.p. injected in a volume of 2 mL/kg. Procedures involving animals
and their care were conducted under current European Community and
Polish legislation on animal experimentation. Additionally, all efforts
were made to minimize animal suffering and to use only the number
of animals necessary to produce reliable scientific data. Approval
for the procedures described in this paper was obtained from the I
Local Ethics Commission in Cracow (no. 309/2019, 17.07.2019), complied
with the European Communities Council Directive of 24 November 1986
(86/609/EEC), and were under the 1996 NIH Guide for the Care and Use
of Laboratory Animals.

## Drugs
15 was suspended in 1% Tween 80
immediately before administration, while MK-801 (MK-801 maleate, Bio-Techne,
Warszawa, Poland) was dissolved in distilled water. All compounds
were given in a volume of 2 mL/kg. 15 was administered
i.p. for 60 min while MK-801 was given i.p. 30 min before testing.
Control animals received vehicle (1% Tween 80 (Sigma-Aldrich, Poznań,
Poland)) according to the same schedule.

## Novel Object Recognition (NOR) Test
The protocol was
adapted from the original work, , and the test
and the administration of compounds were done according to the previously
described protocol (15 and MK-801 were administered 60
and 30 min, respectively, before the T1 phase (the familiarization
phase)). The discrimination index (DI)
was calculated according to the formula
 where EB is the exploration time of a novel
object during T2 session and EA is the exploration time of a familiar
object during T2 session.
MK-801 was chosen as the memory disturbance-induced
compound based on the literature data, which indicates that ligands
of 5-HT6R may prevent memory disturbances in rats induced
by MK-801. , To assess the impact of the injected
compounds on the rats’ exploratory activity, the total exploration
time in T2 phase was measured.

## Forced Swim Test (FST)
The experiment was carried out
according to the method of Porsolt; the
procedure and administration of compounds were done according to the
previously described protocol. Immobility
was assigned when no additional activity was observed other than that
necessary to keep the rat’s head above the water. Fresh water
was used for each animal.

## Elevated Plus-Maze (EPM) Test
The testing procedure
was based on a method described by Pellow and File; the procedure and administration of compounds were done
according to the previously described protocol. The EPM test is an “unconditional” anxiety-like
test based on rodents’ natural aversion to heights and open
space.

## Exploratory Activity Measured in the EPM Test
The experiment
was performed using the EPM apparatus (details see above). Total ambulation
(the total distance covered by a rat and ambulation along the X and
Y axes) was taken to discern drug effects on general activity from
those on open-arm exploration during a 5 min test period (i.e., the
time equal to the observation period in the EPM test). The rats’
behavior was not videotaped during the test.

## Statistical Analysis of Behavioral Studies
STATISTICA
13 (StatSoft) was used for the statistical analysis of results. All
behavioral results are shown as the means ± SEM. The data were
evaluated by an analysis of variance (one-way ANOVA), followed by
Bonferroni’s multiple comparison test; p <
0.05 was considered significant.

## Acknowledgments
Syntheses, molecular modeling, radioligand binding
assay, functional assays, and all in vivo assays
were financed by the National Science Centre, Poland, grant no. 2018/31/B/NZ7/02160.
Some experiments were carried out using research infrastructure financed
by the Polish Operating Programme for Intelligent Development POIR
4.2, project no. POIR.04.02.00-00-D023/20, and equipment co-financed
by the qLIFE Priority Research Area under the “Excellence Initiative—Research
University” program at Jagiellonian University. This work was
supported by Sapienza SEED PNR 2021, Sapienza Progetti di Ricerca
Medi to C. Battistelli (RM12218166AEFC72) and A. Di Sotto. C. Zwergel
is thankful for the generous funding from FSE REACT-EU within the
program PON “Research and Innovation” 2014–2020,
Action IV.6 “Contratti di ricerca su tematiche Green”,
as well as the funding from the KOHR GmbH and the Sapienza Ateneo
Project funding scheme. All authors would like to thank Stefan Böttcher,
Josef Zapp, and Nick Hinderlaad for their excellent technical assistance,
as well as Claus Jacob, Marco Tripodi, Sergio Valente, and Antonello
Mai for fruitful discussions and advice. All authors are grateful
for the contribution of the master students Mikołaj Ryba and
Jerzy Kacprowicz for their participation in chemical syntheses, partly
performed within the Student Medicinal Chemistry Scientific Group
at the Department of Technology and Biotechnology of Drugs, JU MC
(Studenckie Koło Chemii Medycznej, UJCM).

## Glossary

## Abbreviations Used
2′7′DCFH2-DA2′,7′-dichlorofluorescin diacetate
5-HTxRserotonin
receptor 5-HTx
AAascorbic acid
AAEascorbic acid equivalents
AREantioxidant response
element
BACE1beta-site
amyloid precursor protein cleaving enzyme 1
BBBblood–brain barrier
BPSDbehavioral and psychological
symptoms of dementia
FDAU.S. Food & Drug Administration
GPxglutathione peroxidase
hLMshuman liver microsomes
HO-1heme oxygenase-1
MRTmean residence time
MTScolorimetric cell
proliferation assay
MWMMorris water maze
NORnovel object recognition
NQO-1quinone oxidoreductase-1
NRF2nuclear factor erythroid 2-related factor 2
PhSSPhdiphenyl disulfide
PKpharmacokinetic
RBAradioligand binding
assay
rLMrat liver
microsome
Secselenocysteine
SODsuperoxide dismutase
SRTsocial recognition
Y-CATY-maze continuous
spontaneous alternation

## Supporting Information Available
The Supporting Information
is
available free of charge at https://pubs.acs.org/doi/10.1021/acs.jmedchem.3c02148.
Synthesis of compound 15O; HPLC traces,
mass spectra, and 1H, 13C, and 77Se NMR spectra of final compounds 3, 6–15, 15O, and 17; Table S1, elemental
analysis of final compounds 3, 6–15, and 17; Table S2, structures of intermediate
compounds 31–42; Figures S1–S3,
additional data of molecular modeling; details for the functional
bioassays for the 5-HT6 receptor; Figure S4, dose–response
curves from functional in vitro assay for cAMP response of compounds 11–15 and references (Olanzapine, SB752457);
Table S3, cAMP 5-HT6 functional assay for compound 15; Table S4, absorbance results recorded for the analyzed
compounds for all tested concentrations, compared to those for ascorbic
acid (AA); Table S5, ascorbic acid equivalents (%AAE) for compounds 13–15 at different concentrations; Table
S6, effect of compound 15 in the EPM test; Table S7,
analysis of a possible cleavage of 13–15 along C(sp3)–Se bonds in the microsome assays,
based on LC/MS results as well as Figures S5–S23, showing metabolic
stability results; and Figure S24, dose-dependent inhibition of hERG
channel activity by 15 (PDF)
PDB files of docking models for compounds 4, 9, 15, 15O, and 15S (ZIP)
Molecular formula strings (CSV)

## Author Contributions
§ P. Pyka and W. Haberek contributed equally
as first authors.

The authors declare no
competing financial interest.

## Dedication
The article is dedicated
to Thomas Zwergel, who passed away during its preparation. He was
a dear friend who always irradiated benevolence, infectious optimism,
an appreciation for life, an elegant self-irony, and a wonderful sense
of humor. All authors would like to recognize him for the wonderful
discussions about science and beyond.

## Supplementary Material
jm3c02148_si_001.pdf
jm3c02148_si_002.zip
jm3c02148_si_003.csv

## References
 

## Associated Data

## Supplementary Materials
jm3c02148_si_001.pdf
jm3c02148_si_002.zip
jm3c02148_si_003.csv