3532isciiScienceiScienceElsevierPMC1195102611951026119510264016042410.1016/j.isci.2025.111810Single-cell map of innate-like lymphocyte response to Francisella tularensis infection reveals interleukin-17-dependent protection by MAIT cells
OkoyeG Donald KumarAmrendra GhanbariFarshad ChowdhuryNowrin U WuLan NewcombDawn C Van KaerLuc AlgoodHolly M Scott JoyceSebastian 1Department of Veterans Affairs, Tennessee Valley Healthcare System, Nashville, TN 37232, USA2Medical Scientist Training Program, Vanderbilt University School of Medicine, Nashville, TN 37232, USA3Division of Molecular Pathogenesis, Department of Pathology, Microbiology & Immunology, Nashville, TN 37232, USA4Vanderbilt Center for Immunobiology, Nashville, TN 37232, USA5Vanderbilt Institute for Infection, Immunology & Inflammation, Nashville, TN 37232, USA6Division of Infectious Diseases, Department of Medicine, Vanderbilt University Medical Center, Nashville, TN 37232, USA7Department of Biological Sciences, Vanderbilt University, Nashville, TN 37232, USA∗Corresponding author amrendra.kumar@vumc.org
∗∗Corresponding author holly.m.algood@vumc.org
∗∗∗Corresponding author sebastian.joyce@vumc.org
8Lead contact
16120252831118101118102832025© 2025 The Author(s)This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/).

## Summary
Early immune dynamics during the initiation of fatal tularemia caused by Francisella tularensis infection remain unknown. Unto that end, we generated a transcriptomic map at single-cell resolution of the innate-like lymphocyte responses to F. tularensis live vaccine strain (LVS) infection of mice. We found that both interferon-γ (IFN-γ)-producing type 1 and interleukin-17 (IL-17)-producing type 3 innate-like lymphocytes expanded in the infected lungs. Natural killer (NK) and NKT cells drove the type 1 response, whereas mucosal-associated invariant T (MAIT) and γδ T cells drove the type 3 response. Furthermore, tularemia-like disease resistant NKT cell-deficient, Cd1d−/− mice accumulated more MAIT1 cells, MAIT17 cells, and cells with a hybrid phenotype between MAIT1 and MAIT17 cells than wild-type mice. Critically, adoptive transfer of LVS-activated MAIT cells from Cd1d−/− mice, which were enriched in MAIT17 cells, was sufficient to protect LVS-susceptible, immunodeficient RAG2−/− mice from severe LVS infection-inflicted pathology. Collectively, our findings position MAIT cells as potential mediators of IL-17-dependent protection from pulmonary tularemia-like disease.
Subject areas: Immunology, Microbiology, Cell biology

## Graphical abstract
 

## Highlights
•Pulmonary F. tularensis LVS infection induces type 1 and type 3 immune responses
•NK and NKT cells drive type 1, while MAIT and γδT cells drive type 3 responses
•Increased MAIT17 cell accumulation is associated with resistance to TLD
•Adoptive transfer of MAIT17-enriched cells protects immunodeficient mice from TLD

Immunology; Microbiology; Cell biology

statusreleaseddisplay-pdfyesis-olfnois-manuscriptnois-preprintnois-journal-matternois-scannednois-retractednoReceived 2024 May 31; Revised 2024 Aug 7; Accepted 2025 Jan 10; Collection date 2025 Mar 21.

## Introduction
Barrier mucosae form vulnerable habitats for infections. Resident myeloid cells and subsets of unconventional lymphocytes—which include natural killer T (NKT), mucosal-associated invariant T (MAIT) and γδ T cells—collectively called innate-like T lymphocytes (ITLs), continuously surveil the barrier mucosae, including those of the lung, forming the first line of defense against pathogenic agents. The Gram-negative intracellular bacterium Francisella tularensis, the etiologic agency of tularemia, is one such pathogen. Natural F. tularensis infections are currently endemic in many parts of Europe with sporadic outbreaks reported in the United States. , , Natural F. tularensis infection acquired by inhalation frequently causes fatal pulmonary tularemia. , Infection following ingestion of F. tularensis causes gastrointestinal disease, whereas transmission by blood-sucking insects, such as fleas, ticks, and deer flies, as well as exposure of open wounds to the bacterium cause ulceroglandular tularemia. , , Natural infections when diagnosed early are curable by antibiotics. When untreated, F. tularensis organisms from ulceroglandular lesions can disseminate, induce sepsis, and result in pulmonary tularemia. , , , Moreover, respiratory infections with as few as ten aerosol droplets containing type A F. tularensis subspecies tularensis cause fatal pulmonary tularemia. , This high infectivity has raised type A F. tularensis to the top of tier 1 select agent list of pathogens of high interest. The live vaccine strain (LVS) derived from type B F. tularensis subspecies holarctica can protect against the virulent type A F. tularensis, but only when administered via the respiratory route, , , implicating lung-resident immune cells in protective immunity. LVS is not yet licensed as a tularemia vaccine by the Food & Drug Administration (FDA), as its administration via the respiratory route is associated with adverse effects. Hence, there is an unmet need to understand the immune mechanisms of protection to inform targets for the design of better vaccines and therapeutics against tularemia.
Early immune dynamics during the initiation of fatal tularemia remain largely unknown. Current evidence suggests that murine and human natural killer (NK) cells, which primarily produce interferon-γ (IFN-γ) in response to LVS infection in a MyD88-dependent manner, are critical for bacterial clearance. , , Activation of mouse hepatic NK cells during LVS infection reduces hepatic cell death, induces granuloma formation, and limits hepatic necrosis. However, the NK cell response during LVS infection is redundant, as other immune cells, such as myeloid lineage and adaptive immune cells, can compensate for the absence of NK cells. , 
NKT cells are critical early responders to bacterial infections. NKT cells patrol common sites of microbial entry including the respiratory mucosa, where they are activated by self- or non-self-glycolipids presented by CD1d molecules. , Indeed, B cell-NK cell-NKT cell crosstalk in mice can control F. tularensis infection. By contrast, we previously showed that the NKT cell response is detrimental for survival from LVS infection, as NKT cell-deficient Cd1d−/− mice are resistant to tularemia-like disease (TLD). Thus, Cd1d−/− mice exhibit far less type 1-driven sepsis-like inflammation, consistent with runaway inflammation being a hallmark of tularemia. , Similarly, in other models of intracellular bacterial infections, NKT cells failed to protect mice from Mycobacterium tuberculosis infection and were detrimental in Legionella pneumophilia and Chlamydia trachomatis infections where they drive a type 1 inflammatory response. , , As NKT cells were implicated in sepsis previously, their presence may exacerbate inflammation and, thus, impair survival of infected mice. , Notably, LVS-infected Cd1d−/− mice showed increased levels of induced bronchus-associated lymphoid tissues (iBALTs), which have been considered the basis of protection in this mouse model. How a single gain-of-function mutation—i.e., CD1d-deficiency, confers resistance to TLD remains unclear.
MAIT cells, akin to NKT cells are also found at sites of microbial entry. They are essential for protective responses to LVS infection in mice similar to other intracellular bacterial infections including Legionella
longbeachae, M. tuberculosis, and Mycobacteroides abscessus. , , , , MAIT cells are activated by the presentation of vitamin B2 metabolites on MHC-related MR1 molecules. , , MAIT cell activation is primarily dependent on T cell receptor (TCR)-mediated activation, but cytokine receptors may also contribute to MAIT cell activation and function during infection. , , , Importantly, there are two distinct subsets of MAIT cells in mice and humans: the type 1 MAIT1 and type 3 MAIT17 that produce cytokines that mirror T helper 1 (Th1) and Th17 responses, respectively. , They are metabolically distinct and play protective roles in infectious diseases. Recent evidence suggests that MAIT1 cells are essential and sufficient to protect against systemic LVS infection. By contrast, what roles MAIT17 cells play in pulmonary LVS infection, which causes lethal TLD, remains unknown.
Human γδ T cells control both LVS and virulent type A F. tularensis SchuS4 growth in vitro in an IFN-γ-dependent manner. By contrast, protection against pulmonary LVS infection in both humans and mice requires interleukin-17 (IL-17). , , , , As γδ T cell-deficiency caused lethal TLD in mice, this T cell subset was considered the relevant source of IL-17. , By contrast, γδ T cells play a detrimental role in cutaneous F. tularensis LVS infection. However, intranasal infection of mice with LVS induces a TCR-dependent expansion of IL-17-producing γδ T cells, important for adequate bacterial clearance. , Viewed together, current evidence suggests that NK, NKT, MAIT, and γδ T cells as well as IFN-γ and/or IL-17 secreted by them are protective or detrimental to LVS infections. Nonetheless, the dynamics of protective innate-like lymphocyte responses to LVS infection remain unclear.
To gain insights into the questions raised previously, we focused on a mouse model of pulmonary tularemia because the respiratory disease is the most lethal form of disease caused by F. tularensis infection. In this preclinical model, intranasal inoculation with LVS induces pulmonary TLD. We reasoned that correlates of immune protection will emerge from a comparative study of TLD-sensitive C57BL/6 and TLD-resistant Cd1d−/− mice. Hence, a transcriptome profile was established at single-cell resolution to understand the dynamics of lymphocyte responses in the lungs of C57BL/6 and Cd1d−/− mice during the acute phase of LVS infection. Then, the key findings were validated by complementary immunoassays. Finally, the ability of MAIT cells alone to transfer protection in immunodeficient mice was interrogated. Collectively, our findings indicated that, in addition to an anticipated IFN-γ-producing type 1 response, which occurs first, respiratory LVS infection also induced a robust IL-17-producing type 3 response driven in large part by lung-resident MAIT17 cells. These lung-resident MAIT cells are sufficient to confer protection to LVS-susceptible, immunodeficient mice from fatal TLD.

## Results

## Respiratory LVS infection elicits type 1 and type 3 ITL responses
To understand the dynamics of the immune response to respiratory LVS infection during the critical stage of TLD, six-week-old male C57BL/6 mice were intranasally inoculated with PBS (mock) or ∼9,000 cfu LVS—which is based on the LD50 previously established. Seven days post inoculation (dpi), CD45+ hematopoietic cells were flow sorted from single cell suspensions prepared from whole lung tissue of mock and LVS-infected mice. The B cell-negative cell fraction (B220+ cells electronically gating out) of >98% viability ( A) was subjected to single-cell RNA sequencing (scRNA-seq) using 10× Genomics platform (see ). Quality control (as described in the ) yielded a total of 13,063 high quality and comparable cells across the mock and LVS-infected samples. While we attempted to deplete CD14+ cells by flow sorting, CD14 staining was ineffective as CD11b+ and CD11c+ myeloid cells remained detectable in substantial numbers ( A). Because the incomplete depletion of CD14+ cells would undermine any analyses of the myeloid compartment, we focused on the B cell negative, CD45+ lymphocyte compartment. Within this population, both adaptive (tagged naive and effector T) and innate/innate-like (tagged innate-like T and NK cells) lymphocytes were evident. Each cluster was identified and annotated using the scType computational platform for scRNA-seq data and confirmed by manual verification of signature genes as described in the section. Surprisingly, while a conventional T cell response to LVS infection at 7 dpi was evident, CD4+ and CD8+ T cell expansion was not as robust ( A) as would be expected from the critical role they are thought to play to protect against LVS infection. , , Just as surprisingly, only NK cells in the innate lymphoid cell lineage were detectable in this experiment ( A). Hence, in the studies described in the following, NK cells were analyzed together with unconventional T cells.
 In silico sorting of cells from each sample allowed further analyses of lineages of interest. Hence, to focus on and characterize NK and unconventional T cell responses to acute LVS infection of the lungs in detail, 2,598 cells assigned to the lymphocyte clusters in the previous experiment were extracted by in silico sorting, re-clustered and analyzed. Each cluster was identified by gene signatures ( ; B and 1C) as described in the section. The most obvious expansion identified unconventional, ITLs, which included NKT and MAIT cells ( B–1D). Further, Treg cells also expanded and a concomitant reduction in other lymphocytes including NK cells was observed ( B–1D).
We next defined ITL subsets activated during respiratory LVS infection. This analysis identified ITL clusters expressing Ifng and Il17a, and their associated transcription factors (TFs), implying the presence of at least two inflammatory response profiles ( B and S1C). Thus, to establish the specific types of inflammatory responses associated with LVS infection, all lymphocyte clusters were examined for expression of genes associated with type 1 and type 3 inflammation adapted from previously published gene sets. , Type 1 immune signature genes included Ifng, Tbx21, Gzma, Gzmb, Tnf, Bhlhe40, Klrb1c, Klra8, Prf1, Cx3cr1, Il2rb, Klre1, and Ccr5, whereas type 3 genes included Il17a, Il17f, Rorc, Ccr6, Irf4, Il23r, Il1r1, Lmna, Tnf, Nebl, and Lamc1. This analysis revealed that the response was characterized by an NK and NKT cell-driven type 1 and a MAIT and γδ T cell-driven type 3 responses ( E, 1F, D, and S1E). Thus, pulmonary LVS infection triggers both type 1 and type 3 inflammatory responses.

## Respiratory LVS infection of mice elicits ITL responses 5 days post inoculation
The immune response to respiratory LVS infection begins approximately 72 h post inoculation. , , , , This route of infection induces prostaglandin E2 production in the lungs which in turn promotes the release of anti-inflammatory factors. These anti-inflammatory factors inhibit the generation of IFN-γ-producing CD4+ T cells. , Whether this capacity for host immune evasion by LVS infection extends to ITL responses is unknown. Hence, the dynamics of the ITL response was evaluated in a time course study. In this experiment, C57BL/6 mice were inoculated with PBS (mock) or ∼8,500 cfu LVS by the intranasal route, and the response evaluated at 3, 5, and 7 dpi. At these time points, to improve lymphocyte yields, CD11b+ and CD11c+ myeloid as well as B220+ B cells were removed by flow sorting and the remaining CD45+ cells were subjected to scRNA-seq as described above. Quality control yielded a total of 8,326 high quality and comparable cells across all four samples ( A). Consistent with findings in conventional T cells, we observed NK and ITL accumulation after infection with significant expansion only from 5 dpi onward ( B and 2C). Moreover, type 1 and type 3 inflammatory responses were driven by NK, NKT1, and MAIT1 cells and by MAIT17 and γδ T cells, respectively ( D, 2E, and A–S2D). Furthermore, type 1 immune response peaked by 5 dpi while type 3 immune response continued to increase until at least 7 dpi ( D and 2E), suggesting a differential role for these different ITL subsets in the immune response to respiratory LVS infection. Taken together, these data support a model in which respiratory LVS infection of mice expands both type 1 and type 3 ITLs and attendant inflammatory responses only by 5 days post inoculation.
 

## NK and NKT1 cells contribute to type 1 immune responses in LVS-infected C57BL/6 lungs
We previously reported that NKT cell-deficient Cd1d−/− mice are relatively resistant to respiratory LVS infection-induced TLD. This outcome was associated with a reduced inflammatory milieu in Cd1d−/− mice when compared to C57BL/6 mice. Hence, an outsized type 1 response driven by NKT cells may underlie the reported lung pathology to LVS infection in C57BL/6 mice. Notably, NK cells contribute significantly to type 1 inflammation in response to LVS infection. , Thus, to explore NK and NKT cell involvement, all NK, NKT, and associated cell clusters were sorted in silico and sub-clustered for additional analysis ( A). Sustained NK cell presence was observed with notable expression of type 1 inflammatory genes including Ifng ( B–3D). An early expansion of NKT1 cells by 5 dpi expressing Ifng and Tbx21, which encodes Tbet—a Th1-typic TF that drives type 1 responses—was also observed ( B–3D, A, and S3B). Ifng transcript was apparent in NK and NKT1 cells from uninfected mice, as was previously reported. The Ifng transcripts peaked by 5 dpi and persisted until at least 7 dpi ( D). Importantly, neither NKT2 nor IL-17-producing NKT17 cell responses were observed ( E, 3F, and C–S3E). Accordingly, flow cytometric evidence indicated that LVS infection induces a rapid NKT1 cell expansion with a concomitant NKT2 and NKT17 subset contraction in both the lungs and spleen ( F).
 NKT cells can become activated by TCR engagement with glycolipid agonists, self-lipid agonists in combination with inflammatory cytokines, or by inflammatory cytokines alone. Hence, to establish the mode of NKT cell activation by respiratory LVS infection, the expression of Nr4a1—which codes for Nur77 and serves as a proxy for TCR engagement, and Il18r1—that provides a readout for cytokine-mediated activation, , , , was assessed in the in silico-sorted NKT cells. An early expression of Nr4a1 by NKT1 cells was observed, indicating initial TCR engagement ( G). Subsequent decrease in Nr4a1 expression was associated with a commensurate increase in Il18r1 expression by 7 dpi, implying continued NKT cell engagement that is cytokine-dependent but TCR-independent ( G). Consequently, flow cytometry experiments using Nur77 reporter mice confirmed an early and sustained accumulation of NKT cells, and revealed a significant increase in Nur77 levels in NKT cells by 3 dpi with a subsequent drop in Nur77 levels accompanied by increased IL-18Ra levels ( H, 3I, and G). Taken together, the data indicate LVS infection induces NK cell and TCR-mediated NKT1 cell expansion that drives a type 1 inflammatory immune response.
NKTfh cells—a T-follicular-helper cell-like NKT cell subset, also were identified. These cells alongside effector CD8+ T cells also appear to elicit a type 1 immune response to respiratory LVS infection ( A–3C). Nonetheless, Ifng transcript did not increase significantly in these two T cell subsets over time ( D). Moreover, NK, NKT1, and effector CD8+ T cells did not elicit a type 3 response. Consistent with this finding, no Il17a or Rorc transcripts were observed ( E, 3F, C, and S3E). Although NKTfh appear to express type 3 immune signature, they do not express Il17a or Rorc ( E, 3F, C, and S3E). Taken together, the results thus far indicate that NK and NKT1 cells elicit a type 1 immune response typified by IFN-γ production in response to respiratory LVS infection.

## Respiratory LVS infection enhances MAIT cell responses in the lungs of NKT cell-deficient Cd1d−/− mice
We previously reported that NKT cell-deficient Cd1d−/− mice resist respiratory infection with 8,000 cfu LVS—the same dose at which ≥50% of C57BL/6 mice succumb. Moreover, MAIT cells expand in naive Cd1d−/− mice, and play critical roles during LVS infection. Nonetheless, the mode of MAIT cell activation and the specific MAIT cell subset involved in protection from respiratory LVS infection are unknown. Hence, we investigated MAIT cell involvement in pulmonary immune responses to LVS infection in Cd1d−/− mice. As described above, both MAIT1 and MAIT17 cells expanded in response to respiratory LVS infection of C57BL/6 mice ( and ). To fully explore the dynamics of MAIT cell involvement in the context of a protective response, single cell transcriptomic analyses were performed on the B220+ B cell-negative as well as CD14+, CD11b+, and CD11c+ myeloid cell-negative fraction of CD45+ cells flow sorted from the lungs of mock or LVS-infected, Cd1d−/− mice. Quality control yielded a total of 4,986 high quality and comparable cells across the samples ( A). As in LVS-susceptive C57BL/6 lungs, immune cell accumulation was observed that only began by 5 dpi in TLD-resistant Cd1d−/− lungs ( B and 4C). Additional analyses confirmed the presence of a type 1 response driven by NK and CD8+ T cells, as well as a type 3 response mainly driven by MAIT and γδ T cells ( D, 4E, and A–S4D). Thus, LVS infection also induces ITL-dominated type 1 and type 3 immune responses in TLD-resistant, NKT cell deficient, Cd1d−/− mice.
 To explore the protective features of MAIT cell responses to LVS infection, all MAIT cells from C57BL/6 and Cd1d−/− cohorts were independently extracted by in silico sorting and subclustered for in-depth analyses. In line with previous reports, at baseline, NKT cell-deficient Cd1d−/− mice exhibited increased total pulmonary MAIT cells compared to C57BL/6 mice ( A and 5B). Surprisingly, upon LVS infection, C57BL/6 mice showed only a modest accumulation of MAIT cells by 5 dpi, with the most notable accumulation occurring at 7 dpi ( A and A). By contrast, LVS-infected Cd1d−/− mouse lungs exhibited enhanced MAIT cell accumulation by 5 dpi ( B and B). Interestingly, we noted that cluster 2—referred to as transitional MAIT cells, which maintained a highly active type 1 inflammatory signature, was distinctly replaced by cluster 1—referred to as hybrid MAIT cells, which largely maintained a type 3 inflammatory signature. Furthermore, hybrid MAIT cells significantly upregulated the expression of Ikzf3 encoding Aiolos as well as its target genes Irf8 and Myc ( C), which are markers of T cell plasticity. , 
 C57BL/6 MAIT cells displayed significant levels of both type 1 and type 3 gene expression signatures by 7 dpi ( C, 5D, D, and S5E). On the other hand, Cd1d−/− lungs exhibited about a 2-fold increase in expression of both type 1 and type 3 gene signatures by 5 dpi, which persisted through 7 dpi ( E, 5F, E, and S4F). The transitional MAIT cell cluster were so called because they decreased over time commensurate with increased MAIT17 cells, which also showed a hybrid MAIT cell gene signature. We hypothesize that transitional MAIT cells may be transitioning into hybrid MAIT and MAIT17 cells. We also observed that, in addition to a predominant type 3 profile, the hybrid MAIT cell cluster maintained some type 1 gene expression signature ( B, 5D, and 5F). In accordance with previous findings, MAIT cell clusters from both C57BL/6 and Cd1d−/− lungs could be distinctly grouped into Klrg1 and Il7ra (encoding CD127—the IL-7 receptor α chain)-expressing clusters ( F and S5G). Klrg1 was largely expressed by MAIT1 cells, whereas Il7ra was mostly expressed by MAIT17 cells ( F and S5G). Taken together, LVS infection distinctly induces enhanced and accelerated type 1 and type 3 MAIT cell responses in TLD-resistant, Cd1d−/− mice.

## LVS infection expands protective lung-resident MAIT cells via TCR and cytokine-mediated mechanisms
Akin to NKT cells, , MAIT cells can be activated via TCR-dependent but cytokine-independent, TCR-dependent plus cytokine-dependent, and TCR-independent but cytokine-dependent mechanisms. , , , , Nur77—encoded by Nr4a1—is induced upon TCR stimulation in conventional T, NKT, and MAIT cells and, hence, serves as a proxy for T cell activation upon antigen/ligand/agonist recognition. , , , , , , Mouse MAIT cell activation by LVS in vitro is MR1-dependent and, hence, by extension, TCR-dependent. By contrast, despite the presence of a functional riboflavin synthesis pathway that is essential for the generation of MAIT cell agonist 5-OP-RU (5-(2-oxopropylideneamino)-6-day-ribitylaminouracil), M. bovis infection drives a predominant type 3 MAIT cell response in an MR1-independent manner. Hence, we evaluated the induction of Nr4a1 and Il18r transcripts in pulmonary MAIT cells in vivo during LVS infection of both C57BL/6 and Cd1d−/− mice. All MAIT cell subsets in C57BL/6 mice significantly upregulated Nr4a1 expression by 7 dpi. All MAIT cells also rapidly (as early as 5 dpi) upregulated Il18r1 expression ( A). Similarly, MAIT cell clusters in LVS-infected Cd1d−/− lungs significantly upregulated both Nr4a1 and Il18r expression, but both transcripts were upregulated by 5 dpi and sustained through 7 dpi. Interestingly, the transitional MAIT cell cluster, which was not detected in LVS-infected C57BL/6 mice, displayed reduced Nr4a1 expression and contained cells in which Il18r1 was upregulated by 7 dpi ( B).
 Next, the modes of MAIT cell activation were evaluated by flow cytometry in LVS-infected Nur77-reporter Nr4a1eGFP mice. Nr4a1eGFP mice significantly accumulated MAIT cell by 5 dpi with continued accumulation at 7 dpi ( C). eGFP expression, and by proxy Nur77 protein levels, significantly increased in pulmonary Nr4a1eGFP MAIT cells as early as 5 dpi and were sustained through 7 dpi ( D). Concurrently, there was significant increase in IL18Ra protein in Nr4a1eGFP MAIT cells ( D), indicating a combined TCR and cytokine mediated activation of MAIT cells. Hence, both sustained TCR and cytokine mediated activation elicited MAIT cell function during LVS infection in NKT cell sufficient and deficient mice.

## Enhanced MAIT17 cell response protects LVS-susceptible, immunodeficient RAG2−/− mice from severe morbidity and mortality caused by respiratory LVS infection
We next sought to compare the expression of hallmark MAIT1 and MAIT17 cytokine genes in lungs of mock and LVS-infected C57BL/6 and Cd1d−/− mice. In the C57BL/6 lungs, distinct MAIT1 and hybrid MAIT cell clusters expressed significant levels of Ifng and Tbx21 by 7 dpi ( A). Curiously, unlike NK and NKT1 cells in mock infected C57BL/6 lungs ( D), naive MAIT1 cells in the lungs of infected C57BL/6 mice have not transcribed their Ifng and Tbx21 loci ( A). By contrast, in the Cd1d−/− lungs, naive MAIT1, transitional MAIT, and hybrid MAIT cell clusters have already transcribed both the Ifng and Tbx21 loci. Further, LVS infection of Cd1d−/− lungs augmented the levels of Ifng and Tbx21 transcripts by 5 dpi that were sustained until 7 dpi ( B). Surprisingly, however, a small fraction of MAIT17 cells in the C57BL/6 lungs had transcribed the Ifng and Tbx21 loci, whereas those in Cd1d−/− lungs did not ( A and 7B). Interestingly, a mixed Th1/Th17-like MAIT cell cytokine profile was previously reported after in vitro stimulation of MAIT cells. Moreover, in the C57BL/6 lungs, MAIT17 and hybrid MAIT cell clusters expressed Il17a and Rorc, which codes for RORγt—a Th17-typic TF that drives type 3 responses, only by 5 or 7 dpi with LVS ( C). Similar to C57BL/6 lungs, naive MAIT cells have not transcribed Il17a, although naive Rorc+ MAIT and MAIT17 clusters have already transcribed the Rorc locus. By 5 dpi, Il17a and Rorc transcripts were significantly increased and persisted through 7 dpi within the MAIT17 and hybrid MAIT cell clusters ( D). Again, a small fraction of MAIT1 cells in the C57BL/6 lungs had transcribed the Il17a and Rorc loci, which were not found in the Cd1d−/− lungs ( C and 7D). Last, the expression of other hallmark type 1 and type 3 cytokine genes followed similar patterns ( A and S6B).
 The presence of Ifng and Il17a transcripts, albeit at low levels, in naive MAIT cells of Cd1d−/− lungs suggested that these cells are poised to respond quickly to stimulatory signals from LVS infection, which is distinct from naive MAIT cells of C57BL/6 lungs in which Ifng and Il17a transcripts were absent. Hence, we ascertained the dynamics of cytokine protein production by MAIT cells in response to LVS infection by intracellular cytokine staining and flow cytometry ( E). As previously established, we found higher frequency of pulmonary MAIT cells (TCRβ+ MR1/5-OP-RU+) at baseline in Cd1d−/− mice and concordantly increased cell numbers by 7 dpi when compared to C57BL/6 mice ( E). Accordingly, a subset of RORγt+ MAIT cells increased in numbers over time that peaked at 7 dpi with LVS ( C). Consistent with the increased MAIT cells was the significantly increased IL-17A-producing MAIT cell accumulation in Cd1d−/− mouse lungs when compared to C57BL/6 mouse lungs at 7 dpi ( E). A similar trend was observed with IFN-γ-producing MAIT cells, but the difference was not statistically significant ( E). These results indicate that, in addition to a comparable MAIT1 response, TLD-resistant lungs exhibit increased accumulation of IL-17A-producing MAIT cells upon LVS infection.
γδ T cells also surveil the lung mucosa and play roles in infection and immunity. Further, γδ T cells have been suggested as a source of IL-17A that protects against respiratory LVS infections. Hence, comparative analyses of γδ T and MAIT cells were conducted. As previously reported, there were more γδ T cells in Cd1d−/− mice as compared to C57BL/6 mice. Accordingly, these cells expanded to significantly high numbers and produced both IFN-γ and IL17A by 7 dpi in Cd1d−/− lungs when compared with C57BL/6 lungs ( D). Moreover, NKT cell deficient, Cd1d−/− mice have increased levels of pulmonary γδ T cells than MAIT cells at baseline. LVS infection induced significant expansion of total γδ T and MAIT cells in Cd1d−/− mouse lungs 7 dpi. Nonetheless, significantly more MAIT cells than γδ T cells accumulated by 7 dpi ( F). Despite disproportionate γδ T and MAIT cell expansion, there was no significant difference in either IL-17A- or IFN-γ-producing γδ T and MAIT cells at 7 dpi ( E). Thus, MAIT cells are significant contributors to IL-17 production in the lungs post LVS infection.
Previous work showed that the absence of MAIT cells renders mice susceptible to severe morbidity due to pulmonary LVS infection. Thus, MAIT cells are essential for protective responses to LVS infection. , , Whether these cells are sufficient to protect from LVS infection-induced morbidity remained as yet unknown. To that end, 80,000–100,000 MAIT cells were flow sorted from LVS-infected Cd1d−/− mice at 7 dpi and adoptively transferred intravenously into immune deficient RAG2−/− mice. LVS-infected Cd1d−/− mice were used as donors because MAIT17 cells predominate the lungs of infected Cd1d−/− mice ( E). Control RAG2−/− mice received PBS. Eighteen hours post MAIT cell transfer or PBS treatment, recipient and treated RAG2−/− mice were challenged with ∼8,000 cfu (LD50) LVS by the intranasal route. We found that by 9 dpi, the transferred MAIT cells were detectable in the lungs of RAG2−/− mice that received cells but not PBS ( G). Consistent with this finding, MAIT cell-recipient RAG2−/− mice showed reduced weight loss ( H), lower disease manifestation ( I) and improved survival ( J) compared to control mice that received PBS. Taken together, the data suggest that MAIT17 cells, which predominate LVS-infected Cd1d−/− mice, are sufficient to confer protection from morbidity and mortality caused by LVS infection of mice.

## Discussion
The goal of this study was to understand the dynamics of innate-like lymphocyte responses during the onset of TLD in a mouse model of LVS infection. For this, a transcriptomic map of lymphocytes isolated from the lungs of TLD-sensitive C57BL/6 and TLD-resistant CD1d-null mice was developed at single cell resolution. A comparative study of the two transcriptomic maps and confirmatory immunoassays revealed that both strains elicited a type 1 and type 3 inflammatory response. NK, NKT1, and MAIT1 cells were responsible for the type 1 inflammatory response and MAIT17 and γδ T cells for the type 3 response. The TLD-resistant mouse strain distinguished itself with a higher number of MAIT cells over the TLD-sensitive mouse strain, even during homeostatic conditions, as reported previously. Out of this skewed MAIT cell enriched Cd1d−/− mouse emerged an IL-17-dominated response, which upon transfer into immunodeficient RAG2−/− mice conferred protection against the development of TLD. Collectively, these findings position MAIT cells as potential mediators of IL-17-dependent protection from pulmonary TLD. These findings significantly move the field forward in the following ways: First, they support a sequential type 1 to type 3 inflammatory response model to confer protection in the acute phase of TLD. Second, as further discussed in the following, the data implicate an iBALT-mediated mechanism of protection. And last, they inform a MAIT17-targeted vaccine design.
A past study implicated IFN-γ-producing MAIT1 cells as the key mediators of protection from systemic LVS infection. That report did not find MAIT17 cells, which is not surprising as MAIT cells are rare, if at all present, in the spleen and the circulation and, hence, appears at odds with other studies that have revealed a critical role for IL-17 in resistance against pulmonary TLD , , , , and with the current report. Further, one of the studies pin-pointed γδ T cells as the main source of IL-17 and the key mediator of resistance to TLD. The current study suggests that both IFN-γ-producing NK, NKT1, and MAIT1 cells and IL-17-producing MAIT17 and γδ T cells are sequentially involved in the early—3–5 dpi, and late—5–7 dpi, phases of LVS infection, respectively. This sequential response appears to confer resistance against TLD even before the induction of adaptive immune responses by conventional T cells. This model of resistance to LVS infection-induced TLD explains the vast literature (discussed in the Introduction) in which the absence of early IFN-γ-producing innate-like lymphocytes—NK, NKT1, and MAIT1 cells—leads to TLD even though IL-17-producing MAIT17 and γδ T cells are present. We reason that the early IFN-γ response keeps the intracytosolic LVS burden and dispersal under control, as observed in our previous comparative study between TLD-sensitive C57BL/6 and TLD-resistant Cd1d−/− mouse responses to LVS infection. Further, the induction of IL-17 in the later phase of the acute infection is essential for LVS clearance. This IL-17 response does not kick-in early enough to control the infection when the host is relieved of the prostaglandin E2-induced immune suppression by the bacterium and, hence, requires the early IFN-γ response. But the persistence of an oversized runaway type 1 inflammatory response is detrimental as we reported previously. In support of this notion is the finding herein where MAIT cells are yet to open their cytokine gene loci in the TLD-sensitive C57BL/6 mice but have already done so at steady state in the TLD-resistant Cd1d−/− mice. While several innate and adaptive immune mechanisms are perhaps involved in IL-17-mediated LVS clearance, how this is accomplished requires further investigation.
One potential IL-17-mediated mechanism may involve the induction of the tertiary lymphoid structures (TLSs), called the iBALT, in the lungs of LVS-infected mice. Our previous study revealed that TLD-sensitive C57BL/6 mice poorly develop iBALTs in response to respiratory LVS infection. By contrast, the induction of iBALT was a key distinguishing feature of the TLD-resistant Cd1d−/− mice. Thus, when combined with another study, NKT cells appear to inhibit iBALT formation. The role of MAIT cells in iBALT formation, however, remains unclear. MAIT cells, like other ITLs, are present in TLSs where they are thought to enhance a return to homeostasis post insult. , Moreover, IL-17 is required for TLS formation. , As seen in this report, MAIT17 cells produce a significant amount of IL-17. Consistent with these findings, a preliminary analysis of our current scRNA-seq data showed the expression of several genes (Cxcr4, Bcl6, Lta, Tnfsf14, Il17a, Tnf, and Il22) implicated in TLS and/or iBALT formation. , We found a modest upregulation of TLS-promoting factors in C57BL/6 MAIT cells by 7 dpi. By contrast, there was remarkably higher expression of iBALT-promoting factors in Il17a-expressing MAIT cells in LVS-infected Cd1d−/− lungs by 5 dpi that persisted through 7 dpi. Furthermore, a higher frequency of Il17a-expressing MAIT cells from Cd1d−/− lungs expressed elevated levels of iBALT-promoting factors compared to C57BL/6 MAIT cells (unpublished results). These results suggest that MAIT17 cells may contribute to TLS formation to protect mice from morbidity caused by respiratory LVS infection. Additional studies shall help firm this conclusion.
We found that LVS infection first induced Nr4a1 expression—a proxy for TCR engagement and cell activation —and eventually Il18r1 expression in NKT, MAIT1, and MAIT17 cells. This finding suggests that vaccine design against F. tularensis should consider adjuvants that induce both TCR- and cytokine-dependent MAIT cell activation. Moreover, a recent study indicated that the TCR-dependent pathway of MAIT cell activation is critical, as the ribD gene of type A F. tularensis contains mutations that render them defective in riboflavin biosynthesis. Consequently, the type A strain lacks the MAIT cell antigen 5-OP-RU. This ribD mutation when introgressed into LVS, renders it incapable of TCR-dependent MAIT cell activation as well. Hence, the inability to activate MAIT cells may explain the extreme virulence of type A F. tularensis. We found that the lack of NKT cells in CD1d−/− mice tempered this virulence. Hence, a type A vaccine may consider deletion of the NKT cell TCR agonist and the addition of a functional ribD gene. Engineering these changes into SchuS4—a prototype type A F. tularensis strain—may tame its extreme virulence to provide an effective homotypic vaccine. Alternatively, the deletion of the gene/s that encode the NKT cell agonist in LVS may make it a more reliable, effective vaccine. Thus, the findings in this report explain how the sequential type 1 to type 3 inflammatory response can lead to protective immunity to one of the most virulent pulmonary pathogens that involves the induction of iBALTs and how these features can be harnessed for vaccine design.

## Limitations of the study
This study used an infection dose by which ∼50% (LD50) of the wild type (C57BL/6) mice succumb to infection and those that survive are moribund. Hence, the transcriptomic and immunologic outcomes reported herein may not reflect protective mechanisms in place within wild type mice. While an investigation of sublethal infection could have benefitted this study, this does not undermine the current findings, which was a comparative, single-cell-transcriptomic study to understand how a single gene deficiency in mice overcame disease and survived (Cd1d−/− mice) versus the wild type, which became sick progressively and succumbed (C57BL/6 mice). Furthermore, in our previous report both C57BL/6 and Cd1d−/−- mice infected with LVS at 5 × 102 or 2 × 103 cfu inoculum—i.e., two different sublethal doses, did not develop disease and survived the infection despite weight loss. Hence, we reasoned that using a sublethal dose would result in no differences. And because this was a first comparative study, we had no point of reference. Future studies will bear infection dose in mind.
This study reports that IL-17 produced by MAIT cells are protective against LVS infection-induced TLD. This is based on the transfer of total MAIT cells isolated from LVS-infected lungs of Cd1d−/− mice in which MAIT17 cells predominate. As total MAIT cells so isolated also contain IFN-γ-producing MAIT1 cells, additional transfer experiments with purified, IL-17-producing MAIT17 cells and IFN-γ-producing MAIT1 cells are required to rule out or rule in the role of MAIT1 cells in protection from TLD. At the current time, methods to purify the two MAIT cell subsets are only being worked out in our laboratory.
So also, infection biology is reported only in H–7J, which, out of necessity, does not show that survival of Rag2−/− mice that received lung-derived MAIT cells plateaued. The experiment was not carried out for a longer period to determine bacterial burden in the lungs, spleen and liver because Rag2−/− mice are lymphopenic. About 60% of the LVS-infected Rag2−/− mice in the cohort that did not receive MAIT cells had reached the endpoint in the experiment shown in H–7J. The remaining 40% in this cohort would have reached the endpoint within the next day or two. Hence, we opted to terminate the experiment at 10 dpi to have a study group for comparison. Notwithstanding these limitations, the new results reported herein compel further investigations of the immune responses shaped by MAIT17 cells vis-à-vis their interactions with other cells of the immune system to understand how these interactions steer appropriate innate and adaptive immune responses to protect the host from an acute oft-times lethal infectious disease.

## Resource availability

## Lead contact
Further information and reasonable requests for resources and reagents should be directed to and will be fulfilled by the lead contact, Sebastian Joyce (sebastian.joyce@vumc.org).

## Materials availability
This study did not generate new unique reagents or mouse lines.

## Data and code availability

•Single-cell RNA-seq data have been deposited at NCBI Sequence Read Archive (SRA) under the accession numbers SAMN40657083—SAMN40657092 (see ) and are publicly available as of the date of publication.
•The current study does not report original code(s).
•All flow cytometry and infection metrics data reported in this paper will be shared by the upon request. Any additional information required to reanalyze the data reported in this paper is available from the upon request.

## Acknowledgments
We greatly appreciate the technical assistance provided Ms. W. Hu, Dr. Y. Su, and Ms. A.J. Joyce. S.J. is a Senior Research Career Scientist of the US Department of Veterans Affairs supported by IK6 BX004595. G.D.O. and N.U.C. were supported by T32GM007347 and N.U.C. by F30HL159941. This work was supported by Merit Awards BX001444 and BX001610 to S.J. and BX000915 to H.M.S.A. as well as by NIH grants AI137082 to S.J., AI139046 to L.V.K., and HL136664 to D.C.N. Flow Cytometry Shared Resource is supported by CA68485 and DK058404. VANTAGE Shared Resource is supported by RR024975, CA68485, EY08126, and RR030956.

## Author contributions
G.D.O. performed the experiments, analyzed the data, and wrote and edited the manuscript. A.K. co-conceived the project, helped to write the AI137082 proposal, performed experiments, analyzed the data, and edited the manuscript. F.G. assisted with several experiments. N.U.C. assisted with some flow cytometry experiments. L.W. assisted with some of the experiments and edited the manuscript. D.C.N. supervised some flow cytometry experiments and flow data analyses. L.V.K. assisted with data analysis, provided critical reagents, and edited the manuscript. H.M.S.A. co-conceived the project, assisted in data analysis, and edited the manuscript. S.J. conceived the project, sought funding, supervised the project, analyzed the data, and edited and finalized the MS.

## Declaration of interests
L.V.K. is a member of the scientific advisory board of Isu Abxis Co., Ltd. (Republic of Korea).

## STAR★Methods

## Key resources table

 

## Experimental model and study participant details

## Mice
Age-matched, 6-to-12-week-old male mice were used for experiments described herein. Prior epidemiological and experimental reports on F. tularensis have indicated that males were more susceptible to infection than females. , , , , , , C57BL/6J (RRID:MGI:3028467), Nur77GFP (C57BL/6-Tg(Nr4a1-EGFP/cre)820Khog/J; RRID:MGI:5007652), and RAG2−/− (B6.Cg-Rag2tm1.1Cgn/J; RRID:IMSR_JAX:008449) mice were purchased from the Jackson Laboratory (Bar Harbor). Cd1d−/− (B6(C)-Cd1d1tm1.2Aben/J; RRID:IMSR_JAX:017294) mice have been described. Mice were bred and maintained in the VUMC (Vanderbilt University Medical Center) vivarium and provided with food and water ad libitum. LVS infection was performed in an ABSL-2 facility. Vanderbilt’s IACUC approved the experiments described here. The current study did not generate any unique mouse strains. All mouse strain maintained by us for this study are available to investigators from the lead contact upon request.

## Study approval and ethics statement
All procedures for use of mice in the study were approved by the Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee at Vanderbilt University School of Medicine and VUMC. Anesthesia was performed using 1–5% isoflurane or 100 mg/kg and 10 mg/kg ketamine and xylazine, respectively. Euthanasia was performed by CO2 overdose followed by cervical dislocation.

## Bacterial infection
F. tularensis LVS was provided by S. Khader (Washington University, St. Louis, MO). Preparation of working stocks and cfu determination from infected tissue were performed as described. LD50 was determined by the method of Reed and Muench. All infection experiments were performed in a blinded fashion until all data were grouped and analyzed. Male, 6-to-12-week-old mice were anesthetized by i.p. administration of a ketamine/xylazine mixture and ∼8–10 × 103 cfu LVS were administered i.n. in 50 μL sterile PBS. Mice were monitored daily for weight loss and signs of morbidity. Criteria for clinical score were developed based upon observation of mice from at least three separate experiments: 1, no outward signs of illness; 2, consistently ruffled fur; 3, hunched back and altered gait; and 4, reduced mobility/reaction to stimulus, labored breathing, lethargy. Mice were humanely euthanized when weight loss exceeded 30% of the weight at the start of the experiment.
In preliminary experiments, we determined the LD50 of the LVS generously gifted by Professor SA Kadher (University of Chicago). This this experiment, we noticed that infected mice lost up to 30% of their initial weight beginning at day 4 post inoculation (p.i.). Although weight loss was observed at all doses tested (500, 2,000, 8,000 and 30,000 cfu), the degree of disease severity was dependent on the initial inoculum dose. It was only at a dose of 8,000 cfu inoculum where consistent morbidity was observed. At lower doses the majority of mice recovered quickly with few outward signs of disease beyond slightly ruffled fur; this was not consistent between animals. Even at the higher dose, wild type mice that did not succumb by 12 dpi quickly began to regain weight and appeared otherwise healthy. Furthermore, the LD50 established has been consistent with multiple batches grown in our laboratory and is consistent with the published literature. , , Moreover, as noted above, the two sublethal doses—5x102 and 2 × 103 cfu LVS inocula, did not develop disease and survived the infection. And because this is a first comparative study, we had no point of reference. Hence, we reasoned that using a sublethal dose would result in no differences.

## Method details

## Tissue processing
Spleen and lungs were processed as previously described. , , Briefly, mice were euthanized with CO2 and lungs were perfused with PBS. Lungs were minced and incubated in medium containing Collagenase/DNAse for 45 min at 37°C sometimes with vigorous agitation at 15-min intervals. Lung tissue was pushed through a 70 μm nylon screen to obtain a single-cell suspension. Red blood cells were lysed, and the cells were resuspended in PBS containing 2% FBS and 50nM Dasatinib. Cells were further filtered through 40 μm nylon screen before downstream use. Both left and right lung lobes were used for each indicated experiment. For intravascular vs. resident T cell measurements, 2 μM FITC-conjugated anti-mouse CD45.2 antibody was retro-orbitally injected into each mouse 3–5 min before culling.

## Flow cytometry
NKT and MAIT cells were analyzed as previously described using respective NKT- and MAIT-specific tetramers. , All data were acquired on Canto II 3-Laser 8-color flow cytometer or 4-laser Cytek Aurora spectral cytometer and analyzed with FlowJo software (FlowJo, LLC). Cell populations were identified as follows: B (B220+), T (TCRβ+ and/or CD3ε+), NKT (TCRβ+CD3ε+CD1d/αGC tetramer+), MAIT (TCRβ+CD3ε+MR1/5-OP-RU tetramer+), and γδ T cells (TCRγδ+CD3ε+) cells. NKT and MAIT subsets were identified by evaluating intracellular staining for hallmark cytokines (IL-17A, IFNγ, IL-4, IL-5, and IL-13), or intranuclear staining for hallmark transcription factors (Tbet, RORγt). Ligand-loaded and -unloaded CD1d and MR1 tetramers were provided by the NIH Tetramer Core Facility. Cell counts were determined using AccuCheck counting beads (Invitrogen) by using manufacturer’s recommended method.

## Adoptive transfers
Cd1d−/− mice were infected with ∼8—9x103 cfu LVS. Seven dpi, lungs from 3 to 5 mice were processed, stained, and subsequently sorted for MAIT cells using 4-laser Cytek Aurora cell sorter. Eighty thousand to 100,000 MAIT cells were then transferred by tail vein injection into recipient RAG2−/− mice with subsequent inoculation with LD50 LVS 18 h after transfer. Animals were monitored and MAIT cells characterized as described above.

## Single cell RNA sequencing
Lung single-cell suspensions were generated from PBS treated or LVS-inoculated mice at 3, 5, 7 dpi as previously described. , 

## Single-cell RNA library generation and sequencing
Isolated total lung single-cell suspensions were depleted of dead cells by flow cytometry and similarly enriched for T lymphocytes and subjected to droplet-based massively parallel single-cell RNA sequencing using Chromium Single Cell 5’ (v1) Reagent Kit per manufacturer’s instructions (10x Genomics). Briefly, cell suspensions were loaded at 1,000 cells/μL with the aim to capture 10,000 cells/lane. Each cell in the 10x Chromium Controller generated GEM droplets was labeled with a specific barcode, and each transcript labeled with a unique molecular identifier (UMI) during reverse transcription. The barcoded cDNA underwent 16 cycles of amplification and SPRI bead purification before library generation. Libraries were prepared from amplified cDNA and target enrichment products by fragmentation, end repair, A-tailing, adapter ligation, and sample index PCR per manufacturer’s instructions. Libraries were sequenced on a NovaSeq S4 (200 cycle) flow cell, targeting 50,000 read pairs/cell.

## Single-cell RNA-seq data processing
The raw gene expression matrices were generated by the Cell Ranger software (10x Genomics, version 7.0.1) available on the 10x website. After demultiplexing, the resulting fastq files were aligned against the mouse reference genome mm10 with cellranger count. The output filtered gene count matrices were analyzed by R software (v.3.5.3) with the Seurat package (v.3.0.0). Cells that had less than 200 and more than 5000 detected genes were filtered out. The threshold was chosen for mitochondrial genes as follows: had less than 5% of mitochondrial genes for all samples. Samples with similar conditions were merged, data normalized with default parameters, and most variable genes were detected by the FindVariableFeatures function (FDR <0.05 cutoff). All samples were combined using Seurat functions, FindIntegrationAnchors and IntegrateData. ScaleData was used to regress out number of UMI’s and mitochondrial content and principal component analysis (PCA) was performed with RunPCA. The UMAP dimensionality reduction was performed on the scaled matrix using the first 20 PCA. For clustering, the FindNeighbors (20 PCA) and FindClusters (resolution 0.4) functions were used. FindAllMarkers was used to compare a cluster against all other clusters to identify the marker genes. For each cluster, the minimum required average log fold change in gene expression was set to 0.25 and the minimum percent of cells that must express gene in either cluster was set to 25%. Cd1d−/− and B6 samples were analyzed separately but concurrently. The computational platform scType was used for initial cluster annotation. scType combines data from multiple models and organs including lungs to identify a variety of immune and non-immune cells. A marker list adapted from scType and used for identifying each annotated cluster is provided in . Importantly, using scType, as expected, we did not identify any NKT cell clusters in Cd1d−/− samples. Cluster annotations were further confirmed manually by verifying signature genes provided in . To re-analyze lymphocyte sub-populations, we pooled the clusters that were identified as lymphoid in origin and re-ran PCA, tSNE, and clustering to get a better resolution for further analysis. The function FindMarkers was used to compare the cells in a selected cluster across different conditions. The analysis was performed based on the Wilcoxon rank-sum test with thresholds average logFC ≥0.25 and adj-pvalue ≤0.05 using Seurat. Several R packages were used to generate figures and intermediate data preprocessing, such as ggplot2. Inflammatory signature genes were compiled based on previously published gene signatures. , Subsequent analyses of Type 1 cell clusters and MAIT cells were performed as above by pooling annotated clusters.

## Quantification and statistical analysis
Statistical analyses of data were performed using GraphPad Prism version 10.2.2 for Windows, GraphPad Software, San Diego California USA (www.graphpad.com). Where indicated in the figure legends, data were aggregated across several (from two to four) replicate experiments. Otherwise, figures are representative of replicate experiments. Clinical score data were analyzed using Generalized Estimating Equation model based on Poisson regression. In the model, clinical score was predicted by group type and day of assessment (dummy coded), and their interaction. We report comparisons between groups at each time of assessment, which were obtained by changing the reference category between days of assessment. All statistical analyses are reported in the associated figure legends including the statistical tests used, exact value of n, what n represents (e.g., number of animals), definition of center, and dispersion and precision measures (e.g., mean, median, SD, SEM). For all sequencing experiments, cells in each group or condition were pooled before sequencing was performed.

## Additional resources

## Reagents
All reagents used for the current report are publicly available. Details including RRID identifiers are provided in the .

Published: January 16, 2025

## Footnotes
Supplemental information can be found online at https://doi.org/10.1016/j.isci.2025.111810.

## Contributor Information
Amrendra Kumar, Email: amrendra.kumar@vumc.org.
Holly M. Scott Algood, Email: holly.m.algood@vumc.org.
Sebastian Joyce, Email: sebastian.joyce@vumc.org.

## Supplemental information

## Document S1. Figures S1–S6

## Table S1. Gene sets that defined each cluster, related to Figure 1

## References
 

## Associated Data

## Supplementary Materials

## Document S1. Figures S1–S6

## Table S1. Gene sets that defined each cluster, related to Figure 1

## Data Availability Statement

•Single-cell RNA-seq data have been deposited at NCBI Sequence Read Archive (SRA) under the accession numbers SAMN40657083—SAMN40657092 (see ) and are publicly available as of the date of publication.
•The current study does not report original code(s).
•All flow cytometry and infection metrics data reported in this paper will be shared by the upon request. Any additional information required to reanalyze the data reported in this paper is available from the upon request.