4063jacsauJACS AuJACS AuAmerican Chemical SocietyPMC1005224310052243100522433700675510.1021/jacsau.2c00569Glycosaminoglycans:
What Remains To Be Deciphered?
PerezSerge MakshakovaOlga AnguloJesus BediniEmiliano BisioAntonella de PazJose Luis FaddaElisa GuerriniMarco HricoviniMichal HricoviniMilos LisacekFrederique NietoPedro M PagelKevin PaiardiGiulia RichterRalf SamsonovSergey A VivèsRomain R NikitovicDragana Ricard BlumSylvie †Centre
de Recherche sur les Macromolecules, Vegetales,
University of Grenoble-Alpes, Centre National de la Recherche Scientifique, Grenoble F-38041 France‡FRC
Kazan Scientific Center of Russian Academy of Sciences, Kazan Institute of Biochemistry and Biophysics, Kazan 420111, Russia§Insituto
de Investigaciones Quimicas, CIC Cartuja, CSIC and Universidad de Sevilla, Sevilla, SP 41092, Spain∥Department
of Chemical Sciences, University of Naples
Federico II, Naples,I-80126, Italy⊥Istituto
di Richerche Chimiche e Biochimiche, G. Ronzoni, Milan I-20133, Italy#Department
of Chemistry and Hamilton Institute, Maynooth
University, Maynooth W23 F2H6, Ireland7Institute
of Chemistry, Slovak Academy of Sciences, Bratislava SK-845 38, Slovakia8Computer
Science Department & Section of Biology, University of Geneva & Swiss Institue of Bioinformatics, Geneva CH-1227, Switzerland9Institut
für Chemie und Biochemie Organische Chemie, Freie Universität Berlin, Berlin 14195, Germany10Molecular
and Cellular Modeling Group, Heidelberg Institute for Theoretical
Studies, Heidelberg University, Heidelberg 69118, Germany11School
of Biomedical Sciences, Faculty of Biological Sciences, School of
Physics and Astronomy, Faculty of Engineering and Physical Sciences,
Astbury Centre for Structural Molecular Biology and Bragg Centre for
Materials Research, University of Leeds, Leeds LS2 9JT, United Kingdom12Department
of Theoretical Chemistry, Faculty of Chemistry, University of Gdansk, Gdsank 80-309, Poland13Univ.
Grenoble Alpes, CNRS, CEA, IBS, Grenoble F-38044, France14School
of Histology-Embriology, Medical School, University of Crete, Heraklion 71003, Greece15University
Claude Bernard Lyon 1, CNRS, INSA Lyon, CPE, Institute of Molecular and Supramolecular Chemistry and Biochemistry,
UMR 5246, Villeurbanne F 69622 Cedex, France*Email: serge.perez@cermav.cnrs.fr, spsergeperez@gmail.com.
23202333628628–6563032023© 2023 The Authors. Published by American Chemical SocietyPermits non-commercial access and re-use, provided that author attribution and integrity are maintained; but does not permit creation of adaptations or other derivative works (https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/).

## Abstract
 Glycosaminoglycans (GAGs) are complex polysaccharides
exhibiting
a vast structural diversity and fulfilling various functions mediated
by thousands of interactions in the extracellular matrix, at the cell
surface, and within the cells where they have been detected in the
nucleus. It is known that the chemical groups attached to GAGs and
GAG conformations comprise “glycocodes” that are not
yet fully deciphered. The molecular context also matters for GAG structures
and functions, and the influence of the structure and functions of
the proteoglycan core proteins on sulfated GAGs and vice versa warrants
further investigation. The lack of dedicated bioinformatic tools for
mining GAG data sets contributes to a partial characterization of
the structural and functional landscape and interactions of GAGs.
These pending issues will benefit from the development of new approaches
reviewed here, namely (i) the synthesis of GAG oligosaccharides to
build large and diverse GAG libraries, (ii) GAG analysis and sequencing
by mass spectrometry (e.g., ion mobility-mass spectrometry),
gas-phase infrared spectroscopy, recognition tunnelling nanopores,
and molecular modeling to identify bioactive GAG sequences, biophysical
methods to investigate binding interfaces, and to expand our knowledge
and understanding of glycocodes governing GAG molecular recognition,
and (iii) artificial intelligence for in-depth investigation of GAGomic
data sets and their integration with proteomics.
Keywords: glycosaminoglycans, chondroitin sulfate, dermatan
sulfate, heparan sulfate, heparin, keratan
sulfate heparosan, hyaluronan

statusreleaseddisplay-pdfyesis-olfnois-manuscriptnois-preprintnois-journal-matternois-scannednois-retractednoReceived 2022 Oct 15; Accepted 2022 Dec 7; Revised 2022 Dec 5; Collection date 2023 Mar 27.

1.

## Introduction
Glycosaminoglycans (GAGs)
are a family of linear, highly negatively
charged polydisperse polysaccharides, some variably sulfated but others
not, and expressed ubiquitously and abundantly on the cell surface
and in the extracellular matrix. GAGs are also found in invertebrates
and prokaryotes. Upon their discovery, GAGs were considered to play
a minor role, forming an inert “glue” surrounding the
cells and thus set aside from “cutting-edge” research
efforts. However, during the last decades, the field of GAG research
has made giant steps forward, and these macromolecules have emerged
as essential players in critical biological processes regulating cellular
properties, tissue development and remodeling, homeostasis, and disease
progression.
The extraordinary structural diversity of GAGs
translates into
highly diverse functions not accessible to high-order structures and
allows them to modulate interactions with various biological molecules.
For example, GAGs participate in extracellular matrix assembly, cell–matrix
and cell–cell interactions, ligand–receptor binding,
and downstream cellular signaling. They control chemokine and cytokine
activities and growth factor sequestration. They regulate multiple
biological processes in a physiological context, but they also participate
in the progression of many diseases. Besides their biological roles,
their physical properties are of major interest for biomaterials and
tissue engineering applications.
The chemical and structural
complexity of GAGs embodies most of
the challenges we can find in glycoscience research, combining the
heterogeneity of glycans with the difficulties inherent to charged
(“polyelectrolyte”) polysaccharides. Numerous research
areas have focused on deciphering the structure-to-function relationships
underlying the diversity of functions and properties of GAGs. Significant
and decisive advances have been achieved in the past decade, mainly
through interdisciplinary collaborations, demonstrating the tremendous
potential of future discoveries in health and diseases. Nevertheless,
several methodological and biological difficulties still hinder progress
in GAGs research and must be overcome to access the full spectrum
of analytical, physicochemical, chemical, biophysical, and biochemical
investigation capabilities to characterize GAGs and their interactions
with proteins. Although these difficulties are usually well identified
in each discipline, a global, interdisciplinary approach is needed
to identify the major challenges.
Within the context of a European
initiative, we asked the GAG research
community at large what remains to be solved to fully understand the
GAG structure and function. In parallel, we also asked the involved
scientists to identify the unmet needs which should be addressed in
order for them to acquire further knowledge and perform additional
activities in their fields of expertise. Such an approach will allow
the scientists to have both a disciplinary and an integrative view
of the GAG research field. This endeavor is aimed to create a shared
vision for all GAG researchers, from basic research to technological
applications, and the present Perspective is a translation of such
findings and discussions. More specifically, this work deals with
issues relevant to the broad research areas of GAG chemistry, biophysics
and biochemistry, and concentrates on the different disciplines within
these research fields. A companion publication will address the issues
related to the diverse biological functions of GAGs.

2.

## Glycosaminoglycans
GAGs constitute
a structurally heterogeneous class of complex carbohydrates.
They are linear, negatively charged polysaccharides characterized
by sequences of disaccharide repeating units composed of an (occasionally
deacetylated) N-acetylhexosamine alternating with
hexuronic acids (glucuronic or iduronic acid) or galactose. Different
families of GAGs can be distinguished based on the nature of these
disaccharide blocks, namely chondroitin sulfate (CS), dermatan sulfate
(DS), heparan sulfate (HS), heparin (HP), and keratan sulfate (KS).
Heparosan (HN) is the unsulfated precursor of heparin and heparan
sulfate ( ).
 These GAGs are linked to proteins, thus forming
proteoglycans (PGs)
via a xylose-containing tetrasaccharide and synthesized in the Golgi
apparatus. While the synthesis of the core proteins follows a template-driven
process, the biosynthesis of the GAG chains is nontemplate-driven.
GAGs undergo several chemical modifications, e.g., sulfation, de-N-acetylation, and epimerization, which lead to a
large structural diversity. Within this context, hyaluronan (traditionally
also called hyaluronic acid, HA) represents a stand-alone case as
it is not sulfated and not protein linked. Furthermore, its molecular
structure, which may consist of several thousand disaccharide units,
is not modified by epimerization.
2.1.

## Nomenclature
GAGs, as linear and
complex polysaccharides, are made of repeating disaccharide units
comprised of a hexuronic acid (or galactose in keratan sulfate) and
a hexosamine throughout a regular alternation of 1–4 and 1–3
glycosidic linkages.
Complexity stems from the many aspects
of GAGs structures: a high degree of polymerization combined with
size polydispersity, sequence microheterogeneity, high negative charge
density, and the potentially isomeric building blocks. Being highly
polydisperse, the length of GAG chains found on a certain proteoglycan
at a given position is typically not uniform.
Because of this
characteristic microheterogeneity, GAGs cannot
be represented by a single, well-defined sequence.
2.1.1.

## Monosaccharides
The structural
information currently encoded in the Symbol Nomenclature for Glycans
(SNFG) representation of glycans is insufficient
for fully describing, building, and handling three-dimensional structures.
A proposed extension of the SNFG cartoons allows to represent the
nature of the absolute (D or L) and anomeric configurations and to
include (α or β)-O-esters and ethers, with labels attached
to symbols with a number, e.g., 3S for 3-O-sulfate
groups. Another proposed extension indicates
sulfates within the SNFG representation as red dots attached to the
symbols. In the D configuration, all pyranoses
are assumed to be in the 4C1 chair conformation,
whereas those in the L configuration have the 1C4 chair conformation. The descriptors of the ring conformations adopted
by idopyranoses (1C4, 4C1, and 2S0) were included within the monosaccharide
symbol.

2.1.2.

## Disaccharides and Higher Oligosaccharides
The proposed extension of the SNFG discussed above led to 202 unique
GAG disaccharides. All representations
must inform the nature of the glycosidic linkage between two consecutive
monosaccharides. Higher oligosaccharides are constructed by the sequential
addition of a monosaccharide and the nature of its glycosidic linkage
to the preceding monosaccharide. All chemical compounds are described
with IUPAC, Simplified Molecular Input Line Entry Specification syntax
(SMILES), and InChi encodings that are readable by the vast majority
of chemo-informatics tools. All glycans are encoded in GlycoCT, WURCS (Web3 Unique Representation of Carbohydrate
Structures) is the main representation used by the repository, and LINUCS (LInear Notation for Unique description
of Carbohydrate Sequences). The GlycoCT
format is used by the major glycan repository GlyTouCan, Glyco3D, and SugarBind. The GlycoCT format describes the residue entities
in the RESsection, the bonds in the LIN-section, and the number of
repeating units in the REP-section. The GlycanBuilder software automatically
converts GlycoCT-encoded GAG sequences into SNFG images. Alternatively,
the conversion can be done manually with GlycoWorkBench, using the
GlycanBuilder library. 

2.2.

## Extraction and Purification of Natural GAGs
2.2.1.

## Extraction, Depolymerization, and Enzymatic
Digestion
Cartilage and connective tissues contain significant
amounts of proteoglycans, composed of glycosaminoglycans covalently
linked to a core protein. GAGs are most commonly sourced from farmed
animal tissue as byproducts of the food industry, for example, isolated
from the trachea, cartilage, rooster combs, and intestinal mucosa
from pigs, cattle, and poultry. The extraction process involves the
breakdown of the surrounding tissues and core proteins by alkaline
hydrolysis to release the GAGs, which are then subjected to downstream
processing for purification and recovery. Increasingly, bacterial
production is also deployed (e.g., for HA), and nonfarmed
animals can be important GAG sources (e.g., squid
for CS).

## Chemical Depolymerization
While displaying important
versatility, the chemical depolymerization of GAGs mainly occurs by
β-elimination and reductive deamination. Throughout a two-step
reaction mechanism, the process of β elimination introduces
a double bond at the nonreducing ends of each cleaved GAG fragment.
The deamination process results in a loss of nitrogen and sulfate
but does not alter the stereochemistry of the hexuronic acid. Peroxyl
radical cleavage catalyzed by metal ions or gamma irradiation depolymerizes
GAGs. Such a method may not be suitable for producing structurally
well-defined oligosaccharides.

## Enzymatic Depolymerization
Due to the sheer size of
full-length GAG polysaccharides, (partial) chemical or enzymatic depolymerization
into smaller oligosaccharides is crucial for characterization. Depolymerization
combined with chromatographic and electrophoretic separations establishes
the link between the shorter oligosaccharides (dp < 12) and the
full-length GAG chains ( ). Both approaches aim at tackling challenges arising from
dense sulfation and isomerism, two aspects that complicate the analysis
of GAGs, yet are amenable through state-of-the-art technologies, such
as chromatography, MS, and NMR.
 

## Enzymatic Digestion
GAG-degrading enzymes belong to
the hydrolase or endo-or exolytic lyase families. They can be of mammalian
or bacterial origin. Via an eliminative mechanism, the action of lyases
results in a 4,5-unsaturation, i.e., leading to a
double bond on the uronosyl residue. This chromophore absorbs at a
wavelength of 232 nm.
Albeit more or less specific, HP and
HS can be depolymerized from polysaccharides into disaccharides using
different classes of bacterial heparinases I, II, and III. Heparin oligosaccharides generated from heparinase
I digestion will feature sulfated extremities. In contrast, the digestion
of HS with heparinase III will display nonsulfated terminal saccharide
units. Other heparin-degrading enzymes yield the production of oligosaccharides
with distinct structural features. The bacteriophage K5 lyase exclusively
cleaves HS nonsulfated disaccharides, thereby generating large fragments. 
A limited subset of enzymes drives the
digestion of CS/DS. Chondroitinase
ABC catalyzes the complete depolymerization of CS/DS chains into disaccharides.
Chondroitinase AC-II and chondroitinase B also degrade CS/DS, with
a complementary substrate specificity for GlcA- and IdoA-containing
disaccharides, respectively. These yield DS-rich or CS-rich oligosaccharides
from CS/DS mixed polymers, respectively. 
The enzymatic degradation of nonsulfated HA is achieved by
bacterial
lyases rather than extraction from animal tissues, using naturally
producing or genetically engineered microbial strains, and used as
a starting material through digestion with hyaluronidases. Partial digestion with mammalian hyaluronidases
generates a wide range of HA oligosaccharide lengths. Mammalian hyaluronidases
yield tetra/hexasaccharides because these enzymes display hydrolytic
and transglycosylation activities simultaneously.

## Perspectives
GAG lyases and hydrolases represent
valuable tools for studying GAGs, as exemplified by bacterial heparinases,
whose complementary substrate specificities have been proven critical
for defining the fine molecular feature of HS chains (composition,
size, and domain organization) and for the generation of structurally
defined oligosaccharides. However, because of the tremendous structural
heterogeneity of GAGs, further progress will require increasing the
panel of accessible enzymes by identifying and characterizing new
enzymes with alternative and/or higher cleavage specificities. It
is also particularly true for HA and CS/DS, for which the number of
fully characterized, available enzymes remains limited. One striking
example is the absence of commercial HA depolymerase after hyaluronidase
from Streptococcus dysgalactiae has been discontinued. Bacteria, with
highly diverse activities, represent an immense and poorly explored
source of GAG degrading enzymes.( )In particular, increasing interest may arise from bacterial
polysaccharide utilization locus (PUL) encoding new GAG degrading
enzymes as invaluable tools for GAG analysis or further understanding
of Host/microbiota interactions.

2.2.2.

## Purification of Natural GAGs Oligosaccharides
Following depolymerization, isolation of GAGs oligosaccharides
follows two strategies, based on either physical criteria (size or
charge) and/or ligand binding properties.

## Affinity Chromatography
Affinity chromatography uses
protein-functionalized columns. Alternative techniques, such as filter
binding assays, use radiolabeled or biotinylated GAGs. Oligosaccharides
bound to the protein are eluted using a NaCl gradient, the ionic strength
required for elution indicating the affinity of the interaction. However,
these techniques are designed for analytical purposes rather than
upscaling oligosaccharides’ production. Furthermore, because
of the high electrostatic charge and structural redundancy of GAGs,
affinity-based separations are unlikely to lead to pure oligosaccharides.
Protein immobilization on columns, usually achieved through amine
coupling of lysine residues, could affect GAGs’ binding properties.

## Size-Exclusion Chromatography
Size-exclusion chromatography
can be used to separate GAG fragments based on properties, such as
length, net electrostatic charge, and sulfation pattern, and yields
size-defined oligosaccharides. Low-pressure liquid chromatography
with commercial resins, such as Bio-Gels (BioRad) and Sepharose gels
(Cytiva), yields efficient size separation of HS fragments. According
to published calibration curves, Sepharose (CL-4B and CL-6B) resins
have been used for estimating the size of HS chains or large fragments. Bio-Gel P10 allows the resolution of fragments
ranging from di- to octadecasaccharides, commonly used to analyze
nitrous acid and heparinase degradation patterns and prepare size-defined
oligosaccharides. High-pressure size-exclusion columns separate GAG
oligosaccharides ranging from di- to decasaccharides, but these columns
are not suited for preparative purposes and, except for short oligosaccharides
(di- to tetrasaccharides), do not match the resolution achieved by
low-pressure size-exclusion columns.

## Anion-Exchange Chromatography
Because of the polyanionic
nature of GAGs, ion-exchange chromatography is another method of choice
for purifying oligosaccharides (for a review, see ref ( )). Low-pressure, weak ion-exchange
chromatography, with resins such as DEAE or Q-Sepharose, has been
widely used to purify HSPGs from crude cell extract. However, the
resolution of GAG oligosaccharides with fine structural variations
requires strong anion exchange and high-performance liquid chromatography.
Commercial analytical and preparative columns enable the separation
of oligosaccharides primarily according to their charge and, to a
certain extent, their sugar content (particularly regarding the IdoA/GlcA
epimer ratio) and sulfation pattern. With size-exclusion chromatography,
SAX-HPLC remains the reference method for preparing HS oligosaccharide
libraries. This technique has also been commonly used for GAG structural
characterization by disaccharide analysis until being progressively
replaced by separation techniques compatible with MS coupling or disaccharide
fluorescent derivatization. 

## Gel Electrophoresis
Agarose gel electrophoresis has
been applied to the analysis of GAG polysaccharide mixtures from tissue
extracts or body fluids and, to some extent, to low molecular weight
oligomers. Linear or gradient polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis (PAGE)
enables high-resolution GAG and oligosaccharide species analysis.
It has been used for oligosaccharide mapping and for purifying small
quantities of purified oligosaccharides. Staining with cationic dyes
allows the visualization of GAGs, which permits the detection of microgram
quantities of material. Silver staining can also improve detection
sensitivity to the nanogram level, enabling the dosage of GAGs in
biological fluids. After gel electrophoresis, methods for oligosaccharide
blotting onto the membrane have also been established. Interestingly,
PAGE separation properties, which rely on oligosaccharide size, charge,
and shape, significantly differ from size exclusion and SAX chromatography.
When combined with these two techniques, PAGE enabled the preparation
of oligosaccharides with a very high degree of purity. 

## Other Separation Techniques
Finally, the separation
of disaccharides/oligosaccharides for analytical purposes can be achieved
using a large panel of separation techniques. These include capillary
electrophoresis, reversed-phase ion-pairing high-performance liquid
chromatography (RPIP-HPLC) and hydrophilic interaction liquid chromatography
(HILIC). However, these techniques have
been developed for direct coupling to mass spectrometry fluorescent
derivatization and are only suitable for the resolution of minute
amounts of material.
The difficulty of sequencing GAGs from
chemical and enzymatic fragmentations results in the many oligosaccharides
that originate from all parts of the full length polymer. There exists
a strategy that takes advantage of the potential of labeling, via
bio-orthogonal groups, the reducing end of GAG chains liberated from
proteoglycans by β-elimination. Following an enzymatic fragmentation
and a size-separation by PAGE, the labeled fragments are separated
from the unlabeled and blotted to paper functionalized via click-chemistry
with the bio-orthogonal partner. The sequence can be read by establishing
the nature of the nonreducing terminal disaccharide in each band (via
HPLC, MS, specific antibodies, etc.). The bioavailability of the labeled
fragments allows the study of sequence-defined interactions with biomolecules
such as proteins and cells. 

## Perspectives
During the last two decades, considerable
progress has been made in the structural analysis of GAGs, either
purified or from biological samples. However, while these advances
have improved our knowledge of GAG structure, access to highly pure,
naturally occurring GAG oligosaccharides in semipreparative quantities
remains a critical bottleneck for functional studies in biological
assays. The only available techniques for preparing structurally defined
saccharide libraries remain those used for the past 30–40 years,
with major limitations in terms of resolution and processing time.
Because of this lack of modern tools and the natural heterogeneity
of GAGs, achieving preparative purification to a single species of
oligosaccharides beyond the size of a hexasaccharide is still highly
challenging. Most protein binding domains involve saccharides of eight
sugar units and above, and slight changes in sulfation patterns may
dramatically affect biological properties. Therefore, there is a great
need for new separation techniques with improved resolutive properties
to prepare highly pure GAG oligosaccharide structures.

2.3.

## Preparation of Synthetic GAGs
Together
with native GAG depolymerization, chemical synthesis is one of the
most powerful tools for producing well-defined, structurally homogeneous
GAG oligosaccharide sequences. Since the pioneering work on the chemical
synthesis of the heparin pentasaccharide sequence responsible for
the anticoagulant activity of this polysaccharide, multiple total
syntheses of GAG oligosaccharides have been reported. 
2.3.1.

## Solution-Phase Synthesis
The solution-phase
synthesis of GAGs oligosaccharides first involves the preparation
of conveniently functionalized building blocks, generally mono- or
disaccharide units. The coupling of these building blocks leads to
the fully protected oligosaccharide chain analogues, and the deprotection–sulfation
steps deliver the target GAG oligosaccharides. GAG chemical synthesis
is challenging because of the inherent difficulties of oligosaccharide
synthesis, namely the control of the regio- and stereochemistry of
the glycosidic bonds and the introduction of sulfate functions at
specific positions. Furthermore, carefully designed protecting group
strategies are required. Uronic acid moieties are usually identified
as low reactive sugars in coupling reactions due to the electron-withdrawing
effect of the carboxylate functions. In recent years, we have witnessed
impressive advances in GAG oligosaccharide synthesis. , However, only a limited number of structures with specific sulfate
group distributions is available, a process that initiated the preparation
of libraries containing differently sulfated sequences. Developing
an intelligent modular strategy based on orthogonally protected disaccharides
allowed for generating a library of heparan sulfate tetrasaccharides
with different sulfation patterns. 

## Pesrpectives
Despite all these impressive contributions,
the GAG oligosaccharides synthesized to date only cover a small part
of the chemical space, especially when considering sequences longer
than tetramers. This lack of more comprehensive GAG collections arises
from the difficulties of the solution-phase synthesis of these molecules,
which requires column chromatography after each reaction step, making
the synthetic process extremely time-intensive.

2.3.2.

## Automated Solid-Phase Synthesis
Automated solid-phase synthesis offers
a promising alternative to address some of the bottlenecks of GAG
oligosaccharide synthesis. A solid support equipped with a linker
is used in solid-phase synthesis to successfully couple the building
blocks and assemble a growing chain of oligomers. The monomers have
a temporary protecting group removed from the resin-bound oligomer
to allow further chain growth in the next coupling cycle. After each
reaction step, the desired product is purified by washing the resin,
avoiding multiple chromatography steps.
For oligosaccharide
assembly, the regio- and stereochemistry of the coupling must be controlled.
It is secured by a suitable selection of orthogonally protected monosaccharide
building blocks conveying an ad-hoc combination of
temporary and permanent protecting groups.
Due to the straightforward
elimination of side products, on-resin
reactions can be driven to completion using an excess of reagents
or running several reaction cycles.
Solid-phase approaches yielded
the preparation of nonsulfated oligosaccharides.
Nevertheless, the preparation of long sulfated GAGs oligosaccharides
remains difficult. GAG oligosaccharide precursors were prepared on
a fully automated computer-controlled synthesizer. The sulfated, partially protected intermediates were released
from the resin by photocleavage of the linker moiety. However, several
additional solution-phase deprotection steps were required to reach
the final deprotected GAG oligosaccharides. These final transformations
are far from trivial due to the lability of sulfate groups. Furthermore,
the high polarity of sulfated compounds complicates purification.
Considering the lower scalability of solid-phase synthesis, the difficulties
encountered in the final off-resin deprotection steps can limit the
utility of these approaches.

## Perspectives
Improved solid-phase strategies,
including optimized deprotection/sulfation procedures, are in demand.
Novel and more efficient on-resin sulfation and deprotection protocols
facilitated access to HS disaccharides( )and sulfated, non-GAG glycans,( )minimizing the manipulations required
after release from the solid support.
Turning automated
solid-phase synthesis into a routine operation to prepare GAG oligosaccharides
faces some issues. Usually, a large excess (5–15 equiv) of
glycosyl donor building blocks is required to complete the resin glycosylation
reactions. These units are of high value, containing a complex protecting
group distribution that depends on the glycosidic bond sequence and
sulfation pattern of the target GAG. Their synthesis usually involves
a high number of (solution-phase) reaction steps, and, in general,
they are not commercially available. One way to address this problem
could be the development of new glycosylation protocols to achieve
highly efficient coupling reactions on the solid support, avoiding
the use of a large excess of sugar building blocks, for example, by
careful control of the reaction temperature. Novel approaches for rapidly accessing crucial building blocks required
for assembling GAG oligomers are also highly desirable. A good alternative
is the production of the needed disaccharide building blocks by the
controlled acid hydrolysis of the naturally occurring GAG polysaccharides.
Recently, the preparation of core disaccharide building blocks through
the controlled acid hydrolysis of heparin and heparosan has been reported. Noteworthy, automated solution-phase synthesis
of oligosaccharides relying upon preactivation-based, multicomponent
one-pot glycosylation sequences was very recently proposed and demonstrated
to allow the synthesis of fondaparinux pentasaccharide at gram scale
in short times and higher yield with respect to manual one-pot synthesis
( ). 
 These preparations involved half of the chemical
steps usually
required for the traditional synthesis of these precursors from commercially
available monosaccharides. Controllable enzymatic degradation of CS
using bovine testicular hyaluronidase allowed the straightforward
isolation of pure tetra- and hexamer intermediates that facilitated
access to size-defined fucosylated CS oligosaccharides. Despite the growing interest in the peculiar
biological and biomedical features of fucosylated CS, synthetic access
to pure oligosaccharides higher than a nonasaccharide (being an octasaccharide,
the minimum structural unit able to confer remarkable activities)
and/or with an isomeric distribution of fucosyl branches is still
missing. Synthetic efforts toward these targets are foreseen in the
coming years.
Besides solid-phase strategies, alternative methodologies
speed
up GAG oligosaccharide synthesis by minimizing purification processes
associated with repetitive deprotection/glycosylation steps. For instance,
despite rapidly growing employment in many organic synthesis fields,
the application of continuous flow systems has been poorly investigated
for GAG synthesis and could be a topic for interesting developments
shortly. Conversely, a programmable one-pot approach has already been
successfully employed to synthesize protected heparin pentasaccharides
that were selectively deprotected and sulfated to afford sequences
with well-defined 6-O sulfation patterns. This methodology uses a series of glycosyl donors with different
relative reactivity values that can be sequentially activated in “one-pot”
to rapidly generate the target oligosaccharide chain without workup
and purification of intermediates. Another possibility is the application
of fluorous-assisted strategies. In this
case, a highly fluorinated tag is usually attached to the sugar building
block that will constitute the reducing end of the oligosaccharide,
similar to the connection to the resin in solid-phase synthesis. Iterative
glycosylations and acceptor hydroxyl group deprotections will generate
the sugar chain. Since molecules bearing the perfluorinated tag can
be easily separated from nonfluorinated compounds by simple fluorous
solid-phase extraction, the assembly process is greatly facilitated.
Compared to solid-phase approaches, the reactions are run in solution.
This has two positive consequences: standard analytical techniques
can monitor the reaction course, and less glycosyl donor is required
to complete the coupling steps since the reactivity of carbohydrate
building blocks in solution is generally higher than that of solid-supported
sugars. These new procedures for the GAG oligosaccharide chemical
synthesis will expedite the production of more extensive collections
of GAG sequences, with a longer length and more diverse sulfation
patterns, to cover the wide structural variety found in GAG polysaccharides.
Advances in techniques for the structural characterization of these
molecules (MS, NMR) will also positively impact GAG synthesis. Undoubtedly,
these improvements will increase the information derived from screening
glycomic technologies like GAG microarrays.

2.3.3.

## Enzymatic and Microbial Cell Factory Synthesis
of GAG Oligo- and Polysaccharides
Enzymatic and chemoenzymatic
approaches have been successfully applied to produce homogeneous GAG
oligosaccharides. Enzymes catalyze the
glycosidic bond formation with exquisite stereo- and regioselectivity
and the specific positioning of sulfate groups without the complex
protecting group designs required in chemical synthesis. The enzymatic
preparation of GAG oligosaccharides first involves glycosyltransferases
to build the sugar backbone. Then, different sulfotransferases install
the sulfate functions to the designated positions. In the case of
IdoA-containing sequences, a C5-epimerase further converts GlcA residues
to IdoA units. Glycosyltransferases catalyze the linkage between activated
uridine diphosphate (UDP) sugar donors and the corresponding acceptors.
UDP sugars are usually expensive, and enzymatic cascades have recently
been developed to facilitate access to these substrates. Non-natural UDP sugars have been developed to
produce specific sulfation patterns. For instance, a non-natural UDP-GlcNTFA
donor (NTFA = N-trifluoroacetyl) have been used to introduce an N-sulfate
group at a particular position of the oligosaccharide chain by a chemoenzymatic
approach. , Other advances in the field have improved
accessibility to GAG enzymes, lower production costs, and higher conversion
efficiency of 3′-phosphoadenosine-5′phosphosulfate (PAPS),
the universal sulfate donor in sulfotransferase-catalyzed reactions.
The generation of gram-scale quantities of a wide variety of GAG oligosaccharides
is greatly improved. The access to new engineered and GAG biosynthetic
enzymes at high expression levels and the development of novel, chemically
modified, non-natural acceptors and nucleotide sugar donors will expand
the repertoire of GAG oligosaccharides that enzymatic and chemoenzymatic
strategies can prepare.
Apart from synthesizing GAG oligosaccharides
from monosaccharide primers, enzymes can also be useful in obtaining
semisynthetic GAG polysaccharides from microbial-sourced polymeric
substrates. Unsulfated heparosan and chondroitin can be obtained as
capsular polysaccharides from bacteria such as Escherichia
coli, Pasteurella multocida, Streptococcus spp., Yersinia enterocolitica, or Bacillus subtilis (subjected to metabolic engineering strategies and/or tailor-made
fermentation processes to improve the yield of the polysaccharides). They have been exploited as starting materials
for synthesizing heparin and chondroitin sulfate polysaccharides through
enzymatic steps catalyzed by N-deacetylase, epimerase, N-sulfotransferase,
and several different O-sulfotransferases, respectively. In vitro-enzymatic
synthesis can be deployed to produce size-defined polysaccharides,
which are not accessible from animal or bacterial sources. These are
commercially available for HA and established for other GAGs such
as heparosan and chondroitin. 
A
key outcome of all the recent advances in the enzymatic synthesis
of GAGs has been the direct microbial biosynthesis of structurally
homogeneous sulfated GAGs. Suitably metabolically engineered microbial
cell factories have been demonstrated to produce sulfated GAGs, employing
only methanol as a carbon source for polysaccharide skeleton construction. The microbial cell factory approach offers several
applications, including biosynthetic access to unnatural GAG polysaccharides
and derivatives.
Under the name of GAGOme, a library of isogenic
cell lines that
differentially display distinct GAGs features has been constructed.
The library was engineered from a large panel of Chinese hamster ovary
cells with knock-out or knock-in of the genes encoding most of the
enzymes involved in GAG biosynthesis. This library can be used for
cell-based binding assays, recombinant expression of proteoglycans
displaying distinct GAG structures, and the production of distinct
GAG chains on metabolic primers. They can be used for the assembly
of GAG glycan microarrays. 

## Perspectives
Despite the numerous efforts through
the different approaches discussed above, preparing
a large library of GAG oligosaccharides (and even less so polysaccharides)
with defined sulfation patterns remains challenging. A minimal collection
of structurally defined GAGs have become commercially available, and
this restricts fundamental studies in further understanding of GAG
functions

2.3.4.

## Structural Modification of GAGs
Native GAGs can be functionalized with specific target functional
groups or labels. , Most of the structural modifications
are chemoselective. They involve, for example, the derivatization
of the carboxylate functionalities into amides and hydrazides carrying
specific labels (e.g., fluorescent tags, bioactive
moieties) or functional groups (e.g., double bonds,
thiols, o-quinones etc.) for different applications
in controlled drug delivery and tissue engineering. To this end, chemoselective derivatizations of alcohol
moieties, vicinal diols and acetamido groups have also been achieved.
It is worth noting that most of these modifications are randomly distributed
along the polysaccharide backbone, with no control of the positions
subjected to derivatization. Only a limited number of regioselective
modifications have been reported that mainly involve introducing sulfate
groups at specific hydroxyl positions within the repeating units of
microbial-sourced unsulfated GAG biopolymers. 
Single-site functionalizations aim to derivatize GAGs in a
single point of the polymeric structure to introduce a label on the
polysaccharide without altering its natural behavior. These functionalizations
are currently limited to the (pseudo)reducing end of the polysaccharide
chain. They typically exploit the unique reactivity of the hemiacetal
moiety present at the reducing end. Alternatively, the possibility
to isolate, from proteoglycan proteinase digest, the GAG polysaccharide
still carrying a single serine at its pseudoreducing end allows the
site-specific derivatization of its amine group.

## Perspectives
The regioselective derivatization
of GAG polysaccharides remains a challenge. The investigation of tailored
chemical methods—i.e., direct regioselective reactions or multistep
sequences relying upon suitable protecting groups—is mandatory
to avoid random or poorly controlled derivatizations that introduce
additional heterogeneity to GAG polysaccharide structures. Despite
some accomplishments in the last years, there is still a great deal
to be done in the field. Being able to label GAG polysaccharides at
defined locations on the chain is even more challenging. Selective
modification of the reducing end is relatively straightforward, and nonreducing end modification
of enzyme-digested (but not native) chains is also established. Site-specific modifications
of single sulfation motifs or single positions anywhere along the
polysaccharide chain apart from the reducing end, are missing and
appear as a distant goal. Recent years have witnessed progress in
this area, thanks to automated and/or enzyme-assisted syntheses and a limited collection of defined GAGs that
have become commercially available. However, the library is still
limited and restricts fundamental studies in understanding GAG functions.

2.3.5.

## Chemical Synthesis of GAG Mimetics
From all the above, it is clear that synthesizing GAG oligosaccharides
remains a highly sophisticated and complex task. Therefore, developing
novel GAG mimetics, more easily accessible than GAG oligomers, represents
a promising line of work. GAG mimetic compounds can be synthesized
to imitate the structure and biological functions of naturally occurring
GAGs while improving the pharmacological properties of the native
oligosaccharides, thus increasing the therapeutic applications of
GAG-like molecules.
Several sulfated non-GAG oligosaccharides
have been synthesized as GAG mimetics, displaying a simplified chemical
structure compared to natural products. For instance, pixatimod (PG545)
is a 2,3,6-O-sulfated glucose tetrasaccharide carrying a cholestanol
moiety at the reducing end. This clinical-stage HS mimetic has potent
anticancer and anti-inflammatory activities, and recently it has been
demonstrated that it also inhibits the interaction between the SARS-Cov2
Spike protein and the ACE2 receptor. Starting
from maltotetraose, the preparation of this derivative is less complex
than the synthesis of an HS tetrasaccharide. For compounds with clinical
applications, the feasibility of their multigram-scale production
is an important point.
A library of IdoA homo-oligosaccharides
with different sulfation
patterns and chain lengths has also been synthesized as HS mimetics. , These compounds showed the typical conformational plasticity of
IdoA-containing molecules and exhibited binding to chemokines and
potential applications for cancer treatment. Linear polyglycerol sulfates
exhibit good heparin mimetism. Other
types of GAG mimetics are aromatic ring systems, such as polyphenols,
decorated by sulfate groups. These small, structurally homogeneous
nonsaccharide mimetics can interact with diverse GAG-binding proteins
offering promising opportunities as, for example, antiviral drugs. In these compounds, the aromatic backbone can
establish additional contacts with hydrophobic regions of the protein
receptor, giving additional possibilities for optimizing molecular
recognition. The synthesis of multivalent systems, where GAG sequences
are introduced as pendant ligands in a nonsaccharide scaffold, is
another attractive alternative to access well-defined GAG-like molecules
easily. Generally, carbohydrate ligands
are short synthetic oligosaccharides displaying the characteristic
disaccharide repeating unit of a particular GAG and an orthogonal
functional group for further conjugation. These fragments are then
attached to a dendrimeric or polymeric backbone to afford the corresponding
multivalent systems, usually after one single chemical step. Such
compounds presenting multiple copies of GAG ligands can be easily
produced.
Polymeric GAG mimetics have been mainly obtained from
natural,
non-GAG polysaccharides by regioselective sulfation through direct
or multistep approaches. Such engineered
sulfated polysaccharides can be produced in large quantities at a
low cost from renewable raw materials (e.g., plants,
algae, fungi) or microbial fermentations as a more ethical, environmentally
and economically sustainable alternative to the isolation of GAGs
from animal tissues. Furthermore, they
may exhibit improved properties compared with natural GAGs, which
can be tuned appropriately by additional structural modifications
such as the insertion of functional groups for compartmentalization, in vivo biodegradability, hydrogel formation, cross-linking,
3D-printing, etc. An alternative approach to address these challenges
in the frame of polymeric GAG mimetics is the synthesis of sulfated
glycopolymers. They are obtained by polymerizing sulfated glyco-monomers
to yield polymers showing well-defined structures and often closely
controlled molecular weights and narrow chain length distributions. 

## Perspectives
In GAG-mimetics synthesis, it
would be interesting to find a way to construct block copolysaccharides
by linking together two or even more structurally diverse GAGs or
mimetics thereof, each characterized by a different sulfate content
and/or sulfation pattern. The design and synthesis of block copolysaccharides
or, more generally, polysaccharide-containing block copolymers is
a growing field. Nonetheless, no block copolysaccharides composed
of GAG polymer fragments have been reported yet apart from a very
recent paper describing the chemo-enzymatic synthesis of some differently
sulfated HS hexa- to hexadecasaccharides that were then linked together
through CuAAC click reactions to give multidomain structures up to
a 28-mer species. The
achievement of this goal is interesting not only for obtaining newly
designed, synthetic GAG materials with potential interesting bioactivities
but also to have a powerful tool to tackle an almost unexplored issue
of GAG structure–activity relationships. It is the effect on
GAG biological roles of the clustering of differently sulfated disaccharide
subunits in a series of complex regions or domains with variable sulfation
patterns along GAG backbones.
GAG mimetics
showing negative charges on groups different from sulfates also represent
an area of novel development. For example, by comparing sulfate and
phosphate groups, their differences in size, polarity, and acid–base
properties could lend unreported, interesting properties to phosphorylated
GAGs. A theoretical study indicated distinct differences between natural
sulfated GAGs and phosphorylated mimetics regarding structural flexibility
and intra- and intermolecular interaction patterns. Phosphorylated glycopolymers with a
well-defined structure have been reported. Conversely, robust, synthetic access to phosphorylated
species having the same polysaccharide backbone of natural sulfated
GAGs is still lacking, as polysaccharide phosphorylation is a very
challenging reaction, requiring rather harsh conditions and generally
giving products difficult to characterize, with low yields and degrees
of derivatization. Therefore, significant advances in this field are
awaiting. Overall, developing novel mimetics that attain similar 3D
structures and protein-binding properties to GAGs will provide new
tools to control GAG-mediated biological processes, paving the way
to new applications in medicine and biotechnology.

2.4.

## GAG Analysis and Sequencing
Sulfated
GAGs are among the most challenging biopolymers in nature to characterize.
Obtaining information on the sequence of even the simplest full-length
chains is a formidable task. Complexity and the associated challenges
stem from the aspects of the GAGs structure described in . The dense
sulfation of GAGs complicates MS analysis due to Coulomb repulsion,
sulfate loss, and the formation of multiple adducts. The occurrence
of sulfation and epimerization at various positions generates many
isomeric building blocks, which are difficult to distinguish using
MS-based methods. There may exist a relationship between the sulfation
pattern to specific biological functions. Therefore, elucidating such
a “sulfation code” of bioactive sequences involved in
protein binding adds to the analytical challenges of all sulfated
GAGs. ( )
 2.4.1.

## Ion Mobility Spectrometry (IMS)
Online separations are essential for resolving complex mixtures into
components before MS analysis. A relatively recent technique to disentangle
GAGs mixtures is ion mobility spectrometry (IMS), a technique in which
(bio)molecular ions are separated by their mass, charge, size, and
shape. A weak electric field guides the analyte ions through a cell
filled with inert neutral gas (He, N2). Compact ions collide less
frequently with the inert gas than larger ions and traverse the cell
faster. Over the last years, several IMS systems have become commercially
available, usually in combination with MS as IM-MS. All commercial
solutions provide a fast separation; however, the underlying methods
are vendor specific and can differ significantly in the electric field,
duty cycle, and peak-to-peak resolution. IMS can separate isomeric
GAGs and even diastereomers. For reducing adduct formation and the
complexity of the analysis, IMS separations are often performed using
direct infusion. − However, due to the fast millisecond separation,
a direct hyphenation to liquid chromatography is possible, leading
to information-rich multidimensional data sets. 
Various IMS techniques were used to characterize
GAGs and complex GAG mixtures. Despite the potential of IMS, not all
isomers can be quickly resolved, and it is not straightforward to
predict a particular separation’s success (or failure). A comprehensive
analysis of GAG oligosaccharides, including all structural features,
usually requires combining several orthogonal techniques. However,
the peak-to-peak resolution in IMS is increasing rapidly, and structurally
closely related isomers such as those originating from epimerization
can be resolved today. As a result, the
ability to accurately measure ion mobility-derived collision cross
sections for the structural annotation of unknowns rather than the
resolution itself may be the major bottleneck for IMS in the future.

2.4.2.

## Tandem Mass Spectrometry Techniques
The activation methods most commonly used for GAG characterization
via mass spectrometry are collision induced dissociation (CID), electron
detachment dissociation (EDD), electron induced dissociation (EID),
negative electron transfer dissociation (NETD), infrared multiphoton
dissociation (IRMPD), and ultraviolet photodissociation (UVPD). The
analysis method selection influences the abundance of cross-ring versus
glycosidic cleavage products and the subsequent level of structural
information. 

## Collision-Induced Dissociation (CID)
In collision-induced
dissociation , a kinetically excited precursor molecule that collides
with buffer gas gradually imparts enough internal energy to cleave
the most labile bonds. In glycans, these are usually the glycosidic
linkages. In GAGs, however, the situation is different. Many research
groups have applied CID to GAG analysis and found that this method
is rather disadvantageous. Especially in highly sulfated GAGs, the
sulfates are usually lost first, with the consequent loss of precious
structural information.
Due to the sulfate and carboxylic acid
groups, GAGs ionize well in negative ion mode. The most suited ion
activation methods for negative ions include electron detachment dissociation
(EDD) and negative electron transfer dissociation (NETD). EDD, which
operates by irradiating multiply charged negative ions with 15–20
eV, has also been highly valuable for studying GAGs and is widely
used for analyzing chains. Electron-induced dissociation (EID), which
irradiates singly charged anions with 6–20 eV electrons, activates
ions by electronic excitation. Without going through the process of
cross-ring fragmentation, EID produces similar fragmentation to EDD.

## Negative Electron Transfer Dissociation (NETD)
Negative
electron transfer dissociation is the desired fragmentation approach
to study highly sulfated GAGs as the dissociation of the precursor
is accomplished at a faster speed with minimal sulfate loss. In addition,
the short reaction time for NETD allows it to be paired with online
separation techniques such as high-performance liquid chromatography
(HPLC) and capillary-zone-electrophoresis (CZE).

## Ultraviolet Photodissociation (UVPD)
Ultraviolet photodissociation
helps determine modification sites within a GAG chain. UVPD uses an ultraviolet laser to rapidly raise
the internal energy of trapped ions by electronic excitation, resulting
in fragmentation. A single UV photon can raise the precursor ion into
a dissociative state. It favors informative cross-ring fragments and
yielded electron photodetachment, along with the corresponding charge-reduced
neutral loss products. UVPD, at either 193 or 213 nm, produced both
glycosidic and cross-ring fragmentation in GAG standards ionized in
negative mode while maintaining sulfate modifications. UVPD does not
require a fully ionized precursor to produce informative fragmentation.

## Perspectives
Many challenges remain in analyzing
GAGs. Recent advances and research in MS of complex GAGs are paving
the way for faster and more complete analysis. The evolution of MS/MS
methods has led to more detailed structural characterization for this
class of carbohydrates. Promising developments address the elucidation
of structures of GAG chains with meaningful lengths. Structural modifications
can be determined by MS/MS, especially when using electron-based methods.
Recent advances in GAG analysis software lead to a faster analysis
process and a simplified way to identify unknown sample structures.
The variety of separation techniques coupled with MS allows more complex
samples to be explored on a reasonable time scale to determine composition
and sequence information. GAG analysis has focused chiefly on shorter
chains, but in some instances, the sequencing of intact GAG chains
demonstrates the capabilities of MS analysis. Future developments
will integrate the isolation of biologically relevant regions of GAG
chains with MS analysis addressing significant and relevant biology
and medical problems.

2.4.3.

## Gas-Phase Infrared Spectroscopy
The combination of mass spectrometry and gas-phase spectroscopy augments
the range of tools for GAG sequencing. The better availability of
tunable benchtop lasers, which can cover a broad range of wavelengths,
leads to increasing interest in applying gas-phase IR spectroscopy
for various classes of biomolecules, including
sugars. 
Most conventional approaches
are action spectroscopy techniques in
which a photon-mediated “action” such as dissociation
or fragmentation is monitored as a function of the wavelength. InfraRed
multiple photon dissociation (IRMPD) spectroscopy is based on the
sequential absorption of multiple photons. After each absorption,
the energy is redistributed within the molecule. This slow heating
continues until the internal energy of the ion exceeds the dissociation
threshold, and fragments are formed. Plotting the fragmentation yield
as a function of the wavelength yields vibrational fingerprints from
which valuable structural information can be deduced. In the context
of GAGs, IRMPD spectroscopy was successfully applied to determine
the stereochemistry of the HexNAc (GlcNAc versus GalNac) and hexuronic
acid (GlcA versus IdoA), the presence of HexN, the regiochemistry
of the linkages within the oligosaccharide, and the regiochemistry
of sulfation. , IRMPD spectroscopy is usually
limited to oligomers with a relatively low degree of polymerization
as the vibrational spectra become more congested for larger ions and
cannot be deconvoluted. This problem
can be overcome by cryogenic gas-phase IR spectroscopy in which the
ions are cooled prior to irradiation, either in a cold trap with subsequent
messenger tagging or by encapsulation
in superfluid helium nanodroplets ( ). Even though the
underlying principles and the temperature are different in both techniques, the spectra are generally comparable: they exhibit
narrow and well-resolved vibrational bands that are diagnostic to
minute structural details. In combination with sophisticated molecular
calculations at the density functional theory (DFT) level, the resulting
spectra can be used to obtain detailed structural models of the investigated
ions.
 

## Perspectives
The accumulation of experimental
data has revealed that closely related isomers have distinct IR fingerprints.
Such unique IR fingerprints of well-characterized standards could
be organized in a database and used to identify structural features
such as the sulfation pattern and perhaps the entire sequence of unknown
GAG oligosaccharides in the future. However, already at the level
of oligosaccharides, the chemical space of GAGs is too large to be
fully covered by synthetic molecules. Theoretical spectra computed
from DFT structures may be required to bridge this gap and annotate
structures that are not accessible via synthesis. In addition, the
combination of experimental and theoretical spectra will help to gain
detailed information on the folding behavior and conformational landscape
of GAGs.
The biggest technical challenge is
undoubtedly the access to instrumentation. Gas-phase spectroscopy
techniques require specialized light sources and sophisticated instruments,
constraining their application to a few laboratories worldwide. MS
technology is developing rapidly, and tunable lasers are becoming
commercially available. Both are crucial aspects of transforming gas-phase
infrared spectroscopy from a physicist’s toy into an easy-to-use
instrument nonspecialists can operate.

2.4.4.

## Recognition Tunnelling Nanopores
A few reports of the successful sequencing of GAGs using recognition
tunnelling nanopores via a single molecule method circumvents the
need to obtain homogeneous samples to analyze intact GAG chains or
use the complex sequences of analytical techniques mentioned previously.
As a device, a recognition tunnelling nanopore provides a sequential
reading of a mono- or disaccharide unit when the GAG chains translocate
the nanopore. The formation of a transient
complex between the translocated units and the molecules attached
to two tunnelling electrodes generates an electric signal specific
to individual monosaccharide units’ structure. The representations
of the nanopore data signals of four synthetic GAGs of known composition
revealed unambiguously clear differences. A machine-learning algorithm
processed the results, distinguished the four different patterns,
and identified each variant via image recognition software ( ). 
 The characterization of GAGs oligosaccharides having
various sulfate
patterns, epimers of uronic acid residues, and glycosidic bonds can
be achieved using a wildtype aerolysin nanopore. Not only can the
size from tetra- to icosaccharides from heparin, DS, and CS be discriminated,
but the different contents and distributions of sulfate groups as
well. The detection of differences in the α versus β anomeric
configuration at the 1–4, 1–3 glycosidic linkage highlights
the performance of the sequencing. 

## Perspectives
Following the proof of concepts
that recognition tunnelling signals from disaccharide building blocks
of GAGs possess unique signatures that can be used in distinguishing
different stereoisomers, many developments remain. The speed of translocation
needs to be reduced to the record of sufficient electrical signals
for accuracy improvement, and a reference database for recognition
tunnelling sequencing of GAGs is needed too.

2.4.5.

## NMR Analytical Methods
NMR methods
are attractive for GAG analysis as they are nondestructive and do
not require derivatization. Over the years, the arsenal of NMR methods
developed for the structural determination of biomolecules has been
applied to GAGs. The most common multidimensional methods involve
homonuclear spectroscopy (1H–1H correlation
spectroscopy, (COSY), total correlation spectroscopy (TOCSY), nuclear
Overhauser effect spectroscopy (NOESY), rotating frame Overhauser
effect spectroscopy (ROESY), heteronuclear spectroscopy (1H–13C heteronuclear single quantum coherence (HSQC),
and heteronuclear multiple bond coherence (HMBC)). At present, the de novo elucidation of an unknown sample is limited to an
octadecasaccharide.
A relatively low sensitivity limits their
applications as milligrams of pure samples are usually required for
the structural investigation or sulfate distribution through compositional
analysis. A 1H–13C 2D NMR-based approach
has been developed, directly performed on HS isolated from 13C-labeled cells. Integrating the peak volumes measured at different
chemical shifts allows this nondestructive analysis to determine the
polysaccharide’s sulfation and the iduronic/glucuronic profiles. 
In 2008, the adulteration of raw heparin
with oversulfated CS spawned
a global crisis prompting the FDA to revise the old specifications
and recommend the development of physicochemical methods for improving
the related critical quality attributes of heparin such as identity,
purity, and potency assays. At the same
time, the emerging enoxaparin biosimilars led to the need for thorough
similarity proofs not conceivable by the old analytical procedures.
Bidimensional NMR, particularly heteronuclear correlation spectroscopy,
has become the technology of choice both to detect a variety of potential
polysaccharide contaminants and to provide multiple quality attributes
regarding the monosaccharide substitution in GAG sequences. The need
for quantifying the composition of heparin in more detail, including
minor features associated with specific biological activities or specific
animal/organ origin of GAGs or to compare production batches, led
to extending the use of HSQC for quantitative purposes.
The
heterogeneity of heparin and GAGs requires each sample to be
characterized by composition in differently substituted disaccharides
in their sequence, mean molecular weight, and chain length dispersion.
However, these parameters show batch-to-batch differences not only
in products of different sources but also in different processes,
from the same animal source and even in the same process. Therefore,
the composition of a given batch does not bear quality information
if it is not compared with large analytical result databases, representing
the structural variability of heparin. Statistical methods, such as
principal component analysis (PCA), have been used to compare test
samples against mono- and bidimensional spectral libraries of heparin
of different animal and organ origins. PCA extracts from a high number
of variables, which are highly correlated and challenging for interpretation
of a small number of orthogonal variables, which are more useful for
sample profiling. PCA proved effective in clustering GAGs according
to their origin or manufacturing and differentiating different crude
heparins; a very complex mixture of GAGs considered the starting material
of the active pharmaceutical ingredient (API) heparin production.
Novel chemometric techniques, such as spectral filtering, have been
applied to HSQC spectral databases to search for unknown features
in heparin, whether due to contaminants or manufacturing failures. 
Recently, the FDA alerted industries regarding
the potential risk
of heparin contamination with nonporcine ruminant material contaminants,
suggesting the application of physicochemical methods to ensure the
safety of drugs and protect public health. The application of multivariate
classification approaches to heparin 1H NMR spectra was
a rapid and reliable tool for detecting contaminants. Partial least
squares discriminant analysis (PLS-DA) provided the best discrimination
of contaminated batches, enabling the detection of samples contaminated
by heparin from other animal species at 5%. 

## Perspectives
NMR integrated with statistical
analysis is a valid quality tool for heparin in the entire production
process and should be concurrently used with complementary techniques
like SAX-HPLC and disaccharide analysis, but setting acceptance criteria
requires the knowledge of the design space of normal processes of
different animal source and characteristics of the main anomalies.
It will require building large sample databases, supervised by regulatory
authorities, and designing analytical procedures with evaluation ranges
for results as simple as possible. Moreover, whereas the destination
to routine pharmaceutical work usually limits NMR methods to medium
field spectrometers (500–600 MHz), the larger availability
of high field NMR instruments coupled with high sensitivity probes
allows for increasing the sensitivity of these techniques that can
also be applied on biological field, where a limited amount of sample
is usually available.

2.5.

## 3D Conformations
Once the composition
and sequences are established, a series of methods allow for determining
the 3D structural and dynamical features of GAGs. The use of several
spectroscopic methods, such as NMR, with appropriate temporal or spatial
resolution, provides invaluable experimental data that require the
contribution of molecular modeling to be fully interpreted. Structural
elucidations of GAGs cover a range of descriptions from local to global
properties.
2.5.1.

## Diffraction Methods
In contrast
to other macromolecules, X-ray diffraction of polysaccharides does
not provide sufficient experimental information for an unambiguous
resolution of 3D structure; therefore, computer modeling techniques
are needed to complement the lack of experimental data. The process
of structural elucidation combines the calculation of diffraction
intensities from various low-energy models with those intensities
collected on X-ray diffractograms. In this context, it is even most
appropriate to use the term “model” instead of “structure”.
Within uniaxially oriented fibers, GAGs chains are extended. X-ray
fiber diffraction studies of GAGs have demonstrated that they delineate
the boundaries of the possible conformations of their secondary structures
and the modes of associations of water molecules and mono- and divalent
cations. Frequently, the fibers are embedded in small crystallites,
where they make orderly lateral interactions with one another. Such
homotypic organizations are artificial, but the observed secondary
structures might help illuminate some states of GAGs in solutions
and tissues. Those reports with X-ray diffraction and other techniques
had proposed HA self-association through interchain hydrophobic interactions
and hydrogen bonds, but this view has since been refuted. At physiologically
relevant ranges of solvent pH and ionic composition, there is no evidence
for interchain association of HA, as demonstrated in the solution
phase , and in films of surface-grafted HA chains. 

## What Remains To Be Solved
40 years after elucidating
such structural features, one may expect the new possibilities offered
by X-ray synchrotron sources to investigate polycrystalline materials
and explore different levels of structural organizations by microdiffraction
would yield significant advances.

2.5.2.

## Structural NMR
NMR being sensitive
to conformational and dynamics changes allows detailed insight into
the secondary structure of GAGs and their molecular structures and
dynamics in solution. Such analysis requires the correct interpretation
of spectral data by applying sufficiently accurate computational approaches.
The assignments of the 1H and 13C spectra of
heparin, de-N-sulfated, and re-N-acetylated heparin and the measurements
of the 1H–1H nuclear Overhauser enhancements
and 3J coupling constants provided sufficient
experimental data to generate a series of low energy molecular models
which oscillate around a conformation similar to that determined by
X-ray fiber diffraction.
Although scalar coupling constants
usually have a more straightforward interpretation than NOEs, the
analysis of spin–spin coupling constants in GAG molecules showed
that this might not always be the case. In some instances, magnitudes
of proton–proton three-bond coupling constants (3JH–H) have considerably different
values as one would expect according to their dependence upon torsion
angles, and a simple interpretation could lead to incorrect conclusions.
Detailed theoretical analyses in GAG oligosaccharides showed that
the magnitudes of the Fermi contributions to 3JH–H depend upon electronic structures proximal
to (or neighboring) the coupled nuclei. The presence of oxygen atoms
(even quite distant) with lone pairs causes changes in electron densities
in the vicinity of the coupled protons and differs for different positions
in atoms in various GAG residues. Furthermore, the magnitudes of paramagnetic
(PSO) and diamagnetic (DSO) spin–orbit contributions in GAG
residues were surprisingly large and caused the Fermi-contact contribution
to no longer dominate. As the DSO contributions also alter the locations
of the atoms in the molecule, DSO terms can considerably influence
the 3JH–H magnitudes.
These analyses indicate that the influences of oxygen atom lone pairs,
PSO and DSO on the coupling constants magnitudes are rather complex
in sulfated GAGs. Nevertheless, quantum
chemical (QM) methods can provide the first-principle rationale for
the effects in detail, allowing for the correct interpretation of
spin–spin coupling constants.
Due to the high concentration
of negatively charged sulfate and
carboxylate groups, GAGs exhibit a high binding affinity to positively
charged metal ions. Heparin binds to monovalent cations (Na+, K+), divalent ions (Ca2+ and Mg2+) and trivalent cations such as Al3+. Such bindings can
induce structural changes in the three-dimensional structures and
modulate their biomolecular interactions. Several techniques have
been used to study the binding of metal ions, such as infrared spectroscopy,
optical calorimetry, circular dichroism, and potentiometric titration,
yielding inconsistent results. Recently, the metal binding to sodium
heparin was monitored through a 23Na NMR-based competition
assay. , The results of the experiments demonstrate
the occurrence of at least two metal-binding sites with different
affinities, potentially undergoing dynamic exchange.

## Perspectives
Despite significant advances in
computational chemistry methods, further development of quantum chemistry
approaches, including calculations of NMR parameters such as chemical
shifts and spin–spin coupling constants, is desirable. In addition,
it is necessary to test other methods of calculating the influence
of water and counterions.

2.5.3.

## Computational Modeling
Once the
composition and sequence of GAGs are established, determining the
corresponding three-dimensional structural and dynamical features
leads to understanding the molecular basis underlying their properties
and functions. The range of the relevant computational methods capable
of addressing such issues goes from quantum chemistry to mesoscale
modeling throughout molecular dynamics and mechanics and coarse-grained
and docking calculations. , The structural and
physicochemical features of GAGs pose a significant restriction to
probing their 3D conformation experimentally. Computational modeling
techniques based on classical mechanics are a powerful tool to characterize
the statistical ensembles of GAG molecules in solution. Size and structural
heterogeneity require multiscale modeling, which can be addressed
to GAG fragments, starting from monosaccharides to longer polysaccharides
( ). , 
 The term molecular modeling encompasses approaches
at different
levels of complexity of molecular description. Quantum mechanical (QM) methods allow us to determine molecules’
structural, energetic, and spectroscopic properties from the first-principles
of electronic structure theory. Even in their better scaling form,
such calculations are too computationally expensive to allow for the
routine handling of a system counting over 200 atoms, which requires
more approximate representations of matter, often achieved through
all-atom (AA) additive or polarizable force fields within a classical
mechanics framework. Despite their simplicity, these approximations
are remarkably successful and allow for the study within a dynamic
context of systems of biological relevance in terms of sufficient
size and complexity, enabling routine sampling in the microseconds
time scale. As an ultimate level of approximation, coarse-grained
(CG) methods allow the study of the structure and dynamics of very
large (up to several million atoms) and heterogeneous systems by reducing
the complexity of their molecular representation while retaining their
fundamental physicochemical characteristics. CG and supra-CG descriptions
can be back-mapped to all-atom representation, thus back-tracing important
molecular features. The investigations of GAGs primarily exploit such
approaches, even if physical issues of these polysaccharides can often
limit their application.
2.5.3.1.

## Quantum Mechanical Simulations
The quantum mechanical (QM) description is widely adopted to investigate
GAG systems’ hydrogen bonding and coordination interactions
and calculate spectroscopic properties needed to complement or interpret
experimental data (see the section on IRMPD above). , Due to the hefty computational cost required, even the better-scaling
QM methods are regularly used to study monosaccharides and disaccharides,
with rare applications to longer oligosaccharides.
The QM simulations
in the gas phase complement the gas-phase IR spectroscopy experiments
to decipher a complex experimental spectrum. Due to their high flexibility,
GAGs populate multiple conformations at room temperature, not only
in a solvent but also in the gas phase, which is relevant to the back-calculation
of IR spectroscopy data. Even though the accessibility to different
conformers, and thus the rate of conformational interchange, decreases
with temperature, GAGs retain a significant degree of structural flexibility
even in cryogenic conditions. The complex spectrum is still needed
for structural annotation to decompose into components from different
conformational states and species. The original spectrum is compared
with the calculated spectra of the conformers likely to be present
in the mixture. The IR spectra calculations of representative conformers
follow an exhaustive conformational sampling of the molecule of interest.
Optimizing the structure at a high level with the density functional
theory (DFT) formalism, such as PBE0+D3/def2-TZVP, provides a reliable
computed IR spectrum. Certain absorption bands are strongly anharmonic,
so calculating anharmonic frequencies may be required, albeit computationally
expensive.
At a different level of complexity, the water molecules
are considered.
Because of some additional degrees of freedom arising from water molecules
and the low energy cost of their conformational transitions, a long
time is required to minimize energy. The B3LYP functional and the
6-311++G(d,p) or 6-311++G(2d,2p) basis set provide experimentally
relevant geometries, as demonstrated for tetra- and pentaheparin fragments The discrete nature of the explicit water model
in the calculations enables the analysis of water positions located
at hydration sites in GAGs. One can expect significant hydrogen bond
interactions between oxygen atoms in GAG molecules (especially those
oxygens in sulfate and carboxylate groups) and water molecules. DFT
data showed that bifurcated, donor, and acceptor hydrogen bonds occur
between water molecules and oxygens from the sulfate groups, an arrangement
influenced by the structure of the first hydration shell in the vicinity
of the sulfate and carboxylate groups. Theoretical analysis indicates
that the strength of intermolecular hydrogen bonds between carboxylates
in GAGs and water molecules is weaker than in the carboxylic acid–water
complex.
DFT yields reliable NMR spectral parameters, such as
spin–spin
coupling constants. The measurements and interpretations of spin–spin
coupling constants are the most accurate and accessible approach for
determining molecular structures in solution. This approach was applied
to the analysis of various GAG mono- and oligosaccharides, including
the analysis of pseudorotation of the 2-O-sulfated L-iduronic acid
(IdoA2S) pyranose ring. The application of DFT calculations enabled
the calculation of accurate three-bond proton–proton (3JH–H) spin–spin
coupling constants which agree well with experimental data. , 
Other challenges arise from the strong polyelectrolyte nature
of
the sulfated GAGs. The GAGs’ Coulombic interactions with counterions
exhibit site-specific coordination among sulfates, carboxylates, and
positively charged counterions. Location and coordination depend upon
the counterion type. DFT analysis indicated that sodium ions tend
to form 6-fold coordination with oxygens from sulfates and water molecules,
which occurs independently of the pyranose ring conformations. The
coordination of bivalent calcium ions showed a tendency to form a
pentagonal bipyramid. The DFT-derived structure and the computed spin–spin
coupling constants suggest that the formation of the bipyramid is
more appropriate in the chair form, which agrees with the published
experimental data. 
Small cations
(e.g., Na+) can strongly
influence the first hydration shell of sulfated GAGs. Ionic interactions
are generally considered stronger than the intra- and intermolecular
hydrogen bonds; consequently, they play a significant role in shaping
the 3D GAG structures. DFT calculations showed that the energetically
more stable conformer is stabilized mainly by ionic interactions rather
than by intramolecular hydrogen bonds (see the review by Nagarajan
et al. ). For heparin fragments, the first
hydration shell is strongly influenced by ion–ion and ion–dipole
interactions between cations, sulfates, carboxyl, and hydroxyl groups,
stabilizing the spatial structure. The counterions bound to sulfate
groups stabilize some transient local chain conformations that can
be probed experimentally by FTIR spectroscopy since the electron density
of the sulfate group redistributes according to the strength of cation
binding.

2.5.3.2.

## QM or Molecular Mechanics
QM
or molecular mechanics methods throughout the all-atom (AA) molecular
description are applied to sample GAG conformation and GAG-biomolecular
interactions in solution. GAGs fragment length in such computer experiments
is usually limited mainly due to the GAG or GAG-biomolecular starting
structure. This level characterizes physicochemical interactions of
GAGs and other biomolecules; it describes direct and allosteric mechanisms
induced by GAGs. In this approximation, it is not trivial to investigate
the contribution of solvation and counterions to GAG conformations
due to the static point description of the charges in sulfate groups,
water, and ions.
GAGs have benefitted from the development and
application of molecular dynamics (MD) simulations to probe the conformational
dynamics, inter- and intramolecular interactions, energetics of complexation,
and atomistic structure–function for both free and protein-bound
GAGs. Most investigations used the TIP3P
water model for all-atom simulations specifying a 3-site rigid molecule
with charges and Lennard-Jones parameters assigned to each of the
three atoms. The orientation of two lone pairs of oxygen atoms required
for the cation coordination is omitted. The application of TIP5P or
polarizable water models can tackle this problem at the cost of significantly
increasing computational time. Another approximation is the representation
of cations as a single-point charge, albeit the coordination number
is different. Ca2+ interacts with many anionic polysaccharides
and is represented as a single point, but its coordination number
spans from 6 to 8. Some ion models account for total charge distribution
by introducing dummy centers that mimic the coordination features
to minimize the approximation.
MD simulations revealed a wealth
of atomic (e.g., torsions, puckering, hydrogen bonding,
bridging waters), molecular
(e.g., global shape), and thermodynamic (e.g., potential energy) information. Potential energy surfaces
are also visually appealing for GAGs because they directly convey
favored glycosidic torsions (Φ and Ψ), thereby quickly
revealing local similarities and differences. Whereas a collection
of such classical potential energy surfaces is freely available, new
tools have been developed to help their visualizations. NMR studies
have also supported these results, which is an independent approach
to understanding GAG structure. MD and
NMR provide a synergistic approach to understanding preferred conformational
states for GAGs in solution. Conventional
MD simulations may fail to adequately sample the free energy landscape,
grasping only the conformations around the equilibrium. For this reason,
replica-exchange MD and Gaussian-accelerated MD accelerate the conformational
sampling of GAGs, increasing the sampling of conformational landscapes.

## Perspectives
(1) A well-curated nonredundant,
systematically designed data set containing structural and binding
data for protein–GAG interactions should be created to test,
calibrate, and further develop MD-based approaches for protein–GAG
containing systems. (2) Novel MD-based techniques mainly designed
to improve conformational sampling should be further adapted and applied
for highly flexible GAG-containing molecular systems. (3) More focus
on proper modeling solvent, ions, and glycosylation should be put
in the MD-based studies of GAGs and their complexes.

2.5.3.3.

## Coarse-Grained Models
The coarse-grained
(CG) description mainly applies to complex system evolution and molecular
mechanisms or conformational changes occurring in long time-scale
ranges. The approximation relies on representing groups of atoms as
one pseudoatom (usually called a “bead”). This approximation
results in decreasing the degrees of freedom in the molecular system
and flattening the energy landscape, which allows us to speed up the
calculations by some orders of magnitude. The speed increase depends
on the type of mapping and the size of the grains adopted. The general
drawback is the loss of stereoisomers description and the directionality
of hydrogen bonds, which can be indirectly tuned via the mapping type
and nonbonded interaction parameters. Several GAG CG models exist. Most of them, like very broadly used MARTINI, are based on the spherical pseudoatom parametrization,
which could be potentially valuable in describing some purely electrostatics-driven
processes physically inappropriate to reflect the sulfation code and,
therefore, the specificity of GAG interactions. Physically based models
using a nonspherical representation of pseudoatoms would be highly
recommended instead of using empirical or machine learning-based approaches,
whose underlying physics of the intermolecular interactions remains
obscure.
Computational modeling of GAGs allows for describing
GAG conformational space, achieved via the adiabatic approximation
or its extension. The former approach implies that the rotations of
adjacent glycosidic linkages in a linear polysaccharide are independent.
The constituent disaccharides are exhaustively sampled, yielding a
conformational map as a function of potential energy versus two coordinates,
Φ and Ψ angles of the glycosidic linkage. The most energetically
favorable regular configurations can be generated using the (Φ,
Ψ) values of the ground state. The most representative conformation
adopted by GAG is a helix; for HA, numerous helical conformations,
both left- and right-handed, have comparable energies. This approach
allows the generation of long polysaccharide chains with statistically
relevant torsion angle values distribution along the chain. The latter
approach characterizes the evolution of a long GAG chain in solution
using usually all-atom molecular dynamics.

## Perspectives
Even when the MD simulations describe
GAGs or GAG–biomolecule complexes, the length of these sugar
chains is far from the biological conditions since natural GAGs can
reach up to 200 monosaccharide units (and much longer for HA). Furthermore,
these methods lack a description of the dynamics of biologically relevant
dimensions. Each approach has its strengths and limitations, and the
most appropriate method must be selected based on the question that
needs to be addressed.

2.6.

## Physical Properties: From Free-Floating to
Bio-interfaces
2.6.1.

## Free-Floating GAG Polysaccharides
GAG polysaccharides intrinsically lack defined secondary or higher
order structures at physiological pH and ionic strength. Instead,
they dynamically sample a wide range of low-energy conformations.
Characterization of the physical properties of GAGs thus falls within
the scope of physicochemical methods to measure the molecular mass
and the (average) size of GAG molecules in solution.
GAGs from
biological sources are heterogeneous in their mass. The most common
way to quantify the mass distribution of a GAG population is through
the weight-average molecular mass (Mw),
the number-averaged molecular mass (Mn), and the mass dispersity (Đ = Mw/Mn). The mass of sulfated
GAGs (CS, DS, HS, including heparin and KS) in vertebrates is typically
10–50 kDa. HA mass varies much more widely and can reach values
of many MDa. Well-established methods to quantify GAG mass distribution
are available. Multiangle light scattering
(MALS), when coupled with size-exclusion chromatography (SEC) or field
flow fractionation (FFF), provides Mw, Mn, and Đ without the
need for a size standard but requires relatively large amounts of
sample (typically many μg).
Gas-phase electrophoretic
mobility molecular analysis (GEMMA) and,
more recently, solid-state nanopore sensors , are well suited to quantify HA mass. These techniques analyze one
molecule at a time and thus provide the mass distribution of HA samples
with exquisite detail beyond what is encompassed by the average mass
and mass dispersity values. They also need much less samples than
MALS. However, they do require a set of mass standards for analysis
and measurements are affected by GAG charge in addition to mass, which
limits the use of these methods for samples of sulfated GAGs with
unknown or varying charge distribution.
Gel electrophoresis
(GE) is a simple way to estimate GAG mass which
can be readily implemented in any biochemistry laboratory. It can
analyze GAGs of any size, from the smallest oligosaccharides to the
largest polysaccharides. Drawbacks, like for GEMMA and nanopores sensors,
are that it requires mass standards and does not readily separate
mass from charge effects.
Light scattering methods can determine
the size of GAG molecules
in solution. MALS provides the radius of gyration (Rg), i.e., the average distance of the
constituent monosaccharides from the molecule’s center of mass.
Quasi-elastic light scattering yields hydrodynamic radii (Rh) from the rate of molecular diffusion and
is sensitive to smaller molecule sizes than MALS.
The persistence
length (Lp) measures
the flexibility of GAG chains. It defines the contour length range
over which a linear polymer retains a stiff appearance and provides
a link between the total contour length (Lc) and the in-solution size (Rg) of GAG
molecules. The total contour length of GAG polysaccharides is readily
estimated from the GAG mass, considering that each disaccharide unit
has a contour length of 1.0 nm and a mass of 400 Da (for unsulfated
GAGs) or approximately 500 Da (for sulfated GAGs, with minor variations
depending on their degree of sulfation). The persistence length is
4 nm for HA at physiological pH and ionic strength and is likely similar
for other GAGs (although computer simulations suggest that this depends
on their degree of sulfation). This value is larger than most other
biological and synthetic polymers (e.g., unfolded
polypeptides, polyethylene glycol) and implies that GAG polysaccharides
pervade comparatively more space and are easier to stretch. 
Novel methods based on nonlinear spectroscopy
describe the molecular
interactions that mediate critical mechanical properties of HA, such
as the pH-induced gelation of HA, which undergoes a transition from
a viscous to an elastic state in a narrow pH range around 2.5 or the molecular mechanism underlying the condensation
of Ca2+ and the subsequent influence of the chain flexibility. 

## Perspectives
Methods are needed to quantify
the size of small and variably sulfated GAG polysaccharides. Gold
standard methods such as SEC-MALS work well for larger polysaccharides
but have limited sensitivity for small polysaccharides, and all other
methods suffer from difficulties in separating mass from charge effects.
In particular, methods are needed to analyze GAG mass in the often
minute amounts extracted from small tissues or tissue sections. An
open question is also how much the persistence length varies across
GAG types and as a function of GAG sulfation and environmental changes
(e.g., ion types in saline solution). Experimental methods are needed
to probe this directly and complement the predictions of computational
methods. 

2.6.2.

## GAG Polysaccharides at Bio-interfaces
In many biological settings and biomaterials applications, GAGs
are displayed on surfaces or other scaffolding structures, thus forming
films of varying thicknesses. For example, HA can be retained on the
cell surface through one end or multiple attachment points along the
chain contour, and sulfated GAGs are typically tethered to their core
protein via their reducing end. Characterizing the mass and conformation
of end-attached or side-attached GAGs in situ remains
challenging. Conventionally, GAGs are stripped off surfaces and scaffolds
for subsequent solution-phase mass analysis, though this multistep
processing is time-consuming and may entail artifacts.
A recently
developed method based on the quartz
crystal microbalance with dissipation monitoring (QCM-D) exploits
that the softness and thickness of films of end-grafted HA increase
monotonically with HA contour length. The results establish a quantitative
method to determine the mass of end-attached HA, and sulfated GAGs
from 1 to 500 kDa, with a resolution of better than 10%. A workflow
recapitulates the main steps involved in GAG sizing on surfaces using
this method, thereby offering quality control of GAG-based surface
coatings.
Of all biomolecules known, sulfated GAGs have the
highest charge
density. The charge density of GAGs entails a high osmotic swelling
pressure owing to counterions and endows GAG matrices with exceptional
mechanical properties. Among the physiologically relevant properties
of GAG matrices are their ability to lubricate (e.g., synovial fluid of joints) and bear dynamic loads (e.g., in cartilage). The rheological properties of semidilute HA solutions
are well documented, with a particular emphasis on the influence of
temperature, concentration, and ionic strength on dynamic mechanical
properties. Like other flexible and well-solvated polymers, HA solutions
display a viscoelastic behavior exhibiting a transition from viscous
to elastic state with increasing deformation frequency. An increase
in HA concentration and molecular mass yields a more elastic behavior.
Overlapping time–temperature, time–concentration, and
time–ionic strength superpositions demonstrate that temperature,
concentration, and ionic strength do not alter the nature of the relaxation
process but rather the relaxation time scale.

## Perspectives
In situ analyses (and mapping)
of GAG molecular mass, GAG chain conformation, and GAG concentration
in GAG-rich matrices remain a distant goal. However, if accessible,
they would provide a much richer view, focusing on the organization
of GAGs and their associated molecules, rather than their mere presence,
to better understand the mechanisms of GAG function in cells and tissues
and for the design and quality control of GAG-rich biomaterials.

2.7.

## Data Management and Deep Learning Methods
Glycoscience is heavily rooted in multidisciplinary approaches,
often implemented orthogonally to compensate for the absence of genetic
determinants for glycosylation. These approaches all produce rich
catalogues of data, each not sufficient to determine glycan types
of glycosylation sites/populations but necessary when put into context
with additional complementary sets. It is essentially the very definition
of a data set on which Deep Learning algorithms can be trained, tested,
and used for prediction or classification. Glycan sequencing requires
orthogonal protocols involving multiple combinations of different
liquid chromatography (LC), mass spectrometry (MS), NMR, and IR, each
producing heaps of data, usually analyzed separately by highly trained
scientists. Through the compilation of well-designed and curated data
sets, Artificial Intelligence would have the potential to substitute
human intervention, providing consistent data interpretation and,
ultimately, rapid glycoanalytics. Toward this goal, the role of glycobioinformatics
in the setup and curation of glycomics/glycoanalytics data sets is
a notable example of Unicarb-DB.
In terms of 3D structure determination,
the limitations glycoscience currently suffers from are similar to
the difficulties inherent to the structural determination of intrinsically
disordered proteins (IDPs) or regions (IDRs), for which AlphaFold2
is not greatly useful. As it stands, the contribution of glycan builders,
such as glycam.org, CHARMM-GUI,
GAG-Builder, and databases of equilibrated MD structures in combination
with adequate conformational sampling, can address most queries. Nevertheless,
limitations of the empirical additive force field formalism remain
problematic in some cases and work toward developing machine learning
force fields for glycans is one of the highly anticipated upcoming
innovations in the field.

## Perspectives
The use of Machine Learning algorithms
to advance glycomics and glycoanalytics is in its infancy as this
article is being written, with notable initial contributions from
Daniel Bojar and colleagues in the prediction of lectin binding specificities
and glycan-mediated host–pathogen interactions( , )in the development of tools to load and extract information
from glycan data sets. The use of Machine Learning methods to predict and understand GAGs
structure to functions relationships from existing data sets and under-development
databases is one of the promising upcoming fields of GAGs research
soon.

3.0.

## Protein-Glycosaminoglycan Interactions
3.1.

## Analytical Tools to Identify GAG-Mediated
Interactions
The identification and characterization of GAG–protein
interactions rely on low- and high-throughput methods. The most commonly
used are affinity chromatography, analytical ultracentrifugation,
electrophoretic mobility shift assays, and real-time, label-free methods
such as surface plasmon resonance and biolayer interferometry, which
yield kinetic data (i.e., association and dissociation
rates). In contrast, thermodynamic data (enthalpy changes, changes
in entropy, changes in molar heat capacity) can be calculated using
isothermal titration calorimetry. Microarrays
and affinity proteomics have been developed as high-throughput methods
to identify GAG-binding proteins and can be performed with GAG oligosaccharides
of defined size, length, and charge prepared and fractionated as described
in or with
full-length, physiological, GAG chains. GAG and protein arrays have
also been used to characterize the GAG repertoire of a protein and
the protein repertoire of a GAG, respectively. The number of GAGs
and/or GAG oligosaccharides spotted on these microarrays is generally
limited (<100) partly because the purification and synthesis of
GAGs are still challenging. The GAG arrays developed in the past few
years have been recently reviewed. Although
these GAG microarrays are not routinely available to the glycobiology
community, neo-glycolipid-based microarrays have been developed. They
contain a subset of GAGs and GAG oligosaccharides and are available
for screening analysis at an affordable cost (https://glycosciences.med.ic.ac.uk/glycanLibraryIndex.html).
GAG and protein arrays require purified GAGs, oligosaccharides, and
proteins, whereas affinity proteomics can capture GAG-binding proteins
from crude biological samples (e.g., cell or tissue
lysates, culture supernatants, and biological fluids). Although GAG-binding
proteins identified by affinity proteomics may contribute to the biological
and structural functions of GAGs, their direct binding to GAGs and
the biological or structural relevance of these interactions remain
to be demonstrated.
In vitro binding measurements
are not likely to reflect the biological context of the extracellular
matrix, cell surface, or interior and nucleus. Cell or tissue experiments
are needed to assess their biological significance by monitoring the
interaction’s biological response. Chemical or enzymatic treatments
globally or specifically altering GAG chemical groups and/or selective
deletion of GAGs at the cell surface by knocking down the expression
of GAG biosynthetic enzymes provide essential information. In addition,
methods should be developed to study the ability of various GAGs to
assemble multimeric protein complexes and follow the motions of GAGs
and GAG-binding proteins throughout the extracellular matrix and the
glycocalyx to reach and bind to their partners (e.g., cell-surface receptors).

3.2.

## Structure of GAG–Protein Complexes
3.2.1.

## Experimental Techniques: X-ray, NMR, and
SAXS

## X-ray Diffraction
The Protein Data Base comprehensively
records more than 120 structures of GAGs protein complexes and 15
structures of long-chain GAGs s established by X-ray fiber diffractometry,
X-ray scattering or by solution NMR. The size of GAGs bound to proteins
ranges from disaccharides to full length polysaccharide, including
the following degrees of polymerization (DP): DP2 (34), DP 3 (1),
DP 4 (18), DP 5 (13), DP 6 (15), DP 7 (7), DP 8 (8), and DP 9 (1).
More than 80% of the GAGs involved in the complexes are heparin and
hyaluronic acid oligosaccharides, which does not reflect the diversity
of GAGs.
The GAG-DB database (https://gagdb.glycopedia.eu/) provides the architecture and navigation tools to query the Protein
Data Bank, UniProtKB, and GlyTouCan (the universal glycan repository)
identifiers. Special attention was devoted to describing the bound
glycan ligands using simple graphical representation and numerical
format for cross-referencing other databases in glycoscience and functional
data. GAG-DB provides detailed information on GAGs, their bound protein
ligands, and interaction features using several open-access applications.
The binding energy calculated using the Poisson Boltzmann Surface
Area method and the evaluation of quaternary structure are also displayed. This work confirmed the lack of counterion
effect in the interaction between GAGs, the identification of amino
acids preferentially bringing the electrostatic neutrality of the
interaction, and the lack of influence of the sulfate groups on the
glycosidic torsion angles.
Gaining knowledge from accumulating
high-quality results largely
depends on the structural diversity of the investigated samples. An
overview of the literature indicates that almost half of the studies
involving GAGs considered heparin in isolation or in complex with
proteins. It is primarily due to the vast usage of heparin in medical
applications and the search for heparin mimics for therapeutic purposes.
Its structural similarity to HS makes it a substitute or model for
HS in biochemical and simulation studies. Heparin is used as a model
of GAGs because it is available in good purity at an acceptable price.
The number of protein–heparin experimental structures is far
higher than the number available for other GAGs (https://gagdb.glycopedia.eu/). There is a long list of “orphan GAGs” for which
the role, involvement, and mechanisms of action are only partially
taken into account.

## NMR Spectroscopy

## NMR of Protein–GAGS Interactions
Nuclear magnetic
resonance is widely used to study the conformation of GAGs alone or
in complexes with proteins. In NMR,
the behavior of two interacting molecules depends on the relative
lifetimes of the species in the equilibrium and the strength of the
magnetic field. Then, we can distinguish three different chemical
exchange kinetics for protein–GAGs interactions: slow, medium,
and fast in the NMR time scale. In the case of slow exchange interactions,
the signals appear individually in two sets (one for the complex and
the other for the free components). A single signal appears averaged
in the chemical shift time scale between the complex and the free
species for fast interactions. There is an intermediate exchange regime
with a characteristic point, denominated coalescence, where the shape
of the signals cannot be ascribed to a single or multiple signal behavior.
The performance of a compound at a given temperature depends on the
magnetic field strength used, as coalescence depends on how the chemical
exchange kinetics compares with the separation between the signals
in Hertz.
In most cases, for the GAG length typically used in
solution NMR studies, the kinetics of the GAG–protein interactions
fall primarily on the fast exchange regime. Then, to study them from
the whole complex perspective, it is necessary to solve the 3D structure
of the protein and stoichiometric complex using protein NMR techniques,
complemented with a deep knowledge of the GAG NMR properties. Such
investigations use standard protein NMR methods, commonly with double-labeled 13C and 15N proteins. Provided that the protein
is fully assigned and its 3D structure determined, a 15N heteronuclear single quantum correlation (HSQC) titration provides
the location of the ligand. This experiment uses the primary assignment
from the free protein and translates it to the complex. Then the regions
with larger chemical shift perturbations (CSP) can be located, indicating
the protein regions with more significant interaction with the ligand.
Typically, the results are displayed as heat maps of the CSP on the
protein structure that are very informative about the regions involved
in the interaction. When this method compares several complexes, special
care must be taken to quantify the affinity. The 15N-HSQC
titration method can be used together with a complete analysis of KD per residue. KD, CSP, and stoichiometry per residue can be obtained from this analysis.
In this case, the precise location of the ligand in the complex can
be easily found, along with the relative importance of a given residue
in various complexes. Stoichiometry can also be deduced from this
type of analysis. This approach has the benefit of observing two frequencies, 15N and 1H. Still, the disadvantage is that the
protein assignment must be previously done and that the information
comes only from backbone or side chain 15N atoms. Also,
observing stoichiometric complexes avoids the potential interference
of other stoichiometries with larger proportions of ligands. , 
An additional analysis, based on using filtered (13C
and/or 15N) experiments, facilitates the assignment and
evaluation of the restrictions of the ligand signals and eventually
locates the position of the GAG binding site. In this case, the set
of experiments allows the extraction of ligand-to-ligand, ligand-to-receptor,
receptor-to-ligand, and receptor-to-receptor homonuclear correlations
to assign and characterize through bond connections and through space
contacts via NOE nuclear Overhauser effect (NOE). From the NOEs, intermolecular
distances can be extracted as a key structural magnitude. By using
filtered experiments, it can also be analyzed if the binding has any
influence on the 3D structure of the ligand.

## Ligand-Observed NMR Techniques
Several challenges can
complicate the protein NMR approach, for example, undesirable binding-induced
protein aggregation or precipitation using long GAGs. Besides, commercial
long GAGs or those resulting from enzymatic digestions show an intrinsic
heterogeneity that poses difficulties in interpreting 1H,15N HSQC binding studies, e.g., what
specific sulfation pattern and oligosaccharide length are involved
in the interaction with the receptor. These issues have encouraged
using shorter GAG oligosaccharides, which typically show weak affinity.
Fortunately, a low binding affinity indicates that the molecular recognition
process occurs with a fast exchange in the NMR relaxation time scale
so that an excess of the GAG over the receptor facilitates an efficient
“transfer of information” from the bound to the free
state. This feature forms the basis of the “ligand-observed
NMR techniques” to study protein–GAG interactions. With
an excess of GAG, the analysis focuses on the free GAG signals, while
the fast exchange efficiently transfers properties of the bound state
(exchange broadening, large negative NOEs) onto the observable signals
of the free GAG.
Among ligand-observed NMR techniques, transverse
relaxation-based approaches (CPMG, 1H-T1ρ), and NOE-based
approaches (water-ligand observed via gradient spectroscopy (waterLOGSY),
exchange-transferred NOESY, and saturation transfer difference STD
NMR) are of direct applicability to study small/medium-sized GAGs
binding to protein receptors. From them,
only STD NMR and exchange-transferred NOESY are appropriate to gain
structural information in atomic detail about the binding mode and
bioactive conformation of the ligands in the complexes.
Exchange-transferred
NOESY experiments are important to characterize
the bioactive conformations of GAGs containing iduronate rings. Not
only the global GAG bound conformation can be determined, but the
diagnostic H2–H5 NOE allows detection of the presence of the 2SO skew-boat conformation, a unique feature of the iduronate ring, as well as to determine
changes in the population ratios of the 1C4/2SO/4C1 ring conformers between
the free and bound states. 
STD
NMR experiments identify the GAG oligosaccharide regions making
close contact with the protein surface in the bound state (the so-called
ligand binding epitope mapping). Except for long GAGs with regular
repetitive sequences (e.g., heparin), this allows
for determining the binding mode and what residues most likely constitute
the minimum structural requirement for binding. It is a relevant information
to understand the molecular recognition of GAGs by receptors and eventually
design potential ligands to interfere in the process. Additionally,
novel multifrequency STD NMR approaches provide information on the
relative orientation of the ligand within the protein binding pocket.
The so-called differential epitopes (DEEP-STD NMR) by comparison of
STD NMR experiments in H2O and D2O allow identifying
of contacts of the GAG oligosaccharide with arginine side chains commonly
found in the binding pocket of GAG-binding proteins. − 

## Perspectives
Future progress in applying the
novel multifrequency STD NMR approaches along with other ligand-observed
NMR techniques, like exchange-transferred NOESY, will strongly benefit
from the efficient implementation of STD NMR-derived restraints into
docking calculations to generate 3D molecular models of GAG–protein
complexes. These models can be validated by applying a complete conformational
exchange matrix approach (CORCEMA-ST), which can still be time-consuming.
In that regard, faster quantitative approaches dealing with the whole
network of dipole–dipole coupled protons at the interface of
the protein–ligand interaction are needed to be able to implement
efficient binding epitope prediction and validation along long molecular
dynamics simulations (MD), as well as future inclusion of STD NMR-derived
restraints into MD simulations to generate a validated model of the
GAG–protein complex including structure and dynamics of the
molecular recognition process. Isotopically labeled GAGs, from chemoenzymatic
synthesis from bacterial polysaccharide precursors (e.g., heparosan
from E. coli K5) on the application of novel automated synthetic technologies
are also highly desirable, as they will alleviate the difficulties
related to the challenging narrow1H chemical shift dispersion shown by GAGs.

## Computational Prediction of the 3D Structure of GAG–Protein
Complexes
When applied to GAG–protein complexes, computational
approaches aim to characterize the molecular nature of the interactions
(e.g., the noncovalent bonds, the GAG chemical groups,
and the amino acids involved), their mechanism of action, the role
of basic domain motions, and the influence of possible mutations. , 
Such knowledge is crucial to understanding their biological
function, relevance in pathological alteration, and developing new
therapeutics. Methods to accurately elucidate these questions are
in high demand. Experimental methods described in the previous section
have been developed to determine the structures of proteins and have
subsequently been applied to study GAG and GAG–protein complex
structures. However, due to the structural features of GAGs, such
as their length, flexibility, and periodicity, and their tendency
to assume a wide distribution of conformational states, these methods
often failed to describe the structure of long GAGs alone or in complex
with other biomolecules. , At the same time,
these methods could successfully characterize individual proteins
complexed with GAG oligosaccharides of defined length up to DP8 according
to the available experimental structures. Nevertheless, they cannot
reproduce processes, such as the creation of protein gradients or
GAG-mediated protein multimerization, involving natural GAGs up to
200 monosaccharide units. The description of the dynamics of these
systems is progressing.
Molecular modeling and simulations are
“computational microscopes”
that aim to provide real-time visualization of biological phenomena
by describing their dynamics. For GAGs, about 12% of all the investigations
focused on GAG alone, 82% on GAG–protein complexes, and 6%
on GAG–drug, GAG–lipid/membrane, or GAG–GAG interactions
see review. Studies on GAGs alone mainly
describe the dynamics of polysaccharide chains to investigate ring
puckering and conformation, linear and bent conformations, and the
role of sulfation on GAG monosaccharides. The past decade witnessed
the implementation of multiple computational protocols based on molecular
docking or advanced MD techniques aiming at modeling long GAGs chains
alone or bound to proteins. However, the possible misinterpretations
of the strength and stability of the complexes are not frequently
discussed. Gaining accuracy requires more complex and time-consuming
MD simulations to get additional insights into the binding stability,
the role of nonionic and polar residues, and bridging water’s
influence on GAG conformations. , Binding energies
can be calculated from MD simulations following either the linear
interaction energy approximation or the Poisson–Boltzmann Surface(PBSA)/generalized
Born, umbrella sampling, and Potential of Mean Force (PMF) methods
and compared with experimental data. Free-energy-end point methods
are not even close to chemical accuracy for tight binding of drugs,
let alone for highly flexible multicontact-based interactions of low
affinity. The poor documentation regarding the origin of the GAG samples
investigated and their heterogeneity (molecular weight, sulfation)
can primarily impair the comparison with experimental data
About
90% of the studies have been performed with short GAG oligosaccharides
(< DP5). It represents a substantial limitation in translating
the results of the computational prediction to biological processes
at larger scales. Experimentally, this
limitation is mainly due to the lack of available well-characterized
longer oligosaccharides and full-length GAGs and the subsequent limitation
of 3D structures of GAG–proteins complexes (currently more
than 120 PDB entries, including less than 40 nonredundant nonenzymatic
complexes). Computational methods to
tackle long polysaccharide chains are deficient because running MD
simulations for many sequences remains challenging, especially at
a high-throughput level. As a result, biological phenomena induced
by long GAG chains, such as protein homo-oligomerization, the formation
of multimeric biomolecule complexes and cooperative effects, are underexplored. 
Despite all these difficulties, the accumulation
of MD results,
combined with docking studies, suggests that the patterns of recognition
of GAGs by proteins follow a continuum. From a highly selective pattern
to the unselective one, there exists a continuum of intermediate levels
of selectivity, including moderately selective and plastic ( ). 
 The quest for bioactivity and drugability still
drives most of
the research to which computational modeling might contribute. Novel
and foreseeable developments concern the screening of combinatorial
virtual libraries hoping to uncover bioactive GAG sequences before
implementing molecular dynamics simulations. Identifying highly selective
systems (both from the protein and GAG side) is still pending. The fundamental biological role of GAGs in
regulating such responses as chemotaxis, cell signaling, nuclear translocation,
and viral invasion throughout complex yet poorly characterized plasticity
remains lagging behind the quest for druggability.

## Perspectives
Crucial questions regarding the
interaction with highly glycosylated protein receptors,( − )ions,( )and
solvent( )need appropriate
and thorough MD treatments. Even if their progressive uses have not
yet significantly affected the percentage of the overall literature
concerning GAGs, they are paving the way to unveil GAG-induced mechanistic
and allosteric effects on proteins.

3.3.

## GAG Interactomes
As key biomolecular
players, GAGs organize the pericellular and extracellular matrix,
contributing to extracellular matrix architecture, cell–matrix
interactions, and subsequent cell signaling. Advances in GAG sequencing
allow the characterization of GAG sequences binding to proteins, and
GAG-mediated pull-down proteomics can identify GAG-binding proteins
on a proteome-wide scale in various biological and clinical samples.
The availability of these data led to the building of GAGs interaction
networks that help decipher the molecular and cellular mechanisms
underlying GAGs functions mediated by their binding to proteins. All
GAGs, except for hyaluronan, are covalently attached to core proteins
to form proteoglycans, and GAG interactions occur in vivo in the molecular context of proteoglycans. Consequently, GAG interactomes
should be contextualized by integrating proteoglycan interactions,
transcriptomics, and/or proteomics data to generate cell-, tissue-,
or disease-specific interactomes. Additional GAG interactomes can
be built based on a molecular function, a biological pathway, or a
cellular location. It should aid in deciphering the mechanisms associated
with GAG interactions in various physio-pathological contexts.
However, the integration of these data is focused on GAG-binding
proteins. The development of high-throughput assays measuring the
number of individual GAGs in biological samples would allow the collection
of GAGomic data sets, which could then be integrated into GAG networks
to refine their specificity. The setup
of high-trough-put binding assays based on surface plasmon resonance
imaging using commercially available instruments will be helpful in
calculating the kinetic and affinity parameters of an increasing number
of GAG interactions. The integration of these parameters in GAG networks
would be crucial to determine if a specific range of kinetic and affinity
values are associated with specific locations, amount of disorder,
and molecular functions of GAG-binding proteins or with the biological
processes they are involved in as previously shown for a subset of
heparin-binding proteins. 
Large-scale,
high-throughput binding assays, including GAG microarrays
and affinity proteomics, have identified hundreds of GAG-binding proteins.
They have been used to generate GAG interactomes. − At the time of writing, the most comprehensive GAG interactome available
includes 4290 interactions and 3464 unique GAG-binding proteins. ( ). These large data sets provide the opportunity to investigate
the location, molecular function, biological process and biological
pathways associated with the protein partners of a specific GAG. The
integration in these networks of the chemical features (e.g., sulfation) and size of GAGs and of the amino acid sequences and
domains of GAG-binding proteins would be very valuable to explore
the relationships, if any, between these features and the biological
or structural roles of GAG-binding proteins.
 GAG interaction data are freely available in public
databases such
as MatrixDB (http://matrixdb.univ-lyon1.fr/) and GAGDB (https://gagdb.glycopedia.eu/), which have recently been reviewed. The development of standards in data sharing (e.g., the FAIR principle) and storage repositories and databases have
markedly changed access to large data sets and their retrieval and
(re)use. “Big data” have become a precious resource,
and its exploration will benefit from recent advances in artificial
Intelligence (AI). This term covers numerous approaches that constitute
the algorithmic framework needed to interpret and make sense of big
data, whatever they are. The AI revolution has impacted structural
biology and life sciences by allowing the development of the AlphaFold
algorithm used to predict the 3D structure of proteins from their
amino acid sequences. It is still not a substitute for experimental
structural biology and will probably never be, yet it will undoubtedly
expand the knowledge in structural biology and speed up the experimental
determination of 3D structures. It can also be applied to glycoproteins
by grafting glycosylations from a library of glycan blocks onto AlphaFold
protein models. 

## Perspectives
The ability of Deep Learning algorithms
to extract valuable and meaningful information from big data is likely
to provide the long-awaited step change in glycoscience discovery,
i.e., bring glycomics on par with proteomics and genomics. The challenges
still slowing down glycoscience discovery are directly linked to the
lack of routine, easy-to-perform sequencing of bioactive GAGs and
GAG oligosaccharides, which might be addressed by nanopore sequencing
and infrared spectroscopy in the future, and by the difficulty of
studying the 3D structure of these flexible and dynamic molecules,
and capturing their conformational states required for or stabilized
by their binding to proteins. The structural characterization of GAGs
is a huge task due to their high structural diversity (e.g., 48 theoretical
disaccharides for HS), further complicated by their template-independent
biosynthesis. Thinking outside the box, where the “box”
contains glycomic/glycoanalytic data sets and the “thinking”
is AI algorithms, is undoubtedly a promising way to solve the above
issues, to mine glycomic data sets, and promote significant achievements
in glycoscience. The Glycompare tool recently developed to analyze
glycomics data sets using artificial intelligence( )is an excellent example of this approach.

3.4.

## Self-Organization of GAGS and GAG-Binding
Proteins
Extracellular GAG organization plays critical roles
in GAG function, influencing cell-matrix, cell–cell recognition,
cell adhesion, and migration. GAGs, however, do not self-associate
on their own under physiological conditions. Instead, the self-organization
of GAGs is intimately related to the proteins they bind and the core
proteins to which they are attached. Methods to analyze how proteins
cross-link GAGs and how such cross-linking defines the organization
and physical properties (i.e., mechanics
and permeability) of GAG-rich matrices’ organization are underdeveloped.
3.4.1.

## GAG Cross-Linking
The functional
importance of GAG cross-linking is firmly established for a range
of tissues. An early example was the extended HA/aggrecan complexes
(cross-linked by link proteins) that confer load-bearing properties
to cartilage. Perineuronal nets, GAG-rich
coats on neurons with a reticular morphology that modulate synapse
formation and neuronal plasticity, are a molecular network made from
HA, CS proteoglycan, and their cross-linking proteins. Another example is the expanded and ultrasoft
yet elastic matrix that surrounds mammalian oocytes during ovulation.
It regulates transport and fertilization in the oviduct, which requires
HA, a set of HA-cross-linking proteins (TSG-6, pentraxin 3, and inter-α-inhibitor),
and also contains proteoglycans such as versican. Despite their functional importance, little is currently
known about the structure and dynamics of the cross-linking nodes
in all these matrices. We also do not know how the degree of cross-linking
is regulated to achieve matrices with the desired morphology and biophysical
properties (e.g., elasticity and permeability).
Intercellular signaling molecules (e.g., morphogens/growth
factors for tissue development/repair and chemokines for immune cell
trafficking) rely on GAGs for their precise distribution across the
extracellular space. In this context, control over the presentation
of intercellular signaling proteins to the cognate cell surface receptors
(and the downstream intracellular signaling process) has long been
thought to be the primary function of GAGs. Emerging evidence, however,
suggests that many signaling proteins are also capable of cross-linking
GAGs. , These proteins, thus, may also exert their
functions independently from cognate receptors by dynamically reorganizing
GAG-rich extracellular matrix and modulating matrix morphology and
biophysical properties. Such a promising new area of investigation
will require new tools and ways of thinking.

3.4.2.

## Response of GAG–Protein Bonds to
Mechanical Strain
Pericellular coats and extracellular matrices
in which GAGs reside are exposed to varying mechanical strains, and
such strains will impact the flexible GAGs and their interactions.
This dimension of GAG–protein interactions has historically
received very little attention but can now be explored. Single-molecule
force spectroscopy (SMFS) methods are sensitive to probing the mechanics
of individual GAG–protein bonds. They have already revealed specialized interactions such as “catch”
bonds (i.e., bonds that strengthen under mechanical
force, whereas most bonds weaken under force) between HS and the cell
surface sulfatase Sulf1. However, these
methods are not widespread and must be expanded to more protein/GAG
interactions. For example, catch bonds have been proposed to occur
between HA and its cell-surface receptor CD44. Such an interaction is required for the migration of activated
leukocytes from the blood vasculature into the interstitial tissue.
However, current data are inconclusive as to whether HA and CD44 are
indeed forming catch bonds. 

3.4.3.

## Multivalent Interactions and Super Selective
Binding
GAG polysaccharides can engage with several binding
partners simultaneously. Such multivalent binding impacts cells’
recognition of GAGs and their extracellular complexes. A case in point
is HA, which exploits multivalent binding to discriminate its receptors
(e.g., CD44, LYVE-1) sharply based on their comparative
surface densities in contrast to mere affinity. , Such “super selective” binding may explain the long-standing
controversy of how high and low molecular mass HA exert radically
different biological effects (e.g., anti- vs pro-inflammatory)
and, more generally, how multivalent GAG interactions modulate the
communication of cells with their environment.

3.4.4.

## Topology-Dependent Recognition
There is a high level of complexity in how GAGs interact with proteins.
The linear GAGs allow for distinct topology-dependent binding behaviors,
such as one-dimensional sliding, or selective binding to chain ends
(i.e., the nonreducing or the reducing end), or sulfation
motifs. For example, some GAG degrading enzymes and other proteins selectively operate at the nonreducing end
of GAG chains, chemokines may “slide along” GAG chains,
and GAG chains may organize multiprotein functional complexes. Revealing
these effects requires bespoke biophysical tools, which are currently
underdeveloped.

## Perspectives
Our understanding of the molecular
and physical mechanisms underpinning GAG functions under the influence
of proteins is still in its infancy, not the least because we lack
the biophysical tools to probe the complexity of molecular interactions
involving GAGs. Biochemical tools have established a plethora of protein
binding partners for GAGs and basic interaction parameters (e.g.,
affinity, the composition of interaction complexes). However, they
fall short of mechanistically explaining the complexity of GAG–protein
interactions. More and different biophysical methods are needed to
resolve the structure and dynamics (including under mechanical force)
of GAG cross-linking nodes and to probe protein binding modes unique
to polymer chains, such as sliding interactions and selective chain-end
recognition. In addition to analytical tools, we also need new reagents
and methods to reconstitute multipartner GAG–protein interactions
and protein-mediated GAG self-organization in vitro. Such molecularly
defined environments will enable new studies of structure/property/function
interrelationships( )that are impossible with the more complex, less defined, and less
tunable matrices produced by cells and tissues alone.

4.0.

## Future Directions: “Be FAIR to GAGs.”
The previous sections highlighted the accomplishments and progress
achieved using the full spectrum of current analytical, chemical,
physicochemical, structural, biophysical, and biochemical methods
devoted to GAGs. The wealth and the amount of research data produced
represent a gold mine for the discipline. Nevertheless, further progress
could benefit from methods that help understand the extent and complexity
of the accumulated data set. Future research directions aiming at
serving the whole community are presented along several lines, which
are analyzed in light of the most recent development.

## Update on Standards
A first condition would require
that the experimental and computational data are comprehensively characterized,
made publicly available, and organized. In proteomics and genomics,
bioinformatics has generated powerful methods and software tools to
apprehend the extent and complexity of data sets. It is not yet the
case for the field of glycomics, and this particularly challenges
the inclusion of GAGs in physiological and pathological contexts.
Most omics applications rely on robust analytical technology and strong
bioinformatics support to extract as much information as possible
from large data sets generated by automated analytical methods. The
sparsity and heterogeneity of GAG data and the variety of techniques
used for their study still limit the automation of analytical procedures.
The lack of common glycomics standards has hindered progress in
representing information stored in databases and hampered data exchange
and interoperability of such databases. Several cooperative initiatives
for representing and collecting glycomic data have been launched in
response to this situation. An international glycan structure repository
named GlyTouCan was released to become a community resource. As a first step in adopting a standard view on
glycans, it relies on the depiction of 2D structures in the SNFG notation
increasingly shared within and outside glycoscience and applicable
to representing GAGs. Furthermore, semantic Web technology, commonly
used in bioinformatics via Resource Description Framework (RDF) data
modeling, is implemented as a new standard for representing and storing
knowledge in various databases. This
trend was introduced with the GlycoRDF model of glycans that was subsequently implemented in GlyTouCan
but should be refined to become readily usable with GAGs. Recently,
GlySTreeM, another RDF-based model designed to tolerate the frequent
ambiguity of glycan structures (e.g., missing linkage
information and loosely defined monosaccharides), was proposed. It could be helpful to capture uncertain sulfation
patterns in GAGs.
On top of the expected bioinformatic development,
GAG data management
and exchange require consolidation and compliance to standards, as
initiated through the Minimum Information Data Required for Glycomics
(MIRAGE) initiative of the Beilstein Institute (https://www.beilstein-institut.de/en/projects/mirage/). At this point, only a few glycoinformatics resources are collecting
raw data for further availability to the community. While channelling
the structural data (mass spectrometry (MS), NMR, etc.) through a pipeline is essential, only partial consideration has
been given and mainly focused on N- and O-linked glycans. GlycoPOST is the first implementation of a
working MS data repository but remains
rather confidential, especially in the GAG community. Nonetheless,
a pipeline to translate GAGs sequences into a conventional computer-readable
format and generate corresponding 3D models was first attempted to
move the field forward. Despite the long
way to go, the cited initiatives are not attempted in isolation. However,
they can be integrated within the global alliance named GlySpace, formed to step up the definition and adoption
of good glycoinformatics practices and to coordinate research data
processing.

## FAIR and TRUST Principles
In the context of open science,
four guiding principles, Findability, Accessibility, Interoperability
and Reusability (FAIR), underline the
practice of systematic data sharing to chart new horizons. Findability
(F) is indispensable because data search is a frequent task
that should be easy for the largest community of life scientists.
It primarily requires that data and related metadata (information
supplementing data) are associated with a unique and persistent identifier
and, secondarily, readability by humans and computers. Accessibility
(A) involves retrieval using these identifiers with a standardized
protocol such as hypertext transfer protocol (HTTP). Interoperability
(I) is a crucial constraint in attempts to merge or integrate
data from different sources. Data must be described with standard
languages reflecting knowledge representations, commonly known as
ontologies, otherwise also qualified as controlled vocabularies. Reusability (R) can be achieved through well-described metadata,
data provenance, and community standards. The precise recording and
depiction of the heterogeneous experimental and theoretical information
is a definite challenge. Besides, it should be reckoned that in contemporaneous
purpose-focused research, only a limited fraction (approximately 10%)
of the data leading to the results are reported in the published studies.
While many data are not fully characterized, the lack of information
on the metadata (explaining and characterizing the measured or computed
data), the ontologies (the relationships in metadata), and the workflow
of different research groups are difficult to adjust. As a result,
most research data are neither findable nor interoperable.
Nonetheless,
to boost expected changes and ease programmatic access, all members
of the GlySpace Alliance have developed Application Programming Interfaces
(APIs) in their respective resources, enabling data exposure and sharing
for any user in compliance with FAIR principles. When data and metadata
are fully and unambiguously characterized (and results reproducible),
they can be combined with different studies, utilized in different
contexts, and used for deeper analysis and data mining. FAIR was recently
reinforced by TRUST (Transparency, Responsibility, User focus, Sustainability, Technology)
principles that mainly account for the previously missing time component
and emphasize the difficulty of maintenance in the longer term. If FAIR has gained recognition in the past
decade and shaped many bioinformatics initiatives, TRUST is just beginning
to unveil more delicate issues of maintaining resources while coping
with the constant evolution of technology and respecting user needs.

## Cross-Referencing
Within the disciplines covered in
the present article, not all comply with one or several FAIR principles.
A large proportion of research and the vast majority of data is not
utilized in chemistry. The existing digital ecosystem surrounding
scholarly data publication prevents the maximum extraction that would
benefit from research investments. On the whole, the chemistry community,
at large, does not have an inherent FAIR culture. It should go beyond
conventional Open Access to journal articles and provide access to
chemistry-specific data, such as molecules and properties, in a form
that can be validated and reused. Organic synthesis is often based
on personal experience and tricks, which are not readily shared with
others.
Nevertheless, many important data sets emerge from traditional,
low-throughput bench science. These data sets are no less critical
concerning integrative research, reproducibility, and reuse. Linking
those experimental, theoretical, and biological data using common
schemes and ontology will generate a new level of the science of GAGs.

## Data Modeling
The use of computational methods receives
ever-growing attention due to hardware, algorithmic data, and software
evolution. Such development allows for capturing three-dimensional
structures over several temporal and spatial orders of magnitude.
Implementing multiscale data faces many challenges due to the heterogeneity
of simulation setups, force fields, etc. as well as the heterogeneity
of the meaning of the produced data. Related to this heterogeneity
is accuracy, as error bars are usually missing, which impacts the
interoperability of the data with experimental results. Concerning
the data volume in molecular dynamics calculations, it is hardly possible
to store all the information, i.e., the detailed
time evolution of the positions of all the atoms, as they are several
thousand. Selection and compression strategies must be developed to
deal with the type and amount of data.

## Big Data and AI Approach
Ultimately, standardized,
structured, and well-annotated data can accumulate and provide opportunities
to train models and improve the prediction of GAG behavior in definite
contexts or environments. Recent impressive progress in using Deep
Learning methods such as AlfaFold for predicting protein 3D structure demonstrates the worth of collecting well-characterized
data shaped over a long period. Closer to GAGomics, Deep Learning
approaches have also mushroomed lately for predicting glycan protein
interactions (LectinOracle, GlyNet, ref of D Mattox) thanks to the
availability of large amounts of glycan array data. This trend will
likely expand in the coming years, emphasizing all points made earlier
in this section, leading to deciphering the many unknowns embedded
in GAGs.

## Acknowledgments
This article is based upon work from COST Action
INNOGLY CA 18103, supported by COST (European Cooperation in Science
and Technology).

## Author Contributions
S.P., D.N.,
S.R.-B. created the general concept and led the planning of the separate
written contributions provided by all the authors. S.P. organized
the article’s structure and wrote the article from the submitted
contributions. O.M. processed the manuscript and managed all bibliographic
references. All authors, whose names appear in alphabetic order, carefully
read and edited the whole article. CRediT: Serge Perez conceptualization, writing-original draft, writing-review &
editing; Olga Mashkakova writin-original draft, software,
visualization and editing; Jesus Angulo writing-original
draft; Emiliano Bedini writing-original draft; Antonella Bisio writing-original draft; José
L. de Paz writing-original draft; Elisa Fadda writing-original
draft, writing-review & editing; Marco Guerrini writing-original
draft; Michal Hricovini writing-original draft; Milos Hricovini writing-original draft; Frederique Lisacek writing-original draft; Pedro M Nieto writing-original
draft; Kevin Pagel visualization, writing-original draft; Giulia Paiardi writing-original draft; Ralf P. Richter writing-original draft, writing-review & editing; Sergey
A. Samsonov writing-original draft; Romain R Vives writing-original draft; Dragana Nikitovic conceptualization,
supervision; Sylvie Ricard-Blum conceptualization, writing-original
draft, writing-review & editing.

The authors
declare no competing financial interest.

This paper was
published ASAP on
March 2, 2023, with an error in an author’s name. The corrected
version reposted March 13, 2023.

## References