eLifeElife1894elifeeLifeeLife2050-084XeLife Sciences Publications, LtdPMC4854515PMC4854515.1485451548545152707046210.7554/eLife.13446134461Research ArticleCell BiologyDevelopmental Biology and Stem CellsActivation of PTHrP-cAMP-CREB1 signaling following p53 loss is essential for osteosarcoma initiation and maintenance
WaliaMannu K ). While the mutation of TP53 itself is a common event, how this contributes to the initiation of cancer is incompletely understood. The most prevalent mutations are point mutations that result in proteins with altered function ( ). Extensive analysis of these mutations using mouse models has revealed the pervasive cellular consequences of mutant P53 ( ; ; ). In osteosarcoma (OS), the most common primary tumour of bone, unique genomic rearrangements and other mutation types most often result in null alleles of P53 ( ; ). The reason for this distinct TP53 mutational preference in osteoblastic cells, the lineage of origin of OS, is not understood, nor are the signaling cascades that are altered in p53-deficient osteoblastic cells that facilitate the initiation of OS. Understanding how the loss of P53 modifies osteoblast precursor cells to enable OS initiation will provide new avenues to improve clinical outcomes.
OS occurs predominantly in children and teenagers and 5 year survival rates have plateaued at ~70% for patients with localised primary disease and ~20% for patients with metastatic or recurrent disease ( ; ). The advances in the understanding of OS biology and genetics have brought limited patient benefit to date or changes in clinical management. Sequencing of OS using both whole genome and exome approaches identified the universal mutation of TP53 accompanied by recurrent mutation of RB1, ATRX and DLG2 in 29%-53% of cases ( ; ; ). The OS predisposition of Li-Fraumeni patients and mouse models support the key role of p53 mutation in OS: Trp53+/- and Trp53-/- mice develop OS in addition to other tumors while conditional deletion of Trp53 in the osteoblastic lineage results in full penetrance OS, largely in the absence of other tumor types ( ; ; ; ; ; ). The consequence of p53 loss in osteoblastic cells is only understood to a limited extent. A more complete understanding of the pathways impacted by loss of p53 will be important to understanding the rewiring of osteoblastic cells that underlies OS initiation.
Genetic association studies (GWAS) in OS have identified changes in cyclic AMP (cAMP) related processes as predisposing to OS. A GWAS defined two OS susceptibility loci in human: the metabotropic glutamate receptor GRM4 and a region on chromosome 2p25.2 lacking annotated transcripts ( ). GRM4 has a role in cAMP generation. A GWAS in dogs with OS identified variants of GRIK4 and RANK (TNFRSF11A), both involved in cAMP pathways ( ). Using a murine OS model induced by an osteocalcin promoter-driven SV40T/t, OS were identified that deleted a regulatory subunit of the cAMP-dependent protein kinase (PKA) complex, Prkar1a, or with amplification of Prkaca, the PKA catalytic component ( ). A recent transposon mediated mutagenesis OS model recovered both activating and inactivating mutations within cAMP related pathways, but no functional analysis was performed ( ). Evidence from multiple species implicates enhanced cAMP-PKA activity in OS. Osteoblastic cells are highly sensitive to cAMP levels, and major regulators of the osteoblast lineage such as PTHrP/PTH increase cAMP and activate cAMP-dependent signaling ( ). The requirement for these pathways in OS initiation and maintenance has not been tested.
Parathyroid hormone (PTH) and PTH-related protein (PTHrP) are key regulators of osteoblast and skeletal homeostasis ( ; ). PTHrP and PTH activate their common receptor, PTHR1 ( ; ). Binding to PTHR1 on osteoblasts or OS cells activates adenylyl cyclase, stimulates cAMP production, followed by PKA activation, leading to many of the transcriptional changes associated with PTH/PTHrP treatment ( ; ; ; ). In normal osteoblasts PTHrP is produced by osteoblastic lineage cells and acts in a paracrine manner upon other osteoblastic cells at different stages of differentiation ( ; ). The long-term administration of PTH(1–34) resulted in a high incidence of OS in rats ( ). Elevated expression of PTHR1 is a feature of human and rodent OS ( ; ). PTHrP was expressed in murine OS subtypes ( ), placing it as a plausible ligand for activating PTHR1 signaling. It is presently unknown how PTHrP might act in OS. The consequence of PTH/PTHrP signaling via cAMP-PKA is phosphorylation of the cAMP response element binding (CREB1) protein ( ). CREB1 regulates gene expression through the activation of cAMP-dependent or -independent signal transduction pathways ( ).
We sought to understand how loss of p53 leads to the initiation of OS. We identified that an early consequence of p53 deletion in osteoblastic cells was increased cAMP levels and the autocrine activation of cAMP signalling via PTHrP. This same signaling node is active in OS and was important in both the initiation and maintenance of OS. The activation of the PTHrP-cAMP-CREB1 axis was required for the hyperproliferative phenotype of Trp53 deficient osteoblasts and the maintenance of established OS, identifying this as a tractable pathway for therapeutic inhibition in OS.

## Results

## cAMP and CREB1 dependent signaling are activated in Trp53 -deficient osteoblasts
As inactivating mutations of TP53 are universal in conventional OS, we used this to model an OS initiating lesion ( ). Primary osteoblasts were isolated from R26-CreERT2ki/+Trp53+/+ (WT) and R26-CreERT2ki/+Trp53fl/fl (KO) animals and in vitro tamoxifen treatment was used to induce deletion of p53. Over 20 days culture, a loss of expression of p53 target genes in the KO cultures + tamoxifen occurred, compared to both WT and non-tamoxifen treated isogenic R26-CreERT2ki/+Trp53fl/fl cultures ( ). Given the strong association between osteoblastic differentiation, OS and cAMP signaling, we assessed if pathways were impacted by loss of p53. CREB1 transcriptional target genes were identified from ChIP and ChIP-Chip studies of CREB genomic occupancy ( ; ). Only those targets that associated with CREB1 in response to cAMP activation were considered. Analogously, p53 target genes were defined from a ChIP-seq dataset from human HCT116 cells ( ) and further refined against a second independent dataset of p53 ChIP-seq from murine embryonic fibroblasts ( ). Strikingly, the expression of CREB1 target genes was increased, inversely paralleling the reduction in p53 target genes ( , ). Similar gene expression results were obtained using shRNA against Trp53 in primary WT osteoblasts, demonstrating that the observed changes did not result from proliferation differences ( ). The altered transcript levels were reflected at the protein level, where loss of p53 was associated with an increase in total CREB1 and phosphorylated CREB1 (pCREB1) in the KO cells ( ). Interestingly, the KO cultures had increased cAMP levels compared to WT or isogenic controls ( ). Collectively, these results demonstrate that derepression of cAMP/CREB1 pathways is an early event following Trp53 mutation in osteoblasts. 
 

The tamoxifen treated Trp53-KO osteoblasts hyperproliferate after ~15 days ( ), coinciding with the loss of p53. Coinciding with the increased proliferation of the p53-deficient cultures was an increase in cAMP per cell and an activation of CREB1 target genes, potentially explained by the increased Pthlh expression (also known as Pthrp, ). As elevated PTHrP would increase cAMP levels, the involvement of both CREB1 and PTHrP in the p53-deficient response was assessed. Primary osteoblasts from the respective genotypes were infected with two independent shRNAs against either Creb1 or Pthlh then cultured ± tamoxifen. Efficient and stable knockdown of Creb1 and Pthlh mRNA respectively was confirmed in both WT and KO cultures before tamoxifen treatment ( , ). The p53-WT cells were largely unaffected by the shRNA’s independent of tamoxifen treatment, except for an initial delayed proliferation in shCreb1 cultures ( ). The control (shLuc) infected KO osteoblasts hyperproliferated following tamoxifen treatment from day 15 onward ( ). In contrast, knockdown of either Creb1 or Pthlh completely prevented the hyperproliferation of the KO + tamoxifen cells ( , ). Therefore, intact PTHrP and CREB1 signaling are required for the hyperproliferation of p53 deficient osteoblasts.
Finally, to assess the requirements for PTHrP and CREB1 in p53-deficient osteoblasts, we infected cells with the respective shRNAs after they had been cultured for 21 days with tamoxifen, such that the cells had already undergone the hyperproliferative transformation prior to knockdown. The p53-KO osteoblasts underwent apoptosis within 48 hr of knockdown with either shCreb1 or shPthlh whilst the isogenic control (-tam) cultures were minimally affected ( ). The knockdown of PTHrP/CREB1 led to an expected downregulation of PTHrP-CREB1 targets ( , ). The hyperproliferative effect of loss of Trp53 in osteoblastic cells required PTHrP and CREB1.

## Autocrine PTHrP is a primary stimulus of cAMP in OS
Having established the necessity of PTHrP and CREB1 for the hyperproliferation and survival of p53-deficient osteoblasts, we sought to understand the contribution of this pathway in OS. We systematically profiled the contribution of PTHrP, cAMP and CREB1 in primary cell cultures derived from murine OS models compared to primary osteoblasts. We made use of the Sp7(Osx)-Cre Trp53fl/flRb1fl/fl model (Cre:lox deletion of Trp53 and Rb1; referred to as fibroblastic OS) which yields a OS characterised by predominant areas of fibroblastic or poorly differentiated/undifferentiated ( ) histology and a cell surface phenotype consistent with immature osteoblasts ( ; ). The second model was the Sp7(Osx)-Cre TRE_shp53.1224Rb1fl/fl model (shRNA knockdown of Trp53; referred to as osteoblastic OS) which histologically resemble osteoblastic OS with large mineralized areas, appreciated by von Kossa staining or microCT, and a cell surface phenotype of mature osteoblasts ( ). The early passage cells from both models have comparable genetic and pharmacological sensitivities to those of primary human patient derived OS cultures where tested ( ; ). As a control population (referred to herein as “primary osteoblasts”), we isolated osteoblastic cells from the collagenase digested long bones of wild-type C57BL/6 mice. These cells are negative for haematopoietic markers (lineage markers, CD45, CD11b, F4/80), negative for the endothelial cell surface marker CD31 and co-express CD51 and Sca-1. The majority of the cells have a cell surface phenotype consistent with pre-osteoblasts (lin-CD45-CD31-CD51+Sca1+) when the cultures are initiated, and when induced to differentiate acquire a mature osteoblast/osteocyte gene expression profile.
We first assessed PTHrP given that PTHrP stimulates cAMP generation following activation of PTHR1, ultimately leading to CREB1 phosphorylation and transcriptional activation ( ). Osteoblastic OS cells expressed high levels of Pthlh transcript ( ), consistent with our previous data identifying substantial levels of intracellular PTHrP in OS cells ( ). As other GPCRs are expressed on OS cells, such as β-adrenergic receptors ( ), we sought to determine if PTHrP was an OS autocrine ligand. Cells were treated with the phosphodiesterase inhibitor, IBMX, without adding exogenous PTHrP, thus assaying the cAMP induced by autocrine activation of receptor-linked adenylyl cyclase by ligand(s) provided by the OS cells. Treatment with a neutralising anti-PTHrP antibody significantly and substantially reduced cAMP levels ( ) ( , ). Using the shRNAs against Pthlh, a >50% reduction in the cAMP accumulation was observed ( , ). The reduction of cAMP levels by Pthlh knockdown or by antibody mediated PTHrP neutralization are consistent with OS–derived PTHrP as an endogenous ligand promoting cAMP accumulation. 
 

Knockdown of Pthlh ( ) reduced the proliferation ( ), transcription of known target genes ( ) and the levels of pCREB1, and surprisingly, total CREB1 in OS cells at early time points post infection ( ). Correspondingly there was a significant reduction in the basal expression of CREB1 target genes ( ). Next, cell survival 48–72 hr after shRNA infection was assessed. Primary osteoblasts were largely unaffected by Pthrp knockdown. In contrast there was a rapid induction of apoptosis following Pthlh knockdown in OS cells ( ). To determine the contribution of elevated PTHrP expression on OS initiation, we retrovirally overexpressed PTHrP in wild-type primary osteoblasts. Surprisingly, the cells overexpressing high levels of PTHrP failed to thrive and a significant proportion underwent cell death indicating that PTHrP overexpression alone is not sufficient to support OS initiation ( ). Two different fibroblastic OS lines infected with control (sh-Luc) or sh-Pthlh_A were grafted subcutaneously in vivo and both had significantly reduced proliferation as measured by tumor weight ( ), comparable to the effects of shPthr1 knockdown in the same OS lines ( ). These results demonstrate that PTHrP is a critical, OS cell-derived stimulus of the elevated cAMP in OS.

## Elevated cAMP levels in OS lead to sustained CREB1 activation
We next assessed basal cAMP levels in normal osteoblasts and the two OS subtypes in unstimulated proliferating cultures (with and without phosphodiesterase inhibition but no exogenous ligand treatment). OS cells produced significantly greater amounts of intracellular cAMP compared to primary murine osteoblasts ( , ). Furthermore, treatment with the direct cAMP agonist forskolin in the presence of IBMX resulted in an increased and sustained accumulation of cAMP in OS compared to primary osteoblasts ( ). Without IBMX the relative responses to forskolin remained the same, albeit with lower cAMP levels ( ). 
 

Based on the elevated cAMP in OS, we tested the dynamics of CREB1 phosphorylation in serum starved cells to acute elevation of cAMP induced by forskolin. Induction of pCREB1 was rapid in normal osteoblasts, peaking at 30 min, then reducing throughout the 120 min time course as expected ( ). In contrast, OS cells displayed continuous and persistent activation of pCREB1, consistent with the cAMP levels ( ). The OS-specific altered dynamics of cAMP and pCREB1 resulted in aberrantly extended transcriptional activation of known CREB1 target genes based on both transcript expression and chromatin occupancy of CREB1/pCREB1 ( , ). The requirement for CREB1 in the transcription of these targets in fibroblastic OS was confirmed using siRNA ( ). Importantly, there was no evidence of compensation for loss of Creb1 by the related Crem1 in either OS subtype ( ) ( ).

## OS cells fail to reduce CREB1 activity during maturation
We assessed the levels of pCREB1, the downstream transcriptional effector of cAMP signaling, in proliferating OS cells compared to primary osteoblasts. CREB1 was more prominently phosphorylated in the osteoblastic OS than in either the fibroblastic OS or primary osteoblasts ( ). qRT-PCR using independent OS cultures and primary osteoblasts demonstrated that the mean Creb1 expression was 2–3 fold higher in osteoblastic OS compared to fibroblastic OS and primary osteoblasts ( ). Analysis of RNA-seq from human OS revealed a significant increased in the expression level of Creb1 in OS compared to normal osteoblasts ( ) ( ). During culture in differentiation inductive conditions, CREB1 levels reduced over the first 7 days in osteoblasts and stayed low for the remainder of the culture ( , ). In contrast, OS cells maintained CREB1 expression under the same conditions ( , ). The decrease in CREB1 expression (both transcript and protein levels) upon differentiation was confirmed in primary human osteoblasts ( ).
In human OS, somatic SNV mutations in negative regulators of cAMP levels were described, including members of the phosphodiesterases (PDE), A kinase anchoring proteins (AKAP) and protein phosphatases (PP) ( ). There was a 2–3 fold decreased expression of several members of these gene families in the murine OS cells compared to primary osteoblasts ( , ). The reduced expression of PDE, AKAPs and PPs would be expected to favour the accumulation and action of cAMP following GPCR activation.

## Constitutively active cAMP differentially impacts primary osteoblasts and p53-deficient OS
As intracellular cAMP increased following p53 deletion in primary osteoblasts, we sought to determine the effect of elevated cAMP levels on normal osteoblast differentiation. Primary osteoblasts were treated with the forskolin and their response compared to that of OS cells ( ; ). Forskolin stimulates cAMP independently from cell surface GPCRs so was used instead of PTHrP, allowing a meaningful comparison of the isolated consequences of elevated cAMP as undifferentiated primary osteoblasts express less PTHR1 compared to the OS cells ( ).
After 72 hr treatment, primary osteoblasts had altered cell surface phenotypes and reduced expression of Runx2 and Osx ( ) ( ). Brief exposure to forskolin (24 hr) yielded the same result ( ). During differentiation, cAMP activation led to decreased expression of differentiation markers and failure to normally mineralise ( , ). Therefore continuously elevated cAMP increased features associated with immature osteoblasts. In OS cells, the cell surface phenotypes and expression of Runx2 and Sp7 were the inverse of primary osteoblasts after 72 hr forskolin treatment ( , ). Under differentiation conditions, forskolin induced less profound changes in the expression of markers of osteoblast maturation, with the exception of Osteocalcin ( ), and resulted in increased mineralization ( , ). To determine the consequences of CREB1 retention in OS cells, CREB1 was knocked down using both shRNAs (3’UTR, CDS) in fibroblastic OS cells and differentiation evaluated ( ). Both early and late markers of maturation were reduced with sh-Creb1 ( ). Mineralization was significantly reduced in sh-Creb1 expressing cells compared to controls ( ). The level of intracellular cAMP achieved with forskolin treatment is significantly higher that that achieved by cell derived autocrine/paracrine stimuli, such as secreted PTHrP ( ). These levels likely reflect maximal stimulation through the cAMP pathway in these cells which yields a distinct biological effect on primary osteoblastic cells compared to OS derived primary cultures. Therefore continuously elevated cAMP has distinct effects on the behaviour of normal osteoblasts and OS. 
 

## OS subtypes have a differential dependence upon CREB1
Reducing PTHrP levels caused apoptosis of OS cells and also reduced levels of CREB1/pCREB1 ( , ). To determine if loss of CREB1 impacted OS cell survival similarly we assessed the effects of Creb1 knockdown. In all cohorts there was loss of CREB1 protein ( ). CREB1 knockdown in primary osteoblasts caused reduced proliferation in the first week then the cells recovered and proliferated similarly to control infected cells thereafter, with no apparent effect on survival ( ). Loss of CREB1 in fibroblastic OS cells resulted in sustained proliferation impairment, yet cell survival was not appreciably impacted ( ). Knockdown of CREB1 in osteoblastic OS, the most common clinical subtype, caused profound proliferation arrest and apoptosis ( ). The effect was so complete that we have not been able to establish stable sh-Creb1 expressing cultures from the osteoblastic OS. The phenotype was observed with both sh-Creb1 constructs and in ≥3 independent cultures. Therefore, CREB1 is dispensable for normal osteoblast function yet required for proliferation of fibroblastic OS and survival of osteoblastic OS. 

## OS subtypes can be discriminated by CREB1 target gene signatures
Given the subtype specific effects of CREB1 knockdown, we sought to determine if CREB1 gene signatures could be used to appreciate differences between the subtypes. We modelled our analysis on the evidence that PTHrP was the endogenous ligand leading to cAMP accumulation and CREB1 activation. We defined a PTHrP-specific gene signature bioinformatically from previous microarrays comparing PTHrP(1–141) to PTH(1–34) in differentiating osteoblasts ( ). The top 45 candidates from the signature were validated. Using proliferating primary osteoblasts, fibroblastic OS and osteoblastic OS cells, 32 of the 45 genes were most highly expressed in the osteoblastic OS ( ). Archetypal CREB1 target genes were all more highly expressed in osteoblastic OS ( , ). Chromatin immunoprecipitation-PCR (ChIP-qPCR) demonstrated enrichment of active pCREB1 and serine 2 phosphorylated RNA polymerase II (pPolII), a mark of active transcription, on CREB1 target genes in osteoblastic OS ( , ) ( ). Promoter binding was generally lower in the fibroblastic OS, consistent with the expression patterns of the target genes. The enhanced binding of CREB1 in osteoblastic OS corresponded to the elevated levels of cAMP and osteoblastic OS is characterised by increased CREB1 activity. 

## Somatic SNV mutations in human OS overlap with the cAMP-CREB1 interactome
Mutations and oncogenic effects of the cAMP pathway have been described in the context of other tumor types, including breast ( ; ; ; ) and haematological malignancies ( ; ; ; ; ) amongst other tumors. The mutational landscape of OS has been recently defined, identifying 1704 somatic single nucleotide variations (SNV mutations) across 20 cases of sporadic conventional OS ( ). To determine if these somatic SNV mutations were functionally related, we assessed pathways enriched within the somatic SNV mutations ( ). In the top 20 pathways were signatures associated with ion channel complexes, transmembrane transporter complexes, PI3K signaling, calcium channel signaling, and protein kinase A (PKA) activity, all of which are related to cAMP ( ). Based on this result, we compared the somatic SNV mutations of human OS to the 169 genes comprising the KEGG cAMP interactome. To determine if this was OS specific or a more generalised feature of tumors, we further compared the cAMP interactome with whole genome sequencing that identified SNV mutations of other human cancers ( ; ; ; ; ). Genes within the cAMP interactome were most highly enriched within the somatic SNV mutations of human OS ( ). These data suggest that, despite the diverse mutational pattern of somatic SNV mutations in human OS, recurrent and enriched changes in the cAMP and CREB1 pathways occur in OS. 

## Discussion
There remains an incomplete understanding of the cellular rewiring that accompanies the loss or null mutation of TRP53. Although the p53 pathway can be targeted, most interventions aim to activate or restore function of the mutant P53 protein, an approach not feasible in null settings ( ), the most common case in OS ( ). The identification of critical cellular pathways that are activated/altered in response to TRP53 deficiency may yield novel avenues to test therapeutically.
Using the fact that loss/mutation of TRP53 is essentially universal in OS, we modelled an initiating lesion in primary osteoblastic cells and used this to understand the consequences in these cells. Several lines of evidence have implicated the cAMP pathway in OS, yet the functional requirement for this pathway has not been evaluated. We recently demonstrated a role for PTHR1 in OS proliferation and maintenance of the undifferentiated state ( ). We therefore sought to determine if these pathways intersected in the p53 deletion dependent initiation and maintenance of OS. There was a co-ordinated increase in Pthlh, cAMP per cell and CREB1 levels and transcriptional activity when osteoblasts became functionally p53-deficient. This was unexpected, as it suggested that a very early event in the initiation of OS following the loss of p53 is the activation of the PTHrP→cAMP→CREB1 signaling axis. Whilst the detailed processes through which p53 loss activates this pathway is to be resolved, these results demonstrate that this is an essential pathway in the manifestations of the p53-deficient phenotype in osteoblastic cells. Furthermore, we demonstrated that this pathway was also required for the survival of osteoblasts rendered p53-deficient prior to loss of PTHrP or CREB1. Therefore, activation of the PTHrP→cAMP→CREB1 signaling axis appears to be a core component of the rewiring of osteoblastic lineage cells in response to loss of Trp53 ( ).
Our results, together with prior studies implicating cAMP pathways in OS, indicate that elevated cAMP signaling could be considered oncogenic in OS. Forcibly increasing intracellular cAMP in normal osteoblasts retained them in an immature state, consistent with the recent report identifying forskolin as an inducer of pluripotency ( ). Analysis of human OS identified somatic SNV mutations in a number of negative regulators of cAMP levels ( ). Inactivating mutations in these would be predicted to elevate PKA and CREB1 activity. Khokha and colleagues identified mutations in Prkar1a using a murine model of OS, with a corresponding PRKAR1A low human OS subset defined ( ). In the same study, mutually exclusive amplification of the α-subunit of PKA (Prkarca) was also reported. Our data reconcile these observations and indicate that the increased PKA-CREB1 activity is ultimately important for this tumor, in that it has evolved mechanisms ensuring elevated and persistent cAMP levels mediated primarily by autocrine production of PTHrP and modulated by reduced expression of negative regulators of cAMP activity. In normal physiology, PTHrP acts in a paracrine manner whilst in OS, as reported here, there is capacity for PTHrP to act in an autocrine and paracrine manner, as well as intracrine activities. Reducing PTHrP levels was tolerated by normal osteoblasts but not OS cultures.
While mutations promoting accumulation of cAMP are important, the stimulus of cAMP had not been defined. We demonstrate that PTHrP is a key OS cell-intrinsic inducer of cAMP. PTHrP is required for normal bone homeostasis via its actions upon osteoblastic cells ( ). The functions of PTHrP in malignant osteoblast biology, however, have not been resolved. Reducing PTHR1 expression on OS cells enhanced differentiation and mineralization in vivo ( ). There was a trend to greater levels of PTHrP, notably intracellular, in osteoblastic OS compared to fibroblastic OS ( ). These data are consistent with the present measurements of pCREB1 levels in the subtypes and the CREB1 dependence of the osteoblastic OS. We did not previously impact OS in vivo using a neutralizing anti-PTHrP antibody ( ). We reconcile the failure to achieve a therapeutic dose of antibody in vivo with high concentrations of PTHrP likely within the immediate cell environment in OS ( ). The reduction in CREB1 levels when PTHrP was reduced was unexpected, raising the possibility to be explored, that PTHrP may contribute to maintenance of CREB1 levels in an analogous manner to the role of JAK2 in preventing proteasomal degradation of CREB1 ( ). Coupled with the present data, targeting PTHrP is a candidate therapeutic strategy in OS, although any intracrine contribution of PTHrP needs to be evaluated. The therapeutic targeting of components downstream of PTHrP/PTHR1 signalling may also be feasible, with several recent reports of inhibitors of CREB signalling activity ( ; ), although these are yet to progress to preclinical evaluation.
The management of OS has not substantively changed for the last three decades. The identification of the pathways that are utilised during the evolution from osteoblastic lineage cells to OS cells may reveal new means to target this tumour. Recent sequencing and modeling has revealed the genetic complexity and diverse mutational patterns of OS, yet underlying these data is the recurrent and universal inactivation of the P53 pathway ( ; ). The Notch pathway has been implicated in OS and is potentially druggable, however the evidence from human OS is equivocal as mutations in this pathway are not common in sporadic OS ( ). Recent work from two groups using whole genome screening identified the PI3K/mTOR pathway as a conserved therapeutic vulnerability in OS, demonstrating the power of understanding the biological networks underpinning OS ( ; ). The identification of pathways synthetically lethal with p53-deficiency, or that are required for the maintenance of p53 deficient phenotypes, will yield new means to target these cells. Using this approach we have defined a requirement within the osteoblast lineage for continuous PTHrP and CREB1 activity for the initiation and maintenance of OS, yet normal osteoblasts could tolerate the depletion of both of these factors. A striking feature of the requirement for CREB1 was the differences between OS subtypes. The OS subtypes could be discriminated from normal osteoblasts and each other based on the progressive enrichment of CREB1 gene signatures that reflected their dependence on this pathway for proliferation and survival. These observations raise the largely unexplored possibility that OS subtypes are at some level genetically distinct and have different biological dependences. Collectively, the constitutive activity of the PTHrP-cAMP-CREB1 axis, tightly coupled to loss of p53, represents an essential node in OS that is amenable to therapeutic inhibition at multiple levels.

## Materials and methods

## Study approval
All experiments involving animals were approved by the Animal Ethics Committee of St. Vincent’s Hospital, Melbourne. Primary human osteoblasts were isolated from bone marrow aspirates from the posterior iliac crest of de-identified healthy human adult donors with informed consent and consent to publish (IMVS/SA Pathology normal bone marrow donor program RAH#940911a, Adelaide, South Australia).

## Animals
Balb/c nu/nu mice (ARC, Perth, WA) were used as recipients for transplant of OS cell lines. For in vivo tumor growth 25,000 (OS80) or 75,000 (OS494H) cells were implanted subcutaneously on the back flank of Balb/c nu/nu recipients ( ). Cells were resuspended in extracellular matrix (Cultrex PathClear BME Reduced Growth Factor Basement Membrane Extract). All animals received sh-Luc infected cells on one flank and sh-Pthlh infected cells on the alternate flank.

## OS cell cultures and normal osteoblastic cells
Primary mouse OS cell cultures were derived from primary tumors from each of the two mouse models of OS and were maintained and studied for less than 15 passages ( ; ) (all cells used were obtained directly from primary and metastatic tumor material isolated directly from genetically engineered mouse models of OS, no further authentication performed by the authors, mycoplasma negative as tested by PCR based assay by the Victorian Infectious Diseases Reference Laboratory). Normal mouse osteoblastic cells were derived from crushed and collagenase digested long bones of 8-wk old C57BL/6 mice. Osteoblastic cell populations were purified either by FACS (FACSAria, BD Biosciences, San Jose, CA) as previously described ( ; ), or directly cultured following collagenase digestion (all primary osteoblasts were isolated directly from mouse long bone, no further authentication performed by the authors, not tested for mycoplasma). All cell cultures were maintained in αMEM (Lonza, Basel, Switzerland) medium supplemented with 10% fetal bovine serum (Sigma, St. Louis, MO, USA; non heat inactivated), 2 mM Glutamax (Life Technologies, Carlsbad, CA, USA), and except in siRNA transfection experiments, 100 U/ml penicillin and streptomycin (Life Technologies) antibiotics. Cells were cultured in a humidified 5% CO2 atmosphere at 37° Celsius.
Normal human osteoblasts were derived from bone marrow aspirates from the posterior iliac crest of healthy human adult donors (17–35 years of age), with informed consent (IMVS/SA Pathology normal bone marrow donor program RAH#940911a). The cells were outgrown from the bony spicules that were collected following filtration of the BM through a 70 μm filter ( ). The human osteoblasts were obtained directly from primary human bone material, no further authentication performed by the authors, not tested for mycoplasma.

## In vitro differentiation of OS cell lines, and primary osteoblasts
All cells were seeded at 3000 cells/cm2 on 6-well plates in αMEM with 10% FCS three days prior to differentiation induction. When cells had reached 100% confluence (Day 0), control cells were harvested, and all other cells were replenished 3 times per week with osteoblastic differentiation media: αMEM (Lonza), 10% (v/v) FBS, 25mM HEPES, 1% (v/v) (Gibco), Penicillin-Streptomycin (Gibco), 2 mM GlutaMAX (Gibco), 50 μg/ml ascorbate (Sigma), 0.01 M β-glycerophosphate (Sigma).

## cAMP response assays
Three independent cell lines from each group were used. 500 and 1000 cells from each group were seeded in triplicates in a 384 well plate. Cells were treated for 1 hr +/-100 μM Isobutylmethylxanthine (IBMX) before measuring intracellular cAMP. Intracellular cAMP was measured using the LANCE ultra cAMP kit (Perkin Elmer, AD0262) as directed by the manufacturer. Kinetics of cAMP was demonstrated using 10 μM forskolin over a time course of 2 hr. For the agonist treatment experiment 1000 cells were seeded as described, then treated +/-100 μM IBMX before adding 10 μM forskolin following a time course of 2 hr. Intracellular cAMP was measured as described above. For shRNA infected cells, 48 hr post infection cells were treated with 100 μM IBMX and assayed for intracellular cAMP by radioimmunoassay as described ( ). Where indicated cells were treated with 10 μg/ml anti-PTHrP neutralizing antibody at 37°C for 5 hr ( ). To compare cAMP levels between different cells equal number of cells were seeded.

## siRNA knockdown
Cells were transfected 24 hr after seeding with Dharmacon On-Target Plus siRNA pools (GE Healthcare Life Sciences, 20 nM final concentration) complexed with DharmaFECT3 (GE Healthcare Life Sciences) in Opti MEM reduced serum media (Life Technologies). Cells transfected with a non-targeting On-Target Plus control siRNA pool or mock transfected cells served as controls. All assays were carried out in culture medium without antibiotics. Cells were transfected for 72 hr with siRNA pool directed against Creb1 along with the non-targeting control siRNA. After 72 hr incubation with siRNA, the control and the Creb1 knockdown cells were treated with 10 μM of forskolin to assess Creb1 target gene induction.

## ON-TARGETplus smart pool siRNA-Creb1
Target sequence 1:J-040959-12; Target sequence: UUUGUUAACUUCCGAGAAA
Target sequence 2:J-040959-11; Target sequence: GCUAUUGGCCUCCGGAAA
Target sequence 3:J-040959-10; Target sequence: GCUGAGUAUUAUAGCGUAU
Target sequence 4:J-040959-09; Target sequence: GAUAAGAGUAAGUCGAGA

## Plasmids and constructs
Two independent lentiviral shRNA plasmids targetting Creb1 (A= 3’UTR; TRCN0000096629; B= CDS; TRCN0000096658) and Pthlh (A= 3’UTR; TRCN0000179093; B= CDS; TRCN0000180583) were purchased from Sigma-Aldrich in the pLKO.1-puro vector. The pLKO.1-puro sh-Luciferase plasmid (Cat No. SHC007) was used as the control for the Sigma shRNA constructs. Lentiviral packaging vector psPax2 (plasmid #12260) was obtained from Addgene (Cambridge, MA, USA), the pCMV-Eco Envelope (Cat No. RV112) vector was purchased from Cell Biolabs (San Diego, CA, USA). Three independent cell lines from each group were infected with shRNA against Creb1, Pthlh or luciferase control. After 48 hrs cells were selected with 2μg/ml puromycin.

## shRNA sequences
Pthlh 3’ UTR (TRCN0000179093):
CCGGCCAATTATTCCTGTCACTGTTCTCGAGAACAGTGACAGGAATAATTGGTTTTTTG
Pthlh CDS (TRCN0000180583):
CCGGGATACCTAACTCAGGAAACCACTCGAGTGGTTTCCTGAGTTAGGTATCTTTTTTG
Creb1 3’ UTR (TRCN0000096629):
CCGGGCCTGAAAGCAACTACAGAATCTCGAGATTCTGTAGTTGCTTTCAGGCTTTTTG
Creb1 CDS (TRCN0000096631):
CCGGCAGCAGCTCATGCAACATCATCTCGAGATGATGTTGCATGAGCTGCTGTTTTTG
Luciferase CDS (TRCN0000072259):
CCGGCGCTGAGTACTTCGAAATGTCCTCGAGGACATTTCGAAGTACTCAGCGTTTTT

## Alizarin staining for mineralization
Cells were washed 3 times with PBS and fixed with 70% EtOH. Cells were washed 3 times with water then stained with 0.5% alizarin (w/v) in water for 30 min at room temperature. This was followed by 3 washes with water and a 15 min wash in 1 ml of PBS while shaking. PBS was removed and plates were allowed to dry. Well images were then taken using an EPSON perfection V700 photo scanner. Alizarin dye was eluted overnight in 1 ml of 10% CTP (1-Hexadecylpyridinium chloride, w/v) in PBS with shaking. To construct a standard curve, a 1 mM solution of alizarin was dissolved in PBS aided by sonication, and 2-fold serial dilutions were made beginning from 400 μM. 200 μl of each serial dilution and 200 μl of eluted dye from each well were added separately to duplicate wells in a 96 well plate. The absorbance was read at OD562nm using a Polarstar optima+ microplate reader.

## Flow cytometry
OS cell lines (less than passage 5 from establishment) were prepared by trypsinization. Antibodies against murine CD45, Mac1, Gr1, F4/80, B220, IgM, CD2, CD3, CD4, CD8, Ter119, Sca1, CD51, PDGFRα (CD140a), CD31, either biotinylated or conjugated with eF450, PE, PerCP-Cy5.5, or APC were obtained from eBioscience (San Diego, CA) or Pharmingen. Biotinylated antibodies were detected with Streptavidin-Qdot605 (Invitrogen). Flow cytometry was performed on an LSRII Fortessa (BD Bioscience) interfaced with CellQuest software, data was analyzed on FlowJo (TreeStar).

## Annexin V staining
OS cells (3 independently derived fibroblastic and osteoblastic OS cultures) and primary osteoblasts were infected with 2 independent shRNA against Creb1 and Pthlh. shRNA directed against luciferase (sh-Luc) was used as the control. Cells were infected for 48–72 hr prior to harvesting by trypsinization. Cells were washed then stained in 1x Annexin Binding buffer (eBioscience) diluted 1:20 with Annexin V-APC (1 mg/ml) (eBioscience) and 7-Aminoactinomycin D (7AAD) (100 μg/ml) (Life Technologies) for 15 min. Following the addition of 4 volumes of 1x Annexin Binding buffer, apoptotic cells were detected and quantified using FACS (LSRFortessa). Live cells (Annexin V negative, 7AAD low) and cells in early and late stages of apoptosis (Annexin V positive, 7AAD low/high) were quantified.

## PTHrP overexpression
Murine HA tagged Pthlh cDNA was generated by gene synthesis (Integrated DNA Technologies) and cloned into the retroviral MSCV-IRES-Zeocin. Constructs were sequence verified. Retrovirus was generated by transient transfection of 293T cells (purchased from ATCC, no authentication performed, mycoplasma negative as tested by PCR based assay by the Victorian Infectious Diseases Reference Laboratory) using the EcoPac envelope plasmid as previously described ( ). Primary osteoblasts were infected by spin-infection with 8 μg/mL polybrene (Sigma). Levels of PTHrP were assayed by radioimmunoassay using UMR106.01 cells as previously described ( ) (derived by TJ Martin, no authentication performed, not mycoplasma tested).

## RNA extraction, cDNA synthesis and Quantitative realtime PCR (QPCR)
RNA was extracted using RNA extraction kits with on-column DNase digestion (Qiagen, Limburg, Netherlands; Bioline, London, UK) or TriSure reagent (Bioline). cDNA was synthesised from total RNA using a Tetro cDNA synthesis kit (Bioline) or AffinityScript cDNA synthesis kit (Agilent Technologies, Santa Clara, CA, USA). Gene expression was quantified on a Stratagene Mx3000P QPCR system (Agilent) using Brilliant II SYBR green QPCR master mix (Agilent) with primers specific to genes of interest (Primer sequences in ). Gene expression between samples was normalized to β2m expression. Relative expression was quantified using the comparative CT method (2-(Gene Ct – Normalizer Ct)). Samples were amplified in duplicate. 

## Western blotting
Protein lysates were prepared in RIPA buffer (50 mM Tris-HCl pH 7.4, 1% NP-40, 0.5% sodium deoxycholate, 0.1% SDS, 150 mM NaCl, 2 mM EDTA, 50 mM NaF). Protein (10–25 μg) was electrophoresed on 10% Bis Tris or 4–12% Bis-Tris gradient NuPAGE Novex protein gels (Life Technologies) and transferred to PVDF membrane (Merck Millipore, Billerica, MA, USA). Membranes were blocked in 5% skim milk in TBST (20 mM Tris, 150 mM NaCl, 0.1% Tween-20) for 1 hr before incubation with primary antibodies diluted in 5% skim milk in TBST overnight a 4°C, or for 1 hr at room temperature in the case of pan-ACTIN. All antibodies (p53 (1C12) Cell Signaling 2524) (Phospho-CREB (Ser133) Cell Signaling Technologies, #9198), Anti-CREB1 ChIP grade (ab31387) were used at 1:2000, except pan actin (Ab-5, Thermo Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA) that was used at 1:3000. Anti-PTHrP antibody (R88) was generated in house against PTHrP(1–15). IgG was extracted from whole serum using Protein G Sepharose 4B fast Flow (GE Healthcare Life Sciences, Cat number 17-0618-01). Protocol for PTHrP western is the same as described for CREB1 except 3% BSA was used for blocking instead of skim milk. Following four washes of 10 min in TBST, membranes were incubated with secondary goat-anti-mouse or goat-anti-rabbit HRP conjugated antibodies (Thermo Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA) diluted 1:10,000 in 5% milk in TBST for 1 hr at room temperature. Following four 10 min washes with TBST, membranes were exposed to ECL Prime (GE Healthcare Life Sciences, Piscataway, NJ, USA) and exposed to x-ray film to detect the expression levels of proteins.

## Chromatin immunoprecipitation
5x106 cells for each subtype were seeded and allowed to proliferate for 24 hr. An additional counting plate for each subtype was used as cell count control. Primary osteoblasts and OS cells were treated with 10 μM forskolin or 0.1% v/v DMSO for a time course of 2 hr or used in an unstimulated state (PTHrP- or forskolin- free). Adherent cells were fixed with 1% formaldehyde-PBS for 30 min at room temperature. Cross-linking was quenched by incubating cells with 0.125 M glycine diluted in PBS for 10 min at room temperature. Following two washes with PBS, cells were scraped and snap frozen as pellets at -80°C until use. Cell pellets were diluted in sonication buffer (1% SDS, 10 mM EDTA, 50 mM Tris-HCl pH 8.1) with protease inhibitors (Roche, Burlington, NC, USA) and the DNA sheared to lengths between 200–800 bp using a UCD-200 Bioruptor (Diagnenode, Denville, NJ, USA) on high at 4°C for a total shearing time of 15 min (90 min of 10 s on and 50 s off). Cell debris was cleared by centrifugation at 13,000 rpm for 10 min at 4°C and supernatants were diluted 10-fold in ChIP dilution buffer (0.01% SDS, 1.1% Triton X-100, 1.2 mM ETA, 16.7 mM Tris-HCl pH 8.1, 167 mM NaCl) with protease inhibitors. After removing 1% input for the total number of cells of each sample as an input control, samples were incubated with either 2 μg CREB1 antibody (Abcam: (ab31387), 2 μg of phospho-CREB1 antibody (Cell Signaling: 9198), 2 μg of phospho-Pol II antibody Abcam: (ab103968) and 2 μg of control rabbit IgG (Merck Millipore), or no antibody overnight at 4°C with rotation. Complexes were collected for 1 hr at 4°C with rotation with 60 μl of protein A sepharose beads (Invitrogen) that had been pre-blocked for 1 hr in 1 mg/ml BSA and 20 μg/ml of yeast tRNA (Sigma Aldrich, R5636). Beads were washed one time each with Low Salt buffer (0.1% SDS, 1% Triton X-100, 2 mM EDTA, 20 mM Tris-HCl pH 8.1, 150 mM NaCl), High Salt buffer (0.1% SDS, 1% Triton X-100, 2 mM EDTA, 20 mM Tris-HCl pH 8.1, 500 mM NaCl) and LiCl buffer (0.25 M LiCl, 1% NP40, 1% deoxycholate, 1 mM EDTA, 10 mM Tris-HCl pH 8.1), followed by two washes with TE buffer. Protein-DNA complexes were eluted from the beads (0.1 M NaHCO3, 1% SDS) at RT for 30 min with two rounds of elution. Protein was digested by incubation with 50 μg/mL of proteinase K at 45°C for 1 hr. RNA was digested by incubation with 10 μg/mL RNaseA at 37°C for 30 min. DNA was purified by two extractions with phenol:chloroform:isoamyl alcohol and ethanol precipitation. CREB1, pCREB1 and Pol II bound and input samples were analysed by QPCR using primers that amplified CREB1 target gene promoters or negative control regions (Sequences in and for respective ChIP conditions refer to ) 

## Bioinformatics and data mining

## Somatic SNV mutations within human OS and enriched cAMP related functional pathways
Somatic SNV mutations derived from WGS of human osteosarcoma was downloaded ( ). 1704 somatic SNV mutations comprising of insertions and deletions were subjected to pathway analysis. Analysis for functional pathways was performed using Cytoscape v3.1.1 (www.cytoscape.org) ( ;  ). Highly enriched pathways within the cAMP signaling were selected based on FDR. cAMP interactome data containing 169 genes within the Kegg pathway were downloaded (entry number: map04024). The data set was overlapped using Biovenn and Venny (BioinfoGP, CNB-CSIC Key: citeulike: 6994833) with SNV mutations derived from WGS of human osteosarcoma. The overlap between the two databases was considered. Please refer to the for the gene sets and the overlaps.

## Enrichment of somatic SNV mutations within the cAMP interactome
cAMP interactome data containing 169 genes within the Kegg pathway were downloaded (entry number: map04024). Data from the indicated human tumor sets was obtained from the analysed data files and compared as total somatic SNV mutations (all) or predicted non silent SNV mutations as indicated. The tumor somatic SNV mutation data sets were overlapped using Biovenn and Venny (BioinfoGP, CNB-CSIC Key: citeulike: 6994833) with the cAMP interactome. Log p values are calculated using the hypergeometric distribution (phyper function in R). The human set size of 39,227 is derived using all symbols from HGNC.

## RNA-seq and data analysis
RNA-Sequencing (RNA-Seq) was conducted at the Ramaciotti Centre for Genomics (University of New South Wales, Australia) on the Illumina HiSeq 2000 with 100 bp paired-end reads. Reads were aligned to the mouse genome build mm9/NCBI37 using Casava 1.7 and Bowtie v0.12.2 mapping software, normalized using Voom linear modeling ( ) and transcript abundance measured as reads per kilobase of exon per million mapped reads (RPKM) ( ). The datasets are deposited in GEO (accession number GSE58916).

## Statistical analysis
Data were presented as mean ± SEM. Statistical comparisons were performed in Prism 6.0 unless otherwise indicated. Parametric Student’s t-test, area under the curve or 2-way ANOVA with multiple comparison test were used for comparisons with p<0.05 considered as significant; Analysis of the enrichment for somatic SNV mutations within the cAMP interactome in each of the indicated tumor type was defined using hypergeometric distribution test (phyper function in R). P values as indicated in the Figure legend.

## Funding Information
This paper was supported by the following grants:
http://dx.doi.org/10.13039/501100000925National Health and Medical Research Council
APP1084230 to Mannu K Walia, T John Martin, Carl R Walkley.
Australian Sarcoma Study Group
Johanna Sewell Research Grant to Mannu K Walia, Carl R Walkley.
http://dx.doi.org/10.13039/501100000951Cancer Council Victoria
APP1047593 to Carl R Walkley.
Cancer Therapeutics CRC PhD Scholarship to Alvin JM Ng.
http://dx.doi.org/10.13039/501100003747Department of Health, State Government of Victoria
Operational Infrastructure Support Scheme to T John Martin, Carl R Walkley.
http://dx.doi.org/10.13039/501100000926Leukaemia Foundation
Phillip Desbrow Senior Research Fellowship to Carl R Walkley.
http://dx.doi.org/10.13039/501100000925National Health and Medical Research Council
APP559016 to Carl R Walkley.
http://dx.doi.org/10.13039/100008018Victorian Cancer Agency
Mid Career Research Fellowship MCRF15015 to Carl R Walkley.

## Acknowledgements
We thank the SVH BioResources Centre for animal care; S Paton for technical assistance; L Purton and J Heierhorst for comments and discussion; SVI Flow Cytometry Facility (M Thomson) for assistance with FACS analysis; the neutralizing monoclonal antibody against PTHrP was kindly provided by Chugai Pharmaceutical Co., Gotemba, Japan. This work was supported by grants: NHMRC Project Grant APP1084230 (to CW, MW, TJM); Australian Sarcoma Study Group Johanna Sewell Research Grant (to CW, MW); Cancer Council of Victoria APP1047593 (CW); Zig Inge Foundation (CW); NHMRC Career Development Award APP559016 (CW); Victorian Cancer Agency Mid-Career Research Fellowship MCRF15015 (CW); Cancer Therapeutics CRC PhD Scholarship (AN); in part by the Victorian State Government Operational Infrastructure Support Program (to St. Vincent’s Institute); CW was the Phillip Desbrow Senior Research Fellow of the Leukaemia Foundation.

## Additional information

## Competing interests
The authors declare that no competing interests exist.

## Author contributions
MKW, Conceived study, Performed experiments, Analyzed and interpreted data, Wrote the manuscript.
PMWH, Performed experiments, Analyzed and interpreted data, Drafting or revising the article.
ST, Performed experiments, Analyzed and interpreted data, Drafting or revising the article.
AJMN, Performed experiments, Analyzed and interpreted data, Drafting or revising the article.
AG, Performed experiments, Analyzed and interpreted data, Acquisition of data, Analysis and interpretation of data, Drafting or revising the article.
AMC, Performed experiments, Analyzed and interpreted data, Conception and design, Drafting or revising the article.
ACWZ, Performed experiments, Analyzed and interpreted data, Provided samples and reagents, Drafting or revising the article, Contributed unpublished essential data or reagents.
TJM, Conceived study, Performed experiments, Analyzed and interpreted data, Provided intellectual input and conceptual advice, Wrote the manuscript.
CRW, Conceived study, Provided intellectual input and conceptual advice, Wrote the manuscript, Acquisition of data, Analysis and interpretation of data.

## Ethics
Human subjects: Primary human osteoblasts were isolated from bone marrow aspirates from the posterior iliac crest of de-identified healthy human adult donors with informed consent and consent to publish (IMVS/SA Pathology normal bone marrow donor program RAH#940911a, Adelaide, South Australia).
Animal experimentation: This study was performed in strict accordance with the recommendations in the Guide for the Care and Use of Laboratory Animals of the National Health and Medical Research Council, Australia and the Bureau of Animal Welfare, Victorian Government. All of the animals were handled according to approved institutional animal care and use committee (Animal Ethics Committee) protocols (#017/15) of the St. Vincent's Hospital Melbourne.

## Additional files

## Major datasets
The following previously published datasets were used:
Chen X, Bahrami A, Pappo A, Easton J, Dalton J, Hedlund E, Ellison D, Shurtleff S, Wu G, Wei L, Parker M, Rusch M, Nagahawatte P, Wu J, Mao S, Boggs K, Mulder H, Yergeau D, Lu C, Ding L, Edmonson M, Qu C, Wang J, Li Y, Navid F, Daw NC, Mardis ER, Wilson RK, Downing JR, Zhang J, Dyer MA, St. Jude Children's Research Hospital-Washington University Pediatric Cancer Genome Project,2014,Recurrent somatic structural variations contribute to tumorigenesis in pediatric osteosarcoma,https://www.ebi.ac.uk/ega/studies/EGAS00001000263,Publicly available at the European Bioinformatics Institute (accession no. EGAS00001000263)
Berger MF, Hodis E, Heffernan TP, Deribe YL, Lawrence MS, Protopopov A, Ivanova E, Watson IR, Nickerson E, Ghosh P, Zhang H, Zeid R, Ren X, Cibulskis K, Sivachenko AY, Wagle N, Sucker A, Sougnez C, Onofrio R, Ambrogio L, Auclair D, Fennell T, Carter SL, Drier Y, Stojanov P, Singer MA, Voet D, Jing R, Saksena G, Barretina J, Ramos AH, Pugh TJ, Stransky N, Parkin M, Winckler W, Mahan S, Ardlie K, Baldwin J, Wargo J, Schadendorf D, Meyerson M, Gabriel SB, Golub TR, Wagner SN, Lander ES, Getz G, Chin L, Garraway LA,2012,Melanoma genome sequencing reveals frequent PREX2 mutations,http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/projects/gap/cgi-bin/study.cgi?study_id=phs000452.v2.p1&phv=167386&phd=&pha=&pht=2591&phvf=&phdf=&phaf=&phtf=&dssp=1&consent=&temp=1,Publicly available at dbGaP (accession no. phs000452.v1.p1)
Cazier JB, Rao SR, McLean CM, Walker AK, Wright BJ, Jaeger EE, Kartsonaki C, Marsden L, Yau C, Camps C, Kaisaki P, Oxford-Illumina WGS500 Consortium, Taylor J, Catto JW, Tomlinson IP, Kiltie AE, Hamdy FC,2014,Whole-genome sequencing of bladder cancers reveals somatic CDKN1A mutations and clinicopathological associations with mutation burden,https://ega-archive.org/search-results.php?query=egas00001000738,Publicly available at European Genome-Phenome Archive (accession no. EGAS00001000738)
Morin RD, Mungall K, Pleasance E, Mungall AJ, Goya R, Huff RD, Scott DW, Ding J, Roth A, Chiu R, Corbett RD, Chan FC, Mendez-Lago M, Trinh DL, Bolger-Munro M, Taylor G, Hadj Khodabakhshi A, Ben-Neriah S, Pon J, Meissner B, Woolcock B, Farnoud N, Rogic S, Lim EL, Johnson NA, Shah S, Jones S, Steidl C, Holt R, Birol I, Moore R, Connors JM, Gascoyne RD, Marra MA,2013,Mutational and structural analysis of diffuse large B-cell lymphoma using whole-genome sequencing,http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/projects/gap/cgi-bin/dataset.cgi?study_id=phs000532.v5.p2&phv=173801&phd=&pha=&pht=2979&phvf=&phdf=&phaf=&phtf=&dssp=1&consent=&temp=1,Publicly available at dbGAP (accession no. phs000532.v2.p1)
Tirode F, Surdez D, Ma X, Parker M, Le Deley MC, Bahrami A, Zhang Z, Lapouble E, Grossetête-Lalami S, Rusch M, Reynaud S, Rio-Frio T, Hedlund E, Wu G, Chen X, Pierron G, Oberlin O, Zaidi S1, Lemmon G, Gupta P, Vadodaria B, Easton J, Gut M, Ding L, Mardis ER, Wilson RK, Shurtleff S, Laurence V, Michon J, Marec-Bérard P, Gut I, Downing J, Dyer M, Zhang J, Delattre O; St. Jude Children's Research Hospital–Washington University Pediatric Cancer Genome Project and the International Cancer Genome Consortium.,2014,Genomic landscape of Ewing sarcoma defines an aggressive subtype with co-association of STAG2 and TP53 mutations,https://ega-archive.org/search-results.php?query=EGAS00001000855,Publicly available at the European Genome-Phenome Archive (accession no. EGAS00001000855)
Tirode F, Surdez D, Ma X, Parker M, Le Deley MC, Bahrami A, Zhang Z, Lapouble E, Grossetête-Lalami S, Rusch M, Reynaud S, Rio-Frio T, Hedlund E, Wu G, Chen X, Pierron G, Oberlin O, Zaidi S1, Lemmon G, Gupta P, Vadodaria B, Easton J, Gut M, Ding L, Mardis ER, Wilson RK, Shurtleff S, Laurence V, Michon J, Marec-Bérard P, Gut I, Downing J, Dyer M, Zhang J, Delattre O; St. Jude Children's Research Hospital–Washington University Pediatric Cancer Genome Project and the International Cancer Genome Consortium.,2014,Genomic landscape of Ewing sarcoma defines an aggressive subtype with co-association of STAG2 and TP53 mutations,https://ega-archive.org/search-results.php?query=EGAS00001000839,Publicly available at the European Genome-Phenome Archive (accession no. EGAS00001000839)
Ellis MJ, Ding L, Shen D, Luo J, Suman VJ, Wallis JW, Van Tine BA, Hoog J, Goiffon RJ, Goldstein TC, Ng S, Lin L, Crowder R, Snider J, Ballman K, Weber J, Chen K, Koboldt DC, Kandoth C, Schierding WS, McMichael JF, Miller CA, Lu C, Harris CC, McLellan MD, Wendl MC, DeSchryver K, Allred DC, Esserman L, Unzeitig G, Margenthaler J, Babiera GV, Marcom PK, Guenther JM, Leitch M, Hunt K, Olson J, Tao Y, Maher CA, Fulton LL, Fulton RS, Harrison M, Oberkfell B, Du F, Demeter R, Vickery TL, Elhammali A, Piwnica-Worms H, McDonald S, Watson M, Dooling DJ, Ota D, Chang LW, Bose R, Ley TJ, Piwnica-Worms D, Stuart JM, Wilson RK, Mardis ER,2012,Whole-genome analysis informs breast cancer response to aromatase inhibition,https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/geo/query/acc.cgi?acc=GSE29442,Publicly available at Gene Expression Omnibus (accession no. GSE29442)
Ellis MJ, Ding L, Shen D, Luo J, Suman VJ, Wallis JW, Van Tine BA, Hoog J, Goiffon RJ, Goldstein TC, Ng S, Lin L, Crowder R, Snider J, Ballman K, Weber J, Chen K, Koboldt DC, Kandoth C, Schierding WS, McMichael JF, Miller CA, Lu C, Harris CC, McLellan MD, Wendl MC, DeSchryver K, Allred DC, Esserman L, Unzeitig G, Margenthaler J, Babiera GV, Marcom PK, Guenther JM, Leitch M, Hunt K, Olson J, Tao Y, Maher CA, Fulton LL, Fulton RS, Harrison M, Oberkfell B, Du F, Demeter R, Vickery TL, Elhammali A, Piwnica-Worms H, McDonald S, Watson M, Dooling DJ, Ota D, Chang LW, Bose R, Ley TJ, Piwnica-Worms D, Stuart JM, Wilson RK, Mardis ER,2012,Whole-genome analysis informs breast cancer response to aromatase inhibition,https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/geo/query/acc.cgi?acc=GSE35191,Publicly available at the Gene Expression Omnibus (accession no. GSE35191)

 10.7554/eLife.13446.039Decision letter
CooperJonathan AReviewing editorFred Hutchinson Cancer Research Center, United StatesIn the interests of transparency, eLife includes the editorial decision letter and accompanying author responses. A lightly edited version of the letter sent to the authors after peer review is shown, indicating the most substantive concerns; minor comments are not usually included.
Thank you for submitting your work entitled "Activation of PTHrP-cAMP-CREB1 signaling following p53 loss is essential for osteosarcoma initiation and maintenance" for consideration by eLife. Your article has been favorably reviewed by three peer reviewers, and the evaluation has been overseen by a Reviewing Editor and Sean Morrison as the Senior Editor. One of the three reviewers has agreed to reveal his identity: Lawrence Donehower.
The reviewers have discussed the reviews with one another and the Reviewing Editor has drafted this decision to help you prepare a revised submission.
Summary:
The reviewers agree that your results strongly support an important role for autocrine/paracrine PTHrP-cAMP-CREB signaling in osteosarcoma pathogenesis. As you point out in the Introduction, increased PTHrP signaling in osteosarcoma has been observed previously, although PTHrP antibody treatment has not been effective in animal models (Ho et al., 2015). Your identification of the pathway as a key driver of osteosarcoma and the therapeutic opportunities it opens are very exciting discoveries. Conceptually, it would have been even more exciting if you could have somehow identified the molecular link(s) between loss of p53 and activation of PTHrP-cAMP-CREB signaling, but the reviewers are prepared to wait for another paper on this issue. Nonetheless, if you happen to have data that clarify this link, such data would strengthen the paper.
Essential revisions:
1) Tamoxifen-induced p53 deletion clearly causes an increase in PTHrP expression and subsequently cAMP production. The important results shown in should be expanded upon, and a cAMP time course should be shown following tamoxifen treatment. This experiment is important because the authors claim that derepression of the cAMP-CREB1 pathway is an "early event" following loss of p53, but only show cAMP levels at one time point.
2) The RNA-seq data in (an analysis of an already-published data set) shows nearly identical CREB levels in all 3 human osteoblast samples, with quite divergent levels in the OS samples. This important result should be expanded upon in more detail: do CREB levels change over the course of human OB differentiation? Ideally, additional normal samples would be included to strengthen this important finding. Along these lines, in all experiments where 'osteoblasts' are compared to various OS samples, the stage of osteoblast differentiation should be identified. The authors show clearly that CREB is down-regulated during osteoblast differentiation.
3) In addition to increased PTHrP levels in p53-depleted osteoblasts, reduced levels of PDEs, AKAPs, and PPs are observed. Is PTHrP overexpression alone sufficient to transform osteoblasts?
4) For all the experiments in , the degree of cAMP upregulation due to forskolin treatment is likely to be much greater than that observed from autocrine/paracrine PTHrP. Cyclic AMP levels should be measured and directly compared prior to drawing any conclusions from this figure.
5) In , a panel of 45 previously-determined PTHrP-responsive genes is measured in osteoblasts and OS cells. While it does appear that the PTHrP-responsive genes are more likely to be upregulated in osteoblastic OS, a more global comparison of gene expression in these samples would be helpful.
6) In , the conclusion that several of the GO categories enriched within OS-associated SNVs are "cAMP related" is somewhat problematic. Since cAMP is an extremely well-studied second messenger, it's not surprising that cAMP signaling has been associated with many of the GO terms identified. More rigorous methods are needed to justify the claim made. Are the GO terms more enriched in terms related to cAMP than cGMP signaling (for example)?
7) Similarly, the overlap between OS-associated SNVs and genes in the KEGG cAMP interactome is provocative, but it also appears that other malignancies (lymphoma, breast) have a significant overlap as well (albeit with higher p values). Is this due to a pathogenic role for cAMP signaling in these cancers? We do not expect new experiments to definitely address this issue, but would appreciate clarification of the implications of this observation for your model in the text.
10.7554/eLife.13446.040Author response
Summary:

The reviewers agree that your results strongly support an important role for autocrine/paracrine PTHrP/cAMP/CREB signaling in osteosarcoma pathogenesis. As you point out in the Introduction, increased PTHrP signaling in osteosarcoma has been observed previously, although PTHrP antibody treatment has not been effective in animal models (Ho et al., 2015). Your identification of the pathway as a key driver of osteosarcoma and the therapeutic opportunities it opens are very exciting discoveries. Conceptually, it would have been even more exciting if you could have somehow identified the molecular link(s) between loss of p53 and activation of PTHrP/cAMP/CREB signaling, but the reviewers are prepared to wait for another paper on this issue. Nonetheless, if you happen to have data that clarify this link, such data would strengthen the paper. We thank the editor and reviewers for their positive comments and for the opportunity to submit a revised version of our manuscript. We have incomplete preliminary data demonstrating that activation of the p53 response blunts the cAMP/CREB signalling response and would therefore only be in a position to speculate rather than provide a more definitive interpretation of the nature of the interaction. We are actively working on this and have initiated ChIP-seq experiments to resolve this at genome-wide resolution. We hope that you will find the revised manuscript with the additional data and text modifications as requested suitable for publication in eLife.
Essential revisions:

1) Tamoxifen-induced p53 deletion clearly causes an increase in PTHrP expression and subsequently cAMP production. The important results shown in should be expanded upon, and a cAMP time course should be shown following tamoxifen treatment. This experiment is important because the authors claim that derepression of the cAMP-CREB1 pathway is an "early event" following loss of p53, but only show cAMP levels at one time point.

We have included data from a detailed time course using primary osteoblasts isolated from R26-CreERT2ki/+p53+/+(WT) and R26-CreERT2ki/+p53fl/fl(KO) (new data – ). in vitrotamoxifen treatment was used to induce deletion of p53. Over 21 days culture, a loss of expression of p53 led to an acute rise in cAMP levels as compared to both wild-type controls and the non-tamoxifen treated isogenic cultures. R26-CreERT2ki/+p53+/+(WT) did not show any changes in cAMP levels compared to non-tamoxifen treated cells at the end of the time course. These data are consistent with the qPCR results in and indicate that the derepression of cAMP levels, and pathway activation as indicated by CREB1 transcriptional targets, is an "early event" following loss of p53. Note the new cAMP data replaces the original data and has been normalized to protein content, performed with a cAMP radioimmunoassay.
2) The RNA-seq data in (an analysis of an already-published data set) shows nearly identical CREB levels in all 3 human osteoblast samples, with quite divergent levels in the OS samples. This important result should be expanded upon in more detail: do CREB levels change over the course of human OB differentiation? Ideally, additional normal samples would be included to strengthen this important finding. Along these lines, in all experiments where 'osteoblasts' are compared to various OS samples, the stage of osteoblast differentiation should be identified. The authors show clearly that CREB is down-regulated during osteoblast differentiation.

The data used to assess CREB1 levels in was obtained from a publically available, previously published data set used in Moriarty et al. (Nat Genet. 2015 Jun;47(6):615-24) and this data set only contained 3 normal osteoblast samples. Whilst is would not be possible to add additional control osteoblast samples directly to this data set, we have now assessed the status of CREB1 expression (both transcript and protein) in 5 independent human primary osteoblasts samples obtained from normal human bone. Cells from independent donors were subjected to osteogenic differentiation conditions for 28 days. By transcript expression CREB1 reduces concomitant with the induction of osteoblast differentiation (as assessed by induction of transcripts associated with the transition to mature osteoblasts/osteocytes). This result in primary human osteoblast is highly comparable to the data we obtained with the primary murine long bone osteoblasts and supports that interpretation that in normal osteoblastic cells CREB1 levels reduce as the cells undergo differentiation. The new data is in .
The populations we refer to when we describe “primary osteoblastic cells” are cells isolated from crushed, collagenase digested murine lone bones (tibia/femur). These cells are isolated and plated onto tissue culture dishes, allowed to expand for 5-7 days and then used for experiments. By flow cytometry, these cells are negative for haematopoietic markers (CD45, CD11b, F4/80), negative for the endothelial cell surface marker CD31 and co-express CD51 and Sca-1. The majority of the cells have a cell surface phenotype consistent with pre-osteoblasts (lin-CD45-CD31-CD51+Sca1+) when the cultures are initiated and when induced to differentiate acquire a mature osteoblast/osteocyte gene expression profile. Whilst still relative heterogeneous (at least by haematopoietic population standards) these cells are a considerably more pure and comparable population to the osteosarcoma derived cells than any other alternative that doesn’t involve FACS sorting. We have included the following text:
“As a control population (referred to herein as “primary osteoblasts”), we isolated osteoblastic cells from the collagenase digested long bones of wild-type C57BL/6 mice. […] The majority of the cells have a cell surface phenotype consistent with pre-osteoblasts (lin-CD45-CD31-CD51+Sca1+) when the cultures are initiated and when induced to differentiate acquire a mature osteoblast/osteocyte gene expression profile.”
3) In addition to increased PTHrP levels in p53-depleted osteoblasts, reduced levels of PDEs, AKAPs, and PPs are observed. Is PTHrP overexpression alone sufficient to transform osteoblasts?

We thank the reviewers for this comment as it has prompted us to explore the direct role of PTHrP in primary osteoblasts. To access if PTHrP overexpression alone was sufficient to immortalize normal cells, we retro-virally expressed PTHrP in normal osteoblasts. To confirm the we had in fact overexpressed PTHrP, we performed a bioassay for PTHrP in the media of the infected cells and empty vector infected control osteoblasts (note that this assay is performed by collecting the tissue culture media from the infected cells and assaying cAMP production on an independent cell line, UMR106.01, that constitutively express PTHR1). This analysis confirmed overexpression of PTHrP.
When we assessed the primary long bone osteoblasts overexpressing PTHrP we were surprised to find that they were poorly proliferative with a large increase in the proportions of dead cells (as assessed by AnnexinV/7AAD staining). This result was reproducible and occurred in independent cultures. We therefore conclude that increased PTHrP alone is not able to immortalise osteoblastic cells. New data in .

4) For all the experiments in , the degree of cAMP upregulation due to forskolin treatment is likely to be much greater than that observed from autocrine/paracrine PTHrP. Cyclic AMP levels should be measured and directly compared prior to drawing any conclusions from this figure.

We agree that forskolin is a supra-physiological inducer of cAMP. We have now included direct measurement of intracellular cAMP. The levels induced by forskolin are significantly higher, likely the maximal stimulation of this pathway in these cells. We have modified the text (subsection “Constitutively active cAMP differentially impacts primary osteoblasts and p53-deficient OS”, and new data ) to reflect the measurements but believe that these experiments are still worthwhile and the biology reflects an important observation of the effects of elevated cAMP in osteoblasts compared to osteosarcoma cells. As PTHR1 levels are different between the wild-type osteoblasts and also between the OS subtypes (osteoblastic OS express more PTHR1 than fibroblastic OS) we used forskolin to allow a more meaningful comparison of the effects of elevating cAMP.

5) In , a panel of 45 previously-determined PTHrP-responsive genes is measured in osteoblasts and OS cells. While it does appear that the PTHrP-responsive genes are more likely to be upregulated in osteoblastic OS, a more global comparison of gene expression in these samples would be helpful.

We thank the reviewers for this suggestion. We have previously published an extensive characterisation of and comparison between the fibroblastic and osteoblastic OS models (see Mutsears et al., Bone 2013 Jul;55(1):166-78). This work included a global comparison of gene expression between these models and pathway analysis (GSEA). This comparison was limited to the two tumor subtypes. We do not presently have RNA-seq or microarrays of the primary osteoblasts as we have utilised in the present studies to allow a comparison across normal osteoblastic cells, fibroblastic and osteoblastic OS. Profiling of these normal populations is planned but has not been completed to date.

6) In , the conclusion that several of the GO categories enriched within OS-associated SNVs are "cAMP related" is somewhat problematic. Since cAMP is an extremely well-studied second messenger, it's not surprising that cAMP signaling has been associated with many of the GO terms identified. More rigorous methods are needed to justify the claim made. Are the GO terms more enriched in terms related to cAMP than cGMP signaling (for example)?

We thank the reviewers for this comment as it is an important consideration. We have reassessed the enrichment of somatic SNVs with the tumors datasets within the cAMP, cGMP and a data set that is exclusive to each (i.e. with the genes common to both pathways removed and the respective sets reassessed). This analysis confirms our original finding that there is a significant and profound enrichment of somatic SNVs within the cAMP pathway in OS. We see some enrichment of cGMP pathways components, but to a much lesser extend that the cAMP pathway components. This is not unique to this tumor type, but is most statistically enriched within OS of the tumor types that we have assessed. We have included this as a new figure supplement ( ).
7) Similarly, the overlap between OS-associated SNVs and genes in the KEGG cAMP interactome is provocative, but it also appears that other malignancies (lymphoma, breast) have a significant overlap as well (albeit with higher p values). Is this due to a pathogenic role for cAMP signaling in these cancers? We do not expect new experiments to definitely address this issue, but would appreciate clarification of the implications of this observation for your model in the text.
We do not mean to represent the activation of cAMP related pathways, and PKA in particular, as an OS unique event. It is well described in the contexts of other tumours, breast and haematological malignancies amongst other tumors, that this pathway is activated. We have amended the text, references and Discussion to reflect this. cAMP is regulated by the opposing effects of adenylyl cyclase and phosphodiesterases (PDEs). Both these components are regulated by a multitude of pathways like calcium signaling through calmodulin, G-proteins, inositol lipids and receptor tyrosine kinases. As many of these pathways are important for malignancies such as breast cancer and lymphoma, we would expect a significant enrichment of other malignancies within the cAMP component. What is notable is that OS is the highly enriched and the biological assessment of this pathway supports this.