Chem RevChem. Rev822acssdcrChemical Reviews0009-26651520-6890pmc-is-collection-domainyespmc-collection-titleACS AuthorChoicePMC4254030PMC4254030.1425403042540302527564410.1021/cr500255e1ReviewCurrent
and Potential Treatments for Ubiquitous but
Neglected Herpesvirus Infections
GableJonathan
E. AckerTimothy M. CraikCharles S. †Department
of Pharmaceutical Chemistry, University
of California, San Francisco, 600 16th Street, San Francisco, California 94158-2280, United States‡Graduate
Group in Biophysics, University of California,
San Francisco, 600 16th
Street, San Francisco, California 94158-2280, United States*E-mail: charles.craik@ucsf.edu. Phone: 415-476-8146.0210201426112014114222460962014 Drug Discovery and Development for Neglected Diseases11382114121305201402102015021020151108201524012026Copyright © 2014 American
Chemical Society2014American
Chemical SocietyThis is an open access article published under an ACS AuthorChoice License, which permits copying and redistribution of the article or any adaptations for non-commercial purposes.National Institutes of Health, United Statespmc-status-qastatus0pmc-status-liveyespmc-status-embargonopmc-status-releasedyespmc-prop-open-accessyespmc-prop-olfnopmc-prop-manuscriptnopmc-prop-legally-suppressednopmc-prop-has-pdfyespmc-prop-has-supplementnopmc-prop-pdf-onlynopmc-prop-suppress-copyrightnopmc-prop-is-real-versionnopmc-prop-is-scanned-articlenopmc-prop-preprintnopmc-prop-in-epmcyesdocument-id-old-9cr500255edocument-id-new-14cr-2014-00255eccc-price1

## Introduction
More than 90% of the world’s
population is infected with
a herpesvirus. Despite this staggering
fact, only a handful of approved drugs exist for the general treatment
of herpesvirus infections. To date, all of these drugs inhibit the
same enzyme, the viral DNA polymerase. Nine human herpesviruses have
been identified, and each has been associated with disease. In immune-competent
individuals, herpesvirus infections are the causes of unpleasant but
typically non-life-threatening diseases such as oral and genital herpes,
chickenpox and shingles, skin rash in infants (roseola infantum),
and infectious mononucleosis (also known simply as mono). In individuals
with immature or compromised immune systems, herpesvirus infection
can be devastating. Developmental disabilities, loss of sight and
hearing, cancer, life-threatening pneumonia, encephalitis (inflammation
of the brain), and death comprise only a partial list of the cost
herpesviruses have on well being in this subset of the population.
The tremendous complexity of herpesvirus biology brings with it
many potential avenues for therapeutic interventions that remain in
their infancy. However, the past two decades have seen progress toward
novel treatments for herpesviruses; this is the subject of the current
review. Previous reviews of the subject are either more than 10 years
old or cover a subsection of the field. Herein we provide a comprehensive
review of herpesvirus drug discovery with an emphasis on the most
recent advances in the field and their progression from early discovery
to clinical development. The focus is on small-molecule inhibitor
development so we do not cover biologics and vaccine development in
as much detail. There is little work on antiherpes biologics outside
the context of vaccine development, which is reviewed elsewhere. We will, however, discuss some exciting biologics
targeting viral polypeptides that appear to drive oncogenesis, though
they are not required for the viral replication cycle. The necessary
herpesvirus biology is introduced, and a more detailed review of that
biology/virology can be found elsewhere. By highlighting the exciting recent work in herpesvirus drug development,
and the historical studies that enabled it, we hope to spur interest
in the many potential therapeutic targets for this ubiquitous but
neglected virus family.

2

## Herpesvirus Biology
2.1

## Viral Classification
All herpesviruses
are large enveloped double-stranded DNA viruses. The viral genome
is composed of a linear chain of 125–290 kbp and contains ∼70–200
protein coding genes, depending on the specific virus. Herpesvirus
virions (the infectious particles) have three major components: the
nucleocapsid, the tegument, and the envelope. Herpesviruses have an
icosahedral nucleocapsid (T = 16) composed of 162
capsomeres (150 hexons and 12 pentons) where the viral genome resides.
A matrix of viral proteins called the tegument exists between the
lipid bilayer envelope and the nucleocapsid. The envelope contains
glycoproteins critical to cell attachment and entry. Virions are approximately
200 nm in diameter. 

2.2

## Subfamilies
The taxonomic family Herpesviridae consists of herpesviruses that infect mammals,
birds, and reptiles. This family does not include herpesviruses infecting
fish and frogs (Alloherpesviridae) or bivalves (Malacoherpesviridae). Human herpesviruses are further broken
down into three subfamilies, the α-, β-, and γ-herpesviruses
(Figure ). Differences in biology and genetics
give rise to these classifications. To date nine human herpesviruses
have been identified: herpes simplex virus 1 and 2 (HSV1 and 2, α),
Varicella zoster virus (VZV, α), human cytomegalovirus (HCMV,
β), human herpesvirus 6a, 6b, and 7 (HHV6a, 6b, 7, β),
Epstein–Barr virus (EBV, γ) and Kaposi’s sarcoma-associated
herpesvirus (KSHV AKA human herpesvirus 8 or HHV8, γ). All of
these viruses establish life-long latent infections with potential
for periodic lytic reactivation—and all can cause disease (Figures and ). 
 
2.3

## Cell
Tropism
The α-human herpesviruses
(HSV1, HSV2, and VZV; Figure ) establish latent
infection in cells of the peripheral nervous system. HSV1, the primary
cause of oral herpes, resides primarily in the trigeminal ganglia
while HSV2, the primary cause of genital herpes, tends to reside in
sacral ganglia. VZV, the etiologic agent of chickenpox and shingles,
latently infects both the trigeminal ganglia and the dorsal basal
ganglia. Primary infection with HSV1 and HSV2 occurs in mucoepithelial
cells where lytic replication also takes place. Unlike the herpes
simplex viruses, VZV requires transport from mucoepithelial cells
in the upper respiratory tract where infection is established to skin
cells where disease most often manifests. Infection of T-cells is
thought to enable this transport.
The β-herpesviruses
(HCMV, HHV7, and HHV6; Figure ) have a complex
cell tropism infecting an array of immune cells as well as endothelial
cells and fibroblasts. Polymorphonuclear leukocytes (PMNLs), peripheral
blood mononucleated cells (PBMCs) including macrophages and monocytes,
endothelial cells, and fibroblasts can all support both lytic and
latent infection in vivo. Hematopoietic stem cells
and CD14+ monocytes are thought to be the main source of reactivation. The trafficking of human β-herpesviruses
from among different cell types is an active area of research, particularly
for human cytomegalovirus. 
The γ-herpesviruses
infect epithelial, endothelial, and B
cells. For EBV both lytic and latent infection can take place in B
cells. EBV specifically infects B cells through interaction between
EBV envelope glycoproteins and complement receptor 2 (CD21) on host
cells. The exact site of primary infection and the mechanism by which
EBV is transferred from B cells to epithelial cells is still an area
of active research. Primary EBV infection may be mediated by epithelial
cells; however, some have postulated tonsillar B cells are the site
of primary infection as B cells are much more efficiently infected
than are epithelial cells. It is also
possible that both are implicated in primary infection. Numerous methods
have been proposed for cell-to-cell transfer of EBV, and this process
is thought to be critical for infection of epithelial cells. Nasopharyngeal carcinoma and oral hairy leukoplakia
both provide direct evidence for the importance of EBV infection in
epithelial cells. KSHV establishes and maintains latent infection
in CD19+ B cells. Multicentric Castleman’s disease and primary
effusion lymphoma are examples where disease manifests in B cells.
However Kaposi's sarcoma arises from endothelial infection, again
highlighting the importance of the complex cell tropism of γ-herpesviruses.
These KSHV-associated diseases are further discussed in section .

2.4

## Viral Replication Cycle
The viral
replication cycle is depicted in Figure .
During entry, the nucleocapsid is released from the envelope upon
fusion with the host cell membrane and is internalized. Dynein/dynactin
motor protein complexes then transport the nucleocapsid to the nucleus
along tubulin microtubules. Capsids bind nuclear pores, and their
DNA genome is released into the nucleus (Figure ).
In productive infection, the viral genome must be replicated.
A viral replisome composed of a DNA polymerase, the helicase-primase
complex, and an ssDNA-binding protein perform this task (Figure , replication). Cellular RNA Polymerase II generates
viral transcripts. A viral transactivator (i.e., HSV1 VP16), introduced
into the cell as part of the tegument, kick-starts a cascade of viral
gene expression controlled by the intermediate-early promoters. A
variety of viral proteins, such as endoribonucleases, rapidly affect
host mRNA stability, resulting in decreased expression of host proteins
and a competitive advantage for the translation of viral transcripts. The major capsid protein (MCP), assembly protein
(AP), and maturational protease (Pr) are expressed in the cytoplasm
and translocate to the nucleus where they assemble to form the immature
capsid. Processing by the viral protease allows for maturation of
the capsid, formation of the portal vertex, and ultimately encapsidation
of the viral genome by the terminase complex (Figure , capsid maturation). Once the
mature nucleocapsid has formed, it must associate with tegument proteins,
become enveloped, and egress from the cell (Figure , egress). Acquisition of the tegument was recently reviewed. The viral capsid is too large to be transported
through the nuclear pore. Instead, herpesviruses remodel host membranes,
a process mediated in part by viral kinases (i.e., HCMV pUL97, Figure ). Primary envelopment occurs with transport into
the inner nuclear membrane, de-envelopment with transport out of the
perinuclear space and into the cytoplasm, and finally secondary envelopment
moving from the cytoplasm to the extracellular space (Figure , egress). This process requires a range of viral
proteins and was recently reviewed. The
role of host and viral proteins in HCMV maturation, and its comparison
to that of other herpesviruses, was also recently reviewed. 
During latency, maintenance of the viral
episome varies between
herpesviruses, in large part based on whether the cells they latently
infect replicate. The α-herpesviruses infect cells of the peripheral
nervous system that do not normally replicate, so no DNA replication
or segregation is required. β- and γ-Herpesviruses establish
latency in replicative cells and thus require mechanisms to ensure
the viral genome is properly replicated and segregated into daughter
cells. Proteins such as latency-associated nuclear antigen (LANA)
in KSHV have evolved to do this, for instance, by tethering the viral
episome to host chromosomes during segregation and enabling replication
of the viral episome by host replisome machinery. EBV protein Epstein-Barr virus nuclear antigen 1 (EBNA-1)
plays a similar role. The β-herpesviruses
(Figure ), such as HCMV, have no known analog
of LANA/EBNA-1. The mechanism by which the β-herpesviruses maintain
life-long latent infection is still relatively poorly understood and
an area of active research. Recently Mücke et al. determined
that HCMV major immediate early 1 protein (ME1P) binds host nucleosomes
in a way analogous to that of LANA and postulated ME1P may play the
role of LANA/EBNA-1 for HCMV. 

3

## Unmet Clinical Need: KSHV- and HCMV-Associated
Disease
Although all of the human herpesviruses cause disease
and would
benefit from novel treatments, KSHV and HCMV cause especially devastating
disease in immunocompromised individuals. These patients may be living
in developing nations with limited resources, thus diminishing the
incentive for drug discovery targeting the diseases that affect them.
In other cases, such as congenital cytomegalovirus, regulatory concerns
and the difficulty associated with clinical trial recruitment can
disincentivize research in the field. For these reasons, and given
the theme of this journal issue, we focus our description of disease
on those associated with KSHV and HCMV infection. We also highlight
drug discovery efforts in this area, many of which are directly applied
or highly relevant to the other seven human herpesviruses.
3.1

## Kaposi’s Sarcoma-Associated Herpesvirus
(KSHV)/HHV8
KSHV was first discovered in 1994 during the
height of the AIDS pandemic in the United States. On the basis of
epidemiological data the scientific and medical communities suspected
Kaposi’s sarcoma (KS) had an infectious etiology. At that time,
human cytomegalovirus (HCMV), human herpesvirus 6 (HHV6), hepatitis
B virus, HIV, and Mycoplasma penetrans were all considered
possible causes; however, etiologic association between KS and these
infections was not established. Researchers
at Columbia University, New York, used representational difference
analysis to identify novel sequences found in KS lesions but not in
normal-tissue samples from the same patient. Two novel sequences were identified and characterized. The first
had a 51% sequence identity to herpesvirus saimiri capsid protein,
a γ-herpesvirus that infects New World Monkeys and causes lymphoma.
This sequence also had moderate sequence identity (39%) to Epstein–Barr
Virus (EBV) capsid protein, a known human herpesvirus-associated with
lymphoproliferative disorders. The second
sequence was homologous to protein in the tegument between the nucleocapsid
and the virus envelope of both herpesvirus saimiri and EBV. Later,
the full genome of KSHV was sequenced. 
The presence of KSHV DNA in KS lesions described in 1994 was
not, however, sufficient to provide a causal link, and this point
remained contentious as of 1995. Ganem
and colleagues provided critical evidence in support of the etiologic
connection between KSHV and KS. They first showed that most KS cells
exhibited latent infection. This, in combination with establishing
a cell line for the study of KSHV, enabled the development of a serologic
test against the latency-associated nuclear antigen (LANA), mirroring
an assay previously developed for the EBV homologue EBNA-1. Use of this assay determined whether the presence
of KSHV mirrored KS risk in different populations. For example, KS
risk was known to be higher for HIV-positive homosexual men than HIV-positive
patients who contracted HIV through exposure to blood products. Indeed,
this study established that KSHV infection tracks with KS risk and
suggested that KSHV can be sexually transmitted and does not always
accompany HIV infection (i.e., HIV-positive patients who contracted
infection from blood products had a rate of KSHV infection similar
to the HIV-negative population). By
1997, a strong case for a causal link between KSHV and KS had been
made. KSHV DNA was present in KS lesions, KSHV infection preceded
development of KS, KSHV infection tracked with risk of developing
KS, and KSHV was shown to infect the tissue implicated in disease
not only for KS but also for multicentric Castleman’s disease
and primary effusion lymphoma. 
KSHV, like all other herpesviruses, is a large enveloped double-stranded
DNA virus. It has a ∼165 kb genome and encodes 86 proteins.
The lytic stage of KSHV has a complex gene expression pattern and
includes formerly unappreciated small ORFs of unknown function. KSHV establishes latency in B cells but can
infect a variety of endothelial, epithelial, and hematopoietic cells.
The viral life cycle for KSHV mirrors that of other herpesviruses.
Integrins and heparan sulfate have been implicated in KSHV cell entry
via interaction with KSHV glycoproteins. Since integrins and heparan
sulfate are present on most cell types, it was not immediately apparent
why and how KSHV selectively infects endothelial cells and B cells.
Recently, it was shown that the ephrin receptor tyrosine kinase A2
is critical for viral cell entry and fusion with endothelial cells,
however not for cell attachment. 
After fusion and release of the nucleocapsid into the cytoplasm,
the viral genome is transported to the nucleus (Figure , entry). Once in the nucleus, viral DNA is transcribed. KSHV
has distinct genetic programs corresponding to latency and the lytic
cycle. Within the lytic cycle KSHV—like all other herpesviruses—has
immediate-early, early, and late genes. Latently expressed genes are involved in immune evasion and maintenance
of the latent infection. Lytic genes are involved in large part with
generation of new capsids and the productive spread of those capsids
to neighboring cells. Proteins involved in capsid assembly are expressed
in the cytoplasm, but viral capsid assembly occurs in the nucleus
of the cell. In a process mediated by the assembly protein-protease
fusion (AP/Pr, KSHV ORF17), a procapsid forms which then angularizes
with the removal of the assembly protein by cleavage from the major
capsid protein (Figure , capsid maturation).
Liberation of the assembly protein allows for conformational changes
and packaging of viral DNA into the nucleocapsid. The nucleocapsid
then exits from the nucleus, joins tegument proteins, acquires glycoproteins
and enveloping lipids, and ruptures from the cell (Figure , egress).

3.2

## HHV8-Associated Disease
3.2.1

## Kapsosi’s Sarcoma (KS)
Four
primary types of KS are observed: AIDS-KS, classic KS, iatrogenic
KS, and endemic KS. Endemic KS exists primarily in Central and Eastern
Africa and was observed prior to the HIV pandemic. This form of KS
often affects children with disseminated lymphadenopathy. Classic
KS typically affects elderly men of Mediterranean or Ashkenazi Jewish
origin. Iatrogenic KS occurs in patients that are immunosuppressed
for medical reasons, such as organ transplant. AIDS-KS is by far the
most prevalent form of KS, though its frequency in western nations
has diminished drastically with the availability of highly active
antiretroviral therapy (HAART). AIDS-KS remains an enormous health
burden in much of Sub-Saharan Africa where effective HIV/AIDS treatments
are not available and HIV/AIDS incidence is high.

3.2.2

## B Cell Malignancies: Primary Effusion Lymphoma
and Multicentric Castleman’s Disease
Both primary
effusion lymphoma (PEL) and multicentric Castleman’s disease
(MCD) arise from KSHV-infection of B cells. Their diagnosis, clinical
manifestations, and viral etiology have been recently reviewed. Most instances of PEL occur in HIV/AIDS patients.
These cases make up 4% of all HIV-related non-Hodgkin’s lymphomas.
Interestingly, PEL cancer cells have a B-cell genotype but do not
express B-cell antigens. This affects PEL treatment strategies (see
section below). Extensive mutations are
found in immunoglobulin genes of PEL B-cells. KSHV is found in all
PEL samples, but many HIV-positive KSHV-positive patients never develop
PEL. This has led to the conclusion that KSHV is necessary but not
sufficient for PEL. The high frequency of coinfection with EBV in
PEL cancer cells has led some to suggest EBV may be a cofactor that
acts in concert with KSHV to give rise to this lymphoma. This is highlighted
by an abundance of EBV latency protein EBNA1 and EBV microRNA expression,
both thought to play a role in tumorogenesis. 
KSHV is not necessary for MCD; however, KSHV infection is
found in roughly half of the cases in immunocompetent patients and
nearly all cases in the immunocompromised population. There are two
types of MCD, hyaline vascular and plasma cell types. The plasma cell
type is more common, especially in the disseminated multicentric Castleman’s
disease (as opposed to unicentric CD). A hallmark of MCD is cytokine disregulation, especially interleukin
6 (IL-6). This is due both to upregulation of human IL-6 as well as
expression of viral IL-6, an IL-6 mimic encoded by the KSHV genome. Recent success in treating MCD with anti-IL-6
or anti-IL-6 receptor antibodies strongly suggests a role for IL-6
in disease. A host of viral proteins
that suppress apoptosis are also implicated in tumorogenesis. Interestingly,
many of these are lytic genes suggesting that treatment with antiherpesvirus
drugs that target replicating (lytic) virus could be efficacious. 

3.2.3

## Current Treatments
Current treatments
for KS depend on epidemiological classification of the disease. AIDS-KS
treatment focuses primarily on anti-HIV/AIDS therapeutics—though
even with HAART only ∼50% of patients experience complete remission.
For this reason, chemotherapies and radiation are often also used
to treat KS. Liposomal anthracyclines such as Doxil and DaunoXome
are the most commonly used chemotherapy for KS. The anthracyclines
function through DNA intercalation. Paclitaxel (Taxol), gemcitabine
(Gemzar), and vinorelbine (Navelbine) can also be used. Paclitaxel
and vinorelbine are mitotic inhibitors, while gemcitabine is a fluorinated
nucleoside analog. Due to the side effects of these more traditional
chemotherapies an interest in immunotherapies for KS treatment has
arisen. For some time interferon α was used; however, this too
suffers from severe side effects. Clinical trials are ongoing for
drugs such as bevacizumab, interleukin-12, lenalidomide, pomalidomide,
bortezomib, and sorafenib though these are not yet approved for treatment.
Work on HIV vaccines and decreasing cost of antiretrovirals may still
be the best hope for much of the population suffering from AIDS-KS.
KSHV in vitro susceptibility to antiherpesvirus treatments
(Figure ) has been extensively tested with the general conclusion that
ganciclovir (1) was the most potent guanosine nucleoside
analog drug (discussed in section ). Only recently, it was shown in a randomized
double-blind clinical trial that valganciclovir (2),
the prodrug of ganciclovir (1), reduces viral load in vivo. This is consistent
with previous reports that note a reduction in KS frequency in HIV/AIDS
patients being treated with ganciclovir (1) for HCMV
infection, though no measurements of KSHV were made. Antiherpesvirus treatments have also shown utility in the
iatrogenic/organ transplant setting. In
combination, these studies suggest antiherpesvirus treatments such
as ganciclovir (1) and valganciclovir (2) aid in the treatment of KS but are not efficacious enough to be
used as monotherapies.
In an HIV/AIDS setting, HAART is recommended
for treatment of KS, PEL, and MCD. PEL and MCD are both lymphoproliferative
disorders; however, their treatment varies due to expression of B-cell
antigens in MCD and the lack thereof in PEL. For MCD (but not PEL),
rituximab, a chimeric monoclonal antibody that targets CD20 on B cells,
is often used in treatment. Valganciclovir
(2) as a component of combination therapy has also shown
some promise in clinical trials for KSHV-positive MCD treatment, consistent
with a strong correlation between viral replication and disease progression
and severity. Due to involvement of IL-6
and viral IL-6 (a KSHV-encoded IL-6 mimic), anti-IL-6 and anti-IL
6 receptor antibodies are also being investigated as possible treatments. This year an anti-IL-6 antibody, siltuximab,
was approved for the treatment of HIV-negative KSHV-negative MCD.
Unfortunately, siltuximab does not bind tightly to viral IL-6, and
so approval did not include KSHV-positive MCD that makes up about
half of cases in the immunocompetent population and nearly all cases
in immunocompromised individuals. , 
PEL
is not treated with rituximab because PEL tumors do not express
most B-cell antigens, including CD20. Instead, first-line PEL treatment
consists of standard chemotherapy combination treatments. Autologous
stem cell transplant is an additional option. Some temporary remission
has been seen with administration of antiherpesvirus agents directly
into the pleural cavity. However, this approach is thought to be hampered
by the fact that only a small population of infected cells in PEL
are undergoing lytic replication and are thus sensitive to current
antiherpesvirus agents. 

3.3

## Cytomegalovirus Disease
HCMV infects
a large segment of the population with overall age-adjusted seroprevalence
in the United States estimated at 50.4%. In countries such as Brazil, Chile, South Africa, Turkey, and India,
seroprevalence is estimated to exceed 90%. Importantly, seroprevalence increases substantially with age. During
their reproductive years many women and their partners are seronegative.
This leaves many pregnant women at risk of primary HCMV infection,
a high risk factor for congenital HCMV. This is especially the case
in countries with relatively low overall seroprevalence, such as the
United States, where the percent of seropositive women can nearly
double between women ages 12–19 and women ages 30–39. Transmission of infectious HCMV is through body
fluids into which the virus is shed such as saliva, tears, breast
milk, urine, genital secretions, semen, and blood. In the case of
congenital HCMV, transfer can be intrauterine. HCMV infection is largely
asymptomatic for individuals with a healthy immune system; however,
in neonates, organ transplant patients, and individuals with HIV/AIDS
this infection has devastating consequences as discussed below.
3.3.1

## Congenital Setting
The United States
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) estimates that 8000
children born in the United States each year suffer from permanent
health problems such as hearing and/or vision loss, mental disability,
seizures, or in rare cases death due to congenital HCMV infection. This outpaces the incidence of Down syndrome
(4000/yr), fetal alcohol syndrome (5000/yr), or spina bifida (3500/yr)
while receiving considerably less attention and awareness from the
public. In a recent review, Manicklal et al. describe how scientists,
doctors, and the public alike neglect congenital HCMV infection not
just in the United States, but also globally. The biology that gives rise to HCMV neuropathies and their resultant
developmental disabilities remains elusive and is reviewed elsewhere. Mounting evidence from clinical trials suggests
treating neonates confirmed to have HCMV disease with antivirals such
as ganciclovir (1) and valganciclovir (2) (discussed in section ) limits disease
manifestation, though it cannot reverse damage caused before birth
or prior to treatment. Pregnant mothers
cannot be treated with ganciclovir (1) due to documented
mutagenic character of this drug in animal studies, though valaciclovir
(3) may provide some benefit to these patients and their
children. These limited treatment options
have no approved guidelines in the United States. Given the potential
for severe toxicity in neonates and pregnant mothers, parents are
left with the challenge of weighing the risks of potential clinical
manifestation of HCMV in their children and the potential harm of
current treatments.

3.3.2

## Organ Transplant Setting
HCMV infection
causes significant morbidity and mortality in organ transplant patients,
operating primarily through symptomatic viremia (CMV syndrome), invasion
and damage of specific tissues, HCMV pneumonia, as well as an increased
chance of graft rejection. Improved diagnostics, prophylaxis, and
treatment of HCMV have significantly reduced mortality for organ transplant
patients infected with HCMV. As recently as the 1980s and early 1990s,
mortality due to HCMV pneumonia in bone marrow recipients was 70–95%. Today the incidence of HCMV pneumonia has been
much reduced, and mortality in that patient population is 15–50%,
still extremely significant but much improved. Overall mortality stands at 1–2%. The guanosine nucleotide analog ganciclovir (1) and its prodrug valganciclovir (2) have been critical
to this achievement and can be part of the standard of care for transplant
patients. Strategies and guidelines both in the United States and
internationally for managing HCMV infection in the solid organ transplantation
setting were recently reviewed. Despite
the relative success of these drugs, toxicity and emerging resistance
are substantial limitations of the current treatment paradigms. 

3.3.3

## HIV/AIDS Setting
End-organ disease
in the gastrointestinal track and eye are common manifestations of
HCMV infection in HIV/AIDS patients and uncommon in other settings.
It is unclear what gives rise to gastrointestinal symptoms in HIV/AIDS
patients and not in organ transplant or congenital settings. Current
studies cannot rule out contributions from pathogens other than HCMV.
HCMV retinitis however is a well-known symptom of both congenital
HCMV infection and infection in HIV/AIDS patients, though not in organ
transplant recipients. In severe cases of HCMV retinitis, loss of
vision can occur. Prior to the development of highly active antiretroviral
therapy (HAART), both systemic and topical antivirals were used to
treat HCMV infection in HIV/AIDS patients. One particularly interesting
treatment, fomivirsen, was the first antisense drug to be approved
by the FDA in August 1998. This antisense oligonucleotide prevents
HCMV replication by binding mRNA encoding the major immediate-early
transcription factor, a critical regulator of the viral lifecycle. Unfortunately this treatment is limited to HCMV
retinitis due to poor pharmacokinetics that require intraocular injection
as the route of administration.

3.4

## Assays
for Drug Discovery
Three broad
types of assays are available for herpesvirus drug discovery: in vitro assays with recombinant protein, cell culture viral
assays, and animal models of viral infection and disease. The first
type is highly varied, reflecting the multitude of targets available
in herpesvirus drug discovery. They are discussed throughout and include
measurements of kinase activity by Western blot, protease activity
through fluorogenic substrates, and fluorescence polarization to monitor
protein–protein interaction, to name a few.
Yield reduction
assays (YRA), plaque reduction assays (PRA), and cytopathic effect
assays (CPE) are common cell culture viral assays. CPE can be measured by visual microscopic inspection or
by any of a number of dyes: Crystal Violet dye stains the remaining
attached cells in a plate, neutral red dye stains the lysosomes of
live cells, and MTT/XTT/MTS dyes measure mitochondrial activity. If
a test compound prevents viral infection or the lytic cycle, then
fewer cells will die. CPE assays use a higher multiplicity of infection
than PRA assays. Plaque reduction assays also measure cell death.
Inoculums contain fewer virions such that infection of a monolayer
of cells gives rise to individual plaques that can be enumerated.
Each plaque is indicative of a viral infection. The plaque forms as
neighboring cells are infected and die. The yield reduction assay relies on extent of reinfection as a measure
of virion yield. Serial dilution of spent media containing virions
is used to reinfect fresh monolayers of cells, and the extent of reinfection
correlates with how many infectious virions were produced in the presence
of potential inhibitor. Extent of reinfection can be measured in numerous
ways including number of plaques, presence of a virally encoded fluorophore
such as GFP, or cell death. Alternatively,
an YRA can be performed via ELISA to directly quantify the amount
of virus in the media when appropriate antibodies are available.
Animal models for herpesviruses rely on the conservation of this
family of viruses throughout evolutionary history. For example in CMV, murine CMV (MCMV), rat CMV (RCMV),
guinea pig CMV (gpCMV), and rhesus CMV (RhCMV) are critical models
in drug and vaccine development. As in most fields, different animal
models afford different benefits. Mice and rat models of CMV have
a long history with well-understood immunology and great availability
of reagents. However, MCMV and RCMV cannot
cross the placental barrier and thus are not useful as models of congenital
CMV. In contrast, the ability of gpCMV to infect the fetus provides
a congenital model, although fewer reagents are available and gestation
periods are considerably longer. Animal
models for HCMV are reviewed in detail elsewhere. , Throughout this review we reference studies employing many of these
assays in the process of herpesvirus drug discovery.

4

## Nonprotease Drug Targets
4.1

## Current Treatments and
Their Molecular Mechanisms
of Action
All currently approved treatments in the United
States target the viral DNA polymerase (with the exception of the
antisense oligonucleotide fomivirsen which is limited to intraocular
injections for treatment of HCMV retinitis in HIV/AIDS patients).
Ganciclovir (1), valganciclovir (2), valaciclovir
(3), acyclovir (4), penciclovir (5), and famciclovir (6) are all guanosine analogs (Figure ). For the prodrug forms, valaciclovir (3), valganciclovir (2), and famciclovir (6), a valyl ester or an ester acetate group is cleaved to release
the parent compound. A viral kinase phosphorylates the drug to a monophosphate
form. Host kinases then convert the monophosphate to the active triphosphate.
The identity of the viral kinase responsible for that initial phosphorylation
event varies between herpesviruses and can be a source of resistance
mutations. The active triphosphate preferentially
inhibits the viral DNA polymerase and incorporates into the viral
DNA, preventing viral DNA replication. Acyclovir (4)
and ganciclovir (1) (as well as their respective prodrugs)
have different affinities for herpesvirus kinases. For instance, ganciclovir
(1) is a good substrate for HCMV UL97, but acyclovir
(4), while still phosphorylated by UL97, is a worse substrate.
Acyclovir (4) is a better substrate for the herpes simplex
virus thymidine kinases than it is for HCMV UL97. − , It is this variability that makes
ganciclovir (1) a more selective treatment for HCMV,
while acyclovir is commonly used to treat the α-herpesviruses.
Penciclovir (5) is a topical agent for the treatment
of oral herpes caused by HSV-1. Famciclovir (6), a prodrug
of penciclovir (5) with improved oral availability, is
used primarily to treat shingles (VZV, herpes zoster) and to a lesser
extent recurrent HSV-1 and HSV-2 infections.
Brivudine (7), foscarnet (8), and cidofovir (9) are also approved herpesvirus treatments targeting the viral DNA
polymerase; however, they are not guanosine analogs (Figure ). Brivudine [(E)-5-(2-bromovinyl)-2′-deoxyuridine, 7] is a thymidine analog used primarily for the treatment
of shingles (VZV, herpes zoster). It functions similarly to acyclovir
and is active as a triphosphate, monophosphorylated by the VZV thymidine
kinase and subsequently acted on by cellular kinases. Brivudine (7) is approved in some European and Central American countries. Cidofovir (9) is a cytidine analog.
In contrast to the guanosine analogs, it does not require the viral
kinase for phosphorylation to the active form. Host kinases phosphorylate
cidofovir (9) to the active diphosphate form where it
binds to and competitively inhibits the viral DNA polymerase, and
like the guanosine analogs, it is also incorporated into the viral
DNA, although two consecutive cidofovir incorporations are required
to fully inhibit HCMV DNA elongation. These two actions prevent viral DNA replication. Foscarnet (8) is phosphonoformic acid, a phosphonic
acid derivative. It acts at the pyrophosphate binding site of the
viral DNA polymerase, preventing chain elongation. It too does not
require phosphorylation by a viral kinase. Both cidofovir (9) and foscarnet (8) are
second-line treatments for resistant herpesvirus infection. Because
they rely solely on host kinases for conversion to the active form,
they can readily be used to treat patients with viral infections where
resistance mutations have arisen in a viral kinase, blocking guanosine
analog treatments. Unfortunately, foscarnet (8) and cidofovir
(9) also both require intravenous administration and
exhibit severe dose-limiting toxicities. Both can cause severe nephrotoxicity,
and cidofovir (9) can also cause myelosuppression. , 

4.2

## Improving Existing Treatments
Viral
DNA polymerase inhibitors are enormously successful drugs. While there
is a need for drugs with novel mechanisms of action, the track record
of success, well-understood ADMET characteristics, and clear opportunity
for improvement have driven continued development of molecules based
on these existing approved treatments.
4.2.1

## Nucleoside
Analogs
Efforts to improve
the original nucleoside analog, acyclovir, gave rise to compounds
such as valaciclovir (3), ganciclovir (1), and valganciclovir (2) that are now standard of care
treatments for herpesviral infection. Much of this history has been
previously reviewed in the literature. In the current review, we focus on guanosine nucleoside analogs
that have recently entered clinical trials for the first time. Cyclopropavir
(10) and valomaciclovir (11) are both novel
guanosine nucleoside analogs (Figure ). Cyclopropavir (10) is a dihydroxymethyl
methylenecyclopropane nucleoside analog that binds tightly to and
is phosphorylated by the HCMV protein kinase UL97. The monophosphate
form is then converted to the active triphosphate by cellular guanosine
monophosphate kinase. The triphosphate form inhibits the viral DNA
polymerase and prevents viral replication. As with other guanosine
analogs used to treat HCMV, resistance mutations for cyclopropavir
(10) map to UL97 kinase. Cyclopropavir’s potent
binding to UL97 makes it not only an inhibitor of viral DNA synthesis,
but also a competitive inhibitor of UL97. Cyclopropavir (10) is active against HCMV in cell culture and murine CMV in mice.
A phase 1 study to determine safety and pharmacokinetics of cyclopropavir
(10) in healthy volunteers was completed in August 2013.
Preclinical development on this chemical scaffold is ongoing. Monohydroxymethyl
(rather than dihydroxymethyl) methylenecyclopropane nucleoside analogs
with a broader antiherpetic activity and improved resistance profiles
were recently reported and appear to function similarly through a
UL97-mediated process. 
Valomaciclovir
(11), unlike cyclopropavir, is active against the α-herpesviruses
(HSV-1, HSV-2, and VZV) and EBV, but not the β-herpesviruses
or KSHV. Valomaciclovir (11) is a prodrug form of ([(R)-9[4-hydroxy-2-(hydroxymethyl)butyl]guanine] (H2G), an
antiherpesviral compound identified in the early 1990s. H2G, like
valomaciclovir (11), is most potent against the α-herpesviruses
and EBV, although some weak inhibition of HHV-6 and KSHV was observed. H2G had poor bioavailability in animal models,
and thus, analogs with short-chain alkyl esters, valine and divaline
esters, mono- or difatty acid esters, and diesters with an amino acid
and a long-chain fatty acid were generated to improve aqueous solubility
and cell permeability. Ultimately the stearyl/valyl diester found
in valomaciclovir (11) was found to be optimal. , Valomaciclovir phase 2 clinical trials for the treatment of shingles
(herpes zoster, VZV) and infectious mononucleosis (EBV) were completed
in 2009 and 2010, respectively. In August 2012 the results of a phase
2b randomized, double-blind, active-controlled trial versus valaciclovir
(3) for the treatment of shingles were reported. Noninferiority was achieved with the two highest
doses of once-daily valomaciclovir (11) when compared
to the approved active competitor, 3-times-daily valaciclovir (3). Small sample sizes (given the large coefficient of variation
in some measures) and a lack of placebo control were noted as concerns
for the study and reason to pursue additional trials with this compound.
No study results for the infectious mononucleosis trial have yet been
published, and the sponsor, Epiphany Biosciences, had not initiated
additional trials in the United States or European Union at the time
this review was written. 
Bicyclic
nucleoside analogs (BCNAs, Figure ) have recently been developed with high specificity for VZV,
selectively targeting the VZV thymidine kinase over even closely related
HSV-1 and HSV-2 thymidine kinases. BCNAs are not broken down by catabolic
enzymes, a problem that was observed with VZV inhibitor brivudine
[7, (E)-5-(2-bromovinyl)-2′-deoxyuridine,
BVDU]. That BCNAs are not broken down by catabolic enzymes was a welcome
result, providing additional stability and avoiding significant increases
in fluorouracil observed with BVDU (7) due to inhibition
of dihydropyrimidine dehydrogenase by the free base of BVDU (7), (E)-5-(2-bromovinyl)uracil. Unexpectedly,
the triphosphate forms of BCNAs are not detected in cells, and thus,
it is unclear whether BCNAs act via direct inhibition of DNA polymerase.
A valyl-ester prodrug, FV-100 (12), was developed from
the highly potent BCNA cf-1743 (3-(2-deoxy-β-d-ribofuanosyl)-6-(p-pentylphenyl)-2,3-dihydrofuro[2,3-d]pyrimidin-2-one) (13). A phase 2 active comparator
clinical trial against valaciclovir (3) in patients with
shingles (VZV, herpes zoster) was completed in 2010. While FV-100
(12) appeared to show some improvement over valaciclovir
(3) in reduction of pain related to shingles, this result
was not statistically significant and did not meet the primary end
point. After changing hands a number of times, FV-100 (12) is now being pursued by ContraVir. Careful clinical trial design
and outcome measurements could enable FV-100 (12) to
progress into the clinic. It will be exciting to see if these relative
newcomers in the long history of antiherpesvirus nucleoside analogs
make it to the clinic.
FV-100 (12), valaciclovir
(3), and valganciclovir
(2) are all peptidyl prodrugs of their parent compounds
(cf-1743 (13), acyclovir (4), and ganciclovir
(1), respectively). Taking this a step further, Velázquez
and colleagues have developed “double-prodrugs” of cf-1743
(13) and acyclovir (4). In these prodrugs
two enzymatic events must take place, cleavage of a peptide by proteases
and cleavage of a peptidyl-ester by any of a number of hydrolases. Previously this group established that peptides
cleaved preferentially by dipeptidyl peptidase could serve as the
“first” prodrug component. A variety of peptidyl esters,
including the valyl-ester used in valaciclovir, served as the “second”
prodrug component. These compounds exhibited better solubility, serum
stability, cell permeability, and oral bioavailability in mice. The
novel prodrugs were converted to their active compounds and had substantial
antiviral activity in cell culture. , 

4.2.2

## Nucleoside Phosphonates
CMX001
(Brincidofovir) (14), a lipid ester analog of cidofovir
(9), is an additional example of leveraging a tried-and-true
mechanism of action and a previously approved drug to produce a new
chemical entity with improved pharmacological qualities and efficacy.
Cidofovir (9) is a nucleoside phosphonate that targets
viral DNA replication both by inhibition of the viral DNA polymerase
as well as incorporation into viral DNA, preventing replication. Lipid ester analogs of cidofovir not only improve
bioavailability, but also improve antiviral activity by 3–4
orders of magnitude against HSV-1 and 2, VZV, HCMV, murine CMV, HHV-6,
EBV, and KSHV. Hexadecyloxypropyl cidofovir
(CMX001) (14) also showed activity against HCMV strains
resistant to standard of care, including unmodified cidofovir (9). Importantly, the incorporation of lipid esters enabled
oral bioavailability for a drug that previously could only be administered
intravenously. On top of that, it had significantly reduced accumulation
in the kidney, reducing the likelihood of the dose limiting nephrotoxicity
characteristic of cidofovir (9). Excitingly, CMX001 (14) has progressed through phase
1 and 2 trials and is now being assessed in phase 3 trials for the
treatment of adenovirus and HCMV infection (ClinicalTrials.gov identifiers NCT02087306 and NCT01769170).

4.3

## Non-Nucleoside DNA Replication Inhibitors:
Targeting Helicase-Primase
The helicase-primase complex performs
three critical functions for herpesviruses during viral DNA replication;
it (1) unwinds the viral DNA, (2) forms the replication fork, and
(3) primes the leading and lagging strands (Figure , replication). This complex has been best studied in HSV-1
where it was first identified and determined to consist of gene products
UL5, UL8, and UL52 (Table ). Biochemical studies revealed that UL5 has DNA helicase
activity, UL52 has RNA polymerase (primase) activity, and UL8 has
ATPase activity that is stimulated by ssDNA. The first example of a HSV helicase inhibitor, a 2-aminothiazole,
was published in 1998. Kleymann et al.
from Bayer AG and Crute et al. from Boehringer Ingelheim Pharmaceuticals,
Inc., independently published two structurally similar thiazole-based
inhibitors of the helicase-primase complex in 2002 (Figure ). The optimal Bayer compound N-[5-(aminosulfonyl)-4-methyl-1,3-thiazol-2-yl]-N-methyl-2-[4-(2-pyridinyl)phenyl]acetamide, BAY 57-1293
(also known as AIC316 or Pritelivir, 15), exhibited ED50 values of 0.5 mg/kg in a mouse lethal challenge model for
both HSV-1 and HSV-2. Generation of escape mutants and biochemical
analysis with recombinant helicase-primase suggest BAY 57–1293
(15) simultaneously binds UL5 and UL52 and stabilizes
the helicase-primase complex at the replication fork, stalling DNA
replication. The Boehringer Ingelheim
compound 1-benzyl-1-cyclohexanecarbonyl-3-[4-(2-methyl-1,3-thiazol-5-yl)phenyl]urea,
BILS 179 BS (16), was also shown to be a potent inhibitor
of HSV, acts on the helicase-primase complex, and was effective in
animal models. Replacing the methyl
group in 16 with an amino group brought the potency in
cell culture from an IC50 of about 30 nM to 6 nM. Studies on the potential for escape mutants
for helicase-primase inhibitors were recently summarized and are ongoing. 
 In terms of clinical development, BAY 57-1293 (15)
has shown the most promise and is now being developed by AiCuris as
AIC316 (15) or Pritelivir. In January of 2014 results
from a double-blind randomized, placebo controlled, phase 2 study
in otherwise healthy individuals with HSV-2 positive genital herpes
showed significant reduction in viral shedding and hinted at reduced
occurrence of genital lesion outbreaks. In May of 2013 the Food and
Drug Administration placed a hold on further clinical development
of AIC316 due to dermal and hematologic toxicities in monkeys that
could not be readily explained. These monkeys received roughly 15–250
times the highest dose administered in the phase 2 trial (and 70–900
times more than the most effective dose determined by this trial,
which was not the highest). No such toxicities were observed in the
phase 2 trial; however, research into the reasons for these toxicities
in monkeys is reportedly underway. 

4.4

## Targeting Encapsidation and Packaging
4.4.1

## Terminase Inhibitors
Targeting
the terminase complex has great potential for the inhibition of HCMV
replication. The terminase, composed of UL89 and UL56 (Table ) in HCMV, is functionally conserved across herpesviruses. It cuts the replicating viral genome into genome-length
segments and packages them into the capsid. Human cells do not share
any analogous complex, nor do they process their DNA in this way.
This makes the terminase an exciting target in terms of selectively
inhibiting viral replication, while limiting host off-target effects.
Inhibitors of the terminase (Figure ) began to surface in 1995 with the identification of 2,5,6-trichloro-1-ß-d-ribofuranosyl benzimidazole (TCRB, 17), initially
intended as an anticancer agent, and its 2-bromo analog 2-bromo-5,6-dichloro-1-(β-d-ribofuranosyl)benzimidazole (BDCRB 18). As nucleoside
analogs, these inhibitors were expected to undergo phosphorylation
and inhibit viral DNA synthesis. Surprisingly, neither of these expectations
held true. TCRB (17) and BDCRB (18) act
without chemical modification, and resistance mutations map to UL56
and UL89 (Table ) of the HCMV viral terminase. TCRB (17) and BDCRB (18) are potent inhibitors of the β-herpesvirus HCMV, but not
of α-herpesviruses (HSV-1, 2, and VZV), β-herpesvirus
HHV-6, or the γ-herpesviruses (EBV and KSHV/HHV8). At a concentration of 125 μM, BDCRB (18) inhibits the nuclease activity of UL89, though only slightly.
This modest effect observed with recombinant UL89 is insufficient
to explain BDCRB (18) activity in cell culture. This may reflect proposed binding of both UL89
and UL56 (Table ) by this class of molecules. The development and improvement of these benzimidazole
terminase inhibitors and how they ironically gave rise to an inhibitor
of kinase UL97, maribavir (19), were recently reviewed
by Biron et al. Further discussion of
maribavir (19) can be found below (section ).
In 2001 Bayer reported a significantly
different chemical scaffold
linked to terminase inhibition. The sulfonamide 3-hydroxy-2,2-dimethyl-N-[4([[5-(dimethylamino)-1-naphthyl]sulfonyl]amino)-phenyl]propanamide,
BAY 38-4766 (20), inhibits HCMV, and like the benzimidazoles
TCRB (17) and BDCRB (18), resistance mutations
map to UL56 and UL89. BAY 38-4766 (20) is well-tolerated and effective in murine and guinea pig
CMV infection models, including the prevention of guinea pig CMV in
immunocompromised animals. It is also effective against some monkey
CMV strains, though to a lesser extent than the rodent models. BAY 38-4766 (20) was taken into
phase 1 trials and showed safety in healthy volunteers at doses up
to 2 g. However, there is no evidence that BAY 38-4766 (20) progressed further in clinical development. 
The benzimidazole terminase inhibitors suffer from
metabolic instability;
the glycosidic bond is cleaved in vivo. Substitution of the furan sugar found in BDCRB
for β-d-ribose gives GW275175X (21, 2-bromo-5,6-dichloro-1-β-d-ribopyranosyl-1H-benzimidazole) and eliminates
the major metabolic liability of BDCRB and TCRB. Developed and sponsored
by GlaxoSmithKline, this compound advanced through a phase 1 trial
but was dropped to pursue maribavir (19). , 
The most advanced terminase inhibitor to date is AIC246 (22) (Letermovir), a 3,4-dihydro-quinazoline-4-yl-acetic acid
derivative that was developed by AiCuris as a potent inhibitor of
HCMV through extensive hit-to-lead optimization. In cell culture across three different HCMV strains, AIC246
(22) shows low (4–5 nM) EC50 as measured
by cytopathic effect reduction and GFP reduction in fibroblasts. Ganciclovir
(1), the standard of care for HCMV, is more than 400-fold
less potent in these same assays. AIC246 (22) is effective
against HCMV strains resistant to ganciclovir. This is consistent
with the fact that AIC246 (22) activity is independent
of the viral kinases and the viral DNA polymerase, the two primary
sources of resistance mutations for nucleoside analog inhibitors.
AIC246 (22) also shows potent antiviral activity in a
mouse xenograft model of HCMV. In this assay AIC246 (22) is about 5-fold more potent than valganciclovir (2), an orally bioavailable form of ganciclovir (1). Murine
CMV and guinea pig CMV models could not be used since AIC246 (22) is inactive against these viruses in cell culture. AIC246 (22) is thought to act
on UL56 of the HCMV terminase. This is based on generation and genotyping
of mutant viruses that escape AIC246 (22). These data
leave open the possibility that AIC246 (22) binds UL89
and mutations in UL56 (Table ) perturb this
binding indirectly, though the simplest explanation is direct interaction
with UL56. Interestingly, AIC246-resistant viruses were not resistant
to putative sulfonamide and benzimidazole terminase inhibitors, suggesting
distinct structural determinants of binding. , In December 2011 AIC246 (22) completed a phase 2 study,
and in April 2012 AiCuris announced that it had passed all primary
efficacy end points. The drug has received Orphan Drug status in the
European Union and Fast Track Designation in the United States. Late
in 2012 AiCuris announced they have signed on to an exclusive worldwide
licensing agreement with Merck for AiCuris’ portfolio of anti-HCMV
leads, including AIC246 (22).

4.4.2

## Portal
Vertex Inhibitors
Researchers
at Wyeth (now part of Pfizer) identified and developed thiourea derivatives
that inhibit correct formation of the portal vertex (Figure ). One series of compounds was relatively
selective for HSV-1 while
exhibiting some inhibition of HSV-2 and HCMV. Another related series selectively targeted VZV. The initial thiourea compound identified, N-(3-chloro-4-(3-(5-chloro-2,4-dimethoxyphenyl)thioureido)phenyl)formamide
(23), inhibits HSV-1 virus production with an IC50 of 7.9 μM for the Patton strain, and 24.5 μM
in the E377 strain. Substitution of the formamide for the 2-fluoro-phenyl
ring resulted in WAY-150138 (24) and improved potency
∼20-fold for both viral strains. Mechanism of action was determined
by interrogating five critical aspects of inhibitor effect: time-dependence
(relative to time of infection), viral DNA replication, viral DNA
cleavage, capsid morphology, and resistance mutations. WAY-150138
(24) did not prevent viral DNA replication since it inhibits
viral production after DNA replication is expected to be complete,
suggesting it acts later in the viral replication cycle. Southern
blot analysis revealed viral DNA cleavage was not taking place in
the presence of inhibitor. Consistent with those data, no C-capsids
were observed in the presence of inhibitor. Finally three single point
mutations that conferred resistance were identified, all mapped to
the portal protein (HSV-1 UL6). A follow-up
study further investigated the mechanism of action of WAY-150138 (24). It ruled out selective inhibition of UL6 (Table ) protein synthesis, degradation of UL6 after translation,
and extraction of UL6 from already formed B-capsids. Western blots
performed on capsids from compound-treated cells revealed depletion
of UL6 and UL15. The authors propose that WAY-150138 (24) prevents incorporation of UL6 into capsids. Two key arguments are
made in favor of this over the alternative conclusion of interaction
with UL15. First, resistance mutations mapped only to UL6 and not
UL15 (Table ). Second, it has been shown that
UL15 associates with capsids only in the presence of UL6. Thus, if
only UL15 incorporation was prevented, one would expect to still observe
the presence of UL6. In summary, these thiourea derivatives appear
to prevent incorporation of the portal vertex (UL6) into capsids,
thus preventing DNA encapsidation. Closely
related compounds (25, 26, and 27) are reported to function in a similar way against VZV, though mechanism
of action was not as thoroughly pursued, so additional studies are
warranted for further development of this series. On the basis of reports on related thiourea inhibitors
of HCMV (section ) these compounds were
likely dropped due to a lack of stability from hydrolysis of the thiourea
as well as poor bioavailability. 

4.5

## Other Viral Targets and Inhibitors with Unknown
Mechanism of Action
Inhibitors of entry and attachment, of
viral kinases, and vaccine development are additional potential approaches
to herpesvirus treatment. Progress has been made in each case and
is discussed below.
4.5.1

## Targeting Viral Entry
Structural
and biochemical studies of entry and attachment have paved the way
for inhibitor development, though much remains to be done in this
field, and no currently approved drugs act via this mechanism. The
majority of molecules that inhibit entry or attachment are peptides
or large charged molecules such as heparin. While such compounds benefit
from having extracellular targets such as herpesvirus glycoproteins,
they suffer from poor oral bioavailability and metabolic stability.
Arguably the most advanced-stage example of a compound thought to
function by blocking viral entry is SP-303 (also known as Virend),
a proanthocyandin oligomer tested in phase 2 clinical trials as a
topical treatment for anal and genital herpes. This compound showed
some promise; however, there is no evidence that it was further pursued
for FDA approval. Connolly et al. further review advances in our structural
and functional understanding of herpesvirus entry and the potential
for targeting the process therapeutically. 
Another interesting example of entry inhibitors is a thiourea
derivative that is reported to block HCMV glycoprotein B-mediated
fusion with host cells (Figure ). This small molecule came out of SAR
studies from the hit compounds
against HSV-1 that gave rise to the portal vertex inhibitors described
in section . Substitutions at the acyl
group in 28 demonstrate how SAR for HSV-1 and HCMV rapidly
diverged. Introduction of a phenyl group improved potency against
both viruses by 10-fold; however, a 2-furoyl (29), and
other heteroaromatic groups, increased potency against HCMV but lost
activity against HSV-1. The 2-furoyl compound (29) was
selective and potent with an IC50 against HCMV of 0.2 μg/mL
and an IC50 against HSV-1 of >10 μg/mL. This became
the starting point for additional SAR around ring 1. In a series of
alkyl and electron withdrawing groups that had improved potency, introduction
of trifluoromethyl and chloro groups meta and para, respectively,
to the thiourea nitrogen was optimal (30, IC50 0.03 μg/mL). No substitutions on ring 2 were tolerated, though
changes in selectivity were observed. For instance, the 3,6-dimethoxy
analog (31) had modest activity against VZV and no activity
against HCMV. Introduction of a thiazole (32) in place
of the furoyl resulted in further improvement in potency, with an
IC50 of 0.008 μg/mL. Unfortunately, the thiourea
group in this series was readily hydrolyzed under acidic conditions
at elevated temperatures. 
A follow-up
study sought to overcome this stability problem. The
authors presumed that thiourea hydrolysis took place via protonation
of the thiourea nitrogen bound directly to ring 1. They further hypothesized
that the electronegative character of the ring 1 substituents (i.e.,
trifluoromethyl) made for a better leaving group and that insertion
of a linker that is not electron withdrawing between the substituted
phenyl and the thiourea would improve stability. A simple methylene
spacer was sufficient to improve stability. Nearly all of compound 33 remained intact after 7 days at 37 °C, while 66% of
compound 32 decomposed under those same conditions. Likewise,
compound 33 had improved stability under both acidic
conditions (0.1 or 1 N HCl) and basic conditions (0.1 N NaOH) at 37
°C. Fortuitously, this spacer also improved potency 10- to 20-fold
across all seven reported linkers. 
Somewhat surprisingly, mechanism of action studies were carried
out with the less stable thiourea series represented by 32. As described by Jones et al., there is significant evidence that
this series inhibits glycoprotein-B mediated fusion with the host
cell membrane. Resistance mutations were
generated with compound 32 that could be confirmed via
marker transfer experiments to map to the viral glycoprotein B (UL55,
Table ). As the authors acknowledge, however,
they did not look for mutations in other glycoproteins involved in
fusion and thus cannot rule out additional targets beyond glycoprotein
B. To further strengthen their case that these compounds specifically
block fusion, they assessed the effect of time-of-addition of inhibitor,
initial events in the replication cycle such as detegumentation and
cytoplasm-to-nucleus transfer, interaction of inhibitor with host
cell membrane proteins, and direct measurement of fusion in lipid
mixing assays. Inhibitor reduced viral yield when administered at
the time of infection; however, no effect was observed if treatment
occurred just 2 h post infection. This strongly supports activity
very early in the replication cycle. Detegumentation and cytoplasm-to-nucleus
transport, which normally occur rapidly after fusion, did not occur
in the presence of compound as measured by the lack of abundant tegument
protein pp65 in the nucleus. Pretreatment of host cells with inhibitor
prior to infection had no effect, suggesting no highly stable interaction
with the host is made, though weaker interactions are still quite
possible. Finally, the use of virions labeled with fluorescent lipids
enabled direct measurement of fusion inhibition. In the presence of
compound, in contrast to vehicle alone, fluorescent lipids were retained
on the virion and not transferred to the host cell. In summary, there is strong evidence that these inhibitors
prevent HCMV fusion and interact with viral envelope glycoprotein
B; however, additional targets for this compound series cannot be
ruled out. Many other targets in viral entry exist, and Connolly et
al. further review advances in our structural and functional understanding
of herpesvirus entry and the potential for targeting the process therapeutically. 
For KSHV specifically, the ephrin receptor
tyrosine kinase A2 (EphA2)
recently emerged as a potential therapeutic target. KSHV requires
binding to EphA2 for entry into endothelial cells. This could be relevant to the treatment of Kaposi’s
sarcoma, though likely not B cell malignancies PEL and MCD (section ). Both EphA2 binding alone and downstream signaling
by EphA2 contribute to KSHV cell entry. The former greatly enhances
entry, while the latter appears necessary in at least a subset of
endothelial cells. This makes EphA2
an attractive target both for kinase inhibitors targeting the intracellular
tyrosine kinase domain and for small molecules, peptides, or antibodies
that directly block KSHV glycoprotein–EphA2 interaction. Other proteins involved in EphA2 signaling may
also prove to be novel therapeutic targets. The discovery that KSHV requires binding to EphA2 for entry in some
cell types and recent discoveries about herpesvirus entry were recently
described. , , Targets for the viral entry pathway of HSV-1 and HSV-2 are discussed
elsewhere. 

4.5.2

## Targeting
Viral Kinases
Maribavir
(19) [2-isopropylamino-5,6-dichloro-1(β-d-ribofuranosyl)benzimidazole] was identified during the development
of benzimidazole inhibitors of the herpesvirus terminase (section ). Maribavir (19) inhibits viral
kinases, not the terminase that its chemical predecessors targeted.
The full history of maribarvir’s discovery and development
has been extensively reviewed elsewhere. , In the current review, we focus on some highlights of early development,
maribavir’s (19) unique mechanism of action, specificity
among the herpesviruses, and recent progress in its clinical development.
As with many drug development campaigns, resistance mutations were
generated to guide identification of the drug target. Biron et al.
identified mutations mapping to UL97 HCMV protein kinase (Table ) that conferred resistance to maribavir (19). Inhibition of recombinant UL97 (Table ) confirmed that it is maribavir’s target. Maribavir
(19) inhibits wild type UL97 (Table ) potently, with an IC50 of 3 nM in a histone phosphorylation
assay. Somewhat alarmingly, the recombinant UL97 (Table ) with the resistance mutation identified in the study, Leu397Arg,
resulted in a 20 000-fold decrease in potency (IC50 of 60 μM). Maribavir (19) is reported to competitively inhibit ATP binding to recombinant
UL97 (Table ) with a nanomolar Ki (though the Lineweaver–Burk presented shows an
inversion of the typical trend between 15 and 20 nM maribavir and
thus warrants careful replication). UL97
(Table ) is also the kinase responsible for
phosphorylating many nucleoside analog drugs, such as ganciclovir
(1). Ganciclovir-resistant HCMV mutants are susceptible
to maribavir (19). This supports structural models based
on resistance mutations that suggest maribavir (19) interacts
directly with the ATP-binding pocket. Likewise, maribavir-resistant
mutants are susceptible to ganciclovir (1). , Interestingly, however, cyclopropavir (9) is reported
to compete with maribavir (19) for binding to UL97 (Table ), conflicting with the notion that maribavir does
not interfere with guanosine nucleotide analogs binding as substrates.
Gentry et al. note this unexpected result and hypothesize it could
be indicative of conformational differences between ganciclovir (1) and cyclopropavir (9) binding, owing to the
methylenecyclopropane of cyclopropavir. Indeed, cyclopropavir (9) was recently used to generate
HCMV strains resistant to ganciclovir (1) and maribavir
(19), in addition to cyclopropavir (9). These data hint at sites of potential overlap
on UL97 between all three drugs or conformational changes to UL97
(Table ) that preclude their binding.
Later studies found mutations conferring resistance to maribavir
(19) were more commonly found in the viral gene pUL27,
not the kinase, though resistance was mild compared to UL97 mutations.
Study of the biological function of UL27 and its relation to UL97
and maribavir (19) resistance is in its infancy. Reitsma
et al. provide the most compelling evidence of the relationship between
UL97 and UL27 to date. UL27 was shown
to enhance proteasomal degradation of the acetyltransferase Tip60.
Of note, the HIV virulence factor Tat also targets Tip60 for degradation,
and Tat expression in cells infected with UL27-driven maribavir-resistant
HCMV restores susceptibility to maribavir. Degradation of Tip60 results
in increased levels of cyclin-dependent kinase (CDK) inhibitor p21waf/CIP1, leading to a halt of cell cycle progression. Normally,
protein kinase UL97 functions to drive cells into the S phase so that
viral DNA replication can take place. When maribavir (19) inhibits UL97 (Table ), progression to the S phase is hindered leading to reduced
viral replication (though this is only one of numerous effects of
UL97 inhibition, Figure , viral kinases).
If UL27 no longer drives the degradation of Tip60, then p21 expression
is blocked and activity of CDKs allows progression to the S phase,
overcoming that aspect of UL97 (Table ) inhibition. These findings are in agreement with previous
work that showed differences in maribavir (19) susceptibility
based on cell state and cellular kinase modulation. This intriguing and complex mechanism of drug action and
resistance still leaves numerous unanswered questions that will no
doubt be the subject of future work. 
Maribavir (19) inhibits EBV as well as HCMV;
however,
the target for EBV is less clear. Multiple reports indicate that Maribavir
(19) inhibits EBV protein kinase (also known as BGLF4
or EBV-PK, Table ) in cell culture; however,
it showed no inhibition of recombinant EBV-PK in vitro. It is possible that the known EBV-PK
substrates that are no longer phosphorylated in cells in the presence
of maribavir can be acted on by other kinases, which are the true
target of maribavir. This may also be an example of indirect (e.g.,
through blocking a cofactor) or substrate-dependent inhibition of
EBV-PK. It is clear, however, that maribavir (19) prevents
phosphorylation of the EBV DNA polymerase processivity factor (EA-D),
a substrate for EBV-PK, and alters transcription of key viral genes
leading to a reduction in viral fitness. , 
Maribavir (19) exhibits acceptable ADMET characteristics
that enabled progression into clinical trials. Phase 1 and phase 2
clinical trials were successful and established maribavir as having
fewer deleterious side effects than current HCMV treatment options.
Phase 3 clinical trials for prophylaxis in HCMV solid organ transplant
and bone marrow transplant settings were established. Unfortunately,
neither of these trials was successful in meeting their primary or
secondary outcomes. No data were published for these trials, so it
is unclear if study design, lack of full biological understanding
of mechanism of action, or something inherent to the use of maribavir
(19) in the selected patient populations is the most
likely cause for these clinical failures. 

4.5.3

## Targeting the Viral Ribonucleotide Reductase
Human herpesviruses encode a viral ribonucleotide reductase for
the conversion of adequate amounts of deoxyribonucleoside diphosphates
from the corresponding ribonucleoside diphosphates during active viral
DNA synthesis. The importance of the
viral reductase in producing infectious particles has been the subject
of conflicting studies. The reductase is composed of two subunits,
R1 and R2, and their association is required for catalytic activity. Temperature sensitive mutants with a lesion
in the R1 subunit of the virally encoded reductase established 100-fold
decrease in viral production in a tissue culture setting. However, there were several reports that showed
drastic differences in the importance of the viral reductase, and
these differences were species specific in animal models. Nevertheless, the viral reductase was seen
as a tractable therapeutic target, and it was pursued for many years.
Unfortunately, those efforts did not culminate in the approval of
novel therapeutics and have waned in recent years. Below, we discuss
examples of inhibiting the protein–protein interaction between
the R1 and R2 subunits as this was the first example of an effective
protein–protein interaction antagonist in vivo.
Two studies published simultaneously first described the
inhibition of the viral reductase protein–protein interaction
(PPI) with slightly different synthetic peptides incorporating similar
sequences from the C-terminus of subunit 2. Follow-up studies by researchers at Boehringer Ingelheim developed
peptidomimetic compounds, such as BILD 1263 (34, Figure ), that improved potency over shorter synthetic
peptides by over 200 000-fold and that displayed in
vivo efficacy in a mouse ocular model of infection: the first
such example for a PPI antagonist. The
evolution of viral resistance to related compounds and identification
of the sites on the R1 subunit of the HSV-1 reductase sufficient for
resistance (A1091S and P1090L) were also described. 
 The SAR of the compounds was also reported and described
in detail. The authors of the study
noted an important
observation regarding IC50 values and cellular efficacy,
namely that the radioligand binding assay used to establish IC50 was only accurate to 1 nM and that the compounds showing
cellular efficacy all displayed IC50s lower than the sensitivity
of their assay, making meaningful SAR interpretation difficult within
the most potent series. Beginning at
the N-terminal (R1) position of compounds related to 35, it was found that increasing lipophilicity improved potency
and that the stereochemistry around methyl-substituted cyclohexyl
moieties was important (36). Ultimately, a (dimethylcyclohexyl)
amino group improved potency over 7-fold (2 nM). This improved compound
was used to probe the C-terminal (R2, 35)
position and was shown to improve in vivo potency
in an HSV-1 induced keratitis mouse model. Compounds containing the
hydroxymethyl moiety at R2 such as is found in BILD 1263
(34) were significantly less potent in the radioligand
binding assay, but, for seemingly obvious permeability reasons, were
more potent in the cell culture assays. The authors also describe
a series of substitutions related to neopentylamine and discovered
that the addition of a stereochemically defined methyl- or ethyl-substituted
neopentylamine was optimal for activity in the cellular-based assay.
Next, the authors explored the N-substituted pyrrolidine of BILD 1263
(34) and the amide linkage in the N-terminal direction
of this side chain (X in 35). The amide
was replaced with a methylene linkage in order to lower desolvation,
and the potency in the cellular assays was also found to improve by
replacing the pyrrolidine with a tert-butyl group
(i.e., 36). These studies led to the discovery of BILD
1351 (36), which is significantly smaller than the previously
described BILD 1263 (34) and equipotent in the cellular-based
assays. BILD 1351 (36) and another congener more similar
to BILD 1263 (34) both showed improved in vivo efficacy, but unfortunately, no public record of these compounds
advancing further toward clinical trials has been published. 

4.5.4

## Inhibitors with Unknown
Mechanism of Action
A number of recent publications and patents
report herpesvirus
inhibitors with as of yet unknown mechanisms of action. To provide
a comprehensive review and encourage further investigation of these
compounds, they are discussed in brief below.
Patents disclosed
by Wunberg et al. describe a series of dihydroquinazolines that exhibit
anti-HCMV activity in cell culture. The
most potent inhibitors, similar to compound 37, had EC50 values of 0.01 μM with a 50% cytotoxic concentration
(CC50) of 15 μM, 1500 times that of the EC50 value. No statement regarding the mechanism of action for these
compounds is provided in the patent, though detailed SAR is described.
The approved cancer treatment and kinase inhibitor gefitinib shares
the quinazoline scaffold and was previously reported to have anti-HCMV
activity in cell culture, though no activity in an animal model. The quinazolines described by Wunberg et al.
may also be acting on host or viral kinases, though testing of this
hypothesis has not been reported in the literature.
Another
example of antiviral compounds with unknown mechanism of
action comes from a recent publication by De Castro et al. describing
a series of 4-benzyloxy-γ-sultone (38) derivatives. These compounds inhibit VZV and HCMV in cell
culture with EC50 values for the most potent compounds
of approximately 10 μM. They are inactive against HSV-1 and
HSV-2 as well as a number of other viruses. Activity against HHV6
and 7, EBV, and KSHV was not assayed. Extensive SAR revealed that
the 4 and 5 positions of the γ-sultone are critical to antiviral
activity. Specifically, a benzyloxyl group at the 4 position, as shown,
and one benzyl group at the 5 position were required for both HCMV
and VZV inhibition. The authors do not explore the stereochemical
preferences for the antiviral activity. These compounds were equally
active against HCMV strains resistant to ganciclovir, foscarnet, cidofovir,
and acyclovir as well as mutant strains lacking HCMV protein kinase
UL97 and VZV thymidine kinase (VZV-TK). On the basis of these data, it is likely this series of inhibitors
does not act through traditional DNA polymerase inhibition or inhibition
of UL97 or VZV-TK. As we hope this review has made clear, this leaves
many possible mechanisms by which inhibition could be taking place
and additional research is warranted.
Yamanouchi Pharmaceutical
Co., Ltd. (now a part of Astellas Pharma
Inc.), disclosed tetrahydro-2H-thiopyran-4-carboxamide
analogs (39) with potent antiviral activity against the
α-herpesviruses (HSV1 and 2, and VZV). Their most potent inhibitor
(39) has an EC50 of 0.033 μM in a VZV
plaque reduction assay and 0.006 μM in an HSV-1 cytopathic effect
inhibition assay. These compounds also show activity in an HSV-1 mouse
model with 70–100% inhibition of lesions with a 10 mg/kg twice-daily
dosing regimen over 5 days. A more recent
patent application from the same group also claims a reduction in
pain caused by herpesvirus lesions. To
our knowledge, no information on the mechanism of action has been
published.
Our final example of a herpesvirus inhibitor with
an unknown mechanism
is also an example of repurposing. Leflunomide (40),
an immunosuppressive and inhibitor of mitochondrial dihydroorotate
dehydrogenase in the pyrimidine synthesis pathway, is approved for
the treatment of arthritis but was found to have antiviral activity
against resistant strains of HCMV and HSV-1. Its use in the treatment
of HCMV in the organ transplant setting was recently reviewed, including in vitro studies on its potential mechanisms of action. In a study by Waldman et al., electron microscopy
revealed treatment with leflunomide in HCMV-infected cells results
in formation of a mature nucleocapsid, but the tegument and envelope
are not acquired. The same was found
to be true in HSV-1-infected cells treated with leflunomide. Studies of the active metabolite of leflunomide
(A771726, 41) and an analog thereof (FK778, 42), both of which also inhibit HCMV replication, propose a different
mechanism of action. These molecules were found to interfere with
HCMV signaling events and thus prevent some aspects of viral DNA replication
and protein production, as well as apoptosis of HCMV-infected cells. Differences in viral strain and cell type have
been proposed as a potential explanation for some of the discrepancies
between the studies. It is possible
that treatments that so drastically affect cell metabolism could impact
viral replication in multiple ways. While it is clear both biochemically
and clinically that leflunomide can be useful in preventing HCMV replication,
many questions about its mechanism of action remain unanswered.

4.5.5

## Vaccine Development
Tremendous
effort continues toward the goal of developing herpesvirus vaccines.
To date, only the development of VZV vaccines (chickenpox and shingles)
has been successful. Vaccine development has focused primarily on
HSV-1 and 2, HCMV, and EBV. Both modified viruses as well as specific
antigens are being used in this work. Development of HSV vaccines continues to be hampered by a poor understanding
of why previous attempts at vaccination have failed, and, equally,
if not more importantly, why some seropositive individuals are largely
or completely asymptomatic while others have frequent clinical episodes.
Across all herpesviruses it appears that while natural immunity is
protective against reinfection and in some cases clinical manifestation
of disease, it often does not prevent reactivation and shedding of
the virus and thus transmission. In fact, concerns have been raised
that vaccination could reduce symptoms but not shedding, leading to
increased transmission. Past and current development and research
to overcome these challenges have been reviewed elsewhere. − , 

4.5.6

## Targeting
Latency and Immune Evasion
All current herpesvirus treatments
target only replicating virus,
while an ideal treatment also would target latency. To accomplish
this one would need to block the action of those proteins responsible
for maintaining latency. These can be broken into two categories:
direct maintenance of latency (e.g., enabling segregation of DNA into
daughter cells) and immune evasion. Both present interesting and challenging
drug discovery opportunities. The macromolecules required for maintenance
of latency vary substantially among the herpesviruses as one might
expect given the diverse cell tropisms. Direct maintenance has been
best studied in EBV and KSHV, where one can readily establish latent
infection in cell culture. In recent years many papers have been published
on herpesvirus latency, laying the groundwork for future therapeutic
development. From a small-molecule discovery standpoint, the herpesvirus-encoded
GPCRs offer exciting potential targets given the vast knowledge for
targeting GPCRs in other indications. Directly targeting mediators of latency such as LANA could prove
more challenging from a druggability standpoint due to the protein–protein
and protein–DNA interactions involved; however, promising research
in this area is ongoing. Finally, as
we learn more about differences between uninfected and latently infected
cells we are able to take advantage not only of viral proteins expressed
during latency, but also differences in host protein expression that
enable specific targeting of latently infected cells. It will be exciting to watch as these strategies—alone
or in combination—are brought to bear on the challenging goal
of targeting herpesvirus latency.

4.6

## Host
Targets for Herpesvirus Inhibition
As with other viruses,
such as HIV, some attempts to target host
proteins for the inhibition of herpesviruses have emerged. In theory
this approach could substantially reduce, if not eliminate, development
of resistance to treatment. However, targeting host proteins raises
serious concerns about toxicities, both on- and off-target. The three
major host targets being currently explored are the protein kinases
cyclin-dependent kinase (CDK) and mammalian target of rapamycin (mTOR),
and cyclooxygenase 2 (COX2). Many other kinases are up-regulated during
HCMV infection and are potential therapeutic targets, some with known
small-molecule inhibitors. Another recent
potential target is the ephrin receptor tyrosine kinase A2 (EphA2).
KSHV cell entry requires binding to EphA2, and its down-regulation
or addition of soluble ephrin ligand prevented viral entry. , This leaves open the possibility of targeting EphA2 both at the
extracellular receptor as well as the intracellular kinase domain.
The use of CDK inhibitors to prevent viral replication in cell
culture provided the first example of a host-targeted herpesvirus
inhibitor, showing efficacy against at least HSV 1 and 2, VZV, and
HCMV. The exact mode of inhibition appears
to differ between herpesviruses, stalling their replication at different
stages of the viral lifecycle. , Broadly,
CDK inhibitors such as roscovitine (43, Figure ) appear to inhibit viruses that require a nuclear
phase of replication.
 After anecdotal evidence emerged that organ transplant patients
receiving immunosuppressive agents targeting mTOR had fewer and less
severe complications from HCMV, more extensive molecular and clinical
studies were established to interrogate this observation. The underlying
mechanism of action is complex and likely varies between herpesviruses
and disease manifestations. Mechanistic studies using rapamycin recently
revealed that the mTOR pathway is critical for modulation of HCMV
late genes in infected macrophages. Everolimus,
an approved immunosuppressant and rapamycin analog, is now in clinical
trials for treatment of HCMV disease in renal transplant patients
(ClinicalTrials.gov identifier NCT00828503). Other approved
mTOR inhibitors are in clinical trials for EBV- and KSHV-caused cancers,
where molecular mechanism of action is likely much more complex (ClinicalTrials.gov identifiers NCT00918333 and NCT02110069).
Li et al. recently reviewed the use of kinase inhibitors for the treatment
of herpesvirus-associated disease, including but not limited to CDK,
mTOR, and EphA2. Brennan et al. summarize
our understanding of the effect of immunosuppressive drugs on virus
pathobiology, including the effect of mTOR inhibitors on herpesviruses. 
COX2 is one of the many genes that are
upregulated during HCMV
infection. This upregulation of COX2 directly results in a >50-fold
increase in prostaglandin E2. Treatment with noncytotoxic
COX2 inhibitors decreases the accumulation of prostaglandin E2 and reduces the production of HCMV virions from infected
fibroblasts by more than 100-fold. Treatment with both a COX2 inhibitor
and exogenous prostaglandin E2 rescues viral production,
highlighting an important role for prostaglandin E2 in
HCMV replication. More recently, Schröer et al. demonstrated
that COX2 inhibition by approved anti-inflammatory drugs tolfenamic
acid and indomethacin diminished direct cell-to-cell spread of HCMV
in fibroblast cell culture and that this effect was reversed with
the addition of prostaglandin E2. These studies highlight
a potential host target in the control of herpesvirus infection and
build on a long history of research showing prostaglandins play a
critical role in herpesvirus biology. 

5

## Successes in Targeting Viral Proteases
To our knowledge, industry largely (if not entirely) halted efforts
to develop HHV protease inhibitors in the late 1990s and early 2000s.
Since then, myriad antiprotease therapies have entered the clinic,
particularly HCV protease inhibitors and a variety of improved HIV
protease inhibitors. Many lessons can be learned from these discovery
efforts and applied to HHV protease inhibitor development. In combination
with increasing structural, biochemical, and biological understanding
of the HHV proteases, the success of HIV and HCV protease inhibitor
development revives a long-standing interest in targeting the highly
functionally conserved HHV protease family.
5.1

## HIV Protease
Drugs
The development
of HIV protease inhibitors is one of the most successful examples
of structure-based drug design to date and is expertly reviewed in
the literature. In 1981 reports first
surfaced of what we now know as symptoms of HIV/AIDS, namely the severe
opportunistic infections Kaposi’s sarcoma and pneumocystis
pneumonia. Two years later HIV was isolated
and deemed the likely cause of AIDS, and by 1985 full genome sequences
for the virus had been published. Amazingly,
just 10 years after the HIV genome was sequenced, the US FDA approved
the first HIV protease inhibitor, saquinavir (44). Part of this rapid success came from synthetic
compounds developed and lessons learned during failed attempts to
develop inhibitors of renin, an aspartyl protease involved in control
of blood pressure. 
There are 10
HIV protease inhibitors currently marketed in the United States, and
at least one new therapeutic, a deuterated form of the peptidomimetic
inhibitor atazanavir (45), is currently in clinical development.
All but one of these are peptidomimetic competitive active-site inhibitors
with a hydroxyethylene core that acts as a transition state mimetic,
displacing a critical water molecule from the active site and preventing
proteolysis. Tipranavir (46) is the exception, a nonpeptidomimetic inhibitor that uses a dihydropyrone
ring in place of the hydroxyethylene core. As described below, a similar focus on peptidomimetic inhibitors
has dominated drug discovery efforts for herpesvirus protease inhibitors.
In retrospect, HIV protease is an excellent drug target. However,
HIV protease inhibitors faced skepticism in early development, in
part due to inherent challenges in targeting proteases and in part
due to the success of reverse transcriptase inhibitors that entered
the market prior to saquinavir’s (44) approval.
As resistance mutations developed against the reverse transcriptase
inhibitors, another line of attack against these highly mutagenic
viruses was necessary; protease inhibitors continue to play that central
role in combination treatments for HIV/AIDS. The herpesvirus market
mirrors, to some extent, the early HIV market where nucleoside analogs
dominate and pharmaceutical companies, after significant effort, have
largely abandoned the viral protease as a drug target. Ultimately,
the success of HIV protease inhibitors, and later HCV protease inhibitors,
continues to drive interest in and provide critical lessons for the
development of small molecules targeting the highly conserved HHV
proteases.

5.2

## HCV Protease Drugs
In the late 1990s
Vertex pharmaceuticals, the developer of HIV protease inhibitor amprenavir
(Agenerase, 47), initiated preclinical efforts to develop
a clinical hepatitis C virus protease inhibitor. The combined efforts
of academia and industry were able to overcome numerous substantial
challenges: the target was not yet validated in vivo, the viral lifecycle was poorly understood, no robust preclinical
models in cell culture or animals were available, and no structure
of the viral protease had been solved. In a remarkable story that
is expertly reviewed in the literature, scientists were able to achieve
approval of telaprevir (48), the first HCV protease inhibitor,
just 22 years after the virus was discovered in 1989. Since then many other companies have clinical
trials for or have approved HCV protease inhibitors. Parallels can be drawn between the herpesvirus proteases
and HCV protease. When first screened in vitro, no
known serine protease inhibitors were effective against HCV protease.
This was attributed to the active site being flat and solvent exposed,
lacking a well-defined pocket into which an inhibitor could bind. , In addition, it was shown that the protease was dynamic—binding
to different inhibitors yielding different conformations of the enzyme.
The same has been said of the human herpesvirus proteases, as described
below (section ). Initial inhibitor development
against HCV protease focused on decamer peptidomimetics derived from
the natural substrate. To simultaneously obtain low molecular weight
and “drug-like” properties while maintaining potency,
the peptidomimetics were truncated to 5-mers spanning the P4–P1′
sites and a reversible covalent tetra-aldehyde moiety was introduced. , Use of an α-ketoamide warhead was determined to be optimal,
and eventually exploration of that scaffold arrived at Telaprevir
(48). Detailed discussion of medicinal chemistry for
HCV protease inhibitors can be found elsewhere. , , A similar approach to HCMV protease
inhibitors was taken, starting with peptidomimetics and utilizing
covalent inhibitors to overcome lack of potency. An additional parallel
can be drawn in the recent reports of allosteric regulation of HCV
protease, specifically compounds that trap a closed and autoinhibited
conformation of the helicase-protease fusion NS3-4A. A similar allosteric inhibition of herpesviruses proteases
involving the trapping of an inactive monomeric conformation of the
enzyme is reviewed in detail below (sections – and – ).

6

## Human Herpesvirus
Protease
6.1

## Biological Role in Viral Replication
Herpesvirus proteases have long been known to be essential for viral
replication. The protease (also known
as assemblin and Pr) and the assembly protein are expressed from two
overlapping open reading frames (i.e., KSHV ORF17 and ORF17.5, Table ). The assembly protein alone (i.e., KSHV ORF17.5,
Table ) is expressed approximately 10-fold
more than the protease–assembly protein fusion. The viral protease
is expressed in the cytoplasm of virally infected cells as a monomeric
fusion to the assembly protein (AP). The Pr-AP fusion binds the major
capsid protein (MCP) and is translocated to the nucleus where the
procapsid forms. Concentration-dependent dimerization in the nucleus
allosterically activates protease, leading to protease-mediated cleavage
of the release site (R-site) that frees the protease from AP. AP is
proteolyzed from the MCP by hydrolysis at the maturation site (M-site).
Cleavage at the M-site releases the internal assembly protein from
the outer protein layer, enabling a conformational change in the outer
shell as well as the portal vertex. These conformational changes allow
packaging of viral DNA, and the mature capsid is formed (Figure , capsid maturation). , In typical
infections three forms of the viral capsid are produced. A-capsids
are empty, lacking both the assembly protein and viral DNA. B-capsids
contain the inner lining of assembly protein ORF17.5 but no viral
DNA. C-capsids have expelled the scaffolding protein and contain viral
DNA. Only C-capsids progress directly to mature virions. This is true
across multiple herpesviruses. When
the viral protease is not present to perform its function, only B-capsids
are formed and DNA packaging fails. , The lack
of A-capsid formation suggests A-capsids may be the result of premature
release/cleavage of the assembly protein from B-capsids. This suggests
that activators of the protease could block viral maturation, though
further research is needed to confirm this hypothesis. Lacking genetic
material and being morphologically malformed, these B-capsids are
incapable of going on to become infectious virions. The results of
herpesvirus protease knockout, as well as knockdown of the protease
in murine cytomegalovirus that results in reduced viral load, provide
genetic validation of HHV proteases as potential therapeutic targets. 

6.2

## HHV Protease Structure
Many years
of work have contributed to our current understanding of the HHV proteases.
Cytomegalovirus protease was the first herpesvirus protease for which
a crystal structure was determined, with four groups independently
publishing HCMV protease structures in 1996. These structures revealed a novel serine protease fold and a Ser-His-His
catalytic triad providing a structural framework for a unique enzyme
with low proteolytic activity due in part to the noncanonical catalytic
triad (Scheme , Figure ). Consistent with biochemical studies
suggesting numerous herpesvirus proteases form dimers, the HCMV protease
crystal structure revealed a dimeric enzyme where each monomer contains
an independent active site (Figure ). The
monomeric unit consists of a core β-barrel of mostly antiparallel
β-sheets partially surrounded by seven α-helices. Subsequently,
structures of VZV, HSV1 and 2, KSHV, and EBV proteases were solved. All six known HHV protease structures share
the same fold, dimeric state, and Ser-His-His catalytic triad (Figure ). These are the only proteins for which structures
are known that have this fold, comprising their own superfamily in
the SCOP database (MEROPS Clan SH, Family S21). Despite their structural
and functional homology, the HHV proteases vary widely in sequence
identity from 29% to 97% identical. Despite this unique fold, the
Ser-His-His catalytic triad adopts a conformation very similar to
that of the chymotrypsin-fold serine protease catalytic triad (MEROPS
Clan PA, Family S1). The substrate binding pocket is shallow, dynamic,
and solvent-exposed, as was discovered with HCV protease (Figure ). The core β-barrel is conserved while helices
are more divergent, and loops even more so. The structural configuration
of the protease suggests autoproteolytic processing to liberate protease
from assembly protein happens in trans, not in cis. Namely, the distance
between the active site and the release site as well as structural
constraints required for enzyme activity likely preclude intramolecular
proteolysis.
 
6.3

## Substrate
Binding and Specificity
All herpesvirus proteases share a
P1–P1′ specificity
for Ala-Ser. Alignment of all M and R sites across the human herpesviruses
reveals a profile sequence showing the strict requirement for alanine
in the P1 pocket and serine in the P1′ pocket. There is also
a strong preference for tyrosine in the P4 pocket (Figure ). While much of the specificity between these enzymes
is shared, there are distinct differences that produce functional
biochemical consequences. For example, HCMV protease is able to cleave
its own endogenous substrate, HCMV assembly protein, as well as HSV2
assembly protein. Conversely, HSV2 protease is unable to efficiently
cleave HCMV assembly protein. KSHV protease can cleave itself at the
dimer interface leading to loss of activity resulting in additional
regulation of proteolysis. The herpesviruses are recalcitrant to most
standard serine protease inhibitors as described in section and as was observed for HCV protease. This
is likely due to their poor catalytic activity. Antichaotropic agents such as high concentrations of sulfate
or citrate, glycerol, and others can improve herpesvirus protease
activity 10–100-fold. At their
most active, these highly selective processing enzymes are significantly
less active than many other proteases with catalytic efficiencies
2–3 orders of magnitude less than typical digestive enzymes
depending on substrates and conditions.
 HSV2 protease was the first protease to be cocrystallized
with
an active-site inhibitor, diisopropyl phosphate (DIP, 49). This allowed for direct identification of the oxyanion hole, involving
two arginines and two leucines that are absolutely conserved across
all known human herpesvirus proteases. Surface loops that are the
most varied in sequence and structure are proposed to play a role
in substrate recognition as is true for chymotrypsin-fold enzymes. Loops and helices, which are markedly less
structurally conserved than the core β-barrel, contribute to
defining the extended binding pocket.
For KSHV and HCMV proteases,
substrate binding has been shown to
occur through an induced-fit model. Two
distinct but related features have been reported: the effect of substrate
binding on the active site and the effect of substrate binding on
dimerization. Comparison of crystallographic structures between HCMV
protease in its apoenzyme state and protease bound to a transition
state-analog inhibitor reveals rearrangements of the conserved oxyanion
hole arginine residues upon substrate binding. This result is supported
by changes in tryptophan fluorescence of reporter Trp42, which upon
substrate binding is packed against part of loop 9 that contributes
a conserved arginine to stabilize the oxyanion hole (Figure ). In KSHV protease, crystallographic
studies reveal a large pocket in the S4 position to accommodate a
P4 tyrosine when present; however, this pocket is not apparent from
the apoenzyme state. In addition, substrate
binding promotes dimerization. The literature to date does not make
it clear whether substrate binding to a binding-competent monomer
promotes a conformation that more readily dimerizes or whether substrate
only binds the dimer but in doing so stabilizes the interface. In
either case, the observation that addition of increasing concentration
of substrate or peptidyl-inhibitor results in an increasing dimer
population holds. Addition of a phosphonate inhibitor to KSHV protease
results in a “super dimer” that no longer undergoes
measurable monomer–dimer equilibrium. While this does not address
whether substrate can bind to monomer and promote dimerization, it
does confirm that substrate binding stabilizes the dimeric state of
the enzyme. 
 
6.4

## Active-Site Inhibitors
of HHV Proteases
6.4.1

## Generic Serine Protease
Inhibitors
HCMV protease has been the most actively pursued
target of the HHV
proteases both in academia and industry. As was the case for HCV protease,
HCMV protease (and indeed all HHV proteases) is poorly inhibited by
traditional serine protease inhibitors. A typical mechanism-based
serine protease inhibitor, 3,4-dichloroisocoumarin (50), required high concentrations (0.1–1 mM) to achieve inhibition
and was ultimately found to react with thiol groups of HCMV’s
five cysteine residues, not the active-site serine. Widely used chloromethyl-ketones such as the chymotrypsin
inhibitor tosylamido-2-phenylethyl-chloromethyl ketone (TPCK 51) achieves only 33% inhibition of HCMV protease at 250 μM.
Tosyl-l-lysine chloromethyl ketone (TLCK 52),
phenylmethylsulfonyl fluoride (PMSF 53), and benzamidine
(54) show no inhibition of HCMV protease at 250 μM.
Diisopropylfluorophosphate (DFP 55) inhibits both HCMV
and HSV-1, albeit weakly, providing some of the early evidence that
HHV proteases are serine proteases. 
Macromolecular protease inhibitors such as lima bean and soybean
trypsin inhibitors, ovomucoid, Bowman–Birk inhibitor, and bovine
pancreatic trypsin inhibitor likewise do not inhibit HCMV protease
as expected due to the unique structural fold of the enzyme. Peptide
aldehydes chymostatin, elastatinal, leupeptin, and antipain also fail
to inhibit HCMV protease presumably due to the weak nucleophilicity
of the active-site serine as a result of the noncanonical catalytic
triad. HCMV protease—HHV proteases
in general—are clearly nontrivial protease targets.

6.4.2

## Activated Carbonyl Warheads
Similar
to the early development of HCV protease inhibitors, initial attempts
to achieve specific inhibitors of HCMV protease relied on peptides
and peptidomimetics, taking advantage of the substantial work describing
substrate specificity for this enzyme. An 11-mer peptide spanning
P6 to P5′ (GVVVNA/SCRLA) of the native M-site was both a substrate
and competitive inhibitor with Ki of 0.225
mM and KM of 0.515 mM. A similar peptide
where the P1′ serine is replaced by alanine (GVVNA/ACRLA) showed
substantial improvement in both Ki (72
μM) and KM (0.112 mM). Use of a reduced peptide bond at the cleavage
site did relatively little to improve the native M-site peptide as
an inhibitor. The limited success of
competitive noncovalent peptidic inhibitors led to the pursuit of
mechanism-based inhibitors of HCMV protease. These utilized covalent
warheads, such as trifluoromethyl ketone (56). In 1997
a group from Boehringer Ingelheim utilized a trifluoromethyl ketone
warhead linked to M-site-derived peptides to interrogate the influence
of peptide length and side-chain on inhibition. They found that a tetramer was the minimal peptide that
would achieve low micromolar IC50 values. Lengthening the
P1 side chain by a single carbon from methyl to ethyl was tolerated
and somewhat improved inhibition; however adding two carbons to yield
a propyl were not tolerated and decreased activity. Extensive SAR
around the P2 side chain suggested that the S2 site was permissive
while the S3 pocket preferred a bulkier tert-butyl
glycine (Tbg, also known as tert-leucine) over the native valine residue.
With the unnatural amino acid Tbg in place, the P4 capping group was
explored and tolerant of a variety of substitutions. Several warheads
were tolerated in place of the trifluoro methyl ketone. Interestingly,
α-ketobenzoxazoles were not specific to HCMV protease, while
the other warheads maintained selectivity against a panel of serine
proteases. The pentafluoroehtyl ketone inhibitor was the most potent
with an IC50 of 110 nM (57). Unfortunately,
none of these compounds were efficacious in cell culture. The authors
suspect this is due to cell permeability and/or metabolic stability. 

6.4.3

## β-Lactam Inhibitors
In light
of still limited success with activated carbonyls, an alternative
strategy was pursued. As Waxman and Darke describe and as was noted
by the group out of Boehinger Ingelheim that published extensively
on protease active-site inhibitors, monocyclic β-lactam inhibitors
of human leukocyte elastase were co-opted as a starting point for
HCMV protease inhibitor development. , Human leukocyte
elastase, like the HHV proteases, has a substrate preference dominated
by small alkyl side chains. Specifically,
researchers at Merck had shown that N-carbonylamino derived β-lactams
(58) inhibit leukocyte elastase. Déziel and Malenfant reported peptidic substrate-based
β-lactams built both from their previous work on substrate-based
inhibitors described above and on the β-lactam scaffold. , These inhibitors incorporated the optimized peptidyl portion from
the previous work onto the C4 position of the β-lactam through
either an ether or thioether bond and probed substitutions at the
β-lactam nitrogen leading to a 70 nM inhibitor (59). Replacing the peptidyl portion of the compounds with a variety
of substituents failed to improve potency and/or selectivity across
other proteases such as leukocyte elastase. However, some less potent
analogs showed limited activity in cell culture (EC50 of
60 μM in a plaque reduction assay). Further elaboration of this scaffold by the same group provides
interesting SAR but ultimately failed to increase potency in enzyme
assays or cell culture. Bonneau et
al. elegantly show that these β-lactams are indeed acting through
an acyl enzyme intermediate in the case of HCMV protease. Using kinetic analyses with a fluorogenic β-lactam
they were able to measure the rate of acylation and deacylation, and
relate that to IC50. These studies highlight the importance
of whether the C4 position is occupied by a leaving group as well
as the overall electrophilicity of the carbonyl carbon as it is influenced
by the substitutions on the β-lactam ring. 

6.4.4

## trans-Lactam Inhibitors
Derived from euphane triterpene natural
product inhibitors of serine
proteases, the 5,5-translactam scaffold similar to 60 has been optimized to achieve potent inhibition of HCMV protease.
The work of Borthwick et al. skillfully explored and optimized this
novel class of inhibitors and is expertly reviewed elsewhere. In the present review we address the key findings
of these studies and relevant details of the approach that aided in
the inhibitor development against this challenging target.
A
rational design was used beginning from the highly conserved cleavage
sequence for HCMV protease, Val-Xxx-Ala/Ser where the slash denotes
the site of cleavage. A methyl group was introduced α to the
lactam carbonyl in order to mimic the alanine methyl that would hypothetically
occupy the S1 pocket. Given the apparent importance of this alanine,
Borthwick et al. maintained this substituent and synthesized stereospecific
analogs to determine which stereochemistry would best position the
methyl group in the S1 pocket, ultimately favoring the cis-substitution as depicted in 60. The subsequent SAR focused first on the absolute stereochemistry
for the active diastereomer of the translactam, which is also as depicted
in compound 60. Further functionalization of the lactam
nitrogen from which the S1′ site is accessed showed a preference
for trigonal substituents (not tetrahedral), with potency tracking
with electron withdrawing ability, but also showing some preferences
for the sterics of the various substituents that were analyzed. In the same work, the authors utilize array
chemistry to probe tolerable substitutions at the pyrrole nitrogen
of the trans-lactam system and identify the monocyclic
pyrrole derived from S-proline as an ideal substituent
(61). With absolute stereochemistry assigned and evaluated,
the authors modified the R1 and R2 positions
of compound 61 and discovered the dansyl-cyclopropyl
substituents as depicted in compound 62 to be optimal.
The authors report a Ki of 20 nM and an
IC50 of 340 nM for 62 and provide a thorough
mechanistic study as well as docking results. Substantial effort was then dedicated to establishing the
fine balance of potency, pharmacokinetic properties, and selectivity
necessary to advance a small molecule as a drug candidate. The authors moved to a 4-isopropylphenylurea
in place of the dansyl group and replaced the cyclopropyl with a benzothiazole
derivative to obtain 63, which showed a favorable PK
and activity profile including a half-life greater than 24 h, 2 orders
of magnitude selectivity for HCMV protease over acetylcholine esterase,
elastase, and thrombin, and an excellent IC50. Importantly, this compound had high nanomolar
to low micromolar antiviral activity in cell culture against lab strain
AD169, equivalent to ganciclovir (1), and low cytotoxicity,
creating an excellent therapeutic index. Finally, an unsubstituted
benzothiazole derivative showed acceptable bioavailability in dogs
and good brain and ocular penetration in guinea pigs. This exciting work is a quintessential example
of hit-to-lead drug discovery utilizing a combination of rational
SAR, combinatorial chemistry, and structure-based drug design to address
not only in vitro potency, but also pharmacological
considerations critical to drug discovery. Unfortunately, to our knowledge,
there is no literature describing the progression of the trans-lactams into animal disease models or clinical trials.

6.4.5

## Azetidine Inhibitors
Several papers
have aimed to develop efficacious noncovalent active-site inhibitors
against HCMV protease that move away from substrate-based β-lactam
compounds. The first examples of the
switch from covalent inhibitor to noncovalent inhibitor against HCMV
protease were published in 2004. The authors first hypothesize that
derivatives at the C4 position with carbonyl functionality (64) will introduce an interaction with Arg165 and Arg166,
which function to stabilize the oxyanion hole. , Interestingly, the absolute stereochemistry of the covalent inhibitors
had little effect on potency in either the AD-169 or Davies strain.
The first compounds showed a narrow effective concentration range,
however, and all displayed significant cellular toxicity. Removing
the electrophile from the β-lactam led to the discovery of azetidine 65, which is hypothesized to be the first noncovalent competitive
inhibitor of the HCMV protease. The
compound displays an excellent cellular EC50, comparable
to ganciclovir (1), but cellular toxicity remains an
issue. These compounds were not assayed against isolated protease,
so it is difficult to assess any relationship between biochemical
and cellular potencies.
Subsequent efforts to more fully understand
the structure–activity relationships describe modifications
to the lactam nitrogen substituents as well as the C4 carbonyl substitutions.
The authors explore conformational rigidity and stereochemical consequences
of lactam and azetidine compounds and extend the cellular assays to
include VZV. , However, the SAR is complicated.
The benzyl carbamate 65 remains the preferential substituent
over urea derivatives, and the simpler tert-butyl
esters are preferred over amino acid coupled esters and amides at
the C4 carbonyl position. , Overall, the balance
between potency and toxicity remains an issue for these compounds
and further work on the mechanism of action is warranted.

6.4.6

## Benzoxazinone and Thieno[2,3-d]oxazinone Mechanism-Based
Inhibitors
Scientists at SmithKline
Beecham (now GlaxoSmithKline) and Searle (now a part of Pfizer) took
an alternative approach focused on benzoxazinones typified by 66 and related compounds which are mechanism-based serine
protease inhibitors, particularly of human leukocyte elastase. In 1996 Jarvest et al. from SmithKline Beecham
developed benzoxazinones that inhibit HSV-1 protease. The authors
began their optimization efforts by synthesizing derivatives that
contain the alanine from the HSV-1 VNA/S cleavage recognition sequence. The initial efforts verified that inhibition
takes place through an acyl-enzyme intermediate, stereochemistry around
the amino acid moieties is relevant, specific SAR exists at various
positions of the benzoxazinone, and the aqueous half-life could be
optimized. The optimized compound from the initial work contained
an isopropyl amine in the 2- position of the benzoxazinone and a Cbz-Ala-NH
in the 7- position (67). This inhibitor had an IC50 of 5 μM on HSV-1 protease and an aqueous half-life
of 171 h. Similar inhibitors designed
from the known elastase inhibitors were concurrently developed against
HCMV protease. The most potent benzoxazinone
inhibitor (68) of HCMV protease had an IC50 of 0.22 μM; however, it was not selective (e.g., IC50 against chymotrypsin of 0.065 μM). Selective inhibitors were
about 10-fold less potent. 
Optimization
of related thienoxazinone compounds typified by 69 as
a follow-up study by the scientists at SmithKline Beecham yielded
nanomolar inhibitors of HSV-1, HSV-2, and HCMV proteases. SAR in the series varied between the proteases,
and selectivity remained challenging. A follow-up report described
reoriented thienophenes as in 70. The simplest compound
in the study, an unsubstituted cinnamoyl group at the R position of 70 inhibits HSV-2, VZV, and HCMV proteases with 300, 38, and
500 nM IC50 values, respectively. The authors reported
reasonable cytotoxicity data but do not report selectivity over other
relevant proteases. A second lead that used a 2-bromo-5-methyl thiophene
in place of the benzyl group of the initial cinnamoyl hit inhibits
HSV-2, VZV, and HCMV proteases with 270, 8, and 210 nM IC50s, respectively. Both lead compounds
showed no inhibition of elastase and trypsin up to 100 μM and
inhibited HSV-2 protease in cells with ∼8 μM potency—though
the assay was not described and the citation which had been submitted
for publication was never published, leaving the assay design and
interpretation unclear. , It was later reported
by these same authors that additional unpublished data revealed that
these inhibitors did not show antiviral activity in a yield reduction
assay. Without publication of the cell
culture assays and data it is difficult to make sense of these ostensibly
conflicting results (though the nanomolar IC50s in enzymatic
assays remain interesting).

6.4.7

## Spirocyclopropyl
Oxazolones and the Benzylidine N-Sulphonyloxyimidazolones
Mechanism-Based Inhibitors
The scientists from SmithKline
Beecham also identified two new
classes of serine protease inhibitors, the spirocyclopropyl oxazolones
(71) and N-substituted benzylidine imidazolones (72). The SAR shows excellent
selectivity over the canonical mammalian serine proteases elastase,
trypsin, and chymotrypsin for the oxazolones. Several of the oxazolone
analogs with an exodouble bond or acyclic aliphatic chain replacing
the cyclopropyl moiety highlight the importance of the cyclopropyl
group which is hypothesized to properly orient the optimal phenyl
substituent (i.e., R3 = Ph, 71). The most
potent spirocyclopropyl oxazolone had IC50 values of 500
nM and 200 nM against HSV-2 and HCMV proteases, respectively, while
showing modest inhibition at elastase, trypsin, and chymotrypsin at
100 μM. Interestingly, the reported imidazolones were generally
less potent, showing only minimal activity of HSV-2 protease. These
compounds were initially hypothesized to inhibit the enzymes through
the previously described nucleophilic attack/elimination/Lössen
rearrangement reported by Groutas et al. for the structurally similar
succinamide inhibitors of elastase. However,
mechanistic studies of the imidazalones did not observe the expected
acyclic product, but rather isolated an imidazole leading to the proposed
mechanism in Scheme . A sulfonate of the imidazolone with an ethenylbenzene in
place of the phenylcyclopropyl moiety was also active against HCMV
protease with an IC50 of 0.4 μM, while showing little
inhibition of HSV-2 protease. 
 

6.5

## Human
Herpesvirus Protease Dimerization and
Activation
Dimerization is an essential step in the activation
of all human herpesvirus proteases. , The dimer
interface is composed largely of helix 5–helix 5 intermonomeric
interactions, with additional binding surface contributed by helix
1 of each monomer. On average these bury 2000 Å2 surface
area. Unlike HIV protease, each monomer contains its own Ser-His-His
catalytic triad, and these active sites are functional and independent
of one another. Titration of inactive catalytic serine-to-alanine
mutants into wild type monomeric enzyme drives dimerization and activates
the wild type monomer of the heterodimeric species. Two key studies provide a mechanism by which dimerization
is allosterically linked to activation at the catalytic site and support
the notion that this mechanism is conserved across HHV proteases.
Batra et al. demonstrate by mutagenesis and structure determination
that mutation of the dimer interface of HCMV protease can result in
a dimerization-competent protein that is nonetheless inactive due
to a rearrangement of the conserved residues that help form the oxyanion
hole. A single point mutation, S225Y, results in a dimer where conserved
residues Arg165 and Arg166 are disordered. Arg165 is part of the oxyanion
hole, and Arg166 contributes to its stabilization. This loss of the
oxyanion hole explains the roughly 1700-fold reduction in kcat for this mutant. Interestingly, the catalytic
triad (which resides on the core β-barrel of these proteases)
is unperturbed in the S225Y variant. In support of this model, the KM of substrate binding and the disassociation
constant (Kd) of dimerization are unchanged
as well. As a first hint of allosteric networks throughout these proteases,
the binding of an activated peptidomimetic inhibitor caused a structural
change in the variant protease that reverted it to a wild type conformation. The structure of the monomer for these variants,
however, remained elusive. Pray et al. interrogated conformational
changes between monomer and dimer using circular dichroism and tryptophan
fluorescence. These data confirmed an increase in helical content
upon dimerization leading to the hypothesis that dimerization orders
the two c-terminal helices and that this results in activation. Indeed, subsequent studies validated that hypothesis. 13C HSQC NMR chemical shift index measurements and NMR hydrogen/deuterium
exchange experiments show the two C-terminal helices of KSHV protease
are ordered in the dimer and largely disordered in the monomer. Furthermore,
an engineered disulfide bond between the C-terminal helix and oxyanion
loop acts as a redox switch that can activate the enzyme. Even the
obligate monomeric enzyme, KSHV protease M197D, can be activated in
this way showing that the monomer is catalytically active when in
the appropriate conformation. 
How then is dimerization regulated? The most obvious answer is through
changes in concentration of the enzyme. This is consistent with the
current model of HHV protease activation, wherein it is concentrated
into the nucleus and ultimately the immature capsid as a fusion to
the capsid assembly protein. As was suggested by the work of Batra
et al., communication between the substrate binding site and the dimer
interface also regulates dimerization and thus activity. This was
illustrated by the use of an optimized hexapeptide diphenylphosphonate
inhibitor of KSHV protease. In an initially puzzling result observed
by Marnett et al., addition of this covalent inhibitor up to roughly
0.4 mol equiv relative to protease concentration actually increased
enzyme activity, followed by a decrease at higher inhibitor concentrations.
An NMR assay using a selectively labeled methionine at the dimer interface
revealed that inhibitor addition promoted dimerization. Size exclusion
chromatography confirmed this, and circular dichroism indicated an
increase in helical content upon dimerization. Thus, in the absence
of inhibitor the majority of enzyme is monomeric and inactive. As
inhibitor is increased up to roughly 0.5 mol equiv a population of
stabilized dimers in which only a single monomer is inhibited emerges,
leaving the other monomer in a highly active conformation and able
to process substrate. Further increase in the inhibitor concentration
leads to an increasing population of enzyme for which both monomers
are inhibited and overall enzyme activity is reduced. This study solidified
a model in which enzymatic activity is linked to quaternary structure
and an allosteric link exists between the dimer interface and the
substrate binding site. Interestingly, these data also suggest that
substoichiometric active-site inhibition of HHV proteases may lead
to overall activation, a potential contributor to the challenges realized
by those developing active-site inhibitors of these unusual enzymes. The cocrystal structure of KSHV protease and
the hexapeptide phosphonate inhibitor supports these findings. 
The crystallization of an HHV protease
monomer for the first time
further supported this model of a significant structural change between
monomer and dimer and loss of the oxyanion hole as a mechanism by
which dimerization regulates activity (Figure ). Truncation of the two C-terminal helices from KSHV protease established
an obligate monomeric HHV protease. In the presence of a small-molecule
protein–protein interaction inhibitor, discussed in section , Lee et al. crystallized this monomeric KSHV
protease. Consistent with the findings from HCMV protease, monomeric
KSHV protease had a disordered oxyanion hole with no structural perturbation
of the catalytic triad. In the case of KSHV protease, however, the
substrate binding pocket was also occluded by a loop (residues 17–21,
Figure ). 

6.6

## Dimer Disruption as an Alternative to Active-Site
Inhibitors
Although a great deal of work has been put toward
developing active-site inhibitors of the HHV proteases, compounds
targeting the protease have yet to advance to the clinic. An alternative
approach that could potentially overcome limitations inherent to targeting
the shallow and dynamic active site is identifying small molecules
that prevent dimerization, and thus inhibit one or more of the HHV
proteases. Proof of concept for this approach was first achieved using
a peptide instead of small molecules. Interfacial helix 5 of KSHV
protease was grafted onto the avian pancreatic polypeptide (APP).
The avian pancreatic polypeptide scaffold provided stability for the
interfacial helix, whereas a peptide composed of the helix 5 residues
alone is unstructured and shows no inhibition within the solubility
limit of the peptide. This grafted helix 5 APP inhibited KSHV protease
with a 300 μM IC50. Size exclusion chromatography
was used to confirm that addition of the grafted helix 5 peptide results
in loss of the dimer species, and a 7-amino-4-carbamoylmethyl coumarin
(ACC) fluorogenic substrate was used to monitor inhibition of protease
activity. While providing proof of
concept, this peptide inhibitor lacked potency and would not be suitable
for showing antiviral efficacy in cell culture due to its likely being
unable to cross the cell membrane. To pursue a small-molecule inhibitor
of KSHV protease dimerization a 183-compound helical mimetic library
was screened using an optimized fluorogenic ACC substrate. From an
initial hit, a series of 4-benzoylaminobenzoic acid compounds were
synthesized, and a 3 μM inhibitor named dimer disruptor 2 (DD2, 73) was identified. Again, size
exclusion chromatography was used to show a loss of the dimeric state
of KSHV protease with increasing concentrations of inhibitor. Two-dimensional
protein NMR was also used to confirm dimer disruption and map binding
of the compound. Met197, a residue in helix 5, was selectively 13C labeled, and a 13C-HSQC was used to probe dimerization
state. The monomer–dimer equilibrium showed slow exchange kinetics
on the NMR time scale revealing distinct monomer and dimer peaks that
could be used to monitor the monomer and dimer populations in solution.
Addition of DD2 resulted in a complete loss of the dimer peak and
a chemical shift perturbation of the monomer peak. Uniform 15N labeling and 15N HSQC showed significant peak broadening
for Trp109 suggesting DD2 binds at or near Trp109, an aromatic hotspot
at the dimer interface. Truncation of
helix 6 and all but a single turn of helix 5 enabled crystallization
of the monomer bound to DD2. This crystal structure confirmed that
the small molecule bound at the dimer interface in a transient hydrophobic
pocket formed by rotation of the tryptophan indole side chain causing
the structural changes diagramed in Figure . While this approach validated the
dimer interface as a druggable site on KSHV protease, solubility and
permeability of DD2 appear to have prevented its use in cell culture.
Therefore, KSHV protease, as of yet, has not been validated pharmacologically
though it is presumed that inhibition of the enzyme would prevent
viral replication as has been shown for other HHV proteases. While this lack of cell culture activity is
disappointing, disrupting dimerization to allosterically inactivate
the herpesviruses still is a promising approach, as is the DD2 scaffold.
Recently, a combination of kinetics, NMR, and crystallography revealed
that DD2 and two carboxylate bioisostere analogs inhibit not only
KSHV protease, but also HCMV, EBV, and to a lesser extent HSV-2 proteases. These data suggest that elaboration of the
DD2 scaffold could give rise to potent cell-permeable allosteric inhibitors
of HHV proteases. Such a compound would be one of few protein–protein
interaction inhibitors in an infectious disease setting and an exciting
advance in allosteric modulation of traditionally challenging targets.
 

7

## Conclusion
Enormous progress has been
made in the field of herpesvirus drug
discovery, though approved treatments are still limited to a single
viral target. Herpesviruses such as Kaposi’s sarcoma-associated
herpesvirus and Epstein–Barr Virus have no approved antiviral
treatments—despite causing severe disease. Cytomegalovirus
infection has no approved treatment in the congenital setting, and
treatments for the organ transplant and HIV/AIDS settings suffer from
resistance and dose-limiting toxicities. 
Encouragingly, many
scientists in both academia and industry are
stepping up to the challenge. Small molecules against multiple herpesviruses
with targets throughout the viral replication cycle are being developed.
Many of these have activity in cell culture; some are making it to
clinical trials. These inhibitors span the gamut in both target and
mechanism: competitive kinase inhibitors, prodrug DNA polymerase inhibitors,
allosteric protease inhibitors, and host–protein inhibitors,
to name only a few. The field is clearly on the move. As we increase
our understanding of herpesvirus biology and improve our ability to
target “undruggable” proteins, even the lauded goal
of targeting latency may become a reality.
The complexity of
herpesviruses presents both challenges and opportunities
for drug discovery. These viruses encode more than 100 proteins, many
with unclear biology. Small open reading frames and noncoding RNA
are abundant and varied, with little known about their function. , These challenges also represent opportunities. Indeed, every one
of these macromolecules provides a chance to both better understand
and prevent human disease through chemical intervention.

The authors declare no
competing financial interest.
 
Jonathan
E. Gable obtained a B.S. in biochemistry/chemistry from
the University of California, San Diego, in 2008 where he worked in
the laboratory of Professor Judy E. Kim studying antimicrobial peptides
and membrane-protein folding. He is currently an NSF Graduate Fellow
and biophysics Ph.D. candidate in the laboratory of Professor Charles
S. Craik at the University of California, San Francisco. His thesis
project focuses on the development and characterization of protein–protein
interaction antagonists and allosteric inhibitors of herpesvirus proteases.
 
Timothy M. Acker obtained his Bachelor of Science degree
in biochemistry
from San Francisco State University. He attended Emory University
for his Ph.D. in biomedical sciences from the Molecular and Systems
Pharmacology Program with an emphasis in chemical biology in the laboratory
of Dr. Dennis C. Liotta. Tim is currently a Ruth L. Kirchstein NRSA
recipient and postdoctoral fellow in Dr. Charles Craik’s laboratory
at the University of California, San Francisco. His current work aims
to develop and explore the mechanism of novel allosteric dimer disruptor
inhibitors of the human herpesvirus protease.
 
Charles
S. Craik is a Professor in the Departments of Pharmaceutical
Chemistry, Cellular & Molecular Pharmacology, and Biochemistry
& Biophysics at the University of California, San Francisco. He
is also the founder and director of the Chemistry and Chemical Biology
Graduate Program. He received his Ph.D. in chemistry from Columbia
University in New York and carried out his postdoctoral research at
UCSF with Dr. William Rutter. He joined the UCSF faculty in 1985 where
his research interests focus on defining the roles and the mechanisms
of enzymes in complex biological processes and on developing technologies
to facilitate these studies. He is also founder of Catalyst Biosciences,
a biotechnology company focused on therapeutic proteases. The current
research in the Craik lab focuses on the chemical biology of proteolytic
enzymes and their natural inhibitors. A particular emphasis of his
work is on identifying the roles and regulating the activity of proteases
and degradative enzyme complexes associated with infectious diseases,
cancer, and development. These studies are providing a better understanding
of both the chemical make-up and the biological importance of these
critical proteins to aid in the rapid detection, moinitoring, and
control of infectious disease and cancer.

## Acknowledgments
We gratefully acknowledge UCSF Clinical and Translational
Science Institute (CTSI) Grants UL1 TR000004 and UL1 RR024131 and
NIH RO1 GM104659 for financial support. J.E.G. was supported by the
NIH Structural Biology Training Grant GM008284 and NSF Graduate Research
fellowship 1144247. T.M.A. was supported by NIH NIGMS NRSA fellowship
F32 GM111012.