822acssdJournal of Chemical Information and ModelingJ Chem Inf ModelPMC4550072455007245500722622545010.1021/acs.jcim.5b00103AlphaSpace: Fragment-Centric Topographical Mapping
To Target Protein–Protein Interaction Interfaces
RooklinDavid WangCheng KatigbakJoseph AroraParamjit
S ZhangYingkai †Department
of Chemistry, New York University, New York, New York 10003, United States‡NYU-ECNU
Center for Computational Chemistry at NYU Shanghai, Shanghai 200062, China*E-mail: yingkai.zhang@nyu.edu.
307201555815851585–15993072016Copyright © 2015 American Chemical SocietyThis is an open access article published under an ACS AuthorChoice License, which permits copying and redistribution of the article or any adaptations for non-commercial purposes.

## Abstract
 Inhibition
of protein–protein interactions (PPIs) is emerging
as a promising therapeutic strategy despite the difficulty in targeting
such interfaces with drug-like small molecules. PPIs generally feature
large and flat binding surfaces as compared to typical drug targets.
These features pose a challenge for structural characterization of
the surface using geometry-based pocket-detection methods. An attractive
mapping strategy—that builds on the principles of fragment-based
drug discovery (FBDD)—is to detect the fragment-centric modularity
at the protein surface and then characterize the large PPI interface
as a set of localized, fragment-targetable interaction regions. Here,
we introduce AlphaSpace, a computational analysis tool designed for
fragment-centric topographical mapping (FCTM) of PPI interfaces. Our
approach uses the alpha sphere construct, a geometric feature of a
protein’s Voronoi diagram, to map out concave interaction space
at the protein surface. We introduce two new features—alpha-atom
and alpha-space—and the concept of the alpha-atom/alpha-space
pair to rank pockets for fragment-targetability and to facilitate
the evaluation of pocket/fragment complementarity. The resulting high-resolution
interfacial map of targetable pocket space can be used to guide the
rational design and optimization of small molecule or biomimetic PPI
inhibitors.

statusreleaseddisplay-pdfyesis-in-collection-domainyesis-olfnois-manuscriptnois-preprintnois-journal-matternois-scannednois-retractednoReceived 2015 Feb 24; Issue date 2015 Aug 24.

## Introduction
Various protein–protein
interaction inhibitors (iPPIs) are
in development to treat cancer, − neurodegenerative disease, , autoimmune disease, , arthritis, viral infection, , bacterial infection, etc., and several have advanced into clinical
trials and beyond. Historically, PPI interfaces
have been considered comparatively intractable drug targets for typical
drug-like molecules. − But over the past decade, several approaches including
screening of natural product-like compounds, , mimicry of protein interfaces, , and fragment-based
drug discovery (FBDD) , have offered tangible success.
FBDD allows for the identification of small weakly binding chemical
fragments, which can be subsequently linked or extended into unique
multi-fragment scaffolds. , Fragment-based approaches
have led to the discovery of several high-affinity inhibitors that are highly complementary to the distinct
PPI interfaces they target, − and the tightest binders attain
picomolar affinities. , 
Alanine scanning mutagenesis , is commonly used to
identify residues that interact most favorably in a PPI complex. These
interactions, between individual hot spot residues and the partner
protein, are reminiscent of a fragment-centric view of the PPI interface.
Clusters of hot spot residues can serve as promising starting points
for the design of small molecule iPPIs, and biomimetic iPPIs are often designed specifically to preserve
these hot spot interactions and to optimize them. − While identification
of the important side chains can provide a good starting point for
PPI inhibitor design, alanine scanning does not provide structural
information about the surface involved in a hot spot interaction or
the degree of complementarity between the surface and the side chain
binding fragment. Thus, from an inhibitor design perspective, whether
using FBDD or the alanine scanning technique, it is of significant
interest and importance to obtain fragment-centric structural mapping
of the target interfaces.
Mapping of PPI interfaces is closely
related to the problem of
ligand binding site detection. Over the years, a number of diverse
algorithms have been developed for this purpose, which fall into four
general categories: geometry-based, − probe-based, − grid-based, − and docking-based. − Some methods rely on the structure alone, while others incorporate
energetic terms or sequence conservation into the pocket detection.
Examples from all categories perform strongly when detecting classical
ligand binding pockets, which are often large isolated cavities in
the protein surface with well-defined concavity. , , Some of these methods have been applied
to investigate PPI interfaces, such as Q-SiteFinder (a grid-based pocket detection method), FTMap − (a docking-based solvent-mapping method), and FindBindSite (a ligand/fragment-docking-based method), all
of which reveal that PPI interfaces are not adequately described by
a single cavity, but comprise multiple interaction regions. On the
other hand, the grid- and structure-based method DoGSite , has applied the concept of subpockets to demonstrate that a higher-resolution
characterization of classical ligand binding pockets is generally
feasible and practical, however this approach has yet to be applied
to PPI interfaces.
Because PPIs often feature large and flat
binding surfaces, without
the deep pockets of typical drug targets, they pose a distinct challenge
for geometry-based pocket-detection methods in providing a meaningful
fragment-centric structural characterization. For example, the application
of three popular geometry-based methods (CASTp, fpocket, and single linkage
clustering similar to SiteFinder ) to
characterize two established druggable PPI interfaces—Mdm2/p53 , and Bcl-xL/Bak , —results in inconsistent
definitions of pocket profiles (see Figure S1). The results do not represent the fragment-centric interactions
observable at the interfaces and suggest a limited utility of the
methods from a FBDD perspective. We observe three specific limitations:
incomplete interface coverage, pocket expansion into solvent-inaccessible
regions, and overconsolidation of pocket space across multiple side
chain interactions, which lowers the resolution of the interfacial
characterization.
In order to address the above limitations,
we have developed AlphaSpace,
a new computational analysis tool that features a fast geometry-based
approach to provide a comprehensive fragment-centric topographical
mapping of the PPI interface. AlphaSpace follows in the footsteps
of fpocket and MOE’s SiteFinder by using alpha spheres, a geometric feature
of a protein’s Voronoi diagram, to map out concave interaction
space at the surface of a protein. Prior to these, the application
of Voronoi tessellation to cavity detection originated in the pioneering
work of Liang et al. and was first implemented in the CAST program. However, AlphaSpace is unique among these existing
Voronoi-based methods in its general divergence from a cavity-centric
paradigm toward a fragment-centric and full-surface paradigm. Central
to our approach are two new features, alpha-atom and alpha-space,
and the new concept of the alpha-atom/alpha-space pair, which we utilize
to rank interaction regions for fragment-targetability and to evaluate
pocket/fragment complementarity to guide fragment optimization. Additional
AlphaSpace components, including Pocket matching and Pocket communities, extend the fragment-centric methodology
to establish a flexible pocket model and to identify highly targetable
protein surface regions.
In the following sections, first, we
present the methodology behind
AlphaSpace fragment-centric topographical mapping (FCTM) and highlight
aspects that enable AlphaSpace to reveal the fragment-centric modularity
at PPI interfaces and to quantitatively evaluate fragment-centric
pockets. For the initial section of the , we apply FCTM to the well-studied Mdm2/p53 PPI interface, discussing
the utility of fragment-centric inhibitor design features. FCTM results
are compared with the corresponding interaction regions detected using
fpocket and FTMap. In the second section of the , we evaluate the performance of AlphaSpace on a larger data set
of 12 PPI, 12 iPPI, and 9 apo structures from the 2P2I database. , Finally, we discuss a more general perspective on the AlphaSpace
methodology and present conclusions.

## Methods
The central
geometric construct employed by AlphaSpace is alpha
sphere, a geometric feature derived from the Voronoi diagram of a
set of points in three-dimensional space. The Voronoi diagram is a tessellation of the space containing the
points into a set of Voronoi cells, or polyhedrons, formed from planes
that bisect adjacent points from the set. The alpha sphere centers
are defined at the vertices of this tessellation. Each alpha sphere
center will be an intersection of six bisecting planes and equidistant
to exactly four points from the set. The concept of applying Voronoi
tessellation to protein structure was first introduced by Richards
in 1974, along with the “weighted”
Voronoi tessellation, a variation in the calculation to account for
different atomic radii that was later implemented by Liang et al.
in CAST. AlphaSpace employs the “classical”
Voronoi tessellation, also used by fpocket, for which all atoms are treated as equivalent points. In this case,
the alpha sphere makes contact with the centers of exactly four atoms
but is otherwise empty of other atomic centers. Its radius is measured
from alpha sphere center to atom center. Alpha spheres centered outside
the protein surface mark concave surface regions and can be used to
represent potential interaction space. A illustrates how a Voronoi diagram can be
used to map the concave interaction space in a two-dimensional schematic
model of shallow pockets in a surface.
 With AlphaSpace, we introduce two additional alpha sphere-related
geometric features: alpha-atom and alpha-space ( B,C). An alpha-atom shares a center with
its associated alpha sphere but with a reduced radius set to 1.8 Å.
An alpha-atom can be thought of as a theoretical ligand atom at a
discrete interaction point, positioned to make approximate contact
with the small region of protein surface associated with the set of
four alpha sphere contact atoms. The alpha-space is the volume of
the tetrahedron defined by the centers of the four alpha sphere contact
atoms. Every alpha-atom has an associated alpha-space, the volume
of which captures information about the relative positions of the
four contact atoms, which is related to the structure of the surface
region associated with these four atoms. The set of all alpha-spaces
for a set of points is equivalent to its Delaunay triangulation, the
dual graph of the Voronoi diagram.
AlphaSpace fragment-centric
topographical mapping (FCTM) is performed
in two stages: pocket identification and pocket evaluation, as shown
in .
 

## Stage 1: Pocket Identification
The
first stage, pocket
identification, consists of four consecutive steps:
I.Alpha Sphere
Detection. All alpha spheres are identified from the Voronoi
tessellation of
a protein structure. This step is the same as fpocket and MOE’s Site Finder. We employ the python wrapper to Qhull, available in the SciPy package, to
calculate the Voronoi diagram.
II.Alpha Sphere Filtration. Identified alpha spheres
are filtered by radius to remove from the
analysis spheres deemed too small to represent solvent-accessible
space (3.2 Å is set as the default minimum radius cutoff, Figure S2C) or too large to accurately represent
space within contact proximity of the protein surface (5.4 Å
is set as the default maximum radius cutoff, Figure S2B). These filtration parameters, which deviate from the corresponding
default parameters in fpocket (3.0 and 6.0 Å, respectively),
have been optimized to restrict our mapping to include only solvent-accessible
space near the surface of the protein.
III.Alpha Sphere Clustering. Remaining
alpha spheres are clustered into pockets, or “alpha-clusters”,
using an average linkage algorithm to restrict individual pocket size
to represent small, fragment-centric interaction spaces.
IV.Alpha-Cluster Selection. Pockets at the PPI interface, or within an expanded interface, are
then selected for subsequent quantitative evaluation.
In comparison with fpocket and MOE’s Site Finder, the main
deviation of AlphaSpace within this pocket identification stage is
in the third step, alpha sphere clustering, where we employ an average
linkage algorithm with an optimized clustering parameter to achieve
a fragment-centric mapping. Because of the subtlety in fragment-centric
structural modularity at PPIs, there is often not a well-defined gap
within the flow of alpha spheres across the surface. This is why fpocket’s
multi-step clustering algorithm (which
includes a multiple linkage step set to 2 by default) and SiteFinder’s
single linkage clustering algorithm are
observed to extend individual pocket space across multiple fragment
or side chain interactions (Figure S1).
AlphaSpace, alternatively, clusters filtered alpha spheres into localized
pockets, or alpha-clusters, using the average linkage routine in the
SciPy hierarchical clustering package. The algorithm uses the pairwise alpha sphere Euclidian distance
matrix to generate a dendrogram according to the average-linkage criterion
(Figure S3). The clustering parameter,
which is the maximum mean distance between elements of any single
cluster, determines where to cut this tree and, thus, the general
size and final number of alpha-clusters in the topographical map.
Here, by considering amino acid side chains to be the natural binding
fragments in PPIs, we fit this clustering parameter to yield, on average,
one alpha-cluster for every side chain engaged in a PPI. As shown
in Figure S4, the average number of side
chains per pocket is near unity when the maximum average linkage distance
is within the range 4.6 to 4.8 Å. We set the default value of
this parameter to be 4.7 Å.
Besides the third clustering
step, the fourth step, alpha-cluster
selection, also marks a conceptual break from the fpocket algorithm.
Fpocket, as a more classical cavity-centric pocket detection method,
aims to identify the most significant individual pockets as probable
enzymatic active sites or ligand binding pockets. This leads to incomplete
coverage for PPI interfaces, where many of the interactions involve
smaller and shallower fragment-centric pockets. AlphaSpace, alternatively,
does not screen pockets by number of alpha spheres but detects contact
with the molecular binding partner to select for the array of alpha-clusters
engaged in the PPI. This provides a landscape-like topographical map
with extensive coverage of the interaction interface. Furthermore,
in AlphaSpace, adjacent interaction regions are represented simultaneously
as discrete alpha-clusters and as overlapping pockets, with shared
pocket atoms along their boundaries. We leverage this pocket overlap
to moderate the expansion of interface contact maps to reveal unoccupied
targetable pockets near interaction interfaces.

## Stage 2: Pocket
Evaluation
Selected pockets from the
first stage are quantitatively characterized in Stage 2 of AlphaSpace
FCTM. The analysis includes Pocket ranking, Pocket-fragment complementarity, Pocket matching, and Pocket communities, as illustrated in . Pocket evaluation
is facilitated by the alpha-atom and alpha-space features and provides
a high-resolution map of underutilized and targetable pocket space
at a PPI interface.
We use alpha-space as a geometric feature
related to the size and shape of a localized region of protein surface.
The size of an individual alpha-space reflects the surface area and
curvature of the small surface region associated with the set of four
alpha sphere “contact” atoms ( ). While the set of alpha spheres in an alpha-cluster
will overlap, the corresponding set of alpha-spaces will fit face-to-face
to form a contiguous volume. This allows for the sum over all alpha-spaces
within a pocket to serve as a single metric that approximates the
surface area and curvature of the complete pocket. Figure S5 illustrates the geometric relationship between the
alpha-atom and the alpha-space in the context of an alpha-cluster
(the Trp92 pocket from Mdm2/p53).
The alpha-atom construct can
be used to calculate the alpha-cluster
contact surface area (ACSA) for each individual pocket. When alpha
spheres are clustered to define a pocket, the corresponding alpha-atoms
form an overlapping alpha-cluster, the outline of which represents
the approximate shape and size of that pocket’s complementary
pseudofragment ( ). To calculate the atomistic ACSAs for an individual pocket, we
use Naccess to calculate the atomistic
accessible surface areas for the protein structure alone and then
for the same protein in complex with that pocket’s single alpha-cluster.
Subtracting the atomistic values associated with the alpha-cluster
complex from the corresponding atomistic values associated with the
protein alone will yield non-zero (and positive) values only for the
set of atoms in direct contact with the alpha-cluster. These differences
are taken as the atomistic surface areas associated with that individual
pocket. The sum of these atomistic values provides the total ACSA
for that pocket.
 

## Pocket Ranking
Given a pocket J, we
calculate its pocket score with the following formula:
 where α is an alpha-space within pocket J with volume Vα, ACSAi,J is the alpha-cluster contact surface area
for atom i calculated using alpha-cluster J (for each alpha-space we sum over the four corresponding
alpha sphere contact atoms), and NPi,J is the binary polarity status for atom i in pocket J (1 for nonpolar atoms and 0 for polar atoms). Conceptually,
the pocket score is equivalent to the pocket’s nonpolar-weighted
alpha-space volume. The score was developed as a single term to correlate
well with a combination of nonpolar surface area and pocket curvature,
two structural/chemical features previously shown to reflect a pocket’s
maximal binding potential. Pocket score
development details are described in the Supporting Information, Section S4, and Figures S12–14.

## Pocket-Fragment Complementarity
If pocket J is engaged in a PPI or iPPI, we assess the structural complementarity
between the pocket and the bound chemical fragment with the following
formula:
 where
%occJ is
the percentage of the interaction space of pocket J that is occupied by the bound ligand, α is an alpha-space
within pocket J with volume Vα, and Oα is the binary
occupation status of α (1 if occupied and 0 if unoccupied).
Conceptually, we are partitioning the total alpha-space of the pocket
into occupied space and unoccupied space by leveraging the discrete
nature of each alpha-atom/alpha-space pair. Thus, the alpha-space
occupation status is mediated through the position of its corresponding
alpha-atom. Alpha-space occupation is conferred by spatial overlap
between its alpha-atom and an atom from the bound ligand molecule,
evaluated using a 1.6 Å cutoff distance measured between the
centers of the alpha-atom and the ligand atoms. This cutoff is designed
to be just longer than an average carbon–carbon bond length
so that an unoccupied alpha-atom should represent a targetable interaction
space, able to accommodate at least a methyl extension to the ligand,
given the proper structure and chemistry of the evolving ligand.

## Pocket Matching
In order to match similar fragment-centric
pockets among different structures of the same protein, we calculate
an n × n distance matrix, where n is the total number of interface pockets among all structures
included in the matching. Pocket matching can be
applied to any number of structures collectively. To calculate a pairwise
pocket distance, dJ,K, between pockets J and K, we represent
each pocket’s ACSA as an array of length i, where i is the total number of heavy atoms found
in the protein structure, containing the i atomistic
ACSAs for each pocket—this vector will be non-zero only for
the set of atoms in contact with that pocket’s alpha-cluster.
Our distance metric is inspired by the Jaccard distance, a statistic
used for evaluating the dissimilarity between sample sets, and is
implemented as
 where the sum of all nonshared ACSA
between
pocket J and pocket K is divided
by the total ACSA of pocket J and pocket K. This formula approximates the portion of the total pocket
surface area that is dissimilar between the two pockets; values will
range from 0, the distance between two identical pockets, to 1, the
distance between two pockets with zero shared atoms. Additionally,
for every pair of pockets from the same structure, the pocket distance
is artificially set to a large value of 10, which is to avoid matching
pockets within the same structure. From the calculated pairwise pocket
distance matrix, the average linkage hierarchical clustering approach
is employed to decompose all pockets into clusters, for which the
distance clustering parameter is set to 0.75 by default. All pockets
within one cluster are considered to be matched, and the pairwise
pocket similarity, sJ,K, is evaluated as 1 – dJ,K.
This Pocket matching approach serves
as the foundation for an alignment-free flexible pocket model, a concept
previously explored by Eyrisch and Helms to track pockets across a
molecular dynamics trajectory. A pocket
cluster defines a flexible pocket entity, in which the mutual similarity
describes an intrinsic degree of structural integrity, while differences
among individual pockets within the cluster indicate structural flexibility.

## Pocket Communities
Druggable PPI interfaces are typically
defined by multiple fragment targetable interaction regions in close
proximity, which often include one or several particularly important
anchor interactions. , − Inspired by
this anchor/satellite interaction concept, we have developed a Pocket community feature to detect potentially druggable
protein surface regions. First, all quantified pockets are classified
as core, auxiliary, or minor pockets by employing AlphaSpace pocket
score, for which the core and auxiliary pocket score cutoffs are set
to 100 and 30 by default. Then core pockets serve to initiate pocket
communities; each isolated core pocket or each set of overlapping
core pockets is designated as a community core. Each community core
is then expanded to include any overlapping auxiliary pockets. Each
expanded set of core and auxiliary pockets is designated as a pocket
community. This protocol does allow for pocket overlap between distinct
communities; overlapping communities are not consolidated. To qualify
as overlapping pockets—in both core pocket consolidation and
auxiliary pocket expansion—a pair of pockets must satisfy two
requirements: (1) share at least one pocket atom and (2) if the pockets
point away from each other, the angle between their directional pocket
vectors cannot be greater than 90°. The second requirement strengthens
the prediction of pocket community cotargetability; this is included
to avoid grouping together pockets that do share atoms but face opposite
directions. A pocket’s directional vector, a novel AlphaSpace
descriptor, is defined from the centroid of its pocket atoms to the
centroid of its alpha-cluster. The community score, which is the sum
of all pocket scores (core and auxiliary) within a community, can
be used to help detect potentially druggable protein surface regions.

## Results
We first utilized the well-studied Mdm2/p53
PPI as a test case
to retrospectively demonstrate how AlphaSpace fragment-centric topographical
mapping (FCTM) can be employed to facilitate rational PPI inhibitor
design. The Mdm2/p53 PPI offers an attractive model because of the
availability of high-resolution structures for the native PPI as well
as for Mdm2 bound to a biomimetic inhibitor, bound to a small molecule
fragment-based inhibitor, and in the apo protein state. We evaluate
the ability of AlphaSpace to identify hot spot-associated pockets
at the four interfaces and to detect and match important auxiliary
interaction regions. We then evaluate the application of AlphaSpace
to a larger data set of 12 PPI, 12 iPPI, and 9 apo structures from
the 2P2I database; this data set was curated to represent systems
successfully targeted by and crystallized with small molecule PPI
inhibitors. , We confirm that high-ranking
fragment-centric pockets are generally enriched at PPI and iPPI interfaces,
which we leverage using Pocket communities to identify
the iPPI interfaces from surface structures alone. We demonstrate
that Pocket matching between sets of PPI/iPPI/apo
protein structures allows us to identify and track similar pockets
at a fragment-centric resolution to measure pocket flexibility and
to characterize the structural integrity of the surface at functional
interfaces.

## Mdm2/p53: Pocket Ranking
Mdm2/p53 is an important PPI
and oncogene drug target, with several small molecule inhibitors currently
in clinical trials. Its PPI interface
is formed between a 13-residue helical section from the N-terminal
transactivation domain of p53 and a well-defined binding groove in
the surface of Mdm2. This interaction is known to be anchored by three
primary hot spot residues from p53—Phe19, Trp23, Leu26—and
a secondary hydrophobic interaction with Leu22. 
As shown in , AlphaSpace FCTM detects a total of seven contact
pockets in the surface of Mdm2 at the Mdm2/p53 interface. Aside from
pocket 3, which is occupied by the side-chains of Leu26 and Pro27,
and pocket 5, which interacts with the backbone of p53, the other
five pockets each clearly contact a single side chain from p53. There
is a distinct spatial overlap between the alpha-cluster centroids
and the pocket-bound peptide fragments. This indicates an innate structural
modularity in the protein surface that reflects the corresponding
side chain interactions. It should be noted that such a complete and
fragment-centric characterization of the Mdm2/p53 interface was not
achieved using fpocket with the default parameters. As shown in Figure S1B, the corresponding fpocket analysis
detects a single pocket in the surface of Mdm2 at the Mdm2/p53 interface,
spanning the Trp23, Leu26, and Pro27 interactions, and does not account
for the important Mdm2 interactions with Phe19 or Leu22 of p53.
 For the seven AlphaSpace pockets, the calculated pocket features—pocket
score, percent occupied, total alpha-space, and percent nonpolar—are
presented in . The pockets are ranked and numbered by pocket score. We find that
pocket 1 (score = 241; 72% occupied) and pocket 2 (score = 189; 94%
occupied) engage the two essential hot spot residues Trp23 and Phe19
of p53, respectively. The less occupied pocket 3 (score = 154; 33%
occupied) engages the third but less dominant hot spot residue Leu26.
These results are consistent with the experimental alanine-scanning
data for p53, as shown in Table S2, in which mutation of either Phe19 or
Trp23 reduces the Mdm2/p53 binding affinity below the detectable limit
and Leu26/Ala mutagenesis results in a significant reduction of binding
affinity by more than 50 fold. Meanwhile, the Leu22 of p53, whose
alanine mutagenesis results in a 10-fold decrease in Mdm2/p53 binding
affinity, interacts with the lowest ranked pocket 7 (score = 12; 100%
occupied). The targeting of a low-scoring pocket by an important residue
underscores that a truly complete pocket analysis depends on the surface
mapping of both binding partners. Either surface may simultaneously
function as both pocket and ligand, even for a helix-in-groove PPI
such as Mdm2/p53. When we, inversely, map the surface of the p53 helix,
we find Leu22 is involved in the formation of the most significant
p53 pocket (score = 37, 75% occupied), which, in the complex, binds
Val69 from Mdm2 (Figure S6). Thus, in targeting
a small auxiliary pocket, Leu22 also completes the formation of an
important interaction region on p53, enriching the quality of the
total PPI interaction.
The values for several other pocket-centric
and ligand-centric
descriptors are listed in Table S3, including
atom counts, polar atom counts, presence of charged species, and the
residue IDs of the contact fragments. Additionally, results for the
FCTM of a second well-studied system, the Bcl-xL/Bak PPI interface,
are presented in the Supporting Information. Table S5 reports the experimental alanine scanning data for the
Bak helical interaction domain. Figure S16 illustrates the FCTM of the Bcl-xL surface at the PPI interface.
Again, structural modularity can be observed in the overlap between
the interacting side chains of Bak and the alpha-cluster centroids.
The two highest scoring pockets correspond to the two primary Bak
hot spots—Leu78 and Ile85—and the two moderately high
scoring pockets correspond to two of the three secondary Bak hot spots—Val74
and Ile81. (The final secondary hot spot—Asp83—extends
into the solution, away from the PPI interface.) The additional pocket-centric
and ligand-centric features for Bcl-xL/Bak are presented in Table S6.

## Mdm2/p53: Pocket Matching
The Mdm2/p53 interface has
been effectively targeted using both fragment-based and biomimetic
inhibitor design. The nutlins, a set of cis-imidazoline small molecules
that mimic the four main interaction points, were the first inhibitors
discovered to modulate Mdm2/p53. Subsequent
FBDD efforts led to the discovery of the current ultrahigh affinity
inhibitors that optimize these primary interactions and introduce
additional, novel interaction points. , − 
We have selected two iPPI structures of Mdm2 in complex with
ultrahigh-affinity inhibitors emerging from each of these design strategies:
a small fragment-based molecule (a piperidinone sulfone derivative)
with IC50 0.10 nM (PDB: 4oas) and a d-peptide antagonist (DPMI-δ) with Kd 0.22 nM (PDB: 3tpx). displays the mapping of each
of these interfaces, along with those of the native Mdm2/p53 PPI (PDB: 1ycr) and the apo state of Mdm2 (PDB: 1z1m). This Mdm2/p53 map has been expanded to include unoccupied pockets
near the interface in addition to p53 contact pockets. The same interface
atom list from Mdm2/p53 was used to select for pockets in the apo
structure. For the two iPPIs, all ligand contact pockets are shown. Pocket matching is performed on the four Mdm2 structures
collectively, and the result is presented in .
 In the development of these picomolar
inhibitors, mirror image
phage display with chemical ligation , and fragment-based
screening methods led to the identification
of three auxiliary interaction sites in the vicinity of the Mdm2/p53
interface but not utilized in the native Mdm2/p53 PPI. These are an
acetate fragment binding region adjacent to the Leu22 interaction
site (targeted by both inhibitors), a hydrophobic patch on the opposite
side of the helix between the Trp23 and Leu26 binding pockets (targeted
by DPMI-δ), and the “glycine shelf”,
which is adjacent to the Phe19 binding pocket (targeted by the small
molecule inhibitor). FCTM of these interfaces not only identifies
each of these interaction regions as distinct pockets in the corresponding
iPPIs, but identifies all three interaction regions as unoccupied
pockets in the native Mdm2/p53 interface: pocket 7, pocket 10, and
pocket 6, respectively ( A).
The targeting of pocket 7, despite its low pocket
score, significantly
enhances the affinity of both inhibitors by introducing favorable
electrostatic interactions between the acetate fragment and Lys94,
His96, and, for DPMI-δ, His73. The affinity enhancement
due to this fragment is roughly 20-fold for the small molecule inhibitor and, for DPMI-α, a predecessor
to DPMI-δ, the alanine mutation of this acetate side
chain reduces affinity by about 10-fold. For DPMI-α, the alanine mutation of the Leu10,
which targets pocket 10, reduces affinity by 4.5-fold. Pocket 10 has
a particularly low pocket score, but, as with Leu22 of p53 discussed
above, the targeting of this pocket forms a reciprocal pocket in the
surface of DPMI-δ (score = 40) that is filled by
Leu54 from Mdm2 (Figure S7). The specific
affinity enhancement due to the targeting of pocket 6 by the tert-butyl fragment of the small molecule inhibitor is difficult
to assess independently since this fragment and the ethyl fragment
occupying pocket 2 were modified in tandem, but the initial targeting of this pocket in the development of its
predecessor, AM-8553, enhanced affinity about 20-fold. Overall, this indicates that the targeting of
small, auxiliary pockets, detectable using AlphaSpace, can facilitate
the productive design of competitive PPI inhibitors.

## Mdm2/p53: Pocket-Fragment
Complementarity
The top three
pockets from the Mdm2/p53 interface are associated with the primary
hot spot residues from p53 and can be matched with three similar pockets
from the iPPI interface between Mdm2 and the ultrahigh-affinity small
molecule inhibitor ( ). Using Pocket-fragment complementarity,
we measure improvements for all three pockets between the native PPI
and the optimized iPPI. For pocket 1 and pocket 3, by individually
aligning the matching pockets using the positions of shared pocket
atoms, we can visualize the spatial relationship between the unoccupied
subspace detected in the native PPI and the corresponding occupied
space in the iPPI. From the alignment of pocket 1, we observe the
phenyl ring from the 4-chlorophenyl inhibitor fragment is aligned
with the six-member ring of Trp23. The chloro fragment on the inhibitor
extends directly into the unoccupied space identified near Trp23,
and the pocket-fragment complementarity improves from 72% occupied
in the PPI to 95% occupied in the iPPI. For pocket 3, occupation is
only 33% in the PPI; neither of the interacting residues (Leu26, Pro27)
is optimally positioned to extend into the core of the pocket, leaving
considerable unoccupied interaction space. Alternatively, the 3-chlorophenyl
fragment from the inhibitor approaches the pocket from a different
angle, and the halogen extends directly into the space unoccupied
in the PPI, boosting pocket occupation to 98%. Regarding pocket 2,
the conservation of high pocket-fragment complementarity between the
PPI and the iPPI (94% and 100% respectively) is a good example of
functional pocket flexibility. This pocket, expanded in the PPI to
accommodate the bulky side chain of Phe19, collapses significantly
in the iPPI in response to the smaller ethyl fragment, retaining complementarity
with the ligand. As highlighted in , the structural mechanism for this pocket
flexibility is driven primarily by loop dynamics.
 

## Mdm2/p53: Comparison to FTMap
FTMap , is a computational solvent mapping software used to identify high
quality interaction space at the protein surface. By virtue of its
fragment-docking algorithm, FTMap employs a naturally fragment-centric
approach. We compare the topographical mapping results for the Mdm2
interfaces under study with the corresponding FTMap results (Figure S8). In general, the results from the
two methods are remarkably consistent. The interaction regions detected
by FTMap at the interfaces of Mdm2 overlap precisely with alpha-clusters
detected by AlphaSpace, and aside from a few instances, the overlapping
interaction regions are described at a similar resolution (i.e., one
AlphaSpace alpha-cluster overlaps with one FTMap probe cluster). However,
we observe that AlphaSpace provides more comprehensive coverage of
the interaction interfaces. Several small auxiliary pockets, detected
by AlphaSpace and directly targeted by the inhibitors we have discussed,
go undetected in the FTMap results. Additionally, for the apo state
of Mdm2, FTMap identifies only two of the seven pockets detected by
AlphaSpace. These unidentified pockets generally exhibit lower fragment-targetability,
but their detection is critical to achieve a comprehensive and continuous
map of the interface. Overall, the clear agreement between methods
in identifying and localizing high-quality interaction regions is
very encouraging given the strength of the FTMap results published
in the literature. , 

## 2P2I Data Set: Pocket Ranking
In order to evaluate
the performance of FCTM applied to a larger data set, we used AlphaSpace
to map a total of 33 protein surfaces (12 PPIs, 12 iPPIs, and 9 apo
structures) taken from the 2P2I database. These PPIs exhibit a diverse set of interfacial structures including
various α helix, β sheet, and loop motifs. If multiple
iPPI complexes were available for the same protein, we selected the
complex corresponding to the highest affinity inhibitor. (See Table S1 for the complete list of PDB IDs used
in the analysis and the Supporting Information regarding the two systems omitted due to incompatibility.)
AlphaSpace maps provide comprehensive coverage of PPI/iPPI interfaces.
On average, 89% and 95% of all interfacial surface area is characterized
for PPIs and iPPIs, respectively, by the sets of fragment-centric
contact pockets engaged in binding at the interfaces (Table S4). To confirm the enrichment of high-ranking
pockets at the PPI/iPPI interfaces, we mapped the entire protein surface
of each structure (for the 12 matching PPI/iPPI pairs) into fragment-centric
interaction regions and then scored and ranked each pocket among all
other pockets in that protein. We evaluated the rankings for the subset
of pockets found at the PPI/iPPI interfaces. As shown in A, “high-ranking”
pockets (90th percentile and above) are sharply enriched at the interfaces
of the PPIs and the iPPIs, appearing 2.6 and 4.9 times their expected
values. The higher enrichment and lower pocket count at iPPI interfaces
indicate that PPI inhibitors do target high-scoring AlphaSpace pockets.
 

## 2P2I Data Set: Pocket-Fragment
Complementarity
We also
evaluated the complementarity between high-ranking PPI/iPPI pockets
and the peptide or inhibitor fragments they bind. Pocket-fragment
complementarity is expressed as the percent occupation of a pocket,
calculated as described in the section. B illustrates that,
generally, high-ranking PPI and iPPI interface pockets bind to their
respective fragments with moderate to high complementarity. However,
there is a distinct shift for high-ranking iPPI pockets toward higher
pocket occupation; 47% of high-ranking iPPI pockets are occupied above
90% compared to 20% of high-ranking PPI pockets. Better complementarity
may contribute to the generally high ligand efficiency (LE) documented
for successful iPPIs. Furthermore, from
an inhibitor design perspective, partially unoccupied PPI pockets
represent opportunities to optimize affinity over the native interactions.

## 2P2I Data Set: Pocket Communities
To leverage the observed
enrichment of high-scoring pockets at iPPIs, AlphaSpace uses Pocket communities, as described in the section, to search the protein surface for overlapping
clusters of high-scoring pockets. This method is intended to detect
fragment-based drug-targetable surface regions from the surface structure
alone. To validate the application, we evaluated the performance of Pocket communities to identify the known druggable surface
regions from the 12 iPPIs in our 2P2I data set. In 8 out of 12 structures,
the iPPI interface is identified as the #1 ranked pocket community;
in 11 out of 12 structures, the iPPI interface is identified in the
top 3 ranked pocket communities. In 9 out of the 11 identified iPPIs,
the druggable interface is represented by a single pocket community;
otherwise, two pocket communities represent the interface. shows the high precision
in our detection of the druggable interfaces. For 10 out of 11 predicted
iPPI interfaces, the pocket communities account for 100% of the core
and auxiliary pockets in contact with the ligand. And for the 11 identified
iPPI interface, there are, on average, 2.1 unoccupied pockets included
in the corresponding pocket communities. In practice, these unoccupied
pockets may represent viable auxiliary pockets yet to be targeted.
(See to visualize
the druggable pocket communities identified for two example systems:
TNFalpha and Bcl-xL.)
 We also test the performance of Pocket communities to detect drug-targetable communities in the corresponding apo structures
near the known iPPI interfaces. For 5 out of 9 apo structures, the
druggable interface can still be identified as the #1 ranked pocket
community, and 1 more interface is identified by the #2 ranked pocket
community. For the remaining three apo structures—Il-2, Bcl-xL,
and ZipA—no pocket communities are identified at the known
iPPI interfaces. To clarify, an interface will not register as a pocket
community unless at least one core pocket can be detected. However,
for the three apo interfaces that do not register as pocket communities,
we do observe several fragment-centric pockets scoring very close
to the core pocket score cutoff, indicating that the method is sensitive
to their latent druggability. We believe that the inability to detect
high targetability at these particular interfaces is probably an accurate
result for the apo states, especially given a previous report that
several apo conformations of targeted iPPI interfaces require the
rotation of interfacial side chains to improve their targetability. 

## 2P2I Data Set: Pocket Matching
Next,
we evaluated the
performance of Pocket matching as a model to track
pockets at a fragment-centric resolution between PPI, iPPI, and apo
structures for the nine systems with available structures for all
three states. This allows us to assess the degree of structural conservation
or flexibility at the protein surface between the apo structure and
the complex structures. For the apo structures, we only include pockets
in contact with the inhibitor compound from the corresponding iPPI
after superimposing the iPPI structure onto the apo structure. The
motivation here is to explore the ability of AlphaSpace to identify
and assess, specifically, pockets in each apo structure that are near
the verified druggable interaction regions from the iPPIs. (See Figure S9 for a visual representation of the
pocket matching results for all nine systems.) presents, as an example, the pocket matching
results for Menin, which exhibits well-conserved pockets across all
three surface states. Figure S10 illustrates,
for TNFalpha, how the surface structure can change at the fragment-centric
resolution from the apo interface to the iPPI interface.
 The results from indicate that there
are, on average, 4.3 fragment-centric
pockets detected near the druggable surface region for each apo structure
in the data set, and most of these pockets, 79%, can be matched to
binding pockets identified in the iPPI structures. Comparing the apo
vs iPPI pocket scores for the set of 31 pockets that match between
iPPI and apo structures reveals that, while 58% of the fragment-centric
pockets do exhibit reduced scores in the apo structures, which reflects
the general expectation that pockets are attenuated in apo surfaces,
23% of the apo pockets exhibit higher scores than the matching pockets
at the iPPI interfaces, and 19% exhibit similar pocket scores between
the two states.
 There
are, on average, 11 fragment-centric pockets identified at
each PPI interface (this drops to 8.3 if TNFalpha is omitted which
has the largest PPI interface with 33 fragment-centric pockets), and
roughly half of this pocket count, 5.1 pockets on average, is identified
at iPPI interfaces. Seventy-five percent of all iPPI pockets can be
matched to pockets identified in the native PPIs. Interestingly, among
these 34 pockets that match between the PPIs and iPPIs, 41% exhibit
higher scores in the iPPI, 41% exhibit lower scores in the iPPI, and
18% exhibit similar pocket scores. This result indicates that many
pockets are conserved between these structures but still the interfaces
tend to adapt differently to the different binding partners. Furthermore,
25% of all iPPI pockets are distinct from pockets detected in the
PPIs, which also highlights the flexibility at functional interfaces
and the ability of AlphaSpace to detect when an inhibitor has targeted
a novel pocket. On average, there are 2.6 pockets per system that
match between all three protein structure states.

## 2P2I Data Set:
Ligand–Alpha-Cluster Volume/Shape Correlation
In order
to highlight the capacity for alpha-clusters to serve
as mock molecular binders, we evaluate the volumetric correlation
and shape similarity between the bound PPI inhibitors and the corresponding
sets of contact alpha-clusters. For the correlation between the total
contact alpha-cluster volume and the total ligand volume, we calculate r = 0.77. This demonstrates a general volumetric correlation,
but to evaluate the mock ligand feature more precisely, we can omit
from the calculated volumes the specific alpha-atoms representing
unoccupied interaction space as well as parts of the inhibitor molecule
not in direct contact with the surface (i.e., outside 4.5 Å from
the protein surface). For this corrected correlation between the occupied
alpha-atom volume and the surface-contact ligand volume, we calculate r = 0.92. Furthermore, as shown in , the linear fit for these corrected volumes
is quite similar to the line y = x. This result demonstrates
that alpha-clusters roughly approximate the actual size of corresponding
molecular ligands. In , we show the overlapping alpha-cluster and inhibitor structures
for three example systems—Bcl-xL, Il-2, and Xiap—in
order to illustrate the global shape similarity between the inhibitors
and each set of occupied alpha-atoms.
 

## Discussion
AlphaSpace
represents a departure from existing geometry-based
pocket detection in two central aspects. The first is our emphasis
on providing a comprehensive map of interaction space across the molecular
interface of interest. The map is not limited to hot spots but extends
to cover all concave interaction regions engaged in binding and can
be systematically expanded further to reveal unoccupied, targetable
pockets near the interface. The conventional cavity-centric approach
is to screen out what is appraised as insignificant interaction space
and deliver only a small set of the highest-ranking pockets. However,
as shown for the high-affinity Mdm2/p53 iPPIs, small auxiliary pockets
can provide guidance for the extension of fragment-based inhibitors
and can provide opportunities to enhance ligand affinity and selectivity.
Demonstrated for the protein targets in the 2P2I database, AlphaSpace
can effectively match and track pockets between the apo, PPI, and
iPPI states, detecting pocket conservation as well as pocket modulation
between conformations. Pocket matching provides a model to study the
dynamic integrity of functional interfaces and to characterize interface
flexibility at a fragment-centric resolution.
The second major
divergence of AlphaSpace is our development of
a fragment-centric strategy compared to the long-standing cavity-centric
approach. We have found that PPI interfaces are more accurately comprised
of arrays of shallow pockets, which exhibit more subtle spatial separation
than classical binding sites, but can still contribute to overall
binding affinity and are likely to dictate the details of interaction
selectivity. The experimental strategies used to target these surfaces
are evolving from traditional compound screening approaches to fragment-based
screening approaches. This shift has facilitated the successful development
of a number of high affinity compounds with unique molecular scaffolds. The fragment-centric design of AlphaSpace is
a direct response to this methodological shift. Our strategy is to
subdivide broad PPI interfaces into localized fragment-centric interaction
regions, reflecting the types of pockets targeted with FBDD. In addition,
at this fragment-centric resolution, AlphaSpace evaluates pocket-fragment
complementarity to pinpoint unoccupied interaction space for fragment
optimization.
Accounting for the complete determinants of PPI
affinity is a complex
challenge; however, the primary roles of the hydrophobic effect and
of VdW interactions have been established and robustly reiterated
within the literature. , − The AlphaSpace pocket score is
not intended to be a definitive, nor absolute, PPI/iPPI scoring function.
At the least, a more accurate interaction analysis will require the
integration of more explicit electrostatic and desolvation terms.
Rather, our pocket score was developed to be a practical metric reflecting
two key structural features related to the hydrophobic effect—nonpolar
surface area and pocket curvature—to discern the approximate,
relative targetabilities of fragment-centric interaction regions.
Importantly, the scoring function is calculated from the surface structure
alone, allowing for the screening of any protein surface to search
for highly targetable pocket communities as potential starting points
for fragment-based inhibitor development.

## Conclusion
The
therapeutic modulation of protein–protein interactions
represents an important and rapidly expanding field of scientific
research. AlphaSpace fragment-centric topographical mapping (FCTM)
is a new alpha sphere-based pocket detection tool designed to provide
a high-resolution visual and quantitative characterization of all
interaction space at a PPI interface. We have illustrated how several
attractive features of AlphaSpace can facilitate the rational design
and optimization of fragment-based or biomimetic PPI inhibitors. AlphaSpace
is implemented in Python, and a copy can be obtained free of charge
for academic use from http://www.nyu.edu/projects/yzhang/AlphaSpace. We hope that AlphaSpace FCTM will become a useful tool for the
community to assist in the discovery of novel and potent PPI inhibitors.

## Acknowledgments
We acknowledge
support from NIH (R01-GM079223 to Zhang, R01GM073943
to Arora). We thank NYU-ITS and NYUAD for providing computational
resources. Molecular images were generated with the UCSF Chimera package. 

## Supporting Information Available
The Supporting
Information
is available free of charge on the ACS Publications website at DOI: 10.1021/acs.jcim.5b00103.
Figures, tables,
implementation and parametrization
details, and results for the FCTM of a second system, the Bcl-xL/Bak
PPI interface. (PDF)

The authors
declare no competing financial interest.

## Supplementary Material
ci5b00103_si_001.pdf

## References
 

## Associated Data

## Supplementary Materials
ci5b00103_si_001.pdf