J Med ChemJ. Med. Chem822acssdjmJournal of Medicinal Chemistry0022-26231520-4804pmc-is-collection-domainyespmc-collection-titleACS AuthorChoicePMC5346970PMC5346970.1534697053469702807465310.1021/acs.jmedchem.6b009751PerspectiveThe Essential Medicinal
Chemistry of Curcumin
MiniperspectiveNelsonKathryn
M. DahlinJayme L. BissonJonathan GrahamJames PauliGuido F. WaltersMichael A. †Department
of Medicinal Chemistry, Institute for Therapeutics Discovery and Development, University of Minnesota, Minneapolis, Minnesota 55414, United States‡Department
of Pathology, Brigham and Women’s
Hospital, Boston, Massachusetts 02115, United States§Center
for Natural Product Technologies, Department of Medicinal Chemistry
and Pharmacognosy, College of Pharmacy, University of Illinois at Chicago, 833 South Wood Street, Chicago, Illinois 60612, United States∥Institute
for Tuberculosis Research, College of Pharmacy, University of Illinois at Chicago, 833 South Wood Street, Chicago, Illinois 60612, United
States*Phone: 612-626-6864. E-mail: mwalters@umn.edu.11012017090320176052892081620163701072016130320171403201714112022Copyright © 2017 American Chemical Society2017American Chemical SocietyThis is an open access article published under a Creative Commons Non-Commercial No Derivative Works (CC-BY-NC-ND) Attribution License, which permits copying and redistribution of the article, and creation of adaptations, all for non-commercial purposes.Don’t discount all curcumin trial data
54376431320174040NaturePMC681420628252078 
Curcumin
is a constituent (up to ∼5%) of the traditional
medicine known as turmeric. Interest in the therapeutic use of turmeric
and the relative ease of isolation of curcuminoids has led to their
extensive investigation. Curcumin has recently been classified as
both a PAINS (pan-assay interference compounds) and an IMPS (invalid
metabolic panaceas) candidate. The likely false activity of curcumin
in vitro and in vivo has resulted in >120
clinical trials of curcuminoids against several diseases. No double-blinded,
placebo controlled clinical trial of curcumin has been successful.
This manuscript reviews the essential medicinal chemistry of curcumin
and provides evidence that curcumin is an unstable, reactive, nonbioavailable
compound and, therefore, a highly improbable lead. On the basis of
this in-depth evaluation, potential new directions for research on
curcuminoids are discussed.

pmc-status-qastatus0pmc-status-liveyespmc-status-embargonopmc-status-releasedyespmc-prop-open-accessyespmc-prop-olfnopmc-prop-manuscriptnopmc-prop-legally-suppressednopmc-prop-has-pdfyespmc-prop-has-supplementyespmc-prop-pdf-onlynopmc-prop-suppress-copyrightnopmc-prop-is-real-versionnopmc-prop-is-scanned-articlenopmc-prop-preprintnopmc-prop-in-epmcyesdocument-id-old-9jm6b00975document-id-new-14jm-2016-009757ccc-price

## Introduction
Natural products (NPs)
form the basis for many widely used drugs.
This utility was recently recognized on a larger stage, as the discoverer
of artemisinin shared the Nobel Prize in Physiology or Medicine in
2015 with the discoverers of the anthelmintic avermectin family of
NPs. Artemisinin, a NP discovered from a traditional Chinese medicine
(TCM), Artemisia annua, was developed into an effective
therapy for Plasmodium falciparum malaria. Some researchers
viewed this award as a validation of the general utility of TCMs. , In marked contradistinction to this claimed vindication of the role
of certain ethnic and traditional medicines (TxMs) in medical practice
are recent reports labeling curcumin, a constituent of the spice turmeric
and part of the mixture of compounds referred to as curcuminoids,
as both a PAINS (pan assay interference compounds) and an IMPS (invalid metabolic panaceas) compound. Additionally, many researchers have described
the potential “dark side of curcumin”: − the drawbacks noted for curcumin include its poor pharmacokinetic/pharmacodynamic
(PK/PD) properties, low efficacy in several disease models, and toxic
effects under certain testing conditions. These cautionary reports appear to have been swept away in the torrent
of papers, reviews, patents, and Web sites touting the use of curcumin
(and its primary commercial source, turmeric) as an anticancer agent, , a therapeutic for Alzheimer’s disease, a treatment for hangovers, , erectile dysfunction, , baldness, , hirsutism, a fertility-boosting, and
contraceptive extract, collectively establishing
the properties expected of a panacea. , 
Scientific
manuscripts are still published regularly that are based
solely on the foundational premise of the reported activity and therapeutic
utility of curcumin. In 2015, this plethora of data motivated the
compilation of a Curcumin Resource Database (CRDB) that seeks to support
the preclinical development of curcuminoids by putting over 1000 analogues
and their alleged molecular target at
the fingertips of researchers via a Web interface. The CRDB coverage
of over 9000 publications and 500 patents demonstrates the magnitude
of both the scientific interest and vast amount of dormant information
that is awaiting a more global, medicinal chemistry interpretation.
It is the goal of this manuscript to primarily review curcumin (1; ) and related curcuminoids, which are the species extracted from
turmeric, and largely what is sold or tested in clinical trials.
 A simple analogy will help us set the stage for this Miniperspective.
Artemisinin (2; ) has been shown to function like an effective long-range
and targeted missile that homes in on heme-loving parasites and destroys
them in a spectacular burst of nonselective reactivity. The peroxide-containing structure of artemisinin
suggests that it would be unstable in a biological setting. However,
its in vivo stability (T1/2 = 2.5 h; F = 30%) provides evidence
that it is sufficiently stable, from a pharmacokinetic perspective,
to be an effective therapeutic. Curcumin, on the other hand, is more
like a missile that has shown excellent promise in early testing (in
vitro), even though this testing may have been bedeviled by design
problems that led to several misfires. The structure of 1 suggests that it might be unstable in a biological setting, and
in fact, it is: both its in vitro and in vivo stabilities are abysmal
(T1/2 < 5 min; F <
1%) , relative to commercial drugs.
To our
knowledge, compound 1 has never been shown
to be conclusively effective in a randomized, placebo-controlled clinical
trial for any indication. Curcumin is
best typified, therefore, as a missile that continually blows up on
the launch pad, never reaching the atmosphere or its intended target(s).
These results have given curcumin the label of pharmacodynamically
fierce (hits many targets) yet pharmacokinetically feeble (does not
get to its targets). While these failures
would normally end further research on its use as a therapeutic, they
apparently have not deterred researchers interested in its development.
Accordingly, major resources have been expended on research enterprises
that involve curcumin as a key study agent. From 1995 to the present,
according to the NIH RePORTER database (query of the term “curcumin”
in keywords, titles, and abstracts), federal
funds exceeding $150 million have been awarded for projects that are
linked, directly or indirectly, to the biomedical exploration of curcumin.
This result gives an approximate estimate of the order of magnitude
of resources (not scientific significance) that are used directly
or indirectly for experiments with curcumin and its analogues. Consequently,
projects involving, for example, method development work where curcuminoids
serve as model compounds are likely included in this estimation. However,
this continued interest has resulted in the generation of manuscripts
reporting biological studies of curcumin at a rate that far outpaces
those published on artemisinin ( ). This suggests that while artemisinin research has
matured, curcumin research may have entered the steep section of the
hyperbolic black hole of natural products (NPs) where effort rapidly exceeds utility, a common occurrence
for IMPS. Furthermore, most NPs that have been successfully developed
as drugs were discovered in phenotypic assays showing activity at
or near a therapeutically relevant level. This allowed for the rapid
development of the parent natural product or relatively straightforward
analogue development to achieve a desired therapeutic effect. Such was the story for artemisinin, but careful
analysis of the literature leads to a much different conclusion where
curcumin is concerned.
 In this Miniperspective,
we hope to address these questions regarding
curcumin: PAINS, IMPS, or promise? Solid gold or just pyrite? Valuable
lead for therapeutic development or still a tough challenge for NP
and medicinal chemists? These are important questions, and they cannot
be fully addressed even in this platform, as there are greater than
15 000 manuscripts published related to the biological interactions
of curcumin, with ∼50 more manuscripts published each week.
However, it is our goal to offer guidance and orthogonal perspectives
to scientists and reviewers who may not have the time or resources
to trek through the forest of curcumin literature. This is especially
pertinent as articles relating to curcumin bioactivity appear in such
a broad range of journals as to limit the ability of one to evaluate
them all, due to both time and subscription limitations. By outlining
the essential medicinal chemistry of curcumin, we aspire to improve
the significance of science performed in the area of turmeric (and
general NP) research and ensure that ever-precious research resources
are spent most effectively. First, we will present evidence that curcumin
is most probably an invalid lead compound, as can be shown by a critical
evaluation of its PAINS and IMPS characteristics. Second, we will
critically evaluate the physicochemical and pharmacokinetic/pharmacodynamic
properties of curcumin responsible for its behavior in vitro and in
vivo and tie these properties to the reported activity of curcumin
against a variety of biological targets. Third, we will offer a critical
look at a sampling of curcumin/curcuminoids clinical trials to put
its therapeutic utility in context. The final section will compile
the key points from the three discussion areas and seeks to identify
new aspects that could potentially guide future research on this important
traditional medicine.

## Overview: Allure of the “Golden Spice”
Turmeric, the powdered rhizome of Curcuma longa, is extensively used as a spice in curries and mustards, is often
responsible for their distinct color, and contributes much to their
flavor due to the presence of its oleoresins and essential oil. Turmeric
is a member of the ginger family (Zingiberaceae) and is prescribed
abundantly for ailments in both traditional Chinese and Indian medicine. For example, turmeric preparations are applied
to fresh wounds and bruises and as counterirritants for insect bites.
Turmeric paste is used to facilitate scabbing in chicken pox and small
pox. It is used in urologic diseases, hepatobiliary diseases and as
an anthelminthic. Turmeric has also been described as a cancer remedy
in Indian natural medical literature.
Major phytoconstituents
of turmeric are diarylheptanoids, which
occur in a mixture termed curcuminoids that generally make up approximately
1–6% of turmeric by dry weight. Most crude extracts prepared from turmeric, and even some refined
“curcumin” materials, contain three major compounds
( ): curcumin
[1, (1E,6E)-1,7-bis(4-hydroxy-3-methoxyphenyl)-1,6-heptadiene-3,5-dione,
typically 60–70% of a crude extract], demethoxycurcumin (3, 20–27%), and bisdemethoxycurcumin (4, 10–15%), along with numerous and less abundant secondary
metabolites. 
Although the multicomponent
nature of “curcumin”
is well documented, that fact and/or the unambiguous assignment of
specific structures in a particular preparation is not always clear.
Herein, the term “curcumin” will be used interchangeably
with “curcuminoids” unless a more explicit description
(e.g., of a single chemical structure) is deemed necessary. On the
basis of our literature review, many in vitro studies use pure, synthetic 1, while most in vivo studies and clinical trials use a curcuminoid
mixture. The dynamic nature of solubilized 1 makes it
challenging to consider it a single compound in vitro or in vivo.
However, regardless of the source material used in most studies, the
structure of 1 is usually cited, perhaps by default,
as designated active constituent that should be pursued for therapeutic
benefit and is the compound used as a proposed “lead”
structure for medicinal chemistry investigations. This Miniperspective
will not attempt to address the potential therapeutic effects of even
more complex turmeric extracts or preparations thereof but instead
focuses on the reported utility of the chemical structure of the major
constituent of these extracts: curcumin.
 From a drug discovery standpoint, 1 appears
to have
several attractive qualities. There is a plethora of publications
reporting a wide variety of biological activities for the compound(s),
which is/are “generally recognized as safe”
(GRAS) by the FDA as a food additive at levels up to 20 mg per serving, a designation that could conceivably help developers
bypass some regulatory requirements for its approval as a therapeutic.
This designation, along with the long historical and cultural use
of turmeric as a medication, has contributed to its popularity as
a dietary supplement marketed for many common ailments. Sales of curcumin
supplements in the United States were reported to exceed $20 million
in 2014, though a precise number is difficult to estimate. In concert with this boom in nutraceutical applications
of curcumin, DSHEA (Dietary Supplement Health and Education Act) legislation
establishing the legalities of dietary supplements in the United States
(1994) and advents in in vitro testing likely contributed significantly
to a sharp upturn in the publication of manuscripts regarding the
use of curcumin in biological studies in the late 1990s ( ). Since that time,
curcumin has been reported to have activity for the following indications:
anti-inflammatory, anti-HIV, antibacterial, antifungal, nematocidal,
antiparasitic, antimutagenic, antidiabetic, antifibrinogenic, radioprotective,
wound healing, lipid lowering, antispasmodic, antioxidant, immunomodulating, anticarcinogenic, and Alzheimer’s disease, among others. In many scientific and medicinal circles,
these reported effects of curcumin have marked it as a source of future
breakthrough therapeutics for complex diseases that are thought to
require potent but nonselective therapeutics. In this uncritical enthusiasm
for curcumin’s potential utility, its “dark side” is often disregarded. It is important, therefore,
that any manuscript or research proposal that is based on the bioactivity
(experimentally tested or computationally predicted) of curcumin or
its analogues addresses additional characteristics of this natural
product: its chemical instability, poor ADME properties, potential
toxicological effects, and its lack of success to date in the clinic.
These challenges will be addressed in further detail in subsequent
sections.

## Curcumin Is a PAINS, IMPS, and Poor Lead Compound

## Curcumin
Is a PAINS
PAINS, or pan-assay interference
compounds, are compounds that have been observed to show activity
in multiple types of assays by interfering with the assay readout
rather than through specific compound/target interactions. Many compound
classes have been codified and identified as PAINS or potential PAINS. Compound 1 exhibits all known PAINS-type
behaviors: covalent labeling of proteins, − metal chelation, redox reactivity, aggregation, membrane disruption, fluorescence interference, and structural decomposition. , This suggests that any report of its activity in an assay that does
not either exclude or account for these potential modes of assay interference
should be treated with caution. This is a very important consideration
for reviewers, for example, of U.S. federal proposals that rely on
published data regarding the bioactivity of curcumin. The most recent
guidelines for the review of U.S. NIH proposals require four new considerations
to establish reproducibility: premise, design, variables, and authentication.
Consequently, any proposal based on apparent curcumin bioactivity
should ensure that the “scientific premise forming the basis of the proposed research” is sound (that
is, published activity is not simply a result of assay interference)
and that the “chemical resources” are “authenticated”;
i.e., analytical and target engagement methods are employed to provide
convincing evidence that curcumin is the causative agent of activity.

## Curcumin Is an IMP
From a collective point of view,
IMPS are invalid metabolic panaceas located inside
the center of the black hole of natural products that tend to exhaust research resources. As singular elements,
IMPS are prototypes of improbable metabolic panaceas
that exhibit feeble performance as drug leads. The reported bioactive
properties of IMPS are highly complicated by several factors that
may be in addition to PAINS characteristics but often are separate
from them. After evaluating bioactivity
profiles of curcumin reported in the global literature, two broad
observations raise red flags: (1) the high rate at which this compound,
or mixture, is reported as being bioactive and especially (2) the
relatively high ratio of positive activities seen in proportion to
the total number of distinct bioactivities reported: just over 300
as assessed using the NAPRALERT database. NAPRALERT (www.napralert.org) is a relational database on the chemistry, biological activity,
and folkloric use of natural products housed since 1975 at the Program
for Collaborative Research in the Pharmaceutical Sciences at the College
of Pharmacy, University of Illinois at Chicago. Founded by the late
Professor Norman R. Farnsworth, NAPRALERT has since compiled data
from more than 190 000 literature references, with records
of over 200 000 distinct chemical compounds from more than
60 000 species of organisms. As a result, NAPRALERT covers
hundreds of thousands of reports of biological activity tests (including
in vitro, in vivo, and clinical results) for both natural product
extracts (400 000+) and chemical isolates (300 000+).
Further IMPS considerations include the PAINS characteristics of 1, chiefly chemical aggregation, the presence of a reactive Michael acceptor, and fluorescence activity. This last attribute is particularly
important as the main categories of reported activities in NAPRALERT
(see also, Supporting Information Tables 1 and 2) emerge from cellular assays, which typically involve fluorescence
and quenching for end point detection. A more detailed analysis of
the distribution of positive activities reported in NAPRALERT shows
that 28 distinct pharmacological activities, equivalent to less than
10% of all those captured, represent approximately 50% of the total
reported activities for 1. In contrast, in cases of successful
NP-based drug leads such as artemisinin, ivermectin, and paclitaxel,
this ratio is only between 1% and 2%. This distinctive “broad
bioactivity profile” associates 1 closely with
the top 100 compounds with the most promiscuous bioactivity reported.
Of these top 100, the ginsenosides Rb-1 and Rg-1, genistein, quercetin,
apigenin, nordihydroguaiaretic acid, resveratrol, kaempferol, and
fisetin are the only compounds with even more distinct reported activities
than 1. While this means that these nine compounds have
a wide range of positive results in bioassays, it does not automatically
mean that their pharmacological effects cover such a wide range in
practice. It is equally notable that, just like 1, none
of these nine compounds, or any of their derivatives, have reached
maturity as a drug lead to date.
One of the most plausible explanations
regarding the observed polypharmacology
of curcumin, besides its apparent PAINS/IMPS character, promiscuous
bioassay profile, and chemical instability (vide infra), is the variable
purity status and widespread lack of characterization of “curcumin”
materials. This unknown mixture represents what is termed static residual
complexity (static RC; see also https://go.uic.edu/residualcomplexity): , the assumed bioactive material and
any impurities are present and constant throughout the bioassay.
The high variability of curcumin preparations and sources makes static
RC an important factor of variability and can lead to unpredictable
or potentially irreproducible results. In contrast, dynamic residual
complexity (dynamic RC) is related to
metabolic instability, a property that applies particularly to 1. The typical time frame for the biological experiments reported
in NAPRALERT allows for significant degradation of 1 (vide
infra). The degradation products will very likely have distinctly
different in vitro and/or in vivo biological activities from the parent
compound. In addition, biogenic metabolites are often different from
the degradation products present in buffers or laboratory storage
conditions, and the extended incubation times of many cellular assays
make it difficult to know which degradation products are present and
at what concentrations. For example,
a recently identified degradation product of 1 is a spiroepoxide,
which is highly sensitive to acids and reacts readily with thiols. This report indirectly emphasizes the relevance
of dynamic RC by hypothesizing that the polypharmacology of 1 may in part, or even largely, be due to the sum of its degradation
products.
Both the static and dynamic RC issues, as well as
promiscuous reactivity,
make the study of 1 a true challenge for both biologists
and chemists, even when performed in close collaboration. Complex
chemical characterization procedures need to be established and undertaken
before starting biological experiments to control the initial material
and characterize the remaining components at the end of the experiment
(allowing the assessment of any degradation of the studied material).
From the pharmacologist’s or biologist’s point of view,
controlling chemical aggregation, target specificity (especially when
using proteins), and photochemical conditions (absorbance, fluorescence,
quenching, etc.) is paramount for achieving interpretable assay readouts
and meaningful biological outcomes.

## Curcumin Is a Poor Lead
Compound
Compound 1 is completely out of balance
as a lead compound when its PK and
PD properties are weighed. While there are exceptions and some discrepancies
about what makes a “good” lead, a prototypical lead
compound for therapeutic discovery and development generally has less
than 1 μM potency at its desired target(s), evidence of selectivity
and tractable mechanism(s) of action, good bioavailability, chemical
stability, and ADMET (absorption, distribution, metabolism, excretion,
and toxicology) qualities that can be optimized in a reasonable number
of synthetic cycles. Compound 1 has none of these features. Moreover, attempts to improve its ADMET
qualities (typically the most difficult properties of a compound to
optimize) and increase its specificity via chemical optimization and
various formulations have thus far been unsuccessful. Optimization
of the PK/PD of 1 may be impossible given the multiple
structural features presumably responsible for its “desirable”
activity. For example, one property often marked for optimization
is indiscriminate thiol reactivity (particularly with proteins), though
this is most likely a chief explanation for much of its polypharmacology.
Of course, covalent reactivity can be useful in the development of
therapeutics. − However, this mode of action is either purposefully designed into
the drug as part of the discovery process or installed after optimization
of potency and ADMET properties. For example, α,β-unsaturated
reactive groups are often purposefully introduced into optimized,
stable compounds to increase their potency and selectivity. Optimization
to improve the feeble PK of 1 will most likely lead to
concomitant dulling of its PD ferocity.

## Chemical
(In)Stability , 
The structure of 1 contains a β-diketone moiety
that readily undergoes keto–enol tautomerization ( ). NMR studies using
a variety of solvents at pH 3–9 have confirmed that the enol
tautomer (1b), rather than the diketone (1a), is the only form of the molecule present at any detectable level
in solution. This preference for 1b leads to a planar, intramolecularly hydrogen-bonded structure
both in solution and in powder form. The
calculated log P of 1 has been
reported between 2.3 and 3.2, and it is practically insoluble in water
at room temperature and neutral pH. , At alkaline
pH, the phenols are transformed to the phenolates, enabling the dissolution
of 1 in water. A range of pKa values, 8.5–10.4 for the first and 9.5–10.7 for the
second, have been reported for the phenolic protons depending on the
solvent and method of measurement. However,
at both neutral and alkaline pH, 1 degrades rapidly.
Compound 1 is more structurally stable in an acidic environment,
but the equilibrium shifts toward the neutral form (low/no solubility)
of the molecule in parallel with decreasing pH. , Therefore, studies in buffered solvents typically involve first
dissolving 1 in a polar protic organic solvent, like
methanol, then diluting it in an excess of the aqueous solution.
 The conjugated system of 1 absorbs in the visible
range (408–500 nm), and this property
has been used to study its degradation in various buffers through
spectroscopic and HPLC methods (see also Supporting Information Table 2). At neutral pH (7.5) and rt in aqueous
buffer, the t1/2 for loss of 1 as the parent compound is approximately 20 min. When the temperature is increased to 37 °C, the reported t1/2 at pH 7.2 is less than 10 min. This report of rapid degradation upon heating
led to a more thorough investigation of the degradation products of 1. It is known that 1 is photoreactive, as a
5% reduction in parent material is observed simply when preparing
samples in clear versus amber glass. Compound 1 degrades by two main pathways: solvolysis and oxidative
degradation. The solvolysis (nucleophilic substitution or elimination
by solvent molecules) of the heptadienedione chain in aqueous alkaline
buffer results in 90% compound degradation within 30 min. The major
identified products are vanillin (5), ferulic acid (6), and feruloylmethane (7, A). While the relative abundance
of these degradation products differs at different incubation pH or
temperature, they are also observed upon incubation of 1 in cell culture medium (RPMI 1640, Roswell Park Memorial Institute
medium) and human blood. Recent spectroscopic
analysis has revealed that solvolysis is only a minor pathway, and
the major chemical degradation product is a bicyclopentadione (8) that is produced by autoxidation ( B). The spontaneous,
free-radical-driven incorporation of O2 leads to oxygenation
and double cyclization of the heptadienedione chain connecting the
two methoxyphenol rings. Further study
of the kinetics of radiolabeled compound decomposition has also identified
several additional degradation products that likely appear on the
pathway to compound 8 formation. This oxidative reaction occurs without photochemical initiation
and may account, in part, for the reported antioxidant properties
observed for compound 1. These degradation pathways suggest
that dynamic RC (vide supra) should be considered when interpreting
the outcome of bioassays involving 1.
 While oxidative degradation does
not require photochemical initiation,
photochemical degradation of 1 does occur in both the
crystalline and solubilized forms. Crystalline 1 is degraded
by exposure to sunlight to give primarily 5, 6, ferulic aldehyde (9), and vanillic acid (10, C). The same degradation pattern is observed for 1 in organic solvents when it is exposed to light. Several
solvent-dependent products are also formed. In methanol, isopropanol,
and chloroform, an internal cyclization product is formed. Isopropanol
can also behave as a reactive substrate, leading to the formation
of a guaiacol derivative (11, D). The mechanism
of photochemical degradation is caused mostly by type I and type II
reactions with molecular oxygen, which has been described in detail
elsewhere. 
The chemical stability
of 1 can be improved by encapsulation
with lipids or nanoparticles. , Other attempts at improving
stability have included synthetic manipulations to remove or protect
the oxidation sites (phenolic and enolic hydroxyls) and derivatization of the β-diketone to reduce the
activity of the enolate Michael acceptor. , While analogues of 1 may be a more viable route to
the development of a stable molecule for in vitro or in vivo evaluation,
they will need to be evaluated as entirely new chemical entities and
are largely outside the scope of this discussion.
The rapid
degradation of 1 brings many additional
requirements for its investigation in an in vitro or in vivo setting.
Stability of 1 under the assay conditions should always
be demonstrated. This analysis has not been reported in the vast majority
of the publications reviewed here. Additionally, several publications
have used computational methods to predict the activity of 1 or to explain the bioactivity observed experimentally. , Because 1 is likely not present in situ, or at least
its bioactivity is confounded by the presence of multiple reactive
and/or bioactive degradation products, these models are less relevant
to the targets of interest. Even when computational studies have accounted
for the binding characteristics of the degradation products, other
probable mechanisms of interference have not been considered. 
A primary requirement for most pharmaceuticals
is stability under
physiological conditions (a surrogate for in vivo conditions) and
stability under storage conditions or in formulations. Physiological
conditions here are considered an aqueous environment at pH 7.4 and
37 °C. Compound 1 has none of these characteristics
and displays prominent chemical instability. Below, we highlight several
other concerns regarding the physicochemical properties of 1 that could explain its promiscuous reactivity; these also need to
be addressed when studying this molecule in vitro or in vivo.

## Physicochemical
Properties
The chemical instability of 1 is
most likely the key
property responsible for confounding the results of in vitro and in
vivo measurements of its bioactivity and for undermining computational
predictions of its potential binding and activity in biological assays.
Compound 1 also displays undesirable physicochemical
properties relative to known drugs. In addition to being unstable,
it forms chemical aggregates (colloids) under common biochemical assay
conditions. Adding the nonionic detergent
Triton X-100 attenuates the activity of 1 versus AmpC
β-lactamase (IC50 from 12 μM to >30 μM),
malate dehydrogenase (IC50 from 9 μM to >30 μM),
and HIV-2 protease (IC50 from 9 μM to >100 μM).
This pattern is consistent with chemical aggregation and has been
further confirmed by DLS (dynamic light scattering). , These studies describe a critical aggregation concentration between
10 and 20 μM for compound 1. This is highly relevant
because it corresponds to common compound testing concentrations in
many of the investigational assays we encountered. Enzymatic inhibition
by colloidal aggregates is stoichiometric, meaning that at a given
compound concentration, the real concentration of enzyme is much lower.
Once a chemical colloid is saturated with protein (be it enzyme or
carrier protein), any unbound enzyme is free to react in the assay
system. , Consequently, apparent in vitro selectivity
can be influenced by the relative protein concentrations in selectivity
counterscreens (i.e., all proteins present: enzyme, carrier, and substrate
proteins) and does not always reflect selectivity via traditional
compound–ligand interactions. This also means that counterscreens
with excess enzyme may appear less susceptible to aggregating compounds,
helping to identify this circumstance. These phenomena deserve special
consideration when designing experiments that include detergent-free
assays.
In the event that the observed activity is not found
to be due
to assay interference, the instability of compound 1 calls
into question the identity of the “active” compound. It is important to consider the cellular location
of the target protein, as 1 has been shown to perturb
cell membranes. This can lead to membrane perturbation being mistaken
for specific binding to membrane-associated proteins. This could have significant ramifications for many reported
activities, including those for ion channels, transporters, and growth
factors. Beyond these factors, the fluorescence properties of 1 must also be taken into account in many biological experiments.
The absorbance (∼408–500 nm) and emission (∼450–600
nm) of 1 varies greatly depending on solvent, but largely
falls within the range of wavelengths common for many fluorescence-based
bioassays. , 
Other physicochemical properties
of 1 are important
considerations when developing assays or evaluating druglike properties.
Notably, 1 is nearly insoluble in water at room temperature
and neutral pH, estimated at 1–10 μg/mL. This can only
be viewed as an estimate, however, as the true solubility is confounded
by the high propensity for aggregation. Both the estimated ClogP (2.3–3.2) and topological polar
surface area (93.1 A2) fall in the range of known chemical
aggregators. X-ray crystallography studies
with compound 1 also confirm its rapid degradation in
aqueous media. Crystallization of 1 with transthyretin
revealed both the parent compound and compound 6 (a known
degradation product) associated with the protein. When considering molecular modeling, studies based on both
the diketone (1a) and enol (1b) forms have
been reported but fail to recognize the complete lack of solubility
of one form (1a, diketone) and the complete instability
of the other (1b, enol).
Beyond the concerns of
chemical and physicochemical stability,
compounds taken in vivo require appropriate PK/PD properties. Next,
we highlight several concerns that should be addressed when using
compound 1 in vivo.

## ADMET (Absorption, Distribution,
Metabolism, Excretion, and
Toxicology)
In addition to the poor chemical stability and
multiple modes of
assay interference displayed by compound 1, it is generally
accepted that its pharmacokinetic properties are poor. , 

## Absorption
The absorption of any potential therapeutic
is a critical consideration, especially for oral dosing. Several studies,
including clinical trials, have been performed using curcumin in a
variety of oral dosing formulations. An oral dose of up to 12 g/day
has been given with no adverse effects. While this high dose was relatively well tolerated, the absorption
of the compound is negligible. All clinical studies reviewed here
reported that 1 could not be detected in the serum of
the majority of test subjects (including those dosed at 12 g/day).
This is not surprising, as the reported oral bioavailability of synthetic 1 in rats is less than 1%. Moreover,
compound 1 has displayed poor permeability in the standard
Caco-2 model system (Papp = 3.18 ×
10–6 ± 1.08 × 10–6 cm/s), which is a widely accepted predictor of cell
permeability (poorly permeable compounds have Papp < 5.0 × 10–6 cm/s). Several groups have attempted to improve the
absorption and bioavailability of 1 through various formulations.
We note that lipid dispersions and nanoparticle systems have been
developed for 1, with modest improvement in the absorption
and bioavailability of the compound. 

## Distribution
The extent to which a compound distributes
through the body has a large impact on its therapeutic utility. While
the distribution of compound 1 has been extensively studied
in rats, it has only been sparingly evaluated in humans. Several studies
in rodent models have reported variable distribution across tissue
types. , , This high
degree of variability is likely due to (1) differences in the preparation
of the dose used in the study, (2) differences in extraction, preparation,
and detection methods of 1, and (3) lack of specificity
in the detection assay. Many assays we analyzed in the literature
utilized HPLC-based detection without the added specificity of confirmation
of identity by MS. These methods inherently have larger amounts of
error as biological impurities, and degraded or transformed compounds
could have similar retention times and absorbance properties as the
parent compound. In fact, a study comparing the distribution of [3H]-1 to unlabeled 1 found substantially
more radioactivity in tissues compared to the amount of unlabeled 1. This result supports the observation that 1 is degraded and/or transformed before and/or after absorption. , Together, these studies suggest that the parent compound does not
distribute to any specific organs in appreciable levels.

## Metabolism
In part due to its reactive structure, any 1 that
is absorbed by the body has a high potential to be
metabolized. Extensive studies have been done on 1 in
human liver microsomes. Phase I metabolism primarily results in reduction
of the double bonds in the heptadienedione system, mainly through
the action of alcohol dehydrogenase. Phase
II metabolic processes rapidly conjugate 1 and its reduced
metabolites. The most abundant conjugates are glucuronides and sulfates
at the phenolic positions. Unsurprisingly, 1 also interacts
readily with glutathione in a nonenzymatic manner, presumably through
a Michael-type addition. Some of the
formulations investigated to improve the oral bioavailability of 1 also hope to slow down the observed high rate of metabolism
upon absorption. Unfortunately, it appears that once 1 is released in vivo, it has a high potential for modification by
both first and second phase metabolism.

## Excretion
The
majority of 1 ingested by
oral dosing is excreted in the feces, as determined in multiple studies
in rats. Very little is detected in rodent urine; however glucuronide
and sulfate metabolites have been identified in rat plasma. , There are conflicting reports regarding the excretion of 1 and its metabolites in human subjects. In one study, neither the
parent compound nor its metabolites were detected in blood or urine
of human subjects after oral dosing, but 1 was recovered
from feces. In two other studies, 1( ) or one of its metabolites was detected in serum of one or three patients
from each cohort of 12 or 15 patients, respectively. In a fourth study, 1 was detected in serum of only one subject, but the glucuronide
and sulfate conjugates were detected in all subjects. Similar to the reports of absorption, some of this variability
in reporting likely comes from variability in the source material
and methods of dosing and sample collection, preparation, and detection.
Small amounts of compound 1 may be absorbed and excreted
unchanged or, if we consider other physicochemical properties (vide
supra), may not be absorbed but simply pass directly to the feces.
Metabolized 1 is generally excreted in urine as the glucuronide
and sulfate conjugates. The remainder of any dose, whether absorbed
or not, is likely degraded beyond detection by the time it is excreted.

## Toxicology. , − 
In addition to the therapeutic
targets discussed below, 1 (and its degradation products)
shows broad reactivity against a number of human enzymes that are
linked to compound toxicity, namely, hERG channels, cytochrome P450s,
and glutathione S-transferase (see also Supporting Information Table 3). The reactivity
of each of these classes has important implications for potential
toxic side effects: hERG channel inhibition is related to cardiotoxicity; − cytochrome P450 (CYP450) and glutathione S-transferase
(GST) inhibition can lead to impaired detoxification and potential
toxic drug–drug contraindications. Beyond specific enzyme toxicity, compound 1 has recently
been shown to be an active iron chelator in vivo, inducing a state
of overt iron deficiency in mice fed diets poor in iron. This suggests that 1 has the potential
to affect systemic iron metabolism, particularly in people with a
preexisting suboptimal iron status. In studies of therapeutic utility, 1 has been reported as cytotoxic against a number of important
cancer cell lines. What is infrequently noted, however, is that it
also shows cytotoxicity against normal human lymphocytes. Surprisingly, data on the cytotoxicity of 1 against normal (noncancerous) cell lines are sparse. A recent
report demonstrated cytotoxicity of 1 against a murine
macrophage cell line and human kidney cells at IC50 values
of 31 and 15.2 μM, respectively. These values are at or below those reported for several therapeutic
targets or cell lines (see also Supporting Information Tables 1 and 3), suggesting that 1 might be generally
cytotoxic and does not show a preference for normal versus cancerous
cells.

## ADMET Summary
The observed ADMET properties of 1 are not surprising given its chemical structure and physicochemical
properties. The numerous papers that suggest 1 has utility
as a therapeutic agent have led to a large field of study focusing
on the improvement of its PK properties. We would emphasize caution,
however, as such improvement in PK may actually lead to exacerbation
of the toxicological side effects of 1, given its cytotoxic
effects. Fundamental medicinal chemistry
principles, and available ADMET evidence, incline us to hypothesize
that the observed high tolerance in humans and low rate of adverse
events is likely due to its poor absorption and low bioavailability.
As an alternative approach, it may be possible for compound 1 to have an effect on human health without being absorbed.
Emerging research suggests that 1 could affect the gut
microbiota, which has been linked to several chronic diseases. A recent study using a mouse model of colitis-associated
colorectal cancer suggests that compound 1 may have a
chemopreventive effect that is correlated to changes in the microbiota
of these animals. This hypothesis has
yet to be fully validated but may ultimately provide focus for studies
on the use of 1 as a therapeutic.

## Critical Analysis
of Some Reported Activities of Curcumin (Real
and Virtual) , 
Compound 1 is reported to be active at multiple biological
targets. What is not typically acknowledged in these focused studies
is that it is nonselective for what could be considered “good”
versus “bad” targets (vide supra). A comprehensive discussion
of the structure–activity (and reactivity) of 1 has been published. In summary, every
functional group in 1 probably contributes to its reactivity
and its apparent activity. For example, it is not surprising that
compound 1 covalently modifies a number of biological
proteins given that its two α,β-unsaturated systems are
potent Michael acceptors for −SH groups with low pKa values. Additionally, the two phenolic groups are susceptible
to redox transformations, and the 1,3-dicarbonyl is an excellent chelator
of metal ions. It is important to consider the reported activities
of 1 in light of these reactive functional groups in
addition to the other properties detailed above. Examples of this
critical consideration are presented below as case studies (see also Supporting Information Table 1). One common theme
in these reports is particularly disturbing: published bioactivity
data of 1 are typically not evaluated critically before
it is used to justify further research in an area. This is especially
troubling when the original activity reports have been retracted. − 

## Activity Case Studies

## p300
Compound 1 is
reported to inhibit
the histone acetyltransferase (HAT) p300 at low micromolar concentrations
in vitro. , In one of these original studies,
counterscreens failed to show any activity versus the HAT PCAF, the
histone methyltransferase G9a, or the histone deacetylase HDAC1. Since the original publication of this bioactivity,
there have been dozens of reports that have used 1 as
a tool compound to modulate HATs in cell-based and organism-based
experiments across many biological systems: mouse neuroblastoma cells, parasites, viruses, and
a variety of human cell lines. − Several points should be made about the
original data. First, in vitro testing
was performed without detergent and often at compound concentrations
above the threshold for colloid formation (vide supra). It is reasonable
that aggregates of 1 could have contributed to the in
vitro assay readouts and perhaps the apparent selectivity (e.g., enzymatic
modulation by chemical aggregation can be mitigated by increased levels
of proteins). Second, 1 was allowed to preincubate with
the targets in most of the assays. Given
its reported instability in aqueous solutions, it is difficult to
draw conclusions about the nature of compound–target interactions
without additional stability data under these specific testing conditions.
Third, another report showed that radiolabeled 1 binds
covalently to p300 in a manner consistent with Michael addition, yet
failed to inhibit the HATs PCAF or Gcn5 in vitro. The apparent selectivity of 1 for p300 reported
nearly a decade ago may be a function of the intrinsic susceptibility
of each HAT to thiol-reactive compounds. Selectivity in such a case
would be a function of the thiol solvent accessibility, the number
of thiols in the target protein (also the overall assay), and the
protein conformational changes induced by any thiol modification.
As an example, during an investigation of thiol-reactive PAINS, the
highly thiol-reactive probe CPM consistently showed less potent inhibition
of yeast GCN5 compared to yeast Rtt109 and human p300. Fourth, several kinetic experiments were performed
that suggest 1 does not bind to the p300 active site. These experiments appear to be performed without
ruling out reversibility or time dependence, and it is possible these
kinetic results may be confounded by chemical reactivity as well as
compound stability and chemical aggregation. Without question, compound 1 can inhibit p300 HAT activity in vitro based on the published
data. Whether or not this inhibition is therapeutically useful, especially
in a cellular context, is considerably more controversial. When phenotypes
or changes in histone acetylation are observed in cells or whole organisms,
these downstream effects are often attributed carte blanche to the
inhibition of p300 while downplaying or outright disregarding other
potential mediators of cellular histone acetylation such as HDACs
or other HATs. This logic is overly simplistic and often flawed when
used as supporting evidence for studying specific pathways.

## HDAC8
In one report primarily driven by molecular modeling
studies, compound 1 was reported to inhibit HDAC8 at
midmicromolar compound concentrations (IC50 = 115 μM). On the basis of the title (“potent histone
deacetylase inhibitors”), one may be led into thinking 1 could serve as a tool compound for epigenetic studies. As
in the p300 example, the relevant in vitro assays omit detergent to
mitigate chemical aggregate formation, a potential confounder that
is highly likely in this system given the relatively high compound
concentrations tested. In addition, the enzyme source from which the
IC50 value was derived, HeLa nuclear extracts, should contain
multiple HDACs, making it impossible to confidently gauge HDAC8-specific
inhibition. No controls were performed to account for readout interference,
such as fluorescence quenching or autofluorescence. Orthogonal counterscreens
are absent, and there is no evidence presented for direct target engagement
(e.g., ITC, X-ray crystallography, or SPR). The heavy reliance on
molecular modeling is problematic, including the reporting of theoretical
binding constants. Despite these liabilities, subsequent reports cite
curcumin for its ability to specifically modulate HDACs. − 

## GSK-3β
Compound 1 is reported to
be a potent inhibitor of GSK-3β (IC50 = 66 nM). However, detailed analysis of the in vitro
testing conditions may help rationalize this level of potency. First,
the reported concentration of GSK-3β protein present in the
assay was in the femtomolar range, meaning several orders of magnitude
stoichiometric excess of compound 1 are still needed
to appreciably inhibit GSK-3β activity. Second, the biochemical
assay was performed in the absence of thiol-scavenging agents like
DTT, meaning 1, or any potential degradation products,
could still react with the assay target or substrate. Third, as with
previous examples, the assays were performed with incubation times
sufficient for compound degradation (30–90 min), without meaningful counterscreens for selectivity
and without mechanistic studies to demonstrate therapeutically useful
target engagement. In retrospect, the heavy reliance on molecular
modeling is problematic without confirmation of compound stability
in the assay conditions. Nevertheless, curcumin is still the subject
of numerous studies involving GSK-3β. − 

## Tau and Amyloid Fibril Formation
Compound 1 was tested as an inhibitor of tau fibril formation as part of the
NIH MLPCN (Molecular Libraries Probe Centers Network) campaign. The
tested substance showed promising activity in the primary thioflavin
T (ThT) fluorescence-based qHTS (IC50 = 3.5 μM).
However, it was inactive in a fluorescence polarization (FP) based
secondary screen. Compound 1 was still active in a counterscreen
for total fluorescence (IC50 = 13 μM), suggesting
its activity was due in large part to compound-mediated fluorescence
interference. For these reasons, it was not selected for additional
follow-up based on these data. This example demonstrates the utility
of a well-designed screening tree, complete with secondary assays
and assay-specific counterscreens. 
Additionally, 1 has been reported as an inhibitor of
amyloid-β (Aβ) fibril formation and mediator of Aβ
cytotoxicity, also using the ThT assay as a primary readout (IC50 = 1–64 μM). , Subsequent
publications have shown that 1 is highly absorptive in
the same spectral range as ThT. Most
recently, transmission electron microscopy has shown that compound 1 does not affect the aggregation of Aβ in vitro. This report attempts to explain the observed
cellular protective effects by showing that the oligomers formed by
Aβ in the presence of 1 are nontoxic; i.e., the
polyclonal antibody A11, which is reported to specifically detect
toxic Aβ oligomers, does not detect these oligomers. However, the extremely long incubation times
reported here would require follow-up to exclude the likely possibility
of aggregation or degradation in the assay conditions. 

## CFTR (Cystic Fibrosis Transmembrane Conductance
Regulator)
In 2004, compound 1 was reported
as a calcium-adenosine
triphosphatase pump inhibitor for the treatment of cystic fibrosis
(CF). The compound was tested in a mouse
model based on previously reported in vitro activity (5–15
μM) in a related SERCA (sarcoplasmic/endoplasmic reticulum calcium)
pump assay. The assay readout required the release of ΔF508-CFTR
protein from the endoplasmic reticulum, which would increase calcium
ion flux, a process that is known to be deficient in CF patients.
These studies were followed by an investigation using a mouse model
that expresses mutant CFTR, which showed that a dose of 45 mg kg–1 day–1 oral administration of 1 ameliorated phenotypic deficits in these mice. However,
no orthogonal assay was used to confirm target engagement, and there
was no confirmation of 1 in the blood of these animals.
The improvement of ion channel conductance in these studies could
be largely due to the disruption of cellular membranes by 1 (vide supra), thereby increasing ion release. Follow-up studies
by an independent lab were unable to reproduce these in vitro and
in vivo results. The measured concentration
of 1 in vivo peaked at 60 nM, 30 min after oral dosing
at 100 mg/kg, but was not detectable below this dosing level. While
publications continue to point to compound 1 as a CFTR
modulator as a potential CF treatment, no confirmation of CFTR activity has been published.

## CB1
In 2009, compound 1 was reported as
a potent, selective inhibitor of human and mouse cannabinoid receptor
1 (CB1). The initial report should raise
some concern as the assay had a 90 min incubation time of 1 with the receptor at room temperature, conditions known to result
in rapid compound degradation (vide supra). These results are, therefore,
confounded minimally by the formation of degradation products. In
addition, there is no orthogonal evidence presented of direct target
engagement. Approximately six months after the publication of these
results, the manuscript was retracted. According to the letter of retraction, both the authors and three
external labs were unable to reproduce the original results. In repeated
experiments, compound 1 was a low micromolar inhibitor
of both CB1 and CB2 and showed no selectivity. The original authors
hypothesized that their results were due to sample contamination by
their CB1 control compound. Unfortunately, articles are still published
that cite the originally reported activity and selectivity of 1 for CB1, without acknowledgment of the subsequent retraction. 

## Overview of Literature Reports of Curcumin
Activity
A critical review of the literature reveals several
major themes
whenever novel bioactivity has been attributed to 1:
(1) bioactivity was often observed at low micromolar to midmicromolar
compound concentrations, typically above the critical aggregation
concentration threshold for 1; (2) appropriate counterscreens
for assay interference were frequently not performed, and target engagement
was not confirmed nor was target selectivity; (3) nearly all the manuscripts
reviewed failed to consider the stability of the compound; (4) finally,
weak yet desired phenotypes, often observed at relatively high compound
concentrations, were taken to “validate” specific target
engagement but without sufficient evidence to rule out off-target
effects. Such critical review of any reported activity requires a
thorough understanding of the medicinal chemistry properties of 1 (vide supra).

## Critical Evaluation of Clinical Trials
Most researchers currently consider compound 1 as
a dietary supplement, and the FDA does not support claims regarding
its therapeutic utility. For it to achieve a level of documented therapeutic
utility in the United States, researchers will need to show that it
is safe and effective for its intended use. While the essential oils
and oleoresins of turmeric are recognized as GRAS substances, 1 is not on any readily accessible
FDA GRAS list. When one company requested GRAS designation for a proprietary
preparation of a mixture of curcuminoids, the FDA responded that it
“has no questions at this time regarding (the company’s)
conclusion that curcuminoids is [sic] GRAS under the intended conditions”
(inclusion in baked goods; soups; snack foods; imitation dairy products;
and seasoning and flavors at use levels up to 20 mg curcumin/serving)
but that the agency “has not, however, made its own determination
regarding the GRAS status of the subject use of curcuminoids”. 
Adverse events are rarely observed when
curcuminoid preparations
are dosed orally in humans, though some adverse reactions have occurred
when large doses (8–12 g/day) necessary to provide “adequate
systemic exposure” were administered orally. For example, a
phase I dose-escalation study was carried out where three subjects
in each of eight cohorts were treated with a single dose of a commercial
milled curcumin mixture (95% curcuminoids with 70–80% 1, 15–25% 3, and 2.5–6.5% 4), over a range escalating
from 500 mg to 12 g. Compound 1 was only detected in
the serum of 2/6 subjects taking the single doses of 10 or 12 g. A peak serum level of 57.6 ng/mL (156 nmol/L)
was measured at 2 h in the one individual who received the single
12 g dose. (For comparison, the Cmax for
a 10 mg dose of atorvastatin is 2.81 ng/mL.) Adverse events in this study were diarrhea, rash, or headache. These
events occurred in 30% of the trial participants, but did not appear
to be dose related. In a longitudinal Phase I study of curcumin dosing,
15 patients with advanced colorectal cancer were administered 0.45
to 3.6 g daily of the same commercial mixture of curcuminoids described
above for up to four months. In this
case, 1 was found in the blood of 3/6 of the patients
receiving the highest dose (11.1 ± 0.22 ng/mL, converted from
the reported 0.6 nmol/L, at the 1 h time point on days 1, 2, 8, and
29), but not in the other nine subjects who received lower doses.
Sulfate (8.9 ± 0.7 nmol/L) and glucuronide (15.8 ± 0.9 nmol/L)
conjugates were found in all six of the subjects taking the 3.6 g
daily dose, though there was no obvious difference in metabolite levels
between those high-dose subjects in which 1 was found
and in those in which it was not present. Notably “decreases
in tumor markers or serum cholesterol were not observed as a result
of treatment in any of the patients”, and “three significant
changes in quality of life scores were reported: one patient noticed
a significant improvement after one month of treatment, and two patients
deteriorated after two months of treatment, both of whom were found
to have radiologic progressive disease.” Mild diarrhea was
the only sign of toxicity observed. In the present discussion, the
significance of these phase I studies is two-fold. First, large amounts
of 1 appear to be fairly well tolerated, suggesting that
the use of curcuminoids or turmeric as an herbal supplement at lower
doses is probably benign. Second, even at what might be considered
the maximum-tolerated dose from the standpoint of pill consumption, we note that 1 has a variable
and extremely low systemic bioavailability when dosed orally.
Beyond these primarily PK in vivo studies, 1 has a
long history of being the subject of human PD clinical trials. The
first article to report its use as a human therapeutic was in 1937. − None of these studies have yet led to the approval of 1, curcuminoids, or turmeric as a therapeutic for any disease. According
to the United States NIH, currently
(from 2001 to the present) there are 135 registered clinical trials
that have evaluated or will evaluate the toxicity and efficacy of
curcuminoids in the treatment of a broad spectrum of diseases. Of
the 135 trials, eight have reported study results. Forty-nine studies
are listed as “recruiting” or “not yet recruiting”.
It is beyond the scope of this work to compile, categorize, or analyze
the results of all of these trials. We will, however, review the results
of four archetypical clinical trials that illustrate the lack of significant
success in this area. These trials were selected because data were
reported on clinicaltrials.gov, and the therapeutic utility of 1 for these diseases is often referenced in manuscripts as
validating its continued study.

## Radiation Dermatitis
A recent example
(2011–2014,
NCT01246973) advanced to phase II/III and evaluated the administration
of oral curcuminoids for the treatment of radiation-induced dermatitis
in 686 women undergoing radiotherapy for the treatment of breast cancer.
The objective “was to study the efficacy of curcumin in preventing
and/or reducing the severity of dermatitis in radiation treatment
site in breast cancer patients”. The treatment group took four
commercially produced 500 mg curcuminoid mixture capsules (2.0 g)
orally three times daily (6.0 g/day) throughout the course of radiation
treatment plus one adjuvant week, while a placebo group received placebo
capsules. To summarize, the study results appear inconclusive. The
radiation dermatitis score (RDS, 0–4 with higher numbers indicating
worse outcome) was used as a measure of the severity of the dermatitis.
The RDS for the 283 patients who completed the curcumin arm of the
study was 2.02 ± 0.05, while that of the placebo group was 1.99
± 0.06. This result is perhaps not surprising, given the low
oral bioavailability of compound 1. To our knowledge
these data have not yet been published.

## Colon Cancer
A
phase IIa study evaluated the efficacy
of curcumin in preventing colon cancer in smokers with aberrant crypt
foci (NCT00365209). In stage 1 of this trial, 23 enrolled patients
(21 completed the trial) received 2 g/day of a curcumin preparation.
In stage 2, 21 additional subjects (19 completed) received 4 g/day
of the curcumin preparation. In both cases the trial was continued
for 30 days in the absence of unacceptable toxicity or disease progression.
One important outcome measure was post-treatment concentration of
compound 1 in rectal mucosa. In the stage 1 cohort, 5/21
subjects had detectable levels of 1 (8.2 ± 2.9 μg/g
of protein), and in the stage 2 group, 3/18 subjects had detectable
levels of 1 (3.8 ± 0.6 μg/g of protein). Additionally,
compound 1 was observed in 2/19 subjects in stage 2 (3.8
± 1.3 μg/mL). One key outcome measure was the change in
total aberrant crypt foci number. The median change in stage 1 was
0.0 (range, −18 to 15) and was 6.0 in stage 2 (range, −1
to 14). While no statistical analysis was reported, there was no overall
change in the stage 1 group (0.0) and very modest change in the stage
2 group (6.0). For clinical context, a change of 6.0 may move a patient
from “normal” to “precancerous” or from
“precancerous” to “cancerous”, but this
will often result in no change in patient designation. , To our knowledge, these data have not yet been published.

## Alzheimer’s
Disease (AD)
The results of a phase
II 24-week, randomized, double-blinded clinical trial (2004–2008)
studying the tolerability and efficacy of oral curcumin were reported
in 2012. This trial was based on extensive
preclinical experiments demonstrating that 1 reduced
Aβ-induced toxicity in vitro and reduced markers of central
nervous system oxidative stress in Tg2576 APPsw mice. In this study,
human subjects (average age 74 years) received placebo, 2 g, or 4
g of a commercial curcuminoid mixture in two daily oral doses. PK
sampling was performed using HPLC (lower limit of detection (LLOD),
200 ng/mL of 1) at baseline and 0.5, 1, 2, 3, and 4 h
postdose at 24 weeks and by LC/MS/MS (LLOD 1 ng/mL compound 1; 3 ng/mL, tetrahydrocurcumin) at baseline and 3 h postdose
at 24 weeks. As might be expected based on our previous ADMET discussion, 1 was not found by HPLC analysis in any patient plasma sample,
save one sample taken 4 h after a 4 g dose (6 ng/mL, below the assay
LLOD). With more sensitive LC/MS/MS methods, the mean baseline level
of 1 at 24 weeks was 2.67 ± 1.69 ng/mL, while that
of tetrahydrocurcumin was 6.86 ± 1.69 ng/mL. Three hours post-treatment,
the mean plasma levels were as follows: compound 1 (7.76
± 3.23 ng/mL), tetrahydrocurcumin (3.73 ± 2.0 ng/mL), glucuronidated 1 (96.05 ± 26 ng/mL), and glucuronidated tetrahydrocurcumin
(298.2 ± 140.0 ng/mL). After 24 weeks of treatment, there was no observed difference in mental status between the placebo
and treated groups based on several measurements of cognitive status
such as ADAS-Cog or mini-mental state examination (MMSE) scores. While
no serious adverse events were reported, almost all (>90%) of the
control and experimental subjects reported adverse events such as
diarrhea, joint pain, and complaints attributed to endocrine system
effects. The plasma glucose levels in the treated subjects were statistically
higher than those of the placebo subjects, though not outside a normal
range. The potential of compound 1 as a neurotherapeutic
has been extensively reviewed, and it was concluded (our notes italicized):
“It seems debatable to further pursue the supplementation
of high concentrations of curcumin in humans. Instead, in line with
the concepts of promising alternative mechanisms such as neurohormesis
(Note: a mechanism by which the therapeutic effects of low
doses of substances are amplified by stimulation of endogenous, beneficial
biochemical pathways ) and the
gut microbiota as primary targets of curcumin to mediate neuroprotection,
low doses of curcumin should be considered in future in clinical trial
design.” 
Another more recent
review stated
that there is insufficient evidence to recommend the use of curcumin
in dementia patients and that its low bioavailability and poor study
design could explain the apparent discrepancies between in vitro and
human clinical trial results.
The results of an epidemiological
study comparing the low incidence
of AD in Ballabgarh, a rural community in northern India, to a cohort
of subjects in the rural mid-Monongahela Valley of Pennsylvania is
often cited as evidence that a diet containing turmeric (of which 1 is a minor component) is beneficial. However, even the authors of the oft-cited study cautioned
against overinterpretation of their results given the relatively short
duration of the study, the small number of incident cases, and the
wide confidence intervals. Diet was not considered as part of the
study, and the frequency of the APOE4 allele, a risk
factor for AD, was noted as being lower in the Ballabgarh group (0.073)
as compared to the Monongahela Valley group (0.11). Another frequently
cited study used to support the impact
of curcumin on AD measured the cognitive function of 1010 nondemented,
elderly subjects (Singapore National Mental Health Survey) compared
to their self-reported ingestion of curry (containing turmeric spice;
1–6% curcuminoids). Various ethnic
versions of the MMSE were used to compare the cognitive status of
those who consumed curry “never or rarely”, “occasionally”,
or “often” ( ).
 According
to the study authors, “although the results are
suggestive of a biological therapeutic effect, we emphasize that they
do not establish a clear and direct causal effect of curry consumption
on improving cognitive function.” The difference in MMSE between
those who rarely use turmeric and those that often use it is not significant. 

## Pancreatic Cancer
A phase II study
of the use of curcuminoids
in patients with advanced pancreatic cancer was reported in 2008. This study used encapsulated curcuminoids in
a form that contained 90% compound 1, 8% of 3, and 2% of 4. Patients started at a dose of 8 g/day
and took oral curcuminoids daily for at least 8 weeks. The dosing
regimen was then continued if their disease had stabilized. Twenty-one
of the 25 subjects initially enrolled were evaluable for response
at the end of the study. At the time of publication, one patient had
remained stable for more than 18 months and another single patient
had a brief but marked 73% reduction in tumor size that lasted one
month. One other patient remained enrolled in the study for approximately
eight months with “stable weight and a feeling of well-being,
albeit with progression in non-target lesions”. Only low levels
of 1 were detectable in plasma (∼22–41
ng/mL at steady state on day 3). No treatment-related toxic effects
were reported.

## Clinical Trials Review Summary
The
aforementioned clinical
trials were discussed because they are representative of many other
studies for which outcome data are not (yet) available. Given its
low systemic bioavailability, we remain highly skeptical that an oral
dose of 1 can ever be effective in human clinical trials
that are translated from reports of in vitro activity. Disagreements
regarding the importance of alternative therapeutic mechanisms like
neurohormesis notwithstanding, it is hard to formulate reasonable
justification for studying lower oral doses of curcuminoids given
that even at high doses compound 1 is not found in the
serum of test subjects. The transformation of 1 to potentially
active metabolites in the gut and the related influence on the gut
microbiota (vide supra) seems to be
reasonable areas of study as no absorption of the parent compound
is necessary. Still, the lack of any observed efficacy of oral curcuminoids
in clinical trials where it was given in high doses does not bode
well for these alternative hypotheses of therapeutic efficacy.

## Conclusions:
Future Curcumin Research
The vast number of manuscripts published
on the biological activity
of curcumin makes it all but impossible for researchers to keep up
with the state-of-the-art in the field. Herein, an attempt has been
made to present an overview of the medicinal chemistry research that
will be helpful for researchers and reviewers to consider in their
respective roles. At first, curcumin appeared to offer great potential
for the development of a therapeutic from a NP (turmeric) that is
classified as a GRAS material. Unfortunately,
no form of curcumin, or its closely related analogues, appears to
possess the properties required for a good drug candidate (chemical
stability, high water solubility, potent and selective target activity,
high bioavailability, broad tissue distribution, stable metabolism,
and low toxicity). The in vitro interference properties of curcumin
do, however, offer many traps that can trick unprepared researchers
into misinterpreting the results of their investigations.
The
observations of this Miniperspective offer several key points
that can help identify potentially problematic research approaches
and/or interpretation of outcomes in publications or preliminary data
involving curcumin bioactivity. Notably, many of these strategies
have been articulated previously: , 1.Look for evidence
of compound stability
in assay buffer/media, including when molecular models are invoked
as supporting evidence of target engagement.
2.Look for the presence of detergent
and thiol-scavenging reagents in biochemical assays to mitigate the
impact of chemical aggregation and nonspecific thiol reactivity. Are/were
any additional counterscreens performed to rule out these phenomena?
3.Examine the selectivity
data. What
are the magnitudes of any observed selectivity? Are these significant?
Can any selectivity be explained by differential target susceptibilities
to nonspecific interference modalities like thiol reactivity? Can
any apparent selectivity be explained by the assay conditions, such
as target or total protein concentration?
4.Examine the potency of the compound.
At those concentrations, would there be any expected aggregation or
off-target effects? And if so, can one make meaningful conclusions about specific pathways and target engagement? Does
the stoichiometry make sense?
5.Evaluate the methods to confirm target
engagement. Look for biophysical orthogonal methods for support of
target engagement (e.g., SPR, ITC, CETSA), not solely phenotypic assays.
6.Carefully examine the detection
method
for determining the concentration of 1 present in an
assay. What biophysical method is/was used for detection? Can likely
degradation products or metabolites have a similar response and/or
explain the data/hypothesis?

With respect
to curcumin/curcuminoids and in vivo studies and clinical
trials, we believe there is rather “much ado about nothing”.
Certainly, the low systemic exposure levels reported in clinical trials
do not support its further investigation as a therapeutic. Circumventing
the requirement for systemic circulation, curcumin might provide benefit
by acting on gut microbiota. Thus far, there is limited evidence to
support this hypothesis, which will also limit the utility of this
delivery method. Delivery systems such as lipid vesicles, nanoparticles,
and nanofibers might be able to boost the bioavailability of 1, but this could also conceivably narrow its therapeutic
window and lead to off-target toxicity by aforementioned processes.
Available evidence demonstrates curcumin will ultimately degrade upon
release into physiologic media, no matter the delivery mechanism.
Analogues of 1 might address some of the delivery challenges
but would be new chemical entities and would have to proceed through
expensive preclinical work to be approved for clinical trials. In
our opinion, analogues of curcumin are based on a fairly weak foundation.
Of course, we do not rule out the possibility that an extract of
crude turmeric might have beneficial effects on human health. The
large RC of NP extracts, and even of refined NP preparations, makes
the identification of the active constituent(s) and evaluation of
their efficacy in humans very difficult. , Considering the overwhelming evidence showing the weakness of isolated
curcumin (almost always a mixture of curcuminoids) as a viable therapeutic,
consideration of holistic approaches that take into account the chemical
and PD/PK complexity of turmeric and its broad TxM/nutritional foundation
appears to be superior directions for future research in the turmeric
domain. While the concepts of static and dynamic RC apply equally
to synthetically prepared compounds, the development of leads sourced
from metabolomic (natural) sources is intrinsically more prone to
the impact of purity (and unknown impurities). In some ways, the oversimplification
of this complexity has led to complicatedness that makes it difficult
to interpret results of curcumin-based studies. , In addition, there is increasing evidence that TxM agents cannot
be adequately described with reductionist pharmacology models but
require consideration of polypharmacology and synergy. The recent recognition of IMPS adds to the uniqueness of natural products by identifying
panacea-type substances that establish a new dimension of biological
signatures generated by bioactive molecules. Curcumin is not the only
potential IMP that has received much attention by the scientific community
as a drug lead. Development projects with numerous other prominent
plant natural products (e.g., polyphenolics) have experienced similar
drawbacks despite major efforts. As shown here for curcumin, the essential
medicinal chemistry of natural products that were developed into drugs
successfully, and as almost unaltered structures (e.g., artemisinin,
camptothecin, taxol, ivermectin, etc.), differs significantly from
those of potential IMPS. This orthogonal perspective on the druggability
of NPs is further supported by the metabolic feedback hypothesis, which states that bioactivity, especially of
many food-borne phytochemicals, can act via weak negative biological
feedback mechanisms, escaping in vitro detection and blurring our
understanding of mechanisms of action. Collectively, recognition of
these factors may remove complicatedness from ongoing research while
inspiring the development of out-of-the-box approaches to unraveling
the complexity and potential health benefits of turmeric and other
NPs.

## Supporting Information Available
The Supporting
Information
is available free of charge on the ACS Publications website at DOI: 10.1021/acs.jmedchem.6b00975.Supplemental Tables
1, 2, and 3 of assays, half-lives,
and activities, along with a discussion of covalent protein modification
by 1 (PDF)

## Supplementary Material
jm6b00975_si_001.pdf

## Author Contributions
K.M.N., M.A.W.,
J.L.D., J.B., J.G., and G.F.P. wrote the manuscript. K.M.N., M.A.W.,
J.L.D., G.F.P., J.G., and J.B. contributed to revisions.
The authors
declare no competing financial interest.
Kathryn M. Nelson is a Research Associate at the Institute
for Therapeutics Discovery and Development at the University of Minnesota
(UMN) in Minneapolis, MN. She graduated from the UMN College of Pharmacy
in 2013, where she received her Ph.D. in Medicinal Chemistry. Her
doctoral thesis work focused on the development of novel antitubercular
agents and chemical tools for biological target identification. Her
current research interests include development of new Alzheimer’s
therapeutics, assay development and triage, and the development of
new chemical tools for target interrogation.
Jayme L. Dahlin is a Resident Physician in Clinical
Pathology at Brigham and Women’s Hospital in Boston, MA. He
graduated from the Mayo Clinic Medical Scientist Training Program
in 2016, where he received his Ph.D. in Molecular Pharmacology and
Experimental Therapeutics from Mayo Graduate School and his M.D. from
Mayo Medical School. His doctoral thesis work focused on chemical
mechanisms of assay interference in high-throughput screening (HTS)
and early drug discovery. His current research interests include HTS
and triage, bioassay promiscuity, and assay development.
Jonathan Bisson obtained an M.S. degree
in Structural
Biochemistry and started his phytochemistry journey under the mentorship
of Dr. Vincent Dumontet at the Institut de Chimie des Substances Naturelles,
Gif-sur-Yvette, France. He then obtained a Ph.D. in Science, Technology
and Health from the University of Bordeaux, France under the mentorship
of Dr. Pierre Waffo-Téguo, specializing in methodology at the
chemistry–biology interface. In 2013, he joined the University
of Illinois at Chicago, where he is currently a Postdoctoral Research
Associate, developing new methods and tools for natural products research
in interdisciplinary programs, mainly through data analysis, NMR,
and chromatographic approaches related to promiscuous natural products
(IMPS). Recently, he has been involved in the redesign of the NAPRALERT
database.
James Graham received
a B.S. in Chemistry in 1994
from the University of Pittsburgh, followed by a Ph.D. in Pharmacognosy
in 2001, as a protégé of Norman R. Farnsworth at the
University of Illinois at Chicago College of Pharmacy (UIC-COP). Following
an NIH postdoctoral fellowship in Miami and a stint as Technical Officer
at the World Health Organization in Geneva, he returned to UIC-COP
in 2007, where he is currently editor of the NAPRALERT database and
Research Associate Professor in the Department of Medicinal Chemistry
and Pharmacognosy.
Guido F. Pauli is a pharmacist with a doctoral degree
in Natural Products Chemistry and Pharmacognosy. As Professor and
University Scholar at UIC, Chicago (IL), he is PI and collaborator
in various interdisciplinary natural-product-centered research projects
and Director of the Center for Natural Product Technologies. His research
involves metabolome analysis of complex natural products, analytical
methodology for bioactive principles, herbal dietary supplements,
anti-TB drug discovery, and dental applications of natural agents.
His scholarly activities involve the education of the next generation
of pharmacognosist, service on pharmacopoeial expert and federal agency
panels, and guest professorships. His dissemination portfolio comprises
170+ peer-reviewed journal articles as well as journal coeditorial
and board functions.
Michael A.
Walters is a Research Associate Professor
of Medicinal Chemistry at the University of Minnesota (UMN). He began
his academic career in the Department of Chemistry at Dartmouth College
and then worked at Parke-Davis and Pfizer. He is currently the Director
of the Lead and Probe Discovery Group in the Institute for Therapeutics
Discovery and Development at the UMN. This institute serves as a minibiotech
for the development of the ideas of biomedical researchers at the
UMN and Mayo Clinic. His research interests currently focus on the
investigation of compound reactivity as it applies to assay interference
mechanisms, the development of Alzheimer’s disease therapeutics,
and new compounds to treat heart valve calcification.

## Acknowledgments
J.L.D.,
J.B., J.G., and G.F.P. acknowledge Dr. Brian Shoichet
for helpful discussions. J.B. and G.F.P. acknowledge funding from
NCCIH and ODS/NIH through Grant U41AT008706. The funders had no role
in study design, data collection and analysis, decision to publish,
or preparation of the manuscript. The opinions or assertions contained
herein belong to the authors and are not necessarily the official
views of the funders.

## Abbreviations Used
ADAlzheimer’s disease
ADMETabsorption, distribution,
metabolism, excretion, and toxicology
AIDassay identifier
CETSAcellular thermal shift assay
CPMN-[4-(7-diethylamino-4-methylcoumarin-3-yl)phenyl]maleimide
DLSdynamic light scattering
DTTdithiolthreitol
FDAFederal Drug Administration
FPfluorescence polarization
GRASgenerally recognized
as safe
HAThistone
acetyltransferase
HDAChistone deacetylase
HPLChigh-performance liquid chromatography
HTShigh-throughput screening
IC50half-maximal
inhibitory concentration
IMPSinvalid (or improbable) metabolic panaceas
ITCisothermal titration calorimetry
LLODlower limit of
detection
ClogPcalculated partition coefficient
MLPCNMolecular Libraries Probe Centers Network
MMSEmini-mental state examination
NAPRALERTnatural products
alert
NPnatural
product
PAINSpan
assay interference compounds
NMRnuclear magnetic resonance
PDpharmacodynamics
PKpharmacokinetics
RDSradiation dermatitis score
RPMI 1640Roswell Park Memorial Institute
1640 medium
RCresidual
complexity
SPRsurface
plasmon resonance
ThTthioflavin T