J Med ChemJ. Med. Chem822acssdjmJournal of Medicinal Chemistry0022-26231520-4804pmc-is-collection-domainyespmc-collection-titleACS AuthorChoicePMC5949722PMC5949722.1594972259497222896850610.1021/acs.jmedchem.7b005741PerspectiveModulators of 14-3-3
Protein–Protein
Interactions
SteversLoes M. SijbesmaEline BottaMaurizio MacKintoshCarol ObsilTomas LandrieuIsabelle CauYlenia WilsonAndrew J. KarawajczykAnna EickhoffJan DavisJeremy HannMichael O’MahonyGavin DovestonRichard G. BrunsveldLuc OttmannChristian †Laboratory
of Chemical Biology, Department of Biomedical Engineering and Institute
for Complex Molecular Systems (ICMS), Eindhoven
University of Technology, P.O. Box 513, 5600 MB, Eindhoven, The Netherlands‡Department
of Biotechnology, Chemistry and Pharmacy, University of Siena, Via Aldo Moro 2, 53100 Siena, Italy§Division
of Cell and Developmental Biology, School of Life Sciences, University of Dundee, Dundee DD1 4HN, United
Kingdom∥Department
of Physical and Macromolecular Chemistry, Faculty of Science, Charles University, Prague 116 36, Czech Republic⊥Université
deLille, CNRS, UMR 8576, F 59 000 Lille, France#School
of
Chemistry, University of Leeds, Woodhouse Lane, Leeds LS2 9JT, United
Kingdom∇Astbury
Center For Structural Molecular Biology, University of Leeds, Woodhouse Lane, Leeds LS2 9JT, United Kingdom○Taros
Chemicals GmbH & Co. KG, Dortmund 44227, Germany◆Lead
Discovery Center GmbH, Dortmund 44227, Germany¶UCB
Celltech, 216 Bath Road, Slough SL1 3WE, United Kingdom□GlaxoSmithKline, Gunnels
Wood Road, Stevenage, Hertfordshire SG1 2NY, United Kingdom$Cardiovascular
and Metabolic Diseases, Innovative Medicines and Early Development
Biotech Unit, AstraZeneca Gothenburg, Pepparedsleden 1, SE-431 83 Mölndal, Sweden@Department
of Chemistry, University of Duisburg-Essen, Universitätstraße 7, 45141 Essen, Germany*E-mail: c.ottmann@tue.nl. Tel.: +31 40-247
2835.02102017100520186193127423755377814042017140520181505201816022026Copyright © 2017 American Chemical Society2017American Chemical SocietyThis is an open access article published under a Creative Commons Non-Commercial No Derivative Works (CC-BY-NC-ND) Attribution License, which permits copying and redistribution of the article, and creation of adaptations, all for non-commercial purposes. 
Direct
interactions between proteins are essential for the regulation
of their functions in biological pathways. Targeting the complex network
of protein–protein interactions (PPIs) has now been widely
recognized as an attractive means to therapeutically intervene in
disease states. Even though this is a challenging endeavor and PPIs
have long been regarded as “undruggable” targets, the
last two decades have seen an increasing number of successful examples
of PPI modulators, resulting in growing interest in this field. PPI
modulation requires novel approaches and the integrated efforts of
multiple disciplines to be a fruitful strategy. This perspective focuses
on the hub-protein 14-3-3, which has several hundred identified protein
interaction partners, and is therefore involved in a wide range of
cellular processes and diseases. Here, we aim to provide an integrated
overview of the approaches explored for the modulation of 14-3-3 PPIs
and review the examples resulting from these efforts in both inhibiting
and stabilizing specific 14-3-3 protein complexes by small molecules,
peptide mimetics, and natural products.

pmc-status-qastatus0pmc-status-liveyespmc-status-embargonopmc-status-releasedyespmc-prop-open-accessyespmc-prop-olfnopmc-prop-manuscriptnopmc-prop-legally-suppressednopmc-prop-has-pdfyespmc-prop-has-supplementyespmc-prop-pdf-onlynopmc-prop-suppress-copyrightnopmc-prop-is-real-versionnopmc-prop-is-scanned-articlenopmc-prop-preprintnopmc-prop-in-epmcyesdocument-id-old-9jm7b00574document-id-new-14jm-2017-00574rccc-price

## Introduction

## Protein–Protein
Interactions (PPIs)
Protein–protein
interactions (PPIs) are important in almost all biological processes.
Most proteins do not function as single isolated entities but rather
are engaged in a dynamic physical network with other proteins in the
biomolecular context of a cell and its environment, often as part
of a multiprotein complex. This makes the interactions of proteins
as important as the biochemical activity of the protein itself. To
understand the biological role of a protein, it is of great importance
to understand and manipulate its underlying PPI network. An excellent
example of this can be found in cancer biology, where the oncogenic
kinase B-Raf can activate or inhibit the MAPK pathway by mechanisms
that involve changes in the interactions of B-Raf with other members
of the Raf kinase family. − 
The “druggable genome”
has been initially estimated to comprise approximately 1,500 single
protein targets. Although this is still
many more than the 266 human protein targets addressed by currently
approved drugs, intentionally targeting
PPIs significantly enlarges this number. The targeting of PPIs will
be particularly valuable for diseases that cannot be addressed via
“conventional” targets such as enzymes, receptors, or
ion channels. By considering PPIs occurring in the human body, this
situation can undoubtedly be improved given the size of the so-called
protein–protein “interactome” with estimates
lying between 130,000 and 650,000 protein complexes. Successfully addressing PPIs
will vastly expand our opportunities for pharmacological intervention,
especially by exploiting natural products. However, our understanding of biological mechanisms, and thus also
which PPIs are relevant to disease, is still rudimentary. No further
evidence of this is needed other than to reflect on the fact that
the highest attrition rate during the drug-discovery process occurs
during phase II clinical trials when it also becomes more costly. This attrition all too often arises because the
desired biological effect is not observed with a given lead candidate.
The availability of a good chemical probe, in contrast to genetic
methods, uniquely allows temporary and titratable knockdown of a protein
of interest, permitting its “druggability” and relevance
to disease to be evaluated. − Such probes can drive fundamental
biology; for instance, publications on BRD4 (bromodomain) and hDM2 (ubiquitin ligase) have increased dramatically since
the discovery of the PPI inhibitors bromodomain inhibitor (JQ1) and Nutlin. 
The issue of “druggability” is not unique to PPIs.
However, their extensive regulatory role in biological mechanisms
dictates that high-quality tool compounds modulating PPIs are urgently
required as probes of healthy/disease biology and to provide starting
points for drug discovery. Here, PPIs present a further challenge
in that the interacting surfaces are larger, flatter, and generally
deficient in the “binding-pockets” that define conventional
ligandable , proteins, although identification of hot-spots permits a binding site to be defined. This challenge is sufficiently
daunting that, until recently, PPIs were considered too challenging
to modulate using small-molecules and amenable only to modulation
using biologics. However, the emergence
of PPIs as small-molecule targets has now been conclusively demonstrated
by the Nutlin series (Roche) and Navitoclax
(Abbott). Although traditional approaches
(e.g., high-throughput screening, fragment-based drug discovery, and
computer-aided ligand design) are recognized as having limitations
in terms of the identification of hit matter, , the development of design-based approaches, e.g., based on foldamers,
is encouraging. A number of strategic
approaches to modulation can be envisioned comprising competitive
(or orthosteric) inhibition, allosteric inhibition, and stabilization
( A–C)
with general progress in this area summarized in numerous well-cited
reviews. , , , − In terms of intervention within a pathway, the biological effect
might be complex in that competitive inhibition of a PPI might result
in stabilization of a PPI elsewhere within the pathway. Similarly,
allostery affects not only the activation state of a given protein
but the entire pathway in which it is embedded. For instance, the GTPase activity of Ras is modulated through
its PPI with SOS at a remote site, and modulation of this interaction
affects downstream PPI-mediated kinase activity within the entire
pathway. 
 In terms of ligand approaches, competitive, allosteric, and
stabilization
modulation of PPIs are extremely different. Competitive inhibition
is reasonably well established, and a number of inhibitors have been
identified using conventional drug-discovery and design approaches.
Prominent examples include a Nutlin follow-up from Roche (RG7112), Abbott (ABT-199), and GSK (I-BET762), which all entered
clinical trials ( A–C). Challenges associated with competitive inhibition center
on achieving sufficiently potent and selective recognition of either
protein surface for inhibition to occur and the concomitant liability
that might be introduced in terms of inhibiting all PPIs of the target
protein. The biological response is proportional to the quality of
the competitor. Allosteric inhibition may be more challenging to achieve
by “design” and more likely to be identified by chance;
however, allosteric inhibitors offer increased selectivity and self-limiting
activity and, where PPIs are concerned, are much more likely to have
the Lipinski properties characteristic
of traditional small molecule drugs. A number of natural products
have been identified to act through allosteric effects such as Taxol,
which stabilizes tubulin so as to retard its polymerization. Drug-discovery and chemical biology programs
have also delivered allosteric modulators. For instance, allosteric
inhibitors of HIF-2 complex formation have been identified, which
act through recognition of the PAS-B domain of the HIF-2α subunit
( D). Such compounds have been used to validate HIF-2
as a viable cancer target in renal cell cancer. , Stabilization is less well established; however, it features prominently
among natural products Brefeldin A, Forskolin, and Rapamycin (among
others), which all act through stabilization of a PPI ( E and F). In addition, Tafamidis,
one of the few PPI modulators to successfully reach the clinic, stabilizes
the PPI transthyretin, which normally exists as a functional tetramer
and aggregates in neurodegenerative diseases such as transthyretin
amyloidosis. Small molecules such as Tafamidis that recognize and
stabilize the tetrameric complex have been shown to kinetically retard
aggregation and thus amyloid fibril formation. , It should be noted that stabilizers of PPIs should also exhibit
self-limiting biological response and greater selectivity because
they also rely on ternary complex formation.
 Despite these advances, PPI modulation remains a largely
unsolved
problem with inhibitors against only a few targets in current clinical
trials. Progress is hampered by low success
rates in identifying high-quality starting points for drug discovery and by a poor understanding of which PPIs may
be targeted by small molecules. Improved
ligand-discovery approaches and better conceptual understanding might
well arise from the study of certain privileged protein classes. With
several hundred identified protein interaction partners in eukaryotic
cells, the family of the so-called 14-3-3 proteins is an especially
interesting case for small-molecule PPI modulation. This protein family
represents an outstanding testing ground for new conceptual approaches
to PPI modulation and the elaboration of novel therapeutic approaches.
PPIs of 14-3-3 proteins play key roles in numerous disease-relevant
biological pathways and offer clear opportunities in terms of inhibition
and stabilization. This perspective will highlight the state of the
art in both areas with examples from diverse disease pathways.

## 14-3-3
Proteins
14-3-3 proteins are eukaryotic adaptor
proteins involved in many cellular processes such as cell-cycle control,
signal transduction, protein trafficking, and apoptosis. By binding to other proteins, 14-3-3 can assist
in protein folding, protein localization, and stimulation or inhibition
of other PPIs. Seven different mammalian
14-3-3 isoforms exist (α/β, γ, σ, δ/ζ,
η, ε, and τ), which are highly conserved throughout
species and mainly exist as dimers. Each monomer consists of nine
alpha helices forming an amphipathic groove that can bind to (mostly
phosphorylated) protein partners ( ). Among the
several hundred 14-3-3 interaction partners described so far, there
are many disease-relevant proteins involved in key cellular processes,
like the Raf kinases, , cell-cycle phosphatase Cdc, , transcriptional modulator YAP , and tumor suppressor
p53. , This widespread involvement in human disease
makes 14-3-3 proteins a highly interesting case for the development
of technology to modulate their PPIs in a specific and efficient manner.
Because both inhibition and stabilization of 14-3-3 PPIs have been
shown with small molecules, the possibilities for novel pharmacological
intervention by addressing this protein class are substantial. In
this context, stabilization of 14-3-3 PPIs is an especially promising
approach because the problem of specificity might be solved more easily
than with inhibitors. This is due to the relatively high variability
between the respective PPI interfaces. This variability might allow
for the development of compounds that specifically bind to unique
composite pockets at the PPI interfaces. In this way, not only can
tool compounds be developed for the study of the underlying biology
in, e.g., cancer, neurodegeneration, metabolic diseases, infection,
and cystic fibrosis, but the approach can also be exploited in terms
of drug discovery. Here, control of subcellular localization, enzymatic
activity, and biological half-life can be envisioned as modes by which
14-3-3 PPI modulators could act, e.g., on transcription factors (YAP,
c-Jun, MLF1, FOXOs), enzymes shuttling between cytoplasm and nucleus
(Cdc25 phosphatases, HDACs), or kinases (B, C-Raf, LRRK2).
 In recent years, a growing number of crystal structures of
14-3-3
in complex with different binding partner motifs have been published,
for example, the cystic fibrosis ion channel CFTR, the small heat shock protein HSPB6, phosducin, and the Parkinson’s
disease-related kinase LRRK2. As dimeric
species that dock onto pairs of specific phosphorylated serine- or
threonine-containing motifs, 14-3-3 proteins are endowed with special
signaling, mechanical, and evolutionary properties. Although there
are a few cases where a 14-3-3 dimer interacts simultaneously with
phosphorylated sites in two different targets, in most documented
cases a single 14-3-3 dimer binds to two phosphorylated sites that
lie in tandem in the same target protein. This means that a 14-3-3
dimer can act as a signaling integrator when two binding sites on
a target are phosphorylated by different kinases. The mechanical effect
of 14-3-3 will depend on the location of the two docking sites. For
example, these paired sites may straddle a domain or motif whose function
is masked by the 14-3-3, or 14-3-3 binding to a disordered region
can force a disorder-to-order transition that creates a new functional
site in the target. , 
14-3-3 binding sites lie
within motifs that are phosphorylated
by basophilic protein kinases such as PKB/Akt, p90RSK, PKA, and AMPK. This means that 14-3-3 affinity capture and
quantitative mass spectrometry procedures can be used to identify
targets of, for example, regulation by insulin, growth factors, energy
stress, and adrenalin that activate these respective kinases. In this
way, new 14-3-3-based mechanisms have been identified to explain how
insulin and growth factors regulate synchronized shifts in glucose
uptake, glycolysis, mTORC1 signaling, protein translation, and other
regulatory events that promote cell growth and proliferation. − Their roles as mediators of growth factor and nutrient signaling
pathways are consistent with further findings that connect 14-3-3
proteins to a variety of human diseases. In addition to their participation
in diverse cancers, they have been associated
with the development of neurodegenerative diseases and virulence of human pathogenic organisms. , 
The role of 14-3-3 proteins in parasitic organisms has only
recently
emerged. The rising interest in this field is justified by the limited
panel of effective drugs currently available to treat parasite infections,
the relevant side effects associated with these compounds, and the
growing number of treatment-refractory cases. A survey of the recent literature has highlighted a number of reports
showing the role of, and in a few cases the structural features of,
14-3-3 from parasites, which are briefly reviewed here.
Plasmodium falciparum and Plasmodium knowlesi are two species of protozoan parasites that can cause severe malaria
infection in humans. In P. falciparum and P. knowlesi, the single isoform of 14-3-3 was
shown to act as a chaperone only in specific life stages of the parasite. In Plasmodium berghei, the
host skeletal protein dematin is translocated from the erythrocyte
membrane within the parasite, where it interacts with the Plasmodium
14-3-3, thus influencing the remodeling of the erythrocytic cytoskeleton
and modulating the host erythrocyte invasion. 
Eimeria tenella is a coccidian parasite that
causes
a serious intestinal disease in chickens. Although human infection
by E. tenella has not been reported yet, this parasite
has a significant economic impact with an estimated cost to the poultry
industry of around $2.4 billion per annum worldwide, thus justifying
the in depth study of its lifecycle and infection mechanisms. In E. tenella, a single isoform
of 14-3-3 seems to be involved in the regulation of the mannitol pathway.
In particular, the binding of 14-3-3 to the mannitol-1-phosphate dehydrogenase
(M1PDH) was shown to inactivate the enzyme as soon as mannitol biosynthesis
is complete. From a drug discovery perspective, it is important to
note that this pathway is missing in higher eukaryotes, thus representing
an attractive target for the development of selective drugs. 
Toxoplasma gondii is
a protozoan parasite that
causes a disease known as toxoplasmosis, a generally asymptomatic
infection. Despite this, the parasite is known to cause severe congenital
infection in humans and animals. The sexual reproduction of this parasite
occurs in the intestine of definitive hosts (cats) while asexual multiplication
takes place in various hosts, including humans. 14-3-3 proteins have been detected in the asexual form
of the parasite, namely the tachyzoite stage, that is virulent in
humans. Moreover, it was demonstrated
that, in this stage, 14-3-3 proteins from T. gondii induce hypermotility in infected host cells. 
Alveolar echinococcosis (AE) is a rare parasitic
disorder that
occurs after ingestion of eggs of Echinococcus multilocularis. AE is a tumorlike chronic disease, which can be fatal if left untreated. In E. multilocularis, 14-3-3
proteins have been reported to be implicated in the tumor-like growth
process. Furthermore, it has been hypothesized
that overexpressed 14-3-3 proteins may be involved in the promotion
and/or maintenance of the progressive growth capacity of E.
multilocularis larvae. 
Schistosoma mansoni is one of the major intestinal
parasites that can cause schistosomiasis, the most widespread parasitic
disease after malaria. This parasite encodes four 14-3-3 isoforms
that have roles in host immunity, parasite development, and survival. 
Trichinella spiralis is
a nematode parasite that
is responsible for the development of trichinellosis, which is an
important foodborne parasitic disease worldwide. The infection in
humans is generally acquired by eating raw or inadequately cooked
meat that contains encysted larvae of T. spiralis. 14-3-3 proteins from this parasite were shown to play a crucial
role in the early stages of the infection by maintaining the host–parasite
relationship. 
Cryptosporidium
parvum is a parasite responsible
for cryptosporidiosis, a diarrheal disease that affect humans and
animals especially in developing countries. This infection is mainly caused by the ingestion of contaminated
water, and an estimated 748,000 cryptosporidiosis cases occur annually. Unfortunately, only a limited number of drugs
can be used to treat infections by C. parvum and
most of them have low efficacy and an unknown mechanism of action.
The three isoforms of 14-3-3 found in C. parvum (Cp14ε,
Cp14a, and Cp14b) were crystallized in 2011, and two of them showed
some interesting features that are unique among 14-3-3 proteins. In particular, in the isoform Cp14a, the substrate
pocket is much more open compared to the classical folding of 14-3-3,
leading to the hypothesis that this isoform can accommodate large
substrates. The Cp14b isoform was able to bind a phosphorylated copy
of the last six amino acid residues of its own C-terminus. This binding
is much stronger when the C-terminus is truncated, thus suggesting
a competition between C-terminus and its phosphorylated mimic. Even if other studies are necessary to understand
the role of 14-3-3 in the C. parvum life cycle, these
unique features described above can be exploited to develop novel
strategies for cryptosporidiosis treatment.
Giardia
duodenalis is a protozoan parasite that
causes giardiasis by colonizing the upper portion of the small intestine
in mammals. Giardiasis is the most common gastrointestinal diarrheal
illness worldwide, and more than 200 million symptomatic human cases
are reported annually. , In this parasite, the single
14-3-3 isoform (g14-3-3) is essential for the development of cysts
(the infective stage). 
Three crystallographic
structures of G. duodenalis are available, which
makes this protein amenable to study through
structure-based computational methods. The crystal structure of g14-3-3
in the apo form revealed an unusual “open” conformation, whereas computational studies (supported by
crystallographic evidence) proved that the post-translational modification
(phosphorylation) on Thr214 of g14-3-3 induces a conformational rearrangement
that leads to the “closed” and stable g14-3-3 conformation. This form corresponds to the peptide-bound g14-3-3
structure.
In summary, all these findings demonstrate that 14-3-3
proteins
have substantial involvement in parasites’ life cycles. Even
if the molecular basis for the role of 14-3-3 in pathogenicity is
not well understood, we can speculate that this protein family could
represent an alternative and promising axis to treat parasite infections.
Despite rising interest in the role of 14-3-3 in parasites, significant
advancement in basic research is required. Specifically, the development
of a 14-3-3 modulator could be essential for unravelling the contribution
of 14-3-3 proteins to parasite growth and survival in the host.
In general, the ubiquity of 14-3-3 protein involvement in numerous
human diseases has sparked interest in their use as novel targets
for drug discovery. , , , The fact that 14-3-3 proteins serve purely
as adapter proteins means that active compounds against 14-3-3 alone
will impact several binding partners and thus likely give rise to
unwanted pharmacology. However, if the drugs target the complex formation
between 14-3-3 and a protein partner, either by inhibition or stabilization,
then intrinsic specificity should be possible. 

## Structural Biology of 14-3-3 PPIs
Most PDB entries
of 14-3-3 crystal structures represent binary complexes of 14-3-3
with a peptide mimic of the phosphorylated binding site of the PPI
partner protein. Only in a limited number of cases has crystallization
of 14-3-3 with a larger part of the partner protein been possible.
One reason for the difficulty in obtaining full-length structures
of these complexes is the fact that the partner proteins themselves
are often multidomain proteins and thus challenging to crystallize.
A second reason is that the 14-3-3 binding sequences are prevalently
localized in disordered regions of their target proteins and only
undergo a disorder-to-order transition when binding to 14-3-3. In
this transition, it is common for only the directly neighboring parts
of the phosphorylated anchor residues to be involved. Thus, large
parts of the partner protein regions remain disordered, which is a
disadvantage for crystal growth. A commonly adopted alternative strategy
therefore centers on using synthetic peptides comprising around 10–40
amino acid residues to mimic the partner protein binding motif. It
is of course vital that the activity of any stabilizer or inhibitor
found using the simplified 14-3-3/partner-protein-peptide system is
also shown in the context of more physiologically relevant partner
protein constructs. So far, however, crystallography of 14-3-3 in
complex with synthetic peptides has been a useful system to obtain
structural data of 14-3-3 modulators. These synthetic peptides typically
bind in the 14-3-3 amphipathic binding groove like the 14-3-3ζ/C-Raf
complex shown in . Additionally, many structures have been reported where a small
molecule is also bound to form a ternary complex. Historically, 14-3-3
binding sequences have been categorized in different motifs. Mode
I and II interaction partners were defined to require an arginine
at position −3 with respect to the phosphorylated serine or
threonine residue and a proline residue at position +2 (more specifically;
(I) RSX(pS/T)XP or (II) RX(F/Y)X(pS)XP). Mode III motifs were later defined as C-terminal sequences, where
the phosphorylated serine or threonine is the penultimate residue
of the binding partner. However, as recent
reviews of the known 14-3-3 interactome have illustrated, 14-3-3 binding
motifs can deviate from these well-defined motifs. , Here, we will focus on examples where a larger domain of the partner
protein is crystallized with 14-3-3: AANAT, PMA2, Hd3a ( ), and more recently for HSPB6
( ). , , This set of crystal structures
conveniently shows the variety of binding modes possible with 14-3-3
and illustrates their relevance in the identification of important
and distinct interaction interfaces.
 

## 14-3-3ζ/AANAT
Serotonin N-acetyltransferase
(arylalkylamine N-acetyltransferase, AANAT) catalyzes
the transfer of acetyl from acetyl-coenzyme A to serotonin, thus producing N-acetylserotonin, which is the precursor of melatonin.
Melatonin levels are believed to govern the vertebrate daily rhythm
with high levels occurring at night thus providing a hormonal analog
signal of environmental lighting, which can be used to optimize circadian
physiology and possibly form the basis of treatment in sleeping disorders. , In 2001, the crystal structure of 14-3-3ζ in complex with
AANAT was published by the group of Dyda showing that binding to 14-3-3
activates the enzyme by significantly increasing its affinity for
its substrates serotonin and acetyl-coenzyme A. In the crystal structure, two AANAT monomers (residues
18–196) bind to the central channel of a 14-3-3 dimer ( A). In addition to
the phosphorylation-dependent interaction of the N-terminus of AANAT,
which is accommodated in an extended conformation by the amphipathic
groove of the 14-3-3 monomer, the well-structured C-terminal part
of the enzyme makes extensive contacts with the inner wall of the
14-3-3 channel.

## T14-3c/PMA2-CT52 Complex
The plant
plasma membrane
H+-ATPase (PMA) generates both a chemical proton as well
as an electrical gradient (membrane potential) across the plasma membrane. Because almost all transport mechanisms at the
plant plasma membrane are energetically dependent on the PMA-generated
electrochemical proton gradient, PMA plays a central role in plant
physiology as the powerhouse for plant growth. − One of the most important regulatory
events for PMA is phosphorylation of the penultimate C-terminal threonine
residue followed by binding of 14-3-3 proteins, which activates PMA. , This activation is strongly increased by the natural product fusicoccin, , which fills a gap in the interface of 14-3-3 with the regulatory
C-terminus (CT) of PMA. , The structure of the
last 52 amino acid residues of the C-terminus of the PMA isoform 2
(PMA2-CT52) from tobacco (Nicotiana plumbaginifolia) in complex with Tobacco 14-3-3 isoform c (T14-3c) showed two PMA
C-termini bound to one 14-3-3 dimer ( B). The C-terminal 30 amino acid residues
bind as an elongated peptide and a short helix in the amphipathic
groove of each 14-3-3 monomer, whereas the N-terminal 22 amino acid
residues of PMA2-CT52 form a helix that perpendicularly leaves the
14-3-3 binding channel.

## 14-3-3/Hd3a Complex
Approximately
80 years ago, a substance
was proposed to be synthesized in the leaves of flowering plants and
transported to the shoot to induce flowering. This substance was named “florigen”, but
its molecular identity was uncovered by showing that “florigen”
is encoded by the highly conserved plant gene FLOWERING LOCUS
T (FT), whose product is a
mobile protein. In 2011, it was shown
that the FT protein from rice (Hd3a) binds to 14-3-3 proteins in the
apical cells of shoots to form a complex that migrates into the nucleus
where it interacts with the basic leucine zipper (bZIP) transcription
factor FD. Interestingly, the authors
cocrystallized the complex between FT (Hd3a) and a rice 14-3-3 protein
(GF14c) and used crystals of the binary complex to soak a short phosphopeptide
derived from FD (OsFD1) and obtain the ternary complex of GF14c/Hd3a/OsFD1.
In the crystal structure, the entire construct of Hd3a (residues 6–170)
is visible, making it the second-largest 14-3-3 partner protein after
AANAT (residues 18–196) that has been cocrystallized with 14-3-3.
Two Hd3a molecules bind to one 14-3-3 dimer and occupy an unusual
position that is not part of the central binding channel as seen with
all other 14-3-3 ligands including AANAT. Rather, Hd3a binds to the
“upper” edges of the horseshoe-like 14-3-3 dimer ( C). This site is
close to the additional Cdc25C binding site predicted by a mutation
study of human 14-3-3σ that lies outside of the central phosphopeptide
binding channel. 

## 14-3-3σ/HSPB6 Complex
In early 2017, Sluchanko,
Strelkov, and co-workers reported a 14-3-3 assembly with the full-length
HSPB6 dimer ( ). The authors emphasize this is the
first crystal structure of a human small heat shock protein (HSP)
in its functional state. The small HSPs comprise a family of ten ATP-independent
chaperones with molecular masses in the range of 17–23 kDa. HSPB6 (also known as HSP20) is involved in
smooth muscle relaxation and cardio protection and was identified
as a binding partner for 14-3-3 upon phosphorylation of Ser16. , HSPB6 dimerizes via its highly conserved α-Crystallin domain
(ACD) that forms a β-sandwich, whereas both the N-terminal domain
and C-terminal extension (NTD and CTE) that flank this region are
highly unstructured. The interaction motif for 14-3-3 consists of
a classical RRApSAP pattern located in the NTD. 
The authors cocrystallized 14-3-3 with two HSPB6-derived
phosphopeptides (residues 13–20 and 11–23) containing
the phosphorylated Ser16 before solving the structure of the full-length
pHSPB6 complex (residues 1–149) with 14-3-3σ to a resolution
of 4.5 Å. The asymmetric unit was found to contain three heterotetrameric
complexes. Both intrinsically disordered
pHSPB6 N-terminal domains interact with the 14-3-3 dimer grooves identical
to the cocrystal structure with the phosphopeptides. Remarkably, the
ACD dimer of HSPB6 was found to dock onto one 14-3-3 unit, resulting
in an asymmetric overall complex ( ), which is in contrast to the structures
described above. The interaction surface spans ∼400 Å2 and contains an essential salt bridge between Arg224 (14-3-3)
and Glu86 (HSPB6). The positioning of the flexible parts of the NTDs
not covered in the electron density were further characterized in
solution by small-angle X-ray scattering, confirming the 2:2 stoichiometry
of the complex. The authors state that by fully sequestering 14-3-3
binding sites, the chaperone HSPB6 blocks interactions with other
partner proteins, thus acting as a phospho-switching 14-3-3 regulator.

## Inhibitors of 14-3-3 PPIs

## R18 Peptide
The first reported 14-3-3
PPI inhibitor,
peptide R18 (1) (20 amino acid residues), was identified
from a phage display by the Fu Laboratory. In the 14-3-3 complex crystal structure, the central sequence (WLDLE)
can be seen in the amphipathic binding groove of 14-3-3. This structure revealed that, in addition to
salt-bridge interactions between the carboxyl group of the glutamic
acid side chain and three arginines of 14-3-3, there is an extensive
hydrophobic contact surface between the two leucine residues of 1 and a number of 14-3-3 residues ( ). In this way, 1 efficiently
exploits the amphipathic character of the 14-3-3 binding channel to
compete for both phosphorylation-dependent and -independent 14-3-3
PPIs. In later studies, Fu et al. showed that expression of a longer
peptide of 64 amino acid residues with two such inhibiting sequences
resulted in apoptosis, sensitized cancer cells for the antineoplastic
drug cisplatin, and suppressed tumor growth in mice. , These breakthrough studies with 1 proved the principal
feasibility and efficacy of inhibiting 14-3-3 PPIs.
 

## ExoS Macrocyclic Peptide
The groups of Ottmann and
Grossmann recently developed a strategy for the macrocyclization of
bioactive peptides with an irregular secondary structure and showed
that macrocyclic molecules derived from peptides containing 14-3-3
binding motifs can efficiently inhibit the interaction between 14-3-3ζ
and their binding partners. As a proof
of concept, they prepared macrocyclic peptides targeting the interaction
between 14-3-3ζ and the virulence factor of the pathogenic bacterium Pseudomonas aeruginosa Exoenzyme S (ExoS). These inhibitors
were prepared from the ExoS peptide stretch that binds to 14-3-3 in
an irregular and mostly extended conformation ( A, sequence Q420GLLDALDLAS430) by replacing two hydrophobic residues crucially involved
in 14-3-3 binding with non-natural amino acid residues cross-linked
by a (CH2)n chain. The most
efficient inhibition was obtained for the βSS12 (2) inhibitor in which residues Leu422 and Ala425 were replaced
with S-configured non-natural amino acid residues
cross-linked with the chain containing 12 methylene groups ( B and C). This macrocyclic inhibitor binds to 14-3-3ζ
with ∼30-fold higher affinity compared to that of the unmodified
peptide (a Kd value of 41 nM vs 1.14 μM).
The structural analysis revealed that the hydrophobic cross-link is
involved in interactions with nonpolar residues within the ligand
binding groove of 14-3-3ζ, whereas the conformation of the backbone
is very similar to that of the unmodified peptide. Further biophysical
analyses suggested that the improved binding affinity resulting from
the incorporation of the cross-link comes from the significantly decreased
conformational flexibility of the macrocyclic molecule. Because all
14-3-3 binding motifs structurally characterized so far adopt irregular
and extended conformations within the 14-3-3 ligand-binding grooves,
this approach should be applicable to the majority of 14-3-3 binding
interactions. D shows the crystal structure of an ExoS-derived peptide H (3), which has been obtained by a ring-closing alkyne metathesis
used here for the first time for the stabilization of an irregular
peptide secondary structure. 
 

## Tau Epitope
On
a cellular level, the most striking
pathological hallmark of Alzheimer’s disease (AD) is the occurrence
of protein deposits like neurofibrillary tangles (NFTs) and amyloid
plaques. NFTs are composed of hyperphosphorylated Tau displaying paired
helical filaments. NFTs have been found to contain substantial amounts
of 14-3-3 proteins, implicating them in the pathophysiology of AD. Furthermore, 14-3-3 proteins have been found
to directly bind to Tau in solution via the phosphorylated residues
Ser214 and Ser324 as important determinants of binding. , Previously, we solved the crystal structure of 14-3-3 in complex
with synthetic peptides comprising the phosphorylation sites pSer214
and pSer324. The sequence surrounding
pSer214 (211RTPpSLPTP218) is especially interesting
with three proline residues as notable structural features ( A). In particular,
Pro218 occupies a position that is not used by most of the other structurally
elucidated 14-3-3 recognition motifs. This observation inspired the
rational design of peptide-based inhibitors using this position (Pro218)
in the Tau peptide for chemical modifications that would result in
peptides displaying increased affinity to 14-3-3.
 This concept was recently demonstrated by the groups of Ottmann,
Milroy, and Landrieu who designed a potent inhibitor of the 14-3-3/Tau
interaction as guided by cocrystal structures of the protein–stabilizer
and protein–inhibitor complexes. The superposition of cocrystal structures of 14-3-3 complexes with
Fusicoccin A (stabilizer) and Tau epitope (inhibitor, sequence RTPpSLPTP)
showed that the C-terminal Pro218 residue of the Tau epitope and the
A ring of Fusicoccin A overlap. This suggested that the poor binding
affinity of this phosphopeptide for 14-3-3 could be improved by extending
its C-terminus with a hydrophobic group to target the highly conserved
hydrophobic pocket within the amphiphilic groove of 14-3-3, which
led to 14-3-3 inhibiting modified peptides 109B (4),
126B (5), and 201D (6) ( B–D). Indeed, the chimeric inhibitor containing the sterically
bulky and conformationally rigid benzhydryl pyrrolidine moiety at
the C-terminus of the Tau epitope bound to 14-3-3 with 3 orders of
magnitude higher binding affinity compared to that of the unmodified
phosphopeptide. Consequent NMR spectroscopic studies on 14-3-3ζ
and full-length Tau confirmed that this chimeric compound inhibits
the binding of 14-3-3ζ to phosphorylated full-length Tau by
disrupting its interaction with the phospho-epitope sites located
within the C-terminal part of Tau.

## 2-5, Prodrug 15, and 19a
Shao et al. reported in 2010 a 14-3-3
PPI inhibitor called 2-5 (7) that was found using the
small-molecule microarray (SMM)
technique. The library was based on
an optimal 14-3-3 binding amino acid sequence (RFRpSYPP), where they
coupled 50 diverse amines to the C-terminus of the N-terminal peptide
(RFRpS) or 243 diverse acid building blocks to the N-terminus of the
C-terminal peptide (pSYSPP). These hybrids were spotted on a glass
slide, and binding of fluorescently labeled GST-14-3-3 was measured.
Five hits were found with Kd values between
0.6 and 1.03 μM, of which three featured a substitution of the
N-terminal peptide part and two of the C-terminal peptide part. By
combining these fragments into the six possible nonpeptidic molecules,
compounds were found with IC50 values between 2.6 and 3.6
μM (fluorescence polarization (FP) assay), including 7 ( A).
 Phospho-serine mimetic prodrug 15 (8) based
on 7 was reported that showed potent 14-3-3 inhibitory
activity
in cells. The basic idea of the group
of Borch was to transform bioactive peptides with phospho-serine groups,
which suffer from poor membrane permeability and hydrolysis by phosphatases,
into stable and cell permeable molecules with druglike properties.
The phosphate to serine bridging oxygen group of 7 was
replaced by a difluoromethylene linker with the aim of preventing
phosphatase cleavage under physiological conditions. This also enables
the retention of an appropriate pKa to
keep the phosphate mimetic in a doubly charged state to maintain all
essential interactions. For enabling membrane permeability, the two
charges of the phosphonate group were temporarily neutralized by derivatization
of the two phosphonate oxygens with nitro-furfuryl and 4-chloro-N-methylbutan-1-amine groups ( B). Upon entry into the cell, the nitrofurfuryl
group was cleaved off by enzymatic reduction and spontaneous expulsion
to deliver a phosphoamidate anion. Subsequent intracellular cyclization
of an intermediate followed by spontaneous hydrolysis yields the biologically
active phosphonate product 19a (9). Compound 8 inhibits viability
of DG75 leukemia cells with an IC50 value of 5 μM
and induces apoptosis in the same concentration range, whereas free
phosphonate 9 does not show any significant inhibition
at concentrations up to 100 μM.
For confirming the relevance
of 14-3-3 proteins for the cellular
effects of compound 8, a cellular assay for measuring
14-3-3-mediated inhibition of FOXO transcription factors was used.
FOXO3A is a member of the Forkhead family of transcription factors
that is inactivated by Akt1 phosphorylation and subsequent 14-3-3
binding. FOXO3a-dependent reporter gene activation was abolished by
cotransfection with Akt1 in DG75 cells. The repressed FOXO3a activity
was recovered in a dose-dependent manner by addition of compound 8 in concordance with reduced retention of phosphorylated
FOXO3a by 14-3-3 in the cytoplasm. Active metabolite 9 was able to inhibit the interaction between immobilized 14-3-3τ
and phosphorylated FOXO3a at physiologically relevant concentrations
in lysates of DG75 leukemia cells transfected with FOXO3a and Akt1,
whereas prodrug 8 was inactive.

## BV01, BV02, BV101, and 9
The group of
Botta reported the identification of small-molecule inhibitors of
14-3-3σ PPIs by using structure-based pharmacophore modeling,
virtual screening, and molecular docking simulations with library
design and organic synthesis. They started by in silico screening
of 200,000 compounds from the ASINEX chemical collection, of which
14 compounds were eventually selected and tested in cellular and biochemical
assays. This resulted in the identification of BV02 (12) as a lead inhibitor of the interaction between 14-3-3σ and
cAbl in chronic myelogenous leukemia (CML) ( C). Indeed, 12 was able to inhibit 14-3-3/c-Abl interaction and promote
c-Abl nuclear translocation at low micromolar concentration in Ba/F3
cells expressing the wild-type Bcr-Abl as well as its Imatinib-resistant
T315I mutation. Accordingly, 12 represented a useful starting point for the development of an alternative
treatment of CML, particularly for the Imatinib-resistant forms.
Following the discovery of 12, two additional 14-3-3
PPI inhibitors have been reported. These molecules, namely BV01 (10) and BV101 (11) ( C), were also initially discovered by an
in silico approach, and promoted c-Abl
nuclear translocation in Ba/F3 cells expressing the WT and the Imatinib-resistant
T315I-mutated Bcr-Abl constructs. Furthermore, the interaction of 10 with 14-3-3σ was supported by transfer NOE experiments. In 2014, the same group published the discovery
of compound 9 (13, C), a phthalimide derivative of 12 that
is able to promote c-Abl nuclear translocation as well as to sensitize
multidrug-resistant (MDR) cancer stem cells. This discovery was facilitated by in silico docking of a virtual
library of 12 and 10 analogues to a 14-3-3σ
crystal structure using a well-established computational protocol. The most promising molecules were synthesized
and submitted to biological tests. Most notably, molecule 13 was found to promote c-Abl nuclear translocation at 25 μM
and has been shown to decrease the IC50 of doxorubicin
by increasing its accumulation in MDR cancer cells at 10 μM
concentration.
Subsequently, it was discovered that 13 was the product
of spontaneous dehydration of 12 under aqueous conditions
( C) and was,
in fact, the bioactive form of 12, as shown by a detailed
NMR spectroscopy study. The direct interaction
between 13 and recombinant 14-3-3σ was demonstrated
by NOESY experiments, thus corroborating the mechanism of action of 13 at the molecular level. Indeed, in the presence of 14-3-3σ,
the conversion of 13 back into 12 was slowed
down, indicating that temperature and pH are not the only variables
that influence the compounds interconversion. This observation provides
important information for the appropriate setup of biological and
biochemical experiments.

## HSP20 Compound 85070
The phosphorylated
form of HSP20
(phospho-HSP20) interacts with 14-3-3 proteins, the complex playing
a regulating role on the actin depolymerizing protein cofilin. Phospho-HSP20
competition with phospho-cofilin for binding to 14-3-3 proteins frees
phospho-cofilin, resulting in its dephosphorylation and subsequent
depolymerization of the actin cytoskeleton. Free phosho-HSP20 is additionally
able to directly destabilize the cytoskeleton. The phospho-HSP20/14-3-3
interaction could be a critical step in cofilin-mediated disruption
of actin stress fibers and hence smooth muscle relaxation. Small molecules
targeting the phospho-HSP20/14-3-3 interaction could thus lead to
new therapeutic compounds to treat constriction of the airways in
asthma. By screening a 58,019-compound library obtained from ChemDiv
and ChemBridge (SanDiego CA) by high-throughput polarization assay,
researchers at Prolexys Pharmaceuticals and the Johns Hopkins Bloomberg
School of Public Health identified 268 modulators. These primary screen hits show at least 20% reduction of
the polarization emission in the assay that was set up using a FAM-labeled
8-mer phosphopeptide derived from HSP20 to test for full-length 14-3-3
γ isoform (247 amino acid residues) binding. Compounds belonging
to the scaffold PRLX24905 (US patent 20090136561) were further analyzed
by FP for their concentration-dependent activity of inhibition. Structurally
related scaffolds show a range of activity from no inhibition to 50
μM IC50 for compound 85070 (14, structure
not disclosed). These compounds were
additionally evaluated in cell-based assays. Compound 14 was the most efficient in causing, in a dose-dependent manner, a
decrease in cell stiffness, decrease in contractile force in ASM cells,
and an attenuation of active force development of intact tissue ex
vivo. For the time being, the mechanism of action of compound 14 and the basis of these functional effects are not known.

## FOBISIN101
In 2011, the group of Fu reported the first
covalent 14-3-3 inhibitor FOBISIN101 (15, FOurteen-three-three
BInding Small molecule INhibitor). Compound 15 ( A), initially reported in 1998 as the P2X receptor antagonist MRS-2159, was identified by screening of the Sigma-Aldrich
LOPAC library in a FP-based binding assay based on 14-3-3γ and
a phosphorylated Raf-1 peptide. Affinity chromatography was used to
demonstrate the ability of 15 to inhibit the binding
of 14-3-3γ to two known 14-3-3γ binding partners, Raf-1
and p-PRAS40, from COS-7 cell lysates. Compound 15 was
shown to be a pan-14-3-3 inhibitor and inhibited the binding of PRAS40
to 14-3-3ζ and 14-3-3γ with similar potencies (9.3 and
16.4 μM, respectively). Compound 15 also inhibited
the 14-3-3-dependent activation of nonphosphorylated 14-3-3 client
protein ExoS in a functional assay, suggesting that 15 inhibits the binding of both phosphorylated and nonphosphorylated
client proteins. A limited SAR study of analogues of 15 was carried out, employing an ELISA assay based on 14-3-3ζ
and Raf-1. Compounds 15A and 15B ( A) both exhibited
almost complete loss of potency, indicating that the phosphate and
phenyldiazene moieties were required for binding to 14-3-3ζ.
 A structure of the complex of 15 and 14-3-3ζ
was obtained by X-ray crystallography, indicating the formation of
an unexpected covalent adduct with the protein ( B). This was explained by
X-ray-induced cleavage of the N=N bond and reaction of the
radical thus formed with the side-chain terminal nitrogen atom of
Lys120. The phosphate moiety of 15 was shown to interact
with Lys49 (a key residue for recognition of phosphorylated client
proteins) and Asn173.
A color change (from orange to colorless)
of the crystals upon
X-ray exposure was attributed to the loss of the conjugated aromatic
system caused by reductive photo cleavage of the N=N bond.
MALDI-MS also showed that X-ray exposure was required for formation
of this covalent adduct as only irradiated samples exhibited the 183
Da increase in molecular weight corresponding to the 15 fragment observed in the crystal structure. However, X-ray activation
is not required for 15 to bind to 14-3-3ζ, as it
was able to inhibit binding of a Raf-1 peptide to 14-3-3ζ in
an ELISA-based assay. This suggests that the covalent bond may be
a radiation-induced crystallographic artifact rather than the functional
binding mode of 15 in the ELISA assay.
A similar
pyridoxal phosphate derivative 15C ( A) was reported
by Ottmann and co-workers as a 14-3-3 protein-binding ligand. In contrast to 15, no cleavage
of the N=N bond was observed in the 1.8 Å resolution crystal
structure of 15C complexed to 14-3-3σ. Instead,
transimination with the terminal side chain amino moiety of Lys122
(which corresponds to 14-3-3ζ Lys120) led to a covalent adduct
with the N=N bond and phenyldiazene moiety intact. The phosphate
moiety of 15C adopted a similar position to that observed
for 15 bound to 14-3-3ζ as reported by Fu. They
then obtained a structure of 15 with 14-3-3σ, which
in their hands also exhibited imine formation with the aldehyde. It
also exhibited with an intact diazene moiety; however, the electron
density indicated a high degree of ligand flexibility in this region
when compared with the hydrazine adduct observed by Fu et al. Ottmann
and co-workers also demonstrated attachment of up to four intact 15 molecules to the 14-3-3σ protein using ESI-MS with
no observed N=N bond cleavage. The differences in the observed
mechanisms of covalent complex formation of 15 were attributed
to differences in X-ray wavelength and MS conditions used. Further work is needed to fully elucidate the
exact mechanism of the diazene cleavage and subsequent covalent adduct
formation observed for 15.

## UTKO1
In 2005,
the group of Imoto reported the discovery
of the Aspergillus-derived natural product Moverastin
as inhibitors of cancer cell migration by the screening of microbial
extracts. Natural Moverastin is produced
as a diastereomeric mixture of secondary alcohols, and separation
led to the isolation of the pure diastereoisomers Moverastin A (16A) and B (16B) ( ). The Moverastins
are members of the cylindrol family of natural products, which are
known inhibitors of farnesyl transferase (FT). Structurally, the Moverastins differ from other cylindrols
in that they possess a methylidene moiety rather than a trisubstituted
alkene.
 HRas is a common human oncogene, and HRAS
protein
plays a key role in cancer cell migration. HRAS activity is dependent
on posttranslational prenylation (farnesylation) by FT, which leads
to activation of HRAS by membrane localization. Inhibition of FT therefore
leads to a reduction of HRAS farnesylation and inhibition of membrane
localization, subsequently leading to a reduction in cell migration
and tumor metastasis. Compounds 16A and 16B were shown to inhibit FT in vitro with similar potency and also
shown to decrease the nuclear localization of Ras in a tumor cell
line. 
In 2011, the same group
published a series of Moverastin derivatives
with enhanced inhibitory activity against the migration of human oesophogeal
tumor cells. The most potent compound
identified, rac-UTKO1 (17, ) had 3.5-fold increased potency on inhibition
of cell migration (IC50 1.98 μM) compared to 16; however, 17 was shown not to inhibit FT (IC50 > 100 μM), and therefore, another target was likely
responsible for its activity. Biotinylated
UTKO1 derivative B-UTKO1ox (18, ) was used as a probe in a series of experiments
to identify the molecular mode of action of 17. , Coprecipitation experiments with 18 and unlabeled 17 identified two 14-3-3 isoforms (ε and ζ) as
potential 17-binding proteins of which 14-3-3ζ
was considered to be the most likely candidate for the biological
activity due to previous reports of its involvement in cell migration.
The direct binding of 17 to 14-3-3ζ was confirmed
by a competition pulldown experiment using a GST-tagged 14-3-3ζ
protein. All seven mammalian 14-3-3 isoforms were then tested for
binding to 17, and 14-3-3ζ was confirmed as the
isoform with the strongest binding affinity. Compound 17 was also shown to bind to the C-terminal domain of 14-3-3ζ.
This C-terminal domain is the most variable region within the 14-3-3
family, and this was proposed as an explanation for the selective
binding of 17 to 14-3-3ζ. siRNA silencing of 14-3-3ζ
led to suppression of lamellopodia formation (which is key to cell
migration) in a tumor cell line thus increasing confidence that the
observed effect of 17 is due to binding to 14-3-3ζ.
Additional pulldown experiments with GST-tagged 14-3-3ζ were
performed to identify the relevant 14-3-3ζ partner proteins
with two proteins (Tiam1 and βPix) being identified as promising
candidates. siRNA knockdown experiments
showed only Tiam1 to have an effect on cell migration and inhibition
of the binding of Tiam1 to 14-3-3ζ by 17 was confirmed
both in cell lysates and cultured cells. Interestingly, neither the
stability nor cellular localization of Tiam1 was affected by 17, suggesting that a conformational change upon binding to
14-3-3ζ is required for activation of Tiam1 and that this is
inhibited by 17.

## Phosphonate-type Inhibitors
of 14-3-3
Starting from
the identified RFRpSYPP binding motif of an inhibitory peptide of
14-3-3, Wu et al. derived cell-permeable small molecule PPI inhibitor 7 that contains the phosphorylated central serine. The group of Ottmann went a step further and
identified a small molecule 14-3-3 inhibitor by means of virtual screening. An implemented set of filters on a ZINC library
of more than 8 million small molecules yielded 512 diverse compounds
that incorporate one phosphate or phosphonate group and obey the Lipinski’s
rule of five. Their virtual docking into a high-resolution crystal
structure of 14-3-3σ (PDB ID: 3P1N) and follow-up analysis led to the synthesis
and cocrystallization of 11 14-3-3 inhibitors (e.g., compound B2 (19, )). A detailed computational analysis
of the binding mode of eight of these molecules was performed by the
group of Wang et al. They showed that
the hydrophilic residues (Arg56, Arg129, and Tyr130 of 14-3-3σ)
at the bottom of the binding pocket form seven stable hydrogen bonds
with the phosphate group. In addition, two residues (Leu174 and Val178)
in contact with a moiety accommodating the phosphate group contribute
large van der Waals energies, and residue Leu126 provides large electrostatic
energies. This is in agreement with the statement that the phosphate
has the strongest pharmacophoric properties. There are three unfavorable
interactions with residues (Asp126, Glu133, and Glu182) for inhibitor
binding to protein. The averaged free energies for these three residues
in the eight compounds are 0.93, 1.03, and 0.97 kcal/mol. Because
the aspartic acid and glutamic acid residues have negative charges,
they repel the phosphate group and attract the residues with positive
charge in the binding pocket. By contrast, several residues surround
the second hydrophobic moiety of the inhibitors, whereas there are
only weak interactions between this part of the inhibitor and protein
residues.
 

## Molecular Tweezers
Bier et al. published in 2013 another
class of phosphate-containing inhibitors called molecular tweezers
( A and B). With crystal structures, they showed that this
molecule binds around residue Lys214 that is positioned at the edge
of the amphipathic binding groove of 14-3-3σ ( C–E). By binding to
this position, it can interfere with the function of 14-3-3 as an
adapter protein, inhibiting, for example, the binding of phosphorylated
C-Raf and unphosphorylated ExoS ( ) to 14-3-3σ. Surprisingly, the crystal
structure of 14-3-3 in complex with the molecular tweezer CLR01 (20) revealed only one molecule binding to 14-3-3σ. This was unexpected because 14-3-3σ displays
17 surface-exposed lysine residues potentially able to bind this supramolecular
ligand. Closer inspection of the environment of Lys214 and extensive
modeling of the 14-3-3σ/20 interaction identified
a set of structural requirements for the efficient interaction of
the tweezer with lysine residues. In particular, the arrangement of
a predominantly hydrophobic interaction surface formed by Tyr213,
Thr217, and Leu218 seems to be beneficial for a more stable accommodation
of the tweezer molecule. These structural findings can help in the
design of more specific molecular tweezers, an approach currently
followed in the groups of Schrader and Ottmann.
 

## Stabilizers of 14-3-3 PPIs

## Fusicoccanes
Fusicoccin A (21) is a diterpene
glycoside produced by the phytopathogenic fungus Phomopsis
amygdali (formerly Fusicoccum amygdali)
that was initially described in the mid-1960s to be a wilt-inducing
toxin. It was, however, not until 1994
that the molecular target was identified as the binary complex between
the regulatory domain of the plasma membrane H+-ATPase
(PMA) and 14-3-3 adapter proteins, which 21 stabilizes
by acting like a “molecular glue”. Since then, 21 and the related natural product
cotylenin A (22) and semisynthetic
(e.g., Fusicoccin THF (23), ISIR-005 (24) ) fusicoccane
analogues have proven to be valuable tool compounds to study the “molecular
glue” model for stabilizing 14-3-3 binary structures ( ).
 Compound 21 itself has now been shown to stabilize
14-3-3 complexation with a number of medicinally relevant partner
proteins in humans. For example, 21 promotes platelet
adhesion to von Willebrand factor by stabilizing the 14-3-3 interaction
with the C-terminus of the human protein glycoprotein (GP)Ibα. Compound 21 also stabilizes the
14-3-3 interaction with the C-terminus of the F-domain of estrogen
receptor α (ERα) and thus inhibits ERα-dependent
transcription. However, 21 stabilization is not limited to 14-3-3 partners bearing C-terminal
(or “mode III”) 14-3-3 binding motifs. Although the
physiological potency is relatively weak, 21 has recently
been shown to stabilize the 14-3-3 interaction with the cystic fibrosis
transmembrane conductance regulator (CFTR), thus promoting trafficking
of CFTR to the plasma membrane. 
Compound 22 is another natural product produced by
a fungus (Cladosporium sp. 501-7W) that acts as a
bioactive substance against plants. Years
after its discovery as a cytokinin-like substance, this natural product
was reported to induce differentiation in human acute myeloid leukemia
in both cell culture and mouse models. , Interestingly,
anticancer properties were found by combining 22 with
other agents such as vincristine. The
crystal structure of 22 bound to a complex of 14-3-3
with the N-terminal binding motifs of the protein kinase C-Raf published
in 2013 gave important structural insight into how 22 can mediate its antitumor activity. 
The 5-8-5-fused ring system of the fusicoccane scaffold is
highly
complex, and thus, investigating structural variation in the search
for selectivity or enhanced potency is challenging. Nevertheless,
structure-based design and semisynthesis have enabled the discovery
of potent analogues. For example, semisynthetic derivative 23 ( A–C)
was designed as a “mode III”-specific stabilizer and
resulted in a 20-fold stabilization of the interaction between 14-3-3
and the potassium channel TASK3. In
this study, a number of other fusicoccanes like Fusicoccin J aglycone
(26) and cotylenol (27) (the aglycone of cotylenin)
were tested ( C). The respective crystal structures of the complexes of the different
fusicoccanes with 14-3-3 and the TASK3 peptide revealed the structural
basis for their “mode III” preference (26, 22) or “mode III” specificity (23, A). With a C12-dehydroxy fusicoccane like 22, concomitant
binding of a “mode I” or “mode II” 14-3-3
partner like C-Raf and consequently its stabilization is possible
( B). However,
hydroxylation of C12, which is present in 21 and 26, introduces a steric conflict with the proline carbonyl
oxygen at position +2 C-terminal in the 14-3-3 binding motif of C-Raf
( C). Whereas
this steric conflict might not exclude every “mode I”
or “mode II” interaction with 14-3-3, the additional
ring system in 23 makes this molecule a specific “mode
III” stabilizer whose binding to a 14-3-3/partner protein interface
should be significantly hampered with any 14-3-3 interaction motif
that extends beyond the +1 position ( D). Importantly, the utility of 23 could be demonstrated in Xenopus oocytes, which
have been transfected to express human TASK3. Here, adding 10 μM 23 to the culturing solution results in a 45% increase of
TASK3 expression in the plasma membrane. 
 More recently, C-12 dehydroxy
derivative 24 ( ) was shown to
be an analogue well-suited for the stabilization of 14-3-3 interactions
with partner proteins bearing internal (or “mode I or II”)
binding motifs. Biophysical and cellular
experiments showed 24 to stabilize the 14-3-3 –
Gab2 PPI by a factor of 5.3 and the crystal structure of the ternary
complex provided further structural insight. 
The potential of fusicoccane semisynthetics is not limited
to the
search for potent stabilizers. Ohkanda, Kato, and co-workers elegantly
demonstrated the power of intracellular oxime ligation to generate
a fusicoccane–peptide hybrid (25) that induced
cell death, presumably through inhibition of 14-3-3 PPIs ( ). Interestingly, 25 that does not
contain a phosphorylated residue was shown to bind 14-3-3 with a Kd value of 0.37 μM, stronger even than
the interaction with a PMA2-derived phosphopeptide (Kd = 1.24 μM). This
example not only further highlights the potential for modified peptide
inhibitors of 14-3-3 PPIs (i.e., based on ExoS and Tau as discussed
above) but also the importance of expanding the fusicoccane toolbox.
Perhaps the emergence of new synthetic approaches to sesterterpenes can be coupled with previous total synthesis
efforts to achieve this aim. Or perhaps
ever greater understanding of the structure and function of fusicoccadiene
synthase will provide the necessary
starting points for diverse synthetic strategies.

## Epibestatin,
Pyrrolidone1, and Pyrazole34
In 2010,
the results of the first high-throughput screening for 14-3-3 PPI
stabilizers were published. Out of a
library of 37,000 small molecules, two compounds were found by a surface-based
format monitoring the binding of GFP-14-3-3 to surface-immobilized
PMA2-CT52: Epibestatin (28) and Pyrrolidone1 (29) ( ). The
crystal structures of these two compounds in the 14-3-3/PMA2 complexes
revealed two distinctive binding pockets in the 14-3-3/PMA2 protein–protein
interface. Two years later, Pyrazole34 (30) was published. This was based on optimization of the template
of 29 in which the pyrrolidone scaffold had been converted
into a more rigid pyrazole ring. 
 

## AMP/ChREBP
In
2016, the group of Uyeda published the
PPI-stabilizing effect of AMP (adenosine monophosphate, A) (31) toward the complex of 14-3-3 and the carbohydrate-response element-binding
protein (ChREBP). ChREBP is a glucose-responsive
transcription factor that is implicated in the regulation of fat storage
in the liver by facilitating the conversion of carbohydrate to fat. , The N-terminal region of ChREBP binds to 14-3-3 proteins and importin,
which regulates subcellular localization in response to changing glucose
levels. Low glucose leads to phosphorylation of Ser196 of ChREBP by
PKA followed by complexation with 14-3-3 and cytoplasmic sequestration. In addition to the phosphorylation-dependent
regulation of the 14-3-3/ChREBP interaction, a number of metabolites
have been shown to influence this PPI, among them β-hydroxybutyrate
(β-HB) and acetoacetate (AcAc). Both β-HB and AcAc have
been shown to stabilize 14-3-3 binding to ChREBP, a finding that was later extended to 31 including
a convincing structural biology explanation for this activity. A very interesting feature of the interaction
between 14-3-3 and ChREBP is that it also employs a phosphorylation-independent
binding mechanism. Here, the α2 helix of ChREBP (residues 117–137)
binds to the central channel of 14-3-3β, engages both polar
and hydrophobic interactions, and is partly dependent on the presence
of a sulfate ion in the phosphate-accepting pocket of 14-3-3. Using the same crystallization conditions but
adding 100 mM 31 during complexation of 14-3-3β
and ChREBP yielded crystals showing that 31 occupies
the same place where, in the phosphorylation-dependent 14-3-3 complexes,
the phosphorylated serine or threonine residues can be found ( B). The phosphate
group binds to Lys51, Arg58, Arg129, and Tyr130 residues, which are
also used to accommodate the phosphorylated motifs of 14-3-3 partner
proteins. In addition, the adenine ring of 31 interacts
with Ser47 of 14-3-3, and maybe most importantly for its PPI stabilizing
activity, the phosphate establishes polar contacts with Trp127 and
Arg128 of ChREBP. Finally, Asn124 of ChREBP forms a contact with one
of the hydroxyl groups of AMP’s sugar ring. Compound 31 is thus a direct orthosteric PPI interface stabilizer ( C).
 

## Conclusions and Future
Directions
In this perspective, we demonstrated that 14-3-3
proteins are highly
relevant targets in drug discovery and provide a valuable tool in
chemical biology. By presenting an overview of the wide range of 14-3-3
PPI modulators currently published, we illustrate the increasing evidence
for the potential to modulate the activity of key proteins in various
physiological processes, including Tau, p53, HSP20, and LRRK2, by
targeting their distinct interaction with 14-3-3. Importantly, in
addition to structural insights on the molecular mechanisms of the
different small molecules, in a number of cases the influence on biological
pathways has been studied, resulting in promising findings in cell-based
model systems relevant to treating a variety of diseases (e.g., Alzheimer’s
disease, various cancers, asthma, and cystic fibrosis). Bearing in
mind that the modulation of only a small percentage of the several
hundred identified 14-3-3 PPIs has been investigated so far, we believe
that this is just the start of the opportunity that 14-3-3 PPI modulation
can offer. However, this wide range of opportunities that 14-3-3 interaction
partners hold also provides focus to where the biggest obstacles in
the field will lie.
The great number of similar binding modes
of 14-3-3 PPI partners
makes it difficult for small molecule modulation to achieve specificity
for one partner over the others. This is most strikingly illustrated
by 14-3-3 PPI inhibitors, where binding of a competing molecule in
the 14-3-3 binding groove will cause inhibition of binding of most
other 14-3-3 binding partners, potentially leading to many side effects.
For circumventing the nonspecific targeting of the phospho-binding
pocket of 14-3-3 proteins, two approaches can be envisioned for future
efforts toward more selective 14-3-3 PPI modulation. First, although
based on a somewhat limited set of 14-3-3 crystal structures in complex
with larger domain partner proteins, it is becoming clear that 14-3-3
itself is a relatively rigid molecule that allows for the docking
of flexible partner proteins onto different surfaces of its dimer.
By studying the “hot spots” responsible for the binding
of the two partner proteins in these binary structures, we observe
that there is a considerable variety of potentially distinct druggable
pockets. In this regard, we very recently found that fragments from
an NMR-based screen can bind to secondary binding sites outside the
central phosphopeptide-accepting binding channel. The identified pockets are located on the upper rim of
the 14-3-3 dimer, which is less conserved than the central channel
and is used for binding of 14-3-3 to AANAT and FT. Second, the general
approach of stabilization of 14-3-3 PPIs is suggested to be likely
more beneficial compared to inhibition. This has already been illustrated
by several examples where small molecules have been identified that
make contacts with both 14-3-3 and the PPI partner. In this manner,
they act as molecular glue and thereby provide better opportunities
for selectivity. The semisynthesis of the Fusicoccane family provides
a great case study for selectivity in the 14-3-3 PPI stabilization;
the hydroxylation of C12 promotes a preference for stabilization for
C-terminal “mode III” binders over “mode I/II”
binders. Furthermore, molecules like 30 may be a good
starting point to obtain selectivity over other 14-3-3 PPI partners
by expanding the molecule and gaining more contact with the desired
14-3-3 binding partner. To reach the full potential in the field of
14-3-3 PPI modulation, we need to think “out-of-the-binding
groove” and explore the rest of the protein. This should be
possible by using a combination of high-throughput screening, fragment-based
approaches, and rational design, and success will lead to the realization
of small molecule inhibition and stabilization of 14-3-3 PPIs as a
viable option in drug discovery.

## Supporting Information Available
The Supporting
Information is available
free of charge on the ACS Publications
website at DOI: 10.1021/acs.jmedchem.7b00574.14-3-3 crystal
structures deposited in the PDB (PDF)

## Supplementary Material
jm7b00574_si_001.pdf

The authors declare no
competing financial interest.
Loes M. Stevers received
her B.S. (2010) and M.S.
(2013) in Biomedical Engineering at Eindhoven University of Technology,
The Netherlands. During her M.S., she worked on supramolecular membrane
protein dimerization in living cells. Additionally, she did an internship
in in vitro mapping of interactions between human SNX-BAR proteins
at the Institute of Molecular Bioscience, University of Queensland,
Brisbane, Australia. She started her Ph.D. research in Chemical Biology
at Eindhoven University of Technology in 2013, focusing on characterization
and modulation of multivalent 14-3-3 protein–protein interactions.
Eline Sijbesma obtained her
M.Sc. degree with honors
(cum laude) in Biomedical Engineering at the Eindhoven Univeristy
of Technology. To complete her Master’s, she joined the lab
of Michelle Arkin, Ph.D. in the Small Molecule Discovery Center at
UCSF to initiate a fragment-based drug discovery project that explores
protein–protein interactions. At the end of 2015, she returned
to the Eindhoven University of Technology and started her Ph.D. research
in the group of Prof. Luc Brunsveld in Chemical Biology under the
supervision of Dr. Christian Ottmann. The project focuses on 14-3-3
proteins and nuclear receptors and combines chemical biology, drug
discovery, and medicinal chemistry aided by structural insights from
X-ray crystallography to study the potential and molecular mechanism
of PPI stabilization by small molecules.
Maurizio Botta is a Full Professor of Medicinal Chemistry
of the University of Siena. He obtained a degree with laude in Chemistry
at the University of Rome in 1974. In December 1979, he obtained his
Ph.D. at the University of New Brunswick under the supervision of
Prof. K. Wiesner. He has been a researcher in Organic Chemistry at
the University of Rome from 1981 to 1987. From January 2008, he is
an Adjunct Professor at the Temple University College of Science and
Technology in Philadelphia (USA). From November 2009 to December 2012,
he has been Dean of the Faculty of Pharmacy at the University of Siena.
He is author of more than 450 papers, 10 publications on volumes,
26 patents, and more than 240 proceedings at congresses.
Carol MacKintosh is Professor of Molecular
Signaling
in the University of Dundee, where she is also Head of Postgraduate
Studies in the School of Life Sciences. Her laboratory is working
to define how large sets of 14-3-3–phosphoprotein interactions
coordinate diverse responses of human cells and tissues to nutrients,
insulin, and growth factors. Following their discovery that the human
14-3-3-interactome is highly enriched in Ohnologues, members of protein
families that were generated by the two rounds of whole genome duplication
at the origin of the vertebrate animals, Carol’s group has
developed a special interest in understanding how the 14-3-3-interactome
has contributed to the evolution of vertebrate complexity, variety,
and polygenic disorders such as diabetes, cancer, and neurological
syndromes.
Tomas Obsil received
his Ph.D. in Physical Chemistry
from the Charles University, Prague, Czech Republic in 1998 after
which he performed a postdoctoral stay at the National Institutes
of Health (Bethesda, USA). In 2002, he returned to Charles University,
where he obtained habilitation in 2007. Since 2014, he is a Professor
of Physical Chemistry in the Faculty of Science, Charles University.
His current research focuses on investigating the structural basis
of 14-3-3 protein-mediated regulation of various signaling proteins.
Isabelle Landrieu received her
Ph.D. in Biochemical
Engineering (1997) from Liège University (Be) prior to postdoctoral
studies at Ghent University (Be) in the department of Plant System
Biology lead by Professor D. Inzé. I.L. is currently a CNRS
(French National Research Centre) Research Director at Lille University
(Fr) and a P.I. in the laboratory of excellence DISTALZ, which includes
several French groups involved in Alzheimer’s disease research.
Ylenia Cau is a postdoctoral
fellow at the University
of Siena in the department of Biotechnology, Chemistry, and Pharmacy
in the research group of Professor Maurizio Botta. She graduated with
laude in Pharmaceutical Chemistry at the University of Siena in November
2012 under the supervision of Professor Maurizio Botta. In February
2016, she obtained her Ph.D in “Chemical and Pharmaceutical
Sciences” at the University of Siena in the same research group
with a thesis entitled “In silico identification and optimization
of 14-3-3 inhibitors through molecular modelling and computational
methods”. She is author of six papers.
Andy J. Wilson joined the University of Leeds in 2004
and was promoted to full professor in 2012. He currently serves as
Deputy Director of the Astbury Centre. He completed a Ph.D. at Warwick
University supervised by Prof. David Leigh FRS before postdoctoral
research with Prof. Andrew Hamilton FRS at Yale University and with
Prof. E. Meijer and Prof. Rint Sijbesma at Technische Universiteit
Eindhoven. His research is concerned with (a) modulating protein–protein
interactions, (b) developing fundamental approaches and building blocks
for self-assembly, and (c) mechanistic studies of self-assembly using
photo-cross-linking. Andy was recognized through the Royal Society
of Chemistry (RSC) Bob Hay Lectureship (2012) and the RSC Norman Heatley
Award (2016).
Anna Karawajczyk obtained her Ph.D. in chemistry in
2007 from the Leiden Institute of Chemistry, Leiden University (NL).
Afterward, she worked as a postdoctoral fellow at the Centre for Molecular
and Biomolecular Informatics, Computational Drug Discovery, Radboud
University Medical Centre, Nijmegen and at the Molecular Design &
Informatics; Schering-Plough Corporation, Oss. From 2009 to 2013,
she worked as a computational chemist in a Medicinal Chemistry group
of Lead Pharma BV. At the present time, she is a Principal Scientist
in the Medicinal Chemistry Department of Taros Chemicals GmbH &
KG and is working in the field of cancer, antibacterials, and fungicides.
Jan Eickhoff studied biochemistry
at the University
Bayreuth and Imperial College in London followed by Ph.D. studies
at the Max Planck Institute of Biochemistry in Martinsried. He started
his industrial career in 2001 at Axxima Pharmaceuticals, and GPC Biotech,
before he moved to Dortmund in 2008 to build up the screening and
sample management department of the Lead Discovery Center GmbH (LDC).
Furthermore, he was involved in conceptual planning and implementation
of the compound management and screening center of the Max Planck
Society (COMAS). In addition to his role as Head of Assay Development
and Screening at the LDC. From 2013 to 2015, he was holding a role
as managing director of the Hit Discovery Constance GmbH in Constance,
Germany.
Jeremy Davis is
Director of Hit Discovery and Enabling
Technologies at UCB, based in Slough. He obtained his Ph.D. in Organic
Chemistry from Southampton University under the guidance of Professor
Richard Whitby before joining Celltech as a medicinal chemist in 1993.
During this time, Jeremy has worked on a diverse range of protein
targets across immunology, inflammation, and oncology disease areas
always with a keen interest in structure-based drug design. His current
role as Director of Hit Discovery is to generate small molecule starting
points across UCB’s target portfolio. In addition, he leads
a technology group focused on developing advanced NMR and Mass Spectrometry
applications to understand the structure and function of protein–ligand
complexes.
Michael Hann completed
his Ph.D. in organic chemistry
in 1980 and has worked in Pharma R&D initially as a medicinal
chemist and then as a computational chemist. He joined Glaxo in 1986
and was responsible for helping initially build and then lead the
Computational Chemistry department. More recently, he led the biophysics
and protein crystallography activities including developing fragments
theory and practice in lead identification. His current role is in
looking at new ways to enhance our discovery approaches, reducing
attrition, and promoting scientific excellence across the GSK R&D
sites. A particular current interest is in understanding drug distribution
at cellular and subcellular resolution. Michael is a GSK Senior Fellow
and an Adjunct Professor in the Chemistry department at Imperial College
London.
Gavin O’Mahony is a Principal Scientist in
the Cardiovascular and Metabolic Diseases Medicinal Chemistry department
of the Innovative Medicines and Early Development Biotech Unit at
AstraZeneca Gothenburg, Sweden. After B.Sc. and Ph.D. studies in chemistry
at Queen’s University Belfast, Northern Ireland, he carried
out two years of postdoctoral work in medicinal and nucleoside chemistry
at the University of Gothenburg, Sweden. In 2005, he started working
at AstraZeneca as a Senior Research Scientist in the Cardiovascular
and Gastrointestinal Lead Generation department. He has worked on
many targets including the mineralocorticoid receptors GPR40 and PPARγ.
His research interests currently focus on lead generation within the
diabetes field, nuclear hormone receptor medicinal chemistry, as well
as novel approaches to the small molecule modulation of transcription
factor activity.
Richard G. Doveston graduated from the University
of Leicester in 2008 with a first class M.Chem. degree in Pharmaceutical
chemistry (including a year in industry). He went on to complete a
Ph.D. in the group of Prof. Richard J. K. Taylor at the University
of York and in 2012 took up a postdoctoral position with Prof. Adam
Nelson and Prof. Steve Marsden at the University of Leeds to work
in the area of lead-oriented synthesis. In 2015, Richard moved to
work in the Chemical Biology Group at the TU/e and was awarded a Marie
Curie Fellowship in 2016. His research, carried out under Prof. Luc
Brunsveld and Dr. Christian Ottmann, is focused on the discovery and
evaluation of novel bioactive small molecules.
Luc Brunsveld is Professor of Chemical Biology at
Eindhoven University of Technology after having previously worked
at the Organon Research Laboratories (now MSD), the Max Planck Institute
of Molecular Physiology and the Chemical Genomics Centre of the Max
Planck Society. His research interests lie at the interfaces of drug
discovery, protein assembly, and supramolecular chemistry. Research
topics he likes to dive into together with group members and colleagues
include nuclear receptors, protein–protein interactions, synthetic
signaling systems, and supramolecular protein assemblies. Luc is recipient
of the golden medal of the Royal Netherlands Chemical Society and
his passions include teaching and research across disciplines.
Christian Ottmann, Ph.D., is Associate
Professor for
Molecular Cell and Structural Biology at Eindhoven University of Technology,
The Netherlands. He works on small molecule modulation of protein–protein
interactions (PPIs) with a special focus on stabilization of 14-3-3
adapter protein PPIs. He is involved in early drug discovery projects
with the pharmaceutical industry and is coordinator of the FP7 Industry-Academia
Partnership and Pathways (IAPP) 14-3-3STABS and the Horizon2020 ETN
Targeted Stabilization of Protein–Protein Interactions (TASPPI).
Before taking up his current position in Eindhoven, he was a group
leader at the Chemical Genomics Centre (CGC) of the Max Planck Society
in Dortmund, Germany. He obtained his Ph.D. in 2003 from the University
of Tübingen with Prof. Claudia Oecking.

## Acknowledgments
This
work was funded by The Netherlands Organization for Scientific
Research (NWO) via Gravity program 024.001.035 and VICI grant 016.150.366
and by the Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft (DFG) via Collaborative
Research Centre 1093.

## Abbreviations Used
PPIprotein–protein interaction
AANATarylalkylamine N-acetyltransferase
PMAplasma membrane H+-ATPase
FTflowering locus T
HSPheat shock protein
ACDα-Crystallin
domain
NTDN-terminal
domain
CTEC-terminal
extension
ExoSExoenzyme
S
NFTneurofibrillary
tangle
SMMsmall
molecule microarray
CMLchronic myelogenous leukemia
FPfluorescence polarization
MDRmultidrug resistant
FTfarnesyl transferase
ERαestrogen
receptor α
CFTRcystic fibrosis transmembrane conductance regulator
ChREBPcarbohydrate-response
element-binding protein
β-HBβ-hydroxybutyrate