3327cllCell TransplantationCell TransplantSAGE PublicationsPMC66285666628566662856610.1177/0963689719837446ASNTR Abstracts 2019
2342019284464464–4921872019© The Author(s) 2019This article is distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons
Attribution-NonCommercial 4.0 License (http://www.creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc/4.0/) which
permits non-commercial use, reproduction and distribution of the work
without further permission provided the original work is attributed as
specified on the SAGE and Open Access pages (https://us.sagepub.com/en-us/nam/open-access-at-sage).statusreleaseddisplay-pdfyesis-olfnois-manuscriptnois-preprintnois-journal-matternois-scannednois-retractednoIssue date 2019 Apr.

## Ischemic Stroke Induces Delayed Mesencephalic Astrocyte-Derived Neurotrophic
Factor (MANF) Protein Expression in Brain Inflammatory Cells

## J. E. Anttila1, O. S. Mattila2, T.
Kuan-Yin1,3, M. Lindahl1, P. J. Lindsberg2,
and M. Airavaara1

## 
1Institute of Biotechnology, HiLIFE, University of Helsinki,
Helsinki, Finland

## 
2Neurology, Clinical Neurosciences, University of Helsinki and
Helsinki University Hospital, Helsinki, Finland

## 
3Department of Neurological Surgery, Tri-Service General Hospital
and National Defense Medical Center, Taipei, Taiwan
Mesencephalic astrocyte-derived neurotrophic factor (MANF) is an endoplasmic
reticulum (ER)-resident protein important for ER homeostasis and protects
neurons from various injuries. MANF is neuroprotective in ischemic injury,
and post-stroke MANF treatment promotes recovery. In the normal brain MANF
protein expression is neuronal, but expression after ischemia is poorly
characterized. Utilizing immunohistochemistry, we studied how endogenous
cerebral MANF expression evolves after focal cerebral ischemia in rats
(post-stroke day (psd) 2, 7, 14, 28, 56, and 112), mice (psd14), and humans
(psd1–2). Cortical infarct was induced with transient (90 min) distal middle
cerebral artery occlusion (dMCAo) in rats and permanent dMCAo in mice.
Gene-modified NestinCre/+:: Manffl/fl mice were used
to investigate post-stroke MANF expression after neuronal and astroglial
MANF deletion. Specificity of the anti-MANF antibody was confirmed with
pre-adsorption controls and MANF knockout tissue. In comparison to the
contralateral hemisphere, MANF expression was markedly decreased in the
infarct core at psd2 in rats and humans. However, MANF was strongly
upregulated in the infarct core at psd7 in rats simultaneously with the
phagocytic marker CD68. MANF was also upregulated in areas of secondary
damage, i.e. the striatum and thalamus, starting from psd14, coinciding
again with CD68 upregulation. Colocalization of MANF and CD68 was verified
using confocal microscopy. In the NestinCre/+::
Manffl/fl mice MANF expression was also induced in the
infarct core, peri-infarct region, and the ipsilateral striatum and thalamus
at psd14, verifying that the post-ischemic MANF upregulation was not
neuronal nor astroglial. In conclusion, we are the first to show how
endogenous MANF expression is temporally altered after cerebral ischemia and
demonstrate that MANF is evidently expressed in phagocytic
microglia/macrophages at later time points. We also provide the first human
data on post-stroke MANF expression. Our findings provide important insight
into how endogenous MANF may contribute to post-stroke recovery and the
regenerative role of phagocytes, supporting further investigation into
MANF-based therapeutic applications.

## Development and Characterization of hiPSC Cortical Neurons and their Application
to Drug Evaluation in CNS Disease Models

## K. Autar1, X. Guo1, A. Goswami1, M.
Jackson2, J. W. Rumsey2, C. Long2, and J.
J. Hickman1,2

## 
1Nanoscience Technology Center, University of Central Florida,
Orlando, FL, USA

## 
2Hesperos Inc., Orlando, FL, USA
The differentiation of functional cortical neurons from human induced
pluripotent stem cells in vitro easily lends itself to a serum-free,
drug-delivery platform advantageous for testing novel chemicals for safety
and efficacy in disease treatment. Initially, cortical neuron cultures were
characterized morphologically by phase microscopy and immunocytochemistry
and functionally by patch-clamp electrophysiology. Specifically, the
expression of neuronal markers and neuronal activity increased throughout
maturation. On day 0 of maturation, 50% of the culture expressed layer V
cortical neuron marker ctip2 and neuronal marker beta-III tubulin and
displayed spontaneous and repetitive firing through whole-cell patch clamp.
By day 28 of maturation, 90% of the culture expressed the aforementioned
markers and displayed electrical activity. Subsequently, neurons were
cultured on multi-electrode arrays (MEAs) to determine the effects of
chemicals on neural circuit physiology for modeling brain disease
phenotypes. In this system, we tested GABAA receptor antagonists
and agonists as chemical convulsants or anti-convulsants, respectively.
GABAA receptor antagonist administration enhanced spontaneous
activity mimicking an epileptic phenotype, while GABAA receptor
agonist administration quieted spontaneous activity. The versatility of this
model lies in its ability to present an array of brain diseases
characterized by functional brain deficits. Chemicals affecting receptor
binding can be added to manipulate neuronal activity. This serum-free, hiPSC
cortical neuron model establishes a platform for the evaluation of neuron
activity as well as a platform for drug testing in vitro.

## Progerin Induced Aging of the Rat Nigrostriatal System

## T. J. Collier1,2, F. P. Manfredsson1,2, B. F.
Daley1, and I. M. Sandoval1,2

## 
1Department of Translational Science & Molecular Medicine,
College of Human Medicine, Michigan State University, Grand Rapids, MI,
USA

## 
2Hauenstein Neuroscience Center, Mercy Health Saint Mary’s, Grand
Rapids, MI, USA
Aging is the greatest risk factor for development of Parkinson’s disease
(PD). Yet, interrogating the biological intersection between aging and PD in
rodents is challenging as these animals do not exhibit PD-like
neurodegeneration even at advanced ages. It has been speculated that this
may be attributable, in part, to their limited lifespan. We asked the
question “if aging is accelerated in the nigrostriatal system of young adult
rats, will PD-like degeneration of this system ensue?” To test this, we
ectopically over-expressed progerin in the midbrain of rats using
recombinant adeno-associated viral vectors (rAAV). Progerin is the protein
responsible for the human genetic premature aging disorder
Hutchinson–Gilford syndrome and is a mutant version of the filament protein
Lamin A, a major component of the nuclear lamina. Expression of progerin
induces many phenotypes, including abnormal nuclear shape, loss of
heterochromatin, and increased DNA damage, leading to cellular senescence.
In a proof-of-concept experiment we delivered rAAV-progerin or rAAV-mCherry
(control vector) into the substantia nigra of young adult (3-month-old)
rats. Ten weeks later, tissue was collected and processed for histological
analysis. Immunostaining for progerin confirmed successful viral
transduction and proper nuclear localization. Immunostaining for tyrosine
hydroxylase revealed severe loss of midbrain dopamine neurons. Ongoing
studies are aimed at further characterizing this model, including a progerin
dose response, the analysis of nuclear morphology, alterations in epigenetic
markers, quantification of DNA damage, the temporal course of neural
degeneration, and selective vulnerability of neuronal populations. Our
findings indicate that progerin overexpression can produce local
acceleration of the aging process leading to neurodegeneration in young
rats. Progerin expression may serve as a useful tool to manipulate aging in
models of aging-related neurodegeneration in short-lived species.
Support: Gibby and Friends vs Parky fund at Michigan State University.

## Addressing Concerns of Neurological Chimeras in Human–Animal Blastocyst
Complementation

## A. T. Crane1, J. P. Voth1, F. X. Shen2,3,
and W. C. Low1,3

## 
1Department of Neurosurgery, University of Minnesota,
Minneapolis, MN, USA

## 
2University of Minnesota Law School, Minneapolis, MN, USA

## 
3Graduate Program in Neuroscience, University of Minnesota,
Minneapolis, MN, USA
Blastocyst complementation is an emerging methodology in which human stem
cells are transferred into genetically engineered preimplantation animal
embryos. The microinjected embryos are transferred to a surrogate eventually
giving rise to fully developed human tissues and organs within the animal
host for use in regenerative medicine. The ethical, legal, and social
implications surrounding this method have caused the National Institutes of
Health to issue a moratorium on funding that involves the injection of human
pluripotent stem cells into preimplantation animal embryos. A noted concern
over blastocyst complementation is the “creation of human–animal beings with
partly or substantially human brains” and whether such chimeras possess
“humanized” characteristics. To address this concern, we performed a review
of the neural transplantation literature in which human cells have been
transplanted into a nonhuman animal. Our aim was to determine how the
integration of human cells into the nonhuman neural circuitry has altered
the cytoarchitecture and/or behavior of the host. Despite reports of
widespread integration of human cell transplants, our review of 150
transplantation studies found no evidence suggestive of humanization of the
animal host. We conclude that, at present, concerns over humanization should
not prevent research on blastocyst complementation to continue. Caveats of
our study include the species and age of the animal in which human cells
were transplanted. Of note for regenerative cell therapies for neurological
disorders, neural precursors derived from the fetal brain are the most
suitable for transplantation, therefore addressing the concerns of live-born
chimeras that may express human behaviors. We suggest proceeding in a
controlled and transparent manner, and have included recommendations for
future research with careful consideration for how human cells may
contribute to the animal host nervous system.

## Serotonergic Hyperinnervation in Non-Motor Circuits in the Parkinsonian
Rat

## M. Davidsson1, R. C. Sellnow1, R. Yonkers1,
A. M. Zador2, and F. P. Manfredsson1

## 
1Department of Translational Science and Molecular Medicine,
College of Human Medicine, Michigan State University, Grand Rapids, MI,
USA

## 
2Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory, Cold Spring Harbor, NY,
USA
It is becoming increasingly clear that non-motor symptoms (NMS) in
Parkinson’s disease (PD) comprise a significant portion of debilitating
features of the disease, and such symptoms are often more debilitating than
the motor symptoms themselves. Despite its initial effectiveness, chronic
L-DOPA administration leads to motor side effects such as L-DOPA-induced
dyskinesias (LID) in up to 90% of patients and NMS in as many as 60% of
patients. Reports have revealed extensive modifications to serotonergic
(5-HT) innervation of the striatum as dopamine (DA) cells are lost, and that
these 5-HT terminals are crucial in the formation of LID. However, it is
unclear what changes occur in other areas of the brain. To address this we
utilized an AAV reporter virus to label the dorsal raphe (DR) 5-HT
innervation in the hemiparkinsonian rat. 5-HT innervation from the DR was
dramatically enhanced in areas such as the amygdala and prefrontal cortex,
suggesting that changes in 5-HT circuitry may be responsible for NMS. In
order to better understand the role of this circuitry in NMS we generated a
projection-specific viral vector approach whereby specific DR 5-HT terminals
are targeted using novel AAV vectors with retrograde transport capacity, and
paired with viral vectors expressing regulatory elements specifically in the
5-HT soma. However, in order to achieve single circuitry precision we need
to better understand individual projections. Thus, in ongoing
experimentation we are using Multiplexed Analysis of Projections by
Sequencing (MAPseq) in combination with AAV, DNA barcoding, and Next
Generation Sequencing in order to fully map each individual 5-HT projection
from the dorsal raphe. This approach will systematically determine how
neuroadaptation in 5-HT innervation and function modulate DA
neurotransmission in the parkinsonian brain, facilitating therapeutic
targeting of such maladaptive changes to optimize NMF treatment and
therefore quality of life for PD patients.

## Evaluation of DNA-Binding Domains to Selectively Reduce the Expression of Mutant
Huntingtin in Patient-Derived Cells and Transgenic Mice

## P. Deng1,2,3, J. Halmai1,2, S. del Campo1,2,
D. Cameron1,2, J. Waldo1,2, I. Sandoval4, F.
Manfredsson4, J. Nolta1, D. Segal3, and K.
Fink1,2

## 
1Stem Cell Program and Institute for Regenerative Cures,
University of California Davis Health Systems, Sacramento, CA, USA

## 
2Department of Neurology, University of California Davis Health
Systems, Sacramento, CA, USA

## 
3Genome Center, MIND Institute, and Biochemistry and Molecular
Medicine, University of California, Davis, CA, USA

## 
4Department of Translational Science and Molecular Medicine,
College of Human Medicine, Michigan State University, Grand Rapids, MI,
United States; Mercy Health Saint Mary’s, Grand Rapids, MI, USA
Huntington’s disease (HD) is an autosomal dominant neurodegenerative disorder
characterized by the presence of a misfolded mutant
Huntingtin (muHTT) protein. Reduction of muHTT is an
attractive therapeutic approach; however, one must take into consideration
the role of the normal, non-expanded version of Huntingtin.
An ideal therapeutic approach would be able to selectively silence only the
expanded allele, affect a large population of striatal neurons, and have a
durable effect. We have previously shown allele-specific silencing of the
muHTT transcript in patient-derived fibroblasts via
transcription activator-like effectors (TALE) by targeting a single
nucleotide polymorphisms (SNP) that is highly associated with the mutant
allele. In this study we examine the use of an adeno-associated virus (AAV)
as putative delivery vehicle for our therapeutic TALE transgene. AAV9-TALE
was directly injected into the striatum of YAC128 at an early stage (9
months of age) of HD-like symptoms. Mice were then tested on a motor
coordination task to evaluate functional recovery every 2 weeks until they
were 12 months of age, at which point brains were analyzed via
immunohistochemistry (IHC) for expression of the TALE and for molecular
assessment for reduction of muHTT at the RNA and protein level. Presently,
our data demonstrate a functional sparing, attenuation of striatal atrophy,
and reduction of muHTT following injection of AAV9-TALE into the YAC128
transgenic HD mouse. Additionally, we have expanded this work to include a
novel Cas9 variant (xCas9.3.7) that has broad PAM specificity. This novel
construct was cloned into our iCas9 backbone to allow for the evaluation of
various effector domains in both an independent and in combinational
fashion. dxiCas9 was fused with either KRAB, DMNT3a, or both and guide RNAs
were designed for previously identified SNPs in our patient cell lines
(Fibroblasts GM02151, GM04281b, GM04287 and iPSC NN003930 and NN0000033).
Following nucleofection of both guide RNA and dxiCas9 constructs,
significant reduction of huntingtin was observed. The ability of TALE or
dxiCas9 to selectively reduce expression of mutant huntingtin carries
significant therapeutic value.

## Temporal Activation of Paternal Ube3a in Angelman Syndrome Reporter Mouse
Following Transplantation of Zinc Finger Secreted Mesenchymal Stem Cells

## P. Deng1,2, U. Beitnere2, R. D. Lee4, B.
Pyles2, H. O’Geen2, J. A. N. M. Halmai1, J.
A. Nolta1, D. J. Segal2, and K. D. Fink1,3

## 
1Stem Cell Program and Institute for Regenerative Cures,
University of California, Davis Health Systems, Sacramento, CA, USA

## 
2Genome Center, MIND Institute, and Biochemistry and Molecular
Medicine, University of California, Davis, CA, USA

## 
3Department of Neurology, University of California, Davis Heath
Systems, Sacramento, CA, USA

## 
4School of Medicine, University of California, Davis Health
Systems, Sacramento, CA, USA
Angelman syndrome (AS) is a genetically inherited neurodevelopmental disorder
characterized by impaired cognitive development, lack of speech, seizures,
and motor ataxia. The genetic cause for AS is usually due to a de novo
deletion of the maternal ubiquitin protein ligase E3a
(UBE3a) gene in the chromosome 15q11-q13 region.
Additionally, brain-specific postnatal imprinting of the intact paternal
UBE3a gene results in complete loss of
UBE3a in mature neurons due to the presence of a long
antisense transcript driven by the neighboring small nuclear
ribonucleoprotein polypeptide N (SNURF/SNRPN) promoter. Our group has
previously shown re-activation of the paternally silent
Ube3a gene in the brains of the E6-AP adult AS mouse
following intraperitoneal (i.p.) injection of a Kruppel-associated box
(KRAB)-fused Zinc Finger (referred to as S1 K) protein targeted toward the
Snurf/Snrpn promoter—effectively silencing expression
of the antisense transcript. As an alternative delivery method, we have
engineered activating transcription factor (ATF)-secreting bone-derived
mesenchymal stem cells following lentiviral reprogramming.
Presently, we have engineered mouse bone marrow-derived mesenchymal stem
cells (BM-MSCs) to secrete S1 K as confirmed by uptake into Neuro2a cells
with MSC-S1 K conditioned media via fluorescent microscopy. Incubation of
MSC-S1 K conditioned media with E15.5 E6-AP: YFP AS mouse primary neurons
demonstrated significant re-activation of YFP fused Ube3a
as compared with a scramble zinc finger MSC (MSC-SR6) and non-transduced MSC
(MSC-NT) 48-hrs post treatment. We then bilaterally transplanted 250,000
MSCs from each treatment type into their respective treatment arms (MSC-S1
K, MSC-SR6, MSC-NT) into 8-week old E6-AP: YFP mice. We observed significant
re-activation of silent Ube3a via immunohistochemistry
(IHC) and western blotting for YFP expression in the hippocampus,
cerebellum, and cortex as compared to MSC-SR6 and MSC-NT treatment groups 3
and 6 weeks post-transplantation. Currently, we report the first-in-its-kind
use of MSCs as a delivery platform for genetic modifiers in disease.

## Conditioned Medium Derived from Endothelial Progenitor Cells Exerts
Neuroprotection on Cultured Cortical and Midbrain Neuronal Stem Cells

## S. Di Santo, S. Seiler, D. Skrzypczak, T. Bieri, and H. R. Widmer

## Department of Neurosurgery Research Laboratory and Regenerative
Neuroscience Cluster, University of Bern and University Hospital Bern,
Switzerland
There is compelling evidence that stem and progenitor cells secrete a wide
array of trophic factors that could be exploited for repairing injured
tissues. We have previously reported that the conditioned medium (CM)
obtained from endothelial progenitor cell (EPC) cultures promotes
angiogenesis and protects the striatal GABA immunoreactive (-ir) cell
viability against 3-NP toxicity. In the present study, we tested the
hypothesis that EPC-CM may support cortical and midbrain neuronal cell
function and / or survival. EPCs were isolated from the peripheral blood of
healthy human donors and cultured in hypoxic conditions (1.5% O2)
to stimulate the secretion of growth factors. Primary cultures from fetal
rat embryonic (E14) cortex (CX) and ventral mesencephalon (VM) were treated
with EPC-CM and challenged by glucose and serum deprivation (GSD) or MPP+,
respectively. First we found that EPC-CM treatment resulted in a
significantly increased number of TH-ir cells in the VM as well as of
GABA-ir cells in the CX cultures. EPC-CM administration exerted
neuroprotection against GSD, an effect seen either when EPC-CM was
adminstered prior or subsequent GSD incubation. Similarly, EPC-CM protected
the dopaminergic neurons in the in vitro model of Parkinson’s disease. Our
findings identified EPC-CM as a powerful tool to promote viability and/or
differentiation of cultured neuronal cells. In conclusion our results
suggest that EPC-CM might be useful to expand the repertoire of available
tools to tackle neuronal degeneration.
This study was supported by the Swiss National Science Foundation NRP63 and
the HANELA Foundation, Switzerland.

## Characterizing the Role of Adropin in Cerebral Aneurysm Pathophysiology

## W. Dodd, K. Hosaka, and B. Hoh

## University of Florida, College of Medicine, Department of Neurosurgery,
Gainesville, FL, USA
Cerebral aneurysms, which affect 3–5% of the population, are a
life-threatening neurovascular phenomenon. Altered hemodynamics can initiate
an inflammatory response leading to a weakening and localized bulging of the
vessel wall, resulting in an aneurysm. Rupture of an aneurysm is the leading
cause of hemorrhagic stroke and is associated with up to 50% mortality.
There remains a gap in knowledge about the pathophysiology of aneurysm
formation and rupture, and about novel non-invasive treatments. Adropin is a
peptide hormone predominantly expressed in the liver and central nervous
system. Current literature suggests adropin may affect vascular physiology
through regulating eNOS activity and nitric oxide bioavailability. We tested
adropin’s effect on aneurysm formation and rupture in mice. Briefly,
hypertension was induced through renal artery ligation and angiotensin II
infusion, and cerebral hemodynamics were altered through unilateral carotid
artery ligation. Mice were then randomly allocated to receive 5 µg/day
adropin, 50 µg/day adropin, or 0.1% BSA vehicle, before receiving a dose of
elastase into the right basal cistern. Our preliminary data show a trend for
50 µg/day adropin decreasing aneurysm formation in female mice (adropin: 33%
(2 of 6) vs. vehicle: 86% (6 of 7), p=0.10), with no effect
on rupture rate (adropin: 100% (2 of 2) vs. vehicle: 66.7% (4 of 6),
p=1.00). 5 µg/day had no effect on formation in either
female (adropin: 40% (4 of 10) vs. vehicle: 77.7% (7 of 9),
p=0.17) or male mice (adropin: 42.8% (3 of 7) vs.
vehicle: 77.7% (7 of 9), p=0.30), and also had no effect on
rupture rate in females (adropin: 100% (4 of 4) vs. vehicle: 85.7% (6 of 7),
p=1.00) or males (adropin: 100% (3 of 3) vs. vehicle:
71.4% (5 of 7), p=1.00). More investigation is needed on
various dosing regimens and the mechanisms through which adropin exerts its
protective effects.

## Sural Nerve Grafting as a Cell-based Disease-modifying Therapy for Parkinson’s
Disease

## N. El Seblani1,2,4, A. S. Welleford1,2, J. E.
Quintero1,2, F. Pomerleau1,2, P. Huettl1,2,
C. G. Van Horne 1,2,3, and G. A. Gerhardt1,2,3,4

## 
1Department of Neuroscience, University of Kentucky, Lexington,
KY, USA

## 
2Brain Restoration Center, University of Kentucky Medical Center,
Lexington, KY, USA

## 
3Department of Neurosurgery, University of Kentucky, Lexington,
KY, USA

## 
4College of Pharmacy, University of Kentucky, Lexington, KY,
USA
Parkinson’s disease (PD) is the second most common neurodegenerative
disorder, with an annual incidence of 60,000 and costs of $ 25 billion in
US. There is no current treatment that can slow or reverse PD. We
investigate a new cell-based therapy to enhance the survival of the dying
brain dopaminergic cells using Schwann cells (SC), which reside within sural
nerve grafts. Combined research shows that SCs can transdifferentiate into
neural repair cells mainly through c-Jun signaling. Our current clinical
trials (NCT01833364 and NCT02369003) involve the implantation of the
conditioned sural nerve tissue to the substantia nigra in combination with
deep brain stimulation (DBS) for the treatment of advanced PD. The SC grafts
are harvested from the sural nerve of participants undergoing DBS surgery.
RNA sequencing of the conditioned grafts showed transcriptome changes
consistent with the SC repair phenotype. Currently, 21 participants have
completed the two-year follow-up and demonstrated a significant motor
improvement using the MDS-UPDRS scoring system. Postmortem studies of one
participant showed evidence for preservation of the dopaminergic cells in
the substantia nigra in response to the graft. To further study the
neurobiology of the SC grafts and how they may affect the host brain tissue,
we grafted human sural nerve tissue into the brains of athymic nude rats,
which we call “Neuro-Avatars.” Each animal received a unilateral graft into
the dorsal striatum with a contralateral sham insertion. The brains were
processed 2 weeks and 6 months post implantation. Immunostaining against
human nuclear antigen showed a substantial survival of the grafted cells in
addition to host responses to the grafts. Our future experiments will study
the use of similar nerve grafts in a 6-hydroxydopamine rat model of PD. In
conclusion, regenerative changes in the peripheral nerve tissue may hold
therapeutic potential for the treatment of neurodegenerative diseases like
PD.

## FKN Acts as a Double-Edged Sword

## D. Finneran and K. Nash

## University of South Florida, Molecular Pharmacology and Physiology
Department, Tampa, FL, USA
Inflammation is known to contribute to neurodegeneration in a number of
neurological disorders including Alzheimer’s disease (AD), and represents a
realistic and valuable therapeutic target. Neuroinflammation can be
modulated by neuron–glial signaling through various soluble factors, such as
CD200, CD22, CD47 and fractalkine (FKN, CX3CL1). For instance, loss of FKN
signaling has been shown to contribute to increased neurodegeneration in
Parkinson’s disease (PD), amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) and AD. We
have also demonstrated that increasing the expression of a soluble FKN
(sFKN) is neuroprotective in both PD and a tauopathy mouse model of
neurodegeneration, which is consistent with our and others’ findings that
increasing neuroinflammation in mouse models of PD and tau deposition can
exacerbate pathology. However, a debate continues in the literature as to
whether increased sFKN is a benefit to tau pathology, thus confounding the
use of FKN as a therapeutic target for neurodegeneration. We present data
that shed light on the above divergence of the use of FKN. We demonstrate
that the commonly used chemokine domain-only peptide of FKN (ckFKN) has a 10
fold decrease in receptor binding affinity compared with sFKN, which is
consistent with differences seen in calcium signaling between ckFKN and
sFKN. More intriguing is that we have observed opposing effects with FKN
concentration, where at low concentrations (1 nM) FKN reduces the microglial
proinflammatory response, but at higher concentrations (>30 nM) FKN can
begin to exacerbate the proinflammatory response. Inhibitor studies show
that this proinflammatory signaling is likely through a noncanonical
receptor not currently identified or reported for FKN. This is contrary to
the current belief that FKN is an anti-inflammatory molecule that signals
through its sole receptor CX3CR1. These data may clarify conflicts in the
literature and demonstrate that care must be taken with respect to in vitro
and in vivo studies using FKN, in turn emphasizing the underlying need for
better understanding of the biology of FKN and its function.

## In Vivo Mapping of the Spatio-Temporal Invasion of Immune Cells into
Extracellular Matrix Hydrogel in a Rat Model of Stroke Using 19F Magnetic
Resonance Imaging

## H. Ghuman and M. Modo

## University of Pittsburgh, McGowan Institute for Regenerative Medicine,
Department of Bioengineering, Department of Radiology, Pittsburgh, PA,
USA
Hydrogels formed from extracellular matrix (ECM) have the potential to
promote tissue restoration after a stroke. Infiltration of immune cells,
especially macrophages, is a pivotal event to drive biodegradation that
leads to the invasion of neural cells. However, spatio-temporal dynamics of
the infiltration of immune cells into peri-infarct tissue and the ECM
hydrogel remain poorly understood. The tagging of immune cells using
perfluorcarbon (PFC) nanoemulsions affords their in vivo visualization using
19F magnetic resonance imaging (MRI). Rats with middle
cerebral artery occlusion (MCAo), a model of ischemic stroke, were implanted
with ECM hydrogel 14 days after infarction using MRI guidance to define the
site and volume of injection. One day prior to the ECM implantation, animals
were injected with PFC through the tail vein and baseline 19F MR
image was acquired to verify the injection and potential passive influx to
the stroke-damaged brain. However, no PFC influx to the brain was evident at
this time point. “Time lapse” imaging over 24 hours indicated that no immune
cells invaded the brain for 6 hours after ECM implantation, although a major
infiltration in the scalp incision wound was evident within 1 hour after
surgery. Infiltration of immune cells was first evident in the peri-infarct
area at 9 hours post-implantation with subsequent invasion into the ECM
hydrogel. By 24 hours a major invasion of immune cells into the ECM hydrogel
was evident, as verified by immunohistochemistry in post-mortem tissue.
Histological analyses revealed that almost all invading macrophages were
labeled with PFC, indicating that these were peripheral macrophages rather
than brain-derived microglia. ECM hydrogel implantation therefore induces a
delayed invasion of macrophages into the stroke-damaged brain through the
peri-infarct area that is governed by peripheral macrophages effecting the
initial biodegeneration events that lead to brain tissue restoration.

## Phase I Clinical Trial Update: Human Neural Stem Cell Treatment for Parkinson’s
Disease

## R. Gonzalez1, I. Garitaonandia1, G.
Sherman1, A. Semechkin1, E. Braine2, A.
Shahrul2, G. Nair2, A. H. Evans2, and R. A.
Kern1

## 
1Intl. Stem Cell Corp, Carlsbad, CA, USA

## 
2The Royal Melbourne Hospital, Parkville, Australia
Parkinson’s disease (PD) is a devastating neurodegenerative disease with
progressive degeneration of dopaminergic (DA) neurons in the substantia
nigra pars compacta. There are over 10 million people afflicted with PD and
the yearly mortality rate is more than 100,000 worldwide. Unfortunately none
of the available treatment options have the potential to restore the damaged
nigrostriatal pathway. Cell-based therapies have shown considerable promise
because they can achieve significant biochemical and clinical improvements
for several years in some patients. We have demonstrated in preclinical PD
models that transplantation of human parthenogenetic derived neural stem
cells (ISC-hpNSC) promotes behavioral recovery and increases DA levels, as
well as DA neuron innervation and number. Intra-nigrostriatal administration
of clinical grade ISC-hpNSC is safe, well tolerated, reduces inflammation,
and provides neurotrophic support and neuroregeneration to the nigrostriatal
pathway. We are conducting a First-In-Human study to evaluate the safety and
functional activity of ISC-hpNSC, making it the world’s first pluripotent
stem cell-based therapy for PD (ClinicalTrials.gov:
NCT02452723). This is a single-arm, open-label, Phase I study evaluating
three dose regimens of 30, 50 and 70 million ISC-hpNSC. There are 12
patients in this study divided into 3 cohorts of 4 patients each. Patients
receive immunosuppression and stereotactic bilateral injections of 7 cell
deposits per hemisphere into the caudate nucleus, putamen, and substantia
nigra. Patients are evaluated for 12 months with a 5-year long-term
follow-up. The primary endpoint of the study is to assess the incidence of
treatment-emergent adverse events. Secondary endpoints evaluate efficacy by
measuring the change from baseline in 18F-dopa PET, UPDRS,
PDQ-39, BDI, CGI, QUIP-RS, AIMS and MOCA. Eleven patients have been
successfully transplanted with 30, 50 and 70 million ISC-hpNSC,
respectively. Delivery of ISC-hpNSC to the striatum and substantia nigra
went according to plan without intraoperative complications. No serious
adverse events (SAE) associated with ISC-hpNSC or the immunosuppression
regimen has been reported. No graft-induced dyskinesia or evidence of
tumors, inflammation or infection has been reported. Six month analysis of
18F-dopa PET scans and neurological scores from the first and
second cohort will be presented. In summary, interim data shows that
administration of ISC-hpNSC is safe and has the potential to repair the
nigrostriatal pathway.

## Potential Benefits of Environmental Enrichment in a Rodent Model of
Tauopathy

## R. C. Gorzek1,2, A. Mangahas2, S. Osting1,
and C. Burger1

## 
1Department of Neurology, University of Wisconsin-Madison,
Madison, WI, USA

## 
2College of Letters and Sciences, University of
Wisconsin-Madison, Madison, WI, USA
An astounding 1 in 3 senior citizens die with Alzheimer’s disease (AD) and
Alzheimer’s-related dementias, yet no reliable treatments for these
disorders exist. AD in humans has multiple underlying molecular pathologies
including beta-amyloid plaque formation and hyper-phosphorylation of
microtubule-associated protein tau. Research in rats and humans suggests
environmental enrichment (EE) preserves cognitive function during aging, but
the molecular mechanisms are largely unknown. Results from our laboratory
demonstrate that 1 month of EE results in an activity-dependent increase in
phosphorylated p70S6 kinase (p-p70S6 K) for 30 minutes following synaptic
stimulation in the hippocampus. This improves learning and memory in young
and aged rats. p70S6 K is involved in protein synthesis important to
learning, memory, and synaptic plasticity. Curiously, human AD brains show
constitutive phosphorylation of p70S6 K, suggesting that p70S6 K is
dysregulated in AD and may result in adverse effects on cognitive function.
We predict EE will have a protective effect by regulating phosphorylation
levels of p70S6 K in a rodent model of tauopathy. Here, we delivered
wild-type human tau using adeno-associated virus (AAV-Tau4 R) to the
hippocampus of adult rats. We found a 1.3-fold increase in hippocampal tau
levels 15 days following viral vector injection and a 3.4-fold increase in
basal levels of p-p70S6 K. To test the effects of EE in alleviating the
p-p70S6 K dysregulation in this model, we will house animals in EE or
standard conditions (SC) for 1 month prior to AAV injection. Fifteen days
post-injection, we will perform behavioral testing, and quantify basal and
synaptic activity-dependent p-p70S6 K levels. We hypothesize that EE
AAV-Tau4R-injected animals will show normal basal and increased
activity-dependent p-p70S6 K levels, and improved learning compared to SC
injected animals. The results from this study will provide knowledge about
the therapeutic value of EE in regulating molecular pathways contributing to
age-related disorders.

## Exosomal Biomarkers in Brain Injury and Disease

## L. Granholm1, A. Ledreux1, E. Hamlett2, A.
Gilmore1, E. Head3, A. Butterfield4, M.
Carmona-Iragui5, J. Fortea5, M. Margittai6,
and E. Mufson7

## 
1Knoebel Institute for Healthy Aging, University of Denver,
Denver, CO, USA

## 
2Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, Medical
University of South Carolina, Charleston, SC, USA

## 
3Department of Pathology & Laboratory Medicine, University of
California, Neuroscience Research Facility, Irvine, CA, USA

## 
4Sanders-Brown Center on Aging, University of Kentucky,
Lexington, KY, USA

## 
5Memory Unit, Department of Neurology, Hospital de la Santa Creu
I Sant Pau, Universitat Autonoma de Barcelona, Barcelona, Spain

## 
6Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry, University of Denver,
Denver, CO, USA

## 
7Alzheimer’s Program, Barrow Neurological Institute, Phoenix, AZ,
USA
Individuals with Down syndrome (DS) exhibit Alzheimer’s disease (AD)
neuropathology and dementia early in life, with almost complete penetrance.
Reliable blood biomarkers are lacking and could improve early diagnosis and
confirm effects of experimental therapeutics. Extracellular vesicles (EVs)
including exosomes are nanosized particles that are secreted by all cell
types and are present in all bodily fluids. Exosomes contain bioactive
molecules including proteins, mRNA, miRNA, and lipids that can be used for
signaling and transportation across the neuraxis and between individuals. We
have examined the presence of AD-related biomarkers in the cargo of exosomes
derived from neurons obtained from blood samples of people with DS at
different ages, and compared with age-matched controls and patients with AD.
Similar biomarkers have also been examined in exosomes from athletes with
one or several concussions, to determine whether repeated mild traumatic
brain injuries (mTBIs) lead to elevated brain injury biomarkers long term or
at different intervals post-concussion. Further, we have demonstrated that
exosomes derived from patients with DS and AD can develop tangles containing
hyperphosphorylated Tau (p-Tau) when injected into the hippocampus of
wild-type mice. These findings suggest that neuron-derived exosomes can be
developed into a novel and reliable biomarker method, both for mTBI and AD,
and that AD pathology can spread from exosomes into the brain between
individuals following injection. Thus, the novel exosome methodology can
provide new answers as to how AD pathology can spread between adjacent brain
regions.
This work was funded by the National Institutes on Aging and the Alzheimer’s
Association.

## Reparative Effects of Stem Cell Factor and Granulocyte Colony-Stimulating Factor
in Aged APP/PS1 Mice

## X. Guo, Y. Liu, S. Longo, and L-R. Zhao

## Department of Neurosurgery, SUNY Upstate Medical University, Syracuse,
NY, USA
Alzheimer’s disease (AD) is the most common cause of dementia among the
elderly. Increased amyloid-beta (Aβ) aggregation and neuroinflammation are
crucially involved in the pathogenesis of AD. Microglia, the primary innate
immune cells of the brain, play a key role in Aβ clearance and
neuroinflammation. Our previous studies have demonstrated that
administration of two hematopoietic growth factors, stem cell factor (SCF)
and granulocyte colony-stimulating factor (G-CSF), in 9-month-old male
amyloid precursor protein/presenilin 1 (APP/PS1) mice leads to reductions of
cerebral Aβ aggregation. To determine the therapeutic efficacy of SCF+G-CSF
in aged APP/PS1 mice, in this study, 12-day injections of SCF+G-CSF were
given to 25-month-old male APP/PS1 mice. Our data revealed that the
percentage area, the number, and the size of Aβ plaques in both the cortex
and hippocampus were significantly reduced by SCF+G-CSF treatment. The
capillaries with Aβ deposits were also significantly decreased in the cortex
and hippocampus after SCF+G-CSF treatment. In addition, the association of
triggering receptor expressed on myeloid cells 2/ionized calcium-binding
adaptor molecule 1 (TREM2+/Iba-1+) microglia with Aβ plaques was
significantly increased by SCF+G-CSF treatment. Importantly, increased
P2RY12 positive microglia were seen in both the cortex and hippocampus of
the SCF+G-CSF-treated APP/PS1 mice. SCF+G-CSF treatment also led to
significant increases of the branches in the purinergic receptor P2Y,
G-protein coupled, 12 (P2RY12)+ microglia. The decreased pro-inflammatory
molecule nitric oxide synthase 2 (NOS2) and increased anti-inflammatory
molecule interleukin 4 (IL4) were observed in the SCF+G-CSF-treated APP/PS1
mice. Moreover, SCF+G-CSF treatment prevented the loss of
microtuble-associated protein 2 (MAP2)+ dendrites in the cortex and
hippocampus of the aged APP/PS1 mice. These findings suggest that SCF+G-CSF
treatment in aged APP/PS1 mice increases Aβ clearance, reduces
neuroinflammation and prevents dendritic degeneration. The beneficial
effects of SCF+G-CSF in aged APP/PS1 mice are associated with the modulation
of microglial activation. This study sheds new light on the therapeutic
potential of SCF+G-CSF in AD.
This study was supported by NIH/NIA (R01AG051674).

## The Contribution of Stem Cell Factor and Granulocyte Colony-Stimulating Factor in
Reducing Neurodegeneration and Promoting Neural Network Reorganization after
Traumatic Brain Injury

## J. He, T. Russell, S. Longo, and L-R. Zhao

## Department of Neurosurgery, SUNY Upstate Medical University, Syracuse,
NY, USA
Traumatic brain injury (TBI) is a major cause of death and disability in
young adults worldwide. TBI-induced long-term cognitive deficits represent a
growing clinical problem. The aim of this study was to determine the effects
of stem cell factor (SCF) and granulocyte colony-stimulating factor (G-CSF)
on long-term neurological outcomes, neurodegeneration, and neural network
reorganization after TBI. The controlled cortical impact (CCI) model of TBI,
which severely damages the motor cortex, was used in this study. TBI was
performed in 8-week-old male C57BL mice. The combination treatment of SCF
and G-CSF (SCF+G-CSF) was initiated 3 weeks after induction of TBI.
Neurobehavioral tests were performed for examination of neurological
deficits before treatment as well as 2 and 6 weeks after treatment. Spatial
learning and memory was evaluated through the Morris Water Maze test, and
the Rotarod test was used for examining motor function. Hematoxylin and
eosin (H&E) staining was utilized to calculate the tissue loss volume.
Neurodegeneration was determined by Fluoro-Jade C Staining.
Immunohistochemistry of SMI-312 was performed to assess the axons. We found
that SCF+G-CSF treatment significantly reduced latency to platform (escape
latency) in Morris Water Maze at 6 weeks post-treatment. Two weeks after
treatment, TBI-vehicle-treated mice showed significant increases of escape
latency as compared with sham controls, while the escape latency of
SCF+G-CSF-treated TBI mice did not show differences from the sham controls.
Before treatment, there were no differences in neurobehavioral tests between
the two groups of TBI mice that would be treated with/without SCF+G-CSF.
SCF+G-CSF treatment did not change the performance of Rotarod and the tissue
loss volume after TBI. However, TBI-induced neurodegeneration in the
contralateral cortex was significantly reduced by SCF+G-CSF. In addition,
TBI-induced abnormal increases of SMI-312 positive axons in the ipsilateral
cortex adjacent to the TBI cavity were prevented by SCF+G-CSF treatment.
These data suggest that SCF+G-CSF treatment in the late subacute phase of
TBI improves cognitive function, reduces neurodegeneration, and prevents
post-TBI overgrowth of cortical axons.
This study was supported by Department of Veterans Affairs (I01
RX002125).

## (-)-Phenserine Ameliorates Contusion Volume Loss, Neuroinflammation, and
Behavioral Impairments Induced by Traumatic Brain Injury in Mouse

## S-C. Hsueh1,2,3*, Y. Luo1,2,3, N. H.
Greig1,6, B. J. Hoffer1,2,3, J-Y. Wang1,2,
J. P. Miller3, and Y-H. Chiang1,2,4,5

## 
1The Ph.D. Program for Neural Regenerative Medicine, College of
Medical Science and Technology, Taipei Medical University, Taipei,
Taiwan

## 
2Center for Neurotrauma and Neuroregeneration, Taipei Medical
University, Taipei, Taiwan

## 
3Department of Neurosurgery, Case Western Reserve University
School of Medicine, Cleveland, OH, USA

## 
4Department of Neurosurgery, Taipei Medical University Hospital,
Taipei, Taiwan

## 
5Department of Surgery, School of Medicine, College of Medicine,
Taipei Medical University, Taipei, Taiwan

## 
6Translational Gerontology Branch, Intramural Research Program,
National Institute on Aging, National Institutes of Health, Baltimore, MD,
USA
Traumatic brain injury (TBI) is one of the major causes of death and
disability and affects an estimated 10 million people worldwide. Currently,
there is no approved drug for ameliorating the pathological processes of
TBI. Previous studies have shown that (-)-phenserine (phen), an
acetylcholinesterase inhibitor originally designed as a candidate drug for
Alzheimer’s disease (AD), was tested in clinical Phase II studies and showed
no adverse effects. Besides its anti-amyloid activity in AD, our previous
data also showed phen can prevent several neurodegenerative mechanisms as
well as reduce the cognitive impairments induced by mild TBI using a
weight-drop mouse model. In this study, we used a mouse model of moderate to
severe TBI induced by controlled cortical impact to assess the effects of
phenserine on somatosensory functions. Animals were treated with phen (2.5
mg/kg, BID) by intraperitoneal injection for 5 days started from injury day
at a clinically translatable dose and the effects were evaluated by
behavioral and histological examinations at 1 and 2 weeks post-injury. Phen
significantly attenuated TBI-induced contusion volume, enlargement of the
lateral ventricle, and behavioral impairments in sensorimotor functions. The
morphology of microglia was shifted to an active form from a resting form
after TBI, and phen dramatically mitigated the population ratio of activated
to resting microglia, suggesting that phen also mitigates neuroinflammation
following TBI. Taken together, these results show that post-injury treatment
with phen over 5 days significantly reduced the lesion volume and the
enlargement of the lateral ventricle caused by TBI. In addition, phen
effectively reduced sensory and motor deficits at 7–14 days post-injury.
These data suggest a potential development of this compound for clinical use
in TBI therapy.

## Direct Conversion of Astrocytes to Neurons Enhances Neuronal Repair and
Functional Recovery after Ischemic Stroke

## M. Jiang, S. P. Yu, and L. Wei

## Department of Anesthesiology, Emory University School of Medicine,
Atlanta, GA, USA
Regenerative therapies, including cell transplantation, have been extensively
investigated in recent years for the treatment of central nervous system
(CNS) injuries, such as stroke. In the present investigation, we explored an
innovative stroke treatment of reprogramming endogenous astrocytes into
induced neurons (iNeurons) for neuronal repair after focal ischemic stroke.
A mCherry-tagged NeuroD1 lentivirus was generated under a mouse glial
fibrillary acidic protein (GFAP) promoter for in vitro and in vivo
infections. Cultured astrocytes expressing mCherry/NeuroD1 adopted neuronal
morphology and expressed neuronal markers Tuj-1, NeuN, and synaptic proteins
2–4 weeks after infection. Proliferation was drastically reduced compared
with control cultures. Converted cells were found to have developed
significantly longer processes (>20–100 mM) when inspected at 6 weeks
after infection. A focal ischemic stroke of the right sensorimotor cortex
was induced in adult GFAP-Cre x Rosa-yellow fluorescent protein (YFP) mice.
Astrocytes from this mouse remained YFP positive regardless of cell
phenotype. The lentivirus containing mCherry-NeuroD1 and the GFAP promoter
was injected into the peri-infection region 3 days after stroke, which
transduced ∼10% of reactive astrocytes accumulated in the peri-infarct
region. Six weeks later, converted cells were identified by the co-labeling
of YFP (the astrocyte origin marker), mCherry (the marker for NeuroD1
transduction), and NeuN (mature neuron marker). Around ∼60% of converted
cells expressed NeuN and showed neuronal morphology. Western blot assay of
the peri-infarcted region detected significantly higher levels of
brain-derived neurotrophic factor (BNDF) and fibroblast growth factor 10
(FGF10) in NeuroD1-transfected mice compared with animals that received
empty vectors. Meanwhile, the area of gliosis noticeably decreased. Stroke
mice that received NeuroD1 transfection performed significantly better in
the rotarod test and corner test, and a preventive effect was observed with
regard to chronically developed depressive behavior 4 months after stroke.
Thus, astrocyte-to-neuron reprogramming enforces parenchymal neurogenesis
and helps to improve functional recovery after stroke.

## Active Immunization with Tau Epitope in a Mouse Model of Tauopathy Induced Strong
Antibody Response Together with Improvement in Short Memory and Tau
Pathology

## A. Joly Amado1, H. Davtyan2, K. Serraneau1,
K. Zagorksi2, M. N. Gordon1, D.H. Cribbs3, A.
Ghochikyan2, N. Petrovsky4, M. G.
Agadjanyan2, and D. Morgan1

## 
1University of South Florida Health, Byrd Alzheimer’s Institute,
Tampa, FL, USA

## 
2The Institute for Molecular Medicine, Huntington Beach, CA,
USA

## 
3University of California Irvine, Irvine, CA, USA

## 
4Flinders Med. Ctr., Bedford Park, Adelaide, Australia
Abnormal tau hyperphosphorylation and its accumulation into neurofibrillary
tangles are a hallmark of tauopathies, which are neurodegenerative disorders
that include Alzheimer’s disease (AD). Tau immunotherapy has therefore been
proposed as a new therapeutic approach to AD. The aim of this study was to
test if active immunotherapy with a highly immunogenic tau epitope in a
mouse model of tau deposition was capable of reducing levels of tau
pathology in the brain and improving cognition. Tg4510r mice, carrying the
human four-repeat tau with the P301 L mutation (4R0 N tauP301 L) and the
CamK-II tetracycline-controlled transactivator protein were used. Male and
female transgenic rTg4510 mice (3 months old; n=36) were
subdivided into 3 groups (n=12 per group) and received
intramuscular injections of tau vaccine, Abeta vaccine, or adjuvant only.
Non-transgenic and tet only littermates (tetracycline-controlled
transactivator protein expressing mice) were used as control groups for
behavioral testing and anatomy comparisons. All groups received three
injections in alternating weeks and were boosted an additional three times
(4 weeks apart) for a total of 7 injections. Mice were subjected to
behavioral testing including open field, Y maze, radial arm water maze and
novel object recognition by an observer blind to the treatment/genotype of
the mice in order to evaluate learning, memory, and general activity. Active
immunization induced strong humoral immune responses in both non-transgenic
and transgenic mice. Mice vaccinated with the tau epitope displayed an
improvement in short-term memory when compared with adjuvant- and
Abeta-treated mice during novel object recognition test. Hyperphosphorylated
tau but not total tau was also reduced in the cortex of tau-vaccinated mice
compared with Abeta-treated mice. Altogether, these data indicate that
active immunotherapy with tau epitope was effective in improving cognition
and reducing pathology in a mouse model of tau deposition.

## Human Embryonic Retinal Pigment Epithelial Cell (hRPEC) Grafts Provide
Immunomodulation of the Host Microenvironment through Secreted Cytokines

## A. Kim1, T. Cayton1, T. Subramanian3, P. S.
Grigson2 and K. Venkiteswaran3

## 
1Penn State University College of Medicine (PSU-COM), Hersehy,
PA, USA

## 
2Neural and Behavioral Sciences, PSU-COM, Hershey, PA,
USA

## 
3Department of Neurology, PSU-COM, Hershey, PA, USA
Human embryonic retinal pigment epithelial cell (hRPEC) xenotransplantation
in animal models of Parkinson’s disease (PD) and high-dose cocaine
self-administration have been shown to produce behavioral improvements
without the need for immunosuppression. In these experiments, hRPEC
xenografts did not evoke an inflammatory response that is seen with other
central nervous system (CNS) xenografting paradigms. hRPEC graft survival
was excellent without any inflammatory responses in the dorsal striatum or
nucleus accumbens. To understand the mechanism through which the hRPEC
xenografts provide immunomoduation and avoid deleterious inflammatory
responses, we tested the effects of secreted cytokines from hRPECs on
activated microglia and T lymphocytes using hRPEC-conditioned medium
(hRPEC-CM). Murine microglial cells prepared from postnatal day 0–2 rats and
cultured in vitro were activated using lipopolysaccharide
(LPS)/interferon-γ (IFN-γ), and were exposed to hRPEC-CM. IFNγ/LPS
activation of microglial cells incubated in fresh media resulted in a robust
increase in expression of all the three cytokines tested, when compared with
the cells, which were not activated (p<0.001).
Expression of mRNA for interleukin-1beta (IL-1β) was increased 5.3 fold,
tumor necrosis factor-α (TNFα) 2.5 fold and IL-6 6.3 fold as a result of
IFNγ/LPS activation. In the IFNγ/LPS activated cells, expression of all
three cytokines were significantly reduced after incubation with hRPEC-CM
when compared with the cells incubated with fresh media. IL-1β expression
was reduced 2.8 fold (p<0.019), while interleukin-6
(IL-6) expression was decreased 2.6 fold (p<0.001) and
TNF-α expression was reduced 1.6 fold (p<0.001).
Immunomodulatory effects of hRPEC-CM and hRPEC monolayer on activated human
T-cell proliferation were also assessed in vitro using a
tritiated thymidine incorporation assay, which showed substantial
suppression of T-cell proliferation by 30% with conditioned medium, and when
incubated with RPE monolayer the proliferation was suppressed by 80%. These
results show that hRPEC xenografts make the graft microenvironment more
receptive, allowing for its effective use without the need for continuous
life-long immunosuppression.

## Unilateral Optogenetic or Chemogenetic Inhibition of the Nigrostriatal Pathway
Causes Reversible Hemiparkinsonism that is not Associated with Spontaneous or
Levodopa-Induced Dyskinesias

## K. Le1, S. Chinniah1, V. Iyer1, N.
Patel2, C. Lieu1, M. Pennock1, E.
Handley1, A. Zenerowitz1, E. Dickey1, S.
Savaliya1, T. Subramanian1, and K.
Venkiteswaran1

## 
1Department of Neurology, Penn State College of Medicine,
Hershey, PA, USA

## 
2Department of Neurosurgery, Penn State College of Medicine,
Hershey, PA, USA
Levodopa (L-dopa) provides effective relief in Parkinson’s disease (PD) but
in the long term causes levodopa-induced dyskinesias (LID). The loss of
continuous dopaminergic stimulation (CDS) hypothesis would predict that
hemiparkinsonian (HP) patients and HP animals would develop unilateral LID.
However, our studies show that HP rats and monkeys with preserved
interhemispheric nigrostriatal fibers do not develop LID. This suggests that
loss of interhemispheric nigrostriatal connections may be critical for the
genesis of LID. We tested the hypothesis that unilateral nigrostriatal will
lead to reversible HP that will not be associated with dyskinesias. We used
recombinant viral vectors to conditionally express eNpHR3.0 or hM4Di to
cause unilateral inhibition of the left nigrostriatal pathway. In model #1,
Sprague Dawley rats and in model #2 transgenic TH-Cre rats were used. In
both models, recombinant virus AAV5-Ef1a-DIO-eNpHR3.0-EYFP or
AAV8-hSyn-DIO-hM4Di-mCherry was injected into the left substantia nigra pars
compacta (SNpc). A cre-mediated switch, AAV2-Ef1a-mCherry-IRES-WGA-Cre, was
injected unilaterally into the left striatum of model #1 animals. Animals
were repeatedly tested for onset and reversal of right HP (RHP) state. The
eNpHR3.0-treated animals served as controls for the hM4Di-treated animals
and vice versa. In the chemogenetic cohorts, animals were tested using both
Clozapine-n-oxide (CNO) and a novel high-affinity ligand JH37160. With both
compounds, animals showed a mean 75% reduction of the vibrissae-evoked
forelimb placement score (VEFP, p<0.05). Additionally,
the optogenetic cohort also showed a similar 75% reduction in their VEFP
score. Other parkinsonian behavioral tests were also similarly effective to
document reversible HP states. In both models, RHP was completely reversible
with no residual parkinsonism or adverse events and histological
verification of unilateral gene expression. Repeated induction of RHP or RHP
with L-dopa treatments failed to elicit dyskinesias. These findings support
the notion that preservation of interhemispheric nigrostriatal fibers and
dopaminergic synapses will mitigate/prevent LID in PD.

## Intravenously Administered Human Neural Stem Cell-Derived Extracellular Vesicles
Ameliorate Cranial Radiation-Induced Brain Injury

## R. J. Leavitt, M. M. Acharya, J. E. Baulch, N. Ru, M. C. Angulo, L. Apodaca,
L. Yu, and C. L. Limoli

## Department of Radiation Oncology, University of California Irvine,
Irvine, CA, USA
Cognitive deficits following clinical radiation therapy for central nervous
system tumors are progressive and debilitating to surviving cancer patients,
causing a deterioration of quality of life. Using an immunocompromised rat
model, we previously demonstrated that cranial engraftment of human neural
stem cell (hNSC)-derived extracellular vesicles (EV) ameliorated
radiation-induced cognitive dysfunction, neuroinflammation, and neuron
structure damage. Building on those observations, we showed that those same
beneficial effects of EV treatment are conferred to cranially irradiated
(IRR) immunocompetent rodents without the need for immunosuppression or risk
of teratoma formation. Furthermore, toward advancement to a clinically
translatable application, we demonstrated that injection of EV into the
retro-orbital venous sinus (IV injection) represents an effective and
significantly less invasive EV delivery strategy as compared with the
previously used intra-hippocampal route of injection. Behavioral analyses of
these IV injected animals, 1 and 6 months later, demonstrated that the EV
were effective in the rescue of IRR-induced cognitive deficits. We also
observed significantly reduced microglial activation and synaptic protein
loss. In addition, RNA-seq data from the mouse hippocampi uncovered specific
neuronal signaling, synaptic and microglial genes, and pathways altered in
the irradiated group and rescued in the treatment groups. The miRNA
microarray of hNSC-derived EV was integrated with the RNA-seq data to
suggest a role for miR-124 in the mechanism of EV-mediated remediation of
the irradiated brain. Collectively, these studies represent a key
advancement in developing an evidence-based clinical treatment strategy that
will ease the neurocognitive side effects of cranial IRR.

## Gutting the Parkinson’s Brain of Inflammation: Human Umbilical Cord Blood Stem
Cells and Plasma Target Gut–Brain Axis

## J. Y. Lee1, H. Nguyen1, J. Tuazon1, J.
Ehrhart2, J. Holland2, P. R. Sanberg1, and
C. V. Borlongan1

## 
1Center of Excellence for Aging and Brain Repair, Department of
Neurosurgery and Brain Repair, University of South Florida Morsani College
of Medicine, Tampa, FL, USA

## 
2Saneron CCEL Therapeutics Inc., Tampa, FL, USA
Current therapies for Parkinson’s disease (PD), including both
L-3,4-dihydroxyphenylalanine (L-DOPA), and clinical trials investigating
dopaminergic cell transplants, have generated mixed results with the
eventual induction of dyskinetic side effects. Although human umbilical cord
blood (hUCB) stem/progenitor cells present no or minimal capacity of
differentiation into mature dopaminergic neurons, their transplantation
significantly attenuates parkinsonian symptoms likely via bystander effects,
specifically stem cell graft-mediated secretion of growth factors,
anti-inflammatory cytokines, or synaptic function, altogether promoting
brain repair. Recognizing this non-cell replacement mechanism, we examined
here the effects of intravenously transplanting a combination of hUCB and
plasma (from the same cord blood unit) into the 6-hydroxydopamine
(6-OHDA)-induced rat model of PD. Animals received repeated dosing of either
4 × 106 hUCB cells with plasma or vehicle at 3, 5, and 10 days
after stereotaxic 6-OHDA lesion, then behaviorally and immunohistochemically
evaluated over 56 days post-lesion. Compared with vehicle treatment,
transplantation with hUCB and plasma significantly improved motor function,
gut motility, and survival of dopaminergic neurons in the substantia nigra
pars compacta (SNpc), which coincided with reduced pro-inflammatory
cytokines in both the SNpc and the intestinal mucosa and dampened
inflammation-associated gut microbiota. These novel data directly implicate
a key pathological crosstalk between the gut and brain, ushering a new
avenue of therapeutically targeting the gut microbiome with hUCB-derived
stem cells and plasma for PD.
Disclosure: This study was supported by Saneron CCEL Therapeutics Inc. J.E.
is the Director of Research and Development for Saneron. C.V.B. is a
consultant for, and P.R.S is a cofounder of Saneron. P.R.S. is also the
Co-Editor-Chief for Cell Transplantation. Neither P.R.S. nor any of the
other authors took part in the editorial processing of this Abstract.

## Structural and Functional MRI as Biomarkers for Repair Processes Following Stem
Cells Therapy of White Matter Stroke

## S. Lepore1, I. L. Llorente2, I. Pham2, W.
Lowry3, J. Schoenfield1, S. T. Carmichael2,
and N. G. Harris1

## 
1Department of Neurosurgery, School of Medicine, University of
California Los Angeles, Los Angeles, CA, USA

## 
2Department of Neurology, School of Medicine, University of
California Los Angeles, Los Angeles, CA, USA

## 
3Department of Molecular Cell & Developmental Biology, School
of Medicine, University of California at Los Angeles, Los Angeles, CA,
USA
Subcortical white matter stroke (WMS) constitutes up to 30% of all stroke
subtypes and consists of a range of pathophysiological events, from small
infarcts to more diffuse areas of damage. There is currently no specific
therapy for WMS, either to prevent disease progression, or to improve the
brain’s ability to recover from this insult. The use of stem cells is an
emerging therapy for neural repair in WMS. Skin fibroblast-derived induced
pluripotent stem cells (iPSCs) can be differentiated toward glial enriched
progenitors (GEPs) and may be used to enhance endogenous repair mechanisms.
iPS-GEPs are suited for brain repair because they differentiate into
immature astrocytes, the most affected neuroglial cell population after WMS.
Previous pre-clinical studies have shown that iPS-GEPs both replace cells
lost in WMS and induce surviving cells to repair damaged axons. Stem cell
therapy in WMS is ideally suited for the development of a non-invasive
biomarker of tissue repair. WMS regions are currently imaged as
hyperintensity on T2 magnetic resonance imaging (MRI), or altered
diffusivity using diffusion weighted MRI. However, there are currently no
in vivo imaging biomarkers of the brain repair process.
Therefore, in this study, we used a recently developed mouse model of WMS to
establish a quantitative measure of WM structure in vivo using diffusion
tensor imaging metrics (FA, AD, RD and MD) throughout the repair processes
that is produced by iPS-GEPs therapy. Additionally, we explored the use of
resting state functional MRI as a biomarker to provide a readout of
functional enhancement in the cortex during the brain repair process. The
development of a biomarker of iPS-GEPs repair in WMS will substantially
accelerate clinical application of this iPS therapy, by enabling clinical
trials to be conducted with smaller sample sizes and shorter durations
compared with current standards that use cognitive outcome measures.

## Human iPS-Derived Interneurons Enhance Functional Recovery after Cortical
Stroke

## I. L. Llorente1, T. Segura3, W. E. Lowry2
and S. T. Carmichael1

## 
1Department of Neurology, David Geffen School of Medicine,
University of California Los Angeles, Los Angeles, CA, USA

## 
2Department of Molecular, Cell and Developmental Biology,
University of California Los Angeles, Los Angeles, CA, USA

## 
3Department of Biomedical Engineering, Duke University, Durham,
NC, USA
Stroke is the leading cause of adult disability. There are no therapies that
promote recovery from this disorder. Cell transplantation in cortical stroke
has utilized neural progenitors in early differentiation stages; however,
these have often shown poor survival, migration, and differentiation after
transplant. The present studies develop a different paradigm of cell
transplantation in cortical stroke by using induced pluripotent stem
cell-derived (iPS)-interneurons. Interneuron transplantation for diseases
other than stroke shows that these cells survive in hostile brain
environments, migrate widely within the adult central nervous system (CNS),
and integrate into the adult brain circuitry. iPS-interneurons were produced
using small molecule inhibitors of Wnt, transforming growth factor-β
(TGF-β), and bone morphogenetic protein (BMP), and are therefore termed
iPS-3i. The iPS-3i cells progress through a molecular expression pattern
resembling median ganglionic eminence (MGE) cells. iPS-interneurons were
transplanted into the stroke cavity with a hyaluronan (HA) hydrogel
containing clustered vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF) immobilized
on heparin nanocapsules to reduce transplant stress from the direct
transplantation into the stroke cavity. Transplants were done at either the
subacute or chronic stage after cortical stroke (7 days vs. 1 month after
stroke). In order to assess motor deficit and recovery after stroke,
gridwalking and pasta-handling tasks were performed. We report significant
behavioral recovery in mice suffering from motor cortex stroke when the
HA-hydrogel+ VEGF nanoparticles, and iPS-3i were injected simultaneously
into the stroke core. Confocal images of ipsilateral tissue show concurrent
structural changes while electrophysiological recordings demonstrate
integration of iPS-3i into pre-existing circuitry. Notably, these results
are seen when treatment is administered in either the subacute or chronic
stage of stroke. Overall findings provide promising evidence of a stem cell
treatment for stroke unique to the subtype iPS-3i.
Supported by CIRM DISC1-08723.

## Neural Stem Cell Function During Aging: Critical Periods, Regulation, Therapeutic
Opportunities

## L. Madhavan1,5,6, M. J. Corenblum1,6, S.
Ray2, A. Anandhan1, 3, A. Reed2, K. R.
Kirwan2, D. D. Zhang3, and C. A.
Barnes1,4,5

## 
1Department of Neurology, University of Arizona, Tucson, AZ,
USA

## 
2Neuroscience and Cognitive Science Program, University of
Arizona, Tucson, AZ, USA

## 
3Pharmacology and Toxicology, University of Arizona, Tucson, AZ,
USA

## 
4Departments of Psychology and Neuroscience, University of
Arizona, Tucson, AZ, USA

## 
5Evelyn F McKnight Brain Institute, University of Arizona,
Tucson, AZ, USA

## 
6Center for Innovation in Brain Science, University of Arizona,
Tucson, AZ, USA
Understanding neural stem cell (NSC) biology in the context of aging has
significant implications toward developing therapeutics for age-related
neurodegenerative disorders. As aging progresses, it is known that the
regeneration of NSCs in the two major neurogenic niches—the subventricular
zone (SVZ) in the forebrain and the subgranular zone (SGZ) of the
hippocampus—undergoes a notable decline. Our recent work indicates that
while NSC function, in both the SVZ and the SGZ, continuously decreases with
advancing age, there is a critical time period during middle-age (13–15 mos)
when a striking reduction in NSC survival and regeneration occurs (Corenblum
et al, 2016; Ray et al, 2018). These studies also determined the reduced
expression of the redox transcription factor, nuclear factor (erythroid
derived 2)-like 2 (Nrf2), as key in mediating this phenomenon. Therefore, we
investigated whether increasing Nrf2 expression could potentially mitigate
the decline in NSC regeneration across the identified critical period.
Specifically, recombinant adeno-associated viral (rAAV2/1) vectors encoding
Nrf2 were administered into the SVZs of aging rats, at time-points either
before or after the critical period. Results indicate that animals treated
with rAAV2/1-Nrf2, before the critical middle-age period (at 12 mos), showed
greater NSC proliferation, neurogenesis, and migration, and associated
olfactory discrimination function, compared with animals receiving control
rAAV2/1-eGFP viruses. On the other hand, Nrf2 overexpression after the
critical period (at 21 mos) did not significantly alter NSC activity at
either cellular or behavioral levels. Similarly, enrichment of the
hippocampus via the transplantation of rAAV2/1-Nrf2 overexpressing NSCs
before the critical period alleviated the age-related decline in SGZ NSC
regeneration and improved cognitive function (pattern separation abilities).
Overall, these data highlight the importance of redox mechanisms in
controlling NSC regeneration and support targeting the Nrf2 pathway as a
potential approach to advantageously modulate NSC activity with age.

## Brain Dysfunction in a Model of Gulf War Illness Continues into Middle Age with
Elevated Oxidative Stress and Waned Mitochondrial Activity

## L. N. Madhu, S. Attaluri, M. Kodali, L, Melissari, B. Shuai, R. Upadhya, and
A. K. Shetty

## Institute for Regenerative Medicine, Department of Molecular and Cellular
Medicine, Texas A&M University College of Medicine, College Station, TX,
USA

## Olin E. Teague Veterans’ Medical Center, Central Texas Veterans Health
Care System, Temple, TX, USA
Gulf War Illness (GWI) affects ∼40% of military personnel who served in the
first Gulf War (GW). Multiple studies have suggested that concomitant
exposure to GW-related chemicals and stress underlie this illness. The
chemicals include the nerve gas prophylactic drug pyridostigmine bromide
(PB), insect repellant DEET, and the insecticide permethrin (PM). Our
previous studies have suggested that cognitive and mood impairments in GWI
rats were associated with increased oxidative stress and mitochondrial
hyperactivity in the brain. Here, we examined the progression of brain
dysfunction into middle age in GWI rats. Male Sprague-Dawley rats were
exposed daily to GW-related chemicals, PB (2 mg/kg), DEET (60 mg/kg) and PM
(0.2 mg/kg), and 15 minutes of restraint stress for 28 days. Five months
later, a series of behavioral tests revealed cognitive and mood dysfunction
in GWI rats. The brain tissue demonstrated elevated levels of oxidative
stress markers in the cerebral cortex and reduced concentration of
antioxidants. Moreover, the hippocampus displayed increased expression of
genes encoding proteins linked to mitochondrial respiration, with increased
levels of mitochondrial complex proteins, which implied the presence of
hyperactive mitochondria. Analyses of GWI rats 12 months after exposure
revealed the persistence of cognitive and mood dysfunction, along with
elevated oxidative stress and reduced antioxidant activity in the cerebral
cortex and the hippocampus. However, notably, the mitochondrial activity was
reduced, as evidenced by the decreased expression of genes encoding proteins
related to mitochondrial respiration and reduced activity of mitochondrial
complex I. Thus, cognitive and mood impairments in GWI continue into middle
age with persistently increased oxidative stress and hypoactive
mitochondria. It appears that mitochondria initially react to elevated
oxidative stress by enhancing their activity. However, such a compensatory
response leads to the production of higher levels of reactive oxygen species
(ROS), which likely damages the mitochondrial respiratory chain and leads to
hypoactivity.
Supported by grants from the Department of Defense (W81XWH-14-1-0572 and
W81XWH-16-1-0480 to A.K.S.).

## Transplantation of Mesenchymal Stem Cells Genetically Engineered to Overexpress
Interleukin-10 Induces Autophagy, Mitophagy, Molecular Chaperone Response, and
Protected Neuronal Damage in a Rat Model of Traumatic Brain Injury

## P. Maiti1-6, S. Peruzzaro1,2, N. Kolli1,2,
M. Andrews1,2, A. Al-Gharaibeh1,2, J.
Rossignol1,2,7, and G. L. Dunbar1,2,3,4

## 
1Field Neurosciences Institute of Laboratory for Restorative
Neurology, Central Michigan University, Mt. Pleasant, MI, USA

## 
2Program in Neuroscience, Central Michigan University, Mt.
Pleasant, MI, USA

## 
3Department of Psychology Central Michigan University, Mt.
Pleasant, MI, USA

## 
4Field Neurosciences Institute, St. Mary’s of Michigan, Saginaw,
MI, USA

## 
5Department of Biology, Saginaw Valley State University, Saginaw,
MI, USA

## 
6Brain Research Laboratory, Saginaw Valley State University,
Saginaw, MI, USA

## 
7College of Medicine, Central Michigan University, Mt. Pleasant,
MI, USA
Autophagy plays vital role in neuronal death and survival in traumatic brain
injury (TBI). Transplantation of bone marrow-derived mesenchymal stem cells
(BM-MSCs) has been shown to increase autophagy and provide neuroprotection
in animal models of neurological diseases by increasing anti-inflammatory
cytokines, such as interleukin-10 (IL-10). However, due to heterogeneity of
MSCs, it is difficult to measure the levels of IL-10 released by MSCs. We
developed genetically engineered MSCs to overexpress IL-10 in order to
deliver a greater amount of IL-10 to the injured brain area. The present
study investigated the mechanisms of neuronal death and survival, along with
autophagy and mitophagy markers using a rat model of TBI after
transplantation of BM-MSCs-IL-10. Adult male Sprague-Dawley rats were
divided into four groups: Sham + Hank’s balanced salt solution (HBSS), TBI +
HBSS, TBI + MSC-green fluorescent protein (GFP)-IL-10 and TBI + MSC-GFP
(n=9/group). Sham + HBSS, and TBI + HBSS received HBSS,
whereas TBI + MSC-GFP-IL-10 and TBI + MSC-GFP were transplanted with
MSC-IL-10 or MSC-GFP, respectively, 36 h after TBI. We investigated the
neuronal changes, using Cresyl violet, Fluoro jade B, and TUNEL staining. In
addition, macroautophagy, mitophagy, and chaperone-mediated autophagy (CMA)
markers, along with levels of molecular chaperones were analyzed after 3
weeks of TBI and transplantation. Furthermore, cell survival markers,
synaptic markers, and neuroinflammatory markers (glial fibrillary acidic
protein (GFAP), ionized calcium-binding adapter molecule-1 (Iba-1)) were
also investigated. We observed a significantly increased number of pyknotic,
degenerated, and TUNEL-positive cells in TBI rats in the cortex, and in the
CA1 and CA3 subfields of the hippocampus in comparison to sham controls.
Whereas transplantation of BM-MSCs-IL-10 significantly reduced cell death in
all of these brain areas, along with increased autophagy, mitophagy, CMA
markers, and molecular chaperones levels. Furthermore, cell survival and
synaptic markers were restored and neuroinflammatory markers were decreased
by BM-MSC-IL-10 transplantation. Overall, our data suggest that induction of
the autophagy mechanism using BM-MSC-IL-10 may be used to protect against
TBI-induced cell death.

## Association of Hyperacute Blood Pressure Parameters with Baseline Infarct Volume
and Collateral Status of Patients with Anterior Circulation Large Vessel Occlusion
undergoing Endovascular Therapy

## P. Moshayedi, S. Desai, C. Hawkes, A. Jadhav, T. Jovin, and M. Rocha

## Department of Neurology, University of Pittsburgh Medical Center,
Pittsburgh, PA, USA
Blood pressure (BP) mean and variability (BPV) have been previously
implicated in clinical outcomes of large vessel occlusion (LVO) stroke due
to unclear mechanisms. Here we tested whether hyperacute BP parameters are
associated with baseline ischemic core volume and collateral status as
stroke outcomes.
In a single-center retrospective analysis of 94 patients with middle cerebral
artery (MCA) or intracranial internal carotid artery (ICA) occlusion treated
with endovascular treatment (ET) within 24 h of stroke onset, systolic
(SBP), diastolic (DBP), standard deviation (SD), coefficient of variation
(CV), and successive variation (SV) were measured from door to
recanalization time. Associations between BP parameters with baseline
infarct core volume (RAPID software) and CTA collateral status (Miteff’s
score) were tested in univariate and multivariate analysis adjusting for age
and National Institutes of Health Stroke Scale (NIHSS).
The mean age of patients was 71±15, median NIHSS was 17 (IQR, 13–21), 60%
were female and the mean ischemic core volume was 18.6±28.8 ml. The median
number of pre-recanalization BP measurements per patient was 17 (IQR,
13–24). Among 74 patients with collateral assessment 15% had excellent
collaterals. Mean SBP (156±23 mmHg) and DBP (79±13 mmHg) were not
significantly correlated with baseline core volume. Mean SBP CV (9.7±5.9)
had modest correlation with ischemic core volume (ρ=0.215;
P=0.037), which was not statistically significant in
multivariable analysis. Patients with good collaterals had higher mean SBP
(168±24 vs. 154±22; P=0.039), DBP (84±9 vs. 77±12;
P=0.025) and minimum SBP (147±8 vs. 128±3;
P=0.012). Mean SBP (OR 1.04, 95%CI 1.00–1.07;
P=0.047) and minimum SBP (OR 1.05, 95%CI 1.00–1.07;
P=0.01) were independently associated with better
collaterals. BPV measures were not significantly correlated with collateral
status.
Increased BP levels are associated with better baseline collateral status,
but not ischemic core volumes. No significant association was found between
hyperacute BPV and baseline ischemic core or collateral status. Permissive
hypertension may increase collateral capacity in LVO stroke patients.

## T-Cell Phenotype in Murine Osteopontin-Mediated Aneurysm Healing

## K. Motwani1, D. Patel2, D. Wajima3, K.
Hosaka1, B. L. Hoh1

## 
1Department of Neurosurgery, University of Florida, Gainesville,
FL, USA

## 
2College of Medicine, Florida State University, Tallahassee, FL,
USA

## 
3Department of Neurosurgery, Nara Medical University, Kashihara,
Nara, Japan
Cerebral aneurysms (CA), or balloon-like weaknesses in blood vessels
supplying the brain, occur in up to 16 million individuals or 5% of the US
population. Though safer than open surgery and clipping, treatment by
endovascular coiling carries the limitation of up to 44% incomplete
treatment. Our premise is that CA recurrence, often attributed to
recanalization, can be mitigated by investigating the immune-mediated
process of endovascular aneurysm healing. Our previous studies showed that
local delivery of osteopontin, a cytokine expressed by myeloid cells such as
macrophages, improves murine aneurysm healing. We hypothesized that
increased osteopontin improves healing due to downstream cytokine and
cellular mediators. In our established mouse aneurysm coiling model, we
eluted osteopontin into the aneurysm lumen using a polymer-coated coil to
promote aneurysm ingrowth. Osteopontin-eluting and vehicle coiled aneurysm
tissue lysate were compared by cytokine array for mechanistic downstream
mediators at early timepoints. Coiled murine and human aneurysms were also
sectioned and immunostained for CD3+ T cells. With
osteopontin-eluting coil placement in our CA model, we observed a
significant increase compared with vehicle control in the protein expression
of CD25 (5.8 fc; p=0.005) at 1d, ST2/IL1RL1 (3.5 fc;
p=0.006) at 3d and interleukin-(IL)4, IL5, and IL9
(>1.5 fc, respectively; p<0.05) at 7d after coil
placement. Immunostaining in coiled murine and human aneurysms validated the
presence of T cells in aneurysm healing. With the local delivery of
osteopontin into the coiled aneurysm, an increase in CD25, ST2, and type 2
interleukins indicated a potential role for T lymphocytes in
osteopontin-mediated aneurysm healing. Ongoing cytometric studies will
clarify the role of T lymphocytes in this pathway.

## The AAV Alpha-Synuclein Model of Parkinson’s Disease—Optimization of Genetic
Constructs

## J. Mudannayake1, T. Björklund2, T.
Westerling3, and F. P. Manfredsson4

## 
1Lund University, Lund, Sweden

## 
2Molecular Neuromodulation, Wallenberg Neuroscieince Center,
Lund, Sweden

## 
3Aiforia, Technologies Oy, Helsinki, Finland

## 
4Department ofTranslational Science and Molecular Medicine,
Michigan State University, Grand Rapids, MI, USA
Animal models based on α-synuclein overexpression that replicate a range of
disease pathology arguably represent a more clinically relevant alternative
to toxins-based Parkinson’s disease (PD) models. However, the inability to
faithfully reproduce the temporal and neurochemical patterns of pathology
and behavior of published work on these models hinders its wide
applicability in the research laboratory. To generate a replicable,
“standardized” adeno-associated virus (AAV) vector-mediated α-synuclein
model, we comparatively analyzed commonly used AAV serotypes coupled with
various DNA promoter and post-transcriptional regulatory elements. We
designed various AAV genomes: ssAAV-CBA-αSyn-WPRE-bGHpA,
ssAAV-Syn-αSyn-WPRE-lateSV40pA, scAAV-CBh-αSyn-WPRE3-enSV40pA,
scAAV-Syn-αSyn-WPRE3-enSV40pA, scAAV-CMV/Syn-αSyn-WPRE3-enSV40pA, and
scAAV-PGK-αSyn-WPRE3-enSV40p. All constructs were packaged into AAV5, while
scAAV-CBh-αSyn-WPRE3-enSV40pA was also packaged into AAV2 and 6. Vector
titers were determined using digital droplet PCR in order to ensure future
reproducibility. Titer-matched vectors were unilaterally injected into the
rat substantia nigra and brains were harvested 4 weeks post-injection. Using
tyrosine hydroxylase (TH) immunoreactivity in conjunction with a neural
network/machine learning paradigm we quantitatively assessed the extent of
nigral neurodegeneration. Quantitative near-infrared imaging was performed
to assess transgene expression. We found significant differences in both
α-syn expression and nigral neuron death between the different AAV
constructs. In ongoing experimentation we are assessing the efficacy of
selected constructs in long-term experiments where behavioral deficits are
assessed over time.
This work was supported by the Michael J. Fox Foundation.

## Regenerative Medicine for Spinal Cord Injury Using iPS Cells—from Bench to
Bedside

## N. Nagoshi1, M. Nakamura1, and H. Okano2

## 
1Department of Orthopaedic Surgery, Keio University, Tokyo,
Japan

## 
2Department of Physiology, Keio University School of Medicine,
Tokyo, Japan
We have reported numerous research results with the aim of establishing
regenerative medicine for spinal cord injury (SCI). Regarding cell
transplantation, we analyzed both the efficacy and safety using human
induced pluripotent stem cell (iPSC)-derived neural progenitor cells
(iPSC-NPCs). With respect to safety in particular, we focused on γ-secretase
inhibitor, which inhibits Notch signaling that is necessary for maintaining
the undifferentiated status of stem cells. We administered this drug to
determine the tumorigenicity iPSC-NPCs in vitro. Upon
transplantation of iPSC-NPCs into animal models of SCI, tumor formation was
prevented and motor function was restored. Furthermore, since the
tumorigenicity differs depending on the iPSC lines, we performed genomic /
epigenomic analysis which revealed that expression of tumor suppressor genes
and genes for stabilizing reprogramming was decreased in highly oncogenic
cell lines. To realize safe regenerative medicine, we established a system
for tracking the dynamics of transplanted cells using PET-CT imaging. By
identifying tumorigenesis after transplantation, early intervention such as
surgical excision becomes possible, and the safety of cell transplantation
therapy can be guaranteed. Based on the results of these fundamental
studies, we are steadily preparing for the world’s first clinical study on
SCI using iPSC-NPC transplantation. Clinical iPSCs are supplied from Kyoto
University, and we have already established the method of inducing NPCs with
full evaluation of their efficacy and safety. This clinical research targets
patients at the subacute phase of SCI, and the protocol of this study has
already been approved by the Certified Special Committee for Regenerative
Medicine. After approval from the Health Science Council, we plan to start
this project in 2019.

## Effects of UBE3A Overexpression in Sprague Dawley Rats

## A. W. Nenninger, M. M. Peters, E. J. Weeber, and K. R. Nash

## Department of Molecular Pharmacology and Physiology, University of South
Florida Morsani College of Medicine, Tampa, FL, USA
Angelman syndrome (AS) is a disease characterized by severe intellectual
disability, speech and movement problems, abnormal personality, seizures,
and disrupted long-term potentiation. Interruption in expression or function
of the paternally imprinted UBE3A gene is thought to be the
sole cause of AS. Due to this single gene alteration and lack of changes in
brain structure during development, it is believed that a gene therapy
approach could offer a therapeutic treatment. We have previously shown that
introduction of the full-length UBE3A gene using
adeno-associated virus (rAAV) along with stereotactic surgery recovers the
deficits present in AS mouse and rat models. Although gene therapy is a
promising potential treatment, there is some concern that supraphysiological
levels of UBE3A may cause a separate set of cognitive deficits. Evidence for
this comes from studies of a syndrome closely related to AS known as
chromosome 15q11.2-13.1 duplication syndrome, or Dup15q. This syndrome
results from a duplication of the region containing the UBE3A gene resulting
in increased levels of the UBE3A protein. Therefore, to investigate the
effects of overexpression of UBE3A, hippocampi of 2-month-old Sprague Dawley
rats were inoculated with 1010(vg) rAAV encoding
UBE3A. After aging the rats for 3 months, western
blotting was performed on hippocampal tissue from a subset of animals, which
showed a 33% increase in UBE3A levels in the inoculated group compared with
uninoculated controls with wild-type UBE3A levels. Behavioral tests
including open field, elevated plus maze, y-maze, novel object recognition,
sociability, Morris water maze, rotarod, fear conditioning, and Digi-gait
were performed. No change was found in any behavioral test other than
sociability and some locomotion measures. Electrophysiological
characterization of hippocampal long-term potentiation was also measured and
will be presented. Early data demonstrate that a gene therapy approach using
rAAV-UBE3A will likely not cause detrimental side
effects.

## The Role of Interleukin-6 in Murine Estrogen Deficiency-Associated Cerebral
Aneurysm Rupture

## D. Patel, D. Wajima, S. Hourani, C. Jones, K. Motwani, W. Dodd, H. Z. Fazal,
K. Hosaka, and B. L. Hoh

## Department of Neurosurgery, University of Florida, Gainesville, FL,
USA
Cerebral aneurysms are balloon-like dilations that occur at weakened areas of
vasculature and affect up to 5% of the population. Rupture of a cerebral
aneurysm results in subarachnoid hemorrhage, which has a mortality rate of
approximately 50%. While estrogen deficiency is associated with cerebral
aneurysm rupture, the precise mechanism is unknown. Healthy post-menopausal
women have increased levels of interleukin-6 (IL-6), a cytokine with
pro-inflammatory activity. We hypothesized that IL-6 promotes murine
estrogen deficiency-associated cerebral aneurysm rupture. To investigate the
clinical relevance of our hypothesis, we analyzed IL-6 expression in human
cerebral aneurysm samples compared with superficial temporal artery
controls. Using our previously established model, we induced cerebral
aneurysms in estrogen-deficient female C57BL/6 mice. Two different methods
of inducing estrogen deficiency were studied, 4-vinylcyclohexene diepoxide
(VCD) treatment and bilateral ovariectomy (OVE). Mice were blindly
randomized to selective IL-6 inhibition (IL-6 receptor (IL-6 R) neutralizing
antibody, n=25) or control (isotype-matched IgG,
n=28). Murine cerebral arteries at the circle of Willis
were assessed for aneurysm formation, rupture, and macrophage infiltration.
Results demonstrated that IL-6 was expressed in human cerebral aneurysm
samples but not in superficial temporal artery controls. In both methods of
inducing estrogen deficiency, selective IL-6 R inhibition significantly
decreased cerebral aneurysm rupture compared with control treatments (VCD:
31.6% vs. 70.0%, p=0.026; OVE: 28.6% vs. 65.2%,
p=0.019). Cerebral aneurysm formation was not
significantly affected by IL-6 R inhibition (VCD: 90.4% vs. 95%,
p=1.000; OVE: 84% vs. 82.1%, p=1.000).
Selective IL-6 R inhibition significantly reduced F4/80+ macrophage
infiltration at the circle of Willis compared with controls (7.6±0.8 vs.
22.9±2.5 stained cells / 100 µm2, p<0.001).
Our findings suggest IL-6 promotes murine estrogen deficiency-associated
cerebral aneurysm rupture via enhanced macrophage infiltration at the circle
of Willis. Similar to our previous studies, the mechanisms of estrogen
deficiency affect cerebral aneurysm rupture but do not affect aneurysm
formation.

## Assessing In Vivo Neuronal Reprogramming by Automated Resonance-Scanned Confocal
Stereology

## D. A. Peterson

## Center for Stem Cell and Regenerative Medicine, The Chicago Medical
School, Rosalind Franklin University of Medicine and Science, North Chicago,
IL, USA
Direct in vivo reprogramming of non-neuronal cells in the mature central
nervous system (CNS) into phenotypically correct neurons can be achieved
through forced expression of pioneering transcription factors, such as
neurogenin 2 (Ngn2), neurogenic differentiation 1 (NeuroD1), and
achaete-scute family bHLH transcription factor 1 (Ascl1), that normally act
to direct neuronal fate specification during development. This process
produces a variable population of induced neurons that can be identified
through their expression of reporter genes tied to the induction process and
expression of various neuronal phenotypic markers, requiring detection of
multiple fluorescence labels with resolution by confocal microscopy.
Following in vivo gene delivery of lineage instruction factors, the number
of infected cells and their distribution present some challenges for
accurate quantitation by design-based stereological sampling. Generally too
many cells are infected to directly count with accuracy across histological
sections, arguing for subsampling of the population by stereological
principles. However, the cell density varies widely from the site of
injection to the most distant infected cells. This means that sampling
frequency density must be high to reduce estimator variance to an acceptable
level. Traditional acquisition of confocal stacks is time consuming and
inefficient. The recent availability of resonance scanning confocal
microscopes permits the rapid generation of virtual section data sets.
Efficient sampling design can now follow complete image acquisition of the
histological material. The application of artificial intelligence to
detecting cells with different label combinations within the virtual section
data set makes it possible to automate cell counting if detection criteria
can be achieved. However, cell detection must be combined with stereological
sampling principles to account for sectioning and other artifacts and to
accommodate fractionated sampling. These approaches are appropriate for
other “rare” cell populations, such as grafted cells, and could be extended
to dense cell populations if shown to be efficient.

## Human Neural Stem Cell Transplantation in Chronic Spinal Cord Injury

## K. M. Piltti1,2,3,4, B. J. Cummings1,2,3,4, and A. J.
Anderson1,2,3,4

## 
1Sue & Bill Gross Stem Cell Research Center, University of
California Irvine, Irvine, CA, USA

## 
2Institute for Memory Impairments & Neurological Disorders,
University of California Irvine, Irvine, CA, USA

## 
3Department of Anatomy & Neurobiology, University of
California Irvine, Irvine, CA, USA

## 
4Department of Physical & Medical Rehabilitation, University
of California Irvine, Irvine, CA, USA
Spinal cord injury (SCI) is a devastating, lifelong neurological condition
associated with multiple secondary medical complications, and high economic
and social costs. To date, no established treatment to alleviate the loss of
function after SCI exists. Accordingly, development of new therapeutic
interventions in chronic SCI models is a high priority. Chronic SCI is an
appealing time point for potential therapy, not only due to the large number
of clinical subjects, but also the reduced probability for spontaneous
recovery. In accordance, delayed treatment in clinical trial testing may
yield more reliable safety and efficacy data with lower numbers of subjects.
Our studies have focused on human fetal neural stem cells (hF-NSC), which
represent a multipotent cell population capable of differentiating into
neurons, oligodendrocytes, or astrocytes, and which can integrate into the
central nervous system (CNS). Critically, hF-NSCs have demonstrated safety
and efficacy after delayed transplantation, which is critical to the chronic
SCI patient population. In addition, our data suggest that multiple
variables such as transplant location, cell dose, or vertebral level need to
be taken into consideration while developing clinical cell transplantation
protocols. However, a critical variable for clinical success are the
intrinsic properties of the target stem cell line. Data from multiple
studies suggest that biological activity between individual stem cell lines
is not equal and it can be affected by numerous factors such as in vitro
culture conditions, scale-up, and cell banking. Critically, the current
standard in vitro tests for screening intended clinical cell lines cannot
discriminate stem cell lines with biological activity / in vivo efficacy
from those without. To better understand the intrinsic differences between
the stem cell lines that show in vivo efficacy from those without, we have
derived a series of new CD133-enriched hF-NSC lines including
cGTP/cGMP-compliant cell lines. In vitro characterization suggests that each
new hF-NSC line exhibits stable growth rate, sustained CD133 selection,
multipotency, and responsiveness to migration cues. However, line to line
variations are detectable, highlighting the need to investigate how this
variation is related to in vivo performance, and whether new approaches to
attempt to predict in vivo trauma modifying activity can be developed.

## The Role of eIF5A in TDP-43 Pathology in FTD; The Tip of the Iceberg?

## Z. Quadri1, S. Smeltzer1, F. Zamudio1, A.
Loon1, N. Tirado-Class1, S. Saji1, N.
Stewart1, A. Miller1, Dale Chaput2, D.
Lee1, and M-L. Selenica1

## 
1Department of Pharmaceutical Sciences, College of Pharmacy,
University of South Florida, FL, USA

## 
2Proteomics and Mass spectrometry Core Facility, University of
South Florida, Tampa, FL, USA
TAR DNA-binding protein 43 (TDP-43) is a nuclear RNA/DNA-binding protein that
associates with frontotemporal disorders. The clinical manifestations
include motor neuron degeneration such as that in amyotrophic lateral
schlerosis (ALS) and cognitive decline such as that in frontotemporal
dementia (FTD-TDP-43). FTD remains the second most common form of
early-onset dementia after Alzheimer’s disease (AD). The hallmark of TDP-43
proteinopathy is nuclear loss-of-function and accumulation of nuclear and
cytoplasmic TDP-43 inclusions, which acquire toxic gain-of-function. The
unique post-translational modification of eIF5A, hypusination
(eIF5AhypK50), within the hypusination loop denotes its
activation and cytoplasmic localization where it further interacts with
specific RNA binding proteins. eIF5A is implicated in translational
elongation and translation silencing of certain mRNA in stress granules
(SG). Together with our findings we posit that active eIF5A is positioned as
a stress-response protein. Our data show aberrant increases in enzymes
responsible for hypusination in brain tissue from an AD patient, TDP-43
animal models, and arsenite-induced stress cellular models, suggesting that
aberrant hypusination underlies the progression of the disease. Further, we
show that arsenite-induced stress induces interactions between
eIF5AhypK50 and cytoplasmic TDP-43. We also found that
eIF5AhypK50 binds TDP-43 and SG protein TIA-1 during
pathology and arsenite-induced stress. Importantly, we found that
pharmacological inhibition of hypusination and sited-directed mutagenesis
induces acetylation of eIF5A at lysine 47 (eIF5AacK47), resulting
in significant reduction of phosphorylated and total TDP-43 in the cytoplasm
and SG. We further confirm that potentiation of spermidine/spermine
N1-acetyltransferase 1 (SSAT1) acetylates eIF5A and reduces the TDP-43
phenotype in cellular models. Hence, we argue that post-translational
modifications, specifically hypusination vs. acetylation, increases or
subverts TDP-43 pathology, respectively. We predict that
eIF5AhypK50 regulates TDP-43 fate via several potential
mechanisms, including protein–protein binding properties, increasing TDP-43
cytoplasmic retention or perturbing the nucleocytoplasmic shuttling of
TDP-43 via affecting the nuclear transport machinery. Here, we discuses the
strategies and approaches that we have employed to dissect the mechanism of
action through which eIF5A affects TDP-43 pathology in FTD disorders and
related dementia.

## Intermittent Hypercapnia Training to Improve Respiratory Plasticity Following
Cervical Spinal Cord Injury

## M. L. Randelman1,2, L. V. Zholudeva1,2, T.
Bezdudnaya1,2, H. Muralidharan1, L. Qiang1,
M. A. Lane1,2

## 
1Department of Neurobiology and Anatomy, College of Medicine,
Drexel University, Philadelphia, PA, USA

## 
2Spinal Cord Research Center, College of Medicine, Drexel
University, Philadelphia, PA, USA
Cervical spinal cord injury (SCI) frequently leads to severe respiratory
dysfunction due to damage of the spinal phrenic motor system which controls
the diaphragm—the primary muscle for respiration. While some spontaneous
functional plasticity does occur following cervical SCI, the extent is
limited and diaphragm paresis persists. The goal of this ongoing research is
to test whether a novel activity-based therapy—daily acute intermittent
exposures to hypercapnia—can enhance respiratory plasticity and diaphragm
recovery after cervical SCI. We hypothesized that rehabilitation with this
respiratory-specific activity-based therapy will stimulate anatomical and
functional phrenic plasticity and improve diaphragm function following a
moderate mid-cervical contusion injury in the adult rat. Anatomical
plasticity following injury and treatment was investigated using
transynaptic tracing and immunohistochemistry. Pseudorabies virus (PRV) was
used to retrogradely and transneuronally trace the spinal phrenic circuitry
ipsilateral to injury and assess integration of premotor spinal interneurons
with phrenic motoneurons. Immunohistochemistry and western blot analysis
were performed to assess changes in serotonin (5-HT) and brain-derived
neurotrophic factor (BDNF) expression, and axonal growth, rostral and caudal
to injury. Functional plasticity and respiratory recovery following dAIHc
training was assessed with terminal diaphragm electromyography (dEMG).
Hypercapnia-trained animals showed a greater density of serotonergic axons
within the spinal cord, yet surprisingly had increased BDNF expression
within the medulla, when compared with untreated and air control animals. It
was also found that 2 weeks of dAIHc training resulted in a greater
recruitment of interneurons into ipsilateral phrenic circuitry when compared
with untreated and air controls. Diaphragm EMG of the dAIHc-trained animals
resulted in modest improvement of the ipsilateral and contralateral
diaphragm inspiratory amplitude as well as response to respiratory
challenge. These results therefore suggest that dAIHc is able to promote
plasticity within the phrenic network following cervical SCI.

## Gene Expression, Morphological and Behavioral Changes Associated with a Mouse
Model of Mild Repetitive TBI and Treatment with Activators of Nrf2 and PPARγ
Transcription Factors

## W. A. Ratliff1,2, D. Qubty3, C. M. Smith1,
T. Michaels1, C. G. Pick4, and B. A.
Citron1,2,3

## 
1Laboratory of Molecular Biology, Research & Development,
Department of Veterans Affairs, Bay Pines, FL and East Orange, NJ, VA Health
Care Systems, USA

## 
2Department of Molecular Medicine, University of South Florida
Morsani College of Medicine, Tampa, FL, USA

## 
3Department of Pharmacology, Physiology, and Medicine, Rutgers
New Jersey Medical School, Newark, NJ, USA

## 
4Department of Anatomy and Anthropology, Sackler School of
Medicine, Tel Aviv University, Tel Aviv, Israel
The incidence of traumatic brain injury (TBI) is estimated at 0.5% per year
worldwide, with a much higher frequency among military personnel and
athletes. The majority of TBIs are mild, but these can result in deleterious
cognitive effects for which there is currently no effective treatment. We
have demonstrated improved outcomes in both in vitro and
in vivo models of brain injury following treatment with
tert-butylhydroquinone (tBHQ), an activator of the inflammation-responsive
transcription factor, nuclear factor (erythroid-derived 2)-like 2 (Nrf2),
and downstream neuroprotective factors. Additionally, the peroxisome
proliferator-activated receptor-γ (PPAR-γ) agonist, pioglitazone, has been
shown to have neuroprotective effects in models of neurodegenerative disease
and TBI. To better understand the underlying mechanisms of injury, we tested
mice receiving closed head injuries once per week for 5 weeks along with
potentially synergistic treatment by tBHQ and pioglitazone. At acute and
chronic timepoints, we evaluated gene expression, cognitive changes,
dendritic changes, and immunohistochemistry for microglial changes. mRNA
samples from the ipsilateral hippocampi 1 day post-injury were evaluated.
Our initial examination (4 groups, n=6 per group) indicated
that genes displayed a variety of expression patterns. For example, there
was downregulation of secreted phosphoprotein 1 (SPP1) and growth hormone
(GH) in response to injury, while treatment resulted in a significant
upregulation of these two factors. Conversely, we saw an increase in tumor
necrosis factor receptor subfamily 25 (TNFRSF25) with injury and a
subsequent decrease with treatment. Two months post-injury, Golgi staining
has revealed significant changes in dendritic spines within the hippocampi
of injured mice, which is not present with treatment. Behaviorally, we have
shown that object recognition memory is impaired 2 months following injury
and that this is ameliorated by treatment. Through these approaches, we hope
to better define inflammatory responsive transcription factor signaling
pathways and identify factors that could be targeted to produce
neuroprotection and improve outcomes for TBI patients.

## Research supported by
This study was supported by the Department of Veterans Affairs (Veterans Health
Administration, Office of Research and Development, Rehabilitation Research and
Development (I01RX001520)), the Assistant Secretary of Defense for Health Affairs
through the Congressionally Directed Gulf War Illness Research Program
(W81XWH-16-1-0626), the Florida Department of Health James and Esther King
Biomedical Research Program (4KB14), The Bay Pines Foundation, and the Veterans
Bio-Medical Research Institute.

## Disclaimer
The contents do not represent the views of the Department of Veterans Affairs or the
United States Government and the opinions, interpretations, conclusions and
recommendations are those of the authors and are not necessarily endorsed by the
Department of Defense.

## The Effect of hMSCs on Cell Death Pathways in the Spinal Cord of SOD1G93A
Rats

## M. Řehořová1,2, I. Vargová1,2, S.
Forostyak1,3, E. Syková1,4, and P.
Jendelová1,2

## 
1Czech Academy of Sciences, Institute of Experimental Medicine,
Prague, Czech Republic

## 
2Second Faculty of Medicine, Charles University, Prague, Czech
Republic

## 
3 Prime Cell Advanced Therapy a.s., Brno, Czech Republic

## 
4Slovak Academy of Science, Institute of Neuroimmunology,
Bratislava, Slovakia
The most recent clinical investigations in patients with amyotrophic lateral
sclerosis (ALS) who underwent bone marrow mesenchymal stem cell (hMSC)
transplantation have shown procedural safety and clinical proof of principle
with modest neurological benefits. However, the mechanisms responsible for
this beneficial effect are not fully understood. In this study, we aimed to
investigate the effect of repeated intrathecal applications of hMSCs in a
superoxide dismutase 1 (SOD1) transgenic rat model of ALS. As a delivery
route we chose lumbar puncture and/or intramuscular injection. Finally, we
studied the effect of the applied therapies on apoptosis, necroptosis, and
autophagy. All the animals were behaviorally tested (Grip strength test,
BBB, rotarod), and the tissue was analyzed immunohistochemically, by qPCR
and western blot. All symptomatic SOD1 rats treated with hMSCs (into the
spinal canal or in combination with intramuscular injection) had a
significantly increased lifespan, improved motor activity and reduced number
of TUNEL-positive cells. Moreover, a combined hMSC delivery increased motor
neuron survival, maintained neuromuscular junctions, and substantially
reduced the levels of proteins involved in necroptosis (Rip1, MLKL,
cl-casp8), apoptosis (cl-casp 9), and autophagy (beclin 1). Furthermore,
astrogliosis and elevated levels of Connexin 43 were decreased after
combined hMSC treatment. The repeated application of intramuscular
injections alone improved motor activity; however, this improvement was not
supported by changes at the molecular level. We conclude that a combination
of repeated intrathecal and intramuscular hMSC applications protects motor
neurons and neuromuscular junctions mainly through a reduction of the
necroptosis pathway, which is significantly involved in cell death in rodent
SOD1 model of ALS.
Supported by the Center of Reconstruction Neuroscience – NEURORECON
(CZ.02.1.01/0.0/0.0/15_003/0000419) and LO1309.

## Use of Dendrimer Nanoparticles Encapsulated Curcumin as a Potential Therapy for
Glioblastoma in Mice

## J. Rossignol1,2,4, N. M. Munro1,2,4, M.
Fana2,4, B. Srinageshwar1,2,4, C.
Malkowski1,2, S. Climie1,2, J.
Gallien1,2,4, D. Swanson5, A. Sharma5, and G.
L. Dunbar1,2,3,6

## 
1Field Neurosciences Institute Laboratory for Restorative
Neurology, Central Michigan University, Mount Pleasant, MI, USA

## 
2Program in Neuroscience, Central Michigan University, Mount
Pleasant, MI, USA

## 
3Department of Psychology, Central Michigan University, MI,
USA

## 
4College of Medicine, Central Michigan University, Mount
Pleasant, MI, USA

## 
5Department of Chemistry & Biochemistry Central Michigan
University, Mount Pleasant, MI, USA

## 
6Field Neurosciences Institute, Saginaw, MI, USA
Glioblastoma (GB), a grade-4 astrocytoma, is an aggressive form of brain
tumor with no cure, having high mortality and morbidity rates (12 and 15
months after diagnosis). Most of the anti-cancer drugs do not cross the
blood–brain barrier (BBB). The only treatments for GB are
chemotherapy/radiotherapy, and the average survival is 14.6 months. Previous
studies found increased expression of pro-inflammatory markers in the GB
brain, which results in metastasis and inflammation. Therefore, decreasing
pro-inflammatory signals and cell proliferation are potential targets for
GB. Curcumin (Cur), a natural phytochemical, is known to have
anti-inflammatory, anti-oxidant, and anti-carcinogenic properties and can
cross the BBB; however, it is not water soluble, which makes its delivery
challenging. Some studies use lipid formulation of Cur; however, they were
found to be toxic and to increase inflammation in the brain. Therefore, we
used a generation 4 (G4) surface-modified dendrimer nanoparticle [10% amine
surface (positive charge) and 90% hydroxyl surface (neutral charge), known
as D] encapsulated curcumin (D-ECur) that is water soluble and show
effective release of Cur, having a safety profile in vitro
and in vivo. Moreover, D has a cystamine (Cys) core that
can split to give dendrons facilitating the better release of Cur to the
cells. We used the D-ECur to test the therapeutic effect of Cur and D in
mouse-derived glioblastoma cells lines (Gl261) and in GB mice. The GB mice
were injected with the Gl261 cells to initiate tumor and the D-ECur was
injected into the tumor 1 week later. Our data show that D-ECur (1) are
water soluble; (2) specifically kill GB cells in vitro,
sparing the neurons and glial cells; (3) reduce inflammation in
vitro and in vivo in GB brain; and (4)
increase the survival of the GB mice by ∼25%. The future aspect involves
injecting D-ECur systemically into the GB mice.
Support for this study was provided by the Neuroscience program, the College
of Medicine, the Field Neurosciences Institute, and the John G. Kulhavi
Professorship in Neuroscience at CMU

## Investigating the Role of Serotonergic Hyperinnervation of the Prefrontal Cortex
on Parkinson’s Disease Non-Motor Symptoms

## A. Roux and F. P. Manfredsson

## Department of Translational Science and Molecular Medicine, College of
Human Medicine, Michigan State University, Grand Rapids, MI, USA
Parkinson’s disease (PD) is a common neurodegenerative disease characterized
by the loss of dopaminergic (DA) neurons in the substantia nigra. The gold
standard pharmacological treatment, levodopa (L-DOPA), can compensate for
the reduced striatal DA. However, over time, the drug loses its efficacy and
>90% of treated patients develop a secondary set of aberrant motor
symptoms called L-DOPA-induced dyskinesia (LID). We recently demonstrated
that LID occurs as a result of “false DA neurotransmission” from dorsal
raphe serotonin (5-HT) neurons, which is facilitated by a significant
anatomical reorganization and hyperinnervation of the raphe-striatal
circuitry. Interestingly, L-DOPA is also associated with cognitive symptoms
such as psychosis or hallucinations, implicating an involvement of
additional brain areas. We hypothesize that akin to the role of 5-HT
hyperinnervation in LID development described in striatum, that 5-HT
innervation in the prefrontal cortex (PFC) is responsible for these
non-motor features of PD. Quantification of 5-HT transporter (SERT)-positive
projections indeed demonstrated hyperinnervation in PD versus healthy cases.
Next, we aimed to assess these results in the context of synaptic activity
through 3D reconstruction of SERT projections together with pre- and
post-synaptic markers. Using Huygens deconvolution and Imaris Software we
are performing a volumetric and synaptic analysis of 5-HT projections. Our
data demonstrate that the 5-HT hyperinnervation is associated with
significant “functional” changes such as different composition of 5-HT
synapses. We are determining whether there is any correlation between any of
these histological measures and reported cognitive symptoms as indicated in
the Unified Parkinson’s Disease Rating Scale part 1 (UPDRS1). Our data
suggest that the same hyperinnervation that gives rise to LID is also
present in other areas of the PD brain. It is therefore possible that
additional features of PD are caused by DA release from this circuitry,
providing a novel target for the improved treatment of PD symptoms.

## Subcellular Compartmentalization of Alpha-Synuclein Alters Histone
Post-Translational Modification Patterns and Chromatin State in SH-SY5Y
Cells

## I. M. Sandoval1,2, A. Cole-Strauss1, M.
Nelson1, N. Kuhn1, B. F. Daley1, F. P.
Manfredsson1,2, and T. J. Collier1,2

## 
1Department of Translational Science & Molecular Medicine,
College of Human Medicine, Michigan State University, Grand Rapids, MI,
USA

## 
2Hauenstein Neuroscience Center, Mercy Health Saint Mary’s, Grand
Rapids, MI, USA
It is known that the protein alpha-synuclein (αSyn) plays a crucial role in
Parkinson’s disease (PD), but the mechanisms leading to cell death are still
unclear. The main goal of this project is to determine if localization of
αSyn to the nucleus of dopaminergic (DA) neurons exerts toxicity by altering
histone modification patterns and transcriptional regulation. To identify
epigenetic changes associated with nuclear αSyn we successfully developed
four stable inducible SH-SY5Y cell lines for controlled expression of
wild-type αSyn, αSyn tagged with a nuclear localization signal (αSyn-NLS) or
with a nuclear export signal (αSyn-NES), and blue fluorescent protein (BFP)
as a control. We found significantly increased global histone acetylation
with cytoplasmic αSyn expression, and reduced levels with nuclear αSyn
expression. Using ELISA-based assays we have identified several specific
histone modifications that are selectively affected, including H3K14Ac which
has been reported to be altered in the brain of PD patients. ChIP-Seq
experiments are ongoing to identify genes and pathways affected by these
epigenetic changes. Furthermore, we developed a series of rAAV vectors for
in vivo testing: AAVs expressing αSyn, αSyn-NLS,
αSyn-NES, or BFP, as well as GFP tagged with a KASH domain (nuclear envelope
localization domain) for identification of nuclei of positively transduced
cells. Vectors were delivered directly into the substantia nigra of young (3
months old) rats by stereotaxic injection and histological analysis is
ongoing to determine whether compartmentalization of αSyn (nuclear vs
cytoplasmic) has any differential effects on DA cell death.
Supported by Parkinson’s Disease Foundation (Fellowship PDF-FBS-1634) and
Edwin A. Brophy endowment, Michigan State University

## Viral Overexpression of Nurr1 Induces Severe LID in Resistant Rats and Promotes
Dyskinesia-Like Neuronal Signaling

## R. C. Sellnow1, K. Steece-Collier1,2, F.
Altwal3, I. Sandoval1, M. Benskey1, K.
Tseng3, A. West4, and F. P. Manfredsson1,2

## 
1Department of Translational Science and Molecular Medicine,
College of Human Medicine, Michigan State University, Grand Rapids, MI,
USA

## 
2Mercy Health Saint Mary’s, Grand Rapids, MI, USA

## 
3Department of Anatomy and Cell Biology, University of Illinois
at Chicago, Chicago, IL, USA

## 
4Department of Neuroscience, Chicago Medical School at Rosalind
Franklin University, Chicago, IL, USA
Levodopa (L-DOPA) is the gold standard pharmacotherapy for treating the motor
symptoms of Parkinson’s disease (PD). Unfortunately, chronic treatment with
L-DOPA leads to the inevitable development of L-DOPA-induced dyskinesia
(LID) in the majority of patients. LID has debilitating and disruptive motor
symptoms comprising chorea, dystonia, and hyperkinesia. Much research is
aimed at better understanding LID development. The transcription factor
nuclear receptor related-1 (Nurr1) has been identified by our group, and
others, as being significantly upregulated in the striatum of dyskinetic
rats. Notably, Nurr1 is not normally expressed in the striatum. In the
present study, we sought to characterize whether Nurr1 is a causative factor
in LID expression. To examine this we overexpressed Nurr1 (green fluorescent
protein (GFP) as a control) in the parkinsonian striatum of LID-resistant
Lewis or LID-prone Fischer 344 (F344) rats using rAAV2/5 prior to chronic
treatment with L-DOPA. F344 rats—which are predisposed to developing severe
LID—did not show exacerbated LID in response to Nurr1 overexpression
compared with rAAV-GFP. However, in the LID-resistant Lewis rats, ectopic
overexpression of Nurr1 resulted in the development of severe LID over time.
rAAV-GFP-injected Lewis rats displayed mild LID and no abnormal induction of
striatal Nurr1. This indicates that Nurr1 is a causative agent capable of
inducing LID in otherwise resistant subjects. We further demonstrate that
the ectopic Nurr1 induction associated with LID is dependent on the
activation of striatal D1-type dopamine receptors. Finally, we also
determined that striatal Nurr1 overexpression increases corticostriatal
field potentials and increases firing activity in dopamine-depleted striatal
direct pathway neurons of L-DOPA-naïve rats, mimicking the activity seen in
dyskinetic rats. Together, this research supports Nurr1 as a molecular
driver of LID that is capable of inducing physiological changes required for
these abnormal behaviors to develop.

## Aging Increases Microglia Senescence in the Midbrain Region: A Risk Factor in
Parkinson’s Disease

## F. Shaerzadeh, L. Phan, M. Dacquel, A. Bechtle, W. Hachmeister, J. Lebowitz,
D. Miller, W. Streit, T. Foster, A. Kumar, and H. Khoshbouei

## Department of Neuroscience, University of Florida College of Medicine and
McKnight Brain Institute, JHM Health Science Center, Gainesville, FL,
USA
As highly specialized and dynamic brain-resident macrophages, microglia are
responsible for maintaining tissue homeostasis, neuronal support, and
protection. There is growing evidence to support microglial heterogeneity
within the central nervous system, including midbrain regions containing the
highest number of dopaminergic neurons in the brain. Since aging is the
major risk factor for neurodegenerative diseases, including Parkinson’s
disease (PD), we hypothesized that the ratio of microglia to dopaminergic
neurons, as well as microglial heterogeneity, change with aging in the
substantia nigra pars compacta (SNc) and ventral tegmental area (VTA). To
address this hypothesis, we conducted stereological analyses to measure
age-dependent changes in the numbers of microglia and dopaminergic neurons
in the SNc and VTA of 1-, 6-, 9- and 18-month-old C57BL/J6 male mice. For
quantification of the anatomical features of microglia, we stained coronal
sections of the midbrain with tyrosine hydroxylase (TH) and ionized
calcium-binding adaptor molecule 1 (Iba1), and performed stereological image
analysis. In both brain regions, we found an increased number of microglia
at 18 months, whereas the number of TH+ cells reaches a plateau after 1
month and does not change thereafter. Quantitative morphometry analyses
revealed microglial complexity and the projection area declined with aging
while cell body size increased. Quite surprisingly, the contact sites
between microglia and dopaminergic neurons in both regions increased in aged
mice, suggesting an age-dependent increase in microglial support of
dopaminergic neurons. In conclusion, increases in microglial cell number,
the ratio of microglia to dopaminergic neurons, as well as physical contact
sites, suggest these innate biological mechanisms may compensate for the
age-dependent decline of microglial complexity (senescence) for continued
neuronal support in aging. The morphological microglial heterogeneity
between adjacent dopaminergic regions of SNc and VTA found in our studies
may describe the susceptibility of SNc dopaminergic neurons in
neurodegenerative diseases such as PD.

## In Vivo Delivery of Large Plasmids and CRISPR-Cas9 to Edit GFP Gene Using
Dendrimer Nanoparticles

## B. Srinageshwar1,2,4, M. N. Florendo1,4, N. M.
Munro1,2, B. S. Macdonald1,2, L. Dehart4,
S. Peruzzaro1,2, S. Koneru1,2, S. Baiyasi1,2,
A. Antcliff1,2,4, M. M. M. Andrews1,2,4, D.
Swanson5, G. L. Dunbar1,2,3,6, J. L.
Bakke4, A. Sharma A5, and J. Rossignol1,2,4

## 
1Field Neurosciences Institute Laboratory for Restorative
Neurology, College of Medicine, Central Michigan University, Mount Pleasant,
MI, USA

## 
2Program in Neuroscience, College of Medicine, Central Michigan
University, Mount Pleasant, MI, USA

## 
3Department of Psychology, College of Liberal Arts and Social
Sciences, Central Michigan University, Mount Pleasant, MI, USA

## 
4College of Medicine, Central Michigan University, Mount
Pleasant, MI, USA

## 
5Department of Chemistry & Biochemistry Central Michigan
University, Mount Pleasant, MI, USA

## 
6Field Neurosciences Institute, Saginaw, MI, USA
Dendrimers are 3-dimensional branched nanoparticles having applications in
the field of medicine. The commonly used G4 PAMAM dendrimers with 100% amine
surface (G4-NH2) are highly toxic to cells due to their positive
charged surface. Therefore, it is necessary to modify the dendrimer surface
having 10% -NH2 and 90% hydroxyl group (-OH; G4-90/10), thereby
reducing the total number of positive charges. Our data show that these
surface-modified dendrimers (1) are taken up by neurons and glial cells
in vitro and in vivo; (2) are
non-toxic to cells; (3) can cross the blood–brain barrier (BBB) following
systemic injections; and (4) carry and deliver large plasmids of various
sizes. We have delivered a ∼10 kb plasmid with dendrimer nanoparticles
in vitro and in vivo, which is
currently not possible with the viral vectors. In addition, dendrimers can
carry gene-editing plasmids, including CRISPR-Cas9 plasmids. Current
strategies to deliver CRISPR-Cas9 rely on predominately on viral
transduction, electroporation, and hydrodynamic injection. All of these
systems have severe limitations, largely related to toxicity concerns,
minimal broad efficacy, and plasmid packing size. However, dendrimer
nanoparticles can carry a single large plasmid having multiple components to
be delivered into a single cell, thereby enhancing the efficiency of genome
editing and the ability to target multiple tissues. We have shown, as a
proof-of-concept, that dendrimers deliver CRISPR-Cas9 plasmid (∼10 kb), and
successfully edit green fluorescent protein (GFP) into mCherry in
vitro and in vivo in GFP mice. Overall, we
confirm the properties of our dendrimers and show that we can deliver a
large plasmid having multiple components of CRISPR-Cas9 system, thereby
achieving gene editing. The future aspect involves delivering various
plasmids and gene-editing tools using dendrimers in
vivo.
Support for this study was provided by the Neuroscience program, the College
of Medicine, the Field Neurosciences Institute, and the John G. Kulhavi
Professorship in Neuroscience at CMU

## The Role of rs6265 BDNF SNP on Functional Remodeling of the Parkinsonian Striatum
Following Dopamine Neuron Grafting in CRISPR Knock-in Rats

## K. Steece-Collier1,2, J. A. Stancati1, C. E.
Sortwell1,2, T. J. Collier1,2, I. M.
Sandoval1,2, B. F. Daley1, C. J. Kemp1, M.
F. Duffy1, and N. M. Mercado1

## 
1Department of Translational Science & Molecular Medicine,
College of Human Medicine, Michigan State University, Grand Rapids, MI,
USA

## 
2Hauenstein Neuroscience Center, Mercy Health Saint Mary’s, Grand
Rapids, MI, USA
Up to 40% of the general population possess a single nucleotide polymorphism
rs6265 in the Bdnf gene, which results in diminished
neuronal release of brain-derived neurotrophic factor (BDNF) and
significantly reduces levodopa efficacy in Parkinson’s disease (PD)
patients. BDNF plays a critical role in nigral and striatal neuron
maturation and function. We hypothesize that dysfunctional BDNF is an
unrecognized contributor to the discordant finding of abundant survival of
grafted dopamine (DA) neurons and lack of behavioral efficacy reported in a
subpopulation of PD subjects, and in the development of graft-induced
dyskinesias (GID). To test this hypothesis, we generated a CRISPR knock-in
rat model of the human rs6265 BDNF variant to evaluate the impact of this
risk allele on the function and synaptic integration of new DA terminals in
the parkinsonian striatum. In this study we compared embryonic DA neuron
graft survival, integration, and behavioral efficacy between val68 val
wild-type (WT, “BDNF normal”) and homozygous met68met (“BDNF reduced”)
parkinsonian rats. Rats were rendered unilaterally parkinsonian and primed
with levodopa (12 mg/kg, M-Fr) to induce stable expression of
levodopa-induced dyskinesias (LID), which was the primary behavioral
endpoint for graft efficacy. Amphetamine-induced behaviors served as
secondary endpoints for graft efficacy and assessment of GID. Analyses thus
far indicate that contrary to our hypothesis, the Met68Met subjects show
significantly enhanced graft-derived benefit (i.e.,
amelioration of LID behavior) compared with WT subjects. However, consistent
with our hypothesis, only Met68Met subjects exhibited aberrant GID
behaviors. Post-mortem analyses demonstrate that survival of grafted DA
neurons does not differ between the Val68Val and Met68Met subjects; however,
the Met68Met subjects have significantly more robust neurite outgrowth, with
enhanced presence of varicosities. Ongoing post-mortem analyses will include
quantitative assessment of synapse phenotype and degree of connectivity
between grafted dopaminergic neurites and host neurons.
Supported by Michigan Parkinson Foundation and NIH/NINDS (R01NS105826).

## Role of T Cells in an Alpha-Synuclein Model of Parkinson’s Disease

## M. S. Subbarayan1,2, C. Hudson3, N. Litsky1,
K. Nash2, and P. C. Bickford1,3

## 
1Center of Excellence for Aging and Brain Repair, Department of
Neurosurgery and Brain Repair, University of South Florida Morsani College
of Medicine, Tampa, FL, USA

## 
2Department of Molecular Pharmacology and Physiology, University
of South Florida Morsani College of Medicine, Tampa, FL, USA

## 
3Research Service, James A. Haley Veterans Affairs Hospital
Tampa, FL, USA
Parkinson’s disease (PD) is the second most prevalent movement disorder. It
is characterized by up to 70% loss of dopamine (DA)-secreting neurons and
accumulation of Lewy bodies, deposits composed of α-synuclein (α-syn), in
the remaining DA neurons of the substantia nigra pars compacta (SNpc).
Accumulation of α-syn activates microglia, the immune cells of the central
nervous system (CNS). Microglial over-activation causes inflammation and
subsequently leads to neurodegeneration and tissue destruction. Inflammation
caused by the activated microglia and dendritic cells has been associated
with the pathogenesis of PD and several other neurodegenerative disorders.
Recently, apart from microglia, CD4 and CD8 T cells have been shown to be
recruited to the area of damage where they may either mediate
neurodegeneration or act in a neuroprotective manner. The communication
pattern between T cells, microglia, and dendritic cells in PD patients is
unknown. Previous work has shown that injection of human α-syn into the SNpc
of the brain failed to induce neurotoxicity in MHCII (the marker for
activated microglia) deficient mice, suggesting that T-cell and microglial
communication is necessary for the neurotoxic process. Here, we assessed the
role of T cells in an α-syn model of PD in T-cell-deficient (male athymic
nude) and T-cell-competent (male heterozygous nude) rats. Injection of AAV9
expressing human α-syn unilaterally to the SN of heterozygous nude rats at 3
months of age caused deficits in a cylinder test for paw bias in comparison
to green fluorescent protein (GFP)-treated controls when the rats were
tested 2 months post-injection. On the other hand, nude rats injected with
α-syn showed no deficit in the cylinder test when compared with the
controls. The percentage of tyrosine hydroxylase (TH) positive neurons in
SNpc was significantly lower in α-syn injected T-cell-competent rats when
compared with their T-cell-deficient rat counterparts. These data suggest
that T cells may play a major role in DA neuronal loss and confirm that
T-cell communication with microglia is necessary for α-syn-mediated
neurodegeneration in Parkinson’s disease.

## Acknowledgments
This project is funded by VA MRS I01BX000231 grant.

## Distinct Neuronal Ensembles within the Memory Engram Regulate Memory
Discrimination and Generalization

## X. Sun1,2, M. J. Bernstein1, M. Meng1, S.
Rao1, A. T. Sørensen1, L. Yao3, X.
Zhang3, P. O. Anikeeva1, and Y. Lin1,2

## 
1Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Boston, MA, USA

## 
2SUNY Upstate Medical University, Syracuse, NY, USA

## 
3Beijing Normal University, Beijing, China
Memories of previous experiences affect behavioral responses via balancing
discrimination between different and generalization across similar stimuli.
An imbalance between discrimination and generalization, for example
maladaptive generalization of fear memories, can lead to anxiety disorders
such as posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD) and panic disorder. However,
the cellular and circuit mechanisms underlying these two processes are
largely unknown. Here we show that individual contextual fear memories are
represented in the hippocampal dentate gyrus by multiple functionally
distinct neuronal ensembles defined by the Fos- or
Npas4-dependent transcriptional pathways, and that
these ensembles bi-directionally regulate the discrimination–generalization
balance. The Fos-dependent ensemble promotes memory
generalization and recruits excitatory inputs from the medial entorhinal
cortex, which mediates generalization. The Npas4-dependent
ensemble promotes memory discrimination and recruits inhibitory drive from
local cholecystokinin-expressing interneurons, the activity of which is
required for discrimination. Thus we demonstrate for the first time
functional heterogeneity of the memory engram and uncover novel cellular and
circuit mechanisms regulating the discrimination–generalization balance.
These findings may provide new therapeutic strategies to treat anxiety
disorders.

## Effect of Chronic Neuroinflammation on the Clearance of Macromolecules from the
Rat Brain

## S. Suresh1,2 and K. Jenrow1,2

## 
1Program in Neuroscience, Central Michigan University, Mount
Pleasant, MI, USA

## 
2Field Neurosciences Institute Laboratory for Restorative
Neuroscience, Central Michigan University, Mount Pleasant, MI, USA
Two hypotheses have been proposed to explain the removal of macromolecular
waste from the brain extracellular space (ECS): the classic diffusion model
and the recently proposed ‘glymphatic’ model. Both models propose that
cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) facilitates the clearance of these solutes, albeit
by different mechanisms. We hypothesized that chronic neuroinflammation is
sufficient to impair macromolecular clearance from the brain and may result
in the toxic accumulation of extracellular solutes over time. To test this,
we measured the effect of induced lipopolysaccharide (LPS)-induced chronic
neuroinflammation on the clearance kinetics of two fluorescently tagged
dextran tracers from the rat brain using densitometry and spectrophotometry.
We also assessed its effects on the quantity and distribution of aquaporin 4
(AQP4), glial fibrillary acidic protein (GFAP), and amyloid-beta (Aβ)
proteins within the brain, and behavioral measures of cognitive function.
Relative to controls, neuroinflammation impaired the clearance of these
tracers such that, at corresponding time points, tracer concentrations were
significantly increased in the brain parenchyma and significantly decreased
in blood serum. Consistent with previous reports, chronic neuroinflammation
disrupted AQP4 channel distribution on astrocytic end-feet processes within
the prefrontal cortex and hippocampus; however, this did not impair the rate
of CSF influx into the parenchyma. Rather, consistent with the diffusion
model, we saw a size-dependent influx of tracer into the parenchyma in both
LPS and control groups. Chronic neuroinflammation was also associated with
elevated Aβ in the hippocampus, with punctate Aβ deposits within
perivascular space. Behavioral analysis showed enhanced fear memory and a
trend toward context generalization in the LPS group, both consistent with
chronic inflammation-induced stress. Our results are generally consistent
with the diffusion model of waste clearance from the brain, and demonstrate
that chronic neuroinflammation is sufficient to impair the elimination of
macromolecular solutes from the brain, which over time may result in the
accumulation of toxic peptides such as Aβ, contributing to cognitive
impairment and neuropathology.

## Prolyl Oligopeptidase and its Inhibition on Alpha-Synuclein Toxicity—A
Possibility for Disease-Modifying Therapy for Parkinson’s Disease

## R. Svarcbahs, U. H. Julku, M. Jäntti, and T. T. Myöhänen

## Division of Pharmacology and Pharmacotherapy/Drug Research Program,
University of Helsinki, Helsinki, Finland
In Parkinson’s disease (PD), dopaminergic neurons in the nigrostriatal
pathway degenerate, leading to imbalance in neuronal transmission and
clinical symptoms. Although the causes leading to PD are not completely
known, misfolding and aggregation of alpha-synuclein (aSyn) has been
identified as one of the key players for cellular toxicity in PD. Aggregated
aSyn is the main component for Lewy bodies, and aSyn oligomers that are
formed during the aggregation process can damage cellular organelles while
fibrils can propagate aSyn toxicity by cell-to-cell transfer. Several
factors can increase aSyn aggregation, and one of them is a serine protease,
prolyl oligopeptidase (PREP). We have shown that PREP forms a direct
protein–protein interaction with aSyn, leading to increased aSyn
dimerization and formation of soluble aSyn oligomers in
vitro and in vivo. Strong colocalization
between aSyn and PREP is also seen in post-mortem PD brain. KYP-2047, a
small-molecule PREP inhibitor, modifies this interaction and reduces aSyn
dimerization. Additionally, PREP inhibition increases macroautophagy by
activating protein phosphatase 2A (PP2A) and decreases the levels of aSyn
oligomers in cells and in vivo. That in turn ameliorates
aSyn toxicity in cell culture models, and our study showed that
post-symptomatic 4-week treatment by KYP-2047 restored behavioral deficit,
decreased aSyn oligomers, and halted damages in dopaminergic
neurotransmission in a mouse PD model based on nigral AAV-aSyn injection. To
assess the impact of PREP and its inhibition on aSyn propagation, we used
aSyn pre-formed fibrils (PFFs) with Cy3-tag in a neuronal cell culture.
After exposing cells to PFFs, 2-day incubation with KYP-2047 significantly
reduced intracellular PFFs compared with control, and the same was observed
in PREP knock-out cells, suggesting that PREP inhibition or deletion
improves PFF processing in cells. Therefore, we propose that PREP inhibition
could be a multi-targeting drug therapy having effect on aSyn aggregation,
clearance, and propagation.

## Limited NG2 Glial Tropism of Recombinant Adeno-Associated Viral (rAAV)-Mediated
Gene Delivery for In Vivo Neuronal Reprogramming

## M. Thaqi, E. Reisenbigler, R. Greene, and D. A. Peterson

## Center for Stem Cell and Regenerative Medicine, The Chicago Medical
School, Rosalind Franklin University of Medicine and Science, North Chicago,
IL, USA
Direct reprogramming of cell identity from a glial to neuronal phenotype has
been demonstrated both in vitro and in vivo. The induction of phenotypic
neurons from glial cell populations follows forced expression of pioneering
transcription factors, such as neurogenin 2 (Ngn2), neuronal differentiation
1 (NeuroD1), and achaete-scute family bHLH transcription factor 1 (Ascl1),
that are normally expressed during development to specify neuronal fate.
Viral vectors can be used to deliver reprogramming transcription factors to
glial cells. The efficiency of vector tropism has a major impact on the
feasibility to reprogram a sufficient number of new neurons to achieve a
meaningful functional integration. NG2 glia, also known as oligodendrocyte
progenitor cells (OPCs), represent one cellular population that could be an
ideal target for neuronal induction for repair. NG2 glia, understood to
represent a reserve cell population to replace oligodendrocytes, are
actively dividing in the mature central nervous system (CNS), perform no
known critical neural activity, and respond to injury by proliferation and
subsequent population homeostasis. Previously, we have successfully targeted
and reprogrammed NG2 glia to neurons in vitro and in vivo using retroviral
vectors to target the actively proliferating NG2 cell population. rAAV
vectors are an alternative delivery platform frequently used to achieve
efficient and widespread in vivo gene delivery. However, no systematic
assessment of AAV serotype efficiency in targeting NG2 glia has been
reported. We delivered CMV-eGFP constructs into rat cortex and striatum
(n=3 animals per site) using the following AAV
serotypes: 1, 2, 4, 5, 6, 6.2, 8, 9, rh10, DJ, PHP.s, PHP.B, PHP.eB.
Analysis of infected cell types, 3 weeks post-injection, revealed most
serotypes were substantially neurotropic with tropism for astrocytes also
observed with AAV5 and AAV8. None of these serotypes infected NG2 glia to
any extent. These data suggest that targeting reprogramming constructs to
NG2 glia will require designing new and specific AAV serotypes or utilizing
alternatives to AAV.

## Sequential Combined Treatment of Pifithrin-α and Posiphen Enhances Neurogenesis
and Functional Recovery After Stroke

## F. Turcato,1 P. Kim,1 A. Barnett,1 Y.
Jin,1 M. Scerba,3 A. Casey,1 W.
Selman,1 N. H. Greig,2 and Y. Luo1

## 
1Department of Biochemistry, Genetics and Microbiology,
University of Cincinnati, Cincinnati, OH, USA

## 
2National Institute of Aging, Drug Design & Development
Section, Translational Gerontology Branch, Intramural Research Program,
Baltimore, MD, USA
Although cerebral ischemia can activate endogenous reparative processes, such
as proliferation of endogenous neural stem cells (NSCs) in the
subventricular zone (SVZ) and subgranular zone (SGZ), the majority of these
new cells die shortly after injury and do not appropriately differentiate
into neurons, or migrate and functionally integrate into the brain. The
purpose of this study was to examine a novel strategy for treatment of
stroke after injury by optimizing the survival of ischemia-induced
endogenous NSCs in the SVZ and SGZ. Adult SVZ and SGZ NSCs were grown as
neurospheres in culture and treated with a p53 inactivator, pifithrin-α
(PFT-α), and an amyloid precursor protein (APP)-lowering drug, posiphen, and
effects on neurosphere number, size, and neuronal differentiation were
evaluated. This combined sequential treatment approach was then evaluated in
mice challenged with middle cerebral artery occlusion (MCAo). Locomotor
behavior and cognition were evaluated at 4 weeks, and the number of new
surviving neurons was quantified in nestin creERT2-YFP mice. PFT-α and
posiphen enhanced the self-renewal, proliferation rate, and neuronal
differentiation of adult SVZ and SGZ NSCs in culture. Their sequential
combination in mice challenged with MCAo-induced stroke mitigated locomotor
and cognitive impairments and increased the survival of SVZ and SGZ NSCs
cells. PFT-α and the combined posiphen+PFT-α treatment similarly improved
locomotion behavior in stroke-challenged mice. Notably, however, the
combined treatment provided significantly more potent cognitive function
enhancement in stroke mice, as compared with PFT-α single treatment. Delayed
combined sequential treatment with an inhibitor of p53 dependent apoptosis
(PFT-α) and APP synthesis (posiphen) proved able to enhance stroke-induced
endogenous neurogenesis and improve the functional recovery in stroke
animals.

## Intranasal Administration of Exosomes from Human iPSC-Derived NSCs Enhances
Neural Stem/Progenitor Cell Proliferation and Neurogenesis in the Normal Adult
Hippocampus

## R. Upadhya, S. Attaluri, M. Pinson, J. Xu, B. Shuai, and A. K. Shetty

## Institute for Regenerative Medicine, Department of Molecular and Cellular
Medicine, Texas A&M Health Science Center College of Medicine, Temple
and College Station, TX, USA
Exosomes are tiny extracellular vesicles secreted by cells. Exosomes derived
from stem cells such as mesenchymal stem cells (MSCs) and neural stem cells
(NSCs) have neuroprotective and anti-inflammatory properties. Such exosomes
may also have neurogenic properties. The use of stem cell-derived exosomes
for enhancing brain function in normal and disease conditions is attractive
as they can be harvested in large quantities and characterized. Their small
size makes them particularly amenable for administration to the brain via
relatively non-invasive routes, and also avoids several potential safety
hazards linked with cells such as the risk for tumors. Our previous study
has shown that intranasally administered exosomes can enter virtually all
regions of the forebrain and get incorporated into neurons and microglia
(Castro et al., SFN abstracts, 2017). Here, we examined the neurogenic
property of exosomes generated from human induced pluripotent stem cell
(hiPSC)-derived NSCs. The conditioned media containing NSC-derived exosomes
was first processed as described elsewhere (Kim et al., PNAS, 2016) and
further purified through size exclusion chromatography. The hNSC-derived
exosomes expressed the exosome marker CD63. We administered these exosomes
intranasally to adult (5–6 months old) male rats (∼50 billion
exosomes/nostril, ∼100 billion/rat) and examined NSC behavior and
neurogenesis in the subgranular zone (SGZ) of the hippocampus 14 days after
administration. Measurement of Ki-67 expressing cells in the SGZ revealed
the proliferation of increased numbers of putative NSCs in animals receiving
intranasal (IN) exosomes, in comparison to animals receiving IN vehicle
(p<0.01). Moreover, Ki-67+ cell clusters in the SGZ
of exosome-treated animals were more substantial, more frequent and
comprised a higher number of cells per cluster (p<0.01).
Doublecortin (DCX+) immunostaining also revealed increased numbers of DCX+
clusters containing higher amounts of immature neuroblasts
(p<0.05). Thus, hiPSC-NSC-derived exosomes have
neurogenic properties. These exosomes may be suitable as biologics for
enhancing hippocampal neurogenesis in conditions such as aging and
disease.
Supported by grants from the Department of Defense (A.K.S.) and National
Institutes of Health (D.J.P and A.K.S).

## Maximum Tolerated Dose of Exosomes derived from Mesenchymal Stem Cells via
Intra-arterial Dosing in a Rat Stroke Model

## M. Watanabe1, A. Khan2, J. M. Hare2,3, M.
Perez-Pinzon1,4, A. P. Raval1,4, E. V
Badiavas2,5, and D. R. Yavagal1,2,4

## 
1Department of Neurology, Leonard M. Miller School of Medicine,
University of Miami, Miami, FL, USA

## 
2Interdisciplinary Stem Cell Institute, Leonard M. Miller School
of Medicine, University of Miami, Miami, FL, USA

## 
3Department of Medicine, Leonard M. Miller School of Medicine,
University of Miami, Miami, FL, USA

## 
4Cerebral Vascular Disease Research Laboratories, Leonard M.
Miller School of Medicine, University of Miami, Miami, FL, USA

## 
5Department of Dermatology and Cutaneous Surgery, Leonard M.
Miller School of Medicine, University of Miami, Miami, FL, USA
Cell therapy is emerging as a promising novel therapy for ischemic stroke.
Exosomes are endosomal-origin small-membrane vesicles with a size of 40 to
100 nm in diameter, secreted from many types of cells, for example,
mesenchymal stem cells (MSCs). Exosome-encapsulated transfer of miRNAs
promotes neurite remodeling and functional recovery of stroke in rats. These
data suggest that MSC-generated exosomes enhance the stroke recovery
process. There are some publications showing the efficacy of intravenous
exosome administration for stroke, but only one paper of intra-arterial
exosome therapy for a male rat stroke model without showing the maximum
tolerated dose (MTD). Thus, we are proposing to add intra-arterial exosome
delivery to our current intra-arterial MSCs protocol as a treatment of
stroke for female rats, consistent with STAIR recommendations, with a dose
escalation study. Female ovariectomized Sprague-Dawley rats were exposed to
middle cerebral artery occlusion (MCAo) for 90 min. Rats were treated with
IA-exosomes (IAX; 5ug/0.5 mL) or phosphate-buffered saline (IAPBS) at 1 day
(1D) after MCAo. To test neurological and motor function, the standardized
neurobehavioral test battery and the rotarod test were performed. The mean
duration (in seconds) on the device was recorded from 3 rotarod
measurements. The rats were tested at 7, 15 and 30 days after MCAo. Rats
were sacrificed at 30 days for infarct volume measurement using TTC
staining. Dose escalation from this dose is actively being performed in our
laboratory. There was no neurological worsening or mortality seen in either
treatment group. We observed no difference in infarct
volume/rotarod/neurological scores at 30 days between the 1D IAX group
(n=5) and the IAPBS group (n=5,
p>0.05). No deterioration was detected through IAX.
We have not met MTD now, but will show the result of MTD on site.

## Micro RNA-29b Can Effectively Inhibit Alzheimer’s Disease Symptoms and Maintain
Memory

## L-W. Wu1,2, S-Z. Lin1,3, H-J. Harn1,3, and
Tzyy-Wen Chiou2

## 
1Buddhist Tzu Chi Medical Fundation, Hualien, Taiwan

## 
2Department of Life Science, National Dong Hwa University,
Hualien, Taiwan

## 
3Hualien Tzu Chi Hospital, Hualien, Taiwan
Alzheimer’s disease (AD) is a degenerative disease of the brain; its main
symptoms include amyloid accumulation and hyperphosphorylation of the
protein. We screened the initial efficacy of the drug using induced
pluripotent stem cells (iPSCs) that produce symptoms of AD. Among them,
Butylidenephthalide (EF-005) can effectively reduce the production of
amyloid, total protein and phosphorylated protein in cells at an appropriate
concentration. Using miRNA microarray biochip assays, we found that when
AD-iPSCs were treated with EF-005, miRNA-29b increased significantly. The
literature also pointed out that increased expression of PSEN-1 and 2 genes
causes amyloid production in the brains of Alzheimer’s patients. We
speculate that miRNA-29b can bind to the gene sequence fragment of PSEN and
inhibit protein production. This was confirmed using the C6-C99 cell model
which can produce amyloid protein. The PSEN protein was significantly
decreased after the addition of EF-005, and with direct inhibition of
miRNA-29b, EF-005 will not be able to affect the performance of PSEN
protein. The dual luminescence system demonstrated that miRNA-29b binds to
specific gene segments of PSEN and interferes with gene expression. The gene
transfer mouse-3xTg mice with Alzheimer’s disease were treated with EF-005,
and the changes in amyloid accumulation in the mice brains were traced
through Florbetaben-18F for a long time. After 1 year of tracking, the oral
EF-005 treatment group showed a significant reduction in amyloid protein in
the brain compared with the control group. In electrophysiological
examination of the long-term enhancement of the brain, the treatment group
was also superior to the control group. The learning and memory ability was
measured by the water maze, and the treatment group was also significantly
better than the untreated group. We propose that EF-005 can reduce PSEN
protein by increasing miRNA-29b, thereby reducing the aggregation of
amyloid. Inhibiting excessive accumulation of amyloid in the brain by
promoting miRNA drugs can be a strategy for preventing and treating AD.

## Neural Progenitor Cell Survival and Expression of Parvalbumin and Proenkephalin
in a Jaundiced Rat Model of Kernicterus

## F-C. Yang1, J. L. Vivian2, S. M. Shapiro3,
and J. A. Stanford1

## 
1Department of Molecular & Integrative Physiology, University
of Kansas Medical Center, Kansas City, KS, USA

## 
2Department of Pathology & Laboratory Medicine, University of
Kansas Medical Center, Kansas City, KS, USA

## 
3Division of Child Neurology, Department of Pediatrics,
Children’s Mercy Hospital & Clinics, Kansas City, MO, USA
Neonatal hyperbilirubinemia targets specific brain regions and can lead to
kernicterus. Dystonia in kernicterus is caused by bilirubin toxicity in
primarily GABAergic neurons of the globus pallidus (GP). Targeting GP with
neuronal stem cells to restore damaged cells is a promising approach to
treat dystonia in kernicterus. Our goal was to investigate long-term
survival and development of transplanted medial ganglion eminence (MGE)-like
(MGE is the major embryologic origin of GP neurons) neuronal progenitor
cells (NPCs) in the Gunn rat model of kernicterus. At P10, jaundiced (jj)
Gunn rats were injected with 50 mg or 70 mg/kg of sulfonamide, which
promotes the transfer of bilirubin into brain tissue to cause kernicterus.
jj rats and non-jaundiced (Nj) littermates then received WA09 human
embryonic stem cells differentiated into GABAergic MGE-like NPCs into the
GP. Animals were kept for 3 or 7 weeks post transplantation. Cyclosporine A
(10 mg/kg, sc) was given 1 day before and 3 weeks after surgery; thereafter
it was mixed in drinking water (50 µl/ml). We then conducted
immunohistochemical analyses of brain sections to identify grafted cells and
fibers, and the expression of parvalbumin (PV) and proenkephalin (PENK), the
two most prevalent neuropeptides in the GP, in the graft. We found that
MGE-like NPCs survived and generated various types of fibers in jj brains,
even after hyperbilirubinemia exacerbation. More mature graft cells were
observed in brains of the 7-week group than in the 3-week group. PV-ir
neurons were more abundant and mature 7 weeks after grafting than 3 weeks.
Grafted PENK-ir neurons were observed in vivo for the first
time in both the 3- and 7-week groups. Our results reveal that MGE-like NPCs
survive in kernicterus brain and generate connecting fibers, with a
gradually mature appearance, and express major neuropeptides as in the
normal GP. These results support the feasibility of stem cell therapy in
kernicterus.

## Combining Neural Transplantation with Therapeutic Intermittent Hypoxia to Treat
the Injured Spinal Cord

## L. V. Zholudeva, M. Randelman, R. Dilbarova, M. Caplan, L. Qiang, I. Fischer,
and M. A. Lane

## Department of Neurobiology and Anatomy, College of Medicine, Drexel
University, Philadelphia, PA, USA
There is a growing interest in the use of neural progenitor cells (NPCs) to
repair the injured spinal cord. Despite extensive preclinical research, it
remains unclear as to how donor cells develop, differentiate, and integrate
with host injured circuitry, and if integration can be enhanced and/or
guided using noninvasive means such as activity-based therapy. With a focus
on the phrenic circuit and respiratory dysfunction after cervical spinal
cord injury (SCI), the present work tests the hypothesis that pairing
cellular transplantation with a clinical rehabilitation strategy (daily
acute intermittent hypoxia, dAIH) will enhance neuroplasticity and promote
donor–host connectivity. Cultured NPCs isolated from green fluorescent
protein (GFP) rats yielded neuronal and glial restricted progenitor cells.
While the phenotype of these progenitors is being determined in ongoing
work, excitatory, inhibitory, and modulatory neuronal precursors are known
to be present. These cells were then transplanted into a clinically relevant
cervical (C3/4) contusion injury in adult Sprague Dawley rats, 1 week after
injury. Animals received 4 weeks of dAIH (10 × 5 min exposures to 10% oxygen
intermittent with normoxia, 5 days a week), beginning 1 week
post-transplantation. Donor cells survive, differentiate, and integrate with
the host spinal cord as assessed with transynaptic pseudorabies virus
tracing (PRV) and immunohistochemistry. Respiratory training resulted in
significantly enhanced donor–host connectivity to ipsi- and
contralateral-to-injury phrenic circuit, compared with untrained transplant
recipients. At least a subset of these newly integrated donor spinal
interneurons are cholinergic. Preliminary data suggest the underlying
mechanism for directing donor cell outgrowth toward phrenic inter- and
motoneurons is in part mediated via brain-derived neurotrophic factor (BDNF)
expression within the cervical spinal cord. Transplant recipients, with and
without dAIH training, showed greater muscle (diaphragm) recovery than
vehicle-controls, as measured by terminal electromyography. Interestingly,
transplant and dAIH training recipients demonstrated a greater ability to
respond to hypoxic but not hypercapnic respiratory challenge. Ongoing
experiments are focused on identifying donor neural phenotypes that become
connected to ipsi- and contralateral-to-injury host circuitry. These
experiments suggest that rehabilitative strategies such as dAIH may be an
effective way for enhancing donor cell outgrowth and connectivity.

## Acute Treatment of a Hypothermic Compound Attenuates Psychological Deficits
Chronically Developed in Mice with a Focal Ischemic Stroke

## Z. Weiwei1,2, W. Ling1, Y. S. Ping1,2

## 
1Department of Anesthesiology, Emory University School of
Medicine, Atlanta, GA, USA

## 
2Center for Visual and Neurocognitive Rehabilitation, Atlanta
Veterans Affairs Medical Center, Decatur, GA, USA
Stroke is one of the leading causes of disability in the world and around 30%
of patients develop psychological liabilities, such as post-stroke
depression (PSD) and post-stroke anxiety. Basic and translational research
on psychological disorders after stroke is limited. A stroke mouse model
with a focal ischemic stroke in the sensorimotor cortex was used in our
study, which showed sensorimotor functional deficits several days after
stroke. The mice underwent spontaneous recovery in the adhesive removal test
and corner test in 2–4 weeks. However, in our study, these animals gradually
developed depressive/anxious behaviors 4 weeks after stroke and deteriorated
until 8 weeks post-surgery in a series of behavioral examinations, such as
the forced swim test, tail suspension, sucrose preference, and the open
field and water maze tests. Altered neuronal plasticity, suppressed
brain-derived neurotrophic factor (BDNF) and oxytocin signaling, and
disturbed dopamine regulation were detected in the prefrontal cortex (PFC)
of these stroke animals at 6–8 weeks post-surgery. Antidepressants are
common clinical treatments for PSD; however, their efficacy is far from
satisfactory. Emerging evidence has shown that therapeutic hypothermia is a
promising acute protective therapy after stroke; meanwhile, its effect on
post-stroke psychological symptoms has rarely been examined. We have
developed a pharmacological hypothermia treatment using neurotensin receptor
1 (NTR1) agonists and demonstrated brain protective effects against stroke
and traumatic brain injury (TBI). In the present investigation, we inspected
the potential antagonism of acute post-stroke treatment using the
hypothermic drug HPI363 on chronic psychological disorders in a mouse model
of stroke. In stroke mice that received 6 h hypothermic treatment of HPI363
acutely after stroke, depressive and anxious phenotypes were noticeably
attenuated at 6 weeks after stroke, accompanied by restored BDNF and
oxytocin signaling. Our data suggest that an acute hypothermia treatment
induced with PIH363 has a delayed benefit of attenuating chronically
developed post-stroke psychological disorders in mice.

## Acknowledgments
Arizona Biomedical Research Commission (ADHS14-082982) grant and Intramural funds
from the University of Arizona to LM, and the McKnight Brain Research
Foundation.

## Extending Cord Blood to Regenerative Therapies for the Brain

## Joanne Kurtzberg, MD1,2,3

## 
1Director, Marcus Center for Cellular Cures

## 
2Director, Carolinas Cord Blood Bank

## 
3Director, Pediatric Blood and Marrow Transplant Program
Studies in children with selective inborn errors of metabolism have shown
that cord blood cells, administered intravenously after myeloablative
therapy, engraft in the brain. DUOC-01, a cord blood derived cellular
therapy that promotes myelination, is undergoing testing to augment standard
umbilical cord blood treatment in children with leukodystrophies. These
observations led us to hypothesize that cord blood cells might also have
efficacy treating patients with acquired brain injuries. Clinical studies to
date have been performed to demonstrate safety and efficacy of intravenous
infusions of autologous cord blood in babies with hypoxic ischemic
encephalopathy, young children with cerebral palsy, congenital hydrocephalus
and autism, and adults with acute ischemic stroke. Further development of
these therapies using allogeneic cord blood products can provide access to
these therapies for all.

## Learning Objectives

The history and evolution of cord blood banking and transplantation
Quality measures of cord blood units
New clinical applications for cord blood therapies

## Human iPSC-Derived Corticospinal Neuronal Grafts To Repair Cervical Spinal Cord
Injury

## Vanessa Doulames, James Weimann and Giles W Plant

## Department of Neurosurgery, Stanford University Stanford CA 94304
Traumatic spinal cord injuries (SCIs) at the cervical-level sever
corticospinal tract axons disrupt the motor circuit responsible for
voluntary movement and pose both an immediate and long-term burden on the
patient and health care system. Whereas the predominant amount of grafts in
preclinical trials are comprised of undifferentiated and uncharacterized
neural progenitor cells, our laboratory has developed a well-characterized
human induced pluripotent stem cell-derived corticospinal motor neuron
(iPSC-CSMN) transplant relay system to treat cervical SCI. Herein, human
iPSCs underwent a directed differentiation towards a CSMN fate and were then
implanted in immunodeficient nude rats following a C5 unilateral hemisection
injury. Cells were phenotypically characterized and monitored within the
host corticospinal tract following implantation for growth, migration,
synapse formation, and effect on the injury. Additionally, anatomical
changes were correlated with extent of functional recovery. At 12-32 weeks
post transplantation, iPSC-CSMN grafts survived, integrated, did not
proliferate or migrate, extend axons long distances, reduce inflammation and
lesion size, allowed for serotonergic and corticospinal tract axon
innervation, and led to significant improvements in forelimb function.
Further investigation is underway to understand supraspinal innervation of
the CSMN grafts and examining how these fully differentiated iPSC-CSMN
grafts respond to chronic SCIs. Elucidating how to better integrate
transplanted cells into the host neural circuitry to repair and restore
function is a future path of investigation.
Funded by Wings for Life, International Spinal Research Trust (UK), Eileen
Bond Neuroscience Fund, Dennis Chan Neuroscience fund DoD, and NIH.