3327cllCell TransplantationCell TransplantSAGE PublicationsPMC6041886604188660418862985519710.1177/0963689718765742ASNTR 2018 Abstracts
162018274682682–7221672018© The Author(s) 2018This article is distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons
Attribution-NonCommercial 4.0 License (http://www.creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc/4.0/) which
permits non-commercial use, reproduction and distribution of the work
without further permission provided the original work is attributed as
specified on the SAGE and Open Access pages (https://us.sagepub.com/en-us/nam/open-access-at-sage).statusreleaseddisplay-pdfyesis-olfnois-manuscriptnois-preprintnois-journal-matternois-scannednois-retractednoIssue date 2018 Apr.

## Presidential Symposium: Technologies Enabling Brain Repair

## M. Modo1,2,3

## 
1McGowan Institute for Regenerative Medicine, University of
Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA, USA 2Department of Bioengineering,
University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA, USA

## 
3Department of Radiology, University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh,
PA, USA
Brain damage leads to irreversible behavioral deficits. Understanding the
biology of neural dysfunction and loss defines the environment within which
we aim to promote repair. The brain has a limited capacity to repair itself
and understanding this process allows us to conceptualize novel therapeutic
interventions that can abate or reverse these impairments. The delivery of
these approaches is commonly highly dependent on technological developments.
For the past 25 years, the American Society for Neural Therapy and Repair
(ASNTR) has been at the forefront of this effort to define the biological
environments and to devise strategies to modify these to promote recovery.
Our meeting this year will showcase the latest technological developments to
reshape disturbed neurovascular environments in experimental model systems
to translational efforts in clinical trials. With many clinical trials
progressing these exciting treatments, new hope for recovery can be provided
to patients and their families.

## Regenerative Properties of Mesencephalic Astrocyte-derived Neurotrophic Factor in
Developing Neurons

## M. Airavaara

## Institute of Biotechnology, University of Helsinki, Finland
Mesencephalic astrocyte-derived neurotrophic factor (MANF) is an endoplasmic
reticulum (ER) resident protein with neuroprotective actions. We have
recently studied its role in mammalian neurogenesis and found that MANF is
highly expressed in neural stem cells (NSCs) in both the developing and
adult brain. We discovered that endogenous or exogenous MANF does not affect
NSC proliferation. However, MANF-deficient cells have deficits in neurite
extension when they are differentiated into neurons in vitro, and
mechanistic studies indicate that impaired neurite extension is preceded by
reduced de novo protein synthesis and constitutively activated unfolded
protein response (UPR) pathways. We then studied the role of MANF in
neuronal migration and found that both endogenous and exogenous MANF
regulates neuroprogenitor cell (NPC) migration in vitro, and MANF
overexpression in subventricular explant cultures increased signal
transducer and activator of transcription 3 (STAT3) phosphorylation. Using a
rat model of cortical stroke, intracerebroventricular injections of MANF did
not affect cell proliferation in the subventricular zone, but promoted
migration of NPCs towards the corpus callosum and infarct boundary on day 14
post-stroke. Long-term infusion of MANF into the peri-infarct zone increased
the recruitment of NPCs in the infarct area. In conclusion, our data
demonstrate beneficial effects of MANF and a neuroregenerative activity that
facilitates differentiation and migration of NPCs, thereby increasing
recruitment of NPCs into the stroke-affected cortex.

## Activation of the Cytomegalovirus (CMV) Promoter: Considerations for Viral
Vector-Mediated Transgene Expression

## S. M. Bäck,1 A. M. Dossat,1 Y.-H. Chen,2,3
Y. Wang,3 and B. K. Harvey1

## 
1Intramural Research Program, National Institute on Drug Abuse,
National Institutes of Health, Baltimore, MD, USA

## 
2Department of Life Science, Fu Jen Catholic University, New
Taipei City, Taiwan

## 
3Center for Neuropsychiatric Research, National Health Research
Institutes, Zhunan, Taiwan
The transcriptional promoter of the cytomegalovirus (CMV) immediate early
genes has been extensively exploited in mammalian vectors used for in vitro
and in vivo transgene delivery. Transcriptional activation by the CMV
promoter is dependent on the presence of certain cellular transcription
factors, several of which are known to be altered in response to cellular
stimuli. However, the stability of transgene expression in model systems
that depend on coincident stimuli has not previously been addressed. Here we
monitored the activity of the CMV promoter in an adeno-associated virus
(AAV) vector used to deliver constitutively secreted
Gaussia luciferase (GLuc) to primary cortical neurons
in vitro and the rat striatum in vivo. Using a technique for repeated
sampling of cerebral spinal fluid (CSF) in rats, we observed a
methamphetamine-dependent increase in GLuc activity in the CSF. We also
found a methamphetamine-dependent increase in GLuc mRNA
levels in the striatum where the AAV-GLuc was injected. In cultured primary
cortical neurons, glutamate and kainic acid treatment caused an increase in
the CMV-dependent expression of GLuc following viral transduction. Our
results suggest that variations in transgene expression can serve as a
confounding factor in studies where stimulatory substances are applied on
biological systems that use the CMV promoter to drive transgene expression.
However, the observed effect on CMV-driven transcription could also be
exploited for therapeutic purposes. As an example, we provide evidence that
methamphetamine administration induces upregulation of a previously
characterized antibody designed to mediate virus-based passive immunization
against methamphetamine toxicity, leading to higher concentrations of the
antibody in the presence of its antigen (methamphetamine). Collectively, our
data emphasize that the use of a CMV promoter for constitutive, stable viral
vector-mediated transgene expression should be empirically evaluated in the
model system.

## Diffusion Tensor Imaging to Assess Brain Injury and Repair Post
Neurointerventional Stem Cell Therapies in a Canine Model of Stroke

## K. E. Bates, L. Guada, P. Pattany, K. Ramdas, G. Saigal, K. Atchaneeyasakul,
and D. R. Yavagal

## University of Miami Leonard M. Miller School of Medicine, Miami, FL,
USA
White matter damage is an important factor for functional outcome in ischemic
stroke. To assess the microstructural changes in the white matter tracts
(WMTs), more sensitive methods than conventional magnetic resonance imaging
(MRI) is needed. Diffusion tensor imaging (DTI) produces a three-dimensional
representation depicting the integrity of WMTs by capitalizing on the
restricted diffusion of water in intact WMTs. These diffusion patterns
change when axons are damaged or shortened, as in ischemia. From the
diffusion tensor image, the fractional anisotropy (FA) can be computed. We
hypothesize that canines receiving intra-arterial (IA) delivery of
mesenchymal stem cells (MSCs) 48 h post-reversible middle cerebral artery
occlusion (rMCAo) will show improved FA values than controls at 30 days
post-stroke. Mongrel hounds (n=7), aged 12–36 months, were
included in this pilot study. rMCAo was achieved by a detachable helical
ultra-coil over 35–80 min. IA-MSCs or saline were infused 48 h post-stroke
into the ipsilesional carotid artery. DTI-MR images were obtained pre-IA
delivery and at 15 and 30 days. FA values of the right and left hemisphere
corticospinal tracts (CSTs) were determined. Diffusion tensor tractography
(DTT) allowed for visualization of the CSTs. Blinded neurological
evaluations of canines were also performed. We observed a higher average
change in the FA values from IA delivery to 30 days post-stroke in
MSC-treated canines compared with controls. We observed thicker and more
organized CSTs in the DTT of MSC-treated canines. FA improvement correlated
with improved neurological outcomes of MSC-treated canines. Histological
analyses may confirm microstructural changes in the WMTs. DTI/DTT imaging
can be used to assess white matter ischemic brain injury and recovery, which
may better predict functional outcomes. DTI/DTT imaging may also shed light
on the mechanisms by which ischemia impacts axons and how stem cell
therapies facilitate repair.

## Large Animal Modeling and Brain Imaging in Translational Stroke Research

## J. Boltze1,2 and H. Barthel3

## 
1Department of Translational Medicine and Cell Technology,
Fraunhofer Research Institution for Marine Biotechnology, Lübeck,
Germany

## 
2Institute for Medical and Marine Biotechnology, University of
Lübeck, Lübeck, Germany

## 
3Department of Nuclear Medicine, University Leipzig, Leipzig,
Germany
Large animal models are particular suitable for use with state-of-the-art
imaging technologies. This allows for late-stage translational research on
diagnostic and therapeutic paradigms in scenarios closely mimicking clinical
reality. Hybrid positron emission tomography (PET)/magnetic resonance
imaging (MRI) is a new-generation imaging technology with great potential to
improve both clinical and experimental brain diagnostics, and we have
utilized this technology in combination with an ovine stroke model. Here, we
share results and insights from selected research programs. A sheep model of
middle cerebral artery occlusion was used. A wide spectrum of PET tracers
such as 15O-H2O to quantify cerebral blood flow or
18F-fluorodeoxyglucose (FDG) to quantify cerebral glucose
consumption can be utilized with this model. A fully integrated 3 Tesla
PET/MRI Siemens mMR system was available, allowing for anatomical
investigation of acute and chronic stroke lesions. This combination was used
to (i) develop a novel technique for non-invasive measurement of arterial
input function, (ii) challenge the classical perfusion-diffusion mismatch in
MRI using a parallel series of trials in sheep and patients, and (iii)
investigate therapeutic effects of inhalative nitric oxide (iNO). Using
post-hoc PET/MRI coregistration, a technology to obtain an arterial input
function non-invasively by analyzing time-of-flight MR angiography data has
been developed. The method was successfully applied in sheep and humans.
Performing acute stroke imaging in the hybrid PET/MRI system, we were able
to provide initial evidence for a lack of accuracy of the
perfusion-diffusion mismatch concept to describe the ischemic penumbra in
MRI in both sheep and human patients. We were further able to show that
inhaled iNO can preserve parts of the ischemic penumbra in acute stroke. iNO
application does not lead to severe side effects (e.g. blood pressure
decrease) and is well controllable, suggesting its future use in the
pre-hospital environment. Although logistically challenging and just
emerging, combining large animal research with cutting-edge imaging
technologies has fostered our translational stroke research program. The
setup allows investigation of pathophysiological and biochemical processes.
It is reasonable to speculate that this translational tool box can also help
to investigate transplantation strategies to treat stroke such as
application of biomaterials together with regenerative cell populations. Our
talk also provides examples on how such research could be organized and
conducted, including most important challenges and opportunities.

## Cerebral Dopamine Neurotrophic Factor: Advances in Clinical Development

## S. Booms, J. Koskinen and H. J. Huttunen

## Herantis Pharma Plc, Espoo, Finland
Cerebral Dopamine Neurotrophic Factor (CDNF) is a member of a novel family of
unconventional neurotrophic factors. CDNF protects midbrain dopaminergic
neurons and restores motor function in several rodent and primate models of
Parkinson’s disease (PD). A novel therapy for PD is currently being
developed based on intracerebral infusion of recombinant human CDNF protein
(rhCDNF). Previous failures in neurotrophic factor clinical trials have
provided important information on how to improve brain infusion of
therapeutic proteins. Characteristics and location of infusion catheters,
infusion protocol and the distribution properties of the therapeutic protein
are among the key determinants of the efficacy of an intracerebral
neurotrophic factor therapy. As a neurosurgical procedure is required for
implantation of a drug delivery system (DDS) capable of intermittent
intracerebral protein drug delivery, the first-in-human study with rhCDNF
will be carried out in PD patients, not in healthy volunteers. This phase
I–II clinical study [ClinicalTrials.gov
identifier: NCT03295786] will enroll 18 patients with idiopathic PD of
moderate severity. A crossover clinical study design, including a placebo
group, will be used for assessment of safety and tolerability of the
treatment, as well as for preliminary assessment of rhCDNF’s effects on
motor function (Unified Parkinson Disease Rating Scale; UPDRS) and
dopaminergic function in the nigrostriatal pathway (positron emission
tomography (PET) with dopamine transporter (DAT) tracer). In addition, data
will be collected on the safety and functionality of the DDS. First PD
patients were implanted with the DDS in November 2017 and dosed with rhCDNF
in January 2018. Challenges related to late preclinical and pharmaceutical
development of rhCDNF-based therapy as well as regarding the clinical study
design will be discussed.

## Proteasome-Targeted Nanobodies Alleviate Pathology in a Synuclein-based
Parkinson’s Disease Model

## D. Chatterjee,1 M. Bhatt,1 D. Butler,2 E. De
Genst,3 C. Dobson,3 A. Messer,2 and J. H.
Kordower1

## 
1Department of Neurological Sciences, Rush University Medical
Center, Chicago, IL, USA

## 
2Regenerative Research Foundation, Neural Stem Cell Institute,
Rensselaer, NY, USA

## 
3University of Cambridge, Department of Chemistry, Cambridge,
UK
Parkinson’s disease (PD) is a synucleinopathy with a significant loss of
dopaminergic neurons in the substantia nigra (SN) and abrogation of
dopaminergic tone along the nigrostriatal pathway. Therapeutics designed to
target α-synuclein (α-syn) aggregation may be critical in halting the
progression of pathology in PD patients. Nanobodies are single-domain
antibody fragments that can be expressed intracellularly and specifically
bind to target regions critical for protein accumulation. Nanobody fusion
with a proteasome-targeting proline-glutamic acid-serine-threonine rich
(PEST) motif can modulate monomeric concentrations of aggregate proteins
while maintaining aptamer stability. Here we aimed to validate and compare
the in vivo therapeutic potential of gene therapy delivery of two
proteasome-directed nanobodies selectively targeting α-syn in a synuclein
overexpression-based PD model: VH14×PEST (non-amyloid component region) and
NbSyn87×PEST (C-terminal region). Stereotaxic injections of adeno-associated
virus 5 (AAV5)-α-syn into the SN were performed on Sprague-Dawley rats that
were sorted into three cohorts based on their pre-operative behavioral
testing (cylinder test and stepping test). Rats were treated with unilateral
SN injections of vectors for VH14×PEST, NbSyn87×PEST, or injected with
saline 3 weeks post-lesion. Post-mortem assessments of the SN showed both
nanobodies markedly reduced the level of phosphorylated-Serine129 α-syn
labeling relative to saline-treated animals. VH14×PEST showed considerable
maintenance of striatal dopaminergic tone in comparison with saline- and
NbSyn87×PEST-treated animals as measured by tyrosine hydroxylase
immunoreactivity (optical density), dopamine transporter immunoreactivity
(optical density), and dopamine concentration (high performance liquid
chromatography; HPLC). Microglial accumulation and inflammatory response,
assessed by stereological density of ionized calcium-binding adapter
molecule 1 (Iba-1)-labeled cells, was modestly increased in
NbSyn87×PEST-injected rats but not in VH14×PEST- or saline-treated animals.
Both nanobody constructs significantly improved stepping test performance,
with the NbSyn87×PEST-treated group also showing improvement in cylinder
test compared with the saline-treated group, although there was pronounced
variability among individual animals. These data show novel in vivo
therapeutic efficacy of vector-delivered intracellular nanobodies targeting
α-syn misfolding and aggregation in synucleinopathies such as PD.

## Brain Repair via In Situ Astrocyte-to-Neuron Conversion

## G. Chen

## Department of Biology, Pennsylvania State University, University Park,
PA, USA
Glial scar is widely associated with brain and spinal cord injury, stroke,
glioma, and neurodegenerative disorders such as Alzheimer’s disease.
Reactive glia initially exert a neuroprotective role but later form a glial
scar to inhibit neuroregeneration. Currently, there is no effective way to
reverse the glial scar back to neural tissue. We have recently developed an
innovative in vivo cell conversion technology to directly convert reactive
glial cells into functional neurons inside the mouse brain. This is achieved
through in vivo expression of a single neural transcription factor Neuronal
Differentiation 1 (NeuroD1) in the reactive astrocytes in injured mouse
brain or Alzheimer’s disease mouse model. Our in vivo cell conversion
technology makes use of internal glial cells to regenerate new neurons with
90% conversion efficiency, making it possible for the first time in history
to reverse glial scar back to neural tissue. Such an internal cell
conversion method will avoid cell transplantation and immune rejection. More
importantly, our recent study in a stroke model demonstrated that in vivo
neuroregeneration efficiency can be as high as 100 times that of the
internal regeneration capability in the cerebral cortex after injury, an
unprecedented efficiency in regenerative medicine. We have further
discovered a cocktail of small molecules that can directly convert cultured
human astrocytes into functional neurons, paving the way for a potential
drug therapy for human brain repair. We have also successfully converted
reactive glial cells into neurons using NeuroD1 in nonhuman primate brains,
making an important step towards future clinical trials.

## Dopamine Release in the Nucleus Accumbens is Altered Following Traumatic Brain
Injury

## Y. H. Chen,1 Y.-H. Chiang,2 and B. J.
Hoffer3

## 
1Department of Neurological Surgery, Tri-Service General
Hospital, National Defense Medical Center, Taipei, Taiwan

## 
2Department of Neurological Surgery, Taipei Medical University,
Taipei, Taiwan

## 
3Department of Neurological Surgery, Case Western Reserve
University School of Medicine, Cleveland, OH, USA
Mild-to-severe traumatic brain injury (TBI) is frequently associated with
prolonged dysfunction of reward circuitry, including motivation and
salience, which suggests alterations of dopamine (DA) processing within the
core and shell of the nucleus accumbens (NAC). Using fast-scan cyclic
voltammetry in a rodent model of traumatic brain injury, we found that
stimulus-evoked DA release is distinct in the core and shell of the NAC,
with the shell being less responsive to tonic stimulation and more sensitive
to the number of pulses when phasic stimulation is applied. Exposure to TBI
was associated with major changes in both release and reuptake of DA in both
the core and shell of NAC, with greater changes seen in the core. These
alterations evolved over time, becoming most severe 1–2 weeks after injury
with subsequent recovery, and the extent and progression of these
abnormalities was correlated with severity of injury. Taken together, these
data support behavior and anatomical studies suggesting the NAC core and
striatum may serve parallel functions, whereas the shell is distinct. These
data offer a unique window on how different neurological systems respond to
TBI and may help explain affective and cognitive changes that are seen.

## Nogo Receptor-1 Regulates Post-Traumatic Cognitive, Motional, and Emotional
Behaviors in Mice

## Y.-H. Chiang,1,2,3 J.-H. Lai,1,2,3 T. E.
Karlsson,4 J. C.-C. Wu,1,2,3 C.-Z.
Huang,1,2,3 Y.-H. Chen,1,2,3 S.-J.
Kang,1,2,3 B. J. Hoffer,5 L. Olson,4 and
K.-Y. Chen3,6

## 
1Department of Surgery, College of Medicine, Taipei Medical
University, Taipei, Taiwan

## 
2Department of Neurosurgery, Taipei Medical University Hospital,
Taipei, Taiwan

## 
3Center for Neurotrauma and Neuroregeneration, Taipei Medical
University, Taipei, Taiwan

## 
4Department of Neuroscience, Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm,
Sweden

## 
5Department of Neurosurgery, Case Western Reserve University,
School of Medicine, Cleveland, OH, USA

## 
6Graduate Institute of Neural Regenerative Medicine, College of
Medical Science and Technology, Taipei Medical University, Taipei,
Taiwan
Traumatic brain injury (TBI) is a major public health issue involving the
lesioned central nervous system. Among all the TBIs, ∼75–90% are mild TBIs
(mTBIs) and can cause various physical, cognitive, emotional, and
psychological-related symptoms. However, there is currently no efficacious
treatment for mTBI. Although some clinical signs and symptoms of mTBI
resolve within the first few months after injury, recovery is slow and
frequently incomplete, and many patients continue to manifest prolonged or
even permanent neurocognitive dysfunction, with lasting changes in
cognition, motor function, and personality that may contribute to
significant disability. Little is known about the mechanisms of recovery
after a mTBI. If synaptic plasticity plays a significant role in the
recovery, the plasticity regulating Nogo signaling system is likely to be
involved. To test this, based on the finding that Nogo receptor 1 (NgR1)
mRNA levels are rapidly downregulated in activated neurons, we used a mouse
with inducible overexpression of a NgR1 transgene (Tg) in forebrain neurons,
leading to impaired memory and cognition, and reduced dendritic spine
density and dendrite complexity. We hypothesized that the inability to
downregulate NgR1, inhibiting structural synaptic plasticity, would impair
recovery from mTBI. To determine the role of NgR1 on cognitive, motion and
emotional regulation after mTBI, we divided the wild-type mice and NgR1-Tg
mice with doxycycline or not into six groups with or without weight-drop
induced mTBI. Results show NgR1-Tg mice with doxycycline were more
functional than NgR1-Tg mice without doxycycline after mTBI on balance,
learning memory, cognition and anxiety. In addition, the NgR1-Tg mice after
mTBI were worse than those with suppression of NgR1 for cognitive, motion
and emotional aspects. These results support our hypothesis, and suggest
that pharmacological measures to dampen Nogo-NgR1 signaling, might have
beneficial effects.

## Cerebral Organoids as a Novel Source of Dopaminergic Neuron Progenitors for
Cell-Based Treatment of Parkinson’s Disease

## M. Chrostek,1 A. T. Crane,1 A. Vegoem,2,3 B.
Lindborg,2,3 T. D. O’Brien,2,3 and W. C.
Low1,3

## 
1Department of Neurosurgery, University of Minnesota,
Minneapolis, MN, USA

## 
2Department of Veterinary Population Medicine, University of
Minnesota, Minneapolis, MN, USA

## 
3Stem Cell Institute, University of Minnesota, Minneapolis, MN,
USA
Tissue organoids grown from human induced pluripotent stem cells (hiPSCs)
offer a novel source of dopaminergic neural progenitors which could be used
in cell-based therapies to treat Parkinson’s disease (PD). We have developed
cerebral organoids from hiPSC cultured in Cell-Mate 3D hydrogel matrix in E8
medium. Over 8 weeks of growth in vitro, immunostaining of the cerebral
organoids revealed cell markers characteristic of the developing midbrain,
forkhead box A1 (FOXA1), LIM homeobox transcription factor 1 alpha (LMX1A),
activated leukocyte cell adhesion molecule, nuclear receptor related 1
protein (NURR1), and orthodenticle homeobox 2 (OTX2), as well as markers for
dopaminergic cells including paired-like homeodomain transcription factor 3
(PITX3), dopamine transporter (DAT), and tyrosine hydroxylase (TH).
Organoids were dissociated into a single-cell suspension for transplantation
into the striatum of immunosuppressed 6-hydroxydopamine (6-OHDA) lesioned
rats and unlesioned controls. Functional recovery was assessed every 2 weeks
using the amphetamine-induced rotation task. Transplantation of cerebral
organoids into 6-OHDA lesioned rats demonstrated varying degrees of
functional recovery. After 8 weeks following transplantation, neither group
displayed adverse effects and histological analysis revealed no
tumorigenicity from the transplanted organoids. Immunostaining of the
transplanted brains detected the presence of human cells using the STEM121
antibody, indicating engraftment and survival of the transplanted cells.
Immunostaining also revealed the presence of myelin basic protein co-labeled
with STEM121, indicating the presence of a surviving oligodendrocyte lineage
among the transplanted cells. Future immunostaining to characterize the
engrafted cells is underway. These results demonstrate that cerebral
organoid-derived cell preparations can survive transplantation and produce
functional improvements in 6-OHDA-lesioned rat models of PD. Future studies
will interrogate the heterogeneity of cerebral organoids for markers
associated with successful engraftment, including engrailed homeobox 1
(EN1), E26 transformation-specific variant 5 (ETV5), canopy fibroblast
growth factor signaling regulator 1 (CNPY1), paired box gene 8 (PAX8), and
Sprouty receptor tyrosine kinase signaling antagonist 1 (SPRY1).

## An iPSC-Based Platform for Investigating Idiopathic Parkinson’s Disease

## M. J. Corenblum,1,2 A. Annadurai,1 K.
Shrestha,3 and L. Madhavan1,2,4

## 
1Department of Neurology, University of Arizona, Tucson, AZ,
USA

## 
2Center for Innovation in Brain Science, University of Arizona,
Tucson, AZ, USA

## 
3Graduate Interdisciplinary Program in Applied Biosciences,
University of Arizona, Tucson, AZ, USA

## 
4Evelyn F McKnight Brain Institute, University of Arizona,
Tucson, AZ, USA
Human induced pluripotent stem cells (iPSCs) are proving to be a valuable
source of patient cells for generating neural phenotypes relevant to
Parkinson’s disease (PD). Here we characterize iPSCs, as well as
iPSC-derived midbrain dopamine (DA) neurons derived from the skin
fibroblasts of late-onset idiopathic PD subjects. Specifically, we
comparatively analyzed the survival, differentiation, morphology, and
alpha-synuclein protein expression, in cells obtained from idiopathic PD and
age-matched control (AMC) subjects. Our data indicate that the iPSCs from PD
subjects had lower viability rates, and a reduced capacity to generate
neurons when induced to differentiate via a floorplate dual-mothers against
decapentaplegic homolog (SMAD) inhibition method. At day 42
post-differentiation, although the efficiency of tyrosine hydroxylase
positive (TH+) DA neuron generation did not differ between the PD
and AMC DA cultures, the efficiency of production of G protein-activated
inward rectifier potassium channel 2-positive (GIRK2+) TH neurons
(A9 DA neurons) was lower in the PD cultures. Furthermore, the morphology of
DA neurons in the PD cultures appeared altered in that the cells displayed a
smaller soma size, reduced number of neurites, lower neurite arborization,
and shorter neurite lengths, compared with DA neurons in AMC cultures. In
addition, it was found that the expression of the PD-relevant protein,
alpha-synuclein, was higher in the DA neurons obtained from PD subjects than
AMC cells. Our current studies are further extending these findings by
examining the redox, mitochondrial, and electrophysiological profiles of the
iPSC-derived PD and AMC DA neurons. In conclusion, our study develops an
iPSC-based model that captures a phenotype relevant to the study of
idiopathic PD, as well as biomarker and therapeutic testing.

## Mechanisms of Age-Related Cognitive Decline

## G. P. Cortese,1 A. Olin,2 K. O’Riordan,3 R.
Hullinger,4 and C. Burger1,4

## 
1Department of Neurology, University of Wisconsin-Madison Medical
Sciences Center, Bardeen, Madison, WI, USA

## 
2College of Letters and Science, University of Wisconsin,
Madison, WI, USA

## 
3Department of Pharmacology & Therapeutics, Biotechnology
(Watts) Building, Trinity College, Dublin, Ireland

## 
4Neuroscience Training Program, University of Wisconsin-Madison,
WI, USA
Currently, few molecular targets have been identified to treat age-related
memory disorders such as mild cognitive impairment during normal aging, or
Alzheimer’s disease. We identified an isoform of the Homer1
gene, Homer1c that plays an important role in age-related
learning. Our goal is to understand the molecular mechanisms of age-related
learning and memory formation by studying the role of
Homer1c in age-related cognitive decline. Environmental
enrichment (EE) preserves cognition in the senescent brain. Although humans
with high cognitive activity have a lower risk for Alzheimer’s disease,
little is known concerning mechanisms giving rise to the functional benefits
of EE. Rodent models of aging have been used to study the effects of
environmental enrichment on cognition in normal aging and neurodegenerative
disease. EE enhances performance in multiple well-established behavioral
tasks, including the Morris water maze which measures spatial memory, and
memory for objects and odors. Both spatial and object/odor memory declines
with age in humans. In order to understand the molecular pathways involved
in enhanced cognition and synaptic plasticity in EE in aged rats, we exposed
aged rats to three different housing conditions: EE, socially enriched (SE),
or standard housing (SC). We found that aged rats exposed to 1 month of EE
exhibit enhanced learning and memory in the Morris water maze and novel
object recognition behavioral tasks. Moreover, we showed that EE rats
perform significantly better than SE or SC rats in the radial-arm water
maze, and display enhanced metabotropic glutamate receptor-dependent
long-term potentiation (mGluR-LTP). Enhanced hippocampal function results
from activity-dependent upregulation of mGluR5, Homer1c,
and phospho-p70S6 kinase. These findings suggest a potential mechanism by
which EE benefits overall cognition in the aging brain.

## Zika Virus as an Oncolytic Agent in Human and Murine Malignant Gliomas

## A. T. Crane,1,2 M. Shiao,2 J. P. Voth,2 C.
Sipe,2 S. Vaid,2 C. J. Bierle,3 M. R.
Schleiss,3 V. D. Krishna,4 M. C. Cheeran,4
and W. C. Low2, 5

## 
1Minnesota Craniofacial Research Training Program, University of
Minnesota, Minneapolis MN, USA

## 
2Department of Neurosurgery, University of Minnesota, Minneapolis
MN, USA

## 
3Department of Pediatrics, University of Minnesota, Minneapolis
MN, USA

## 
4Department of Veterinary Population Medicine, University of
Minnesota, Minneapolis MN, USA

## 
5Stem Cell Institute, University of Minnesota, Minneapolis MN,
USA
Patients with malignant brain tumors have limited options; the survival rate
for grade IV glioblastoma multiforme is 5% at 5 years after the initial
diagnosis. The emergence of Zika virus (ZKV) to the status of public health
emergency led to increased funding towards mechanisms of ZKV-related
microcephaly. Our data suggest that ZKV infection of fetal brain induced
increased expression of autophagy and apoptosis-related genes. Given the
similarities between neural stem cells and glioma stem cells, we sought to
determine if ZKV is a viable therapeutic option for malignant gliomas.
Characterization of in vitro cultured human and murine glioma cell lines
demonstrate expression of putative receptors for ZKV entry. Analysis of the
kinetics of infection and active viral replication in glioma cell lines
through the plaque-forming assay reveal variable kinetics in ZKV infected
cells; murine gliomas are relatively resistant to ZKV replication while
highly passaged human gliomas are highly amenable to ZKV propagation and
virus-induced lysis. To interrogate ZKV as an oncolytic agent in vivo, we
induced brain tumors in immunocompetent C57BL/6 J mice through
transplantation of the murine GL261 glioma cell line within the striatum
followed immediately by injection of ZKV at the same coordinates. At all
three concentrations tested, ZKV did not significantly prolong the overall
survival of tumor-bearing mice, relative to untreated tumor-bearing mice. We
next sought to determine if ZKV can be used in conjunction with
immunotherapies. Our lab previously developed a vaccine immunotherapy in
which ex vivo cultured tumor cells are irradiated then infused into
tumor-bearing mice which modestly extended overall survival. In the current
study, we induced brain tumors in C57BL/6 J and immunodeficient non-obese
diabetic-severe combined immunodeficient (NOD-SCID) mice. Mice in the
treatment condition were immediately injected with ZKV at the same
coordinates. At 3, 7, and 14 days following brain tumor induction, mice were
subcutaneously infused with irradiated GL261 tumor cells previously infected
with ZKV. We observed an increase in overall survival of immunocompetent
treated mice with roughly half of all treated mice surviving long-term.
These long-term survivors were re-challenged with tumor cells and the immune
response was analyzed using flow cytometry. Relative to age-matched
tumor-bearing controls, we observed increases in activated microglia and
infiltrating T-lymphocytes in the brain of treated tumor-bearing mice. These
results suggest that ZKV acts as an adjuvant, signaling an immune response
to the infected tumor cells in the brain.

## Delivery of a Zinc Finger Artificial Transcription Factor for
Ube3a Reactivation via Mesenchymal Stem Cells in Angelman
Syndrome

## P. Deng,1,2 U. Beitnere,2 B. Pyles,2 H.
O’Geen,2 J. A. N. M. Halmai,1 J. Carter1,
S. Carter,1,2 J. A. Nolta,1 D. J. Segal,2 and
K. D. Fink1,3

## 
1Stem Cell Program and Institute for Regenerative Cures,
University of California, Davis Health Systems, Sacramento, CA, USA

## 
2Genome Center, MIND Institute, and Biochemistry and Molecular
Medicine, University of California, Davis, CA, USA

## 
3Department of Neurology, University of California, Davis Heath
Systems, Sacramento, CA, USA
Angelman Syndrome (AS) is a genetically inherited neurodevelopmental disorder
characterized by impaired cognitive development, lack of speech, seizures,
and motor ataxia. The genetic cause for AS is usually due to a de novo
deletion of the maternal ubiquitin protein ligase E3A
(Ube3a also known as E6AP) gene in the
chromosome 15q11-q13 region. Additionally, brain-specific postnatal
imprinting of the intact paternal Ube3a gene results in
complete loss of Ube3a in mature neurons due to the
presence of a long antisense transcript driven by the neighboring small
nuclear ribonucleoprotein polypeptide N (SNRPN) upstream reading frame
(SNURF)/SNRPN promoter. Our group has previously shown reactivation of the
paternally silent Ube3a gene in the brains of the E6-AP
adult AS mouse following intra-peritoneal injection of a Krüppel-associated
box (KRAB)-fused Zinc Finger (referred to as S1 K) protein targeted towards
the Snurf/Snrpn promoter – effectively silencing expression
of the antisense transcript. As an alternative delivery method, we have
engineered artificial transcription factor (ATF)-secreting bone
marrow-derived mesenchymal stem cells (BM-MSCs) following lentiviral
reprogramming. Presently, we have engineered mouse BM-MSCs to secrete S1 K
as confirmed by uptake into Neuro2a cells with MSC-S1 K conditioned media
via fluorescent microscopy. Incubation of MSC-S1 K conditioned media with
E15.5 E6-AP: yellow fluorescent protein (YFP) AS mouse primary neurons
demonstrated significant reactivation of YFP-fused Ube3a as
compared with a scramble Zinc Finger MSC (MSC-SR6) and non-transduced MSC
(MSC-NT) 48 h post-treatment. We then bilaterally transplanted 250,000 MSCs
from each treatment type into their respective treatment arms (MSC-S1 K,
MSC-SR6, MSC-NT) into 8-week-old E6-AP: YFP mice. We observed significant
reactivation of silent Ube3a via immunohistochemistry (IHC)
and Western blotting for YFP expression in the hippocampus, cerebellum, and
cortex as compared with the MSC-SR6 and MSC-NT treatment groups, 3 weeks
post-transplantation. Future experiments will evaluate improvement of
phenotypic outcome measures in the E6-AP mouse. Currently, we report the
first-in-its-kind use of MSCs as a delivery platform for genetic modifiers
in disease.

## Mutant Allele Knockdown in the YAC128 Transgenic Mouse Model of Huntington’s
Disease Using an Artificial Transcription Factor

## P. Deng,1,2 J. A. N. M. Halmai,1 I. M.
Sandoval,3,4 F. P. Manfredsson,3,4 D. J.
Segal,2 J. A. Nolta,1 and K. D. Fink1,5

## 
1Stem Cell Program and Institute for Regenerative Cures,
University of California Davis Health Systems, Sacramento, CA, USA

## 
2Genome Center, MIND Institute, and Biochemistry and Molecular
Medicine, University of California, Davis, CA, USA

## 
3Department of Translational Science and Molecular Medicine,
College of Human Medicine, Michigan State University, Grand Rapids, MI,
USA

## 
4Mercy Health Saint Mary’s, Grand Rapids, MI, USA

## 
5Department of Neurology, University of California Davis Health
Systems, Sacramento, CA, USA
Huntington’s disease (HD) is an autosomal dominant neurodegenerative disorder
characterized by the presence of a misfolded mutant
Huntingtin (muHTT) protein. Reduction of this protein
via antisense oligonucleotide (ASO) therapies are now in clinical trials,
however the current clinical approach targets both the normal and mutant
Huntingtin allele. We have previously shown
allele-specific silencing of the muHTT transcript in patient-derived
fibroblasts via transcriptional activator-like effectors (TALEs) by
targeting a single nucleotide polymorphism that is highly associated with
the mutant allele. Furthermore, we have demonstrated significant reduction
of the muHTT (approximately 50%) and an observable reduction of the muHTT
protein following unilateral striatal injection of the TALE into transgenic
HD mice. In this study we examine the use of an adeno-associated virus (AAV)
as a putative delivery vehicle for our therapeutic TALE transgene in the
YAC128 transgenic HD mouse model. We have executed a longitudinal study
evaluating AAV9-TALE for distribution of the TALE, duration of transgene
expression over the course of 3 months, duration of mutant allele silencing,
and attenuation of HD-related neuropathology and behavioral phenotypes.
Identification of a potent, widespread delivery vehicle and assessment of
the long-term duration of expression and effect of our therapeutic transgene
will be vital in the evaluation of our TALE as a viable therapeutic for
HD.

## Characterization of the Effects of Conditioned Medium Derived from Endothelial
Progenitor Cells on Cultured Striatal Neuronal Stem Cells

## S. Di Santo, S. Seiler, and H. R. Widmer

## Department of Neurosurgery Research Laboratory and Regenerative
Neuroscience Cluster, University of Bern and University Hospital Bern, Bern,
Switzerland
There is growing evidence that stem and progenitor cells exert regenerative
actions by means of paracrine factors. Moreover, impairment of vascular
tissues in the brain is known to be involved in the pathogenesis of
neurodegenerative disorders. In line with these notions we recently
demonstrated that endothelial progenitor cell (EPC)-derived conditioned
medium (CM) substantially increased the viability of brain microvascular
cells. In the present study we aimed to investigate whether EPC-CM supports
striatal progenitor cell function and/or survival. For the preparation of
EPC-CM, mononuclear cells were isolated from the peripheral blood of healthy
human donors and consequently cultured under hypoxic conditions (1.5%
O2) to stimulate the secretion of growth factors. Chloroform
extraction and protein K treatment experiments were performed to narrow down
key effectors of EPC-CM-mediated effects. The specific protein kinase B
(AKT) inhibitor LY294002 and the extracellular signal-regulated kinase (ERK)
inhibitor PD98059 were used to analyze for the involvement of these
signaling pathways in the effects of EPC-CM. The effects of EPC-CM were
monitored by immunocytochemical analysis for γ–amino butyric acid (GABA). We
observed that primary cultures from fetal rat embryonic (E14) ganglionic
eminence treated with EPC-CM demonstrated a significant increase in
GABA-immunoreactivity (ir) cell densities. Inhibition of the AKT and ERK
pathways suppressed the EPC-CM dependent increase in GABA-ir cell numbers.
Similarly, proteolytic digestion (protein K) and lipid extraction
(chloroform) significantly reduced the effects of EPC-CM. Importantly,
EPC-CM displayed neuroprotection against 3-nitropropionic acid (3-NP)
induced toxicity. These findings demonstrate that EPC-derived paracrine
factors substantially promote survival and/or differentiation of striatal
progenitor cells by activating AKT and ERK signaling cascades. Furthermore,
our results suggest the activity of EPC-CM to support cultured striatal
progenitor cells involves proteinaceous factors and lipidic factors. A
deeper characterization of EPC-CM constituents might represent a cell-free
approach to explore novel strategies for the treatment of neurodegenerative
diseases.

## Kainic Acid and Glutamate Induce Endoplasmic Reticulum Calcium Depletion in
Primary Cortical Neurons

## A. M. Dossat, L. V. Fortuno, and B. K. Harvey

## Molecular Mechanisms of Cellular Stress and Inflammation Unit, National
Institute on Drug Abuse, Intramural Research Program, National Institutes of
Health, Baltimore, MD, USA
The endoplasmic reticulum (ER) is a cellular compartment responsible for the
folding and maturation of newly synthesized proteins; which functions as an
intracellular store for calcium. The calcium concentration in the ER and the
extracellular space are approximately 1000-fold higher than the cytosol and
each compartment serves as a source of calcium for the cytosol. Calcium ions
play an essential role in many functions, including cell-to-cell
communication, synaptic plasticity, and cell survival. Our lab developed a
bioluminescent reporter of ER calcium homeostasis, known as a secreted ER
calcium monitoring protein (SERCaMP). This reporter enables longitudinal
monitoring of ER calcium from a single biological sample. ER calcium
homeostasis is essential for cellular function and health, and is
compromised in several neurological disorders, including epilepsy. Epilepsy
is characterized by unpredictable seizures caused by excessive neuronal
activity. The contributions of extracellularly-sourced calcium to the
neuronal activity associated with epilepsy are well established, however,
the role of ER-sourced calcium in epilepsy pathology remains to be
delineated. We induced an experimental epilepsy-like hyperexcitability in
primary cortical neurons by administration of kainic acid (KA) or glutamate.
We measured SERCaMP in the extracellular and intracellular compartments to
examine the impact of epileptogenic agents on ER calcium homeostasis. We
found that KA and glutamate significantly increased extracellular SERCaMP 24
h after treatment, which is consistent with impairment in ER calcium
homeostasis. There was an increase in intracellular levels of SERCaMP,
suggesting impairment in the secretory pathway of the cells or an increase
in the transcriptional activity of our promoter following this treatment.
Overall, our results indicate that these epileptogenic agents deplete ER
calcium and support a role for ER calcium dysregulation in the pathology
associated with epilepsy-like neuronal activity. Further studies will
examine the ability of ER calcium stabilizing compounds to mitigate the
excitotoxic effects of epileptogenic agents.

## Lewy Body-Like Alpha-Synuclein Inclusions Trigger Reactive Microgliosis Prior to
Nigral Degeneration

## M. F. Duffy,1 T. J. Collier,1,2 K. C. Luk,3
M. G. Tansey,4 K. L. Paumier,5 J. R.
Patterson,1 D. L. Fischer,1 N. K.
Polinski,1 C. J. Kemp,1 J. J. Chang,4 J. W.
Howe,6 and C. E. Sortwell1,2

## 
1Department of Translational Science and Molecular Medicine,
Michigan State University, Grand Rapids, MI, USA

## 
2Mercy Health Hauenstein Neuroscience Medical Center, Grand
Rapids, MI, USA

## 
3Center for Neurodegenerative Disease Research, Department of
Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, University of Pennsylvania Perelman
School of Medicine, Philadelphia, PA, USA

## 
4Department of Physiology, Emory University School of Medicine,
Atlanta, GA, USA

## 
5Department of Neurology, Washington University, St. Louis, MO,
USA

## 
6Department of Biomedical Sciences, Grand Valley State
University, Allendale, MI, USA 
It remains unclear whether neuroinflammation contributes to, or is merely a
secondary consequence of nigrostriatal degeneration in Parkinson’s disease.
Our lab has characterized the accumulation of phosphorylated alpha-synuclein
(α-syn; pSyn) intraneuronal inclusions and nigrostriatal degeneration
following intrastriatal injection of sonicated α-syn preformed fibrils
(PFFs) into rats. The time course of inclusion formation in this model
offers the distinct advantage that nigral inclusions precede dopamine neuron
loss by several months, allowing for evaluation of neuroinflammation prior
to and following degeneration. To examine the neuroinflammatory signature,
rats received unilateral intrastriatal injections of mouse α-syn PFFs or
vehicle (phosphate-buffered saline; PBS) and cohorts of rats (total
n=114) were euthanized at monthly intervals up to 6
months. pSyn inclusions in the substantia nigra pars compacta (SNpc) were
most abundant at 2 months post-injection (p.i.). We observed a significant
decrease in ipsilateral tyrosine hydroxylase immunoreactive (TH-ir) neurons
at 5 and 6 months p.i. compared with controls (p ≤ 0.027).
At 2 months, increases in microglial soma size (∼20%) and in thickness, and
number of processes was observed in the SN of PFF-injected rats compared
with controls (p<0.02). Major histocompatibility
complex-II immunoreactive (MHC-IIir) microglia were observed in the
ipsilateral SN in both α-syn PFF and PBS control rats at all time points.
Significantly higher numbers of MHC-IIir microglia were observed in the SN
of α-syn PFF-injected rats compared with controls at months 2, 4 and 5
(p<0.006) with the highest number of MHC-IIir
microglia observed in the SN 2 months p.i. (p<0.02).
Significantly fewer MHC-IIir microglia were observed at months 5 and 6, the
interval of SNpc neuron loss. To examine whether neuroinflammation in this
model is associated with changes in inflammatory cytokine levels in the
periphery, a separate cohort of male Fischer344 rats
(n=120) received unilateral injection of mouse α-syn PFFs
or vehicle (PBS), and the cerebral spinal fluid (CSF) and plasma were
collected. Preliminary analysis suggests dysregulation of several
inflammatory cytokines prior to, and following nigral degeneration.
Collectively, our results show that Lewy body-like α-syn inclusions trigger
disturbances in local microglia months prior to loss of nigral dopamine
neurons.

## Preclinical Evaluation of iPSC-Derived Midbrain Dopaminergic Neurons for
Parkinson’s Disease

## M. E. Emborg,1,2,3,4, Y. Tao,5 S. C.
Vermilyea,1,2 J. Metzger,1.3 S. Phillips,1
H. Resnikoff,1 A. Johnson,1 C. Boettcher,1 K.
Brunner,1 C. Erickson,1 V. Bondarenko,1 M.
Olsen,4 W. Block,4,6,7 B. Christian,4,5 M.
Zammit,4 J. Holden,4 and S.-C. Zhang1,5,8

## 
1Preclinical Parkinson’s Research Program, Wisconsin National
Primate Research Center, Madison, WI, USA

## 
2Neuroscience Training Program, University of Wisconsin, Madison,
WI, USA

## 
3Cellular and Molecular Pathology Training Program, University of
Wisconsin, Madison, WI, USA

## 
4Department of Medical Physics, University of Wisconsin, Madison,
WI, USA

## 
5Waisman Center, University of Wisconsin, Madison, WI,
USA

## 
6Department of Radiology, University of Wisconsin, Madison, WI,
USA

## 
7Department of Bioengineering, University of Wisconsin, Madison,
WI, USA

## 
8Department of Neuroscience, University of Wisconsin, Madison,
WI, USA
The possibility of replacing lost dopaminergic nigral neurons in Parkinson’s
disease has been a tantalizing goal for the field of brain repair.
Investigators have relied on nonhuman primate studies to provide insight on
the feasibility, safety, and efficacy of the approach, methods of cell
collection, preparation, and viability, as well as ideal brain targets.
Aiming towards clinical translation, our interdisciplinary team has
developed protocols for generating human and nonhuman primate induced
pluripotent stem cells (iPSCs) and subsequent differentiation into midbrain
dopaminergic (mDA) neurons. We have demonstrated that autologous
iPSC-derived mDA neurons can successfully integrate in the Parkinsonian
monkey brain. Lastly, we have optimized methods of intracerebral cell
delivery, applying real-time intraoperative magnetic resonance imaging
(RT-IMRI) for improved accuracy and replicability. We have applied these
methods to evaluate the effects of autologous iPSC-derived mDA neurons in
1-methyl-4-phenyl-1,2,3,6-tetrahydropyridine (MPTP)-induced hemiparkinsonian
rhesus monkeys. After 24 months from intrastriatal cell delivery, we found
positive graft-induced functional effects by motor behavioral outcome
measures and in vivo positron emission tomography (PET) with
11C-dihydrotetrabenazine. As a next step towards improved cell
replacement, we used the site-specific genome editing method clustered
regularly interspaced short palindromic repeats (CRISPR) to engineer iPSC
lines to carry the excitatory (modified human M3 muscarinic (hM3Dq)
receptor) or inhibitory (modified human M4 muscarinic (hM4Di) receptor) form
of designer receptors exclusively activated by designer drugs (DREADDs). At
12 months post RT-IMRI grafting of iPSC-derived mDA-DREADDs, PET with the
radioligands 11C-clozapine and 11C-raclopride showed
changes in radioligand uptake associated with the administration of the
designer drug clozapine-N-oxide or clozapine. Overall, our ongoing studies
in nonhuman primates suggest that the combination of improved methods of
producing and accurately delivering iPSC-derived mDA neurons hold promise
towards the clinical application for brain repair in Parkinson’s
disease.

## Intracellular Calcium Leads to α-Synuclein Aggregation and Release in
Dopaminergic Cells

## D. Erdengiz1 and K. A. Maguire-Zeiss2

## 
1Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Georgetown
University Medical Center, Washington DC, USA

## 
2 Department of Neuroscience, Georgetown University Medical
Center, Washington DC, USA
Sporadic and genetic forms of synucleinopathies like Parkinson’s disease
share invariant pathological hallmarks including loss of neurons,
intracytoplasmic eosinophilic proteinaceous inclusions enriched in
α-synuclein (αSyn) called Lewy bodies and neurites, and increased microglial
activation. αSyn is a 140 amino acid protein that misfolds and aggregates
into oligomeric species which are considered pathogenic. Recently, research
suggests that αSyn pathology might spread through a prion-like mechanism and
contribute to the development of synucleinopathies. However, what remains to
be determined is the biochemical process behind release and transfer.
Dopaminergic pacemaker neurons in the substantia nigra pars compacta show
elevated levels of intracellular calcium, ([Ca2+]i)
due to a high density of L-type voltage-gated calcium channels (VGCCs). αSyn
can interact with calcium ions and form oligomers via its acidic-residue
rich, calcium-binding domain at the C-terminus. Previous research showed
that, αSyn aggregation takes place in the presence of high
[Ca2+]i within a neuroblastoma cell line, which is
attenuated after treatment with VGCC blockers. Therefore, we hypothesize
that increased neuronal calcium levels will lead to the release of αSyn.
Employing a dopaminergic doxycycline-inducible (DOX) αSyn-overexpressing
cell line (MN9Dsyn) we demonstrated that 96 hours of DOX treatment led to
maximum intracellular αSyn expression and release. Monomeric and oligomeric
conformers were detected in conditioned media. We also showed that MN9Dsyn
cells express CaV1.2, the channel pore-forming subunit of L-type VGCCs.
Furthermore, fluorescent calcium-imaging experiments, revealed a significant
increase (p<0.0001) in peak amplitude fluorescence
(ΔF/Fo) in αSyn-overexpressing cells compared with
vehicle-treated cells. Taken together, our studies show that αSyn
overexpression leads to an increase in [Ca2+]i, which
in turn augments αSyn aggregation and release. Next steps will be to
investigate the effect of VGCC blockers on αSyn release, as they represent
potential therapeutics for synucleinopathies.

## Introducing a Novel Method of Intravascular Adeno-Associated Virus-Mediated Gene
Delivery

## H. Z. Fazal,1 K. Hosaka,1 F. P.
Manfredsson,2 and B. L. Hoh1

## 
1Department of Neurosurgery, University of Florida, Gainesville,
FL, USA

2Department of Translational Science and Molecular Medicine,
College of Human Medicine, Michigan State University, Grand Rapids, MI,
USA
Adeno-associated virus (AAV) has shown therapeutic potential as a viral
vector in various studies of gene therapy. However, research on its use in
targeting intravascular cells in a localized manner is lacking. We introduce
a novel method to deliver various AAV serotypes intravascularly and examine
their efficiency in transducing cells of the murine carotid artery. The
study aimed to examine the transduction efficiency of AAV-mediated gene
delivery in cells of the murine carotid artery both with and without a fully
formed aneurysm. Results of infection were visualized with green
fluorescence protein (GFP) reporter gene. Naïve murine carotid artery or
experimentally-induced murine carotid aneurysm was ligated distally and
proximally. A small incision was made and 5 µl AAV2, AAV5, AAV8, or AAV9 was
microsurgically injected and allowed to incubate for 30 minutes. The
incision was closed and tissue was excised 3 weeks following AAV injection.
The carotid artery or aneurysm tissue was excised and fixed in 4%
paraformaldehyde solution. On both naïve carotid artery tissue and aneurysm
tissue, GFP was visualized by immunofluorescence using antibody against GFP.
Overall, three out of four serotypes of AAV successfully transduced cells
within both the murine aneurysm tissue and the naïve carotid artery tissue.
AAV5- and AAV9-transduced aneurysm tissue showed the greatest presence of
GFP, with AAV8 showing less overall fluorescence. AAV2 showed no
fluorescence. AAV-mediated gene delivery is an effective way to transduce
cells intravascularly with a transgene of interest. Our method can be
generalized across a wide variety of studies to further research or treat
other vascular disease.

## Differential Cleavage of the Chemokine Fractalkine Alters its Effect on Primary
Microglia

## D. J. Finneran,1 D. Morgan,2 and K. R. Nash1

## 
1Molecular Pharmacology & Physiology Department, Byrd
Alzheimer’s Institute, University of South Florida, Tampa, FL, USA

## 
2Translational Science & Molecular Medicine, College of Human
Medicine, Michigan State University, Grand Rapids, MI, USA
Fractalkine (FKN) also known as chemokine (C-X3-C motif) ligand or CX3CL1) is
an endogenous chemokine expressed throughout the body. It is a transmembrane
protein containing the chemokine domain, a long mucin-like stalk, and small
transmembrane and intracellular domains. FKN can be cleaved by several
proteases (a disintegrin and metalloproteinase domain-containing protein 10
(ADAM10) and ADAM17) to signal as a soluble peptide, consisting of the
chemokine domain and the mucin-like stalk domain (sFKN). In the central
nervous system, FKN is expressed solely by neurons and binds its unique
receptor, chemokine (C-X3-C motif) receptor 1 (CX3CR1), which is expressed
only on microglia. FKN signaling reduces expression of proinflammatory
cytokines such as tumor necrosis factor (TNF)-α. We have recently published
studies in two models of Parkinson’s disease examining the anti-inflammatory
effects of the membrane-bound or soluble species of fractalkine. We
demonstrated that only the soluble fragment was effective in reducing
neurodegeneration. We have also shown that adeno-associated virus
(AAV)-mediated overexpression of sFKN in tau transgenic (Tg4510) mice
inhibited microglial activation, reduced tau pathology, and ameliorated
neuron loss. However, a recent study in amyloid precursor protein/presenilin
1 transgenic (APP/PS1) mice expressing only the chemokine domain of FKN
failed to rescue phospho-tau pathology present in
APP/PS1;CX3CL1-/- mice. Given this discrepancy, we decided to investigate the
differential microglial response to sFKN and the chemokine domain of FKN
(ckFKN). We show that low nanomolar concentrations of sFKN and ckFKN
significantly reduce TNF-α secretion by lipopolysaccharide (LPS)-stimulated
primary rat microglia; however higher nanomolar concentrations of both FKN
species significantly increase TNF-α secretion. Calcium-imaging data shows a
significantly reduced calcium response to higher concentration sFKN than
lower concentrations. Furthermore, we found ckFKN has an approximately
1000-fold higher EC50 than sFKN. These data suggest a differential response
of microglia to high and low concentrations of FKN and that the chemokine
domain alone has significantly reduced efficacy. These data may explain the
discrepancies observed in the current published literature, suggesting that
in future work, the form of FKN and concentration of FKN must be carefully
considered.

## Advancing Stem Cell Therapy for Repair of Blood–Spinal Cord Barrier in
Symptomatic Amyotrophic Lateral Sclerosis Mice

## S. Garbuzova-Davis, D. J. Eve, G. Steiner, A. Mahendrasah, S. Navarro
Ricaldy, T. Besong, J. Cruz, S. Hailu, S. Inbornone, K. Boccio, P. R. Sanberg,
and C. V. Borlongan

## Center of Excellence for Aging and Brain Repair, Department of
Neurosurgery and Brain Repair, University of South Florida Morsani College
of Medicine, Tampa, FL, USA
Impairment of the blood–central nervous system barrier (B-CNS-B) via
endothelial cell (EC) degeneration in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS), a
fatal neurodegenerative disease, is supported by significant evidence. Such
barrier damage has been recently recognized as a hallmark of this disease
pathogenesis. Replacement of damaged endothelial cells with transplanted
cells to restore B-CNS-B integrity may be a new therapeutic approach for
ALS. Our recent study examined effects of intravenously transplanted
unmodified human bone marrow CD34+ (hBM34+) cells, a
primary source of endothelial cells, into symptomatic G93A superoxide
dismutase 1 (SOD1) mice towards blood–spinal cord barrier (BSCB) repair.
Symptomatic G93A mice at 13 weeks of age received 5×104,
5×105, or 1×106 hBM34+ cells or media.
Results demonstrated that the highest dose of 1×106 cells
provided the most significant benefits at 4 weeks post-transplantation by:
(1) improved behavioral disease outcomes; (2) differentiation into ECs and
engraftment into spinal cord capillaries; (3) enhanced ultrastructural
capillary morphology; (4) decreased Evans Blue extravasation into spinal
cord parenchyma; (5) reduced astrogliosis and microgliosis; (6) improved
perivascular end-feet astrocyte integrity; (7) greater spinal cord motor
neuron survival; (8) decreased microhemorrhages in spinal cord gray and
white matter. Also, the presence of hBM34+ cells was determined
after perfusion in blood smears of cell-treated animals by human nuclei
marker. Additionally, elevated expression of tight junction proteins zonula
occludens 1 (ZO-1), occludin, and claudin-5 were noted in cell-treated mice,
yet no significant differences were found between media and
hBM34+ cell-treated mice. These novel data demonstrated
benefits of unmodified hematopoietic stem cells derived from human bone
marrow when treatment was initiated at the symptomatic disease stage, with
results suggestive of potential BSCB restoration in ALS mice. Transplanted
cells determined in blood circulation of treated late symptomatic ALS mice
might indicate ongoing BSCB repair processes. Overall, hBM34+
cell transplantation at an optimal dose may have therapeutic potential for
B-CNS-B repair not only in ALS, but also in other neurodegenerative
disorders with similar barrier damage.

## Biochemical and Genetic Methods for Enhancing Polysialic Acid on Transplanted
Cells After Spinal Cord Injury

## M. Ghosh,1,2,3 Y. Xu,3 A. A. Morales,3 A. El
Maarouf,4 U. Rutishauser,4 and D. D.
Pearse1,2,3,5,6

## 
1Bruce W. Carter Department of Veterans Affairs Medical Center,
Miami, FL, USA

## 
2Department of Neurological Surgery, University of Miami Leonard
M. Miller School of Medicine, Miami FL, USA

## 
3The Miami Project to Cure Paralysis, University of Miami Leonard
M. Miller School of Medicine, Miami FL, USA

## 
4Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center, New York NY, USA

## 
5The Interdisciplinary Stem Cell Institute, University of Miami
Leonard M. Miller School of Medicine, Miami FL, USA

## 
6The Neuroscience Program, University of Miami Leonard M. Miller
School of Medicine, Miami FL, USA
Schwann cells (SCs) have shown promise as a therapeutic strategy for spinal
cord injury (SCI) repair experimentally and are currently being evaluated
for safety in phase I clinical trials for acute and chronic human SCI. We
have shown that modification of the surface of SCs with polysialic acid
(PSA) can significantly enhance their migration and support for supraspinal
axon growth when transplanted into the injured spinal cord. The current
investigation sought to compare the degree of transplanted and host cell
polysialylation as well as axonal ingrowth when two different approaches
were used to enhance PSA; (i) lentiviral vector (LV) transduction of SCs
with polysialic transferase (PST) or (ii) incubation/co-injection of SCs
with bacterial PST enzyme (PSTnm). For these studies a moderate (25.0 mm)
spinal cord contusion injury was performed using the Multicenter Animal
Spinal Cord Injury Study impactor in female Fischer rats and red fluorescent
protein (RFP)-labeled SCs were transplanted into the lesion epicenter at 1
week post-SCI. Using immunohistochemistry for PSA, polysialylation of the SC
implant-lesion site was found to be most pronounced when PST was expressed
in the cells using LV, however, mixing SCs with PSTnm in suspension for
co-injection produced pronounced polysialylation of adjacent host tissue in
addition to the SC graft. Migration of SCs was greatest in the LV-PST group,
though both LV-PST and PSTnm SCs migrated for significantly greater
distances into adjacent host spinal tissue than RFP-SC only controls. Axon
ingrowth into the transplant-lesion site, as measured by
neurofilament-positive axon density, was similar among both biochemical and
genetic methods of PSA enhancement and more than three-fold in amount
compared with RFP-SC-only controls. These studies show that transient
application of PSTnm may offer an alternative approach to genetic methods
for enhancing PSA on transplanted SCs following SCI so as to enhance their
migration and reparative efficacy.

## Sub-Additive Effects of Cell and Physical Therapy in a Rodent Model of
Stroke

## H. Ghuman,1,2 F. Nitzsche,1,3 M. Gerwig,1,4
J. Moorhead,1,5 L. Grice,1,2 N. Perry,1,2 A.
Poplawsky,1,3 B. Wahlberg,1,3 F.
Ambrosio,1,5 and M. Modo1,2,3

## 
1University of Pittsburgh, McGowan Institute for Regenerative
Medicine, University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA, USA

## 
2Department of Bioengineering, University of Pittsburgh,
Pittsburgh, PA, USA

## 
3Department of Radiology, University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh,
PA, USA

## 
4Department of Neuroscience, University of Pittsburgh,
Pittsburgh, PA, USA

## 
5Department of Physical Medicine and Rehabilitation, Pittsburgh,
PA, USA
Stroke caused by the occlusion of a cerebral artery can lead to death or
severe, long-lasting functional impairments. Treatment options are extremely
limited, extensive, and cost-intensive without any guarantee to restore lost
functions. Physical therapy (PT) is currently the only treatment used to
improve chronic behavioral impairments. Emerging approaches, such as stem
cell therapies, are promising and can support tissue restoration and
functional recovery. The aim of this study was to evaluate if the
combination of human neural stem cell (NSC) transplantation with physical
therapy will improve efficacy compared with either treatment alone. Adult
male Sprague-Dawley rats underwent transient middle cerebral artery
occlusion (MCAo). Success of MCAo was determined by T2-weighted
magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) and animals were then randomly assigned to
the following conditions: MCAo only, MCAo+NSCs, MCAo+PT, MCAo+NSCs+PT.
Groups subjected to NSCs or NSCs+PT received a perilesional NSC graft
(450,000 cells) at 2 weeks post-stroke. Experimental groups with PT
underwent daily treadmill running at a speed corresponding to 80% of their
maximum capacity. Functional deficits and improvements were followed over a
time course of 10 weeks. The maximum capacity test measures the maximum
speed that the rats can maintain on a treadmill and showed that animals in
the exercise group improved their performance by over 50%, while the
untreated and control groups saw a decline (−10%). Bilateral asymmetry
testing revealed that NSCs, exercise and combination therapy groups reduced
the sensorimotor neglect by 20%, 33% and 42% compared with MCAo only. The
foot-fault test measured an animal’s ability to integrate motor responses
and demonstrated the most improvement in the NSC-treated group, with 57%
fewer mistakes at week 10 compared with pretransplantation.
Immunohistological analysis of the graft revealed a good survival of the
transplanted cells. A combination of physical and cell therapy therefore
produces sub-additive therapeutic effects that are greater than each
treatment by itself.

## Extracellular Matrix Hydrogel Injection for the Treatment of Stroke: Time Course
Comparison of Hydrogel Retention and Phenotypic Characterization of Invading
Cells

## H. Ghuman,1,2 C. Mauney,1 J. Donnelly,3 A.
R. Massensini,1,4,5 S. F. Badylak,1,2,6 and M.
Modo1,2,4

## 
1McGowan Institute for Regenerative Medicine, University of
Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA, USA 2Department of Bioengineering,
University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA, USA

## 
3Department of Biological Sciences, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania,
USA

## 
4Department of Radiology, University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh,
PA, USA

## 
5Universidade Federal de Minas Gerais, Department of Physiology
and Biophysics, Belo Horizonte, Brazil

## 
4Department of Surgery, University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA,
USA
Stroke is the leading cause of adult disability and a significant effort is
under way to develop therapies to repair the damaged tissue. The loss of
function after stroke is caused by the death of neurons, leaving behind a
tissue cavity filled with extracellular fluid (ECF) and cell debris.
Biomaterials composed of mammalian extracellular matrix (ECM) promote
constructive tissue remodeling with minimal scar formation. At ECM
concentrations that have similar rheological properties as brain tissue, the
biomaterial exists in a fluid phase at room temperature, while forming
hydrogels at body temperature. ECM with different concentrations (0, 3, 4, 8
mg/ml) was injected into the lesion cavity after stroke to support
endogenous repair mechanisms. Retention and gelation of the ECM, as well as
host cell invasion and phenotype was analyzed at 1, 14 and 90 days
post-injection using immunohistochemistry. Complete retention of ECM
hydrogel within the cavity occurred at concentrations >3 mg/ml, with
extensive diffusion into the host tissue at lower concentrations. A
significant host cell invasion into the ECM hydrogel was seen at 1 day
post-injection, with an average of over 350,000 cells invading in the 8
mg/ml concentration. As the acute inflammatory response was replaced with an
ECM remodeling phase at later time points, there was a significant decrease
in the total number of cells invading the biomaterial. Initial invading
cells were of a microglia and macrophage phenotype and followed specific
trails into the ECM biomaterial along topological features conducive to cell
migration. The follow-on cells were neural and oligodendrocyte progenitor
cells, which are essential for repopulation of the neural tissue. This
characterization demonstrates that an ECM hydrogel can be readily injected
and retained within the lesion cavity, while promoting a continued
endogenous repair response. A behavioral study is necessary to evaluate the
therapeutic efficacy of this approach.

## Phase I Dose-Escalation Study of Neural Stem Cells in Patients with Parkinson’s
Disease

## R. Gonzalez,1 I. Garitaonandia,1 G.
Sherman,1 A. Semechkin,1 G. Nair2, A. H.
Evans,2 and R. Kern1

## 
1International Stem Cell Corporation, Carlsbad, CA, USA

## 
2The Royal Melbourne Hospital, Parkville, VIC, Australia
Parkinson’s disease (PD) is a devastating neurodegenerative disease with
progressive degeneration of the nigrostriatal pathway and dopaminergic cells
in the substantia nigra pars compacta. There are over 10 million people
afflicted with PD and the yearly mortality rate is more than 100,000
worldwide. Unfortunately, none of the available treatment options have the
potential to restore the damaged nigrostriatal pathway. We have previously
demonstrated in preclinical PD models that intracranial transplantation of
human parthenogenetic derived neural stem cells (ISC-hpNSC®) is
safe, restores nigrostriatal pathway damage and significantly ameliorates
PD-like symptoms. We are currently conducting a phase I open-labeled,
dose-escalation study investigating the safety and preliminary efficacy of
ISC-hpNSC® in moderate-to-severe Parkinson’s disease patients
[ClinicalTrials.gov identifier: NCT02452723]. The clinical
trial will evaluate three different dose regimens of 30, 50 and 70 million
ISC-hpNSC® in 12 patients divided into 3 cohorts of 4
patients each. Currently seven patients from the first and second cohorts
have successfully been transplanted with 30 and 50 million
ISC-hpNSC®. Delivery of ISC-hpNSC® to the striatum
and substantia nigra went according to plan without intraoperative
complications. No serious adverse events associated with
ISC-hpNSC® or the immunosuppression regimen have been
reported. No graft-induced dyskinesia or evidence of tumors, inflammation or
infection has been reported. A 6 month interim analysis of
18F-dopa positron emission tomography (PET) scans and
neurological scores from the first cohort will be presented. In summary,
interim data shows that administration of ISC-hpNSC® is safe and
has the potential to repair the nigrostriatal pathway.

## Exosomal Biomarkers in Blood for Neurodegenerative Disease

## C. Granholm, E. Hamlett, A. Gilmore, and A. Ledreux

## Knoebel Institute for Healthy Aging, University of Denver, Denver CO,
USA
Exosomes are extracellular vesicles secreted from all cell types in the body
and range in size from 40 to 100 nm. Exosomes carry with them both surface
markers that can identify their cell of origin, and also protein, peptide,
and RNA cargo which may be used to identify disease processes in a
particular cell. They are small enough to escape the blood–brain barrier,
and it has been shown that exosomes derived from neurons or glia in the
brain can be examined after purification of blood samples. We have purified
neuron-derived exosomes from individuals who are at risk of developing
neurodegenerative disorders later in life, to determine whether exosomal
cargo could be used to identify specific disease processes before any
symptoms develop. In the first study, amyloid and phosphorylated tau (p-tau)
assessment in neuron-derived exosomes revealed significant elevations in
both of these biomarkers for Alzheimer’s disease in children with Down
syndrome, more than three decades prior to onset of dementia symptoms. In
the second study, which is currently ongoing at the Knoebel Institute, we
have found significant alterations of dementia-related biomarkers in
exosomes isolated from Division 1 athletes suffering from a concussion, and
participating in high-impact sports including ice hockey, soccer, and
lacrosse. Currently, methods are being refined and validated, using
post-mortem brain tissue as well as blood to purify neuronal exosomes.
Collectively, this novel biomarker method may be able to detect the earliest
signs of pathology in individuals with a genetic or injury-related brain
degenerative process.

## Resolvin E1 Reduces Inflammation and Enhances Memory in the Ts65Dn Mouse Model of
Down Syndrome

## E. Hamlett,1 X. Wang,2 A. Ledreux,1 E.
Hjorth,2 A.-C. Granholm,1,3 and M.
Schultzberg2

## 
1Knoebel Institute for Healthy Aging, University of Denver,
Denver CO, USA

## 
2Department of Neurobiology, Section of Neurodegeneration,
Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm, Sweden

## 
3Department of Neurosciences, Medical University of South
Carolina, Charleston, SC, USA
Alzheimer’s disease (AD) occurs early in individuals with Down syndrome (DS)
and progresses to near uniformity by the age of 60. Chronic inflammation,
including microglial activation and elevated proinflammatory cytokines, is a
key hallmark of DS-AD and a primary therapeutic target to prevent neuronal
degeneration. Inflammation is normally counterregulated by specialized
proresolving mediators (SPMs) which bind a special class of conserved G
protein-coupled receptors that promote resolution processes. In vivo SPM
therapy is in phase II clinical trials but the therapeutic potential to
augment chronic brain inflammation remains unexplored. To date, resolution
factors in the DS brain are uncharacterized. Since SPMs present a novel
class of neuroprotective compounds that could translate towards clinical
administration, we sought to explore how administration would affect
neuropathological indices in a mouse model of DS. We aimed to quantify the
therapeutic potential of Resolvin E1 (RvE1), a potent SPM, in the
well-characterized DS mouse model, Ts65Dn and evaluate various components of
resolution in post-mortem brains from individuals with DS-AD. At 8 months of
age, Resolvin E1 or vehicle was delivered by subcutaneous mini-osmotic pumps
for a 30-day period. At 9 months of age, behavioral tasks were employed to
assess locomotion, short-term versus long-term object discrimination and
cue-based memory performance. SPM-related biosynthetic enzymes, resolution
receptors, downstream signaling effectors, and microglia markers were
quantified by immunostaining. Proinflammatory cytokines (tumor necrosis
factor (TNF)-α, interleukin (IL)-1β, IL-6, IL-12) were quantified with
multiplex enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA) in serum or by the
classical Western blot technique of brain region extracts. Resolution
receptors are more highly expressed in pathology-positive post-mortem DS-AD
brain sections suggesting a protracted production of SPMs. In our mouse
studies, chronic RvE1 treatment significantly enhanced memory behavior tasks
while normalizing open field hyperactivity. Chronic RvE1 treatment also
reduces peripheral inflammatory cytokines and brain microglial activation in
Ts65Dn mice. We measured very specific proteomic responses to RvE1 treatment
that suggest a peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor (PPAR) gamma
mechanism may underlie neuroprotection conferred by this novel class of
compound. Resolution receptor perturbations are correlated with pathological
events in post-mortem DS-AD brains. This suggests a potential involvement of
resolution processes with chronic inflammation. The positive results from
chronic RvE1 treatment in Ts65Dn mice suggest a potentially safe and
transferable therapy that could target chronic inflammation.

## Effects of Traumatic Brain Injury on Measures of Limb and Tongue Function in
Rats

## J. L. Harris,1 S. Christian,1 P. Keselman,1
R. Alam,2 K. G. Stanford,2. and J. A. Stanford2

## 
1Hoglund Brain Imaging Center, University of Kansas Medical
Center, Kansas City, KS, USA

## 
2Department of Molecular & Integrative Physiology, University
of Kansas Medical Center, Kansas City, KS, USA
Traumatic Brain Injury (TBI) can lead to neurological deficits. Testing
potential therapeutic approaches in preclinical models of TBI is essential
for developing therapies for clinical use. Controlled cortical impact (CCI)
is a commonly used model of contusive TBI for studies in rodents. This
approach allows for the control of injury severity across animals that are
then tested for motor, cognitive, or other effects. As in most preclinical
studies involving motor outcomes, most studies using CCI have focused on
limb function (e.g. locomotion, gait, or balance). The goal of the current
study was to determine the effects of CCI on orolingual motor function in
rats by measuring tongue force and tongue motility as rats lick water from a
force-sensing disc. Rats were challenged by increasing the distance required
to reach the disc and by increasing the force required to produce more
water. We compared these effects to the rotarod and beam walk tests which
are widely used and validated in rodent CCI. After collecting pre-injury
baseline data for orolingual motor function, rotarod, and beam walking, rats
received a unilateral CCI targeting the right sensorimotor cortex. We found
that, compared with non-injured sham controls, rats with CCI exhibited
immediate deficits on the beam walk and rotarod. With time, beam walk
performance normalized but rotarod deficits persisted. Orolingual motor
function effects were more subtle than effects on limb function, but tongue
motility deficits emerged as task requirements increased. High-resolution ex
vivo magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) was used to quantify lesion volumes.
Results will be discussed in the context of modeling orolingual motor
function in preclinical TBI studies.

## The Tale of the Tail of MANF: ER Calcium Homeostasis as a Therapeutic
Target

## B. K. Harvey,1 K. A. Trychta,1 S. M. Bäck,1
A. M. Dossat,1 S. Yan,1 J. Anttila,2 K.-J.
Wu,3 M. Airavaara,2 Y. Wang,3 and M.
Henderson1,4

## 
1National Institute on Drug Abuse, Baltimore, MD, 21234,
USA

## 
2University of Helsinki, Helsinki, Finland

## 
3National Health Research Institute, Zhunan, Taiwan, Republic of
China

## 
4National Center for Advancing Translational Science, Rockville,
MD 20850, USA
Mesencephalic astrocyte-derived neurotrophic factor (MANF) is an endoplasmic
reticulum (ER) stress response protein capable of promoting neuroprotection
and neuroregeneration. We conducted structure and function studies of the
various protein domains of MANF and found the C-terminal tail (ASARTDL) is
necessary and sufficient for ER localization. We also found the tail is
mediating secretion in response to the depletion of calcium in the ER. ER
calcium stores are important for many cellular functions, such as protein
folding, lipid metabolism, and signaling pathways. Disruption of ER calcium
homeostasis is implicated in multiple neurological diseases, including
stroke, Parkinson’s disease, and Alzheimer’s disease. Using the tail of
MANF, we developed a secreted ER calcium modulated protein (SERCaMP) to
monitor ER calcium depletion in both in vitro and in vivo disease models. We
created a Gaussia luciferase (GLuc)-ASARTDL SERCaMP
reporter and showed that oxygen-glucose deprivation caused ER calcium
depletion and decreased cell viability. Treatment with the ryanodine
receptor antagonist dantrolene attenuated secretion of our reporter and
increased cell viability in vitro. Intracranial adeno-associated virus
(AAV)-GLuc-SERCaMP-injected rats showed evidence of ER calcium depletion
following occlusion of the middle cerebral artery and dantrolene treatment
reduced the infarction volume. Lastly, we developed a high throughput screen
based on our GLuc-SERCaMP reporter and identified novel drugs for
stabilizing ER calcium and improving recovery from oxygen-glucose
deprivation. Our data support a model in which stroke causes ER calcium
depletion and suggests that dantrolene can be used to reduce ER calcium
depletion and improve the outcome from ischemic damage.

## Cerebral Aneurysm Healing: Monocyte Chemotactic Protein-1, Interleukin 6 and
Osteopontin

## K. Hosaka, H. Z. Fazal, and B. L. Hoh

## Department of Neurosurgery, University of Florida, Gainsville, FL,
USA
Cerebral aneurysms (CAs) occur in up to 5% of the population, and can rupture
causing 50% mortality and 30% dependency. CAs are treated with surgical
clipping or endovascular coiling. Coiled human CAs that have not recurred
and are obtained at autopsy have been compared with recurrent CAs, and the
successfully treated nonrecurrent CAs are characterized by a sac ‘plugged’
with tissue ingrowth. These are characteristics of inflammatory wound
healing. Based on our preliminary results, the central hypothesis is that
monocyte chemotactic protein-1 (MCP-1) is necessary for aneurysm healing,
which is directed by cell-specific populations and regulated by downstream
mediators to create tissue ingrowth in the aneurysm lumen. We have
previously demonstrated that local delivery of MCP-1, via a MCP-1-releasing
poly(lactic-co-glycolic acid) (PLGA)-coated coil, promotes intra-aneurysmal
tissue healing. Using a murine model of carotid intra-aneurysmal healing, we
observed increased expression of interleukin 6 (IL-6) in MCP-1-coil-treated
aneurysms and not in control-PLGA-only-treated aneurysms. MCP-1-mediated
intra-aneurysmal healing is inhibited in mice given a blocking antibody to
IL-6 receptor, and only at early time points. MCP-1-mediated
intra-aneurysmal healing is also inhibited by a blocking antibody to
osteopontin (OPN). Local delivery of OPN to murine carotid aneurysms via an
OPN-releasing coil significantly promotes intra-aneurysmal healing, but an
IL-6-releasing coil does not, suggesting IL-6 cannot promote aneurysm
healing independent of MCP-1. In the MCP-1-mediated aneurysm healing
pathway, OPN expression is dependent on IL-6: inhibition of IL-6 receptor
significantly inhibits OPN expression in MCP-1-mediated aneurysm healing.
Our findings suggest that IL-6 and OPN are key downstream mediators of
MCP-1-mediated intra-aneurysmal healing.

## Sprouting of the Corticorubral Tract Induced by an Intensive Rehabilitation
Contributed to Functional Recovery in Internal Capsule Hemorrhage Rats

## A. Ishida,1 K. Kobayashi,2 T. Isa,3 and H.
Hida1

## 
1Deptartment of Neurophysiology and Brain Science, Nagoya City
University Graduate School of Medical Sciences, Nagoya, Japan

## 
2Section of Viral Vector Development, National Institute of
Physiological Sciences, Okazaki, Japan

## 
3Department of Physiology and Neurobiology, Kyoto Graduate School
of Medicine, Kyoto, Japan
Capsular stroke causes the disruption of the corticospinal tract and motor
dysfunction. Compensative sprouting of the other descending tracts is one of
the substrates for functional recovery, which could be induced by
rehabilitation. In the present study, we investigated the sprouting of the
corticorubral tract (CRT) and the corticoreticular tract (CReT) after
internal capsule hemorrhage (ICH) and their contribution towards recovery.
Wistar rats were injected with collagenase into the internal capsule, and
then biotin dextran amine was injected into the ipsilesional motor cortex at
post-ICH day 1 to label the CRT and the CReT. ICH rats were forced to use
their impaired forelimb for days 1–8. We found the CRT was significantly
increased by forced-limb use on day 12 and 28, but the CReT was not. To
block the CRT or the CReT selectively, we next injected lentivirus vectors
into the red nucleus (neuron-specific infection of tetracycline responsive
element (TRE) and enhanced tetanus neurotoxin (eTeNT) tagged with enhanced
green fluorescent protein (EGFP; NeuRet-TRE-EGFP.eTeNT) and reticular
formation (neuron-specific infection of murine stem cell virus and Cre
recombinase (NeuRet-MSCV-Cre)) and then injected AAV vectors (8 serotype AAV
hybrid capsid containing Ca2+/calmodulin-dependent protein kinase
II promotor linked Tet-On 3G (AAVdj-CaMKII-rtTAV16)/8 serotype AAV hybrid
capsid with double-floxed coupled modified human M4 muscarinic receptor
designer receptors exclusively activated by designer drugs (DREADD) fused
with mCherry (AAVdj-Flex-DIO-hM4D-mcherry)) into the motor cortex. We
revealed that the recovered forelimb function was impaired with CRT blockade
both in the early-recovery phase (post-ICH days 13–20) and chronic-plateau
phase (days 92–99). The data suggest that the CRT is an important pathway
for rehab-induced recovery of forelimb function after ICH.

## Polyphenol Supplementation Reverses Age-Related Microglial Decline via
RICTOR-Dependent Rac1/Cdc42 Signaling

## A. Jalloh,1 C. Hudson,1,2 S. Stevens,1 and
P. C. Bickford1,2

## 
1Center of Excellence for Aging and Brain Repair, Department of
Neurosurgery and Brain Repair, University of South Florida Morsani College
of Medicine, Tampa, FL, USA

## 
2James A Haley VA, Research Service, Tampa, FL, USA
Microglia are the resident central nervous system (CNS) macrophage, and
mediate innate immunity. These cells can become dysfunctional with age, and
promote neuronal death that exacerbates neurodegenerative disorders. We have
previously described age-related changes in rodent microglia using
mass-spectrometry-based proteomics and identified protein networks that are
dysregulated with age including transcriptional regulation, energy
metabolism, and cytoskeleton remodeling. We identified a
rapamycin-insensitive companion of the mechanistic target of rapamycin
(RICTOR), a subunit of the mechanistic target of rapamycin complex 2
(mTORC2), as a significant upstream regulator whose inhibition drives this
aging phenotype. In this study, we evaluated the effect of polyphenol
supplementation on these networks. We observed a predicted reversal of
age-related RICTOR inhibition that accompanied decreased inflammation and
actin cytoskeleton remodeling, as well as altered chemotaxis and
phagocytosis. We further explored the role RICTOR plays in age-related
microglial dysfunction and identified Ras-related C3 botulinum toxin
substrate 1 (Rac1) and cell division cycle 42 (Cdc42) as inflammatory
mediators and cytoskeleton-remodeling proteins that were downregulated with
polyphenol supplementation as possible therapeutic targets. We used
label-free mass spectrometry to compare differentially expressed microglial
proteins between young (3 mo.) and aged (20 mo.) rats. Ingenuity pathway
analysis allowed us to identify signaling networks whose predicted activity
may explain differences in experimental groups in our dataset. We then used
the same approach to compare microglial proteins from aged animals fed a
normal diet and those fed a diet supplemented with NT-020, a proprietary
blend of polyphenols including blueberry extract, green tea extract,
l-carnosine, and vitamin D-3. To validate our proteomics, we performed a
phagocytosis assay, and measured RICTOR, Rac1, and Cdc42, as well as markers
for inflammation and microglial homeostasis in highly aggressively
proliferating immortalized (HAPI) rat microglial cells co-cultured with
lipopolysaccharide (LPS) and NT-020-treated media. Predicted RICTOR
inhibition in aged microglia was lost following NT-020 treatment. This loss
coincided with an increase in inflammatory mediators, tumor necrosis factor
α (TNFα) and interleukin 1β (IL-1β), that we confirmed via the polymerase
chain reaction (PCR) and enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA). Rac1 and
Cdc42 were overexpressed in aged microglia and HAPI cells stimulated with
LPS, but downregulated in HAPI cells treated with LPS+NT-020. Phagocytosis
was altered compared with controls in HAPI cells after LPS stimulation, but
this effect was ameliorated with NT-020 supplementation. Our proteomic
analysis identified several cell functions in microglia that become
compromised with age and that are predicted to drive inflammation and
neurodegeneration. The data revealed protein networks that govern cell
growth, cytoskeleton remodeling, and the inflammatory response that
converged on RICTOR as a major signaling point. We investigated the role of
Rho guanosine triphosphatase (GTPase) activity downstream of RICTOR via Rac1
and Cdc42 in regulating microglial activation and control of phagocytosis.
Polyphenol supplementation can attenuate LPS-induced activation of
Rac1/Cdc42, and diminish inflammatory gene expression and microglial
phagocytosis. This study highlights the utility of polyphenols as
therapeutic agents against age-associated microglial pathology.

## Intra-Arterial Highway to the Brain for Cell Therapy

## M. Janowski,1 R. Guzman,2 D. R. Yavagal,3
and S. Savitz4

## 
1Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, MD, USA

## 
2University of Basel, Basel, Switzerland

## 
3University of Miami, Miami, FL, USA

## 
4University of Texas, Houston, TX, US
We are witnessing an unprecedented explosion of indications, fueled by the
rapid progress in the design of endovascular devices, for intra-arterial
procedures to treat central nervous system (CNS) disorders. Detachable coils
revolutionized the management of intracranial aneurysms, while the
introduction of stent retrievers and aspiration catheters redefined the
acute stroke care. The intra-arterial neurointerventions are now practiced
worldwide at high volumes in a minimally invasive fashion with a low number
of complications, thus now they are becoming an attractive way to deliver
directly to the brain therapeutic agents such as stem cells, antibodies or
small molecules. The recent advances in real-time magnetic resonance imaging
(MRI) permit one to deploy intra-arterially administered therapeutic agents
in a predictable and precise fashion to maximize therapeutic potential while
avoiding adverse effects due to off-target deliveries. The sorting or
engineering of stem cells as well as local opening of blood–brain barrier
facilitates delivery of therapeutic agents to the brain at the first pass to
fully exploit the benefits of intra-arterial route. The intra-arterial route
has been shown to be effective in the delivery of stem cells to the brain in
large animal models as well as being safe in clinical studies. We do expect
that the share of intra-arterial route in delivery of therapeutic agents to
the CNS will be growing along with further conceptual and methodological
advances in this field.

## Post-Stroke Sonic Hedgehog (SHH) Agonist Treatment Improves Functional Recovery
by Enhancing Neurogenesis and Angiogenesis

## Y. Jin,1 A. Barnett,1 Y. Zhang,2 X.
Yu,2 and Y. Luo1

## 
1Department of Neurological Surgery, Case Western Reserve
University, Cleveland, OH, USA

## 
2Department of Biomedical Engineering, Case Western Reserve
University, Cleveland, OH, USA
Due to the limitation in the treatment window of the recombinant tissue
plasminogen activator (rtPA), the development of a delayed treatment for
stroke is needed. In this study, we examined the efficacy of delayed
post-stroke treatment (post 3–8 days) of the sonic hedgehog pathway agonist
(SAG) on functional recovery and the underlying mechanisms. We evaluated
functional recovery at 1 month after stroke using locomotion analysis and
Barnes maze test for cognitive function. We utilized a genetically inducible
neural stem cell (NSC)-specific reporter mouse line (Cre recombinase fused
to a triple mutant form of the human estrogen receptor under a nestin
promotor in a Cre-activable yellow fluorescent protein reporter mouse;
nestin-CreERT2-R26R-YFP) to label and track their proliferation, survival
and differentiation in ischemic brain. Brain tissue damage, angiogenesis and
cerebral blood flow recovery was evaluated using magnetic resonance imaging
(MRI) techniques and immunostaining. Our results show that delayed treatment
of SAG in stroke mice results in enhanced functional recovery both in
locomotor function and cognitive function at 1 month after stroke. Further,
utilizing the nestin-CreERT2-R26R-YFP mice, we showed that post-stroke SAG
treatment increased the number of surviving newly born cells derived from
both subventricular zone and subgranular zone (SGZ) NSCs, total surviving
doublecortin positive (DCX+) neuroblast cells and neurons
(neuronal nuclei (NeuN+)/YFP+) in the ischemic brain.
SAG treatment also improved the brain tissue repair in the ischemic region
supported by our T2-weighted MRI, cerebral blood flow map by arterial spin
labeling and immunohistochemistry (alpha-smooth muscle actin and cluster of
differentiation 31 (CD31) immunostaining). These data confirm an important
role for the sonic hedgehog pathway in post-stroke brain repair and
functional recovery, suggesting a prolonged treatment window for potential
treatment strategy to modulate the sonic hedgehog pathway after stroke.

## Involvement of Nuclear Factor-κB Pathway in the Treatment of Spinal Cord
Injury

## K. Karova,1,2 J. Ruzicka,1 L. M. Urdzikova,1
A. G. Amin,3 M. H. Schmidt,3 M.
Jhanwar-Uniyal,3 and P. Jendelova1, 2

## 
1Institute of Experimental Medicine, Czech Academy of Sciences,
Prague, Czech Republic

## 
2Department of Neuroscience, Charles University, Second Faculty
of Medicine, Prague, Czech Republic

## 
3New York Medical College, Westchester Medical Center, Valhalla,
NY, USA
Spinal cord injury (SCI) is a devastating condition which is characterized by
an extended secondary injury phase caused by local inflammation. Nuclear
factor-κB (NF-κB) is considered a prototypical proinflammatory
signaling molecule, which is activated by cytokines such as tumor necrosis
factor α (TNFα) and others. Here, we investigated the role of NF-κB after
SCI in rats, and determined how anti-inflammatory compounds curcumin or
transplantation of spinal neural precursor cells (SPCs) modulate the
activation of NF-κB. Rats were given one of the following treatments:
curcumin or saline directly at the injured spinal cord, and thereafter daily
intra-peritoneal injection. SPCs were grafted 7 days after SCI. Nuclear
translocation of NF-κB p65, and levels of secretory TNFα were determined
using immunohistochemistry and multiplex immuno-bead method, respectively.
Results demonstrated that the nuclear expression of NF-κB p65 displayed
bimodal peaks at days 3 and 28 post-SCI, albeit a higher level was seen at
28 days in the control group treated with saline. Curcumin treatments caused
a significant reduction in the density of nuclear NF-κB p65 at all time
points as compared with control rats, while TNFα levels decreased at days 1
and 14 after SCI in curcumin-treated rats. Nuclear translocation of NF-κB
p65 was significantly decreased at 28 days after SCI in SPC-grafted rats and
the levels of TNFα reduced following transplantation of SPC cells at days 10
and 14 after injury which was followed by an increase at 28 days. These
results demonstrated that TNFα regulates the NF-κB signaling pathway during
the secondary injury phase of SCI. Furthermore, alterations in inflammatory
responses produced by, either treatment with pharmacological agents or
neural progenitor cell therapy, also appears to regulate NF-κB signaling
pathways that could potentially lead to behavioral improvement after
SCI.

## A1-Exosomes Suppress Systemic Inflammation and Neuroinflammation Induced by
Lipopolysaccharide in Mice

## D. K. Kim,1 Q. Liu,1 N. Pacienza,1,2 S.
Fang,1 G. Yannarelli,1,2 and D. J. Prockop1

## 
1Institute for Regenerative Medicine, Department of Molecular
Cellular Medicine, Health Science Center, College of Medicine, Texas A&M
University, College Station, TX, USA

## 
2Laboratorio de Regulación Génica y Células Madre, Instituto de
Medicina Traslacional, Trasplante y Bioingeniería (IMeTTyB), Universidad
Favaloro/CONICET, Buenos Aires, Argentina
Neuroinflammation is an important component of many diseases of the brain.
Recently there has been great interest in the therapeutic potential of the
small endometrium-derived vesicles loosely defined as exosomes. We and
others previously demonstrated that some preparations of exosomes produced
beneficial effects in several models of brain injury. Here we examined the
model for inflammation induced by systemic administration of
lipopolysaccharide (LPS) to mice. We first established a low dose of LPS
that at 2 to 6 hours produced increases of proinflammatory cytokines in
multiple tissues, including the brain. We then tested the effects of
exosomes that we had previously isolated with a chromatographic protocol
from the medium of mesenchymal stem/stromal cells cultured under defined
conditions. The exosomes were anti-inflammatory by several criteria and to
distinguish them from other exosomes, we referred to them as A1-exosomes.
Intravenously administered A1-exosomes suppressed proinflammatory cytokines
in multiple tissues, including the hippocampus and cortex. Exosomes
pre-labeled with dye were found in microglia, indicating they had crossed
the blood–brain barrier (BBB). In contrast, intravenous administration of
1.2 mg/kg dexamethasone decreased proinflammatory cytokines in the spleen of
LPS-treated mice but not in the hippocampus or cortex. The results support
previous indications that intravenously administered exosomes may be a more
effective therapy for neuroinflammation than drugs and other agents that
were tested in the past and that do not effectively cross the BBB.

## 
CRISPR-CAS9 Mediated Non-Homologous End Joining Mechanism for Silencing of
the Mutant Huntingtin Gene in an In Vitro Model of Huntington’s
Disease

## N. Kolli,1,2 M. Lu,1,2 P. Maiti,1,2,3,4,5 J.
Rossignol,1,2,6 and G. L. Dunbar1,2,3,4

## 
1Field Neurosciences Institute laboratory for Restorative
Neurology at Central Michigan University, MI, USA

## 
2Program in Neuroscience, Central Michigan University, MI,
USA

## 
3Department of Psychology, Central Michigan University, MI,
USA

## 
4Field Neurosciences Institute, St. Mary’s of Michigan, MI,
USA

## 
5Department of Biology, Saginaw Valley State University, Saginaw,
MI, USA

## 
6College of Medicine, Central Michigan University, MI,
USA
Huntington’s disease (HD) is a rare autosomal dominant neurodegenerative
genetic disorder, resulting in abnormal movements of the limbs, along with
cognitive deficits and psychiatric symptoms. The underlying cause of the
disease is a genetic mutation of the Huntingtin gene
(mHTT), which codes for the Huntingtin protein (HTT),
whereby the polyglutamine (CAG) repeat domain is extended to more than 35
CAG repeats. At present, only palliative treatments are available to
alleviate the symptomology of the disease, as a cure or an effective
treatment has been elusive. Many studies have shown that embryonic stem
cells (ESCs) can delay the progression of HD, putatively by providing a
protective environment in the striatum, the region in which neurons are
first lost as part of the disease pathology. More recently, transplantation
of induced pluripotent stem cells (iPSCs), generated from patient’s skin
cells, has been proposed as an alternative cell-based therapy for HD.
Although allogeneic stem cell transplantation is relatively safe, autologous
transplantation provides significantly less immunogenic responses than
allogeneic stem cell transplantation. However, since HD is an autosomal
dominant neurological disorder, the stem cells generated from the person
affected with the HD would carry the heterozygous alleles having the normal
HTT gene and also the mHTT. Since the
mHTT protein formed from the mHTT gene has a toxic
gain-of-function property, editing the mHTT gene in the
stem cells by either silencing the mHTT gene or correcting
mHTT before using it for autologous transplantation,
should prove to be more beneficial than utilizing direct autologous
transplantation. The primary goal of this study was to permanently prevent
the translation of mHTT at a relatively high efficiency. In
this study, we are applying clustered regularly interspaced short
palindromic repeat (CRISPR)-CRISPR-associated protein 9 (Cas9) to silence
the mutant Huntingtin gene, that causes HD, in the bone
marrow-derived mesenchymal stem cells (BM-MSCs). CRISPR-Cas9 has been
revolutionizing the prospects of gene therapy and biotechnology. It has been
used widely to create knock-in, knock-out, or to edit the genes, both to
investigate the function of a gene, as well as to treat genetic disorders.
In order to curb the production of the mHTT, two CRISPR-Cas9 plasmids were
constructed to target the DNA; one at an untranscription region upstream to
the open reading frame (uORF), and the other nicks the DNA at the
exon1-intron boundary. Our results suggest that the disruption of uORF
through CRISPR-Cas9 has resulted in a 79% decrease in the mutant mHTT
protein. Also, this study unravels the synchrony between the toxicity
exerted by mutant Huntingtin and the expression of mutant Huntingtin protein
in the BM-MSCs extracted from YAC128 mice that carry human mutant Huntingtin
protein. We have observed that blocking the mHTT by
CRISPR-Cas9 increased the cell survival of the BM-MSCs, which could in turn
provide the means whereby allografts of ‘gene-silenced’ cells might be
safely and effectively used for transplantation into HD patients.

## Timing Matters: The Impact of Hypothermia on Human Neural Stem Cell Action In
Vitro Supports the Need to Find Optimal Timing for Combined Cell-Based Therapy with
Hypothermia for Perinatal Hypoxic Ischemic Injury

## J. Law, C. Pernia, W. Niles, and E. Y. Snyder

## University of California – San Diego, Sanford Burnham Prebys Medical
Discovery Institute, San Diego, CA, USA
As many as 8 out of every 1000 live births, experiences a lack of oxygen to
the brain near the time of delivery, a phenomenon called perinatal hypoxic
ischemic injury (HII). If left untreated, up to 65% of these babies may have
lifelong neurologic sequelae including cerebral palsy, severe motor,
sensory, and cognitive impairment, epilepsy, learning disabilities, and
autistic behaviors. Although hypothermia (HT) is the standard-of-care (SOC)
in treating HII, it is only marginally effective in moderate cases and
ineffective in severe HII. We and others have reported the efficacy and
safety of transplanted human neural stem cells (hNSCs) for salvaging injured
brain parenchyma (referred to as the penumbra) leading to improved
histologic and behavioral outcomes in rodent models of HII. hNSCs help
reconstitute damaged neural elements as well as protect endogenous neurons
via anti-inflammatory, pro-angiogenic, neurotrophic, antioxidant,
anti-excitotoxic, and other neuroprotective actions. None of these reports,
however, evaluated hNSC action under SOC HT conditions. It remains uncertain
whether HT antagonizes or complements hNSC function. hNSCs were studied in
vitro under normothermic (NT) (37°C) and SOC HT (33.5°C) conditions and
evaluated on days 0, 1, 2, 3, and 6. Change in hNSC colony size over time
was measured as a marker of proliferation, and migration was assessed using
scratch assays. Proliferation and migration were quantified using ImageJ
(National Institutes of Health). Measurements for each environment were
pooled by day and expressed as means. Proteins produced by NT and HT hNSCs
were evaluated on each day by Silver Stain, bicinchoninic acid assay (BCA),
immunofluorescence (IF), and Western blot. For IF, we used fluorescent
antibodies to β3-tubulin (an immature neuronal marker) and Ki67 (a marker of
cell proliferation). For Western analysis, antibodies to β3-tubulin and
proliferative cell nuclear antigen (PCNA – a marker of cell proliferation)
were used. HT decreased the rates of hNSC proliferation and migration
(p=0.0006 and p<0.0001,
respectively) compared with NT. The doubling time for NT hNSCs was 5.2 days
compared with 21.1 days for HT hNSCs. Microscopic imaging of individual
colonies over time was performed. Cells in the NT incubator showed an
expansion of the colonies both in number of cells and in production of
exploratory lamellipodia. Cells kept in the HT incubator showed minimal
change in colony size or production of lamellipodia. HT hNSCs exhibited an
altered proteomic profile via Silver Stain and decreased protein abundance
by BCA analysis (p=0.0004) relative to NT hNSCs. IF of NT
hNSCs colonies showed an organized pattern of β-3 tubulin production, a
primarily peripheral distribution of Ki67 positive hNSCs, and an even
distribution of neuronal cell nuclei (as indicated by
4’,6-diamidino-2-phenylindole (DAPI) staining) throughout the colony. This
was in marked contrast to the hypothermic hNSCs that had substantial
disorganization of both β-3 tubulin and Ki67 as well as an uneven nuclear
distribution. Western blot analysis demonstrated no difference in β3-tubulin
presence in NT versus HT cells, however there was a strong trend towards a
decrease in markers of cell division in HT compared with NT hNSCs
(p=0.06). Most of these changes were not apparent until
after 3 days of HT. HT significantly altered hNSC proliferation, migration,
and protein production in vitro. However, given that SOC HT is instituted
for only 3 days following HII and most changes in HT hNSCs were not apparent
until after 3 days of exposure, combining these two neuroprotective
therapies seems feasible. Alternatively, optimal timing for the introduction
of cell-based therapy may be after HT is completed. Coordinating therapies,
whether concurrently or in sequence, to improve outcomes must be tested in
animal models of HII. Furthermore, our results raise the question of whether
endogenous hNSCs, required for repair and regeneration of the neonatal brain
after HII, are also affected by HT.

## Hematopoietic Growth Factors Enhance Amyloid Beta Clearance Through Bone
Marrow-Derived Monocytes/Macrophages

## B. Li, X. Ren, and L.-R. Zhao

## Department of Neurosurgery, State University of New York, Upstate Medical
University, Syracuse, NY, USA
Alzheimer’s disease (AD), a rapidly growing health problem, has created
serious public and personal crises at both medical and financial levels.
Developing therapeutic strategies for AD is highly important, as no cure is
currently available. There is a growing body of evidence showing that
dysfunction of the innate immune system for amyloid beta (Aβ) clearance is
crucially involved in cerebral Aβ deposition and AD progression. Our earlier
study has demonstrated that a 12-day treatment of combined two hematopoietic
growth factors, stem cell factor (SCF) and granulocyte colony-stimulating
factor (G-CSF) (SCF+G-CSF), results in reduced cerebral Aβ load at 9 months
post-treatment in amyloid precursor protein/presenilin 1 (APP/PS1) mice. It
remains unclear, however, how the SCF+G-CSF treatment leads to cerebral Aβ
reduction. This study aimed to clarify whether the SCF+G-CSF-reduced
cerebral Aβ load through enhancing Aβ clearance, and the role of bone
marrow-derived monocytes/macrophages in SCF+G-CSF-reduced cerebral Aβ
accumulation in APP/PS1 mice. Using live brain imaging, we scanned the brain
and examined Aβ deposits before SCF+G-CSF treatment and 7 days
post-treatment in 13-month-old APP/PS1 mice. We found that
methoxy-XO4-labeled plaques in the brain were significantly decreased in
SCF+G-CSF-treated mice compared with non-treated controls, suggesting that
SCF+G-CSF enhances Aβ clearance in the brains of APP/PS1 mice. To track bone
marrow-derived cells, the bone marrow of mice expressing enhanced green
fluorescent protein (GFP) under the direction of the human ubiquitin C
promoter (UBC-GFP mice) was transplanted into APP/PS1 mice 6 months before
SCF+G-CSF treatment. At day 12 of SCF+G-CSF treatment, ionized
calcium-binding adapter molecule 1 positive
(Iba1+)/GFP+ cells were significantly increased in
the brains of APP/PS1 mice, and the association of
Iba1+/GFP+ cells with Aβ plaques was also
significantly increased. Flow cytometry data further validated the increases
of bone marrow-derived Iba1+ cells in the brain and blood of
SCF+G-CSF-treated APP/PS1 mice. In addition, our in vitro studies revealed
that the ability of bone marrow-derived Iba1+ cells in engulfing
aggregated Aβ was significantly increased by SCF+G-CSF. These findings
suggest that bone marrow-derived monocytes/macrophages play an important
role in SCF+G-CSF-enhanced Aβ clearance. This study sheds light on the
contribution of hematopoietic growth factors in restricting pathological
progression of AD.

## Glial Enriched Progenitors: A Novel Cell-Based Therapeutic for White Matter
Stroke

## I. L. Llorente,1 W. E. Lowry,2 and S. T.
Carmichael1

## 
1Department of Neurology, University of California, Los Angeles,
CA, USA

## 
2Department of Molecular, Cell and Developmental Biology,
University of California, Los Angeles, CA, USA
White matter stroke (WMS) occurs in deep penetrating blood vessels in the
brain and includes a spectrum of diseases from small infarcts to more
diffuse areas of damage. Subcortical WMS constitutes up to 30% of all stroke
subtypes. There have been no studies of specific cell transplants in neural
repair in WMS. The different cellular constituents of white matter mean that
WMS, unlike large artery stroke, damages primarily astrocytes, axons,
oligodendrocytes, and myelin, we therefore hypothesized that a more
astrocyte-based therapy is ideally suited for brain repair after WMS. Brief
changes in oxygen tension permanently alter the fate commitment of induced
pluripotent stem cells (iPSCs). This effect is mediated by hypoxia-inducible
factor 1, and can be mimicked by prolyl hydroxylase inhibition, such as with
deferoxamine (DFX). Brief treatment of iPSC-derived neural progenitor cells
(iPSC-NPCs) with DFX permanently biases differentiation so that a
substantial percentage of the cells differentiate into astrocytes. This
process allows rapid and efficient production of a new astrocyte-based line
of iPSC-derived glial enriched progenitors (iPSC-GEPs), ideally suited for
brain repair after WMS that allows scaling of this process for a clinical
application. In this study, iPSC-GEPs were tested in a model of subcortical
white matter stroke that mimics aspects of vascular dementia. These cells
were transplanted at a late or subacute stage after the infarct. iPSC-GEPs
migrate widely in the injured brain and stimulate oligodendrocyte precursor
cell (OPC) proliferation and differentiation, myelination of damaged brain
tissue and the formation of cortical connections after stroke. iPSC-GEPs
promote recovery of neurological deficits in white matter stroke.
Importantly, this recovery is more substantial and complete compared with
other iPSC types, including the parent line for iPSC-GEPs.

## Modulation of Receptor Protein Tyrosine Phosphatase σ Promotes Neuroregeneration
and Functional Recovery After Experimental Stroke

## F. Luo,1,2 J. Silver,2 and Y. Luo1,2

## 
1Department of Neurological Surgery, Case Western Reserve
University, Cleveland, OH, USA

## 
2Department of Neurosciences, Case Western Reserve University,
Cleveland, OH, USA
Stroke leads to permanent cognitive, sensory, and motor deficits in patients.
Therapeutic interventions that target the repair of stroke-induced damage
that will allow for a longer treatment window after stroke onset are
urgently needed. The two main cellular processes of neural repair after
stroke have been described: post-stroke axonal sprouting and post-stroke
neurogenesis. Understanding how these endogenous cellular mechanisms
contribute to the repair of the post-stroke brain will help us develop novel
therapeutic interventions. Inhibitory chondroitin sulfate proteoglycans
(CSPGs) are increased within the glial scar and perineuronal net after
ischemic brain injury, which might play a critical role in blocking
neuroblast migration, axonal regrowth and sprouting. Protein tyrosine
phosphatase σ (PTP σ) has been identified as a major receptor for inhibitory
glycosylated side chains of CSPGs. Recently, a novel small peptide mimetic
of the PTP σ wedge region named ISP (intracellular sigma peptide) was
generated and has the capacity to specifically target PTP σ and relieve CSPG
inhibition in models of spinal cord injury, spinal root avulsion and
myocardial infarction. Here, we aimed to determine whether post-stroke ISP
treatment could improve functional recovery in a mouse model of cortical
ischemia. C57BL/6 mice underwent transient intraluminal filament middle
cerebral artery occlusion (tMCAO) and were then subcutaneously injected with
ISP (30 mg/kg/day) or vehicle daily for 4 weeks beginning 24 h or 7 days
post-tMCAO. Motor and sensorimotor functions were measured prior to MCAO and
at 1, 2, 3 and 4 weeks post-stroke using locomotion analysis and the
adhesion removal test. Cognitive function was also assessed with the Barnes
maze test at 4 weeks post-stroke. We found that continuous ISP treatment
starting at 24 hours post-stroke improves both survival and long-term
functional recovery after stroke and 7-day post-stroke treatment improves
functional recovery. Correlated with the improved behavior,
immunohistochemical analysis revealed that post-stroke ISP treatment
increased the total number of newly generated neuroblast cells migrating
towards the peri-infarct area. We also found a robust sprouting/regeneration
of serotonergic axons around the stroke peri-infarct and even into the
lesion core. These results suggest that inhibition of PTP σ/CSPG signaling
by ISP stimulates functional recovery after stroke via promoting neuroblast
migration and axonal growth. Pharmacological targeting of the PTP σ/CSPGs
interaction is therefore a potential novel therapeutic strategy for stroke
treatment.

## Arginine-Sensing-Induced mTORC1 Activation Affects Tauopathies

## C. Ma,1,2,3 A. Kovalenko,1,2 L. A.
Sandusky-Beltran,1,2 J. Calahatian,1,2 H.
Liang,1,2 M. Kallupurackal,1,2 J. Hunt,1,2
K. R. Nash,1,3 M. Fahnestock,4 D. Morgan,1,3 P.
C. Bickford,1,3 and D. Lee1,2

## 
1Byrd Alzheimer’s Institute, University of South Florida, Tampa,
FL, USA

## 
2College of Pharmacy, Department of Pharmaceutical Sciences,
University of South Florida, Tampa, FL, USA

## 
3Department of Molecular Pharmacology and Physiology, University
of South Florida Morsani College of Medicine, Tampa, FL, USA

## 
4Department of Psychiatry and Behavioural Neurosciences, McMaster
University, Ontario, Canada
Tauopathies including Alzheimer’s disease (AD) consist of age-associated
neurodegenerative diseases for which no disease-modifying treatments exist.
Our group has uncovered a unique interaction between arginine metabolism and
tauopathies. Arginine metabolism affects multiple biological processes that
show considerable influence upon tau pathology. We demonstrated in cells and
animal models of tauopathy, the benefits of increasing arginase 1 (Arg1) in
reducing many aspects of the tau phenotype (hallmarks comprised of tau
effects). Several seminal findings showed lysosomal and cytoplasmic arginine
sensors that modulate the mechanistic target of rapamycin complex 1 (mTORC1)
signaling pathway. The first identified arginine sensor is solute carrier
family 38A9 (SLC38A9), a lysosomal amino acid transporter that signals
arginine sufficiency to mTORC1 within the lysosome. The second arginine
sensor is a cytoplasmic regulator known as cytosolic arginine sensor for
mTORC1 subunit 1 (CASTOR1). Other key studies revealed that G protein
coupled receptor family C, group 6 member A (GPRC6A) binds arginine and may
serve as an extracellular arginine sensor. Our data indicated increased
activation of the arginine-sensing mTORC1 pathway in human AD brains and
transgenic mouse model of tauopathies. We discovered that arginine producing
and metabolizing enzymes, arginine sensors (SLC38A9, CASTOR1, GPRC6A), and
mTORC1 complexes all increased in the hippocampus of AD patients compared
with control age-matched brains. We also found that tau increased total
arginine levels in the mouse tauopathy brains by 35%, increased basal levels
of extracellular arginine and arginine release following neuronal
stimulation. Furthermore, genetic reduction of SLC38A9 and GPRC6A inhibited
normal mTORC1 signaling pathways, activated autophagy and reduced total tau
protein level in cellular models. We posit that tauopathies cause impaired
arginine metabolism and uncoupling of arginine-sensing mTORC1 signaling,
which leads to hyper-mTORC1 activation creating a positive feed forward loop
to augment the tau phenotype. Therefore, arginine sensors can become novel
therapeutic targets to modify tauopathies.

## iPSC Technology: Breaking New Ground

## L. Madhavan1,2,3

## 
1Department of Neurology, University of Arizona, Tucson, AZ,
USA

## 
2Evelyn F McKnight Brain Institute, Bio5 Institute, University of
Arizona, Tucson, AZ, USA

## 
3The Center for Innovation in Brain Science, University of
Arizona, Tucson, AZ, USA
The discovery of induced pluripotent stem cells (iPSCs) has challenged
existing paradigms, and revolutionized the fields of developmental biology
and regenerative medicine over the past decade. Not only has iPSC research
provided fundamental insights into basic biology, but it has also forged
advances in unexpected areas, such as human disease modeling, drug
development, and precision medicine. The essence of iPSC technology lies in
the ability to reprogram, via defined factors, somatic cells from patients
with effectively any disorder, to ‘embryonic-like’ pluripotent stem cells.
These patient-derived pluripotent cells can then be differentiated into a
variety of mature cell types, to potentially recapitulate phenotypes of not
only monogenic diseases, but also late-onset polygenic diseases (e.g.
Parkinson’s disease, Alzheimer’s disease, and schizophrenia). Moreover, the
establishment of such disease- and patient-relevant phenotypes would provide
powerful human platforms for finding therapies through candidate drug
testing or high throughput screening. The next decade promises to
significantly propel iPSC technology through improved directed
differentiation methods, and development of organoid culture systems, that
will push the horizons of our knowledge to ultimately help tackle complex
neurological diseases. This seminar will review the basics of iPSC
technology, its applications and limitations, as well as the future
opportunities that it offers.

## A9 Dopamine Neuron Differentiation from Monkey Induced Pluripotent Stem Cells and
Somatic Cell Nuclear Transfer

## R. Malpass, M. Seay, Y. G. Chung and D. E. Redmond, Jr

## Yale University School of Medicine, New Haven, CT, USA
Patient-derived stem cells may provide a strategy for the treatment of many
diseases including Parkinson’s disease (PD), a degenerative disease
characterized by the loss of A9 dopaminergic neurons in the substantia nigra
pars compacta. Although numerous in vitro studies have reported successful
generation of dopamine neurons derived from embryonic stem cells (mouse,
human and nonhuman primates), many of these species are suboptimal for PD
modeling or unavailable for transplantation experiments. Here we report the
generation of A9-like neurons for African green monkey (AGM), a nonhuman
primate that closely mimics PD signs in humans. We generated two different
types of stem cell lines: somatic cell nuclear transfer (SCNT) lines from 11
monkeys and induced pluripotent stem cell (iPSC) lines from 2 adult monkeys
using fibroblasts. We show that all the SCNT and iPSC lines express markers
associated with pluripotency, including octamer-binding transcription factor
3/4 (Oct3/4), NANOG, stage-specific embryonic antigen 4 (SSEA-4), and
TRA-1-60, and do not express markers for differentiated cells. Adapting
human neural induction protocols to primate cell lines poses significant
challenges, and the success of protocols used to derive dopamine neurons
from human embryonic stem cells (hESCs) vary greatly. Using a protocol
modified from Kirkeby et al., we show our lines are capable of in vitro
differentiation towards A9 dopaminergic neurons. Immunofluorescence analysis
revealed positive staining for tyrosine hydroxylase (TH) and forkhead box A2
(FOXA2). Western analysis shows expression of key neuronal markers in mature
A9 neurons (LIM homeobox transcription factor 1 alpha; LMX1A) and absence of
the stem cell pluripotency marker TRA-1-60. Qualitative real-time polymerase
chain reaction (qPCR) analysis indicates that during in vitro
differentiation towards A9 neurons, AGM and hESC lines express neuronal
markers at comparable time points. These results indicate that AGM SCNT and
iPSC lines are capable of expressing specific A9 dopaminergic neuron markers
and may represent functional and transplantable A9 neurons for further
studies in monkeys.

## Gene Therapy Modalities

## F. P. Manfredsson

## Department of Translational Science & Molecular Medicine, College of
Human Medicine, Michigan State University, Grand Rapids, MI, USA
Gene therapy, regardless of the means by which it is performed, is
classically associated with the treatment of the disease. For instance, the
delivery of a corrected protein to correct the toxic loss of a mutated
protein, is a common means to treat a disorder. Nevertheless, gene therapy
is an incredibly valuable tool in the neuroscience laboratory. Gene therapy
can be used to manipulate neural activity in specific circuits, to measure
neurological and physiological processes, to model disease, and many other
possibilities. This seminar will discuss common modalities by which gene
therapy is being used in the research laboratories, and the different
questions that can be addressed using gene therapy.

## 
ESC-Derived Oligodendrocyte Progenitor Cells (AST-OPC1): Clinical Update
and Preclinical Progress in Cervical Spinal Cord Injury

## N. C. Manley, C. C. Case, E. D. Wirth III, and J. S. Lebkowski

## Asterias Biotherapeutics. Fremont, CA, USA
AST-OPC1 is a population of early-stage oligodendrocyte progenitor cells
(OPCs) that is differentiated from human embryonic stem cells (hESCs) using
the H1 cell line. The AST-OPC1 differentiation process is commercially
scalable, compatible with current good manufacturing practices, and the
resulting OPC population has been approved by the United Stated Food and
Drug Administration for early phase clinical testing in spinal cord injury
(SCI). Studies of AST-OPC1 in rodent models of SCI provide evidence of its
therapeutic benefit when transplanted directly into the injured spinal cord
approximately 1 week after injury and have indicated that AST-OPC1 can act
via multiple therapeutic mechanisms to promote CNS repair and augment
functional recovery. In this presentation, we will discuss recent
preclinical studies that explore AST-OPC1’s cellular composition, potency,
and multi-faceted mechanisms of action. An update on the ongoing cervical
SCI clinical trial will be provided, and future directions of this candidate
cell therapy will be discussed.

## Viral Vector-Mediated α-Synuclein Overexpression Rat Models of Parkinsonian and
Cerebellar Variants of Multiple System Atrophy

## D. J. Marmion,1 R. J. Mandel,2 D. Kirik,3 Y.
Chu,1 T. J. McCown,4,5 S. J. Gray,6,7,8 and
J. H. Kordower1,9

## 
1Department of Neurological Sciences, Rush University Medical
Center, Chicago, IL, USA

## 
2 Department of Neuroscience, University of Florida, Gainesville,
FL, USA

## 
3 Department of Experimental Medical Science, Lund University,
Lund, Sweden

## 
4Gene Therapy Center, University of North Carolina, Chapel Hill,
NC, USA

## 
5Department of Psychiatry, University of North Carolina, Chapel
Hill, NC, USA

## 
6Department of Pediatrics, University of Texas Southwestern
Medical Center, Dallas, TX, USA

## 
7Department of Molecular Biology, University of Texas
Southwestern Medical Center, Dallas, TX, USA

## 
8Department of Neurology and Neurotherapeutics, University of
Texas Southwestern Medical Center, Dallas, TX, USA

## 
9The Van Andel Institute, Grand Rapids, MI, USA
Multiple system atrophy (MSA) is a rare, neurodegenerative disorder with an
uncertain etiology and pathophysiology. MSA can be stratified into a
Parkinsonian variant (MSA-P) characterized by striatonigral degeneration
with associated Parkinsonian-like motor features, and a cerebellar variant
(MSA-C) characterized by olivopontocerebellar atrophy with associated
ataxia. MSA is a unique synucleinopathy, where α-synuclein accumulates
preferentially in oligodendrocytes. MSA is believed to be a primary
oligodendrogliopathy in which α-synuclein aggregation is thought to elicit
dysfunction in oligodendrocytes, causing disruption in myelin and reduced
neurotrophic support leading to secondary neurodegeneration. Traditional
animal modeling of MSA relies on transgenic murine models in which human
α-synuclein is overexpressed using different oligodendrocyte-specific
promoters. In this study, we sought to develop novel viral vector-mediated
overexpression models of both MSA-P and MSA-C to establish more clinically
relevant models for future use as platforms for drug discovery. α-synuclein
or green fluorescent protein (GFP) was overexpressed in oligodendrocytes
using a recently developed, novel oligotrophic adeno-associated virus
vector, Olig001. Sprague-Dawley rats were injected in the striatum to model
MSA-P and in the pontine nucleus and middle cerebellar peduncle to model
MSA-C. Histological analysis showed 94–97% of the GFP-positive cells
colocalizing with oligodendroglial marker Olig2. There was little
coexpression in neurons (2.9–4.7%) or astrocytes (0.18–0.49%), indicating
the highly oligodendrocyte-specific tropism of this vector in vivo.
Widespread α-synuclein accumulation was seen throughout the injection areas,
which were resistant to Proteinase K digestion, indicating the formation of
insoluble inclusions. Loss of myelin was observed in white matter regions
containing α-synuclein expression. Unbiased stereological counts indicate a
∼20% loss of neurons in the striatum of MSA-P rats. Taken together, our data
indicates the establishment of novel animal models of the Parkinsonian and
cerebellar variants of MSA, recapitulating key aspects of the disease.
Long-term studies are underway to evaluate the progression of pathology and
development of motor symptoms.

## Conserved Mechanisms Underlying Benefit of MultiStem Cell Therapy for
Neurological Injury and Disease

## R. W. Mays, B. T. Lang, and S. A. Busch

## Department of Regenerative Medicine, Athersys, Inc., Cleveland, OH,
USA
Over the past 20 years, cellular therapies have progressed into the clinic
for the treatment of neurological disease and injury, however, an
understanding of the mechanisms of benefit following cell infusion has
remained incomplete. Athersys is developing MultiStem®, a unique
allogeneic cell therapy, for the treatment of multiple indications. To
evaluate potential conserved mechanisms of action underlying MultiStem
treatment we have performed focused preclinical animal studies in models of
central nervous system (CNS) injury and disease. Based on cumulative
results, we hypothesize that MultiStem infusion alters the innate immune
response directly via interactions with splenocytes. Detailed
biodistribution studies have revealed that MultiStem cells home primarily to
the spleen in an injury-dependent fashion, reside in the marginal zone and
likely interact with splenocytes prior to efflux. Further, MultiStem
treatment reduces both systemic inflammation and neuro-inflammation, as
demonstrated by a reduction of proinflammatory gene changes, circulating
proinflammatory cytokines, and monocytes-macrophages entering the nervous
system. We have observed a consistent Th2 type response following MultiStem
infusion, consisting of increased T regulatory cells and ‘alternatively’
activated (M2) macrophage/microglial phenotypes. Our completed phase II
randomized double-blinded placebo-controlled clinical trial of MultiStem in
acute ischemic stroke has provided support of these preclinical findings.
Intravenous delivery of 1.2 billion cells, 24–36 hours following stroke
onset provided sustained significant functional improvements at 1 year, but
also significantly reduced global proinflammatory cytokine levels and
circulating T-cells in the blood. Our studies have identified conserved
mechanisms underlying immunomodulation leading to neuroprotection and
recovery following MultiStem therapy.

## Neurodegeneration and Neuroprotection in a Nonhuman Primate Model of Parkinsonian
Cardiac Dysautonomia

## J. Metzger,1,2 R. Fleddermann,1 H. Matsoff,1
G. Wachowski,1 V. Bondarenko,1 H. Simmons,1 A.
Kapoor,1 T. Ziegler,1 C. F. Moore,3 and M.
E. Emborg1,2,4

## 
1Wisconsin National Primate Research Center, University of
Wisconsin – Madison, Madison, WI, USA

## 
2Cellular and Molecular Pathology Graduate Program, University of
Wisconsin – Madison, Madison, WI, USA

## 
3Department of Psychology, University of Wisconsin – Madison,
Madison, WI, USA

## 
4Department of Medical Physics, University of Wisconsin –
Madison, Madison, WI, USA
Cardiac dysautonomia is a common nonmotor symptom of Parkinson’s disease
associated with loss of sympathetic innervation to the heart and decreased
plasma catecholamines. Disease-modifying strategies are not available, and
biomarkers are lacking. Systemic administration of the catecholaminergic
neurotoxin 6-hydroxydopmaine (6-OHDA) recapitulates this loss of cardiac
sympathetic innervation and circulating catecholamines. We recently used
positron emission tomography (PET) imaging in 10 6-OHDA-treated (50 mg/kg
intravenously) adult, male rhesus monkeys to visualize and quantify cardiac
sympathetic neurodegeneration, increased inflammation, and oxidative stress
following the neurotoxin, which were attenuated in pioglitazone-treated
animals (n=5; 5 mg/kg) compared with placebo
(n=5). Here we report post-mortem characterization of
heart and adrenal tissue in these animals compared with age- and sex-matched
normal controls (n=5). Tissues were collected following
paraformaldehyde (PFA) perfusion, blocked in paraffin, sectioned at 5 µm,
immunostained, and immunoreactivity (-ir) quantified as the area above
threshold (%AAT) in the National Institutes of Health, ImageJ. In the heart,
immunohistochemistry was performed for sympathetic innervation (tyrosine
hydroxylase; TH) and inflammation (human leukocyte antigen-DR; HLA-DR) in
three layers (base to apex) and four regions (septal, anterior, lateral,
inferior) of the left ventricle. 6-OHDA induced a significant loss of
cardiac nerve bundle TH-ir in all left ventricle levels and regions in both
placebo- and pioglitazone-treated animals compared with healthy controls
(p<0.001); no differences were found between placebo
and pioglitazone groups. A repeated measures correlation across cardiac
regions and levels was observed between TH-ir and in vivo PET data for
sympathetic innervation 12 weeks post-6-OHDA (r=0.442,
p<0.000001). HLA-DR-ir was greater in the
pioglitazone group than normal controls when evaluated semi-quantitatively
in cardiac nerve bundles (p<0.01) and around vessels
(p<0.01). Additionally, perivascular HLA-DR-ir was
elevated in the cardiac base relative to apex, similar to PET findings.
Catecholamine production in the adrenal medulla was analyzed by TH-ir and
aromatic amino acid decarboxylase (AADC)-ir quantification. TH-ir %AAT was
reduced in placebo animals (53.6%) compared with controls (90.5%;
p<0.0001), and was preserved in the pioglitazone
group (78.9%) compared with placebo (p<0.01). AADC-ir
%AAT in the adrenal medulla confirmed these findings, with a significant
difference between placebo (50.0%) and control (86.7%) animals
(p<0.01), but not between pioglitazone (69.0%) and
control. High performance liquid chromatography (HPLC) for plasma
norepinephrine showed significantly higher percent loss from baseline to 1
week post-6-OHDA in placebo (69.1% loss) compared with pioglitazone-treated
(57.4% loss) animals (p=0.016). Overall, these results
validate in vivo findings of 6-OHDA-associated cardiac sympathetic
denervation and demonstrate the ability of pioglitazone to preserve enzymes
critical for catecholamine production in the adrenal medulla.

## Somatic Transgenesis Modeling in the Brain Using Different Promoters to Target
Cell Type-Specific Gene Expression

## S. Modrow, P. E. Cruz, C. Ceballos-Diaz, A. M. Rosario, T. E. Golde, and P.
Chakrabarty

## Center for Translational Research in Neurodegenerative Disease,
Department of Neuroscience, University of Florida, Gainesville, FL,
USA
Neurodegenerative diseases affect different areas in the brain; therefore,
targeting different cell types will be an advantageous strategy for further
research. The Chakrabarty and Golde laboratories have proposed an experiment
that will evaluate the efficacy of cell-specific promoters to target
different cell types in the mouse brain. This experiment will be performed
by using self-complementary adeno-associated virus (scAAV), to circumvent
the need for DNA synthesis after injection, and AAV capsid 6 that is triply
mutated at Y731F/Y705F/T492 V (TM6). TM6 has been shown to effectively
permeate microglial cells, one of the most difficult cell types to permeate,
so we set out to test each cell-specific promoter with TM6 to evaluate if
the capsid effectively targets other cell types. The following different
specific cell types were tested: neuron-specific (microtubule-associated
protein 2 (MAP2), Ca2+/calmodulin-dependent protein kinase II
(CaMKII), neuron-specific enolase, nestin and synapsin), astrocyte-specific
(glial fibrillary acidic protein (GFAP), GFAP-104 and brain lipid-binding
protein (BLBP)) and oligodendrocyte-specific (myelin basic protein (MBP)).
Each recombinant AAV genome was self-complementary and expressed a reporter
gene, enhanced green fluorescent protein (EGFP), from a cell type-specific
promoter and was packaged in the TM6 capsid. AAV preparations were
intraventricularly injected into the subventricular area of neonatal
wild-type mice. Mice brains were harvested 15 days and 30 days later. These
brains were fixed in formalin, paraffin-embedded and expression of EGFP was
tested in different cell types using immunohistochemical techniques. We
observed that all of the neuronal promoters resulted in neuron-specific
expression of EGFP, except the nestin promoter which also targeted astrocyte
cells. The astrocyte promoter-induced expression of EGFP was tightly
regulated, resulting in primarily astrocyte-specific expression of EGFP. The
oligodendrocyte promoters, however, either did not result in any expression
or showed scant expression from non-specific cell types. This exhaustive
analysis has thus yielded a tool-kit that can be used for understanding gene
function in different cells or delivering cell-specific therapeutic
techniques in the brain.

## Local Action of Monocyte Chemoattractant Protein-1 and Osteopontin in Murine
Aneurysm Healing

## K. Motwani,1 D. Wajima,2 S. Hourani,1 H. Z.
Fazal,1 K. Hosaka,1 and B. L. Hoh1

## 
1Department of Neurosurgery, University of Florida, Gainesville,
FL, USA

## 
2Department of Neurosurgery, Nara Medical University, Kashihara,
Nara, Japan
Asymptomatic cerebral aneurysms occur in up to 5% of adults. In aneurysm
therapy, though complication rates are lower for endovascular coiling than
for operative clipping, aneurysm recurrence is a limitation of coiling.
Recurrence is attributed to recanalization of the aneurysm neck following
coil embolization, whereas the goal is to establish durable occlusion from
the parent artery. Coiling therapy is limited by lack of mechanistic
knowledge regarding aneurysm healing. In our murine aneurysm model,
sustained local elution of monocyte chemoattractant protein-1 (MCP-1; also
known as C-C motif chemokine ligand 2; CCL2) increases tissue ingrowth into
the aneurysm sac which requires osteopontin (OPN)-mediated signaling. Local
MCP-1 activity is necessary for murine aneurysm healing. OPN mediates
healing by reparative (M2) macrophage interaction with lymphocytes and
platelets, by cluster of differentiation 44 (CD44) or integrin pathways.
Carotid aneurysms are created in wild-type (WT), MCP-1 knock-out (KO) or C-C
motif chemokine receptor 2 (CCR2) KO mice using our established model.
MCP-1-eluting, OPN-eluting, or control poly(lactic-co-glycolic acid)
(PLGA)-coated platinum coils are implanted into the aneurysm sac. Systemic
neutralizing antibody is applied to inhibit MCP-1 or OPN pathways. Cytokine
levels of OPN-coiled aneurysm lysate are assayed in the early days of
aneurysm healing. Coiled aneurysm tissue is measured for % tissue ingrowth
into the aneurysm lumen and immunohistochemistry for effector cell
populations. With MCP-1-coiling, systemic depletion of MCP-1 or CCR2 by
neutralization (0.8% or 9.2%) or KO (11% or 4.6%) attenuates luminal
ingrowth versus WT (56%, p<0.0001). M2
macrophage-stained area is increased in WT (7.4%) versus MCP-1/CCR2 KO (1.4%
or 1.6%) or inhibitor (1.4% or 1.5%) groups. Systemic MCP-1 administration
reveals no difference in ingrowth versus vehicle. Cytokine arrays at
post-OPN coiling days 1, 3, and 7 reveal upregulation of numerous cytokines
including platelet factor 4 (PF4) and interleukin 17 (IL-17) versus control.
Local delivery of MCP-1 is critical for murine aneurysm healing. OPN may
further activate lymphocyte subsets and platelets to promote aneurysm
healing, which merits future study.

## Insulin-Like Growth Factor-2, an Increasing Factor in Neonatal White Matter
Injury Brain, Promotes the Differentiation of Oligodendrocyte Progenitor Cells In
Vitro

## S. Ogawa, M. Hagiwara, T. Shimizu, Y. Ueda, S. Misumi, A. Ishida, and H.
Hida

## Department of Neurophysiology & Brain Science, Nagoya City University
Graduate School of Medical Sciences, Nagoya, Japan
A rat model of neonatal white matter injury (NWMI) was made by
hypoxia-ischemia at postnatal day 3 (P3). This model had fewer
oligodendrocyte (OL) progenitor cells (OPCs), and exhibited disorganization
of OL development in layers II/III of the sensorimotor cortex without
apparent neuronal loss, as well as mild hindlimb dysfunction with imbalanced
motor coordination in adulthood. Alterations of dendrite morphology and
electrical responses in the cortex were observed before the rearrangement of
the motor map in the model. Green fluorescent protein (GFP)-positive OPCs
grafted into the corpus callosum at P5 can survive at least for 3 weeks and
differentiate to adenomatous polyposis coli (APC or CC-1) positive cells
accompanied by myelination. To know what kinds of factors are related to the
differentiation of grafted OPCs, analysis of gene expression at P5 of
neonatal WMI model was performed. Among the 98 factors increased, we focused
on insulin-like growth factor (IGF)-2, and investigated the role of IGF-2 on
cultured OPCs. OPCs obtained from mixed glial culture, were plated on
poly-l-lysine (PLL)-coated slide glass at a density of
5000/cm2, expanded with fibroblast growth factor 2 (FGF-2)
and platelet-derived growth factor (PDGF) for 4 days and allowed to
differentiate for 6 days with ciliary neurotrophic factor (CNTF) and
3,5,3’-triiodothyronine (T3). IGF-2 (100 ng/ml) was applied to OPCs from the
start of the differentiation, followed by fixation at 2 or 6 days later.
Serial expressions of the following immunological markers on OPCs were first
confirmed: neural glial antigen 2 (NG2), PDGF receptor A (PDGFRα), CC-1 and
2’,3’-cyclic-nucleotide 3’-phosphodiesterase (CNPase). It was found that the
proportion of NG2-positive cells and PDGFRα-positive cells were
significantly decreased while the proportion of CC1-positive cells and
CNPase-positive cells were increased on the second day. A similar tendency
was also observed on day 6 of differentiation. These data suggest that
IGF-2, a factor upregulated in NWMI brain, promotes the differentiation of
OPCs, which is more prominent in the presence of CNTF and T3.

## Schwann Cell Transplantation Alters the Innate Immune Response After Spinal Cord
Injury

## D. D. Pearse,1-5 J. Bastidas,3 S. S.
Izabel,3 Y. Xu,3 A. A. Morales,3 and M.
Ghosh1-3

## 
1Bruce W. Carter Department of Veterans Affairs Medical Center,
Miami, FL, USA

## 
2Department of Neurological Surgery, University of Miami Leonard
M. Miller School of Medicine, Miami FL, USA

## 
3The Miami Project to Cure Paralysis, University of Miami Leonard
M. Miller School of Medicine, Miami FL, USA

## 
4The Interdisciplinary Stem Cell Institute, University of Miami
Leonard M. Miller School of Medicine, Miami FL, USA

## 
5The Neuroscience Program, University of Miami Leonard M. Miller
School of Medicine, Miami FL, USA
Schwann cell (SC) transplantation has shown potential as a therapeutic
strategy for spinal cord injury (SCI) treatment. Currently, United States
Food and Drug Administration-approved phase I clinical trials seek to
determine the safety of SC transplantation in humans with subacute and
chronic SCI. SCs are the myelinating glia of the peripheral nervous system
(PNS) and are known to play a critical role in repair after injury. In the
PNS, SC-mediated repair occurs in the presence of macrophage recruitment
from the peripheral circulation and an upregulation of both pro- and
anti-inflammatory mediators. However, the interaction between SCs and the
activities of the innate immune response during central nervous system
injury and repair remains poorly understood. The goal of our study was to
assess if SCs, when implanted subacutely in an animal model of incomplete
thoracic SCI, were able to regulate the phenotypic state of microglia and
macrophages within the lesion environment. Using fluorescence-activated cell
sorting (FACS) analysis and immunohistochemistry, we found that transplanted
SCs drive a specific anti-inflammatory low level of induced nitric oxide
synthase (iNOSLOW) phenotypic state, in activated immune cells,
without altering the expression of other proinflammatory markers like
cyclooxygenase 2 (COX2) and cluster of differentiation 38 (CD38), or
enhancing the levels of characteristic anti-inflammatory markers, such as
arginase 1 (ARG-1) and CD206. In addition, while the SC graft showed less
CD68 positive (ED1+) or ionized calcium-binding adapter molecule
1+ (Iba1+) expression compared with lesion-only
controls, both markers were elevated in adjacent tissue surrounding the
transplants along with increased coexpression of the scavenger receptor
CD163. In sum, these findings have revealed that SCs, within the injured
spinal cord milieu, can drive alternative phenotypic states of activated
immune cells of the innate immune response and these alterations could play
a key role in their reparative action.

## The Difference Between Activity and Function: Utilizing Mouse Models and hiPSCs
to Elucidate the Electropathophysiology of Bipolar Disorder

## C. Pernia,1 R. O’Donnell,1 A. Winquist,1 B.
Tobe,1 Y. Goshima,2 and E. Y. Snyder1

## 
1Del E. Webb Center for Neuroscience, Aging, & Stem Cell
Research, Sanford Burnham Prebys Medical Discovery Institute, La Jolla, CA,
USA

## 
2Department of Molecular Pharmacology and Neurobiology, Yokohama
City University Graduate School of Medicine, Yokohama, Japan
Bipolar disorder (BD) is a neuropsychiatric disease that impacts 2.6% of the
adult population, and is characterized by oscillations in depressive and
manic behavior. BD is the most fatal psychiatric disease due to a high
suicide rate, and little is known regarding its underlying pathology.
Currently there is no therapy that is both safe and efficacious for treating
BD, which is a critical unmet need. Utilizing transgenic mouse models, we
recently demonstrated collapsin response mediator protein-2 (CRMP2) plays an
integral role in BD’s molecular pathology; to the best of our knowledge, our
study is the first to provide mechanistic insight into the molecular
pathology of BD. How CRMP2 mediates BD has yet to be elucidated. Employing
CRMP2 transgenic mice as models for BD, we have discovered CRMP2 activity
impacts neuronal electrophysiology, structure, and proteomics.
Interestingly, many of the aberrations found in the transgenic CRMP2 neurons
superficially appear counterintuitive, but under further examination expose
the complexity of how neuronal networks function. Specifically, BD-like
transgenic CRMP2 neurons appear to have hyperactive calcium activity, while
having less neuronal-network signaling. Collectively, these works begin to
illuminate long sought-after insights in BD pathology, and offer new targets
for future BD therapeutics.

## Stem Cell Factor and Granulocyte Colony-Stimulating Factor Promote Brain Repair
and Cognitive Function Through VEGF-Mediated Angiogenesis in a Mouse Model of
CADASIL

## S. Ping, X. Qiu, M. Kyle, K. Hughes, J. Longo, and L.-R. Zhao

## Department of Neurosurgery, SUNY Upstate Medical University, Syracuse,
NY, USA
Cerebral autosomal dominant arteriopathy with subcortical infarct and
leukoencephalopathy (CADASIL), a NOTCH3 gene mutation-induced cerebral small
vascular disease, is characterized by progressive degeneration of vascular
smooth muscle cells (VSMCs) in cerebral small arteries, leading to ischemic
stroke and vascular dementia. There is currently no treatment that can slow
the progression of CADASIL. We have recently demonstrated the efficacy of
combining two hematopoietic growth factors, stem cell factor and granulocyte
colony-stimulating factor (SCF+G-CSF) in improving cognitive function and
increasing cerebrovascular density (angiogenesis) in a transgenic mouse
model of CADASIL (TgNotch3R90C). The aim of this study was to determine how
SCF+G-CSF promoted angiogenesis and whether SCF+G-CSF-enhanced angiogenesis
was involved in brain repair and cognitive improvement in TgNotch3R90C mice.
To examine whether SCF+G-CSF-promoted angiogenesis is mediated by vascular
endothelial growth factor (VEGF), Avastin, a drug for inhibiting
angiogenesis by neutralizing the biologic activity of VEGF, was given before
SCF+G-CSF treatment. Water maze testing results revealed that the
SCF+G-CSF-improved spatial learning and memory in TgNotch3R90C mice was
prevented by Avastin pretreatment. In addition, reduced cerebrovascular
densities in TgNotch3R90C mice were restored by SCF+G-CSF treatment, whereas
the SCF+G-CSF-enhanced angiogenesis was completely eliminated by Avastin.
Moreover, Avastin also blocked the SCF+G-CSF-increased neural network
rewiring (microtubule-associated protein 2 (MAP2), neurofilament marker
SMI312, and growth-associated protein 43 (GAP43) immunostaining),
neurogenesis (doublecortin immunostaining) and synaptogenesis (polysynaptic
density 95 (PSD95) and synaptophysin immunostaining) in the brains of
TgNotch3R90C mice. Furthermore, Western blot data showed that VEGF
expression was significantly decreased in cultured cerebral VSMCs of
TgNotch3R90C mice and the whole brain of TgNotch3R90C mice compared with the
age-matched wild-type mice. SCF+G-CSF treatment enhanced the VEGF expression
in both the cultured VSMCs and brain tissue of TgNotch3R90C mice. These
findings suggest that SCF+G-CSF-increased VEGF may play a key role in
enhancing cerebral angiogenesis, which is required for promoting brain
repair and cognitive function in a mouse model of CADASIL. This study sheds
light on how hematopoietic growth factors restrict CADASIL pathology.

## Cerebral Chemokine Receptor CCR5 Contributes to Postischemic Brain
Protection

## S. Ping, M. Kyle, X. Qiu, and L.-R. Zhao

## Department of Neurosurgery, SUNY Upstate Medical University, Syracuse,
NY, USA
The chemokine (C-C motif) receptor 5 (CCR5) is a G protein-coupled receptor
highly expressed on T-cells and macrophages. It has been well studied that
CCR5 is involved in the recruitment of immune cells in both physiological
and pathological conditions. Emerging evidence has revealed that CCR5 is
also expressed in the brain and plays an important role in the central
nervous system. However, the role of CCR5 in ischemic brain injury remains
unclear. In this study, we have determined whether hematogenous or cerebral
CCR5 is involved in brain damage after ischemia. Bone marrow chimeras were
created in both wild-type (WT) and CCR5-/- mice (3-month-old
male). After hematopoietic reconstitution at 1 month post-bone marrow
transplantation, permanent cerebral ischemia was performed by permanent
occlusion of the middle cerebral artery (MCAO). At 48 hours after MCAO,
cerebral infarct volume was measured by triphenyl tetrazolium chloride
staining. In an additional experiment, mice were examined for neurological
deficits starting 1 week after MCAO and were sacrificed at 2 months
post-ischemia. Brain sections were processed for histological and
immunohistochemical analyses. We found that CCR5-/- mice
transplanted with WT bone marrow had larger infarcts than those of WT mice
with WT bone marrow transplantation. Importantly, the infarct volume of
CCR5-/- mice that received WT bone marrow transplantation was
similar to those of mice lacking CCR5 both in the brain and in the
hematogenous cells, suggesting that CCR5 in the host brain is involved in
the brain damage after ischemia. Sensorimotor function (tape removal test)
and motor coordination (rotarod test) were significantly decreased in
CCR5-/- mice that received either WT or CCR5-/-
bone marrow transplantation. At 2 months after MCAO, the infarct cavity was
still significantly enlarged in CCR5-/- mice that received either
WT or CCR5-/- bone marrow transplantation as compared with the WT
mice. In addition, the number of Fluoro-Jade C-positive degenerative neurons
in the peri-infarct area was significantly increased in the
CCR5-/- mice. We also observed that microtubule-associated
protein 2 (MAP2) positive dendrites were significantly decreased in the
peri-infarct area of CCR5-/- mice treated with either WT or
CCR5-/- bone marrow. These data suggest that cerebral CCR5 is
required for neuroprotection in ischemic brain injury. This study offers new
insight into a novel role of CCR5 in stroke, which would provide a new
target for stroke therapy.

## Combined Stem Cell Factor and Granulocyte Colony-Stimulating Factor Promote
Corticospinal Tract Sprouting and Improve Neurological Function in the Chronic Phase
of Traumatic Brain Injury

## X. Qiu, M. Kyle, K. Hughes and L.-R. Zhao

## Department of Neurosurgery, SUNY Upstate Medical University, Syracuse,
NY, USA
Traumatic brain injury (TBI) is a major cause of long-term disability among
children and adults. To date, evidence-based treatment for TBI recovery,
especially in the chronic phase, is not yet available. Our previous studies
have shown that combined stem cell factor (SCF) and granulocyte
colony-stimulating factor (G-CSF) can enhance cerebral neural network
remodeling and improve neurological function recovery in the chronic phase
of stroke. However, the efficacy of the combined SCF and G-CSF (SCF+G-CSF)
to enhance TBI recovery in the chronic phase remains unexplored. In this
study, we used a controlled cortical impact model of TBI to determine the
effectiveness of a single or repeated SCF+G-CSF treatment on central nervous
system (CNS) repair in the chronic phase of TBI. At 3 months post-TBI, mice
were randomly divided into three groups: a vehicle control group, a single
SCF+G-CSF treatment group, and a repeated SCF+G-CSF treatment group.
Age-matched mice without TBI served as sham controls. SCF+G-CSF were
subcutaneously injected for 7 consecutive days (single treatment) or the
7-day treatment was repeated a total of three times with a 4-week interval
between each treatment (repeated treatment). Neurobehavioral testing
revealed that repeated treatment significantly improved recovery of spatial
learning and memory (water maze test) and sensorimotor function (adhesive
tape removal test). The TBI mice that received a single SCF+G-CSF treatment
showed a trend towards improved sensorimotor function
(p=0.069). Using the approach of tracking corticospinal
tract pathways by intracortical injections of biotinylated dextran amine in
the contralesional hemisphere, we observed that the contralateral
corticospinal tract sprouting to the lesion side of 5–7 cervical spinal
segments was significantly increased in TBI mice that received the single
treatment and repeated treatment of SCF+G-CSF while the repeated treatment
showed superior enhancement effects in sprouting of corticospinal tract
fibers as compared with the single treatment. Moreover, Sholl analysis of
the sprouting axons further confirmed that both the single treatment and
repeated treatment of SCF+G-CSF significantly increased sprouting axons when
compared with the vehicle controls. The repeated SCF+G-CSF
treatment-enhanced axon sprouting was much greater than the single treatment
group. Confocal imaging also revealed that the newly generated axons formed
synapses with other neurons in the cervical spine. Furthermore, the number
of sprouting axons was positively correlated with sensorimotor function
recovery. These findings suggest that combined SCF and G-CSF treatment in
the chronic phase of TBI promotes corticospinal tract sprouting and improves
neurological function recovery. This study provides a potential novel
therapy for chronic TBI recovery and reveals a possible mechanism underlying
SCF+G-CSF treatment-enhanced TBI recovery.

## The Role of eIF5A Hypusination on TDP-43 Accumulation and Stress Granule
Formation in Frontotemporal Dementia TDP-43 Proteinopathy

## Z. Quadri,1,2 S. Sazi,1,2 S. Smeltzer,1,2 F.
Zamudio,1,2 and M.-L. B. Selenica1,2

## 
1Byrd Alzheimer’s Institute, University of South Florida, Tampa,
FL, USA

## 
2Department of Pharmaceutical Sciences, College of Pharmacy,
University of South Florida, Tampa, FL, USA
Transactive response (Tar) DNA Binding Protein-43 (TDP-43) is a heterogeneous
ribonuclear protein and is linked to frontotemporal dementia (FTD)
pathology. FTD refers to a group of disorders resulting in progressive brain
atrophy involving the frontal and/or temporal lobe. One major feature of FTD
neuropathology is nucleocytoplasmic shuttling of TDP-43 and inclusion
formation in the cytoplasm. Recently, accumulation of TDP-43 protein in
stress granules (SGs) has been reported to be the surrogate feature of FTD
pathology. Interestingly, the eukaryotic translation initiation factor 5A
(eIF5A), is a crucial translation factor with linkage to nucleocytoplasmic
transport, mRNA stability and SG formation. eIF5A is the only known protein
undergoing a post-translation modification known as hypusine, eliciting
therefore activation of eIF5A (eIF5Ahypk50). We found a
correlation between the levels of eIF5Ahypk50 and TDP-43
pathology in the TDP-43 transgenic mouse model. Moreover, we found increased
SG formation in this model, as measured by expression levels of
T-cell-restricted intracellular antigen-1 (TIA-1; SG marker). By
immunoprecipitation, we demonstrate a direct interaction of TDP-43 with
eIF5Ahypk50 proteins, suggesting that eIF5Ahypk50
binds to and promotes TDP-43 accumulation in SGs and the cytoplasm. Indeed,
our group is the first to report that pharmacological or small interfering
RNA (siRNA) inhibition of hypusination reduces cytoplasmic TDP-43 levels and
its accumulation in SGs, suggesting that modification in the eIF5A pathway
beneficially reduces TDP-43 pathology. Strategies to investigate the exact
mechanism by which eIF5Ahypk50 exerts its effects on TDP-43
pathology both in vitro and in animal models is currently under
investigation. Preliminary genetic studies have implicated
eIF5Ahypk50 in impairing RNA metabolism of TDP-43 target
molecules, suggesting a TDP-43 loss-of-function. Overall, we reveal
eIF5Ahypk50 as a novel and plausible therapeutic target in
TDP-43 proteinopathy disorders.

## Gene Expression Changes and Chronic Responses in a Repetitive Mild TBI Mouse
Model

## W. A. Ratliff,1,2,3 D. C. Driscoll,1,2 S.
Neyra,1,2 D. Qupty,4 C. G. Pick,4 and B. A.
Citron1,2,3

## 
1Laboratory of Molecular Biology, Research & Development,
Department of Veterans Affairs, Bay Pines, FL, USA

## 
2East Orange Campus of the VA NJ Health Care Systems, East
Orange, NJ, USA

## 
3Department of Molecular Medicine, University of South Florida
Morsani College of Medicine, Tampa, FL, USA

## 
4Department of Anatomy and Anthropology, Sackler School of
Medicine, Tel Aviv University, Tel Aviv, Israel
The incidence of traumatic brain injury (TBI) is estimated at 0.5% per year
worldwide, with a much higher frequency among service personnel and
athletes. The majority of TBIs are mild; however, even mild injuries can
result in deleterious cognitive effects, especially if these injuries are
repetitive in nature. There is no current effective treatment for these
types of injuries. In an effort to better understand the underlying
mechanisms of injury, and how to treat it, we tested mice receiving closed
head injuries once per week for 5 weeks along with potentially synergistic
treatment by tert-butylhydroquinone (tBHQ), a nuclear factor erythroid
2-related factor (Nrf2) antioxidant pathway activator, and pioglitazone, a
peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor (PPAR)-γ agonist. At acute and
chronic times, we evaluated gene expression, cognitive changes, and
immunohistochemistry for microglial changes (ionized calcium-binding adapter
molecule 1; Iba1) and lipid peroxidation (4-hydroxynonenal). mRNA samples
from the ipsilateral hippocampi 1 day post-injury were evaluated with
Affymetrix GeneChip Arrays. Our initial examination (four groups,
n=6 per group) indicated that genes displayed a variety
of expression patterns. For example, dysregulations after injuries alone
included upregulation of G protein-coupled receptor 3
(Gpr3) and downregulation of aminolevulinic acid synthase
(Alas2). After injuries, the transcription factor
modulation caused elevation of cysteine-rich secretory protein LCCL
domain-containing 2 (Crispld2) and lowering of erythroid
differentiation regulator 1 (Erdr1) expression. Some genes
that were decreased by the injury were increased by the treatment, e.g. sex
determining region Y (SRY)-box 3 (Sox3), and certain genes,
like ankyrin repeat and suppressor of cytokine signaling box-containing 6
(Asb6), were induced by the injury and reduced by the
treatment. We have also shown that object recognition memory is impaired 2
months following injury and that this is ameliorated by treatment. Through
these approaches, we hope to better define inflammatory responsive
transcription factor signaling pathways and identify factors that could be
targeted to produce neuroprotection and improve outcomes for TBI
patients.
This study was supported by the Department of Veterans Affairs (Veterans
Health Administration, Office of Research and Development, Rehabilitation
Research and Development (I01RX001520)), the Assistant Secretary of Defense
for Health Affairs through the Congressionally Directed Gulf War Illness
Research Program (W81XWH-16-1-0626), the Florida Department of Health James
and Esther King Biomedical Research Program (4KB14), The Bay Pines
Foundation, and the Veterans Biomedical Research Institute.

## Brain Slice Culture Models of CNS Targeted Gene Expression

## K. E. Rewis, C. L. Croft, P. E. Cruz, and T. E. Golde

## Center for Translational Research in Neurodegenerative Disease,
Department of Neuroscience, McKnight Brain Institute, University of Florida,
Gainesville, FL, USA
We sought to establish ex vivo models for future experiments by employing the
use of organotypic brain slice cultures (BSCs). BSC models can be used to
study aspects of Alzheimer’s disease (AD) through three-dimensional systems
and can be used to observe cellular and molecular processes of the brain in
real-time over long periods in culture. The BSCs of neonatal mice contain
the cortex and hippocampus and are harvested from p8 or p9 mice. The slices
are 350 µm thick and are transduced on day 0 in culture with recombinant
adeno-associated viruses (rAAVs) to deliver fluorescent proteins with
different neuronal and nonneuronal promoters and mutated and native capsid
serotypes. We have used our BSCs in combination with rAAVs to study gene
expression of AD-relevant genes and the development of proteinopathies, but
they show potential to study other aspects of AD such as neuroinflammation
and synaptic and network properties. The rAAVs were used to transduce the
BSCs and show great efficiency since initially they cause mild immune
responses, infect both nondividing and dividing cells, and lack
pathogenicity, but show no toxicity. By using different promoters, rAAVs can
target specific transduction of neurons, astrocytes, oligodendrocytes, and
microglia, and in conjunction with certain capsids, show varying
efficiencies and infectivities. To produce rAAVs, the microscale production
method for rAAV was used where HEK293 T-cells grown in a 6-well plate format
are transfected with plasmid of interest/AAV helper plasmid with
polyethylenimine (PEI) and the media produced transduces the BSCs. This
microscale production method requires minimal incubator space, is cost
efficient, requires small amounts of plasmid of interest, and enables one to
harvest, produce, and transduce on the same day. Using the BSC models and
rAAVs, we were able to determine what capsids and promoters are most
effective and efficient in successfully transducing specific brain cells
relevant to AD ex vivo, which is necessary to further understand and develop
gene therapy. These models could enable streamlining of preclinical
experiments and may be used to further understand mechanisms contributing to
AD and other neurodegenerative diseases.

## Endoplasmic Reticulum Located Trophic Factor CDNF Protects and Maintains Dopamine
Neurons

## M. Saarma

## Institute of Biotechnology, HiLIFE, University of Helsinki, Helsinki,
Finland
In Parkinson’s disease (PD), dopamine (DA) neurons located in the substantia
nigra (SN) degenerate and die. Since all current therapies are symptomatic,
our attempt is to develop novel disease-modifying therapies for PD. Glial
cell line-derived neurotrophic factor (GDNF) and its homologous protein
neurturin can protect and repair DA neurons in animal models of PD, but the
results of their phase II clinical trials with PD patients have given
controversial results. Our group has discovered a new endoplasmic reticulum
(ER)-located neurotrophic factor (NTF)-cerebral dopamine neurotrophic factor
(CDNF). We have solved the crystal and solution nuclear magnetic resonance
structure of CDNF and its homologous protein mesencephalic astrocyte-derived
neurotrophic factor (MANF) and found that they differ from other known NTFs.
We have demonstrated that CDNF can protect and repair midbrain DA neurons in
rodent 6-hydroxydopamine (6-OHDA) and
1-methyl-4-phenyl-1,2,3,6-tetrahydropyridine (MPTP) models of PD at least as
efficiently as GDNF. Thus, CDNF acts like the ‘conventional’ NTFs promoting
cell survival and functional recovery of midbrain circuits. However,
differently from other NTFs, CDNF is mainly located in the ER, where it
regulates ER stress and unfolded protein response (UPR) pathways. In
nonhuman primate models of PD, CDNF protects and repairs dopamine neurons,
and regulates ER stress more efficiently than GDNF. These results indicate
that CDNF may prove to be an efficient disease-modifying therapy for PD. To
understand the role of CDNF in mammals we created CDNF knock-out mice
(Cdnf -/-). CDNF-deficient mice have a normal lifespan, but surprisingly
develop an age-dependent loss of enteric neurons and constipation, similar
to PD patients. There is also an age-dependent amphetamine-induced
hyperactivity in Cdnf -/- mice that most probably is the result of aberrant dopamine
transporter function.

## CRISPR/Cas9 Technology. What is the Big Deal?

## I. M. Sandoval

## Department of Translational Science and Molecular Medicine, College of
Human Medicine, Michigan State University, Grand Rapids, MI, USA
The ability to modify the genome holds enormous potential for biotechnology
and biomedical applications. To facilitate this, a number of technologies
have been developed over the years; the most efficient of which are
‘designer nucleases’. These engineered proteins consist of a catalytic
domain of an endonuclease coupled with a DNA binding domain, allowing you to
introduce a desired modification at a specific genomic location. The newest
class of these customizable nucleases, CRISPR/ Cas9 (Clustered Regular
Interspaced Short Palindromic Repeats/CRISPR-associated protein 9), was
developed from the adaptive immune system of bacteria. In this approach, the
effector domain – the protein Cas9 – is targeted to the desired loci by a
short guide RNA with complementarity to the DNA sequence of interest,
therefore, multiple custom targeting reagents can be easily designed by
standard molecular biology techniques. Furthermore, the nuclease domain of
the Cas9 protein can be mutated to be adapted for applications beyond DNA
editing, such as epigenetic modulation or DNA labeling. Considering its
remarkable ease, efficiency, and versatility, it is no surprise that
CRISPR/Cas9 technology has been described as ‘the biggest biotech discovery
of the century’. This seminar will review the basics of the technology, as
well as potential applications and limitations, including a detailed review
of the workflow for putting CRISPR into practice.

## Differentiation and Characterization of Isogenic Cells from African Green Monkey
for Potential Transplantation

## M. Seay,1 Y. G. Chung,1 J. Lian,1 E.
Sumida,1 R. Malpass,1 E. Sumida,1 T. J.
Collier,2 and D. E. Redmond Jr1

## 
1Department of Psychiatry, Yale School of Medicine, New Haven,
CT, USA

## 
2Translational Science and Molecular Medicine, Michigan State
University, Grand Rapids, MI, USA
Major aspects of idiopathic Parkinson’s disease (PD) are due to a depletion
of dopaminergic neurons in the substantia nigra for which cell replacement
therapy might ameliorate signs and symptoms associated with the disease.
Published evidence and preliminary data in rodents and nonhuman primates
support the hypothesis that dopamine (DA) neuron replacement strategy can
achieve modest success. However, a major limitation in the effectiveness of
DA-ergic neuron transplantation in humans is that (1) only a relatively
small fraction of transplanted cells survive or retain their neural
characteristics and (2) all human studies thus far have been done with
allografts using different protocols for immunosuppression. Since the
contribution of innate immunity in cell replacement strategies is poorly
understood, it is difficult to determine if cell survival and
differentiation limitations post-transplantation are due to inefficient
differentiation methods, allograft issues, or unintended effects of
long-term immunosuppression. To circumvent immune compatibility issues,
patient-derived induced pluripotent somatic cells (IPSCs) and somatic cell
nuclear transfer (SCNT) have emerged as candidates to produce viable
replacement dopamine neurons but have not been extensively studied in
nonhuman primates. Here we present data for the derivation of 10 SCNT and 2
IPSC lines reprogrammed from the adult fibroblasts of African green monkeys.
Our analysis shows normal karyotype, expression of pluripotency markers and
teratoma formation for these lines. We differentiated both lines to A9
subtype dopamine neurons and characterized them based on quantitative
real-time polymerase chain reaction (qPCR) analysis, immunocytochemistry
(ICC), DA release and fluorescence-activated cell sorting (FACS) analysis.
We injected four of the SCNT-derived lines into six monkeys and showed green
fluorescent protein (GFP) expression and cell survival for up to 3 months.
The successful derivation and initial characterization of iPSC and SCNT
lines will prove useful in studies examining the contribution of innate
immunity to cell survival and functionality post-transplantation when
matched or not matched with their fibroblast donors.

## The HSP90 Activator AHA1 Promotes Pathogenic Tau

## L. B. Shelton,1 J. D. Baker,1 D. Zheng,1 J.
Koren III,1 B. S. J. Blagg,2 and L. J. Blair1

## 
1Byrd Alzheimer’s Institute, Department of Molecular Medicine,
University of South Florida, Tampa, FL, USA

## 
2Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry, The University of
Notre Dame, Notre Dame, IN, USA
Pathogenic tau is the hallmark protein in diseases known as tauopathies, the
most common one being Alzheimer’s disease (AD). Previous studies have shown
that heat shock protein 90 (HSP90) and its cochaperones can regulate tau
pathogenicity. The activator of HSP90 adenine triphosphatase (ATPase)
homolog 1 (AHA1) is a cochaperone of HSP90 that stimulates its ATPase
activity. Our lab has shown that AHA1 is able to dramatically increase the
production of aggregated, toxic tau species. AHA1 colocalized with tau
pathology in human brain tissue and this association positively correlated
with AD progression. Overexpression of AHA1 in the rTg4510 tau transgenic
mouse model promoted the formation of both insoluble and oligomeric tau,
which led to both neuronal loss and cognitive deficits. Drugs targeted at
inhibiting HSP90 have been a popular therapeutic treatment in tauopathies
recently, and while these inhibitors do lead to reductions in toxic tau
species, most HSP90 inhibitors are not blood–brain barrier-permeable and can
present associated toxicities. We hypothesized that targeting AHA1, which
stimulates the ATPase activity of HSP90, could be a more direct way of
reducing pathogenic tau. Therefore, we screened several novel AHA1
inhibitors and found that some were able to reduce insoluble tau in vitro.
Overall, these data suggest that AHA1 is able to modulate pathogenic tau
species through its interaction with HSP90 and could offer an excellent
therapeutic target for AD and other tauopathies.

## LISPRO Mitigates Alzheimer-Like Cognitive- And Neuropsychiatric-Behavioral
Deficits in APP/PS1 Mice

## R. D. Shytle,1 A. Habib,2 D. Sawmiller,2 Y.
Xiang,2 D. Rongo,2 J. Tian,2 H.
Hou,2 J. Zeng,2 A. Smith,3 A.
Feng,2 G. Currier,2 and J. Tan2

## 
1Center of Excellence for Aging & Brain Repair, Department of
Neurosurgery & Brain Repair, University of South Florida Morsani College
of Medicine, Tampa, FL, USA

## 
2Department of Psychiatry & Behavioral Neurosciences,
University of South Florida Morsani College of Medicine, Tampa, FL,
USA

## 
3KemPharm, Inc., Celebration, Florida
Alzheimer’s disease (AD) is characterized by progressive decline of cognitive
function with associated neuropsychiatric symptoms including weight loss,
anxiety, agitation, depression, irritability, and aggressiveness. However,
no therapeutic interventions have yet been shown to delay progression of the
disease. Recently, we have shown that LISPRO (LP), an ionic cocrystal of
lithium salicylate and proline, has a better therapeutic profile than
lithium carbonate in terms of safety and efficacy in ameliorating AD
pathology in cell culture and transgenic mouse models. The present study was
designed to evaluate and compare the efficacy of LP with lithium carbonate
(Li2CO3; LC) and lithium salicylate (LS) in
ameliorating cognitive impairments and associated neuropsychiatric symptoms,
including depression, anxiety, irritability, and impaired locomotor
function, in amyloid precursor protein/presenilin 1 (APP/PS1) mice, a
commonly used transgenic model of AD. Female APP/PS1 mice at 4 months of age
were orally treated with LP, LS, or LC for 9 months at 2.25 mmol
lithium/kg/day followed by determination of body weight, growth of internal
organs and cognitive and non-cognitive behavior. Untreated age-matched
non-transgenic mice (B6C3F1/J) served as controls. No significant
differences in the growth of body weight, brain, heart, lung, spleen, liver
or kidney were found between lithium treated- and untreated cohorts. LP
treatment produced superior improvement of cognitive function compared with
untreated APP/PS1 mice, as shown by a lower escape latency during training
and probe trial of the Morris water maze test and longer contextual freezing
time during the fear conditioning test. LP treatment also reduced
depression-like behavior, as assessed by tail suspension test, and
irritability, as assessed by the touch escape test. However, lithium
treatment did not alter anxiety or locomotor activity as assessed by open
field, elevated plus maze or accelerated rotarod tests. Our findings suggest
that LISPRO showed superior prevention of cognitive impairment, depression,
and irritability in female APP/PS1 mice compared with lithium carbonate,
supporting the potential of this lithium formulation for the treatment of
AD.

## The Development of a Neural Stem Cell Therapy for Chronic Disability After
Stroke

## J. Sinden

## ReNeuron, Pencoed, Bridgend, UK
Chronic disability after stroke represents a major unmet neurologic need.
ReNeuron’s human neural stem cell (hNSC) therapy using its proprietary CTX
cell line, currently progressing through clinical studies, is pioneering a
unique treatment. The Pilot Investigation of Stem Cells in Stroke phase I
trial conducted in Glasgow, Scotland published in August 2016, showed no
safety concerns and some promising signs of efficacy. A UK single-arm phase
II multicenter trial in patients with stable upper-limb paresis showed
positive improvements in patients across a range of motor function tests and
disability scales up to 12 months post-treatment, which has led to
Investigational New Drug approval for a pivotal randomized controlled trial
of CTX in disabled stroke patients in the United States. This trial will
begin recruitment in the second quarter of this year, with Dr Sean Savitz
(University of Texas, USA) as PI. CTX (or CTX0E03) is a manufactured,
conditionally immortalized and clonal hNSC line generated with our c-Myc and
modified estrogen receptor fusion protein (c-mycERTAM) technology. The cell
line was originally isolated in 2003 and a substantial amount of
characterization as well as quality, safety, biological activity, and animal
efficacy data has been generated since then. The c-mycERTAM technology has
enabled CTX to be manufactured at large scale under current Good
Manufacturing Practice (cGMP) conditions, ensuring sufficient supply to meet
the demands of research, clinical development and, eventually, the market.
CTX has key pro-angiogenic, pro-neurogenic, and immunomodulatory
characteristics; these are mechanistically important in functional recovery
post-stroke. In this talk, I will chart the progress of CTX cell therapy
both in preclinical stroke models and phase I and II clinical trials. In
collaborative preclinical studies, I will show the versatility of CTX in
responding to different host environments to adapt its regenerative
capabilities.

## PAMAM Dendrimers Cross the Blood–Brain Barrier When Injected Systemically via
Tail Vein In Vivo and Use of Dendrimers as a Vehicle to Deliver Large Coding and
Noncoding Plasmids In Vitro

## B. Srinageshwar,1,2 A. J. Dil,3 J. P.
Sturgis,3 M. N. Florendo,3 A. E.
Wedster,1,2 D. Swanson,4 G. L.
Dunbar,1,2,5,6 A. Sharma,4 and J.
Rossignol1,2,3

## 
1Field Neurosciences Institute Laboratory for Restorative
Neurology, Central Michigan University, Mount Pleasant, MI, USA

## 
2Program in Neuroscience, Central Michigan University, Mount
Pleasant, MI, USA

## 
3College of Medicine, Central Michigan University, Mount
Pleasant, MI, USA

## 
4Department of Chemistry & Biochemistry, Central Michigan
University, Mount Pleasant, MI, USA

## 
5Department of Psychology, Central Michigan University, Mount
Pleasant, MI, USA

## 
6Field Neurosciences Institute, Saginaw, MI, USA
Dendrimers are 3-dimensional nanoparticles that are highly branched having
multiple applications in the field of biomedicine. Previous evidence shows
that the conventional G4 polyamidoamine (PAMAM) dendrimers having 100% amine
surface (G4-NH2) are highly toxic in vitro and in vivo due to
their highly positive-charged surface. Therefore, there is a need to modify
and synthesize a new form of dendrimers having an overall less positive
charge. We have synthesized dendrimers having only 10% of the surface
covered with NH2 and 90% of the surface covered with hydroxyl
groups (-OH; known as G4-90/10) thereby the total number of positive charge
being less than G4-NH2. These dendrimers were found to be less
toxic than the G4-NH2. Our previous study showed that these
modified dendrimers are taken up the cells (neurons and different types of
stem cells) in vitro, and by neurons and glial cells in vivo. Our previous
study also showed that the G4-90/10 dendrimers can cross the blood–brain
barrier (BBB) when injected systemically via the carotid artery in C57BL/6 J
mice. However, multiple injections via carotid artery is not feasible in
rodents. Therefore, to overcome this issue, and still have the dendrimers
cross the BBB, we administered dendrimers via tail vein injection multiple
times at different doses. Our results showed that the dendrimers cross the
BBB when injected via tail vein in C67BL/6 J mice and are taken up by
neurons and glial cells. Analysis of dendrimers in peripheral organs such as
lungs, liver, spleen, and kidneys showed that the dendrimers were present in
the kidney cells as well at higher amounts compared with the lungs, liver,
and spleen. This proves that the remaining dendrimers which are not taken up
by the brain cells are excreted from the biological system, thereby not
causing any adverse effects, as seen in other types of nanoparticles that
get retained in the biological system. Dendrimers are known to have
anti-inflammatory properties and have the capacity to carry
drugs/biomolecules. Therefore, conjugating the drugs/biomolecules with the
dendrimers could be a future aspect of delivering cargo systemically across
the brain by crossing the BBB. The G4-90/10 dendrimers are capable of
forming complexes with plasmid DNA of various sizes. We have shown that
these dendrimers can deliver large coding and noncoding plasmids (having a
reporter gene) in mesenchymal stem cells (MSCs) in vitro. Since our major
interest lies in using brain-derived neurotrophic factor (BDNF)-based
therapy for Huntington’s disease, we have also delivered hBDNF using
dendrimers in MSCs and quantified the amount of BDNF using enzyme-linked
immunosorbent assay (ELISA) following delivery of the plasmid. Our data has
shown that the amount of BDNF produced from the MSCs that received the
dendrimer-delivered plasmid was higher than the control MSCs which did not
receive the plasmid. Our research findings showed that (1) the dendrimers
alone can cross the BBB when injected via the tail vein, and are taken up by
neurons and glial cells; (2) the dendrimers can deliver coding and noncoding
plasmids of various sizes in vitro and (3) the delivered plasmid containing
the gene of interest (such as BDNF) results in secretion of the protein,
showing that the plasmids remain intact and functional following complexing
with the dendrimer and delivery. The future aspect involved delivering
various plasmids using dendrimers in vivo.

## Biodistribution of Glial Progenitors Injected to the 3D Bioprinted Model of
Piglet Cerebral Ventricular System Depends on Infusion Speed, Volume of Cell
Suspension and Iron Oxide Labeling

## R. K. Srivastava,1 A. Jablonska,1 C. Chu,1
L. Gregg,1 J. W. M. Bulte,1 R. C. Koehler,2 P.
Walczak,1 and M. Janowski1

## 
1The Russell H. Morgan Department of Radiology and Radiological
Science, Division of MR Research Institute for Cell Engineering, Johns
Hopkins University School of Medicine, Baltimore, MD, USA

## 
2Anesthesiology and Critical Care Medicine, Johns Hopkins
University School of Medicine, Baltimore, MD, USA
White matter damage persists in hypoxic-ischemic newborns treated with
hypothermia. We have previously shown that intraventricular delivery of
human glial progenitors (GPs) at the neonatal stage is largely capable of
replacing host abnormal glia and rescuing a lifespan of dysmyelinated mice.
However, the small size of the murine brain does not allow investigation of
the transplantation challenges related to high-volume ventricles and long
transport distances for stem cells in human brain. Our long-term goal is to
study the potential benefit of complete glia replacement in a large animal
(piglet) model of neonatal hypoxia-ischemia. The cerebral ventricles would
be an attractive gateway to introduce cells to vast brain areas, and so we
investigated the potential variables that could maximize the biodistribution
of injected GPs within the ventricular system while minimizing outflow to
the subarachnoid space. A custom-designed, 3D-printed model of the piglet
ventricular system was used in our study. We found that lower injection
speed and lower volumes are better suited to minimize outflow outside the
ventricles, while having little effect on the distribution within the
ventricular system. More importantly, we found that iron oxide (Molday ION
Rhodamine B, BioPAL) labeling changes the rheological properties of GP
suspension such that, even at high speeds and high volumes, outflow beyond
the ventricular system was reduced whereas more cells were displaced longer
distances from the injection site. The viability of non-labeled and labeled
cells was comparable. The macro view of the injected iron oxide-labeled
cells suggested formation of clumps or a kind of hydrogel during a passage
through a catheter. To summarize, we have found that the infusion speed,
volume of cell suspension, and iron oxide labeling strongly influence the
biodistribution of GPs injected through a catheter in a model of piglet
cerebral ventricles.

## AAV-Mediated Silencing of Striatal CaV1.3 Calcium Channels Can Prevent and
Reverse Expression of Levodopa-induced Dyskinesia

## K. Steece-Collier,1,2 T. J. Collier,1,2 J. A.
Stancati,1 I. M. Sandoval,1,2 N. M.
Mercado,1 N. J. Collier,1 C. E.
Sortwell,1,2 C. J. Kemp,1 B. F. Daley,1 N.
Kuhn,1 and F. P. Manfredsson1,2

## 
1Department of Translational Science & Molecular Medicine,
College of Human Medicine, Michigan State University, Grand Rapids, MI,
USA

## 
2Hauenstein Neuroscience Center, Mercy Health Saint Mary’s, Grand
Rapids, MI, USA
Striatal voltage-dependent, L-type, alpha 1D subunit calcium channels
(CaV1.3) are a target of interest for prevention of levodopa-induced
dyskinesias (LIDs) in individuals with Parkinson’s disease (PD). Previous
studies have shown that voltage-dependent, L-type, alpha 1C subunit calcium
channel (CaV1.2)/1.3 channel antagonists can reduce expression of LID in
Parkinsonian rats, however, this effect is partial and lost over time. The
limitation in scope and loss of protection over time are thought to be
related to pharmacological limitation of currently available drugs. To
provide unequivocal target validation we developed a recombinant
adeno-associated virus (rAAV)-CaV1.3-short hairpin RNA (shRNA) to provide
continuous, high potency, target-selective, mRNA-level silencing of striatal
CaV1.3 channels. For the LID Prevention Study, adult male Sprague-Dawley
(SD) rats received a unilateral intrastriatal injection of rAAV-CaV1.3-shRNA
(N=11) or a scrambled shRNA control, rAAV-Scr-shRNA
(N=9). At 1 week post-vector, rats were rendered
unilaterally Parkinsonian with intranigral 6-hydroxydopamine (6-OHDA) and 2
weeks post-lesion began daily (M-Fr) treatment with escalating doses of
levodopa (low=6 mg/kg; moderate=9 mg/kg; high=12 mg/kg; and
supratherapeutic=18 mg/kg; 2 weeks/dose; +12 mg/kg benserazide for all
doses). For a LID Reversal Study, SD rats were unilaterally lesioned with
6-OHDA and primed with daily 12 mg/kg levodopa for 3 weeks to
establish stable LID prior to CaV1.3 silencing. Rats
displaying LID received unilateral intrastriatal injection of
rAAV-CaV1.3-shRNA (N=11) or rAAV-Scr-shRNA
(N=12); 96 h post-vector they resumed daily levodopa
(12 mg/kg) for 2 months. The results revealed that mRNA-level silencing of
striatal CaV1.3 channels: (1) prior to the introduction of
levodopa can completely prevent induction of LID, and the
antidyskinetic benefit persists long-term (2 months) and with high doses of
levodopa; (2) in rats with already established LID can
ameliorate these behaviors, however a 7-day ‘drug holiday’ appears
beneficial and/or necessary. Importantly, striatal CaV1.3 silencing does not
impair motor behaviors in response to low dose levodopa. These data suggest
that genetic silencing of striatal CaV1.3 channels may be a useful
antidyskinetic clinical therapy in the PD.

## Soluble CX3CL1 Rescues Cognitive Deficits in CX3CL1 Knock-Out Mice

## M. S. Subbarayan,1,2 A. N. Winter,2 B.
Grimmig,1,2 M. Peters,1 E. Weeber,1 K. R.
Nash,1 and P. C. Bickford1,2,3

## 
1Department of Molecular Pharmacology and Physiology, University
of South Florida Morsani College of Medicine, Tampa, FL, USA

## 
2Center of Excellence for Aging and Brain Repair, Department of
Neurosurgery and Brain Repair, University of South Florida Morsani College
of Medicine, Tampa, FL, USA

## 
3Research Service, James A. Haley Veterans Affairs Hospital
Tampa, FL, USA
Fractalkine (chemokine C-X3-C motif ligand 1; CX3CL1) is a chemokine
expressed predominately by neurons that mediate communication between
neurons and microglia. CX3CL1 possesses two isoforms, a full-length
membrane-bound form and a soluble form, generated by cleaving membrane-bound
CX3CL1. Recently, the idea that these two isoforms may display differential
activities within the central nervous system (CNS) has garnered increasing
attention, but has not been extensively explored. By regulating microglial
activity, CX3CL1 can effectively mitigate the damaging effects of chronic
inflammation within the brain, a state that plays a major role in aging.
Microglial activity is critical for establishing and refining neural
circuits in both the developing CNS and the adult brain. Levels of soluble
CX3CL1 decrease with aging, which could lead to enhanced inflammation,
deficits in synaptic remodeling, and subsequent declines in cognition. Here,
we assessed the consequences of CX3CL1 knock-out on the cognitive behavior
of mice at different ages. These mice displayed impaired long-term retention
of a contextual fear conditioning task at both 3 months and 15 months of
age. Moreover, at 3 months of age, CX3CL1-/- mice tested on the
Barnes maze learned the location of an escape hole at a similar rate as
wild-type controls, but displayed an altered search pattern in a subsequent
probe trial, spending less time in the target zone than their wild-type
counterparts. Cognitive impairments correlated with altered synaptic
plasticity and impaired long-term potentiation, as well as decrease in
neurogenesis within the hippocampus. Treating CX3CL1-/- mice with
a viral vector expressing the soluble form of CX3CL1 at 2 months of age
partially rescued the deleterious effects of CX3CL1 knock-out when mice were
assessed at 3 months of age in the Barnes maze task, but appeared to
negatively impact long-term memory retention in the contextual fear
conditioning task.

## Bilateral Transplantation of Human Fetal Retinal Pigment Epithelial Cells
Attached to Microcarriers into the Shell of the Nucleus Accumbens of Cocaine
Self-Administering Rats Protects Against Drug-Seeking

## T. Subramanian,1,2 A. Rao,1 A. Piquet,1 E.
Handly,1 D. Alexander,2 M. Puhl,2 J. E.
Nyland,2 M. P. Subramanian,1,2 P. Iyer,1 T.
Bhardwaj,1 T. Cayton,1 P. S.
Grigson-Kennedy,2 and K. Venkiteswaran1,2

## 
1Department of Neurology, Penn State University College of
Medicine, Hershey, PA, USA

## 
2Department of Neural and Behavioral Sciences, Penn State
University College of Medicine, Hershey, PA, USA
Chronic high dose exposure to recreational stimulant drugs leads to damage to
the ‘reward pathway’ that originates in the ventral tegmental area (VTA) and
terminates in the nucleus accumbens (NAc). This damage is associated with
loss of continuous dopaminergic stimulation and it causes dopamine
dysregulation syndrome (DDS) that is characterized by risky drug-seeking
behavior. Bilateral transplants of human fetal retinal pigment epithelial
cells (hfRPECs) attached to microcarriers into the NAc, rescued cocaine
self-administering rats with a history of high drug-taking from drug-seeking
after a period of abstinence. Excellent survival of hfRPEC grafts was seen
in all grafted rats. Tyrosine hydroxylase positive (TH+) cell
bodies in the VTA were better preserved (p<0.035) in
transplanted animals compared with controls suggesting that these grafts
prevent damage to the VTA-NAc pathway. To verify underlying mechanisms, we
investigated if cocaine-induced neuronal death in fetal mesencephalic (FVM)
primary cultures and tested whether cocaine-induced damage can be prevented
by hfRPEC-secreted factors. E13.5 FVM cultures were treated with increasing
concentrations of cocaine to demonstrate dose-responsive loss of
TH+ neurons. Pretreatment or simultaneous treatment with
hfRPEC culture supernatant 24 h with cocaine exposure significantly improved
survival of TH+ neurons. Our results suggest that NAc hfRPEC
grafts permit retrograde transport of graft-secreted factors to enhance VTA
neuronal survival. Thus, hfRPEC grafts may be an attractive therapeutic
option for severe, chronic, conventional treatment-resistant neurostimulant
drug addictions.

## Using Mouse Organotypic Spinal Cord Cultures to Validate New Self-Complimentary
AAVs to Target Central Nervous System Cells by Using AAV6 Triple Tyrosine Mutant
(T492V-Y70SF-Y731F)

## D. V. Tran,1 P. E. Cruz,1 V. Q. Truong,2 D.
Deng,3 A. M. Rosario,1 K.-L. Schob,1 M.
Parianos,4 V. Richards,1 M. Pardo,1 A.
Hernandez,1 C. Ceballos,1 X. Liu,1 G.
Aslanidi,5 J. Ayers,1 and T. E. Golde1

## 
1Center for Translational Research in Neurodegenerative Disease,
Department of Neuroscience, University of Florida, Gainesville, FL,
USA

## 
2Virginia Tech, Blacksburg, VA, USA

## 
3University of South Florida Morsani College of Medicine, Tampa,
FL, USA

## 
4University of Central Florida, College of Medicine, Orlando, FL,
USA

## 
5The Hormel Institute, University of Minnesota, Austin, MN,
USA
One of the primary limitations of using dissociated in vitro brain cell
cultures is that it is difficult to understand and study cell-to-cell
interactions. One avenue to study these interactions is by utilizing in vivo
animal models; however, traditional animal models are costly and labor
intensive to maintain. The use of ex vivo organotypic spinal cord slice
cultures (SSCs) presents a viable intermediate model between cell and animal
models, as it preserves the in situ cell architecture, making it useful for
neurodegenerative, pharmacological, and tissue regeneration studies.
Recombinant adeno-associated viruses (rAAVs) are nonpathogenic viruses that
are useful in gene therapy applications as they are highly infectious and
persist in human cells. Typically, rAAVs are capable of transducing all cell
types in the spinal cord (neurons, astrocytes, and Schwann cells) except for
microglia. AAV6 triple mutant T492V-Y70SF-Y731F (TM6), is one such rAAV that
can transduce microglia with a self-complementary AAV vector (scAAV) that
transduces faster, more efficiently, and with greater persistence than a
single stranded AAV. We transduced p10 mouse SSCs using scAAV with the TM6
capsid and packaged with a plasmid that expresses hGFP (humanized green
fluorescent protein). The universal promoter chicken B-actin was used to
target expression of hGFP to all spinal cord cells, while cell-specific
promotors were used to target expression to individual cell types. Neurons
were targeted by using Ca2+/calmodulin-dependent protein kinase
II (CamKII), glutamate decarboxylase 67 (GAD67), microtubule-associated
protein 2 (MAP2), and synapsin (SYN) promoters. Motor neurons were targeted
by using the homeobox HB9 promoter. Schwann cells were targeted by using
myelin basic protein (MBP) and myelin oligodendrocyte glycoprotein
promoters. Astrocytes were targeted by using the glial fibrillary acidic
protein 104 (GFAP104), brain lipid-binding protein (BLBP), and
sodium-dependent glutamate/aspartate transporter 1 (GLAST) promoters.
Microglia were targeted using the cluster of differentiation 68 (CD68) and
epidermal growth factor module-containing, mucin-like hormone receptor
(F4/80) promoters. Ependyma cells were targeted using the nestin promoter.
The potential universal herpes simplex virus type 1 thymidine kinase
(HSV1-TK) 66 bp long minimal promoter was also evaluated. By utilizing SSCs
in concert with scAAVs, we can more rapidly screen clinically significant
capsid/promoter combinations.

## Graft-Host Synaptic Connectivity Can be Optogenetically or Chemogenetically
Inhibited to Eliminate Graft-Induced Dyskinesias Without Losing Anti-Parkinsonian
Benefits

## K. Venkiteswaran,1 M. Dawson,1 V. Iyer,1 N.
Patel,1 M. Subramanian,1 E. Jaffrey,1 E.
Handley,1 S. Chinniah,1 A. Cocking,2 Z.
Liu,2 C. Ramakrishnan,3 K. Deisseroth,3 and
T. Subramanian1

## 
1Penn State University College of Medicine, Hershey, PA,
USA

## 
2Penn State University College of Engineering, University Park,
State College, PA, USA

## 
3Stanford University, Stanford, CA, USA
Striatal fetal ventral mesencephalic (FVM) and other dopaminergic transplants
are under investigation as experimental therapy in Parkinson’s disease (PD).
However, such graft recipients are at risk of graft-induced dyskinesias
(GIDs). We tested the efficacy of optogenetic and chemogenetic inhibition of
striatal FVM transplants to overcome GID without losing graft-induced
anti-Parkinsonian benefits. The denervated striatum of hemiparkinsonian rats
were injected with adeno-associated virus 2 elongation factor 1 alpha
promoter, mCherry tagged, internal ribosome entry site, wheat germ
agglutinin Cre recombinase (AAV2Ef1a-mCherry-IRES-WGACre) 3 weeks prior to
transplantation of E13.5 mouse FVM cells transfected with either AAV5Ef1a,
double-floxed inverse open reading frame, halorhodopsin, enhanced yellow
fluorescent protein (AAV5Ef1a-DIO-eNpHR3.0-EYFP) or AAV8-human synapsin I,
DIO, inhibitory modified human M4 muscarinic receptor, mCherry
(AAV8-hSyn-DIO-hM4Di-mCherry). Thus, synaptic connectivity between the graft
and the host was obligate for the expression of eNpHR3.0-EYFP or
hM4Di-mCherry. Activation of eNpHR3.0 using a 590 nm light or hM4Di with
clozapine-N-oxide (CNO)/clozapine caused completely reversible loss of
graft-derived behavioral benefits (p<0.05) at 3, 8 and
12 weeks post-transplantation. Control grafted animals did not show any loss
of graft function in response to laser or CNO/clozapine exposure. In
transplanted animals, 5-hydroxytryptamine 6 (5HT6) receptor agonist
ST1936-induced GID was eliminated by both optogenetic and chemogenetic
inhibition (p<0.05) without any loss of
anti-Parkinsonian benefits. All grafted animals had excellent survival of
large numbers of striatal tyrosine hydroxylase (TH) positive FVM neurons
that co-expressed eNpHR/EYFP or hM4Di/mCherry confirming extensive synaptic
connections with host medium spiny neurons. These preclinical experiments
provide proof-of-principle that optogenetic or chemogenetic modulation of
dopaminergic grafts can be safely incorporated into dopaminergic grafts to
overcome GID without losing graft-induced anti-Parkinsonian benefits.

## LRRK2 Genomic Editing in Common Marmoset Stem Cells

## S. C. Vermilyea,1,2 A. Babinski,2 S.
Guthrie,2 T. G. Golos,2,3,4 and M. E.
Emborg1,2,5

## 
1Neuroscience Training Program, University of Wisconsin, Madison,
WI, USA

## 
2Preclinical Parkinson’s Research Program, Wisconsin National
Primate Research Center, University of Wisconsin, Madison, WI, USA

## 
3Department of Comparative Biosciences, University of Wisconsin,
Madison, WI, USA

## 
4Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, University of
Wisconsin, Madison, WI, USA

## 
5Department of Medical Physics, University of Wisconsin, Madison,
WI 53715, USA
Leucine-rich repeat kinase 2 (LRRK2) G2019 S is the most common monogenic
mutation associated with Parkinson’s disease (PD). Located in the kinase
domain of LRRK2, G2019 S facilitates substrate access to the kinase, thus
increasing the catalytic rate of the enzyme. G2019 S patient-derived
dopaminergic (DAergic) neurons present increased activated caspase-3,
simplification of neurites and cell body accumulation of α-synuclein. In an
effort to validate the common marmoset (Cj) monkey as a candidate species
for genomically modeling PD, we are investigating in vitro cell modeling
strategies. LRRK2 inhibitors in G2019 S patient-derived DAergic neurons have
been reported to largely restore a wild-type (WT) phenotype. However,
removing LRRK2 leads to autophagy-related phenotypes in mice. Therefore, we
hypothesized that truncated LRRK2 (tLRRK2) would present WT morphology,
although with dysfunction in autophagy and endoplasmic reticulum
(ER)-related homeostasis. Utilizing a WT clustered regularly interspaced
short palindromic repeat (CRISPR)-associated protein 9 (Cas9) complexed with
a guide RNA species that recognizes the 6055 genomic site for G2019 S, we
successfully isolated a biallelic tLRRK2 cell line from our marmoset
embryonic stem cell line (Cj-ESCs). After the tLRRK2 clone was expanded, we
administered a dual-mothers against decapentaplegic (SMAD) inhibition
protocol that our group previously validated for differentiating marmoset
stem cells to neurons. The WT parental cell line was differentiated in
parallel as a control for phenotypic comparison. The ImageJ (National
Institutes of Health) plugin NeuriteQuant was used for objective
quantification of neurite complexity. tLRRK2 in neurons had no effect on
average neurite length, branches per cell, neurites per cell, branches per
neurite length, and overall neurite length per cell when compared with WT
controls. Preliminary quantitative real-time polymerase chain reaction
(qPCR) for ER stress and autophagy-related genes binding immunoglobulin
protein (BiP or glucose-regulated protein, 78 kDa;
GRP78), CCAAT/enhancer binding protein (C/EBP)
homologous protein (CHOP), autophagy-related 7
(ATG7), and sequestome 1 (P62)
indicated similar levels of expression at d30 between WT and tLRRK2.
However, at d42, CHOP expression was higher in tLRRK2 cells
while ATG7 was higher in WT cells. Immunohistochemistry
revealed a nonuniform cell body localization of the mitochondrial marker
translocase of outer mitochondrial membrane 20 (TOMM20) in tLRRK2 neurons.
We then performed a 2’,7’-dichlorodihydrofluorescein diacetate
(H2DCF-DA) reactive oxygen species assay in the pluripotent
WT and tLRRK2 cells; no difference at baseline, or after hydrogen peroxidase
(H2O2) burden, was observed. To investigate the
feasibility of genomically editing the G2019 S mutation in marmoset-derived
stem cells, we optimized and combined our CRISPR/Cas9 system with a repair
template to accomplish the more challenging task of single nucleotide
editing. We successfully isolated G2019 S clonal lines from both Cj-ESCs and
marmoset induced pluripotent stem cells. Off-target analysis and
next-generation sequencing validated site-directed precision as well as
purity of the isolated clones respectively. Our results demonstrate that
genomic editing of the LRRK2 gene can be successfully accomplished in common
marmoset-derived pluripotent cells, and tLRRK2 may be associated with
altered gene expression and TOMM20 cellular distribution.

## Role of CDNF in SOD1-G93A Mouse Model of Amyotrophic Lateral Sclerosis

## M. H. Voutilainen,1 F. De Lorenzo,1 E.
Montonen,1 R. K. Tuominen,2 D. Lindholm,3
M. Sendtner,4 and M. Saarma1

## 
1Institute of Biotechnology, University of Helsinki, Helsinki,
Finland

## 
2Division of Pharmacology and Pharmacotherapy, Faculty of
Pharmacy, University of Helsinki, Helsinki, Finland

## 
3Faculty of Medicine, University of Helsinki, Helsinki,
Finland

## 
4University of Wuerzburg, Institute of Clinical Neurobiology,
Germany
Neurotrophic factors (NTFs) regulate the development, maintenance and
plasticity of the nervous system (Airaksinen & Saarma, 2002) and in
adult animals protect and repair injured neurons. Several NTFs promote the
survival of motoneurons (MNs) in vitro and in vivo, thus being possible drug
candidates for amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS). Among them, the novel
cerebral dopamine neurotrophic factor (CDNF) seems particularly promising,
since it is highly expressed in muscle tissues, spreads better than other
NTFs in the brain and rescues only degenerating neurons. Furthermore, CDNF
is crucially involved in the regulation of the endoplasmic reticulum (ER)
stress, which plays an important role in the pathophysiology of ALS. Here we
show that a single intraventricular (i.c.v.) injection of human recombinant
CDNF can significantly postpone the appearance of clinical symptoms, improve
motor coordination and increase lifespan in the G93A mutant superoxide
dismutase 1 (SOD1-G93A) mouse model of ALS. CDNF treatment can prevent the
death of MNs compared with controls and CDNF also preserves neuromuscular
junctions (NMJs) in the studied gastrocnemius muscle. We also found
upregulation of the mRNA levels of unfolded protein response (UPR) genes
such as glucose-regulated protein, 78 kDa (Grp78) and
CCAAT/enhancer binding protein (C/EBP) homologous protein
(Chop) in the SOD1-G93A model, whereas their levels
were reduced in CDNF-treated animals. Therefore, our results strongly
suggest that CDNF has a protective effect in the SOD1-G93A mouse model of
ALS, promoting the survival of MNs and the preservation of NMJs. The
decrease in UPR gene mRNA levels after CDNF treatment also suggests the
intriguing possibility that CDNF might rescue MNs by regulating the ER
stress response.

## The Effect of Low Dose Carbon Monoxide on Adult Neurogenesis in Injured Mammalian
Spinal Cord

## L. Wang,1,2,3 I. Han,1,2,3 X. Zeng,1,2,3 Z.
Aljuboori,1,2,3 R. D. Zafonte,1,2 and Y. D.
Teng1,2,3

## 
1Department of Physical Medicine & Rehabilitation, Spaulding
Rehabilitation Hospital Network, Brigham & Women’s Hospital,
Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston, MA, USA

## 
2Department of Neurosurgery, Spaulding Rehabilitation Hospital
Network, Brigham & Women’s Hospital, Massachusetts General Hospital,
Boston, MA, USA

## 
3Division of SCI Research, VA Boston Healthcare System, Boston,
MA, USA
We previously reported that non-toxic low dose carbon monoxide (CO)
inhalation dose-dependently protected epicenter motor neurons and white
matter in a rat model of T9-10 moderate compression spinal cord injury
(SCI). CO treatment resulted in significantly improved hindlimb function
mainly through preserving neural tissue and antagonizing secondary
inflammatory or oxidative damages. In a subsequent replication study,
ventilatory exposure of 500 ppm CO, the most potent dose identified before,
was applied to SCI rats, starting 4 hours post-injury (p.i.) and thereafter
1 h CO inhalation per day for 12 consecutive days. In addition to
reconfirming CO’s therapeutic benefits on locomotion, neuroprotection and
neuroinflammation, the effect of CO on adult neurogenesis derived from the
central canal ependymal cells was investigated, to test our hypothesis that
CO could activate neural stem cells (NSCs) via the heme oxygenase 1 p38
mitogen-activated protein kinase-vascular endothelial growth factor (HO1-p38
MAPK-VEGF) and phosphorylated neuronal nitric oxide synthase (p-nNOS)
pathways. We uncovered that there were differentially manifested neurogenic
outcomes in the lesion epicenter and lumbar enlargement, respectively, in
the CO-treated spinal cords that were discernibly different from those of
the control group that was exposed to room air. The impact was detectible at
5–6 weeks after CO treatment (i.e. 7–8 weeks p.i.), indicating a possible
role of CO-induced neurogenesis in promoting long-term neural repair.
Compared with the control epicenters where newborn neural progenitors
contributed to augmenting glial scar formation, the mean scale of reactive
astrogliosis was significantly reduced in the CO-treated spinal cords.
Importantly, we observed the presence of immature neurons in Rexed laminae
(RL) IV–VIII in the CO-ventilated groups only. Since the quantities of
CO-mediated preservation of cholinergic and gamma-aminobutyric acid
(GABA)ergic interneurons (Ins) in the same RL zones were positively
correlated with the levels of hindlimb locomotor improvement, our data
suggested that besides its efficacy observed in treating acute SCI,
non-toxic low dose CO may also be an effective therapeutic to recover
function and/or ameliorate inflammatory complications (e.g. neuropathic
pain, etc.) for chronic SCI.

## Multiple Intra-Arterial Dosing of Mesenchymal Stem Cells Reduces Ischemic Brain
Injury in a Rat Stroke Model

## M. Watanabe,1 P. Bhattacharya,2 A. Khan,3 J.
M. Hare,3,4 M. Perez-Pinzon,1,5 A. P. Raval,1,5
and D. R. Yavagal1,3,5

## 
1Department of Neurology, University of Miami Leonard M. Miller
School of Medicine, Miami, FL, USA

## 
2Department of Pharmacology and Toxicology, National Institute of
Pharmaceutical Education and Research (NIPER), Ahmedabad, Gandhinagar,
Gujarat, India

## 
3Interdisciplinary Stem Cell Institute, University of Miami
Leonard M. Miller School of Medicine, Miami, FL, USA

## 
4Department of Medicine, University of Miami Leonard M. Miller
School of Medicine, Miami, FL, USA

## 
5Cerebral Vascular Disease Research Laboratories, University of
Miami Leonard M. Miller School of Medicine, Miami, FL, USA
Cell therapy is emerging as a promising novel therapy for ischemic stroke.
Intra-arterial (IA) mesenchymal stem cell (MSC) delivery in ischemic stroke
has a high potential for clinical translation. Recently, we demonstrated
safety and efficacy of IA delivery of MSCs at 24 h in a reversible middle
cerebral artery occlusion (rMCAo) rodent model. Given the trophic mechanism
of action in cell therapy for stroke, a second dose of cells may be
beneficial. However, it is unclear if a second IA-MSC administration is safe
and efficacious. Therefore, we aimed to evaluate administration of two doses
of IA-MSCs in the rodent ischemic stroke model. Female ovariectomized
Sprague-Dawley rats were exposed to MCAo for 90 min. Rats were treated with
IA-MSCs (1×105 cells) or phosphate-buffered saline (PBS) at 1 and
6 days (1D–6D) after MCAo. To test neurological and motor function, the
standardized neurobehavioral test battery and the rotarod test were
performed. The mean duration (in seconds) on the device was recorded from
three rotarod measurements. The rats were tested at 7, 15, and 30 days after
MCAo. Rats were sacrificed at 30 days for infarct volume measurement using
histology. There was no neurological worsening or mortality seen in either
treatment group. We observed significant reduction in infarct volume in
1D-6D MSCs group (21±15mm3; n=5) compared with
the PBS-treated group (86±19 mm3; n=8,
p<0.05). The 1D-6D MSCs group also showed
non-significant improvement in rotarod test results (16.8±5.8% versus
7.9±3.4%, p=0.075) at 30 days and neurological scores
(5.6±1.2 versus 7.75±0.6, p=0.15) at 15 days. Dual dosing
of IA-MSCs at 1D-6D post rMCAo is safe and reduces ischemic brain injury in
female rats, with a trend towards functional improvement.

## RNA-Seq and Histological Characterization of Human Peripheral Nerve Tissue for
Use in Brain Grafts for the Treatment of Parkinson’s Disease

## A. S. Welleford,1,2 C. G. van Horne,1,2 J. E.
Quintero,1,2 E. M. Blalock,1 J. A.
Stanford,3 S. M. Shapiro,3 S. M. Riordan,3
and G. A. Gerhardt1,2

## 
1University of Kentucky, Lexington, KY, USA

## 
2Brain Restoration Center, Lexington, KY, USA

## 
3University of Kansas, Lawrence, KS, USA
Currently two clinical trials [ClinicalTrials.gov
identifiers: NCT01833364 and NCT02369003] are underway which feature the
implantation of a peripheral nerve autograft to the brain (targeted to the
substantia nigra) in combination with Deep Brain Stimulation (DBS) for the
treatment of patients with Parkinson’s disease. As of 8 January 2018, 46
patients have received a graft. This nerve tissue is harvested from the
sural nerve, a cutaneous sensory nerve located in the lateral ankle, from
patients undergoing DBS surgery. The tissue receives a conditioning injury
in situ 2 weeks prior to grafting. This study aims to characterize the
effect of this conditioning, as well as the state of the nerve graft tissue
immediately prior to implantation. Two sural nerve tissue samples
(pre-conditioned and post-conditioned) per patient were collected from six
patients during DBS surgeries 14 days apart. RNA sequencing (RNA-seq) was
used to measure absolute and relative levels of gene transcripts in the
pre-conditioned and post-conditioned nerve tissue. These findings were
supplemented by histology of the nerve tissue. The results of these
experiments show: (1) Consistent similarity within the pre-conditioned and
post-conditioned group transcriptomes; (2) Consistent changes between the
pre-conditioned and post-conditioned group transcriptomes; (3) Increased
transcript levels related to nerve repair, growth factor production, and
immune cell migration pathways; (4) Decreased transcript levels related to
myelin production pathways, consistent with the repair Schwann cell
phenotype. All results are statistically significant
(p<0.05). These findings suggest that the nerve graft
tissue implanted in human patients has a pro-regenerative phenotype which
has the potential to alter the course of neurodegeneration in the brain. In
addition, some preliminary clinical data of the patients’ Unified
Parkinson’s Disease Rating Scale (UPDRS) score will be presented.

## Neurophysiological Approaches for the Study of Neuropharmacological and Genetic
Manipulations

## A. R. West

## Rosalind Franklin University of Medicine and Science, Department of
Neuroscience, North Chicago, IL, USA
Neurophysiology is a branch of electrophysiology which studies the flow of
ions in neuronal tissues, as well as the communication and signaling
pathways within individual neurons, local neuronal networks, and
anatomically distinct neuronal systems. Neurophysiology encompasses both the
electrical and optical recording techniques that allow for the measurement
of this ion flux (i.e. changes in current flow) and changes in potential
differences (voltage potentials) across neuronal cell membranes separating
the extracellular and intracellular neuronal compartments. Studies in
reduced preparations such as brain slices focus on the examination of the
electrophysiological properties of single neurons or the effects of
neuromodulators such as monoamines, peptides, and others, on the passive
membrane properties, synaptic integration, and neuronal output of the cells
of interest. In vivo neurophysiology is useful for solving systems
neuroscience level questions and determining how pharmacodynamic drug
effects and genetic manipulations performed in intact animals act on the
neuronal and network levels. This seminar will detail neurophysiological
approaches for studying the impact of neuropharmacological and genetic
manipulations with a focus on in vivo recording techniques. I will also
describe in detail various approaches which can be combined with the above
recording techniques for local drug delivery (e.g. reverse dialysis,
microinjection, and intracellular application).

## Standards for Deriving Nonhuman Primate Induced Pluripotent Stem Cells

## G. Yang,1 K. E. Malloy,1,2 A. Torres,1 H.
Hong,1 J. Li,2 J. Kim,1 G. R.
Choudhury,1 P. T. Fox,2 G. D. Clarke,2 and
M. M. Daadi1,2

## 
1Southwest National Primate Research Center, Texas Biomedical
Research Institute, San Antonio, TX, USA

## 
2Research Imaging Institute, Radiology, University of Texas
Health Science Center at San Antonio, TX, USA
Our limited understanding of the cues controlling proliferation,
differentiation and maturation of induced pluripotent stem cells (iPSCs) and
their ability to establish functional connections or integrate into host
tissue after cell grafting remains a significant bottleneck in the
development of stem cell-based therapies. Standardized and well-defined
stable iPSC lines and animal model resources will play a critical role in
supporting efforts in the scientific community and industry to overcome this
hurdle and to move forward with this therapeutic strategy for clinical use.
However, qualified nonhuman primate (NHP) iPSC lines from various NHP
species for studying transplantation in various NHP disease models are
currently lacking. iPSCs have virtually an unlimited capacity to provide
defined populations of all cell types of the body. However, the use of
well-characterized and validated NHP iPSCs is rare. This contributes to
variability and discrepancies between laboratories. Thus, establishing
standards for deriving a high quality validated NHP iPSC lines is of
critical need. We use the non-integrative episomal vector system to generate
iPSCs from NHP skin biopsies. Taking advantage of our genomic resources, we
have validated these iPSC lines by confirming pluripotency and propensity to
differentiate into all three germ layers (ectoderm, mesoderm and endoderm)
according to established standards and measurable limits for a set of marker
genes. The iPSC lines were characterized in vitro and morphologically in
vivo, cryopreserved, stored and made available for distribution to
scientists through our online biological materials request form.
NHP-iPSC-based species-specific cell types will open the door to test
transformative developmental, regenerative or evolutionary hypotheses.

## Melanoma-Derived Exosomes Induce Inflammatory Microenvironments: Possible
Involvement in Brain Metastases

## E. Yoo,1 S. K. Hur,2 Q. Liu,3 S.
Fang,3 D.-K. Kim,3 and D. Kim1

## 
1Department of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Texas A&M Health
Science Center, Irma Lerma Rangel College of Pharmacy, Texas A&M
University, College Station, TX, USA

## 
2Department of Molecular Cellular Medicine, Texas A&M Health
Science Center, College of Medicine, Texas A&M University, College
Station, TX, USA

## 
3Institute for Regenerative Medicine, Texas A&M Health
Science Center, College of Medicine, Texas A&M University, College
Station, TX, USA
Brain metastases are secondary brain tumors that can occur through release of
cancer cells from the primary tumors via hematogenous and lymphatic vessels
of the circulatory system. Compared with other non-central nervous system
(non-CNS) systemic cancers, melanoma has the highest tendency to metastasize
to the brain and shows brain metastasis rates above 40% in malignant
melanoma patients. Despite the aggressive progress of melanoma with high
morbidity, mortality, and poor prognosis, however, the metastasis mechanism
has not been clearly elucidated. Accumulating evidence has suggested that
cancer-derived exosomes can enter into the lymphatic/blood vessels and then
rapidly traffic to other distal organs. Also, recent results suggest that
the involvement of the exosomes in metastasis is at least partially
explained by their delivery components including cytokines, proteins,
lipids, saccharides, and RNAs that induce a favorable microenvironment for
cancer cells. In our melanoma B16F10 grafting experiments, we found that
proinflammatory cytokines, tumor necrosis factor alpha (TNF-α), and
interleukin 6 (IL-6) levels, were significantly increased in the brain at 10
days after subcutaneous inoculation of the cancer cells. We also found that,
compared with control (no treatment), the exosomes chromatographically
isolated from the culture media of melanoma cells induce the enhanced level
of TNF-α and IL-6 in the brain (p<0.05) as well as other
peripheral organs at 2 h or 6 h after intravenous injection of melanoma
exosomes. Our results may provide that molecular and cellular aspects for
therapeutic intervention with brain metastatic processes of melanoma.

## Intraventricular Implantation of Human Mesenchymal Stem Cell 3D Aggregates as
Regeneration Center for Ischemic Stroke Treatment

## X. Yuan,1 A. Bagdasarian,1,2 J. T.
Rosenberg,1,2 S. C. Grant,1,2 and T. Ma1

## 
1Chemical and Biomedical Engineering, The Florida State
University, Tallahassee, FL, USA

## 
2The National High Magnetic Field Laboratory, The Florida State
University, Tallahassee, FL, USA
Human mesenchymal stem cells (hMSCs) have become a potential candidate for
cell therapy in stroke treatment due to their trophic effect,
immunomodulation and lineage-specific differentiation. However, reduced cell
survival and therapeutic functions after transplantation are the major
barriers for clinical application of hMSCs in stroke patients. Moreover,
replicative expansion of hMSCs is required to meet clinical scale-up, but
this is known to result in cellular aging with reduced cellular properties
and therapeutic potency. To enhance hMSC therapeutic efficacy,
preconditioning hMSCs has shown promising results in the middle cerebral
artery occlusion (MCAO) rat model in our previous studies. Here, we report
the direct delivery of three-dimensional (3D) hMSC aggregates as a
‘regeneration center’ for sustained immunomodulation and trophic effects in
stroke rats. hMSCs labeled with micrometer-sized iron oxide (MPIO) particles
spontaneously formed 3D aggregates on ultra-low adherent surface. Instead of
intra-arterial injection with single hMSC suspension, hMSC aggregates
(diameter: ∼400 µm; 5000 cells/aggregate) were intraventricularly implanted
into the cortex or lateral ventricle of MCAO rats. The influence of MPIO on
hMSC aggregation and the effects of aggregation on hMSC secretion of
immunomodulatory, pro-angiogenic, and antiapoptotic cytokines were assessed
in vitro. To map temporal changes, ex vivo magnetic resonance imaging (MRI)
was performed at 11.75 T. To monitor the in vivo lifespan for transplanted
hMSC aggregates, serial in vivo MRI at 21.1 T was performed to acquire
images of cell migration and localization in the cerebrum. Preliminary
results showed hMSC aggregates retained the MRI signals at very low
concentrations of MPIO, with reduced size and enhanced migration. In vivo
MRI demonstrated penetration into the contralateral and ventricle of
transplanted hMSC aggregates. We are currently evaluating the effects of
aggregate transplantation on lesion recovery based on 1 H and
23Na signal as evidence of the influx of extracellular water
and disruption of ionic homeostasis. Neurological function recovery is also
being evaluated by behavioral tests.

## The Dynamics of Microglial Polarization in Experimental Subarachnoid
Hemorrhage

## Z. V. Zheng, P. K. Lam, W. S. Poon, and K. C. G. Wong

## Division of Neurosurgery, Department of Surgery, The Chinese University
of Hong Kong, Hong Kong, China
Subarachnoid hemorrhage (SAH) is a devastating stroke type. Microglia,
considered as resident immune cells, play a critical role in the
neuroinflammatory response after SAH. Microglia are capable of M1/M2
two-dimensional polarization after activation. The classic M1 phenotype is
related to the tissue injury, while the alternative M2 phenotype tends
towards tissue repair. This study aims to unravel the polarization-specific
dynamic of microglia after SAH in a murine model. SAH was induced by
endovascular perforation on C57BL/6 mice. Immunofluorescence and
quantitative real-time reverse transcriptase polymerase chain reaction
(qRT-PCR) were employed to characterize the profile of microglial
polarization on day 1, day 3, day 5, and day 10. The SAH mice showed
subarachnoidal bleeding around the circle of Willis and SAH-like symptoms.
Microglia showed the M1-predominant phenotype at the early phase, then
gradually transformed into the M2 phenotype. The functional microglial
polarization advanced along with the morphological changes through their
ramified to an amoeboid shape. The bipolar microglia appeared through the
morphological transformation with the colocalization of M1/M2 markers.
Consistently, the M1-related proinflammatory cytokines (interleukin 6 (IL-6)
and tumor necrosis factor (TNF)-α) showed an increasing expression in the
early phase, while M2-related anti-inflammatory cytokine (IL-4 and
transforming growth factor (TGF)-β) gradually upregulated during the delayed
phase. The endovascular perforated SAH model mimics the ruptured aneurysm,
which is similar to the clinical patient. Microglia demonstrated an early
activation after SAH. The dynamic of microglial morphological changes and
polarization was largely function-related. The temporal phenotype changes
implied a neuroinflammatory response and the pathophysiologic process of
restoration upon the hemorrhage attack. This study contributes to the
comprehensive understanding of SAH pathogenesis, and provides the novel
therapeutic target of microglia for SAH patients.

## Transplantation of Neural Progenitor Cells and V2a Interneurons into the Injured
Cervical Spinal Cord

## L. V. Zholudeva,1,2 N. Iyer,3 L. Qiang,1,2
V. M Spruance,1,2 M. L. Randelman,1,2 T.
Bezdudnaya,1,2 I. Fischer,1,2 S.
Sakiyama-Elbert,4 and M. A Lane1,2

## 
1Department of Neurobiology and Anatomy, College of Medicine,
Drexel University, Philadelphia, PA, USA

## 
2The Spinal Cord Research Center, College of Medicine, Drexel
University, Philadelphia, PA, USA

## 
3Department of Biomedical Engineering, University of Wisconsin,
Madison, WI, USA

## 
4Department of Biomedical Engineering, The University of Texas,
Austin, TX, USA
While there is growing interest in the use of transplanted neural progenitor
cells (NPCs) to repair the injured spinal cord, the identities of cellular
components that most effectively contribute to repair and recovery remain
unclear. With a focus on cervical spinal cord injury (SCI) and the resulting
respiratory deficits, we recently identified a population of spinal
interneurons (SpINs) that contribute to anatomical plasticity post-SCI.
These SpINs are a glutamatergic class of ventrally-derived interneurons
(Ins) that are known to mediate locomotor and respiratory functions within
the uninjured spinal cord – the V2a. Building upon this discovery, the
present work tests the hypothesis that transplantation of NPCs enriched with
V2a INs can contribute to neural networks that promote repair and enhance
respiratory plasticity after cervical SCI. Adult female rats (∼250 g)
received a lateralized, mid-cervical contusion injury (Infinite Horizon
Impactor; 200 kilodyne), which disrupts the phrenic motor circuit
controlling the diaphragm, the primary respiratory muscle. Cultured NPCs
(comprised of neuronal and glial restricted progenitor cells) derived from
the embryonic (E13-14) rat spinal cord were enriched with stem cell-derived,
Ceh-10 homeodomain-containing homolog (Chx10)-driven, V2a INs and allowed to
aggregate for 2 days in vitro. These cellular aggregates (∼120 micron
diameter) were then transplanted into the lesion epicenter (500,000 cells) 1
week post-injury. Anatomical and functional analyses were performed 1 month
following transplantation. Immunohistochemical analysis revealed donor cell
survival, differentiation and integration with the injured host phrenic
circuitry. NPC-derived glia migrated both rostral and caudal to transplant
epicenter, and donor V2a INs extended neurites both rostrally (up to 8.6 mm)
and caudally (up to 7.5 mm) as measured from the edge of the transplant. A
proportion (12.2%) of V2a donor cells expressed neuronal marker neuronal
nuclei (NeuN), while NPCs yielded both NeuN-positive neurons and glial
fibrillary acidic protein (GFAP)-positive glia. Functional diaphragm
electromyography demonstrated increased diaphragm output and enhanced
ability to respond to respiratory challenges (hypoxia, hypercapnia) 1 month
following transplant, compared with injured, vehicle-treated animals. These
ongoing studies not only test the efficacy of a promising therapeutic
strategy, but also offer insight into the neuronal phenotypes that can be
effective for neural transplantation to repair injured neural circuits.