296nucrsigNuclear Receptor SignalingNucl Recept SignalSAGE PublicationsPMC6348741634874163487413071898210.1177/1550762918801071C2H2-Type Zinc Finger Proteins: Evolutionarily Old and New Partners
of the Nuclear Hormone Receptors
MackehRafah MarrAlexandra K FaddaAbeer KinoTomoshige 1Sidra Medicine, Doha, Qatar✉Tomoshige Kino, Investigator, Department of
Human Genetics, Division of Translational Medicine, Sidra Medicine, Out Patient
Clinic, 6th Floor, Rm. C6-332, P.O. Box 26999, Al Luqta Street, Education City
North Campus, Doha, Qatar. Email: tkino@sidra.org
24102018151550762918801071155076291880107124102019© The Author(s) 2018This article is distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons
Attribution-NonCommercial 4.0 License (http://www.creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc/4.0/) which
permits non-commercial use, reproduction and distribution of the work
without further permission provided the original work is attributed as
specified on the SAGE and Open Access pages (https://us.sagepub.com/en-us/nam/open-access-at-sage).

## Abstract
Nuclear hormone receptors (NRs) are evolutionarily conserved ligand-dependent
transcription factors. They are essential for human life, mediating the actions
of lipophilic molecules, such as steroid hormones and metabolites of fatty acid,
cholesterol, and external toxic compounds. The C2H2-type zinc finger proteins
(ZNFs) form the largest family of the transcription factors in humans and are
characterized by multiple, tandemly arranged zinc fingers. Many of the C2H2-type
ZNFs are conserved throughout evolution, suggesting their involvement in
preserved biological activities, such as general transcriptional regulation and
development/differentiation of organs/tissues observed in the early embryonic
phase. However, some C2H2-type ZNFs, such as those with the Krüppel-associated
box (KRAB) domain, appeared relatively late in evolution and have significantly
increased family members in mammals including humans, possibly modulating their
complicated transcriptional network and/or supporting the morphological
development/functions specific to them. Such evolutional characteristics of the
C2H2-type ZNFs indicate that these molecules influence the NR functions
conserved through evolution, whereas some also adjust them to meet with specific
needs of higher organisms. We review the interaction between NRs and C2H2-type
ZNFs by focusing on some of the latter molecules.
Keywords: Broad-Complex, Tramtrack, and Bric-a-brac (BTB)/poxvirus and zinc finger (POZ), coregulator, evolution, Krüppel-associated box (KRAB), noncoding RNA, SCAN

statusreleaseddisplay-pdfyesis-olfnois-manuscriptnois-preprintnois-journal-matternois-scannednois-retractednoReceived 2016 Dec 20; Accepted 2017 Feb 2; Collection date 2018.

## Abbreviations
AF, activation function; APL, acute promyelocytic leukemia; AR, androgen receptor;
Bcl2, B-cell lymphoma 2; BTB, Broad-Complex, Tramtrack, and Bric-a-brac; CAR,
constitutive androstane receptor; CBP, CREB-binding protein; CHD8, chromodomain
helicase DNA-binding protein 8; CLAMP, chromatin-linked adaptor for MSL protein;
CNS, central nervous system; CoCoA, coiled-coil coactivator; COUP-TF, ovalbumin
upstream promoter-transcription factor; CtBP, C-terminal tail-binding protein; CTCF,
CCCTC-binding protein; DAX-1, dosage-sensitive sex reversal, adrenal hypoplasia
critical region, on chromosome X, gene 1; DBD, DNA-binding domain; DRIP,
VDR-interacting protein; EAR2, V-erbA-related protein 2; E2F1, E2F transcription
factor 1; ER, estrogen receptor; FXR, farnesoid X receptor; Gas5, growth
arrest-specific 5; GCNF, germ cell nuclear factor; GIOT-1, gonadotropin-inducible
ovarian transcription factor-1; GR, glucocorticoid receptor; HAT, histone
acetyltransferase; HDAC, histone deacetylase; HNF4, hepatocyte nuclear factor 4;
HP1, heterochromatin protein 1; HTLV-1, human T-cell leukemia virus type-1; HUB1,
HTLV-1 U5RE-binding protein 1; KAP-1, KRAB-associated protein-1; KLF, Krüppel-like
factor; KRAB, Krüppel-associated box; KRIP1, KRAB-A-interacting protein 1; LBD,
ligand-binding domain; lincRNA, long intergenic ncRNA; lncRNA, long ncRNA; LXR,
liver X receptor; miRNA, microRNA; MR, mineralocorticoid receptor; MSL,
male-specific lethal; nc, protein noncoding; NCoA, nuclear receptor coactivator;
NCoR, nuclear receptor corepressor; NOR1, neuron-derived orphan receptor 1; NRs,
nuclear hormone receptors; NTD, N-terminal domain; NUR77, nerve growth factor 1B;
NURR1, nuclear receptor related 1; Paris, parkin-interacting substrate; p/CAF,
p300/CBP-associated factor; PCG-1α, PPARγ coactivator-1α; PCGEM1, prostate-specific
transcript 1; PLZF, promyelocytic leukemia zinc finger protein; PNR, photo-specific
nuclear receptor; POZ, poxvirus and zinc finger; PPAR, peroxisome
proliferator-activated receptor; PR, progesterone receptor; PRC, polycomb-repressive
complex; PRDM, PR domain zinc finger protein; PRNCR1, prostate cancer associated
noncoding RNA 1p; PXR, pregnane X receptor; RAR, retinoic acid receptor; ROR,
RAR-related orphan receptor; RXR, retinoid X receptor; SETDB1, histone H3K9
methyltransferase SET domain bifurcated 1; SF-1, steroidogenic factor-1; SHP, small
heterodimer partner; SMRT, silencing mediator for retinoid and thyroid hormone
receptors; SP, specificity protein; SR, steroid hormone receptor; SRA, steroid
receptor RNA activator; STAT5, signal transducer and activator of transcription 5;
TAD, topologically associated domain; TFIIIA, transcription factor IIIA; TFIIIC,
transcription factor IIIC; TFIID, transcription factor IID; TIF1, transcription
intermediary factor 1; TLX or TLL, timeless receptor; TR, thyroid hormone receptor;
TRAP, TR-associated protein; TRIM, tripartite motif protein; TRE, TR response
element; U5RE, U5 repressive element; VDR, vitamin D receptor; WT1, Wilms tumor 1;
YY1, Yin-Yang 1; ZER6, zinc finger-estrogen receptor interaction, clone 6; ZF, zinc
finger; ZNF, zinc finger protein.

## Introduction
Gene transcription is essential for maintaining life of organisms through expression
of the effector component proteins and influences every aspect of their activities.
However, skewed gene expression leads to the development of various disorders in
humans, such as metabolic abnormalities, infection, inflammation, and cancer. Thus,
higher organisms have developed a sophisticated regulatory system of gene
transcription to control the expression of encoding proteins in appropriate places
(organs/tissues) at the right timing, to create their complex body components, and
to maintain their appropriate functionality. This is also evident by the fact that higher organisms have expanded their
genome content, particularly the nonprotein-coding genome area, which harbors plenty
of regulatory elements, such as promoters, enhancers, and insulators (98.5% of the
entire genome in humans), in contrast to the area and the number of the
protein-coding genes, which remained unchanged from lower to higher organisms (~20
000-30 000 genes). Thus, expansion of the noncoding genomic area provides a more complex and
sophisticated regulation on the expression of a limited number of coding genes.
Interestingly, a substantial part of the nonprotein-coding genome area expresses
numerous numbers and different forms of nonprotein-coding (nc) RNAs, which provides
an additional layer of the regulatory mechanisms on gene transcription and protein
function. , 
In addition to genome regulatory elements and abundant ncRNAs for organizing gene
transcription, transcription factors are the major protein components that translate
cellular internal/external changes to gene transcription. Indeed, small changes in their expression/activation can result in dramatic
yet concordant alteration in the entire functional network in organisms. They usually contain the structural domain(s) for binding to DNA and the
effector components attracting the transcriptional regulatory machinery. Transcription factors include 2 large families, nuclear hormone receptors
(NRs) and C2H2-type zinc finger proteins (ZNFs). The former proteins are evolutionarily conserved and function as
ligand-dependent transcription factors by mediating the biological actions of small
lipophilic compounds. On the contrary, the latter molecules demonstrate characteristic expansion of
their member proteins in higher organisms and act as transcription factors and/or
transcriptional regulators/cofactors through their multiple zinc fingers (ZFs) and
other distinct functional modules. Involved in diverse and important biological functions as well as exposed to
the strong evolutional pressure, NRs and C2H2-type ZNFs have developed mutual and
multilayered interactions to coordinate each other’s activities. In this review, we
will discuss these 2 families and highlight their roles and mutual interaction from
an evolutional point of view.

## Nuclear Hormone Receptors
NRs are transcription factors, the activity of which is dependent on their
association with their cognate ligands. NRs are essential for organisms to support their numerous activities,
including development, reproduction, energy metabolism, neural, musculoskeletal,
gastrointestinal, and immune functions. , Upon binding to ligand, NRs,
either by translocating into the nucleus or by constitutively residing in this
subcellular component, interact physically with their specific DNA sequences called
response elements. DNA-bound NRs then change the transcription rates of their responsive genes
by communicating with many co-regulatory molecules. 
The NR family consists of more than 200 members in general and more than 40 in
mammals (48 in humans) currently cloned and characterized across species. , Their encoding genes are
categorized into 7 major subfamilies from NR0 to NR6, depending on their
phylogenetic proximity ( ). NRs
have common structural features: the N-terminal domain (NTD), a middle DNA-binding
domain (DBD), and the C-terminal ligand-binding domain (LBD) , ( ). There is a short
sequence called hinge region (HR) between DBD and LBD. The NTD of NRs is the most
variable domain, presumably mediating receptor-specific transcriptional activity
through the transactivation domain(s) (activation function-1 [AF-1]) residing in
this domain. In contrast, the DBD is highly conserved among NRs and consists of 2 C4-type
ZFs through which it directly binds receptor-specific response elements. These sequences are mostly present in tandem, as many of NRs bind these
sequences as a homo- or a heterodimer. The LBD has a ligand-binding pocket and a transactivation domain (AF-2),
which is created through ligand-dependent conformational changes inside this domain. This second transactivation domain interacts with the histone
acetyltransferase (HAT) coactivators, including the CREB-binding protein (CBP)/p300
and the nuclear receptor coactivators (NCoAs), through the latter’s LxxLL
coactivator motifs, and stimulates NR’s ligand-dependent transcriptional activity by
cooperating with the first transactivation domain located in NTD. In addition to HAT
coactivators, NRs interact with numerous cofactor molecules, including
mediator/TR-associated protein (TRAP)/VDR-interacting protein (DRIP) and switch/
sucrose non-fermenting (SWI/SNF) protein complexes, and each of their component
proteins appears to influence the transcriptional activity of a specific fraction of
the NR-responsive genes. 
 NRs are empirically and functionally categorized into 3 major groups: (1) metabolic
sensor (or adopted orphan) receptors, (2) endocrine receptors, and (3) orphan receptors. NRs of the first group, including peroxisome proliferator-activated receptors
(PPARs), liver X receptors (LXRs), pregnane X receptor (PXR), and constitutive
androstane receptor (CAR), act as sensors for lipid metabolites, such as fatty
acids, prostanoids, oxysterols, bile acids, dietary lipids, and xenobiotics, by
binding to these compounds as ligands with relatively low affinity. NRs in the second group (endocrine receptors), including steroid hormone
receptors (SRs) (glucocorticoid receptor [GR], mineralocorticoid receptor [MR],
androgen receptor [AR], progesterone receptor [PR] and estrogen receptors [ERs]),
thyroid hormone receptors (TRs), retinoic acid receptors (RARs), and the vitamin D
receptor (VDR), act as receptors for steroid hormones (glucocorticoids,
mineralocorticoids, androgens, progestins, and estrogens), retinoid acids, thyroid
hormones, and vitamin D, with high affinity interaction to these compounds. The last group, orphan receptors, including Nerve growth factor IB (NUR77),
chicken ovalbumin upstream promoter-transcription factors (COUP-TFs), hepatocyte
nuclear factor 4s (HNF4s), and dosage-sensitive sex reversal, adrenal hypoplasia
critical region, on chromosome X, gene 1 (DAX-1), do not regularly have known ligands. However, some of these receptors (eg, NHF4s and steroidogenic factor-1
[SF-1]) can constitutively bind “structural” ligands, which function as components
of their LBDs. - 
NRs, particularly SRs, are among the molecules most well examined
phylogenetically. , Some NRs are present even in simple metazoans with multiple
cellular components, whereas substantial numbers of NRs have been reported for
metazoans like Caenorhabditis elegans. The ancestral SR first appeared in primitive vertebrate lamprey, and all SRs
can be found in ray-finned fish. Therefore, NRs are observed from the early evolutional period particularly
before and around the time of vertebrate emergence and, thus, their functionality is
relatively conserved.
NRs have a major impact on diverse regulatory activities in humans ( and ). For example, a
substantial number of NRs (TRα and β, timeless receptor [TLX or TLL], COUP-TFs,
RARs, RAR-related orphan receptor [RORs], V-erbA-related protein 2 [EAR2], NUR77,
nuclear receptor related 1 [NURR1], neuron-derived orphan receptor 1 [NOR1], and
germ cell nuclear factor [GCNF]) play critical roles in the embryonic development,
especially in the development/differentiation of the central nervous system
(CNS). - Another biological actions of
NRs (such as by TRs, COUP-TFs, PPARs, Rev-erbβ, RORα, LXRs, farnesoid X receptor
[FXR], VDR, HNF4s, GR, MR, and small heterodimer partner [SHP]) lie in the
regulation of energy, intermediary and electrolyte metabolism, such as for glucose,
cholesterol, fatty acids, sodium/potassium, and calcium, consistent with the fact
that many of the NRs employ metabolites of these biological pathways as their
ligands. - Reproduction
and development/maintenance of reproductive organs are also important biological
activities regulated by NRs, such as ERs, estrogen-related receptors (ERRs), PR, AR,
NUR77, SF-1, and DAX-1. , Furthermore, most of the NRs, including PPARs, RORs, LXRs, VDR,
ERs, GR, PR, NUR77, NURR, NOR1, and RORs, have immune regulatory activities, whereas
some others play roles in hematopoiesis. , Rev-erbs and RORs are
important components of the circadian CLOCK system that synchronizes the body’s
activities to diurnal day-night changes caused by rotation of the earth. PXR and CAR play a central role in the xenobiotic metabolism by binding toxic
metabolites/exogenous compounds as their ligands and by regulating the expression of
their metabolizing enzymes including cytochrome P450-related reductases. 
 

## C2H2-Type ZNFs
C2H2-type ZNFs are another major group of transcription factors. Zinc fingers are
small peptide domains with a secondary structure stabilized by a zinc ion bound to
the cysteine and/or histidine residues of the finger. Different combinations of these 2 residues lead to the development of
different classes of ZFs, such as C2H2, C2HC, C2C2 (C4: eg, NRs), and C2C2C2C2
fingers. Among the combinations of ZFs, the C2H2-type ZF motif is known as the
“classic ZF.” In humans, more than 700 proteins have this motif, constituting the largest
class of putative human transcription factors. The C2H2-type ZF comprises up to 30 amino acids in the consensus sequence
CX2-4CX12HX2-8H (X refers to any amino acid),
which forms 1 α-helix and 2 β-sheets, respectively, in the C- and N-terminal
portion. - These
secondary structures of the peptide fold into a stable assembly through hydrophobic
interactions and enclosure of a zinc ion by 2 conserved cysteine and 2 conserved
histidine residues. , Multiple ZFs are usually present in tandem and are connected by
linkers with conserved amino acid sequences. C2H2-type ZNFs function primarily as DNA-binding proteins by forming various
modes of contacts to target DNA double helices with their ZFs, as shown in the
interaction of the transcription factor IIIA (TFIIIA) with DNA ( ). In addition to the primary role as
DNA-binding factors, some C2H2-type ZNFs use their ZFs for interacting with other
proteins or double-stranded RNAs, which may be important for their communication
with other proteins/RNAs also attracted to the multimolecule transcriptional complex
formed on DNA. - 
 Based on the number, localization, and arrangement of ZFs within a molecule,
C2H2-type ZNFs can be divided into 4 classes: (1) single-fingered, (2)
triple-fingered, (3) separated-paired-fingered, and (4) multiple adjacent-fingered,
and this classification may explain to some extent the functions of the proteins in
the respective class ( ). C2H2-ZNFs
that interact with NRs are found among triple-fingered or multiple adjacent-fingered
ZNFs. Besides ZFs, C2H2-type ZNFs harbor additional structural modules, such as the
Broad-Complex, Tramtrack, and Bric-a-brac (BTB)/poxvirus and zinc finger (POZ),
Krüppel-associated box (KRAB), and SCAN domains. These domains are usually located in the N-terminal portion and function as
platforms for protein-protein interactions, whereas ZFs are positioned in the
C-terminal area , ( ). The BTB/POZ and KRAB domains have transcriptional regulatory activity
(mostly repressive), while the SCAN domain does not. Among human C2H2-type ZNFs, about 7% have a BTB/POZ domain (BTB/POZ-ZNFs),
43% harbor a KRAB domain (KRAB-ZNFs), and 7% contain a SCAN domain (SCAN-ZNFs). Sixty-seven percent of the human C2H2-type ZNFs have only ZFs without any of
these domains (thus, they are “poly-ZNFs”). Some C2H2-type ZNFs contain multiple of the same or of different domains,
whereas the SCAN domain appears as a sole domain in one molecule. 
 

## Evolution of C2H2-Type ZNFs
The C2H2-type ZNFs are present throughout the organisms from yeasts to humans. They
have expanded their member proteins following evolution, becoming the largest
transcription factor family in humans, in contrast to the C4-type ZNFs (mostly NRs),
the numbers of which are similar in vertebrates but show a characteristic increase
in Nematodes , ( ). The number of C2H2-type ZNFs
particularly increases in vertebrates, eg, becoming almost double in humans compared
with Takifugu fish or to Zebrafish ( ).
BTB/POZ-ZNFs are seen from yeasts to humans, while KRAB-ZNFs and SCAN-ZNFs appear in
vertebrates and mammals, respectively. The number of KRAB-ZNFs and SCAN-ZNFs increase significantly in higher
organisms with the former demonstrating this tendency more obviously ( ). Thus,
the addition of these domains to C2H2-type ZNFs, particularly the KRAB domain,
appears to be required for the functions specific to higher organisms, such as the
complex transcriptional regulation of genes that enables development,
differentiation, and/or function of their complicated organs and tissues. As
poly-ZNFs and BTB/POZ-ZNFs are observed early in evolution, they may support more
fundamental and/or conserved functions of the organisms, such as general
transcriptional regulation and early embryonic development shared among different
organisms. In contrast, KRAB-ZNFs and SCAN-ZNFs are likely to play roles in the
activities specific to higher organisms. For example, the characteristic expression
of the KRAB-ZNFs in human brain appears to be required for the transcriptional
network that drives human-specific brain functions, such as enhanced cognitive
activities and significantly larger brain size, compared with other primates like chimpanzees. 
 

## Regulation of NR Activity by C2H2-Type ZNFs
NRs regulate and influence numerous critical activities of organisms as we explained above, and C2H2-type ZNFs are among their important partners. Based on the previous
observation for other proteins, it appears that C2H2-type ZNFs appeared from lower organisms, such as
poly-ZNFs and BTB/POZ-ZNFs, may regulate the actions of NRs, which are fundamental
and/or commonly observed in many organisms. On the contrary, the C2H2-type ZNFs
found only in higher organisms like KRAB-ZNFs seem to modulate the actions of NRs
involved in complex regulatory mechanisms or in adjusting the NR actions for
species-specific needs. Although overall actions of C2H2-type ZNFs on NRs are still
largely unknown at this moment, the above-indicated tendency can be seen in some of
these molecules , ( ). Below, we review the functional interactions between C2H2-type ZNFs
and NRs (listed in ), focusing on their physiologic and pathologic importance. NRs
functionally and/or physically interact with poly-ZNFs, BTB/POZ-ZNFs, and KRAB-ZNFs,
but none of them have been found to cooperate with SCAN-ZNFs to date.
 

## Poly-ZNFs
Poly-ZNFs that do not contain BTB/POZ, KRAB, or SCAN domain are the oldest members of
the C2H2-type ZNF family. Most of these proteins are evolutionarily conserved. , , Many of the
triple-fingered and some of the multiple adjacent-fingered poly-ZNFs function as
classic transcription factors, while others act as transcriptional modulators
incorporated in the transcriptional regulatory complex formed on other DNA-binding
factors. Representatives of the triple-fingered poly-ZNFs interacting with NRs are
the specificity protein (SP)/Krüppel-like factor (KLF) family transcription factors,
while those of the multiple adjacent-fingered poly-ZNFs also influencing the NR
activities, include the Yin-Yang 1 (YY1) and Wilms tumor 1 (WT1) transcription
factors, and the CCCTC-binding protein (CTCF) transcriptional regulator.

## SP/KLF Transcription Factors
This family consists of 2 subgroups, SP1- and KLF-related proteins. The former group is composed of 9 members (SP1 to SP9) in humans, while
the latter has 17 (KLF1 to KLF17). Their orthologs are present across species from drosophila to humans. These ZNFs have 3 C2H2-type ZFs in their C-terminal portion ( ). SP
proteins contain the Bottomhead box (BTD) just N-terminally to their ZFs,
whereas KLFs do not have this motif. , Both SP- and KLF-related
proteins bind the DNA sequences called GC and GR boxes (5’-GGGGCGGGG-3’ and
5’-GGTGTGGGG-3’, respectively) frequently found in CpG islands associated with
the promoter of downstream coding sequences. SP1, a representative of the SP family proteins, is essential for the
transcription of TATA-less genes, facilitating the formation of the
transcription initiation complex on their promoters through interaction with
TFIID, which is a multiprotein complex including the TATA-binding protein and
plays a central role in the RNA polymerase II–mediated transcription. Due to its interaction with TFIID and binding to CpG islands, SP1 is
required for the transcription of a substantial number of protein-coding genes,
obviously functioning as a component of the general transcriptional complex. In
contrast, KLF family proteins function as “regular” transcription factors, by
binding to the response elements located in the promoter or enhancer regions and
by stimulating the transcription of downstream protein-coding genes. Knockout mice for the SP/KLF family member genes generally demonstrate
early embryonic/perinatal death or severe functional defects in various organs. Thus, these poly-ZNFs play important roles in the general transcriptional
regulation and/or in the organ development/differentiation observed in the early
embryonic phase shared by many organisms. Characteristically, SP/KLF
transcription factors have 3 major modes of action on NRs ( ).
First, SPs/KLFs and NRs mutually influence each other’s transcriptional activity
through either direct or indirect interaction at their regulating genes. Second,
SPs/KLFs modulate the expression of NRs, and augment/repress the transcriptional
activity of NRs. Third, NRs alter the expression of certain SP/KLF family
proteins, employing them as mediators of NR activities.
 SP1 is the most well-studied member of the SP subfamily. SP1 can modulate the
transcriptional activity of ERα/β, PR, AR, PPARγ, COUP-TFs, and SF-1, through
either direct or indirect interaction with these receptors. For example, SP1 regulates estrogen-induced cell growth by influencing
the transcriptional activity of ERs on the genes encoding c-fos, cyclin D1,
B-cell lymphoma 2 (bcl2) and E2F transcription factor 1 (E2F1) and the hormonal
activation of the mitogen-activated kinase pathway. SP1 is required for AR to repress gonadotropin-stimulated luteinizing
hormone receptor expression. SP1 enhances AR-induced expression of the p21 cell cycle component protein. Furthermore, SP1 is required for PPARγ-mediated repression of the
thromboxan gene possibly by tethering this receptor to the promoter site where
SP1 binds. Finally, SP1 facilitates SF-1-mediated expression of the steroidogenic
acute regulatory protein (StAR), a key molecule for cholesterol trafficking in
mitochondria and thus for steroidogenesis. SP1 and some of these NRs seem to interact physically through the
former’s C-terminal domain and latter’s DBD. In addition, SP1 appears to
influence the expression of a substantial number of NRs through its ubiquitous
DNA-binding sites found in the promoter region of the NR genes. This indicates that SP1 regulates the activity of these NRs by changing
their expression levels.
KLF family proteins are important transcription factors involved in cell
proliferation, differentiation, and induction of apoptosis by regulating the
expression of numerous effector molecules, including cyclin D1, cyclin B1, and
c-Myc, and are essential for cardiac and vascular development and hematopoiesis
in the embryonic phase. They are also required for adipogenesis, lymphocyte and
monocyte/macrophage differentiation, and maintenance of intestinal epithelial
cells after birth. KLF proteins influence the transcriptional activity of key NRs involved
in these biological pathways, such as PPARγ (KLF5, 2 and 7) for adipogenesis and
ERs (KLF9) for breast tissue differentiation and breast cancer
proliferation. , KLF4, KLF9, KLF11, and KLF13 regulate hormone-dependent
proliferation and differentiation of uterine endometrium and myometrium by
influencing directly or indirectly the transcriptional activity of ERs and PR on
the E2F transcription factors and the Wnt/β-catenin signaling pathway. , KLF9 and
KLF13, respectively, modulate ER- and PR-mediated signaling pathway by
stimulating the expression of these receptors. KLF11 cooperates with GR for the expression of the monoamine oxidase-A
gene, the protein product of which degrades monoamine-related neurotransmitters
important for the actions of CNS. KLF4 also cooperates with GR for the expression of genes involved in the
formation of the skin barrier function in prenatal fetus. , The
orphan receptor SHP inhibits the transcriptional activity of KLF6 on the matrix
metalloproteinase-9 gene to regulate endothelial cell motility. 
In addition to acting as regulators of the NRs’ transcriptional activity, KLFs
function as their downstream mediators, being their encoding genes responsive to
NRs. For example, the KLF9 gene promoter contains glucocorticoid response
elements (GREs) and induction of KLF9 by GR is important for the survival of the
newly differentiated hippocampal granule cells originating from adult neural
stem cells (these neuronal cells play important roles in memory consolidation)
as well as for the regulation of the inflammatory response in
macrophages. , , Glucocorticoids/GR are known to have strong effects on
these activities. , Induction of KLF15 by glucocorticoids is important for
the expression of enzymes that catalyze branched-chain amino acids and for the
proteasomal degradation of cellular proteins, which ultimately contribute to the
development of muscle wasting observed with chronic glucocorticoid excess. In colon cancer, PPARγ stimulates the expression of KLF10, which
underlies the anti-cancer effect of this receptor. As many of the above-indicated KLFs, the expression of which is regulated
by NRs, also function as regulators for the transcriptional activity of
corresponding NRs, they form a feed-forward transcriptional regulatory loop in
the signaling pathways functional for NRs ( ).

## YY1 and WT1
YY1 is an ubiquitously expressed transcription factor containing 4 C2H2-type ZFs
in its C-terminal portion. As the name “Yin-Yang” indicates, YY1 regulates the transcription of its
responsive genes positively or negatively. YY1 influences cell proliferation and differentiation, and is essential
for the embryonic development. In addition, YY1 contributes to cancer biology. Its aberrant expression
is found in various cancers, and it modulates the expression of genes involved
in cancer development and progression. YY1 physically interacts with AR and regulates the latter’s
transcriptional activity on the prostate-specific antigen gene, which is an
indicator of prostate cancer progression. YY1 cooperates with PXR for the regulation of the cytochrome P450 enzymes
involved in xenobiotic metabolism, such as CYP3A4 and CYP3A5. YY1 represses the transcriptional activity of VDR on vitamin D-responsive
genes in osteoblastic cells. In renal cells, it represses VDR-mediated transcription of the 24(OH)
gene whose encoding enzyme inactivates vitamin D (25-dihydroxyvitamin
D3). YY1, GR and the signal transducer and activator of transcription 5
(STAT5) cooperate with each other in stimulating the transcription of the growth
hormone gene by forming a transcription factor complex on its promoter. 
WT1 is also a transcription factor containing 4 C2H2-type ZFs in its C-terminal
portion. WT1 regulates cell proliferation and differentiation, and is essential
for controlling the transition between the mesenchymal and epithelial state of cells. It plays critical roles in the development of urogenital organs,
including kidneys, gonadal organs, and external genitalia. WT1 is also involved in hematopoiesis, blood vessel formation, and
development of various benign/malignant tumors, including Wilms tumor, acute
myeloid leukemia, uterine sarcoma, and breast cancer. , WT1 facilitates
SF-1-induced transcriptional activity on the genes associated with sexual
differentiation, whereas DAX-1 opposes to this WT1/SF-1 cooperation. Furthermore, WT1 contributes to the sexual differentiation by regulating
the expression of DAX-1. WT1 interacts with ERα and suppresses estrogen-stimulated expression of
the insulin-like growth factor-1 receptor, antagonizing to the
estrogen-dependent growth of breast cancer cells. WT1 also represses the transcriptional activity of AR, functioning as a
negative regulator for prostate cancer development and progression. In renal cells, WT1 stimulates the expression of VDR and augments vitamin
D-induced modulation of their cell fate. , WT1 suppresses RARα
expression, while PPARβ inhibits WT1 expression and suppresses melanoma cell
proliferation. , 

## CCCTC-Binding Protein
CTCF consists of 11 C2H2-type ZFs ( ) and acts as an architectural
protein for maintaining/regulating 3-dimensional chromatin interaction by
cooperating with the cohesin protein complex and other accessory factors,
including TFIIIC, ZNF143, PR domain zinc finger protein 5 (PRDM5), and
chromodomain helicase DNA-binding protein 8 (CHD8). CTCF is evolutionarily conserved and widely present in bilaterian phyla,
but absent in other eukaryotes. CTCF forms chromatin loops through which it organizes long-range DNA
interactions between 2 and more genomic areas. Although it is called as “CCCTC-binding” factor, it can bind sequences
with extensive variations by using selected sets of its ZFs. The human genome contains ~15 000 CTCF-binding sites and some of them are
distributed in insulators or borders of the topologically associated domains
(TADs), but substantial CTCF-binding sites are found inside TADs and
intragenomic regions. , This distribution pattern of the CTCF-binding sites
indicates that CTCF acts not only as an organizer of TADs by blocking the action
of the regulatory gene sequences/propagation of specific histone marks but also
as a regulator of the enhancer/promoter switch ( ). Thus, CTCF regulates the
transcriptional activity of the associated protein-coding genes positively or
negatively by changing their interaction to specific enhancers/promoters,
ultimately contributing to the tissue/phase-specific expression of these genes.
In addition to acting as an organizer for chromatin interactions, CTCF plays
roles in the recombination of immunoglobulin genes and transcriptional pausing
and alternative splicing. As CTCF acts as a general architectural protein, it virtually influences
the transcriptional activity of all NRs. The effect of CTCF was examined in
details for the transcriptional regulation by ERα. , , In a genome-wide
analysis, CTCF-binding sites are enriched in ERα-binding regions, suggesting
that CTCF acts as a cofactor for ERα-mediated transcription by facilitating the
association of DNA-bound ERα and the promoter regions of ERα-regulating genes in
a 3-dimensional fashion. Furthermore, CTCF-binding sites are more likely to overlap with cell
line–specific ERα-binding sites, indicating that CTCF determines tissue-specific
actions of estrogens by organizing enhancer/promoter interaction of the
ERα-regulating genes through formation of the chromatin loops. CTCF also cooperates with TR. Some enhancers/promoters responding to TR
through their TR response elements (TREs) also have CTCF-binding sites. Indeed, about 18% of CTCF-binding sites harbor TREs. CTCF- and TR-binding sites sometimes form composite elements having their
binding sites closely, and CTCF-mediated enhancer-blocking activity is dependent
on the presence of the TR bound on these composite elements, indicating that TR modulates the genome regulatory activity of CTCF.
 

## Other Poly-ZNFs
Zip67, Zac1, ZNF217, and ZNF536 are multiple adjacent-fingered poly-ZNFs. Their
biological/physiological actions are not well elucidated, but they act as
cofactors for the transcriptional activity of some NRs. Similar to other
multiple adjacent-fingered poly-ZNFs, such as ZNF592 and ZNF687, these ZNFs are
likely to be incorporated in the transcriptional complex formed on NRs and
modulate their transcriptional activity through communication with other
regulatory molecules inside the complex. 
Zip67 or ZNF653 contains 5 ZFs and was identified as a regulator of SF-1-induced
transcriptional activity. Zip67 directly interacts with SF-1 LBD and represses SF-1-induced
transcriptional activity. Zip67 also represses the transcriptional activity of LXRα, NUR77, GR, and
ER, suggesting that Zip67 functions as a general cofactor for some NRs. 
Zac1 or PLAG1 (PLAG-like zinc finger 1) has 7 ZFs and was first identified as a
putative transcriptional activator involved in the regulation of apoptosis and
cell cycle. , Zac1 physically interacts with the HAT coactivators,
p300 and p300/CBP-associated factor (p/CAF) through its ZFs, and regulates the
latter’s HAT activity. , Zac1 can coactivate or corepress the hormone-dependent
transcriptional activity of AR, ERα, and TRβ1. Zac1 also stimulates PPARγ expression by binding to the proximal portion
of the PPARγ promoter, suggesting that Zac1 exerts its
anti-proliferative effects on various cancer cells through modulating the
expression of this receptor. 
ZNF217 possesses 8 ZFs. ZNF217 acts as a coactivator of ERα-induced
transcriptional activity in various cell lines. In the chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP) followed by high throughput
sequence analysis, ZNF217- and ERα-binding sites are clustered in the distal
enhancer region, and ZNF217 interacts physically with ERα through the former’s
C-terminal portion harboring ZFs and the latter’s hinge region. Interestingly, expression of ZNF217 was correlated with that of ERα in
breast cancer tissues, and its higher expression is linked to worse prognosis of
the patients with breast cancer, possibly by enhancing the
proliferation-stimulating activity of ERα. Indeed, ZNF217 is found to be overexpressed in more than 20% of the
breast cancers, and its elevated expression is associated with aggressive tumor behavior. 
ZNF536 was identified as a novel protein interacting with the C-terminal
tail-binding protein (CtBP) in the yeast two-hybrid screening. ZNF536 has 10 ZFs, is highly conserved in vertebrates, and is most
abundantly expressed in the neural cells especially of developing brain. ZNF536 regulates neuronal differentiation by repressing retinoic
acid/RAR-induced transcriptional activity, presumably through competing with
RARα for binding to the latter’s response elements, as ZNF536 can bind these
elements similar to RARα. 
ZNF366 is an 11 ZFs-containing protein identified as a molecule interacting with
ERα in the yeast two-hybrid screening using an ERα mutant lacking LBD as bait. ZNF366 acts as a corepressor for ERα-induced transcriptional activity by
interacting with receptor-interacting protein 140 (RIP140) and CtBP. ZNF366
represses estrogen-responsive genes in breast cancer cells, suggesting that it may function as a negative factor for
estrogen-dependent proliferation of breast cancer cells.
ZNF423 or Roaz contains 30 ZFs and was first described as a binding partner of
the EBF1/OLF1 transcription factor. , ZNF423 is important for
the differentiation of adipocytes and olfactory neurons and for the development
of B-cell lymphoma. ZNF423 is a critical factor required for the retinoic acid–induced
differentiation of the neuroblastoma cell lines, acting as a cofactor for
RAR/RXR-induced transcriptional activity by binding directly to RARα and RXRα. High expression of ZNF423 in neuroblastoma tissues is associated with
good prognosis of the patients harboring this tumor, suggesting that ZNF423 is a promising clinical marker and/or a treatment target. 

## BTB/POZ-ZNFs
BTB/POZ-ZNFs are also evolutionarily conserved proteins observed from C
elegans and insects in the evolutionary tree. , The BTB/POZ domain spans ~120
amino acids and is also found in some actin-binding proteins containing a kelch motif. BTB/POZ domain has multiple activities, including oligomerization between
family members and transcriptional repression through interaction with repressive cofactors. There are 2 BTB/POZ-ZNFs that interact with NRs, Kaiso, and the promyelocytic
leukemia zinc finger protein (PLZF).

## Kaiso
Kaiso, or ZNF348 or ZBTB33 (zinc finger and BTB-containing protein 33), is a
triple-fingered ZNF having a BTB/POZ domain in its N-terminus and 3 ZFs in the
C-terminus. Kaiso physically interacts with the p120-catenin signaling molecule
and binds methylated CpG dinucleotides in the consensus sequence CGCG. In addition, Kaiso is physically associated with the nuclear receptor
corepressor (NCoR) through its BTB/POZ domain and facilitates deacetylation of
histone tails; thus, it acts as a methylation-dependent transcriptional
repressor by binding to methylated CpG islands of the target gene promoters. As many NRs attract NCoR for their repression of responsive genes, Kaiso
may be a key molecule for the interplay between gene silencing by DNA
methylation and NR-mediated transcriptional repression through histone
deacetylation. Kaiso represses GR expression by binding to the proximal promoter
region of the GR gene in a methylation-dependent fashion,
influencing the anti-apoptotic activity of this receptor in breast cancer cells. Kaiso also interacts with the unmethylated consensus sequence, CTGCNA,
and represses expression of the molecules involved in the Wnt signaling pathway. 

## Promyelocytic Leukemia Zinc Finger Protein
PLZF or ZBTB16 (zinc finger and BTB-containing protein 16) is a BTB/POZ-ZNF with
9 ZFs ( ). PLZF
was first identified as the gene for chromosomal translocation t(11;17)(q23;q21)
in acute promyelocytic leukemia (APL), which produces the PLZF-RARα fusion protein ( ). PLZF
plays a role in the control of cell cycle progression and is involved in the
forebrain organization, hindbrain segmentation and musculoskeletal/limb
development, differentiation of myeloid cells, and spermatogenesis. - PLZF binds through its
BTB/POZ domain some repressive cofactors, such as the silencing mediator for
retinoid and thyroid hormone receptors (SMRT), NCoR, Sin3 and histone
deacetylase 1 (HDAC1), and forms a transcription-repressive complex. The PLZF-RARα fusion protein disrupts normal transcriptional regulation
organized by retinoic acids, leading to the development of APL by reciprocally
attracting the polycomb-repressive complex 1 (PRC1) and PRC2 to RARα-binding sites. Progesterone and glucocorticoids strongly stimulate PLZF expression in
human endometrial stromal cells and myometrial smooth muscle cells, suggesting
that PLZF plays a role in the proliferation and/or differentiation of these
cells during the menstrual cycle influenced by these steroid hormones.

## KRAB-ZNFs
KRAB-ZNFs form the largest subfamily in C2H2-type ZNFs, comprising nearly half of
these proteins in humans ( ).
KRAB-ZNFs appeared in the tetrapod vertebrates and they demonstrate a significant
lineage-specific expansion in higher organisms. This expansion is caused by segmental gene duplication, as evidenced by the
fact that the genes encoding KRAB-ZNFs are found as clusters in particular portions
of chromosomes, such as chromosome 19q13, 6p22, 16p13, and 16p11 in humans. Rapid expansion of KRAB-ZNFs is particularly observed in the primate lineage,
and substantial proportion of the human KRAB-ZNFs has no mouse orthologs. , These pieces
of evidence indicate rapid diversification of KRAB-ZNFs and their potential
importance in the regulation of the biological functions specific to primates
including humans. Indeed, they appear to be responsible for some of the major
transcriptional differences found between humans and other primates. Furthermore, some human KRAB-ZNF genes (eg, PRDM9)
demonstrate diversity in the number of their encoding ZFs among human populations,
indicating that they may underlie the variability observed between different populations/individuals. 
KRAB-ZNFs are well known to act as transcriptional repressors, but some of them also
function as transcriptional enhancers. , KRAB-ZNFs have the KRAB domain
in their N-terminal portion and multiple ZFs in the C-terminal area, which function
respectively as a transcriptional regulatory unit and an anchoring component to DNA,
RNA, and/or other protein molecules. Most of the KRAB-ZNFs have more than 4 ZFs and some contain more than 30 of
these motifs (average number of ZFs: 7.5 and 8.5 in mouse and human, respectively),
and they selectively use some of their multiple ZFs for interacting with specific
DNA sequences and RNA/protein molecules, indicating a potential of having many
different partner/target molecules/genes. , The KRAB domain spans
approximately 75 amino acids, and has one or both of the KRAB-A and KRAB-B boxes. KRAB-A box consists of 45 amino acids and acts as a strong transcriptional
repressor domain by recruiting several cofactor molecules including the
KRAB-associated protein-1 (KAP-1), , which is also known as the
KRAB-A-interacting protein 1 (KRIP1), tripartite motif protein 28 (TRIM28), or
transcription intermediary factor 1β (TIF1β). In contrast, functions of KRAB-B box are not well known, but it enhances the
activity of KRAB-A box. KAP-1 binds KRAB domain as an oligomer and further recruits the
heterochromatin protein 1 (HP1), HDACs, and the histone H3K9 methyltransferase SET
domain bifurcated 1 (SETDB1) through which KRAB-ZNFs silence their associating genes
by changing the chromatin status/structure. , Importantly, KAP-1 acts as a
coactivator for some NRs, similar to its homologous molecule TIF1α
(TRIM24). - TIF1s
physically interact with NRs and participate in their transcriptional
regulation , ; thus, they are a link for the functional interaction between
KRAB-ZNFs and NRs. Several KRAB-ZNFs, such as ZNF746 (Paris), ZNF282, ZNF764,
ZNF398, and ZNF461, influence the transcriptional activity of NRs.

## ZNF746
ZNF746 also known as the parkin-interacting substrate (Paris) is a KRAB-ZNF
containing 4 ZFs. ZNF746 functions as a transcription repressor by binding to
the TATTTT[T/G] consensus motif. ZNF746 is a substrate of the ubiquitin E3 ligase Parkin and represses the
transcription of the PPARγ coactivator-1α (PGC-1α) gene in neurons. Thus, the reduction of Parkin expression or the presence of its
inactivating gene mutations results in increase of ZNF746 protein levels in
these cells. Elevated ZNF746 in turn reduces PCG-1α expression and contributes
to the development of neurodegeneration observed in Parkinson disease through
down-regulating the expression of PCG-1α-dependent genes. PGC-1α is a coactivator for several NRs, including PPARs, ERs, RXRα,
HNF4α, and GR, by interacting physically with these receptors through its LxxLL
coactivator motif, and regulates intermediary metabolism, adaptive
thermogenesis, mitochondrial biogenesis, and adipocyte differentiation/function
in part through these receptors. Thus, ZNF746 potentially influences the activity of these receptors
indirectly by stimulating the expression of PGC-1α.

## ZNF282
ZNF282 is a KRAB-ZNF containing 5 ZFs and was originally identified as a protein
that binds the U5 repressive element (U5RE) of the human T-cell leukemia virus
type-I (HTLV-I) (thus, it is also called the HTLV-I U5RE-binding protein 1: HUB1). ZNF282 physically interacts and synergistically cooperates with the
coiled-coil coactivator (CoCoA), a cofactor interacting with NCoA HAT
coactivators and contributing to NR-induced transcriptional activity. , ZNF282
enhances ERα-mediated transcriptional activity in the presence of CoCoA and
stimulates estrogen-dependent proliferation of breast cancer cells. ZNF282 also enhances the transcriptional activity of GR, TR, and AR. However, in vivo importance of such ZNF282-mediated
regulation of NR activity is not known yet.

## ZNF764
ZNF764 consists of 7 ZFs in its C-terminal portion and one KRAB-A domain in its
N-terminal area ( ). ZNF764 was identified as a potential gene
causing the multiple steroid hormone resistance observed in a patient with
16p11.2 microdeletion. The 16p11.2 gene segment is highly susceptible to segmental
duplications/deletions in the great ape lineage. The gene rearrangement in the 16p11.2 segment is still ongoing in modern
humans. For example, length of this segment has almost doubled in humans and
chimpanzees compared with their ancestor orangutans. This activity has also generated in the segment human-specific genes with
beneficial effects, whereas it causes various congenital disorders by impacting
appropriate copy numbers of residing genes, such as in the case of
ZNF764. , In human cells, ZNF764
enhances the transcriptional activity of GR, AR, MR, and TRs in cooperation with KAP-1. In a genome-wide binding study using ChIP-sequencing in human HeLa cells,
ZNF764- and GR-binding sites are found in close proximity, indicating that
ZNF764 modulates GR transcriptional activity by incorporated in the
transcriptional complex formed on DNA-bound GR. The exact physiologic functions of ZNF764 in humans are not known, but it
appears to regulate the GR activity involved in the stress response organized by
the hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal axis and the AR activity required for fetal
development of male-type external genitalia. 

## ZNF398
ZNF398 also known as ZER6 (zinc finger-estrogen receptor interaction, clone 6) is
a KRAB-ZNF containing 6 ZFs and was identified as an ERα-interacting protein in
a yeast two-hybrid screening using full-length ERα as bait. Alternative splicing generates 2 ZER6 isoforms, p52-ZER6 and p71-ZER6.
ERα physically interacts with p52-ZER6 in a ligand-dependent fashion but not
with p71-ZER6, due to the presence of the HUB1 domain in the latter isoform. ERα strongly represses the transcriptional activity of ZER6 on the gene
containing its response elements. As ZER6 is specifically expressed in breast tissues, ZER6 may mediate
some actions of estrogens in this organ. ZER6 is also expressed in ERα-positive, but not ERα-negative breast
cancers, suggesting its potential role in the regulation of estrogen-dependent
proliferation in this malignancy. 

## ZNF461
ZNF461, also called as the gonadotropin-inducible ovarian transcription factor-1
(GIOT-1), was first identified as a molecule induced by the follicular
stimulating hormone. ZNF461 is predominantly expressed in steroidogenic tissues, including
testicular Leydig cells, ovarian granulosa and theca cells and adrenocortical
cells, indicating its primary role in the regulation of steroidogenesis in mammals. ZNF461 contains one KRAB-A domain and 12 ZFs, and acts as a
transcriptional repressor. Expression of ZNF461 is regulated by SF-1 and NUR77, respectively, in
ovarian granulose cells and testicular K28 Leydig cells. On the contrary, ZNF461 represses SF-1-mediated transcriptional activity
by physically interacting with SF-1 and by attracting HDAC2, indicating a
presence of auto-regulatory loop between ZNF461 and SF-1 in the steroid hormone
production by gonads and adrenal glands. 

## Conclusions and Future Perspectives
NRs are evolutionarily conserved ligand-dependent transcription factors that mediate
the actions of lipophilic hormones and metabolites and/or intermediates of several
important biological pathways. NRs are essential for human life, by affecting every aspect of human
activities. , 
On the contrary, C2H2-type ZNFs form an evolutionarily expanding family of
transcription factors, characterized by multiple, tandemly arranged ZFs and distinct
functional modules, such as BTB/POZ, KRAB, and SCAN domains. Among them, KRAB-ZNFs have expanded their members significantly in higher
organisms, possibly organizing the species-specific biological actions through the
transcriptional regulatory network that has also increased its complexity following
evolution. , , Substantial numbers of C2H2-type ZNFs function as DNA-binding
transcription factors, whereas others may act as transcriptional cofactors
incorporated in the transcription complex formed on NRs. As both NRs and C2H2-type
ZNFs have diverse regulatory actions on human biology, these 2 groups mutually
interact with each other through their evolution/diversification, ultimately
contributing not only to the functions conserved through evolution but also to the
complex gene regulation and/or species-specific activities of higher organisms.
Research on the former mainly mediated by the interaction between NRs and older
C2H2-ZNFs has demonstrated major progress, as it plays roles in more fundamental
biological systems shared by many organisms. In contrast, importance of the latter,
eg, for the human-specific actions of KRAB-ZNFs, has just been recognized recently.
Indeed, these younger genes tend to have less functional communication with other
genes, in contrast to older genes that were well incorporated in the gene
interaction network built through long evolutional history ( ).
Nevertheless, the new genes including KRAB- or SCAN-ZNFs appear to be emerged to
support the activities important for respective species, such as superb CNS
functions observed in humans. Thus, revealing the actions of newly appeared
C2H2-ZNFs is important to understand human-specific biological activities and is
critical to elucidate causes and pathophysiology of human diseases (eg, depression
and schizophrenia , ). Clarifying the regulatory actions of evolutionarily old and
new C2H2-type ZNFs on NRs will ultimately improve our understanding on NR actions
general to many organisms, but also those relevant and specific to humans.
Another important aspect of C2H2-type ZNFs is their interaction with abundant ncRNAs.
Numbers of ncRNAs have been significantly increased in higher organisms following
expansion of noncoding-gene area. Many of the ncRNAs employ protein molecules as their functional targets
and/or mediators of their effects. For example, argonaute proteins are necessary for microRNAs (miRNAs) to
interact with their target mRNAs, while many long ncRNAs (lncRNAs) interact with
various proteins to exert their effects on chromatin/DNA. , C2H2-type ZNFs are among
such molecules that mediate the actions of ncRNAs. For example, roX, a drosophila
lncRNA essential for dosage compensation of the sex chromosome by stimulating the
transcription of single X chromosome in males, communicates with its target DNA
sequences through the chromatin-linked adaptor for male-specific lethal (MSL)
protein (CLAMP). CLAMP is a poly-ZNF with 7 ZFs and is a component of the MSL complex necessary
for the dosage compensation by roX. CLAMP binds roX with its ZFs and guides this
lncRNA to target DNA sequences. CTCF, a poly-ZNFs with 11 ZFs, exerts its insulator function by forming a
complex with the DEAD-box RNA helicase p68 and the steroid receptor RNA activator
(SRA) lncRNA. SRA participates in the transcriptional activity of SRs by interacting with
their AF-1 transactivation domain and by forming a complex with p160-type
NCoAs , ; thus, CTCF, SRA, and NRs cooperate with each other to
regulate NR-induced transcriptional activity. Similar to SRA, the lncRNAs known to
have regulatory actions on NRs, such as the growth arrest-specific 5 (Gas5),
prostate cancer–associated noncoding RNA 1 (PRNCR1), and the prostate-specific
transcript 1 (PCGEM1) , might exert their effects through the interaction with
C2H2-type ZNFs, as some C2H2-ZNFs are known to regulate the transcriptional activity
of NRs for which these lncRNAs are also functional. Furthermore, lncRNAs and some
C2H2-type ZNFs may play important regulatory roles in tissue-specific gene
expression, indicating their functional overlap and potential cooperation in target
biological activities. As increasing numbers of the ncRNAs with NR regulatory
activities was observed during the last several years, elucidation of their
interaction with C2H2-ZNFs may help revealing the regulatory actions of such ncRNAs
on NRs.

## Footnotes
Author Contributions: RM and TK wrote the article. AK created tables. RM, AKM, AF, and TK edited the
article.
Authorship Statement: This article is not under consideration by another journal, and all authors agree
to the submission of the article, have approved the final submitted copy, and
are aware of and agree to be bound by the editorial policies of Nuclear
Receptor Signaling.
Declaration of Conflicting Interests: The author(s) declared no potential conflicts of interest with respect to the
research, authorship, and/or publication of this article.
Funding: The author(s) disclosed receipt of the following financial support for the
research, authorship, and/or publication of this article: Literary work of this
article was funded by the Intramural Research Program of the Sidra Medical and
Research Center, Doha, Qatar.

## References