822acssdJournal of the American Chemical SocietyJ Am Chem SocPMC8874904887490488749043516449910.1021/jacs.1c09848Structure
and Gating Behavior of the Human Integral
Membrane Protein VDAC1 in a Lipid Bilayer
NajbauerEszter
E Tekwani MovellanKumar GillerKarin BenzRoland BeckerStefan GriesingerChristian AndreasLoren B †Department
of NMR-Based Structural Biology, Max Planck
Institute for Multidisciplinary Sciences, Am Faßberg 11, 37077 Göttingen, Germany‡Life
Sciences and Chemistry, Jacobs University
of Bremen, Campus Ring 1, 28759 Bremen, Germany*Email: land@mpinat.mpg.de.
1422022144729532953–29672822022© 2022 The Authors. Published by American Chemical SocietyPermits the broadest form of re-use including for commercial purposes, provided that author attribution and integrity are maintained (https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/).

## Abstract
 The voltage-dependent
anion channel (VDAC), the most abundant protein
in the outer mitochondrial membrane, is responsible for the transport
of all ions and metabolites into and out of mitochondria. Larger than
any of the β-barrel structures determined to date by magic-angle
spinning (MAS) NMR, but smaller than the size limit of cryo-electron
microscopy (cryo-EM), VDAC1’s 31 kDa size has long been a bottleneck
in determining its structure in a near-native lipid bilayer environment.
Using a single two-dimensional (2D) crystalline sample of human VDAC1
in lipids, we applied proton-detected fast magic-angle spinning NMR
spectroscopy to determine the arrangement of β strands. Combining
these data with long-range restraints from a spin-labeled sample,
chemical shift-based secondary structure prediction, and previous
MAS NMR and atomic force microscopy (AFM) data, we determined the
channel’s structure at a 2.2 Å root-mean-square deviation
(RMSD). The structure, a 19-stranded β-barrel, with an N-terminal
α-helix in the pore is in agreement with previous data in detergent,
which was questioned due to the potential for the detergent to perturb
the protein’s functional structure. Using a quintuple mutant
implementing the channel’s closed state, we found that dynamics
are a key element in the protein’s gating behavior, as channel
closure leads to the destabilization of not only the C-terminal barrel
residues but also the α2 helix. We showed that cholesterol,
previously shown to reduce the frequency of channel closure, stabilizes
the barrel relative to the N-terminal helix. Furthermore, we observed
channel closure through steric blockage by a drug shown to selectively
bind to the channel, the Bcl2-antisense oligonucleotide G3139.

statusreleaseddisplay-pdfyesis-in-collection-domainyesis-olfnois-manuscriptnois-preprintnois-journal-matternois-scannednois-retractednoReceived 2021 Sep 16; Issue date 2022 Feb 23.

## Introduction
Mitochondrial function
is essential for the viability of eukaryotic
cells. Mitochondria are responsible for cellular respiration and also
play a role in signaling pathways, cell growth and differentiation,
and apoptosis. , These processes all require a
continuous flux of proteins, , ions, and metabolites
between the mitochondrial matrix and the cytosol through the mitochondrial
membranes.
Voltage-dependent anion channels (VDACs) are integral membrane proteins abundant in the
outer mitochondrial
membranes, constituting up to 80% of the
membrane surface. VDACs are the main avenues
for the transport of various metabolites (e.g., adenosine diphosphate
(ADP), adenosine triphosphate (ATP), pyruvate, malate) and ions (e.g.,
Ca2+) across the mitochondrial
outer membrane, and have been suggested
to form part of the mitochondrial permeability transition pore. , (Note that despite “anion-selective” appearing in
the name, VDAC also allows permeation of cations.)
VDAC exhibits
a conductance and selectivity that is dependent on
the membrane potential: the channel is in a high-conductance, moderately
anion-selective state at low membrane potentials; however, at an absolute
value of a few tens of millivolts, the channel closes and becomes
cation-selective , (cf. potential across the outer
mitochondrial membrane is estimated to be in the range up to ±60
mV). VDAC is a critical player in mitochondrial
apoptosis, and its malfunction may lead to cancer and neurodegeneration. 
At 31 kDa in size, and comprising 283
residues, VDAC1 is the most
abundant of the three known isoforms in humans. Human VDAC1 (hVDAC1) and mouse VDAC1 (mVDAC1) are closely
related, differing by only four amino acids. Structures of hVDAC1
and mVDAC1 in detergent micelles − and also from bicelles − showed a β-barrel composed of 19 β-strands and an N-terminal
α-helix positioned horizontally inside the pore, which in some
structures , is divided into two helical segments
(α1 and α2) by residue G11 ( and S1). These
structures, however, are not consistent with the structures inferred
previously through functional studies, which show the pore wall to
consist of 16 β-strands or an α-helix
and 13 β-strands. 
 Several studies have shown that the presence of detergents
may
alter the structural and dynamic properties of proteins, − which provides motivation for structural studies in a membrane environment. − There is increasing evidence that VDAC only assumes its fully functional
form in a lipid bilayer, however, obtaining
structural information under such near-native conditions is challenging.
Initial magic-angle spinning (MAS) NMR investigations using 13C detection on VDAC preparations in liposomes yielded assignments
for the N-terminal helix and nine residues from three β-strands. These were later extended to include residues
from seven β-strands using various
isotopic labeling schemes and 2D crystalline preparations, , where local order arises from the densely packed channels, similar
to VDAC’s natural state. , Previously reported
MAS NMR spectra indicate that VDAC’s structure is stable across
a range of phospholipid compositions, including 1,2-dimyristoyl-sn-glycero-3-phosphocholine (DMPC), 1,2-diphytanoyl-sn-glycero-3-phosphocholine (DPhPC), and a complex mixture of brain lipids. 
Membrane proteins of a size exceeding 30 kDa have
long presented
a challenge for MAS NMR spectroscopy, however, the optimization and
refinement of proton-detected methods − has made it possible to tackle systems of this size. , , 
The VDAC1 structures determined
so far − (Figure S1) are thought
to represent the open state of the channel, which occurs in the absence
of applied voltage. Models for describing the mechanism of channel
closure include the unwinding or displacement of the whole α-helix to the center of
the pore, a partial dislodging of the α2 helix from the barrel
wall, , and elliptic deformations (breathing motions)
of the barrel. , While a total dislocation of
the helix from the barrel wall is improbable, as cross-linking experiments
have shown that the L10C-A170C mutant (α1 helix-barrel cross-link)
shows native-like gating behavior, a
partial dislocation of the α2 helix may be possible, as the
A14C-S193C mutant (α2 helix-barrel cross-link) shows an elevated
preference for the open state. A direct
determination of the gating mechanism has so far proved difficult
due to technical challenges in applying voltage during structure determination
with NMR spectroscopy or X-ray crystallography.
However, the
closed state of the channel can also be implemented
by mutations. The G21V/G23V mutant containing two mutations in the
linker between the helix and the barrel has been shown by electrophysiology
experiments to lock the channel into its closed state in around 50%
of the channels. Apart from changes in
membrane potential, VDAC’s gating behavior may also be regulated
by the binding of various small molecules , , and proteins. , 
We present
the structure of hVDAC1 in a lipid bilayer. We obtained
comprehensive assignments as well as the vast majority of structural
restraints from measurements on a single sample from a set of three-dimensional
(3D) and four-dimensional (4D) MAS NMR spectra using automated resonance
assignment, and determined the protein’s structure from a combination
of experimental structural restraints and modeling based on secondary
structure prediction by TALOS-N. 
We also used a quintuple mutant of the protein building on the
G21V/G23V mutant to implement the channel’s closed state to
obtain insights into the channel’s gating mechanism. We additionally
investigated the mechanism by which small-molecule interaction modulates
gating behavior, as inferred from changes in NMR spectra, for the
case of cholesterol and the Bcl2-antisense phosphorothioate oligonucleotide,
G3139.

## Experimental Section

## Protein Expression
The expression of 2H, 13C, 15N-labeled
and fully back-exchanged E73V/C127A/C232S
hVDAC1 with a C-terminal (LE)-His6-tag (triple mutant) was based
on the protocols of Malia and Wagner and
Eddy et al., with several modifications.
Briefly, the protein was expressed in minimal medium (Table S1). Depending on the specific labeling
scheme, the medium was supplemented with 1 g of 15N ammonium
chloride and 4 g of 13C,2H d-glucose
per liter as nitrogen and carbon source.
For producing perdeuterated
hVDAC1(E73V/C127A/C232S), the bacteria were stepwise adapted to 100%
D2O and the expression culture contained 100% D2O. A 1 L shaking culture was grown at 37 °C to an OD600 of 0.7–0.8
and expression was induced with 1 mM isopropyl β-d-1-thiogalactopyranoside
(IPTG). The cells were harvested 20 h after induction. After cell
lysis, inclusion bodies were isolated, dissolved in denaturing buffer
(8 M urea, 50 mM Tris–HCl, pH 7.5, 100 mM NaCl, 20 mM imidazole,
0.5 mM phenylmethylsulfonyl fluoride (PMSF)), loaded on a 10 mL Ni2+ agarose column (Macherey-Nagel) and purified by elution
with the same buffer supplemented with 250 mM imidazole. Fractions
containing hVDAC1 protein were combined and dialyzed overnight against
4 L of precipitation buffer (50 mM Tris–HCl, pH 7.5, 50 mM
NaCl, 1 mM ethylenediaminetetraacetic acid (EDTA)). The precipitated
protein was dissolved in 25 mM sodium phosphate pH 7.0, 6 M guanidinium
hydrochloride, 100 mM NaCl, 1 mM EDTA, and further purified by denaturing
gel filtration on an SD75 16/60 gel filtration column (GE Healthcare).
Subsequently the protein concentration was adjusted to 5 mg/mL and
then refolded by dropwise dilution into a 10-fold volume of 4 °C
refolding buffer (25 mM NaPi, pH 7.0, 100 mM NaCl, 1 mM EDTA, 1% lauryldimethylamine
oxide (LDAO) (Anatrace)).
The refolded protein was dialyzed
against a 20-fold volume of 4
°C cold 25 mM sodium phosphate, pH 7.0, 1 mM EDTA, 0.1% lauryldimethylamine
oxide (LDAO), loaded on a 5 mL SP XL-cation exchange column (GE Healthcare)
and eluted with a 60 mL linear gradient to 1 M NaCl in the same buffer.
Subsequently, folded hVDAC1 protein was separated from misfolded or
aggregated protein by a further gel filtration on an SD200 16/60 column
(GE Healthcare) equilibrated with 25 mM sodium phosphate pH 7.0, 1
mM EDTA, 150 mM NaCl, 0.1% LDAO. The α proton exchange by transamination
(α-PET) labeled sample was prepared as described previously. 
For spin labeling, an A2C mutation was
introduced at the N-terminus
of hVDAC1(E73V/C127A/C232S) and hVDAC1(G21V/G23V/E73V/C127A/C232S).
During the purification steps, buffers contained 5 mM dithiothreitol
(DTT); however, the pellet of the precipitation step (see the above
paragraph) was washed with cold dialysis buffer containing no reducing
agent. All subsequent purification steps were performed in the absence
of reducing agents. After dissolving the pellet in the denaturing
gel filtration buffer, S-(1-oxyl-2,2,5,5-tetramethyl-2,5-dihydro-1H-pyrrol-3-yl)methyl methanesulfonothioate (MTSL) was added
in 10-fold molar excess and the solution was incubated for 2 h before
the following gel filtration step. MTSL was once more added in 3-fold
excess before refolding of hVDAC1. MTSL labeling was performed before
refolding the protein to avoid any potential inaccessibility to tagging
in the folded protein. As a control for potential misfolding, the
MTSL tag was reduced with a 5-fold molar excess of ascorbic acid solution.
To achieve this, a rotor fully packed with 2D crystalline hVDAC1(MTSL-A2C/E73V/C127A/C232S)
was emptied into 200 μL of ascorbic acid solution (10 mM 2-(N-morpholine)ethanesulfonic acid (MES), pH 6.5, 150 mM NaCl,
20 mM MgCl2, 3 mM ascorbic acid) and incubated for 24 h
at room temperature. The pellet was then washed three times each with
200 μL of the NMR buffer (10 mM MES, pH 6.5, 150 mM NaCl, 20
mM MgCl2), allowing diffusion of the buffer for a few hours
between each wash, then packed into a rotor, and the spectrum was
compared to hVDAC1(E73V/C127A/C232S).

## Two-Dimensional Crystallization
of hVDAC1
The fractions
containing the folded protein were combined and concentrated to about
3 mg/mL. 2D crystals were then prepared according to Eddy et al. , Briefly, the purified protein was dialyzed overnight at 4 °C
against 4 L of 50 mM Tris, pH 8.0, 0.6% (w/v) n-octyl
polyoxyethylene (n-octyl-POE) (Bachem). Lyophilized
DMPC (Avanti Polar Lipids) was dissolved in cold 50 mM Tris pH 8.9,
1% n-octyl-POE to a final concentration of 0.5 mg/mL.
After adjusting the concentration of the dialyzed hVDAC1 protein to
1 mg/mL, equal volumes of the protein and the lipid solution were
mixed and dialyzed at room temperature against 4 L of 10 mM MES, pH
6.5, 150 mM NaCl, 20 mM MgCl2, with four exchanges of the
dialysis buffer over the course of 2 days, resulting in a lipid-to-protein
ratio of about 25:1 by mole. After the last buffer change, the sample
was dialyzed for 6 more days at room temperature. During this time,
2D crystals appeared. The crystals were finally collected by ultracentrifugation
and transferred to a magic-angle spinning (MAS) NMR rotor.
The
same protocol was used for preparing the G21V/G23V/E73V/C127A/C232A
quintuple mutant implementing the channel’s closed state.

## Negative-Stain Electron Microscopy
Two-dimensional
crystals of hVDAC1(E73V/C127A/C232S) were applied to 400-mesh copper
grids (Plano, Wetzlar, Germany) and stained with 1% uranyl acetate
(Merck). Images were acquired using a Philips CM120 electron microscope
(Philips, Amsterdam, The Netherlands) equipped with a TemCam 224A
slow-scan CCD camera (TVIPS, Gauting, Germany) at a defocus of 2.3
μm.

## NMR Spectroscopy
The 31P powder pattern
(static) spectra were acquired on a 599 MHz Bruker Avance III spectrometer
in a 1.3 mm rotor averaging 24576 scans for each spectrum. To eliminate
baseline distortions, we implemented a Hahn echo before detection.
The temperatures for the measurement (below and above the phase-transition
temperature, 283 and 303 K, respectively) were calibrated using 100%
methanol. 
All MAS spectra were
recorded using proton detection and fast magic-angle spinning , on a narrow-bore Bruker Avance III HD 800 MHz spectrometer in a
three-channel probe (1H, 13C, 15N)
at 55 kHz spinning frequency in a 1.3 mm rotor, with the VT gas flow
set to 900 L/h at 250 K. The only exceptions were the (H)(CA)CB(CA)NH
and (H)(CA)CB(CA)(CO)NH spectra, which were measured on a narrow-bore
Bruker Avance III HD 950 MHz spectrometer in a four-channel 0.7 mm
probe at 90.909 kHz MAS. For these two spectra, the VT gas flow was
set to 300 L/h at 270 K. Typical 90° pulse lengths of 2.5 μs
(1H), 3.1 μs (15N), and 4 μs (13C) were used for all measurements. Heteronuclear magnetization
transfers were implemented using cross-polarization (CP). During evolution
periods, 12.5 kHz two-pulse phase-modulated (TPPM) decoupling was used on 1H, and 10 kHz waltz-16
decoupling on both heteronuclei. Water
suppression was achieved with the MISSISSIPPI scheme applied at 13.75 kHz. Recycle delays were set to 0.8–1.0
s.
The following 3D spectra were acquired: (H)CANH, (H)CA(CO)NH, (H)(CA)CB(CA)NH, (H)(CA)CB(CA)(CO)NH, (H)CONH, (H)(CA)CO(CA)NH, (H)N(CO)(CA)NH, (H)N(CA)(CO)NH, , and H(H)NH. In addition, we acquired 4D spectra for assignment: (H)CACONH, (H)(CO)CACONH, structure determination: HN(H)(H)NH
(2.3 ms RFDR mixing), and for mapping protein–water and protein–lipid
contacts: H(H)(N)CANH (50 ms nuclear Overhauser effect (NOE) mixing). All spectra were referenced to the water signal
at 4.7 ppm (using the IUPAC frequency ratios for DSS and liquid ammonia),
assuming a sample temperature of 30 °C based on external calibration.
For the multidimensional experiments (3D and above), typical acquisition
times in the indirect dimensions were 20 ms on 15N, 10
ms on 13C, and 5.3 ms in the indirect 1H dimension.
Experimental parameters are summarized in Table S2. Additionally, (H)NCAH , and (H)NcoCAH , spectra were acquired for the α-PET labeled sample.
D2O exchange was investigated by washing the sample
twice with 200 μL of deuterated buffer, then packing the rotor
and measuring (H)CANH experiments immediately afterward. The (H)CANH
spectrum was recorded in a time frame of 1 day.
Spectra were
corrected for magnetic field drift using a Topspin
AU macro, and for longer acquisitions,
blocks of ∼1-day acquisition were added. Spectra were processed
using 10 ms of data in the direct 1H dimension, and in
indirect dimensions, all acquired data were used (as specified in Table S2, usually 20 ms on 15N and
10 ms on 13C). The data were processed in Topspin 3.5pl7
using a squared sine window function with a phase shift of π/2
and analyzed in Sparky 3.113. 

## Ligand
Binding
To test cholesterol binding, a DMPC/cholesterol/protein
ratio of 25:5:1 was used and the same 2D crystalline sample preparation
protocol was applied, The lipid was deuterated on the acyl chains
(d54-DMPC). The H(H)CANH spectrum was
recorded with the CP-based pulse sequence described in Najbauer et
al., replacing the H–N and N–C
CP steps with one H-CA CP step. The CP conditions are identical to
those described in Table S2 for the (H)CANH
experiment. The NOE mixing time was 75 ms. The spectrum was recorded
using 3.55% nonuniform sampling with 5.2 ms indirect 1H,
10.1 ms 13C, 20.1 ms 15N, and 21.3 ms direct 1H evolution times, averaging a total of 38 scans.
G3139
(Sigma-Aldrich) was added to the reconstituted membrane protein sample
resuspended in 200 μL of sample buffer at an estimated 1:1.5
protein/ligand molar ratio. (H)NH, (H)CANH, and (H)(CO)CA(CO)NH spectra
were recorded with the parameters described previously.

## Resonance Assignment
Automated assignments were obtained
from the FLYA module of the CYANA software package using a custom library file that included proton-detected
MAS experiments (Supporting Information, SI). Tolerances were set to 0.07 ppm for 1H and 0.4 ppm
for heteronuclei. For each of the 10 runs, the initial population
was set to 50, and 15 000 iterations were performed. A resonance
was counted as confident, when it converged to the same assignment
in at least 80% of the runs. Automated assignments were then checked
and extended manually. Chemical shifts can be accessed under BMRB
ID 34694.
The closed-state G21V/G23V/E73V/C127A/C232S quintuple
mutant and the ligand-bound samples were assigned based on (H)CANH
and (H)(CO)CA(CO)NH spectral pairs and resonances of the E73V/C127A/C232S
mutant.
Chemical shift perturbations (CSP) between the triple
mutant in
LDAO detergent and a DMPC lipid bilayer
(this work) were calculated from the nuclei indicated as a combination
of chemical shift changes (Δδi) with weighting factors (αi) of
1 on 1H, 0.17 on 15N, and 0.3 on 13C. 
 

## Structure Calculation
Structure calculation was done
with CYANA 3.98.13. Unambiguous distance
restraints were assigned in the HN(H)(H)NH spectra, and hydrogen bonds
were inferred from these for the structure calculation. Dihedral angle
restraints were generated from chemical shifts using the TALOS-N web
server. Error margins were set to 3 times
the predicted standard deviations, capped at a minimum of ±30°.
Due to clashes in the loop between β3 and β4, torsion
angles of residues T65-G68 were removed. Due to clashes, error margins
of the torsion angles of T211 and R218 were set to 4 times the predicted
standard deviations. Additional hydrogen bonds were modeled in between
two residues predicted to be in extended conformation based on either
chemical shifts or the primary sequence. A residue was also considered
to be in extended conformation if both its neighbors were predicted
to be extended. The barrel’s diameter was defined based on
atomic force microscopy (AFM) measurements in a lipid bilayer to be
between 27 and 38 Å. The position
of the helix was defined using both long-range-distance restraints
from previous MAS NMR measurements in a lipid bilayer and MTSL labeling.
Helix-barrel contacts used for structure calculation from previous
studies were: L10 Cγ-V143 Cα, Cβ, and A14 Cβ-S193 Cβ. For MTSL distance restraints, an upper limit distance restraint
of 10 Å was implemented for peaks where Irel < 0.1 I̅rel, where Irel = IMTSL/Iunlabeled. (Distances were defined as the distance
between A2Cβ and the corresponding amide proton.) These residues
were R120-N124. An additional four residues toward the C-terminus
of the barrel (G145, K174, T217, and N238) met the criterion for strong
signal attenuation but were not used for distance restraints, as they
did not cluster together, and their bleaching most probably stems
from MTSL labels in neighboring barrels. We noticed slow convergence
toward low target function values such that many structures of the
standard CYANA bundle had high associated target function values above
10. Therefore, many structures were calculated, a total of 2400, and
the 10 structures with the lowest target functions were selected.
(Two structures not compatible with a planar lipid bilayer were excluded.)
Distance restraints included in the structure calculation are summarized
in Table S4. All restraint files can be
found in the Protein Data Bank (PDB ID7QI2).

## Electrophysiology Measurements
Planar phospholipid
bilayer measurements of the hVDAC1(G21V/G23V/E73V/C127A/C232S) mutant
were performed as described previously. Lipid bilayers of the Mueller–Rudin type were created by painting 5 μL of a solution of 1%
DPhPC lipids in n-decane over the hole (area ≈
0.4 mm2) of a Teflon cuvette. A 1 M KCl solution containing
10 mM N-(2-hydroxyethyl)piperazine-N′-ethanesulfonic acid (HEPES), pH 6.0, was used as an electrolyte.
The hVDAC1 mutant in LDAO was diluted with 1% (w/v) Genapol to a final
concentration of approximately 5 μM and mixed 1:1 with cholesterol
powder suspended in 1% (w/v) Genapol. Aliquots of hVDAC1 (typically
1–5 μL) were added to both cuvette chambers at a standard
membrane potential of 20 mV. Current was measured with Ag/AgCl electrodes
and an in-house amplifier.

## Results

## Sequential
Assignment
Using the protocol developed
by Dolder et al. and adapted for MAS
NMR measurements by Eddy et al., a 2D
crystalline sample of E73V/C127S/C232A-hVDAC1 was prepared. The three
mutations were introduced to improve sample stability (preventing
oligomerization through the removal of the two cysteines) and to improve
spectral quality. These mutations, however, do not influence VDAC’s
gating behavior: Aram et al. had previously shown that the two cysteines
in VDAC are not required for voltage gating, nor is glutamine required at position 73. Using negative-stain electron microscopy, a lamellar structure was
observed, showing that our preparation reproduced the microscopically
ordered layers described by Eddy et al. in their preparation (Figure S2). The 31P powder patterns of the 2D DMPC lipid crystals also confirm
that the lipids in the sample are lamellar (Figure S3).
To achieve an assignment as complete as possible
of hVDAC1 in lipids, a set of three- and four-dimensional assignment
experiments were recorded on a perdeuterated, 100% HN back-exchanged
2D crystalline sample of hVDAC1(E73V/C127S/C232A), following the proton-detected
strategy described in several previous publications (Figure S4). , A full list of spectra and the
experimental parameters are shown in Table S2.
Peak lists from the spectra listed in Table S3 were used as an input for the FLYA algorithm of the CYANA
software package, which uses a genetic algorithm to assign proteins
in an automated manner, avoiding the bias of human spectral evaluation. To test for the usefulness of the information
provided by different spectra in the assignment of membrane proteins,
different subsets of assignment spectra were used as an input to FLYA.
Peak lists from only the six 3D experiments linking Cα, C′,
and Cβ (“basic six”) yielded confident assignments
for 74 residues, the algorithm performing particularly well for the
majority of the α-helix (residues 5–21), as well as residues
from β-strands either containing many residues with distinct
chemical shift values (β2) or strands with particularly large
chemical shift dispersion of the peaks (e.g., β15, β16)
( A, dark green).
(Assignments where the residue was part of an assigned stretch of
at least two residues with at least two assigned backbone atoms were
considered confident.)
We found that the most assignments were
gained by including information
from either 4D (H)COCANH and (H)(CO)CACONH spectra or the 3D (H)N(CO)(CA)NH
and (H)N(CA)(CO)NH spectra. Including information from either of these
two spectral pairs besides the “basic six” experiments
roughly doubled the number of confident assignments: 150 and 137 residues
were assigned, respectively. Little additional information was to
be gained using peak lists from additional spectra, achieving 163
confident assignments in total ( A, dark green), when including peak lists from 13 different
spectra. The assignment levels achieved using different subsets of
spectra are shown in Table S3. Assignments
were manually checked and extended to a total of 194 out of 283 residues,
as shown in A (light green) and B. Two additional AG spin systems were identified, assignable
presumably to A134-G135 and A270-G271; however, reliably linking these
to other spin systems was not possible. Residues in the α-helix
were particularly easy to assign, having high signal intensities and
good separation from the predominantly β-sheet resonances of
the protein. This is in agreement with previous observations by MAS
NMR in lipid bilayer samples where assignment of the α-helix
was possible, , and in contrast to studies in
detergents, where the protein’s N-terminus was completely or partially , unassignable.
Assuming the topology of the protein to be identical to that in detergents,
our assignments provide a comprehensive overview of the protein with
residues assigned from the N-terminal α-helix and all 19 β-strands.
To pinpoint any differences between hVDAC1 structure in detergents
and in lipids, we calculated chemical shift perturbations between
assignments of hVDAC1(E73V/C127A/C232S) in 2D DMPC lipid crystals
and in LDAO micelles. Chemical shifts matched well overall, with 41
residues showing perturbations larger than 0.2 ppm, the largest values
being 1.15 ppm (F169), 0.70 ppm (Y62), and 0.65 ppm (R120 and A134).
These 41 residues are located almost exclusively in strands, which
have the helix running next to them, close to the helix-barrel contact
sites determined by solution NMR ( A and S5). The
loop between strands β7 and β8, where two hydrogen bonds
between the carbonyl oxygens of A2 and P4 and the HN of
H122 and the Nδ2 of N124 were identified by X-ray crystallography, was particularly affected by the change of environment.
The chemical shift perturbations could be a result of helix-barrel
contacts being influenced by the binding of detergent molecules, which
are known to bind to hydrophobic regions. The particularly large HN and NH chemical
shift changes of residues I123 and N124 (HN: 0.32 ppm,
and 0.53 ppm, respectively, NH: 4.9 ppm in both cases)
could be an indication of not only altered hydrogen bonding between
the protein’s N-terminus to the loop but also a conformational change in this protein region; significant
Cα and Cβ perturbations are observed for R120 Cβ:
3.2 ppm, I123 Cα: 1.3 ppm, and N124 Cβ: 1.5 ppm.

## Mobility
in the Open Channel
Peak intensities in MAS–NMR
are excellent indicators of dynamics, as molecular motion can manifest
as weaker dipolar coupling strength, resulting in a decrease of signal
intensity. Motion on the μs timescale
has been shown to interfere with magic-angle spinning, resulting in signal loss. We first characterized peak heights for the open-state
hVDAC1(E73V/C127A/C232S) mutant. Similar to previous studies in detergents, we found a low signal intensity indicating increased
mobility in the four N-terminal β-strands β1–4,
as well as the two connecting C-terminal strands β18–19.
With the exception of β10, strands β5–17 all showed
higher average signal intensities, as did the α-helix ( ). This is in agreement
with H/D exchange experiments (Figure S6), where residues in strands β5–18 showed reduced rates
of exchange. Helical residues showed the highest average intensity
in the protein, indicating a well-structured α-helix, the α2 helix being somewhat more mobile
than the α1 segment, as also observed in detergents. 
 

## Structure Calculation
We obtained unambiguous long-range
amide–amide contacts between hydrogen-bonded residues from
the four-dimensional HN(H)(H)NH spectrum (Figures S7 and S8), where mixing of magnetization between protons was
achieved using radiofrequency-driven recoupling (RFDR). Direct helix-to-barrel contacts were not identified,
due primarily to perdeuteration of the protein. To locate the helix,
we introduced an N-terminal MTSL spin label at the A2C position (Figure S9), which resulted in five restraints
to residues R120-N124 in the loop region between strands β7
and β8 (Figure S10). We also used
helix-barrel contacts previously determined on fully protonated hVDAC1
in lipid bilayers, specifically L10 Cγ-V143 Cα, Cβ, and A14 Cβ-S193 Cβ. 
Contacts from the HN(H)(H)NH spectrum clearly defined
the channel’s topology as a 19-stranded β-barrel and
an N-terminal α-helix; however, to better define the barrel,
especially around loop regions, we modeled additional hydrogen bonds
based on secondary structure predictions from TALOS-N. Hydrogen bonds
were modeled in between two residues predicted to be in extended conformation
either based on chemical shifts or the primary sequence. Results of
the TALOS-N prediction and hydrogen bonds identified in the HN(H)(H)NH
spectrum and through modeling are shown in Figure S11.
Moreover, as the barrel is quite large and can exhibit
elliptic
deformations, we defined its shape based
on AFM data recorded in lipid bilayers to have a diameter between
27 and 38 Å to improve convergence
of structure calculation. To this end, we defined the distance of
residues in the middle of the barrel, found in opposing strands (e.g.,
β1 vs β9 and β10) to be in the range of 27 and 38
Å. Residues in the middle of β-strands, a quarter of a
barrel (five strands) away were defined to be 19.1–26.9 Å
apart. All constraints used for structure calculation are listed in Table S4.
From the ensemble of lowest-energy
structures, we excluded topologies
where some strands form an angle relative to the rest of the barrel
(Figure S12). These “flipped”
strands contained residues previously shown to be in contact with
lipids, which is inconsistent with this
topology and the fact that hVDAC1 is an integral membrane protein.
The root-mean-square deviation (RMSD) of the backbone excluding loops
is 2.2 Å. The ensemble of the 10 lowest-energy structures excluding
the above-mentioned topology is shown in A–C, and the superposition of the
structure closest to average in a DMPC lipid bilayer and in LDAO
micelles is shown in D. Since RMSD is not directly comparable to the resolution
obtained from X-ray crystallography, we used the resolution-by-proxy
(ResProx) method to predict the atomic
resolution of our NMR structure. Using the same models with which
RMSD was calculated, we obtained an estimated resolution of 2.7 ±
0.1 Å for our MAS NMR structure. Statistics of structure calculation
are summarized in .
 

## Characterization of Mobility in Closed-State
hVDAC1
Investigation of hVDAC1’s gating mechanism
and determining
its closed state pose a problem for all structural biology methods,
as the measurement would have to take place under applied voltage.
This can be circumvented however with the investigation of hVDAC1
mutants permanently exhibiting the channel’s low-conductance
state ( ). Such
a mutant was initially suggested by Geula et al., where the G21V/G23V mutations were shown to partially lock
the channel into a closed-state conformation. These mutations served
as a basis for developing the closed-state G21V/G23V/E73V/C127A/C232S
quintuple (5m) mutant by introducing mutations necessary for sample
stability. The electrophysiology of this mutant was shown to be identical
to that of the G21V/G23V mutant (Figure S13A,B).
 The quintuple (5m) mutant’s (H)NH spectrum was found to
overlay excellently with that of the triple (3m) mutant, with no significant
changes in chemical shifts, and as expected, signals belonging to
G21 and G23 could not be observed. It was however quite surprising
that in the quintuple mutant’s (H)NH spectrum, many peaks were
of low relative intensity or had disappeared entirely from the spectrum
( C). An (H)CANH
spectrum was recorded to quantify any changes in intensity. Interestingly,
peaks from the α2 helix and strands β7–17 were
no longer higher in intensity than the rest of the barrel ( A). The region with
the highest relative intensities included strands β2–5
(located on the opposite side of the barrel, where the N-terminal
helix runs), while β18 and 19, as well as the C-terminal part
of the helix (α2), and the neighboring β1 were almost
completely broadened beyond detection. β7–17, the strands
neighboring the helix in the open-state structure, were also significantly
reduced in intensity, as well as the N-terminal part of the helix
(α1) ( B,D).

## Investigation of Cholesterol Binding to hVDAC1
Since
cholesterol was in some cases necessary to obtain normal function
of recombinant hVDAC1 and has been shown
to bind strongly to the channel, we previously
investigated the interaction of cholesterol and hVDAC1 in a lipid
bilayer and identified three of the binding sites predicted through
docking. , Electrophysiology experiments have shown
the binding of cholesterol not only to facilitate hVDAC1’s
membrane insertion but also to slightly reduce the % closure ((1 – G50 mV/G0)100)
of the channel. To understand whether
cholesterol stabilizes the channel’s open state by reducing
barrel mobility that is crucial for channel closure, we plotted the
relative intensities (Icholesterol-bound/Iunbound) measured in the (H)CANH spectrum
of the cholesterol-bound sample and in the unbound sample ( ). We found that
relative signal intensities of residues in the barrel averaged ∼1.5-fold
higher than the N-terminal helix, a clear indication of cholesterol’s
stabilizing effect on barrel dynamics. Furthermore, the relative intensities
of β7–13, strands with six of the seven identified cholesterol
contacts, were all somewhat higher than average ( ). This is in agreement with
our observation that most probably binding sites 1 and 2 are more
populated than site 3, and the cholesterol
bound to these two sites stabilizes the contacting β-strands.
 

## Determining the Binding Site of G3139
The 18-mer phosphorothioate
oligonucleotide G3139 (TCTCCCAGCGTGCGCCAT, the individual nucleotides
linked by thiophosphate instead of phosphate bonds) has been shown
to selectively block the VDAC channel, and although the mechanism
is unclear, a partial entry into the pore was suggested. , We incubated 2D crystals of hVDAC1(E73V/C127A/C232S) with G3139
solution at a 1:1.5 protein/ligand molar ratio and determined chemical
shift perturbations, as well as intensity changes ( ) by measuring an (H)CANH spectrum,
as well as the linking (H)(CO)CA(CO)NH spectrum to confirm assignments.
 No chemical shift perturbations >0.2 ppm (calculated
from HN, HN, and Cα shifts; see the ) were observed for residues
that could
be unambiguously identified, however chemical shift perturbations
larger than 0.1 ppm were identified in strands β13 (G191, G192)
and β14 (T211) ( C). Even more striking was the fact that several residues
disappeared from the (H)CANH spectrum, shown in A,B. Residues whose intensities were most
affected were G11, T19, and K20 in the α-helix; G23 and G25
in the kink between the helix and the barrel; and residues N238, N239,
and I243, close to/in the loop between strands β16 and β17,
on the cytosolic side of the channel. 
A significant decrease in peak intensities was also observed
in
strands β12 (F178, Q179, T182), β13 (G192), and β14
(N207). With the exception of T70, and S43, a residue whose assignment
was ambiguous in the G3139-bound state, residues most affected are
on the side of the barrel contacting the helix, suggesting a binding
site at the helix and the neighboring, C-terminal strands of the barrel.
This binding site overlaps very well with the interaction sites identified
for other nucleotides (ATP, GTP, uridine
triphosphate (UTP), reduced β-nicotinamide
adenine dinucleotide (β-NADH) ).

## Discussion

## Comprehensive Sequential Assignment of hVDAC1 in a Lipid Bilayer
Membrane proteins of ∼30 kDa and above are challenging systems
to investigate by MAS NMR. Both solid-state NMR of aligned samples
as well as MAS NMR have been applied to the determination of an increasing
number of membrane protein structures in lipid bilayer membranes. − To date, using only MAS NMR data and lipid bilayer samples, only
two β-barrel membrane protein structures have been reported. , 
In previous solution NMR studies of hVDAC1, relatively complete
assignments have been achieved for both wild-type hVDAC1 and E73V mutants. Recently, Böhm et al. increased assignments to 88% for wild-type
VDAC and to 91% for the E73V mutant in LDAO detergent micelles. They found that with the exception of some loop
residues (broadened out due to exchange), all residues in the barrel
could be confidently assigned (Figure S14). The assignment of the N-terminal region still remains somewhat
problematic, however, as here only 12 out of the 15 helical residues
(T6-K20) could be assigned, an indication of elevated exchange in
this region in micelles.
The bottleneck in the MAS NMR assignment
process is the usually
insufficient sample quality resulting in severe overlap for large
proteins. This was previously also the case for hVDAC1, where DMPC
liposome samples only allowed assignment of most of the α-helix
(up to V17), with the exception of a few barrel residues that could
clearly be identified with selective labeling. 2D crystalline preparations in DMPC lipids for the MAS NMR investigation of hVDAC1 were a real
breakthrough, as these samples gave spectra of exceptional resolution. With a 13C-detected assignment strategy
on at least four selectively labeled 2D crystalline samples, Eddy
et al. could assign not only the entire N-terminus but also stretches
from seven different β-strands, a total of 88 residues (31%
of all residues) (Figure S14).
Using the same 2D crystalline sample preparation
on u-[2H,13C,15N]-hVDAC1 (the E73V/C127A/C232S
mutations
were introduced to improve sample stability and spectral quality),
and following a proton-detected strategy for assignment, , , we assigned a total of 194 residues
(69% of the protein) from a single sample (an Hα-labeled sample
was used only to confirm assignments and obtain Hα assignments,
however, no new residues were assigned based on this sample). This
is comparable to the assignment completeness recently achieved in
membrane proteins of similar size in lipid bilayers: 60% in the 34
kDa outer membrane protein G (OmpG) using a total of 10 amino-acid-type
selective labeling schemes, and 84% in
the 24 kDa membrane protein AlkL. Using
only automated assignments, 58% of the protein could be assigned.
It is even comparable to the 82% achieved for the 42.5 kDa maltose-binding
protein (MBP) in a microcrystalline state that is particularly suitable
for MAS NMR. 
Similar to previous
MAS NMR studies, the N-terminal helix could
be assigned confidently, although the first two residues assigned
by Eddy et al. are missing, due to prolines breaking the backbone
walk in the amide proton detection spectra and leaving an isolated
stretch of only three residues. Significantly, residues from all 19
β-strands could be assigned, giving a comprehensive picture
of the β-barrel in a lipid bilayer. As discussed previously
by Eddy et al., although loops often
disappear from MAS NMR spectra due to their mobility, 2D lipid crystalline
samples tend to introduce rigidity to these regions through the tight
packing of the molecules. Indeed, we were able to assign residues
from a total of 8 loops in the barrel (Figure S14).
Comparison of 13C-detected MAS NMR assignments
given
by Eddy et al. for wild-type hVDAC1 and
our proton-detected assignments of hVDAC1(E73V/C127A/C232S), both
in a DMPC lipid bilayer, show discrepancies larger than the deuterium
isotope effect (ca. 0.5–1 ppm on 13C and ca. 1–1.5
ppm on 15N) for 26 residues
(chemical shift perturbation >2 ppm on HN or >1 ppm on Cα)
(Figure S14). These residues do not cluster
in
any particular region but are scattered evenly across the barrel.
This is quite surprising, as with the exception of strands around
the E73V mutation site (residues ca. 40–100), no major chemical
shift perturbations were observed in micelles when comparing the wild-type
and the E73V mutant of the protein. Large
heteronuclear (especially 13C) chemical shift perturbations
are also not expected upon slight changes in experimental conditions
such as temperature or buffer composition. A possible explanation
is that in a 2D crystal, where the molecules are tightly packed against
each other, the E73V mutation could also affect other regions of the
neighboring β-barrels. Of course, another possible reason for
chemical shift differences could be occasional misassignment. Since
all perturbed residues could be assigned in the highly unambiguous
4D (H)CACONH and (H)(CO)CACONH spectra, it is unlikely that these
residues were misassigned in the proton-detected approach.

## Structure
of hVDAC1 in Lipid Bilayers
The structure
of hVDAC1 has long been controversial. While all structural studies
in detergents (micelles and bicelles) − showed a 19-stranded β-barrel forming the bulk
of the protein, these were in contrast to the structure based on functional
studies: , a barrel consisting of 13 β-strands
and an α-helix.
β-barrel topologies are especially
amenable to deuteration and back-exchange. Indeed, although other
samples were necessary for maximizing assignments and 1H–1H contacts, both lipid bilayer structures of
β-barrel membrane proteins available to date , relied on this approach. Using a single sample to obtain 1H–1H distances, we were able to unambiguously determine
hVDAC1’s topology in a lipid bilayer to be the 19-stranded
β-barrel and an N-terminal α-helix, identical to the topology
observed by other structural studies. While the N-terminus clearly
showed the characteristic contact pattern of α-helices for residues
between T6 and K20 (Figure S11), it showed
a breaking point at G11, a residue showing no contacts to neighboring
residues. This allows us to conclude that the structure of the N-terminus
in lipid bilayers displays a kink between the two helical segments,
also observed around G11 in several detergent structures, − as well as indicated by predicted torsion angles in a lipid bilayer. , 
We further confirmed the topology of the protein, as determined
from the HN(H)(H)NH experiment and spin labeling by extensive torsion
angle predictions based on resonance assignment and by residue-specifically
mapping the protein’s environment through z–z mixing experiments. 
We found that the chemical shift-based prediction
of torsion angles
agrees well with previous structures obtained in detergents (Figure S15). Major differences (Δϕ
or Δψ > 100°) were found almost exclusively in
loops
(Figure S16). The only exceptions to this
were residues S44, G45, and G56 in one cluster. Two of these residues
lack Cβ-s, making the predictions less reliable. They are also
in the more mobile N-terminal β-strands, which makes it possible
that they sample different conformations.
Residue-specific mapping
of water and lipid proximities to the
protein backbone also confirmed the 19-stranded
barrel topology and contrasted starkly with the structure suggested
by Colombini (Figure S17). In the latter, many residues shown to be in contact with
aliphatic lipid chains would be located in loops (especially between
β9 and β10). The helix, although shown by NMR to be completely
exposed to water, and with no lipid contacts observed, is embedded
in the membrane in Colombini’s model.
Although the chemical
shift perturbations in the strands along
the helix-barrel contact sites ( ) indicate some minor changes in the interaction of
the helix and the barrel when comparing assignments from micelles
and 2D crystals, the MTSL labeling experiments and helix-barrel contacts
observed in previous MAS NMR studies in lipids , confirmed the overall orientation of the helix shown in detergent
structures.
The backbone RMSD of the MAS NMR structure for structured
regions
is 2.2 Å, the predicted resolution being 2.7 Å. This, although comparable to the initial detergent
structure of the protein, is lower than
the resolution of previously reported high-resolution structures , (ca. 1.5–2 Å). This is due to a lack of long-range restraints
in our approach (due to sparse protonation), and could be further
improved by full protonation at MAS frequencies >100 kHz and extensive
spin labeling, which could also be used to define the barrel’s
ellipticity. The RMSDs between the MAS structure and previously published
VDAC structures are shown in Table S5.
We find that the MAS NMR structure agrees within the ensemble RMSD
with almost all other structures.
A slight ellipticity of the
channel had been previously observed
in hVDAC1 and mouse VDAC (mVDAC) (ε = 0.1), , and the high-resolution structure of hVDAC1(E73V) showed an even
more pronounced elliptical deformation (ε =0.2). , The possibility was raised that this stems from the pressure exerted
by the micelles onto the channel (Laplace pressure ), and in the case of the E73V mutant, the mutation stabilizes
a certain barrel conformation. However, since an AFM study on yeast
revealed highly elliptical channels (ε = 0.3) under native conditions
in the mitochondrial outer membrane, it
is possible that the channel is naturally noncircular (while the Laplace
pressure could deform the channel in micelles, in a lipid bilayer
the pressure could be coming from the tight packing of the neighboring
molecules). Determining the exact ellipticity of VDAC in a lipid bilayer
would, however, be extremely challenging, if at all possible by MAS
NMR due to the lack of highly accurate long-distance restraints. 

## hVDAC1’s Mobility and Gating Behavior
hVDAC1’s
voltage gating behavior is one of the channel’s most characteristic
properties. A multitude of electrophysiology
studies have shown the channel to be in a high-conductance, anion-selective
open state in the absence of applied voltage, while under voltage,
a drop in conductance and a change of selectivity can be observed. There is increasing evidence that channel gating
is a highly dynamic process, with multiple open and closed substates.
Both the barrel and the helix, located inside the pore in an ideal
position to regulate conductance, have been suggested to partake in
voltage gating. , , − 
Peak intensities in MAS NMR are excellent indicators
of dynamics, as molecular motion can manifest as weaker dipolar coupling
strength, resulting in a decrease of signal intensity. In hVDAC1(E73V/C127A/C232S) (3m) (implementing
the channel’s open state), we observed increased mobility in
the N-terminal β-strands β1–4, as well as in the
adjoining C-terminal strands β18 and β19 (peaks in β10
were also of lower intensity, however, the surrounding strands all
showed strong signals). This observation agrees well with the significant
peak broadening observed in detergents in the four N-terminal β-strands,
as well as β16–19 in wild-type hVDAC1, and to some extent
in hVDAC1(E73V). The higher intensity
of peaks in β5–17, the strands adjacent to the α-helix,
indicates a stabilizing effect of the helix on the barrel wall. Indeed,
Schneider et al. had observed destabilization of the barrel upon truncation
of the helix in ΔN(1–20)-hVDAC1 in liposomes. Compared to the rest of the barrel, the average
intensity of residues in strands β1–4, 18, and 19 was
roughly 65%, while the N-terminal α1-helix and α2-helix
residues up until and including V17 were 20% more intense than β5–17.
Interestingly, V143 in β9 (which interacts with V17 by side-chain
interactions) also displayed a high intensity. Methyl group dynamics
measured in LDAO micelle conditions led to different conclusions since
increased mobility was detected at L10 (α1-helix), V17 (α2-helix),
and also V143 (β9). While it is
conceivable that the backbone is rigid as seen from the liposome experiments
and the side chains adopt different rotameric states as seen from
the ILV experiments of ref ( ), this difference could also be due to different environments,
namely, lipid bilayers versus micelles. The latter view is consistent
with the observed chemical shift perturbations between lipid and detergent
assignments ( A) for residues close to helix-barrel contacts including for V143.
For the closed-state quintuple (5m) (G21V/G23V/E73V/C127A/C232S)
mutant in 2D lipid crystals, we found a strong increase of dynamics
especially in the helix (most apparent in the α2 segment), as
well as most of the barrel: in β1 as well as the adjoining C-terminal
part, β6–19 ( A,B). This is in agreement with cross-linking experiments
by Böhm et al. suggesting that
dynamics of the α2 helix are responsible for voltage gating.
This also fits well with the previous observation in liposomes that
the barrel is mobilized upon truncation of the N-terminal helix in
Δ(1–20)-hVDAC1, resulting in channel closure, and the molecular dynamics (MD) simulation results
that large-scale deformations are needed to reproduce channel selectivity. The region β6–19 overlaps remarkably
well with strands β5–19 shown in MD simulations in a
DMPC bilayer to be stabilized by interaction with the helix. This raises the possibility of an at least partial
dissociation of the helix (especially the α2 segment) from the
barrel wall upon channel closure. The less pronounced increase in
dynamics in the α1 segment and in the strands with the α1
segment running in front of them (β7–12) ( A,B), as well as an electrophysiology
study showing the channel to gate normally even in the presence of
an L10C-A170C cross-link suggest that
the N-terminal α1 segment does not dissociate from the barrel
wall.
The separate motions of the two helical segments upon
voltage gating
could also explain the conservation of the G11 residue among human
VDAC isoforms. Since a hinge-like role , has frequently been attributed to glycines due to their conformational
flexibility, G11 could impart the possibility for the α1 and
α2 helical segments to move independently.
The role of
barrel mobility in channel closure is further underlined
by the effect of cholesterol binding. Cholesterol binding plays a
role in VDAC’s membrane insertion and also increases the probability
of the channel’s open state. Our
data provide a link between the channel’s electrophysiology
behavior and barrel dynamics by showing that the barrel is stabilized
in comparison to the helix in the presence of cholesterol ( ).
A new landing
site for the α-helix may also be involved in
the gating mechanism. Broader lines and overall lower spectral quality
of the MTSL-labeled quintuple mutant (Figure S18) could be a result of the helix sampling a large number of conformations,
bringing the spin label into close proximity with residues throughout
the barrel. Although the original spectrum of the MTSL-labeled quintuple
mutant could not be fully recovered after reduction of the label with
ascorbic acid, increasing the possibility of misfolding of the MTSL-labeled
mutant, the reappearance of residues D230 and G244 in the spectrum
allows us to hypothesize a second landing site for the helix at the
hydrophobic patch around residues L242 and L262, both of which point
into the water-filled pore.

## Comparison of Blockage Mechanisms
Although an important
player in apoptosis, cancer, and neurodegeneration, VDAC’s
druggability is problematic due to a lack of specific binding partners. Since the Bcl-2 antisense oligonucleotide G3139
is a promising drug candidate shown to greatly reduce channel conductance
by directly binding VDAC1, we investigated
the mechanism through which it inhibits hVDAC1’s normal function.
We did not find changes of peak intensities in complete regions within
the protein, which indicates that the mechanism of channel closure
is different from the observation in the closed-state mutant (G21V/G23V/E73V/C127A/C232S),
where channel closure is accompanied by mobilization of a large portion
of the barrel, as well as part of the helix. Rather a decrease in
intensity for individual residues in β16 and β17, as well
as β12–14, in the α2 helix, as well as in the linker
between the helix and the barrel was observed ( A), a signature of intermediate exchange
occurring upon ligand binding. These
data, taken together with the fact that the effect of the oligonucleotide
is length-dependent, and upon investigating both the full-length and
truncated versions of G3139, only the longest ones (14–16,
and 18-mers) were found to cause significant losses of channel conductance, suggest that G3139 acts by sterically blocking
the channel.
The dinucleotide β-NADH was recently shown
by solution NMR and MD simulations to block the channel by steric
occlusion by binding to VDAC in the same pocket at β16 and β17 that we identified as the binding site of G3139.
Moreover, the nucleoside triphosphate ATP has been shown to possess
a binding site encompassing the α-helix, the linker between
helix and barrel, and strands β12–19, which overlaps with G3139’s binding site. Other
nucleotides, such as GTP and UTP have also been shown to share this
site. These results indicate a common
mechanism of action for nucleotide binding to VDAC. Similar steric
occlusion as a blockage mechanism for the channel was also suggested
for hexokinase-I and the inorganic polycationic dye ruthenium red
(RuR). 

## Concluding Remarks
We have performed a comprehensive study of the human voltage-dependent
anion channel 1’s (hVDAC1’s) structure and interactions
in a lipid bilayer. Using a 2D crystalline sample giving spectra of
exceptional resolution, we obtained extensive assignments for the
membrane-bound channel, allowing us to determine the protein’s
topology in a DMPC lipid bilayer and to calculate a structural model
with a 2.2 Å RMSD. We found the topology of the protein to be
the same as previously identified in micelles: an N-terminal α-helix
broken into two segments by G11, and a 19-stranded β-barrel,
showing a parallel orientation of strands at β1 and β19.
We could identify elevated dynamics in the N-terminal β-strands
β1–4, as well as in the adjacent C-terminal strands β18–19,
as was also observed in micelles. We, however, found both segments
of the α-helix to be exceptionally rigid in the open state,
in contrast to the case in micelles.
The closed state of hVDAC1,
implemented by introducing the two
additional G21V/G23V mutations to the linker between the helix and
the barrel, showed an increase in dynamics in the N-terminal helix,
particularly the α2 segment, as well as in the β-strands
previously stabilized by the helix. This provides further evidence
for the closed state of hVDAC1 being highly dynamic, with both α2
helix displacement and barrel elliptic deformation participating in
voltage gating. We showed that cholesterol reduces barrel motions
in the open state. Furthermore, we showed the binding site of the
specific binding partner and cancer drug candidate G3139 to coincide
with nucleotide-binding sites observed in micelles.

## Acknowledgments
The authors thank
Christian Schmidt for providing chemical
shifts for hVDAC1 (E73V/C127A/C232S) in detergent and discussions
regarding channel gating, and Matthew Eddy for inspiring the measurements
on G3139. They also thank Marcel C. Forster for initial help with
assignments and Dietmar Riedel for negative-stain electron micrographs.

## Glossary

## Abbreviations
MAS NMRmagic-angle spinning NMR spectroscopy
hVDAC1human voltage-dependent
anion
channel 1
AFMatomic
force microscopy
ATPadenosine triphosphate
ADPadenosine diphosphate
MTSLS-(1-oxyl-2,2,5,5-tetramethyl-2,5-dihydro-1H-pyrrol-3-yl)methyl methanesulfonothioate
IPTGisopropyl β-d-1-thiogalactopyranoside
PMSFphenylmethylsulfonyl fluoride
β-NADHreduced β-nicotinamide
adenine dinucleotide
RuRruthenium red
n-octyl-PEOn-octylpolyoxyethylene
MES2-(N-morpholine)ethanesulfonic
acid
DTTdithiothreitol
GTPguanosine triphosphate
UTPuridine triphosphate
DMPC1,2-dimyristoyl-sn-glycero-3-phospho-choline
DPhPC1,2-diphytanoyl-sn-glycero-3-phosphocholine
α-PETα
proton exchange
by transamination

## Supporting Information Available
The Supporting Information
is available free of charge at https://pubs.acs.org/doi/10.1021/jacs.1c09848.
Additional images, spectra,
and tables (PDF)

## Author Contributions
The manuscript
was written through contributions of all authors.

The authors
acknowledge funding from the Deutsche Forschungsemeinschaft through
SFB 803 project A04 (C.G. and L.B.A.) and Emmy Noether Program grant
AN1316/1-1 (L.B.A.), and from the Max Planck Society. Open access
funded by Max Planck Society.

The authors declare
no
competing financial interest.

## Supplementary Material
ja1c09848_si_001.pdf

## References
 

## Associated Data

## Supplementary Materials
ja1c09848_si_001.pdf