ACS Pharmacol Transl SciACS Pharmacol Transl Sci3799acsptsptACS Pharmacology & Translational Science2575-9108American Chemical SocietyPMC8009102PMC8009102.2800910282043253413675710.1021/acsptsci.0c002152ArticleA Blueprint for High Affinity SARS-CoV-2 Mpro
Inhibitors from Activity-Based Compound Library Screening Guided by
Analysis of Protein Dynamics
http://orcid.org/0000-0002-0730-6796GossenJonas AlbaniSimone HankeAnton JosephBenjamin P. BerghCathrine http://orcid.org/0000-0001-8771-1865KuzikovMaria CostanziElisa ManelfiCandida StoriciPaola GribbonPhilip BeccariAndrea R. TalaricoCarmine http://orcid.org/0000-0002-4016-227XSpyrakisFrancesca LindahlErik http://orcid.org/0000-0002-1740-8390ZalianiAndrea http://orcid.org/0000-0002-9010-0149CarloniPaolo http://orcid.org/0000-0001-5951-8670WadeRebecca C. http://orcid.org/0000-0003-0200-1712MusianiFrancesco http://orcid.org/0000-0002-4687-6572KokhDaria B. http://orcid.org/0000-0002-2032-4630RossettiGiulia aInstitute
for Neuroscience and Medicine (INM-9), Forschungszentrum
Jülich, Jülich, 52425, GermanybInstitute
for Molecular Neuroscience and Neuroimaging (INM-11), Forschungszentrum Jülich, Jülich, 52425, GermanycInstitute
for Advanced Simulations (IAS-5) “Computational biomedicine”, Forschungszentrum Jülich, Jülich, 52425, GermanydFaculty of
Mathematics, Computer Science and Natural Sciences, RWTH Aachen, Aachen, 52062, GermanyeMolecular
and Cellular Modeling Group, Heidelberg
Institute for Theoretical Studies (HITS), Schloss-Wolfsbrunnenweg 35, Heidelberg, 69118, GermanyfInstitute
of Pharmacy and Molecular Biotechnology (IPMB), Heidelberg University, Im Neuenheimer Feld 364, Heidelberg, 69120, GermanygScience for
Life Laboratory & Swedish e-Science Research Center, Department
of Applied Physics, KTH Royal Institute
of Technology, Stockholm, 11428, SwedenhDepartment
of Screening Port, Fraunhofer Institute
for Translational Medicine and Pharmacology ITMP, Schnackenburgallee 114, Hamburg, 22525, GermanyiElettra-Sincrotrone
Trieste S.C.p.A., SS 14-km 163,5 in AREA Science Park, Basovizza,
Trieste, 34149, ItalyjDompé
Farmaceutici SpA, Via Campo di Pile, L’Aquila, 67100, ItalykDepartment
of Drug Science and Technology, University
of Turin, via Giuria
9, Turin, 10125, ItalylScience
for Life Laboratory, Department of Biochemistry and Biophysics, Stockholm University, Solna, SE-106 91, SwedenmZentrum
für Molekulare Biologie der University Heidelberg, DKFZ-ZMBH
Alliance, INF 282, Heidelberg, 69120, GermanynInterdisciplinary
Center for Scientific Computing (IWR), Heidelberg
University, INF 368, Heidelberg, 69120, GermanyoLaboratory
of Bioinorganic Chemistry, Department of Pharmacy and Biotechnology, University of Bologna, Bologna, 40126, ItalypJülich
Supercomputing Center (JSC), Forschungszentrum
Jülich, Jülich, 52425, GermanyqDepartment
of Hematology, Oncology, Hemostaseology, and Stem Cell Transplantation, RWTH Aachen University, Aachen, 44517, Germany*Email: g.rossetti@fz-juelich.de.1603202111062021433838351079109517122020160320223003202130082023© 2021 The Authors. Published
by American Chemical Society2021The Authorshttps://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/Permits non-commercial access and re-use, provided that author attribution and integrity are maintained; but does not permit creation of adaptations or other derivative works (https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/).10.1021/10.1021/acsptsci.0c00216 
The SARS-CoV-2 coronavirus outbreak continues to spread at a rapid
rate worldwide. The main protease (Mpro) is an attractive target for
anti-COVID-19 agents. Unexpected difficulties have been encountered
in the design of specific inhibitors. Here, by analyzing an ensemble
of ∼30 000 SARS-CoV-2 Mpro conformations from crystallographic
studies and molecular simulations, we show that small structural variations
in the binding site dramatically impact ligand binding properties.
Hence, traditional druggability indices fail to adequately discriminate
between highly and poorly druggable conformations of the binding site.
By performing ∼200 virtual screenings of compound libraries
on selected protein structures, we redefine the protein’s druggability
as the consensus chemical space arising from the multiple conformations
of the binding site formed upon ligand binding. This procedure revealed
a unique SARS-CoV-2 Mpro blueprint that led to a definition of a specific
structure-based pharmacophore. The latter explains the poor transferability
of potent SARS-CoV Mpro inhibitors to SARS-CoV-2 Mpro, despite the
identical sequences of the active sites. Importantly, application
of the pharmacophore predicted novel high affinity inhibitors of SARS-CoV-2
Mpro, that were validated by in vitro assays performed
here and by a newly solved X-ray crystal structure. These results
provide a strong basis for effective rational drug design campaigns
against SARS-CoV-2 Mpro and a new computational approach to screen
protein targets with malleable binding sites.

conformational spacedruggabilityMpromolecular dynamics simulationvirtual screeningprotein binding site flexibilitySARS-CoV-2â EXaSCale smArt pLatform Against paThogEns for Corona Virusâ Exscalate4CoVâ NA101003551pmc-status-qastatus0pmc-status-liveyespmc-status-embargonopmc-status-releasedyespmc-prop-open-accessyespmc-prop-olfnopmc-prop-manuscriptnopmc-prop-legally-suppressednopmc-prop-has-pdfyespmc-prop-has-supplementyespmc-prop-pdf-onlynopmc-prop-suppress-copyrightnopmc-prop-is-real-versionnopmc-prop-is-scanned-articlenopmc-prop-preprintnopmc-prop-in-epmcyespmc-license-refCC BY-NC-NDdocument-id-old-9pt0c00215document-id-new-14pt0c00215ccc-priceIn December 2019, a new coronavirus
(CoV), belonging to the clade b of the Betacoronavirus viral genus,
caused an outbreak of pulmonary disease in the Hubei province in China. , In the first months of 2020, the new pandemic spread globally and
it is still continuing. The virus shares more than 80% of its genome
with that of the SARS coronavirus discovered in 2002 (SARS-CoV). , Hence it has been named severe acute respiratory syndrome-coronavirus
2 (SARS-CoV-2) by the International Committee on Taxonomy of Viruses.
Interfering with viral replication is a promising strategy of treatment.
In this context, the chymotrypsin-like proteinase (often referred
to as the main protease, Mpro hereafter) is an excellent pharmaceutical
target. , It does not depend on host immunogenic responses,
and it is essential for generating the 16 nonstructural proteins,
critical to the formation of the replicase complex.
Mpros are highly conserved enzymes across CoVs. , SARS-CoV
Mpro was already suggested as one of the main drug targets in the
pandemic associated with that virus, about 15 years ago. − Inhibitors of proteases (e.g. aspartyl protease) are also common
drugs used in the clinic against other deadly viruses, e.g. HIV-1. 
The SARS-CoV Mpro active form is a homodimer ( A), with each monomer consisting
of N-terminal, catalytic, and C-terminal regions ( B). Mpros were shown to process polyproteins on diverse cleavage sites,
using a cysteine/histidine catalytic dyad: the histidine (His41 in SARS-CoV-2) forms a hydrogen bond (Hbond)
with a water molecule that, in turn, interacts with an aspartate (Asp187)
and a histidine (His164) side chains. Asp187 is further stabilized
through a salt-bridge with a nearby arginine (Arg40, C). In this way, His41 can
act as a base, extracting a proton from the catalytic cysteine (Cys145)
side chain and activating it for the nucleophilic attack that cuts
the polypeptide.
 SARS-CoV-2 Mpro shares 96% sequence identity with Mpro from SARS-CoV
(Supporting Information (SI), section S1,
Figure S1A). Twelve residues differ between both Mpros, and only one,
namely, Ser46 in SARS-CoV-2 (Ala46 in SARS-CoV), is located at the
mouth of the active site cavity (Figure S1B). The binding sites share 100% of sequence identity (Figure S1A). Thus, exploiting the known libraries
of SARS-CoV Mpro inhibitors has been a strategy followed by many research
groups. Unfortunately, most SARS-CoV Mpro inhibitors with good (nM)
activity against SARS-CoV Mpro in vitro and in cell-based
assays, exhibited limited (sub-μM) potency against the protein
from SARS-CoV-2 in enzymatic assays, and low-μM IC50 values (4–5 μM) in cell-based assays. , 
A similar scenario has emerged from the virtual screening (VS)
of Mpro inhibitors toward SARS-CoV-2. Indeed, none of these strategies,
(i) repurposing of SARS-CoV drugs for SARS-CoV-2, , (ii) Deep Docking trained on SARS-CoV Mpro inhibitors, (iii) libraries of the other SARS proteases, − and (iv) clinically approved drugs for other SARS Mpros or other
similar proteases, − have led so far to clinical advances. Because only 12 residues,
far from the binding site, differ between SARS-CoV Mpro and SARS-CoV-2
Mpro, the mutation of distant residues can substantially contribute
to the binding site plasticity and to the ligand binding through allosteric
regulation. The inability to identify
Mpro inhibitors for SARS-CoV-2 might also be due to the short amount
of time passed since it is rise to urgency. Recently, however, it
has been shown that the dipeptide prodrug GC376, and its parent compound
GC373 inhibit the two proteases with IC50 values in the
nanomolar range. This suggests that,
despite the intrinsic and significant differences between the two
Mpros, common binding features against some classes of high-affinity
ligands are retained.
Molecular dynamics (MD) simulations provided hints to address this riddle: they showed that the SARS-CoV
Mpro active sites display major differences in both shape and size.
In particular, while both Mpros reduce their accessible volume upon
inhibitor binding by approximately 20%, the maximal volume of the holo SARS-CoV Mpro active site is over 50% larger than that
of SARS-CoV-2. In addition, the accessibility of the binding hotspots
(i.e., the key residues for substrate binding) and the flexibility
of one of the two loops delimiting the binding pockets (ASL1 in B) differs between
the two Mpros. The simulations indicate
that the binding sites of the two Mpros are dynamically diverse and
that ligand binding can impact them differently. 
Therefore, transferable binding features across Mpros, as well
as unique ones for SARS-CoV-2, are difficult to predict: the exceptional
flexibility and plasticity of the binding site is here coupled with
large adjustments of the cavity shape in response to the binding of
an inhibitor. This clearly emerges from an analysis of the SARS-CoV-2
Mpro binding pocket’s conformational changes (performed here)
across the majority of the 196 X-ray crystal structures available
in the Protein Data Bank up to September 30th 2020. , − This flexibility makes a rational drug-design approach
extremely challenging: , the screening potential of Mpro
conformational space is too large, too flexible, and unpredictable,
and the actual available binding space can differ significantly from
ligand to ligand. , , 
It is therefore imperative to identify the relationship among SARS-CoV-2
conformational space, flexibility, druggability, and ligand binding.
Here, we analyzed the mentioned 196 X-ray crystal structures, along
with about ∼31 000 conformations extracted, not only
from the longest (100 μs) MD simulation of SARS-CoV-2 Mpro so
far, but also from the binding site enhanced
sampling simulations carried out here. Among these structures, we
selected ∼30 000 conformations for which we systematically
performed druggability analyses on the binding sites. The top 216
druggable structures were selected for virtual screening of a sample
library of ∼13 500 ligands. The latter includes marketed
drugs and compounds under development, the internal chemical libraries
from Fraunhofer Institute and the Dompè pharma company, as
well as the so-far known inhibitors of SARS-CoV Mpro from literature.
We redefine here the protein druggability in a new way exploiting
the chemical space shaped by the different configurations of the binding
site upon virtual screening. Specifically, we identified a consensus
protein–ligand interaction fingerprint across the chemical
space and the corresponding SARS-CoV-2 Mpro unique structure-based
pharmacophore. The latter was able to identify known nM-binders (IC50 ≤ 400 nM) of SARS-CoV-2 Mpro, distinguish these from
micromolar inhibitors, and to identify Myricetin and Benserazide as
novel nM inhibitors. The prediction was validated by an enzymatic
activity binding assay. The calculated binding mode of Myricetin is
in excellent agreement with a recently solved X-ray crystal structure
(Kuzikov et al., submitted). The active pharmacophore also provides
a rationale for the variability in ligand affinity of currently known
SARS-CoV ligands and for the general lack of transferability of SARS-CoV
ligands to SARS-CoV-2, shedding light on the complexity, plasticity,
and druggability of SARS-CoV-2 Mpro.

## Results
and Discussion
To understand how Mpro’s binding site conformation affects
the druggability and the chemical space of selected binders, we considered
∼30 000 Mpro conformations spanning different binding
site arrangements and flexibility obtained from different sources
( ). These include
the following:(i)All the X-ray crystal structures deposited
to date of apo and holo SARS-CoV-2
Mpro. After analyzing all of them, we selected 43 structures for follow-up
analysis. These exhibit a RMSD lower than 1 Å with respect to
the excluded ones. Therefore, they can be considered a good representative
ensemble of the overall deposited SARS-CoV-2 X-ray crystal structures
(“X-ray ensemble” hereafter, see Table S1).
(ii)Two sets of MD ensembles: (a) The
“MD10000” ensemble, that is 10 000 frames, taken
every 10 ns, of a 100 μs-long MD of apo Mpro
from D. E. Shaw Research and (b) the
“MSM ensembles”, two collections of 30 and 40 representative
conformations extracted from a three-state and a four-state Markov
state model (MSM), respectively. The MSM analysis was performed on
the same 100 μs-long MD trajectory (see section S2, Figure S2). These are included to identify conformations
representing structural changes potentially related to binding.
(iii)About 22 000 conformations
obtained with two enhanced sampling methods implemented in the TRAPP
(TRAnsient Pockets in Proteins) web server: Enhanced sampling by Langevin Rotamerically Induced Perturbation
(LRIP) and constraint-based sampling
by tConcoord referred to as “LRIP/tC
ensembles” hereafter. These ensembles were derived using the
X-ray crystal structures of the protein in complex with the inhibitor
N3 (PDB ID 6LU7) and with another α-ketoamide inhibitor (PDB ID 6Y2G).

 

## Binding
Site Features and Druggability
We calculated specific binding
site parameters for the ensembles described above (see SI section S3 for the complete list). We discuss
here the volume, and the hydrophobicity, because they turn out to
be key descriptors of the SARS-CoV-2 Mpro active site shape and druggability
(see below). The latter was evaluated with the “druggability”
scores: SiteScore and Dscore, as derived from the SiteMap tool implemented in the Schrödinger suite
2019–4 (Schrödinger, LLC, New York, NY, 2019) and the
CNN and LR (Convolution Neural Network and Linear Regression) druggability
models as implemented in the TRAPP package. Although TRAPP and SiteMap use different approaches
for computing the pocket characteristics (3D grid-based versus residue-based),
the trends in the computed parameters are similar.
From this
analysis, we conclude the following:(i)The binding site volumes computed
with TRAPP for the holo X-ray crystal structures
are distributed over a slightly larger and more variable range of
values than that for the apo X-ray crystal structures
( A, Figure S3). The distribution of volumes is higher
in the MD and LRIP/tC ensembles with respect to the X-ray. Indeed,
the loop region shows a high amount of flexibility (see Figure S4 and paragraph below). The difference
in volume distributions in the crystal structures could be caused
by crystal packing as we show in SI section
S3.2 (Table S3, Figure S5).
During the MD simulations, on the
other hand, the large range and variability in binding site volume
are associated with conformational changes of loops ASL1 (res. 44–53)
and ASL2 (res. 184–194) ( B, Figure S4). It can be
seen that ASL1 is more flexible than ASL2, from the MSM analysis (section S2) and by calculation of the residue
occurrence in the binding site (section S3, Figure S3). Volume variability also results from the transient participation
(with a frequency of ∼25%) of the N- and C-terminal tails of
the adjacent subunit in the binding site ( C). During the MD, these two termini move
in the proximity of the pocket. For the seven apo X-ray crystal structures, where the termini are resolved (Tables S1,S2), the C-terminus is far away from
the binding sites, whereas the N-terminus is always close by (see D). In the holo crystal structures, the N- and C-terminal tails of
the adjacent subunit can both be found close to the binding site (see D). A similar scenario
is observed for the holo structures in the LRIP/tC
ensemble, where both terminals are present in the binding pocket even
more often (in about 40% of simulated structures, Figure S3).
(ii)The binding site hydrophobicity is
here estimated in terms of hydrophobicity distribution across the
different conformational ensembles, calculated with TRAPP and SiteMap. Holo X-ray crystal structures include conformations with
higher hydrophobicity of the pocket with respect to the apo ones: these are complexes in which large ligands, with a molecular
mass of 400 Da or greater, are covalently bound to Cys145 (PDB IDs 6LU7, 7BUY, and 7C8R). The MD and LRIP/tC
ensembles instead can span from low to high hydrophobicity values
(see section S3.3, Figure S6A).

 

## Druggability
Here, we analyze the druggability as defined by the CNN and LR
scores from TRAPP along with DScore/SiteScore
from SiteMap. , All pockets in the crystallographic
structures (except one, PDB ID 6WTK) are scored as druggable: their druggability
indices are above the scores’ thresholds for druggability (0.8,
0.8, 0.5, 0.5 for SiteMap, DScore, LR, and CNN models, respectively, Figure S6. These thresholds were taken from Halgren et al. and Yuan et
al.( ), respectively). There is,
however, no notable correlation between the druggability scores derived
from the SiteMap and TRAPP methods. This is expected because the observed
variations in the druggability index lie within the method prediction
uncertainty. Despite the slightly lower druggability indices in SiteScore
and TRAPP-LR for the apo X-ray crystal structures
compared to the holo crystal structures, they are
still predicted to be druggable within the uncertainty of the methods.
In contrast, about 50% of the simulated structures (MD, LRIP, and
tConcoord) were predicted not to be druggable (Figure S6).
The druggability scores of the simulated,
and, more, of the X-ray crystal structures correlate with binding
site hydrophobicity (Figure S6, section S3.3, and Tables S4,S5). The correlation with other binding site
features is much smaller (see Tables S4,S5). We conclude that, as expected, the more hydrophobic the pocket
is, the better it is scored.

## Virtual
Screening
We defined a sample library of a total of 13 534
compounds ( , Figure S7). The library included commercialized
drugs and compounds under development, the internal chemical library
from Dompè pharma company, and compounds from the Fraunhofer
Institute BROAD Repurposing Library, as well as known inhibitors of
SARS-CoV Mpro. In particular the library included a set consisting
of 180 compounds with pIC50 against SARS-CoV Mpro greater
than 6 reported in the literature (active molecules, hereafter). , , − Our sample library is chemically very diverse as compared to the
crystallographic ligands in complex with SARS-CoV-2 Mpro and the active
molecules (see Figure S7). A more detailed
chemoinformatic analysis is reported in section S4.1–2.
We selected SARS-CoV-2 Mpro conformations
with scores above the druggability thresholds. These include all the
X-ray crystal structures except 6WTK (42 structures), 10 MSM ensemble
conformations (MSM selection), and 8 representatives of the top 10%
scoring conformations from the MD10000 and LRIP/tC ensembles (see , section S4.3, Table S6, Figures S8,S9).
The ligands were screened against the conformations using OpenEye
FRED and Schrödinger Suite Glide
Version 85012. , We discuss here the results obtained
with FRED. Those obtained with Glide present similar trends and are
reported in the SI (section S4.4 and Figure
S10). Also, we report here only the calculation results obtained with
the MD10000/LRIP/tC and X-ray selections. The data obtained with the
MSM selection are reported in the SI (section
S4.5, Figure S11).
The quality of the virtual screenings was evaluated in terms of
(i) enrichment factor (EF) defined as EF(1%) = (no. active molecules
in the top 1%/no. molecules in the top 1%)/(active molecules in the
whole set); (ii) receiver operating characteristic (ROC) curves, used
to evaluate the true positive rate and the area under the curve (AUC).
The structures from the MD10000/LRIP/tC and MSM selections, along
with the apo X-ray structures, exhibited a poor EF
(below 5%), despite being identified as druggable by all the druggability
prediction methods here implemented ( ). The poorer performance of the apo X-ray crystal structures was expected since they exhibited
overall lower druggability scores with respect to the holo structures (Figure S6F). This was not
the case with the selected structures from the MD10000 and LRIP/tC
ensembles (see section S4.3), where only
the 10% of the structures with the highest druggability scores were
used for screening. This suggests that the druggability prediction
methods are not sensitive enough to distinguish between high- and
low-EF conformations for the chemical space considered (see also discussion
below). On the other hand, for the holo X-ray crystal
structures, both “well-performing” (EF > 15%) and
“poorly-performing” (EF < 5%) conformations were
identified ( ).
 Next, we determined which of these ensembles exhibits a protein–ligand
interaction fingerprint (PLIF) comparable to the one established by
the ligands cocrystallized with SARS-CoV-2 Mpro. In the PLIF of the
latter ( A),
we observe an overall predominance of Hbond interactions over hydrophobic
ones, with Cys145 (catalytic dyad), Gly143, Ser144, His163, and Glu166
as the most attractive residues to form Hbond interactions (comparable
occurrence) with the ligands. The only exception is represented by
His41 (catalytic dyad), which is similarly involved in Hbonds and
hydrophobic interactions.
 The PLIF of the well-performing conformations ( B, upper panel) matches the
one of the crystallographic complexes ( A). Namely, the same hot-spot (i.e., preferential
residues for ligand binding) residues emerge: the ligands form Hbonds
with Cys145 (catalytic dyad), Gly143, Ser144, Gly166, and His163,
as well as hydrophobic interactions with His41 (catalytic dyad). The
main difference between the two PLIFs is in the lower occurrence of
Hbonds involving Gly143, Ser144, and Cys145 (catalytic dyad) than
in the crystallographic complexes, and in the higher occurrence of
hydrophobic contacts with Thr25 and His41 (the second residue in the
catalytic dyad). This change in the surrounding of the reactive cysteine,
Cys145 (Thr25, Gly143, Ser144) might be due to the presence of several
covalent ligands in the crystal structures. Covalent binding might
locally alter the PLIF, and this effect is not considered in the virtual
screening.
In all the other selections (i.e., poorly performing X-ray structures, B lower panel, MD10000
and LRIP/tC selection, C, and MSM selection, Figure S11), the key Hbonds above-discussed have an occurrence that is markedly
lower than nonspecific hydrophobic interactions. Also, the latter
interactions substantially decrease, including those with His41 (catalytic
dyad). Moreover, in the MSM, MD10000 and LRIP/tC selections, ligands
interact with almost all residues of the binding site ( C and Figure S11), but with an occurrence below 25% (for each interaction
type) and with a strong predominance of hydrophobic interactions versus
Hbonds. This points to a rather nonspecific binding of the screened
molecules in the MD/MSM-selected structures.
Summarizing, we found that our evaluation of the virtual screening
procedure correctly identifies the conformations able to provide the
most similar PLIF to the known crystallized ligands of SARS-CoV-2
Mpro.
To rationalize these dramatic differences in the PLIF across the
ensembles of structures, we compared their average binding site shapes.
We found that the residues in the MSM, MD10000, and LRIP/tC selections
are distributed over a larger volume than in the crystal structures
( D–F);
therefore, the spatial location of the hotspots (i.e., Hbond donors/acceptors,
hydrophobic patches, charges) is significantly different. Even reselecting
the conformations from the MD-ensembles using the similarity with
respect to well-performing structures as criterion (i.e., root mean
square deviation, RMSD), did not provide a satisfying performance,
nor the optimal spatial location of the hotspots (section S5, Figure S12), indicating that key features for
obtaining high EFs in the virtual screening, that is, the precise
placement of interacting residues, are missing.
Taken together, these results may explain why the druggability
indices are unable to distinguish the binding site features linked
to a good performance in virtual screening: very subtle variations
of the conformations of the binding site residues induced upon binding,
and therefore not present in the structural ensembles generated in
the absence of a ligand, can lead to significant differences in the
EF (see also Figure S13). These subtle
variations are very challenging to discriminate in terms of druggability
indices.

## The Active-Pharmacophore
and the SARS-CoV-2 Blueprint on the Chemical Space
To identify
the relevant ligand features that might relate to high affinity binding,
we extract here the consensus chemical space, defined by the common
ligands across the top 1% of the well-performing structures in the
virtual screening. These are 32 molecules, 16 of which belong to the
“active” molecules in our library (“consensus
active” hereafter, Figure S14 and ). We next calculated
the corresponding pharmacophore (i.e., an ensemble of steric and electronic
features that is necessary to ensure the optimal supramolecular interactions
with a specific biological target) and linearly combined it with the
X-ray pharmacophore. This is done to consider possible additional
features coming from covalent binding that cannot be covered by the
virtual screening protocol. The consensus pharmacophore combined with
the X-ray pharmacophore constitutes the “active-pharmacophore”,
hereafter (see Methods, ).
 Next, we tested the predictive power of our active-pharmacophore
in discriminating the higher affinity binders across all the so-far
known SARS-CoV-2 Mpro inhibitors: these are 46 molecules coming from
the papers published until November 20th 2020, which were not included
in our sample library and that display a measured affinity spanning
from 30 nM to 125 μM. , , − Some of these molecules were excluded by the docking software due
to their excessive size or due to the presence of metals (e.g. Candesartan
Cilexetil, Evans blue, Phenylmercuric acetate).
For this purpose, we calculated the Dice coefficient, which measures
the number of features in common between the molecule and the active-pharmacophore,
relative to the average number of features present. When scoring the 46 known SARS-CoV-2 Mpro binders according
to the Dice coefficient, the highest scored molecules are 11a, 11b,
11r, UAWJ246, UAWJ247, UAWJ248, Compound 23, Compound 26, Compound
27, and CG373 (see Figure S15), which are
also the highest affinity (IC50 ≤ 400 nM) SARS-CoV-2
Mpro binders (nM-binders, hereafter). On the other hand, it is not
possible to discriminate the sub-μM-binders of SARS-CoV-2 Mpro
(400 nM < IC50 ≤ 1000 nM) from the μM ones
(IC50 > 1000 nM) (see Figure S16). These results have to be taken with great care given the fact
we are comparing assay-dependent IC50 values coming from
different laboratories. Also, several of these inhibitors are predicted
to be covalent binders, which further complicates the use of their
respective IC50 values (see the discussion offered in the paragraph). Therefore, in the next
section, we analyzed the chemical space shaped by the well-performing
conformations upon ligand binding, and offer a rationale for the predictive
power of our active-pharmacophore in identifying nM-binders of SARS-CoV-2
Mpro.

## Rationalization
of the Active-Pharmacophore and SARS-CoV to -CoV-2 Mpro Ligands’
Transferability
The PLIF of the consensus chemical space
is dominated by the “consensus active” ones (the latter
PLIF is almost identical to the former one, Figure S17A) and it shows a predominance of Hbond interactions with
His163, Glu166, Gln189, and Cys145 ( A), as well as hydrophobic interactions with
Thr25, His41, Met165, Pro168, and Gln189. Accordingly, the same trend
can be seen for the PLIF of the SARS-CoV-2 Mpro nM-binders ( B), the only differences
being (i) the additional high occurrence of Gly143 and Ser144 Hbonds
(as already observed in the PLIF of the X-ray structures), and (ii)
the lower occurrence of hydrophobic interactions with Thr25.
When the binding poses of the “consensus active” molecules
and the nM-binders of SARS-CoV-2 Mpro (Section S6) are compared, we found indeed that the indole group (in
11a, 11b, and 7 of the 16 molecules of the “consensus active”
set) or the benzyl group (in GC373, 11r, and 6 of the 16 molecules
of the “consensus active” set), or the benzimidazole
group (in 1 of the 16 of the “consensus active” set)
is buried in the upper subcavity defined by residues Glu166, Pro168,
Gln182, Gln189, and Thr190 ( E,F). Notably, this cavity region which consists of
β-sheets (residues from Tyr161 to Asp176) and the coil (residues
from Gly183 to Ala194) was previously denoted as the “anchor
site”. This region was shrunk
in the poorly performing structures, further validating the importance
of this part of the binding side and also the quality of our model
that correctly excluded the conformations potentially incompatible
with nM-binders. Instead, the benzothiazole moiety of the “consensus
active” is placed in the lower part of the binding cavity defined
by Thr24, Thr25, and Thr26. This benzothiazole moiety is absent in
the SARS-CoV-2 Mpro nM-binders, possibly explaining the lower occurrence
of hydrophobic interactions with Thr25.
These findings suggest that the binding to the lower part of the
binding site (Thr24, Thr25, Thr26) is not a relevant feature for the
nM affinity of SARS-CoV-2 ligands. In contrast, the high occurrence
of Gly143 and Ser144 Hbonds appears to be a signature of nM-binders
of SARS-CoV-2 Mpro, also found in the PLIF of the known X-ray ligands
of SARS CoV-2 complexes. Notably, the formation of these two Hbonds
appear to be significantly hampered in the “consensus active”
set due to the presence of the above-mentioned benzothiazole moiety,
that seems to compromise the juxtaposition of the Hbond acceptors
of the ligands. Accordingly, none of the SARS-CoV-2 nM-binders display
benzothiazole or analogous bulky aromatic groups in such a position
(Figure S14, ).
 Analysis of all 166 holo SARS-CoV-2 Mpro crystal
structures also showed that all their ligands except two (PDB IDs 7JKV and 6XR3) do not have a benzothiazole
or analogous bulky aromatic groups in the Thr24, Thr25, Thr26 subpocket
(Figure S18). Concerning the μM binders
known so far, only very few of them are predicted to have a bulky
group in such a position (Figure S16).
In other words, our results suggest that the bottom part of the binding
cavity in SARS-CoV-2 Mpro should only host small aromatic/hydrophobic
moieties (or nothing at all) to facilitate the formation of Gly143
and Ser144 Hbonds, the latter being a signature of the currently known
nM-binders to SARS-CoV-2 Mpro.
Currently, the X-ray structure of GC373 in complex with SARS-CoV-2
Mpro was solved (PDB ID: 7BRR, recently superseded by PDB ID 7D1M (October 28th 2020).
The ligand in the crystal structure appears in two different conformations,
one resembling the predicted pose from us, in which the benzyl group
of GC373 is not buried in the upper subcavity defined by residues
Glu166, Pro168, Gln182, Gln189, and Thr190; the other in which this
benzyl group is exposed toward the solvent. Yet, when the crystallographic
complex undergoes 500 ns of MD simulations, the pose where the aromatic
ring is exposed toward the solvent rearranges as in the predicted
docking pose (see Section S7 and Figure S19). Such results further validate our active-pharmacophore. The latter
is not only able to discriminate the nM-binders of SARS-CoV-2 Mpro
(IC50 ≤ 400 nM) from the rest, but it also identifies
key specific transferable and not-transferable binding features of
nM SARS-CoV Mpro binders to SARS-CoV-2 Mpro ones.
Taken together, these results suggest that our active-pharmacophore
is a fair representation of the SARS-CoV-2 Mpro blueprint in the chemical
space. Namely, it correctly represents a set of binding features compatible
with the induced SARS-CoV-2 conformational space of the binding site.
The latter is in part determined by the ligand upon binding and in
part it depends on the residues differing in SARS-CoV-2 Mpro with
respect to SARS-CoV Mpro, as also shown in Bzówka et al. 
A cheminformatics analysis of the molecules that were active, but
not part of our “consensus active” set is offered in
the SI (see section S8, Figure S20).

## Identification
of nM-Binders of SARS-CoV-2 Mpro
We considered a set of publicly
available compounds within the E4C network, from the EU-OPENSCREEN Bioactive CompoundLibrary, coming from the PROBE MINER repository. , The set was rescored based on the Dice similarity of their docked
pose to our active-pharmacophore (see Methods). Benserazide (EOS100736)
and Myricetin (EOS100814) compounds (see schemes in A,B) were predicted as nM-binders
of SARS-CoV-2 Mpro candidates. SARS-CoV-2 Mpro biochemical assays
performed here established the accuracy of our predictions by measuring
IC50 values as low as 140 nM and 220 nM, respectively (see section S9.1–2), Figure S21).
 The best docking pose of Myricetin, as coming out from our virtual
screening procedure, shows an orientation which is comparable to the
one observed in the newly solved X-ray structure with PDB ID 7B3E (resolution 1.77
Å, see C). In this pose, the bicyclic rings in the two structures nicely
overlap, while the 3,4,5-trihydroxyphenyl moiety is rotated in our
predicted pose with respect to the crystallographic one. By refining
the docking pose (see section S9.3 and C) both the bicyclic
ring and the 3,4,5-trihydroxyphenyl moiety assumes an orientation
nearly identical to the one found in the X-ray pose after covalent
binding with Cys145, with an overall RMSD of 0.46 Å between the
refined predicted pose and the crystallographic one. Interestingly,
Baicalin features the same isoflavone scaffold as Myricetin, yet it
binds the protein with a different orientation, as shown by X-ray
structure determination (PDB ID 6M2N). Our procedure predicted this orientation,
although the best binding pose differed more significantly from the
crystallographic one than the one obtained with Myricetin (see section S9.4, Figure S22).
Myricetin and Benserazide contain polyhydroxy-phenolic moieties,
which are considered promiscuous due to their redox features and also
to the presence of a high number of close Hbond acceptor/donor sites
that allow them to satisfy several 3D-pharmacophores. Nonetheless,
these classes of compounds have, respectively, reached approved clinical
usage (i.e., for Parkinson’s disease and alcohol use disorder ) and are in
use in our diet like other polyhydroxyphenol-containing products. Also, Quercetin, structurally similar to Myricetin,
was identified as a mild inhibitor of SARS-CoV-2 Mpro (Ki ∼ 7 μM). 
SARS-CoV-2 Mpro is an important target for COVID-19 drug discovery
because of its key role for viral replication and low similarity with
human proteases. , Given its conserved nature with
respect to the other Mpros across Coronaviruses and the presence of
a huge number of crystallized structures (apo and holo), several drug repurposing and structure-based drug
design campaigns have been conducted. − Unfortunately, this has so far led to only 10 SARS-CoV-2 Mpro inhibitors
in the nM range (IC50 ≤ 400 nM). , This contrasts with SARS-CoV Mpro, for which 127 inhibitors are
known in this range. , , , , , − , The observed difficulties in identifying potent SARS-CoV-2 Mpro
inhibitors was suggested to arise from the large plasticity of the
binding site, along with other factors
(also observed for SARS-CoV Mpro), including induced-fit conformational
changes and formation of covalent bonds upon ligand binding. , , Therefore, the available binding
space can differ significantly from ligand to ligand.
Accounting for receptor binding site flexibility in molecular docking
is a significant challenge. This can
be partially overcome with a careful choice of the most appropriate
receptor and reference ligand(s) or by performing ensemble docking
approaches. , While it seems logical to employ
multiple protein structures and ligands where available, very few
published studies have systematically evaluated the impact of using
additional information on proteins’ and ligands’ structure. These studies arrive at the conclusion that
an alternative structure-based design approach may be needed to define
pharmacophores based on the binding site and use them to search large
chemical databases. , 
Our paper exploits the particularly large amount of structural
information available for Mpro (∼200 X-ray structures in the apo and in the holo forms), along with
a very long MD simulation from D. E. Shaw Research and structures generated here by enhanced sampling of the
binding site dynamics. First, we have determined the potential druggability
of each of the ∼30 000 Mpro conformations generated
from these sources, as calculated using TRAPP and SiteMap druggability
tools. , , Next, we have
used a sample library to understand how selected potential high-druggable
protein conformations perform when probed with a diverse chemical
space, here defined by ∼13 000 compounds (see t-SNE
plot in , and
methods for details).
 Our library included also “active” molecules, that
is, molecules that are known to bind with nM affinity (pIC50 > 6) to SARS-CoV Mpro. Therefore, virtual screenings against
∼200 protein conformations were performed. We found that only
a few of these highly druggable (“well-performing”)
conformations recognize a sufficiently high percentage of such “active”
molecules: the ones in common among the well-performing structures,
“consensus active” molecules, represent a small subgroup
of the overall “active” molecules’ ensemble with
specific features. In particular, the “consensus active”
(16 molecules) are mostly clustered in two main areas of the t-SNE
plot, both corresponding to peptidomimetic structures but differing
from each other by the presence of a benzothiazole moiety and an additional
peptide bond. The specific protein–ligand interaction fingerprint
(PLIF) of the “consensus active” molecules strikingly
resembles the one emerging from the SARS-CoV-2 Mpro cocrystallized
ligands. The latter indeed cluster in the same region of the t-SNE
plot. Notably, no consensus was found for the poorly performing structures.
We then combined the crystallographic and the virtual screening
PLIFs (i.e., the chemical space emerging from experimental structures
and the chemical space selected upon virtual screening).
Within the limitations of the procedure (see paragraph), we obtained an “active-pharmacophore”
that we first used against a selection of SARS-CoV-2 Mpro binders
(46 molecules): the latter are very diverse and they are spread overall
the t-SNE plot ( ).
The active-pharmacophore could predict known nM-binders for SARS-CoV-2
Mpro (12 molecules out of the total of 46), which are also clustered
in the peptides and peptidomimetics region of the t-SNE plot, and
discriminate these from the μM ones. Moreover, it could also
discriminate the transferable from the nontransferable binding features
from SARS-CoV to SARS-CoV-2 Mpro.
The former include the interaction with the catalytic dyad residues
along with (i) His163, the mutation of which to Ala inactivates SARS-CoV
Mpro and (ii) Glu166, which plays a role
in the dimerization (required for enzymatic activity) in SARS-CoV. In addition, its interactions with the N-finger
of the other subunit assist the correct orientation of residues in
the binding pocket for both proteins. , Also (iii)
Gln189, which correlates evolutionally with residues from the Cys44-Pro52
loop in both proteins, which was shown to regulate ligand entrance
to the binding site in both proteins;
and (iv) Ser144, the mutation of which to Ala hampers the catalytic
activity in SARS-Cov Mpro. 
The nontransferable binding features include the ability to place
large hydrophobic/aromatic groups in the part of the cavity defined
by Thr25 and Thr26 that is partially lost in SARS-CoV-2 Mpro compared
to SARS-CoV Mpro. This appears to affect Hbonds with Gly143 and Ser144.
Accordingly, this cavity is empty or occupied by a smaller aromatic
group such as the benzyl ring in all the known nM-binders and the
cocrystallized ligands of SARS-CoV-2 Mpro. In contrast, several of
the known nM-binders of SARS-CoV Mpro have benzothiazole or analogous
bulky aromatic groups in this position.
We finally used our active-pharmacophore against a public library
of compounds. We predicted two ligands to be nM for SARS-CoV-2: Benserazide
and Myricetin. While in-cell anticytopathic effects and virus yield
reduction assays showed a modest effect of those compounds, they are
nevertheless confirmed to be nM binders of SARS-CoV-2 Mpro in binding
assays (Figure S21). Our predicted pose of Myricetin is in excellent agreement
with the independently solved X-ray crystal structure of the complex
( C). This was
not expected since Baicalin, bearing the same isoflavone scaffold
of Myricitin, binds in a reversed orientation (PDB ID 6M2N). Thus, the pharmacophore
not only successfully predicts poses in the highly flexible binding
site of SARS-CoV-2 Mpro, but it also discriminates between different
orientations of quite similar chemical scaffolds.
Our methodological approach also demonstrates that only a small
fraction of the binding sites of the apo protein
from crystal structures or simulations are similar to those of the
well-performing holo structures. However, even the
conformations with high structural similarity and high druggability
scores, generated by molecular dynamics simulations, yielded low enrichment
factors in virtual screening. Thus, druggability assessment methods
fail to discriminate between small structural variations of the binding
site that lead to successful performance in virtual screening. These
small structural differences significantly impact ligand binding predictions
as observed in our virtual screening campaigns. They could also be
a source of disappointing results in other virtual screening campaigns
on Mpro carried out so far by research groups worldwide. , , , , These observations indicate that there is
space to improve the discriminatory ability of druggability scores
by training on a wider range of structures generated by simulation
as well as crystallography. Moreover, they highlight the need to develop
simulation methods to generate holo-like protein
structures for virtual screening.
This work was carried out in part within the framework of the EXSCALATE4CORONAVIRUS
(E4C) project. We here used 400 000
core-hours on the JURECA supercomputer in the Jülich Supercomputing
Centre for the virtual screenings. Our work demonstrates how an advanced
computational procedure combined with experimental validation can
correctly predict structure and affinity trends of effective hit molecules
for a challenging protein target. This combined approach may provide
a powerful drug discovery strategy, especially against pandemic viruses
and other pathogens, for which the immediate identification of effective
treatments is of paramount importance.

## Experimental
Procedures
Protein Expression, enzymatic activity methodologies and primary
screen and dose response are reported in the SI (section S9.1 and S9.2)

## Site Analysis
of SARS-CoV-2 Main Protease Structure
The SiteMap tool, together with the TRAPP approach were used for the characterization of the proteins’
binding sites. TRAPP provides tools for (i) the exploration of binding
pocket flexibility and (ii) the estimation of druggability variation
in an ensemble of protein structures. 

## Druggability
Calculation
Two druggability indices from SiteMap tool were
used: The SiteScore is based on a weighted sum of several properties
accounting for the degree of pocket enclosure, size, and the balance
between hydrophobic and hydrophilic character in the binding site.
The Dscore uses almost the same properties as SiteScore but different
coefficients are used and hydrophilicity is not considered.
In the TRAPP tool, the active site pocket of SARS-CoV-2 Mpro was
defined by assigning a distance of 3.5 Å around all atoms of
the ligand N3 from PDB ID 6LU7. This distance was used to detect residues that potentially
may contribute to the binding site and to define dimensions of a 3D
grid that was then used to compute the binding pocket shape. Then
the binding pocket for each structure was mapped on the 3D grid. The
druggability score of this pocket was computed using linear regression
(LR) or a convolutional neural network (CNN) and scaled between 0
and 1. Scores were calculated for all
conformations generated for 6LU7 and 6Y2G from LRIP and tConcoord, as well as for frames collected every 10
ns from the 100 μs spanning classical MD trajectory generated
by starting from the crystal structure with PDB ID6Y84by D. E. Shaw Research. For each structure, a set of the binding site
residues that line the binding pocket was detected using the procedure
implemented in the TRAPP package. Specifically, each residue was characterized
by the number of atoms that contact with the binding pocket.

## Structure
Selection
We selected all structures generated by tConcoord,
LRIP (see SI section S10), or extracted
from MD trajectories, within the top 10% of the LR and CNN druggability
score. These structures were then clustered by the binding site similarity
into eight clusters using k-means procedure (see Figure S8 and also section S4.3 for more details).

## Virtual
Screening and Library Preparation
Virtual screening studies
were performed on a repurposing library including all the commercialized
and under development drugs retrieved in the Clarivate Analytics Integrity
database, merged with the internal chemical library from Dompè
pharma company of already proven safe-in-man compounds and the Fraunhofer
Institute BROAD Repurposing Library, removing duplicate structures.
Known inhibitors of SARS-CoV Mpro were retrieved from several sources
including the literature, the Clarivate Analytics Integrity database,
the GOSTAR database, and the data repository shared by the Global
Health Drug Discovery Institute. Library preparation is reported in
the SI section S10. Virtual screening was
conducted on the 216 selected receptors by both Fred and Glide docking programs.
The protocols are reported in the SI section
S10.

## Fingerprints
Generation
Results are reported in the SI (section S10).

## Limitations
As with any modeling study, our models also have limitations. Protein
mobility is most probably increased by the presence of moving and
displaceable water molecules. Solvation
effects can account for up to 100-fold difference in binding affinity
(corresponding to ∼3 kcal/mol in binding free energy ). Our docking protocols do not consider individual
water molecules. Also, we in part rely on scoring functions to rank
and select the best binding poses. Current docking/scoring methods , were suggested to provide reasonable predictions of ligand binding
modes, but their performance can be disappointing. Additionally, those
methods are often system-dependent, making it very hard to decide
which scoring function is suitable for the chosen target protein.
To partially overcome these issues, we carefully setup Glide and Fred
docking procedures by reproducing a set of covalent and noncovalent
SARS-CoV-2 Mpro-ligand crystal poses (Table S7) and by using other criteria, as ROC and EF to establish the quality
of our docking procedure.
Moreover, we compare assay-dependent
IC50 data coming from different laboratories. In addition,
several of the known Mpros inhibitors are covalently bound to the
protein. Irreversible (covalent) enzyme inhibitors cannot be unambiguously
ranked for biochemical potency by using IC50 values, because
the same IC50 value could originate either from relatively
low initial binding affinity accompanied by high chemical reactivity,
or the other way around. In other words,
the important quantity to be considered would be the rate of covalent
modification, (kinact/Ki), that describes the efficiency
of covalent bond formation resulting from the potency (Ki) of the first reversible binding event and the maximum potential
rate (kinact) of inactivation. This
information is unfortunately not available for most of the ligands
here considered.

## Supporting Information Available
The Supporting Information
is available free of charge at https://pubs.acs.org/doi/10.1021/acsptsci.0c00215.Supplemental experimental procedures, Figures S1–S22,
Table S1–S6, and supplemental computational methods section
S10 (PDF)

## Supplementary Material
pt0c00215_si_001.pdf

## Author Contributions
# J.G., S.A., and A.H. equally contributed. E.L., A.Z., P.C., R.C.W.,
F.M., D.B.K., and G.R. shared senior authorship. J.G. and S.A. performed
all the docking experiments, the PLIF and pharmacophore calculations,
as well as editing most of the figures and tables of the manuscript.
A.H. and D.B.K. performed the TRAPP analyses. B.P.J. collected and
analyzed the X-ray structures. F.M. and G.R. performed the SiteMap
analyses. C.M., C.T., and A.B. took care of the library collection.
C.B. and E.L. performed the MSM analyses. M.K., P.G., and A.Z. performed
the experiments. E.C. and P.S. solved the crystal structure. F.S.,
A.Z., P.C., R.C.W., F.M., D.B.K., and G.R. wrote the manuscript and
contributed to the design of the research and the analysis of the
data. All authors have given approval to the final version of the
manuscript.
The authors
declare no competing financial interest.

## Notes
Tables S1–S3 in .xlsx format are available
at DOI: 10.5281/zenodo.4299967. The data sets (.csv, .xlsx) generated
during this study are available at DOI: 10.5281/zenodo.4299967.

## Acknowledgments
This research was conducted under the project “EXaSCale
smArt pLatform Against paThogEns for Corona Virus–Exscalate4CoV”
founded by the EU’s H2020-SC1-PHE-CORONAVIRUS-2020 call, Grant
No. 101003551. Additional computational resources were provided by
the Swedish National Infrastructure for Computing (SNIC) and the Knut
and Alice Wallenberg Foundation. D.B.K and R.C.W. acknowledge the
support of the Klaus Tschira Foundation. G.R., P.C., D.B.K., and R.C.W.
acknowledge the Human Brain Project funded by the European Union’s
Horizon 2020 Framework Programme for Research and Innovation under
the Specific Grant Agreement No. 945539 (Human Brain Project SGA3).
G.R., A.Z., P.S., and P.C. acknowledge the E4C consortium. We would
also like to thank Dr. Katja Herzog (EU-OPENSCREEN ERIC) for providing
access to the EU-OPENSCREEN ERIC Bioactive Compound Library data.