Stem Cells Transl MedStem Cells Transl Med2027sctmSCT3Stem Cells Translational Medicine2157-65642157-6580Oxford University PressPMC8046045PMC8046045.1804604580460453352891810.1002/sctm.20-0177SCT3128861Pluripotent Stem CellsPluripotent Stem CellsEnhanced differentiation of human induced pluripotent stem cells toward the midbrain dopaminergic neuron lineage through GLYPICAN‐4 downregulation
GPC4 KD ENHANCES DOPAMINERGIC DIFFERENTIATIONCorti et al.CortiSerena BonjeanRemi LegierThomas RattierDiane MelonChristophe SalinPascal TosoErik A. KybaMichael Kerkerian‐Le GoffLydia MainaFlaviohttps://orcid.org/0000-0001-6100-4695 DonoRosannahttps://orcid.org/0000-0002-7200-9464 rosanna.dono@univ-amu.fr
1
Aix Marseille Univ, CNRS, Developmental Biology Institute of Marseille (IBDM), Turing Center for Living Systems, Parc Scientifique de Luminy, NeuroMarseille
Marseille
France

2
Lillehei Heart Institute and Department of Pediatrics
University of Minnesota
Minneapolis
Minnesota
USA
*Correspondence
Rosanna Dono, PhD, Aix Marseille Univ, CNRS, Developmental Biology Institute of Marseille (IBDM), Turing Center for Living Systems, Parc Scientifique de Luminy, Marseille, France.
Email: rosanna.dono@univ-amu.fr02220215202110537973310.1002/sct3.v10.572574225112020254202016122020020220211604202117042021© 2021 The Authors. stem cells translational medicine published by Wiley Periodicals LLC on behalf of AlphaMed Presshttps://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/This is an open access article under the terms of the http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/ License, which permits use and distribution in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited, the use is non‐commercial and no modifications or adaptations are made.

## Abstract
Enhancing the differentiation potential of human induced pluripotent stem cells (hiPSC) into disease‐relevant cell types is instrumental for their widespread application in medicine. Here, we show that hiPSCs downregulated for the signaling modulator GLYPICAN‐4 (GPC4) acquire a new biological state characterized by increased hiPSC differentiation capabilities toward ventral midbrain dopaminergic (VMDA) neuron progenitors. This biological trait emerges both in vitro, upon exposing cells to VMDA neuronal differentiation signals, and in vivo, even when transplanting hiPSCs at the extreme conditions of floor‐plate stage in rat brains. Moreover, it is compatible with the overall neuronal maturation process toward acquisition of substantia nigra neuron identity. HiPSCs with downregulated GPC4 also retain self‐renewal and pluripotency in stemness conditions, in vitro, while losing tumorigenesis in vivo as assessed by flank xenografts. In conclusion, our results highlight GPC4 downregulation as a powerful approach to enhance generation of VMDA neurons. Outcomes may contribute to establish hiPSC lines suitable for translational applications.

Schematic representation of the functional properties acquired by human induced pluripotent stem cells (hiPSCs) following GLYPICAN‐4 (GPC4) downregulation versus control. This includes impaired in vivo tumorigenesis as assessed by flank xenografts, and enhanced differentiation toward ventral midbrain dopaminergic (VMDA) neuron progenitors both in vitro and upon brain transplantation. 

GLYPICAN‐4hiPSCshPSC‐derived dopaminergic neuronsintrastriatal transplantationself‐renewal and differentiationNational Institute of Arthritis and Musculoskeletal and Skin Diseases 10.13039/100000069R01 AR075413French Ministry of Higher Education, Innovation and Research FellowshipBIOTRAIL PH.D. Program in Life Science, Marseille, FranceFondation pour la Recherche Médicale 10.13039/501100002915DEQ20141231766Centre National de la Recherche Scientifique 10.13039/501100004794Aix‐Marseille University 10.13039/100007586Network of Centres of Excellence in Neurodegeneration (COEN) Pathfinder IIICOEN4014Centre National de la Recherche Scientifique‐Pre‐Maturation ProgramSATT Sud‐Est “Technology Transfer accelerator”Fondation de France 10.13039/5011000044312013_00043173Association France Parkinson: 096038 and fellowship 4th year PH.D. thesis 10.13039/501100008211Investissements d'AvenirANR‐17‐EURE‐0029nEURo*AMUA*MIDEX (Aix‐Marseille Initiative of Excellence)AMX‐19‐IET‐004 We then assessed whether GPC4 downregulation affected hiPSC self‐renewal and pluripotency. Under standard stemness conditions, GPC4sh hiPSCs stained for the pluripotent stem cell marker alkaline phosphatase (AP) as did control cells (Figure ). GPC4sh cells also showed growth and survival rates similar to control hiPSCs, as evidenced by the comparable cell cycle (Figures and C), timing for confluence (Figures and D), proliferation rate (phospho‐Histone3 (pHH3) positive cells; Figures 
 E) and cell survival (cleaved‐Caspase3; Figures and E). Additionally, GPC4sh hiPSCs expressed levels of epiblast and pluripotency factors such as OTX2, OCT4, NANOG, and SOX2, comparable to controls as assessed at RNA (Figures and F) and protein levels (Figures and G,H). Collectively, these results show that GPC4 is dispensable for maintenance of hiPSC identity and self‐renewal.
Next, we analyzed the pluripotent differentiation potential of GPC4sh hiPSCs in vitro and in vivo by performing embryoid body (EB)‐mediated spontaneous differentiation and teratoma formation assays, respectively. By using immunocytochemistry, we found that differentiating GPC4sh EBs exhibit loss of the hiPSC marker OCT4 and express markers of the three germ layers, such as OTX2 for Neuroectoderm, BRA for Mesoderm and SOX17 for Endoderm, similar to controls (Figures and I). This indicates that GPC4sh hiPSCs retain pluripotency potential and lineage entry in EB‐mediated spontaneous differentiation. Instead, assessment of developmental capacity by performing flank xenografts in nude mice revealed a ∼4.5‐fold reduced tumor formation in GPC4sh hiPSCs compared with controls (Figure ). Interestingly, histological and immunohistochemical analysis revealed that reduced GPC4 levels in hiPSCs not only reduce tumor formation in size but also affect the morphological feature of teratomas. In particular, derivatives of the three germ lines, endoderm, neuroectoderm and mesoderm, were found in CTRLsh hiPSCs as shown by the presence of SOX9‐, MAP2‐, and SMA‐positive cells. Instead, GPC4sh hiPSCs generated predominantly endodermal derivatives. Therefore, loss‐of‐GPC4 impairs teratoma development (Figure ).
Altogether, these results show that GPC4 downregulation is compatible with maintenance of self‐renewal and pluripotency in stemness conditions, whereas it impairs hiPSC tumorigenic potential following in vivo transplantation.

3.2

## Downregulation of GPC4 in hiPSCs promotes generation of VMDA progenitors in vitro
By re‐analyzing expression of GPC4 in a previously published single‐cell RNA‐seq dataset from human embryo VM cells, we found five distinct cell types sharing high probability of GPC4 expression: four radial glia‐like (Rgl) cells (hRgl1, hRgl2a, hRgl2b, hRgl3) and one floor‐plate progenitor [lateral floor‐plate progenitors (hProgFPL)] (Figure A). Intriguingly, analysis of this RNA‐seq dataset revealed drastic differences in the probability expression of the other GPC family members. In particular, we found lack of expression for GPC5 and GPC6, restricted expression of GPC3 to serotonergic neurons and of GPC2 to postmitotic DA progenitors (Figure B). Instead, GPC1 probability expression partially overlapped with GPC4 in hRgl2a and hRgl2b cells (Figure B). As Rgls within the human mesencephalon are neurogenic and serve as DA neuron progenitors, the restricted localization of GPC4 transcripts to distinct precursors of VMDA neurons could underlie functional implications during early VMDA generation.
We examined the differentiation potential of GPC4sh hiPSCs toward VMDA neurons by applying the protocol of Nolbrant et al. With this protocol, neuroepithelial cells generated via the dual SMAD inhibition approach are directed toward a floor‐plate and then a VMDA progenitor identity by progressive activation of SHH, WNT and FGF8 signaling pathways. Afterwards, cells are exposed to factors promoting survival and terminal differentiation to generate functional VMDA neurons in vitro (Figure C). The differentiation profile of CTRLsh and GPC4sh hiPSCs at the stage of midbrain floor‐plate induction and VMDA progenitor generation [day 0 (d0) to d15] was assessed by following expression of well‐established markers by qRT‐PCR and immunocytochemistry (Tables and ).
In CTRLsh lines, the hiPSC markers OCT4 and NANOG were drastically downregulated by d5 of differentiation and no more detectable by d9 (Figure ). This was accompanied by the upregulation of VMDA progenitor markers. In particular, FOXA2 and OTX2 expression levels peaked between d5 and d9 and were maintained at later differentiation stages (Figure ). CORIN expression peaked at d12 then was downregulated at d15. LMX1A transcripts were detected at later time points than those of FOXA2 (d9 LMX1A vs d5 FOXA2; Figure ) and levels increased progressively (Figure ). The overall expression profile of markers during our differentiation studies was similar to that previously reported. , , Interestingly, analysis of GPC4 expression during VMDA neuron differentiation revealed a rapid decrease of transcripts levels from d0 to d5, suggesting that GPC4 downregulation might be involved into the transition of hiPSCs from pluripotency to DA neuron lineage entry (Figure D).
 In the four GPC4sh hiPSC cell clones, the kinetics of expression of these VMDA progenitor markers were similar to those seen in CTRLsh (Figure ), but significant differences in transcript levels were found at all time points analyzed, except for OTX2, whose expression level was similar to controls (Figures and F). FOXA2, CORIN, and LMX1A transcripts were on average between 1.5‐fold to 3‐fold higher in GPC4sh cells (Figure ). In particular, FOXA2 upregulation was evident from early days of differentiation (d5), whereas LMX1A, and CORIN mRNA significantly increased starting from d9 of VMDA patterning (Figures and F).
The differentiation protocol we used was optimized to obtain VMDA identity. However, it is widely known that VM‐patterned cultures can contain other contaminating neural progenitors. We assessed whether GPC4 downregulation in hiPSCs would affect generation of other precursor types. We first analyzed the expression of SOX1, a pan‐neural marker expressed in all neural precursors with the exception of VMDA progenitors, as well as HOXA2 and NKX2.2, which are expressed in serotonergic progenitors and other brain regions such as hindbrain and lateral midbrain. QRT‐PCR analysis revealed that these three markers were expressed in differentiating cultures at early time points, but their levels were markedly reduced in the four GPC4sh lines compared with CTRLsh cells (Figures and G). Instead, the expression levels of SOX2 and NESTIN, two additional pan‐neural markers also expressed by VMDA neuron precursors, were similar in differentiating CTRLsh and GPC4sh cells (Figure ). Taken together, these results indicate that GPC4 downregulation in hiPSCs favors the generation of VMDA neuron progenitors rather than triggering a general increase of neural differentiation. Yet, the increased VMDA precursors might occur at the expenses of other neuronal cell types.
The preferential midbrain and floor‐plate patterning of GPC4sh cultures was also corroborated by qRT‐PCR analysis of genes commonly used to monitor the presence of contaminating forebrain and hindbrain cell populations. When compared with CTRLsh, GPC4sh cells showed increased transcript levels for genes activated in the midbrain and floor‐plate (OTX2, LMX1A, LMX1B, LHX1, WNT1, FOXA1, FOXA2, SHH, CORIN), but decreased levels of those expressed in forebrain (SIX3, EMX2) and hindbrain (IRX3, GBX2, HOXA2), whose transcript levels were significant only at early differentiation stages (Figure ).
We further examined neural differentiation by performing immunofluorescence labeling of NESTIN and of differentiation of VMDA progenitors by performing triple immunofluorescence labeling of LMX1A, FOXA2, and OTX2. NESTIN staining showed that most CTRLsh and GPC4sh cells acquired a neural phenotype already by d9 (Figure A). Triple positive LMX1A, FOXA2 and OTX2 neural progenitors were found in both CTRLsh and GPC4sh, in increasing numbers between d9 and d15. But their proportion appeared markedly higher in cultures of all four GPC4sh lines, strengthening enhanced differentiation propensity toward VMDA precursors (Figures and B). Quantitative analysis showed that the percentage of triple positive cells in GPC4sh cultures was ∼3‐fold to 6‐fold higher than in CTRLsh lines at d9 (CTRLsh: 8.1 ± 1.8%; GPC4sh5‐c10: 26.5 ± 1.6%; GPC4sh4‐c8: 42.3 ± 3.1%) and remained at least ∼2‐fold higher at 12 and 15 days (eg, d15, CTRLsh: 31.4 ± 3.1%; GPC4sh5‐c10: 62.7 ± 7.6%, GPC4sh4‐c8: 62.7 ± 9.0%; Figure ).
We further quantified the expression of individual markers by cells overtime. Concerning FOXA2 and OTX2, GPC4sh and CTRLsh cultures showed significant differences in the percentage of cells positive for these markers only at d9, whereas the percentage of cells positive for LMX1A were significantly higher at all time point analyzed (Figure ). It is tempting to speculate that GPC4sh cells might have a higher competence for LMX1A expression compared with controls. Finally, we observed at day 15 enhanced proportion of cells expressing the floor‐plate marker CORIN in GPC4sh cultures, as illustrated for GPC4sh5‐c10, further pointing to their VMDA progenitor nature (Figure ). Therefore, independently on the VMDA marker used, GPC4sh hiPSCs outnumbered CTRLsh, indicating that GPC4 downregulation enhances the capability of hiPSCs to generate VMDA progenitors.
To assess the effect of GPC4 downregulation in a different hiPSC line, we examined the generation of VMDA precursors in the AICS‐0023 hiPSCs targeted with CTRLsh and GPC4sh (Figure S5). Qualitative and quantitative analyses of cell pools showed a significant ∼2 and ∼1.8‐fold increase into the percentage of VMDA precursors triple positive cells in GPC4sh cultures at d9 and d15 of differentiation respectively (d9: 12.53 ± 1.0%; GPC4sh: 23.8 ± 1.7%. d15: CRTLsh: 38.1 ± 2.7%; GPC4sh: 65.9 ± 0.9%; Figure S5C and S5D). These results show that efficient differentiation of hiPSCs into VMDA precursors following GPC4 downregulation is not limited to one hiPSC line.
We next investigated whether the enhanced VMDA progenitor formation associated with GPC4 downregulation could be linked to changes in cell proliferation or survival. We performed immunocytochemical detection of dividing cells using the mitotic marker pHH3 and of apoptotic cells expressing active Caspase‐3 at different time points (d0, d5, d9, d12, d15) of VMDA neuron differentiation. Qualitative and quantitative analyses did not reveal significant differences in either cell proliferation or survival between all four GPC4sh and CTRLsh cultures (Figures and C).
Taken together, these results establish a specific role of GPC4 in fate decision during generation of VMDA precursors in hiPSCs. Its downregulation confers to hiPSCs a higher propensity for generation of VMDA progenitors, possibly at expense of other neural cell types, without changes of proliferation or survival of differentiating cells.

3.3

## 
VMDA neuron progenitors with downregulated GPC4 acquire a mature phenotype and a SN VMDA neuron identity
To explore whether the strategy of GPC4 downregulation in hiPSCs can promote terminal differentiation into functionally mature VMDA neurons, we first analyzed the expression of the DA synthetizing enzyme tyrosine hydroxylase (TH). In all clones of the 029 cell lines examined, numerous TH+ cells were visualized at d22, with co‐expression of the pan neural marker MAP2 establishing their neuronal nature (Figure ). Interestingly, the number of cells expressing TH in GPC4sh differentiating cultures was ∼2‐fold enhanced compared with CTRLsh cells at d22 of differentiation (CTRLsh: 8.8 ± 0.5%; GPC4sh5‐c10: 16.0 ± 0.8%; GPC4sh4‐c8: 17.2 ± 1.6%; Figures and A), d26 (Figures B and C) and d50 of DA neuron differentiation (Figure ). Of note, microscopic examination of AICS‐0023 hiPSCs also revealed that the proportion of cells expressing TH in GPC4sh differentiating culture at d20 was ∼1.7‐fold higher than in controls (TH at d20: CTRLsh: 13.6 ± 4.0%; GPC4sh: 21.6 ± 4.0%; Figure S7D and S7E).
 As cell types other than DA neurons express TH, we tested whether TH+ cells also express NURR1, a protein crucial for progressive acquisition of a VMDA neuron neurotransmitter phenotype. , Cells in both CTRLsh and GPC4sh cultures were in great majority double positive for TH+/NURR1+ (Figure ), and can be thus considered as “bona fide” VMDA neurons.
We next analyzed the expression of other markers of functionally mature VMDA neurons. Remarkably, we found co‐expression of TH with VMAT2 (involved in dopamine storage into vesicles and release; Figure ), DDC (involved in dopamine production; Figure ) and DRD2 (dopamine receptor subtype expressed as autoreceptor in dopamine neurons; Figure ). Part of TH+ neurons also co‐expressed the membrane dopamine transporter DAT, which is one of the latest markers to be expressed during VMDA differentiation, in both CTRLsh and GPC4sh lines at d50 (Figure ). Quantitative analysis showed that their percentage was also higher in differentiating GPC4sh vs CTRLsh lines, consistent with their enhanced VMDA neuron differentiation properties (Figure ).
 Interestingly, these differentiating cultures are enriched in TH neurons co‐expressing ALDH1A1 (protecting neurons from the accumulation of dopamine aldehyde intermediates; Figure ) and GIRK2 (Figure ), whereas they contain only sporadic calbindin‐positive TH neurons (Figure ). Of note, ALDH1A1 and GIRK2 are predominantly expressed in SN in contrast to calbindin, which is also highly expressed in the VTA. , Thus, these analyses revealed that the enhanced differentiation properties of GPC4sh cells observed at neuronal progenitor stage are preserved during all the differentiation process up to terminal differentiation into mature neurons with SN VMDA neuron identity.

3.4

## 
GPC4 downregulation in hiPSCs does not increase the presence of contaminant GABAergic, serotonergic, and glutamatergic neurons in VMDA cultures
Detailed knowledge about the neuronal subpopulations present in hiPSC derivatives is essential for their successful use in cell replacement therapy of PD. For example, the presence of contaminating serotonergic neurons appears to cause severe side effects such as dyskinesia. We therefore analyzed transcript levels of key molecular markers of other neuronal populations often found in differentiating cultures, such as GABAergic, serotonergic and glutamatergic neurons. QRT‐PCR analyses of GABAergic markers GAD1 and GAD2 at d29 and d35 showed no changes in transcript levels between CTRLsh and GPC4sh differentiating cells (Figure ). The serotonergic markers 5‐HT, 5‐HTT and TPH2 were either not expressed at d29 and d35 of DA differentiation (for 5‐HT and 5‐HTT; data not shown) or showed no significant change (for TPH2) between CTRLsh and GPC4sh cultures (Figure ). Similarly, glutamatergic marker genes, vGLUT1, vGLUT2 and GLS were found predominantly unchanged at these time points (Figure ). To strengthen these data, we also investigated GABAergic and serotonergic markers by immunocytochemistry. CTRLsh or GPC4sh cells contained very few GABA+ and 5‐HT+ neurons (Figure ). Regarding glutamatergic neurons, the different antibodies tested for vGLUTs did not provide good quality immunostainings. Overall, these results indicate that GPC4 downregulation in hiPSCs leads to a specific increase of VMDA neurons.
 
3.5

## Downregulation of GPC4 promotes specification of hiPSCs transplanted into rat brains at floor‐plate stage toward VMDA progenitors
To establish whether GPC4sh hiPSCs are competent to acquire a VMDA progenitor fate in vivo, we performed cell transplantation experiments in rat brains. Currently, transplantation experiments with hESC and hiPSC derivatives make use of cell differentiated in vitro for 16‐ to 25‐days in order to well establish the VMDA neuron identity and to enrich cultures with postmitotic progenitors. , , , We have previously reported that GPC4sh mESCs efficiently generate functional VMDA neurons even though they were transplanted after only 4‐days of in vitro spontaneous differentiation. We therefore assessed the differentiation properties of GPC4sh hiPSCs in vivo by transplanting them at floor‐plate stage after a short pulse of SHH and WNT agonist (Figure ). Specifically, cells were differentiated in vitro for 5 days, a time point in which differentiating cells display floor‐plate features and the efficient differentiation properties of GPC4sh cells become apparent (Figure ).
 We grafted 40 000 cells, either CTRLsh‐derivatives or GPC4sh‐derivatives, into the striatum of adult rats with prior 6‐hydroxydopamine‐induced lesion of the nigrostriatal DA neurons (Figure ). Analyses were performed 9 weeks after transplantation. Despite differences in their size, which was ∼3‐fold higher for CTRLsh vs GPC4sh (CTRLsh: 0.9 ± 0.2 mm3, GPC4sh: 0.3 ± 0.1 mm3; Figure ), both CTRLsh and GPC4sh grafts did not show signs of aberrant features such as tumor formation or necrosis, indicating a healthy state of transplanted cells.
Consistent with our previous in vitro analyses, immunohistochemical analyses showed no visible staining for OCT4 in the grafts suggesting lack of contaminating undifferentiated cells (data not shown). Similarly, we did not found expression of mesoderm (BRAC, TBX3; data not shown) and endoderm makers (SOX17; data not shown). Instead, we observed a broad staining for hNCAM (human‐specific neural cell adhesion molecule) in CTRLsh and GPC4sh grafts showing the presence of a high proportion of human neural cells (Figure ). Furthermore, both grafts were enriched in NESTIN+ cells, indicating that cells were still at early stage of neural progenitor differentiation (Figure ). This was supported by the presence of SOX2 neural progenitors (Figure ) and of sporadic TH+ and MAP2+ cells (Figure A and data not shown). Interestingly, we found a consistent presence of GFAP+ cells in both CTRLsh and GPC4sh grafts, with a slight increase of GFAP+ cells in GPC4sh grafts (Figure ). Of note, GFAP is a marker of astrocytes that, beyond their important roles in structural, metabolic support and synaptic transmission repair, are able to enhance DA neuron differentiation. 

We next studied the differentiation potential of the transplanted 5‐days patterned VMDA cells by examining the distribution of progenitor markers by means of FOXA2 and LMX1A co‐staining. Grafts from CTRLsh cells were enriched in FOXA2+ cells and displayed very sporadic LMX1A+ cells (Figure ), whereas GPC4sh‐derived grafts were enriched in both FOXA2+ and LMX1A+ cells (compare Figure with and with ). Quantitative analysis evidenced a ∼2‐fold increase of FOXA2+ (CTRLsh: 14.5 ± 1.9% of DAPI+ cells; GPC4sh: 27.7 ± 8%), and a ∼5‐fold increase of LMX1A+ (CTRLsh: 2.4 ± 0.3%; GPC4sh: 10.9 ± 1.8%) in GPC4sh compared with CTRLsh grafts (Figure B). Finally, a ∼5‐fold increase was also found in the percentage of FOXA+/LMX1A+ double positive cells in GPC4sh grafts compared with CTRLsh cells (CTRLsh: 1 ± 0.2%; GPC4sh: 5.5 ± 0.8%, Figure ). Expressing values as numbers of FOXA2+/LMX1A+ double cells vs graft volume confirmed these results (Figures and C).
 Taken together, these results show that hiPSCs transplanted after 5‐days of in vitro VMDA differentiation into the striatum pursue efficiently toward the stage of VMDA progenitors at 9 weeks postgrafting. Moreover, they highlight the capability of transplanted GPC4sh hiPSC‐derivatives to generate VMDA progenitors in a more efficient fashion than controls, thus indicating that downregulation of GPC4 in hiPSCs may be a strategy to enhance differentiation of hiPSCs in VMDA neurons also in vivo.

4

## DISCUSSION
A current challenge for the development of hiPSC‐based disease modeling and cell replacement therapy for PD is to achieve efficient differentiation of suitable cell types from hiPSCs. In these studies, we identified the membrane bound HSPG, GPC4, as a key protein enabling manipulation of hiPSC fate. In particular, our loss‐of function studies show that reducing GPC4 expression in hiPSCs significantly enhances their differentiation properties toward the VMDA neuron lineage both in vitro and upon brain transplantation without affecting hiPSC maintenance and stemness. Importantly, VMDA neurons derived from hiPSC with reduced GPC4 protein levels meet molecular criteria characterizing the SN VMDA neurons and complete the in vitro differentiation program by expressing proteins for DA synthesis, release and uptake. By characterizing the process of VMDA neuron differentiation, we discovered that the enhanced differentiation properties of hiPSCs with downregulated GPC4 relies on their increased capability to enter into the VMDA lineage and acquire a VMDA neural progenitor fate. Interestingly, such propensity is retained in vivo as GPC4sh cells grafted in the striatum of rat brains at floor‐plate stage generate a 5‐fold higher proportion of VMDA progenitors compared with controls. Thus, readjustment of the GPC4 protein levels allows the overall process of VMDA neuron differentiation from hiPSCs to become more efficient.
Mechanistically, GPC4 functions as cell membrane sensor of the extracellular environment and can interact with several signaling pathways, among which are the VMDA progenitor fate determinants, SHH, WNT and FGF. , At the cell membrane, GPC4 fine‐tunes the cell perception of these signals by impacting on mechanisms such as receptor‐ligand interactions, temporal and quantitative supply of active signals. These GPC4 functions are crucial for developmental processes, such as gastrulation and dorsal forebrain patterning in which GPC4 regulates WNT11 and FGF signaling activities, respectively. , As we have previously shown, these GPC4 functions also impact aspects of SC biology as GPC4 positively modulate WNT/β‐catenin signaling in self‐renewing mESCs. Control of FGF signaling by GPC4 levels might also operate at VMDA progenitor fate determination. Recent studies using mESCs and hESCs have reported that blockade of FGF signaling on exit of the lineage‐primed epiblast pluripotent state initiates an early induction of LMX1A and FOXA2 in nascent neural progenitors. In addition to inducing VM characteristics, the FGF signaling blockade during neural induction directs midbrain fate by suppressing forebrain or caudal fates in embryos, as we observed here in differentiating hiPSCs with downregulated GPC4. On the same line, addition of FGF8 to the differentiation medium of hESCs during the early phase of neural induction causes a reduced yield of VMDA progenitors. Our expression analysis of GPC4 transcripts during VMDA neuron differentiation is compatible with a need for reduced GPC4 function during neural induction and acquisition of a VMDA progenitor fate. Thus, reducing GPC4 protein levels might contribute to establish the cell‐signaling threshold underlying efficient VMDA neuron lineage specification. The higher proportion of VMDA progenitors in differentiating GPC4sh hiPSC cultures correlates with an increased number of differentiating cells expressing LMX1A. Previous studies have shown that forcing expression of LMX1A in hPSCs is sufficient to direct the fate of differentiating neural progenitors toward VMDA neurons of the SN subtype. Moreover, a stepwise control of FGF and WNT signaling initiates an early induction of LMX1A in nascent neural progenitors. These findings open the intriguing possibility that the molecular setting established in hiPSCs following GPC4 downregulation may confer a higher competence for LMX1A expression. Additional studies are needed to decipher the mechanism underlying the enhanced differentiation of hiPSCs toward VMDA progenitor fate following GPC4 downregulation.
Our in vivo studies also showed how robust can be the new molecular setting acquired by hiPSCs with downregulated GPC4. When transplanted in brains, GPC4 mutant neuroectodermal cells received only a short SHH and WNT treatment (5 days without FGF) and they were grafted upon acquiring a floor‐plate stage. Despite these extreme conditions, transplanted cells engraft in the host striatum and become VMDA progenitors. It is still unclear whether the denervated striatum is a permissive environment for VMDA neuron differentiation and whether it releases survival or differentiation factors. Of note, our qRT‐PCR data on cultured hiPSCs revealed endogenous expression of SHH, WNT1, and FGF8 during VMDA neuron patterning in vitro. Therefore, one could hypothesize that these endogenously produced factors would continue to trigger VMDA neuron generation in vivo, and that downregulation of GPC4 in these cells would ensure their qualitative and quantitative actions.
Despite these unique differentiation features, downregulation of GPC4 in hiPSCs results in a new cellular system also displaying additional advantages at the undifferentiated stage. First, reduction of GPC4 does not affect other hiPSC biological properties such as undifferentiated growth characteristics, self‐renewing ability, expression of stemness‐associated transcription factors, and in vitro pluripotent differentiation potential, thus enabling a long‐term maintenance of GPC4sh hiPSC lines. A second major advantage of hiPSCs with reduced GPC4 levels is their impaired potential for tumor development. Tumorigenesis is a major risk for hiPSC‐based regenerative therapy. , Cell transplantation studies into immunodeficient hosts have indicated that a threshold of undifferentiated cells ranging from 100 to 245 may be sufficient for tumor development. , To overcome tumor side risk, either postmitotic VMDA neurons or FACS sorted progenitors are currently desired for transplantation in PD patients. Our data suggest that the approach of GPC4 downregulation in hiPSCs is relevant not only to enhance the differentiation of these cells toward VMDA lineage, but also to minimize the tumor side risk. As GPC4 is a cell surface protein, it may become an attractive “drugable” target to design strategies that may enable reaching the unique cell biological properties of GPC4sh hiPSCs without involving genetic manipulation.

5

## CONCLUSION
In conclusion, our study uncovers a new systematic approach that should enable the generation of hPSC lines most suitable for future translational applications. Our discoveries also present a novel entry point to define a new molecular mechanism underlying development of VMDA neurons of the SN subtype.

## CONFLICT OF INTEREST
The authors declared no potential conflicts of interest.

## AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS
S.C.: conception and design, methodology, collection and assembly of data, data analysis and interpretation, manuscript review and editing; R.B.: collection and assembly of data, manuscript proofreading; T.L., D.R.: collection and assembly of data, contribution to data analysis and interpretation, manuscript review and editing; C.M., P.S.: conception and design rat transplantation experiments, methodology rat transplantation experiments, visualization and interpretation rat transplantation experiment, manuscript visualization; E.A.T.: resources, methodology, manuscript visualization; M.K.: resources, methodology, manuscript review and editing, financial support; L.K.L.G.: conception and design rat transplantation experiments, manuscript review and editing, financial support; F.M.: contribution to design, manuscript review and editing, financial support; R.D.: conception and design, collection and assembly of data, data analysis and interpretation, financial support, manuscript original draft, review and editing.

## Supporting information

Figure S1 Generation of the CRTLsh and GPC4sh hiPSC lines. A, Schematic representation of GPC4 cDNA showing the position of the six different GPC4‐targeting shRNAs tested in these studies. B, Western blot analysis showing the efficiency of GPC4 downregulation by different GPC4‐targeting shRNAs tested in HEK cells. HEK cells were either transfected with a HA‐tagged hGPC4 (hGPC4 cDNA) alone or co‐transfected with the indicated GPC4sh targeting plasmids. Each shRNA is indicated with a number, whose position is reported in (A). Antibodies recognizing the HA‐tag (α‐HA) and GPC4 (α‐hGPC4) protein are shown. Note that GPC4sh2, GPC4sh4, and GPC4sh5 efficiently downregulated GPC4 levels. C, Graph reporting GPC4 expression levels in WT hiPSCs (029 hiPSCs) and HEK cells (293 cells) measured by qRT‐PCR. Data are presented as mean ± SEM (n = 3 independent experiments). D, Western blot analysis of total protein extracts of 029 hiPSCs (029), HEK cells (−) and HEK cells overexpressing HA‐tagged human GPC4 (GPC4 cDNA). Several GPC4 forms are detected: a cleaved form at ∼38 kDa, the GPC4 core protein at ∼60 kDa and the high molecular weight forms containing HS chain modifications (glycanated forms) at ∼170 kDa and higher). E, Western blot analysis of OCT4, NANOG and SOX2 protein levels in total protein extracts of WT and CTRLsh hiPSCs. Note similar protein levels in both lines. Actin protein was used as loading control in all Western blot analyses. F, Graph reporting qRT‐PCR expression analysis of GPC4 in WT hiPSCs and in WT hiPSCs 72 hours after infection with a lentiviral vector expressing CTRLsh, GPC4sh2, GPC4sh4, and GPC4sh5. GPC4 expression was normalized to levels in WT cells. Results show that these three selected shRNAs efficiently downregulate GPC4 in hiPSCs. Data are presented as mean ± SEM for CTRLsh, GPC4sh4, and GPC4sh5 (n = 2 experiments). G and H, Western blot analyses of total protein extracts of WT, GPC4sh5 plus GPC4sh10 (GPC4sh5‐c5 + c10), and CTRLsh 029 hiPSCs. Note reduced high (G) and low (H) molecular weight forms of GPC4 in GPC4sh cells.
Click here for additional data file.

Figure S2 Characterization of WT, CTRLsh and GPC4sh hiPSC lines at the undifferentiated stage. A, Graph reporting expression analysis of GPC4 in WT, CTRLsh, GPC4sh5‐c5, GPC4sh5‐c10, GPC4sh4‐c8 and GPC4sh4‐c11 hiPSCs by qRT‐PCR. Note downregulation of GPC4 in the GPC4sh lines hiPSCs respectively, compared with WT hiPSCs (GPC4sh5‐c5: 53 ± 6%; GPC4sh5‐c10: 40 ± 9%; GPC4sh4‐c8: 81 ± 3%; GPC4sh4‐c11:79 ± 3%). mRNA levels were normalized to the expression of GPC4 in the WT line. Data are presented as mean ± SEM (n = 7 independent experiments). One‐way ANOVA: ***P < .001. Dots in each column indicate the number of independent biological replicates. The same representation is used in all graphs reported in figures. B, Immunofluorescence analysis of GPC4 protein levels in WT, CTRLsh, GPC4sh5‐c5, GPC4sh5‐c10, GPC4sh4‐c8 and GPC4sh4‐c11 hiPSCs. Note downregulation of GPC4 in all GPC4sh lines. GPC4 is represented in green and DAPI in blue. C, Cell cycle analysis of all hiPSC lines used in this study. Number of cells in G0/G1, S and G2/M phases are shown as % of total cells. Data are presented as mean ± SEM (n = 3 experiments). One‐way ANOVA: ns = not significant. D, Graph reporting cell viability at the indicated days of culture. Number of cells is reported as total counts. Data are presented as mean ± SEM (n = 3 experiments). One‐way ANOVA: ns = not significant. E, Immunofluorescence analysis of cleaved‐Caspase 3 (red), phospho‐Histone H3 (pHH3) (green) and DAPI (blue) positive cells showing no differences in cell survival or proliferation among cell lines. Numbers at the bottom of each panel report the % of pHH3 positive cells/DAPI (in green) and the mean fluorescent intensity of cleaved Caspase3 vs CTRLsh hiPSCs (in red). Data are presented as mean ± SEM (n = 3). One‐way ANOVA: *P < .05. F, Graphs reporting qRT‐PCR analysis of OTX2, OCT4, NANOG, and SOX2 mRNA levels in WT, CTRLsh, GPC4sh5‐c5, and GPC4sh4‐c11 hiPSCs. Data presented as mean ± SEM (n = 7). One‐way ANOVA: ns = not significant. G and H, Immunofluorescence analysis (G) and western blots on total protein extracts (H). No significant differences in these stemness markers were found at RNA and protein levels in all hiPSC lines. I, Immunofluorescence analysis of EB‐mediated spontaneous differentiation of WT, CTRLsh, GPC4sh5‐c5, and GPC4sh4‐c11 hiPSCs at d21 of in vitro culture. Cells expressing OTX2, BRACHURY (BRA), and SOX17 correspond to cells undergoing ectoderm, mesoderm, and endoderm lineage entry, respectively. OCT4 staining was used to detect undifferentiated hiPSCs (single positive) or cell lineage‐biased but not fully committed (double positive with OCT4). J, Quantitative analysis of tissue weights after dissection of ectopic masses. WT hiPSCs developed teratomas of an average weight of 0.372 ± 0.10 g whereas CTRLsh hiPSCs form teratomas of an average weight of 0.533 ± 0.18 g. Note no significant differences in average weight were found between WT and CTRLsh hiPSCs. Data are presented as mean ± SEM from two independent experiments (WT: n = 14; CTRLsh: n = 9). One‐way ANOVA: ns = not significant. Panels reporting values for WT, CTRLsh GPC4sh5‐c10, and GPC4sh4‐c8 hiPSCs are the same shown in Figure and reported here for direct comparison with other clones.
Click here for additional data file.

Figure S3 Downregulation of GPC4 in hiPSCs promotes specification of VMDA progenitors in vitro. A and B, Violin plots generated from single‐cell RNA‐seq data of the developing human VM (La Manno et al, 2016). GPC1‐6 expression levels are shown across the indicated cell types (GPC4 in A; GPC1,2,3,5,6 in B). Right axis shows absolute molecule counts. Gray: enriched over baseline with posterior probability >99.8%. Cell types with enriched expression of GPC4 are four radial glia‐like (Rgl) cells (hRgl1, hRgl2a, hRgl2b, hRgl3) and one floor‐plate progenitor [lateral floor‐plate progenitors (hProgFPL)]. For the overall nomenclature, see La Manno et al (2016). C, VMDA neuron differentiation protocol used in vitro and adapted from Nolbrant et al (2017). BMP and TGFβ inhibitors were used to achieve neural induction, SHH to induce ventral patterning and WNT activator followed by FGF8 to induce midbrain patterning. BDNF, ascorbic acid (AA), GDNF, db‐cAMP, DAPT, and TGFβ3 were added for terminal maturation and neuron survival. The time frames of hiPSCs (pink), VMDA progenitor (light blue), VMDA immature (dark blue), and VMDA mature neurons (purple) are shown. The main VMDA markers analyzed by qRT‐PCR and immunofluorescence to confirm the VMDA identity of the cultures are shown at the bottom. Their time frame of expression is reported as lines. Dashed lines indicate continuous gene expression for the whole VMDA differentiation, whereas solid lines temporal‐restricted gene expression. D, Graph reporting GPC4 expression levels at the indicated times of VMDA differentiation in CTRLsh, GPC4sh5‐c10, and GPC4sh4‐c8 hiPSCs. mRNA expression levels were measured by qRT‐PCR and normalized with the expression of GPC4 in CTRLsh hiPSCs at d0. Data are presented as mean ± SEM (n = 3). One‐way ANOVA: ***P < .001. E, Graphs reporting qRT‐PCR analysis of stemness markers (OCT4, NANOG) from d0 to d9 of in vitro VMDA differentiation in CTRLsh, GPC4sh5‐c5, and GPC4sh4‐c11 cells. Gene expression was normalized with levels in CTRLsh hiPSCs at d0. Data are presented as mean ± SEM (n = 3). F and G, Graphs showing qRT‐PCR analysis of the expression of different markers at d12 and d15 of VMDA differentiation in CTRLsh, GPC4sh5‐c5, and GPC4sh4‐c11 cells. F, Genes expressed in VMDA progenitors (FOXA2, CORIN, LMX1A). G, mRNA levels of a pan‐NSC marker (SOX1) not expressed in VMDA progenitors and of genes expressed in other brain regions (HOXA2, NKX2.2). Gene expression was normalized to GAPDH expression. Data are presented as mean ± SEM (n = 3‐6 biological replicates, normalized as described in Materials and Methods). Mann‐Whitney: *P < .05, **P < .01.
Click here for additional data file.

Figure S4 Downregulation of GPC4 in hiPSCs promotes generation of VMDA progenitors in vitro. A, Immunofluorescence staining of NESTIN (red) and DAPI (blue) cells in CTRLsh, GPC4sh5‐c10, and GPC4sh4‐c8 cultures at d9 and d12 of VMDA differentiation. White squares indicate the position of the areas whose magnifications are shown on the right of each panel. B, Immunofluorescence visualization of LMX1A (red), FOXA2 (green), OTX2 (purple), and DAPI (blue) positive cells in CTRLsh, GPC4sh5‐c5, and GPC4sh4‐c11 cultures at d9, and d12 of VMDA differentiation. LMX1A+, FOXA2+, OTX2+ cells correspond to VMDA progenitors. Dashed areas with a star highlight LMX1A+, FOXA2+, and OTX2+ VMDA progenitors in each line. C, Immunofluorescence analysis of cleaved‐Caspase 3 (red), phospho‐Histone H3 (pHH3) (green), and DAPI (blue) positive cells showing no differences in cell death nor proliferation in CTRLsh, GPC4sh5‐c10 and GPC4sh4‐c8, GPC4sh5‐c5, and GPC4sh4‐c11 cells at the indicated time of VMDA differentiation. Numbers in panels report the mean fluorescent intensity of cleaved‐Caspase3 vs CTRLsh (in red) and the % of pHH3 positive cells/DAPI (in green). Data are presented as mean ± SEM (n = 3). One‐way ANOVA: *P < .05. A slight increase of cell death was observed in only few GPC4sh lines at some late time points, possibly linked to a premature requirement of neurotrophic factors.
Click here for additional data file.

Figure S5 Efficient generation of VMDA progenitors in vitro in a different hiPSC line, AICS‐0023, downregulated for GPC4. A, Graph reporting expression analysis of GPC4 in WT, CTRLsh, GPC4sh4, GPC4sh5 hiPSC pools by qRT‐PCR. Note downregulation of GPC4 in the GPC4sh compared with WT hiPSCs (GPC4sh4: 67 ± 0.02%; GPC4sh5: 68 ± 0.08%). mRNA levels were normalized to the expression of GPC4 in the WT line. Data are presented as mean ± SEM (n = 6 independent experiments). One‐way ANOVA: ***P < .001. Dots in each column indicate the number of independent biological replicates. B, Immunofluorescence analysis of OCT4 and SOX2 proteins in WT, CTRLsh, GPC4sh4, and GPC4sh5 hiPSC pools. No significant differences in these stemness markers were found in any hiPSC lines. C, Immunofluorescence visualization of LMX1A (red), FOXA2 (green), OTX2 (purple) and DAPI (blue) positive cells in CTRLsh, GPC4sh cultures at d9, and d15 of VMDA differentiation. LMX1A+, FOXA2+, OTX2+ cells correspond to VMDA progenitors. Dashed areas with a star highlight LMX1A+, FOXA2+, and OTX2+ VMDA progenitors in each line. D, Quantification of the percentage of LMX1A+, FOXA2+, OTX2+ VMDA progenitors over DAPI+ (VMDA progenitors at d9: CTRLsh: 12.53 ± 1.0%; GPC4sh: 23.8 ± 1.7%; at d15: CRTLsh: 38.1 ± 2.7%; GPC4sh: 65.9 ± 0.9%;). Data are presented as mean ± SEM (n = 2‐3 biological replicates). One‐way ANOVA: *P < .05, **P < .01.
Click here for additional data file.

Figure S6 Downregulation of GPC4 in hiPSCs differentially impacts the generation of FOXA2, LMX1A, and OTX2 single positive cells in vitro. Quantification of total number (in percentage) of single FOXA2+ cells, LMX1A+ cells, and OTX2+ cells over DAPI+ at d9, d12, and d15 of VMDA differentiation in CTRLsh, GPC4sh5‐c10, GPC4sh4‐c8 lines. Data are presented as mean ± SEM (n = 2‐3 biological replicates). One‐way ANOVA: ns = not significant, *P < .05, **P < .01, ***P < .001 (one‐way ANOVA).
Click here for additional data file.

Figure S7 Downregulation of GPC4 in hiPSCs yields to an increased proportion of differentiating DA neurons. A and B, Immunofluorescence analysis of TH (green), MAP2 (red), and DAPI (blue) positive cells in CTRLsh, GPC4sh5‐c5 and GPC4sh4‐c11 cultures at d22 in the differentiating 029 hiPSC line (A) and in CTRLsh, GPC4sh5‐c10 and GPC4sh4‐c8 cultures at d26 (B) of VMDA differentiation. Note the enhanced number of TH expressing neurons in the different GPC4sh cell lines vs CTRLsh. C, Quantification of total numbers (in percentage) of TH+ neurons over DAPI+ in CTRLsh, GPC4sh5‐c10, and GPC4sh4‐c8 cultures at d26 of VMDA differentiation, showing the ∼2‐fold higher proportion of TH expressing neurons in GPC4sh cell lines. Data are presented as mean ± SEM n = 4‐5 biological replicates). One‐way ANOVA: ***P < .001. D and E, Analysis of the different AICS—0023 hiPSC line. Immunofluorescence analysis of TH (green), ALDH1A1 (violet), MAP2 (red), ALDH1A1, and DAPI (blue) positive cells in hiPSC pools targeted with CTRLsh and GPC4sh at d20 of VMDA differentiation (D). Note the enhanced number of TH expressing neurons in the GPC4sh line vs CTRLsh. E, Quantification of total numbers (in %) of TH+ neurons over DAPI+ in CTRLsh, GPC4sh cultures at d20 of VMDA differentiation, showing the ∼1.7‐fold higher proportion of TH expressing neurons in GPC4sh cell lines (TH at d20: CTRLsh: 13.6 ± 4.0%; GPC4sh: 21.6 ± 4.0%). Data are presented as mean ± SD (n = 2). Mann‐Whitney test: ***P < .001.
Click here for additional data file.

Figure S8 Downregulation of GPC4 in hiPSCs promotes generation of VMDA progenitors after transplantation in rat brains. A, Overview of immunohistochemical analysis of Graft overview: immunohistochemistry of TH (violet) and DAPI (blue) in grafts of brain sections following transplantation with CTRLsh (left panels) and GPC4sh (right panels) cells at d5 of in vitro VMDA differentiation. Graft areas are highlighted with a white dashed line. B and C, Graphs reporting quantification of the total number (in percentage) of FOXA2+ cells (left) and of LMX1A+ cells (right) present in the CTRLsh and GPC4sh grafts. Numbers of positive cells are reported over DAPI+ (B) and over graft volume (C). Numbers of positive cells reported over DAPI+ are: for FOXA2+: CTRLsh: 14.5 ± 1.9%; GPC4sh: 27.7 ± 8%; for LMX1A+: CTRLsh: 2.4 ± 0.3%; GPC4sh 10.9 ± 1.8%. Numbers of positive cells reported over graft volume are: for FOXA2: CTRLsh: 31 559 ± 4002/mm3; GPC4sh: 67 039 ± 24 510/mm3; for LMX1A: CTRLsh: 5328 ± 1025/mmm3; GPC4sh: 25 493 ± 5716/mm3 in grafts. Data are presented as mean ± SEM (n = 3 for CTRLsh and n = 4 for GPC4sh grafts). Each dot represents an animal. Unpaired t test: ns = not significant *P < .05, **P < .01.
Click here for additional data file.

Table S1 GPC4‐targeting shRNA analyzed

Table S2. List of all primary antibodies used. Dilutions regard immunocytochemistry (ICC) unless differentially reported. IHC = immunohistochemistry, WB = Western blot

Table S3. List of all human primers used for qRT‐PCR.
Click here for additional data file.

Data S1 Supporting Information.
Click here for additional data file.

## ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We thank: all members of our labs for helpful discussions and comments; A. Fico for critical reading of the manuscript; F. Shi and M. Sorce for contribution during the initial analysis of GPC4sh hiPSCs, and during the initial analysis of cell transplanted rat brain, respectively; A. Gagna for helping us to develop a mathematical method to calculate differentiation efficiency of different experiments; S. Lev and L. Khera for producing lentivirus particles carrying shRNA and for advises on use of lentivirus. Microscopy was performed at the imaging platform of the IBDM, supported by the ANR through the “Investments for the Future” program (France‐BioImaging, ANR‐10‐INSB‐04‐01). The authors thank members of the IBDM core facility for microscopy and mouse husbandry for their technical support. This project is a part of the research program of the Centre of Excellence DHUNE, which is supported by the French National Plan on Neurodegenerative Diseases funded by the French Ministry of national education, higher education and research and the “Investissements d'Avenir” French Government program. The IBDM is affiliated with NeuroMarseille (AMX‐19‐IET‐004), the AMU neuroscience network, and with NeuroSchool, the AMU graduate school in neuroscience supported by the A*MIDEX foundation and the “Investissements d'Avenir” program (nEURo*AMU, ANR‐17‐EURE‐0029 grant). This work was funded by Association France Parkinson (Convention 096038), Fondation de France (2013_00043173), SATT Sud‐Est “Technology Transfer accelerator”, Programme de pré‐maturation du Centre National de la Recherche Scientifique to R.D.,Network of Centres of Excellence in Neurodegeneration (COEN Pathfinder III 4014) to R.D. and L.K.L.G., and was supported by Centre National de la Recherche Scientifique and Aix‐Marseille Université. F.M. received support from FRM (Fondation Recherche Médicale; DEQ20141231766). S.C. was supported by the BIOTRAIL PH.D. Program in Life Science, Marseille, France and by Association France Parkinson 4th year PH.D. fellowships. R.B. was supported by a grant from the Programme de pré‐maturation du Centre National de la Recherche Scientifique to R.D. T.L. and D.R. were supported by the French Ministry of Higher Education, Innovation and Research fellowship. M.K. and E.A.T. were supported by the National Institute of Arthritis and Musculoskeletal and Skin Diseases; R01 AR075413. The funders had no role in study design, data collection and analysis, decision to publish, or preparation of the manuscript.

## DATA AVAILABILITY STATEMENT
The single‐cell RNA‐seq dataset from human embryo VM cells used to analyze the expression of GPC1‐6 has been published as additional data of the article: La Manno, G., Gyllborg, D., Codeluppi, S., Nishimura, K., Salto, C., Zeisel, A., Borm, L. E., Stott, S. R. W., Toledo, E. M., Villaescusa, J. C., et al. (2016). Molecular Diversity of Midbrain Development in Mouse, Human, and Stem Cells. Cell 167, 566‐580 e519. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cell.2016.09.027. Link: http://linnarssonlab.org/ventralmidbrain/. The expression profile of GPC4 in undifferentiated hESCs and hiPSCs was obtained from the StemMapper database published with the article: Pinto, J. P., Machado, R. S. R., Magno, R., Oliveira, D. V., Machado, S., Andrade, R. P., Braganca, J., Duarte, I. and Futschik, M. E. (2018). StemMapper: a curated gene expression database for stem cell lineage analysis. Nucleic Acids Res 46, D788‐D793. https://doi.org/10.1093/nar/gkx921. Link: http://stemmapper.sysbiolab.eu.