319nihpaCell reportsCell RepPMC901809890180989018098NIHMS17896683529487410.1016/j.celrep.2022.110512Coordinated changes in glycosylation regulate the germinal center through CD22
EnterinaJhon R SarkarSusmita StreithLaura JungJaesoo ArlianBritni M MeyerSarah J TakematsuHiromu XiaoChangchun BaldwinTroy A NitschkeLars ShlomchickMark J PaulsonJames C MacauleyMatthew S 1Department of Medical Microbiology and Immunology, University of Alberta, Edmonton, AB T6G 2E1, Canada2Department of Chemistry, University of Alberta, Edmonton, AB T6G 2G2, Canada3Department of Molecular Medicine, The Scripps Research Institute, La Jolla, CA 92037, USA4Division of Genetics, Department of Biology, University of Erlangen, 91058 Erlangen, Germany5Faculty of Medical Technology, Fujita Health University, Aichi 470-1192, Japan6Department of Immunology and Microbiology, The Scripps Research Institute, La Jolla, CA 92037, USA7Department of Immunology, University of Pittsburgh School of Medicine, Pittsburgh, PA 15261, USA8Lead contactAUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS
J.R.E. and M.S.M. designed the experiments, analyzed and interpreted the data, and wrote the manuscript. J.R.E. performed all mouse and ex vivo experiments. S.S. assisted with all aspects of the mouse experiments. L.S. carried out experiments with iGC B cells. J.J. prepared mCD22-Fc. B.M.A. and J.C.P. helped develop the R26lsl-Cmah mice. S.J.M. and L.N. provided bone marrow cells from knockin mice containing ITIM-deficient CD22. C.X. and H.T. provided reagents and expert advice for establishing R26lsl-Cmah mice. T.A.B. provided Nur77GFP mice and advised on their use/data interpretation.M.J.S. provided the CD20-ERT2Cre mice and provided critical advice on the project. All authors have read and approved the manuscript.
*Correspondence: macauley@ualberta.ca
153202238111105121105121942022This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/).The publisher's version of this article is available at Cell Rep

## SUMMARY
Germinal centers (GCs) are essential for antibody affinity maturation. GC B cells have a unique repertoire of cell surface glycans compared with naive B cells, yet functional roles for changes in glycosylation in the GC have yet to be ascribed. Detection of GCs by the antibody GL7 reflects a downregulation in ligands for CD22, an inhibitory co-receptor of the B cell receptor. To test a functional role for downregulation of CD22 ligands in the GC, we generate a mouse model that maintains CD22 ligands on GC B cells. With this model, we demonstrate that glycan remodeling plays a critical role in the maintenance of B cells in the GC. Sustained expression of CD22 ligands induces higher levels of apoptosis in GC B cells, reduces memory B cell and plasma cell output, and delays affinity maturation of antibodies. These defects are CD22 dependent, demonstrating that downregulation of CD22 ligands on B cells plays a critical function in the GC.

## Graphical abstract

 

## In brief
Changes in glycosylation on GC B cells are hypothesized to affect CD22, an inhibitory BCR co-receptor. Enterina et al. show that altered glycosylation in the GC leads to a CD22-dependent defective GC. Therefore, coordinated changes in glycosylation in the GC play a critical functional role through modulating the function of CD22

statusreleaseddisplay-pdfyesis-in-collection-domainyesis-olfnois-manuscriptyesis-preprintnois-journal-matternois-scannednois-retractednohas-published-versionno

## INTRODUCTION
Efficient clearance of invading pathogens relies partly on the production of high-affinity antibodies. These antibodies are secreted by plasma cells that emerge from germinal centers (GCs) that transiently form in the secondary lymphoid organs following an infection or vaccination ( ; ). GCs are organized into two functionally distinct compartments: the dark zone (DZ) and light zone (LZ). Within these compartments, GC B cells undergo iterative clonal expansion, diversification of their B cell receptor (BCR) genes through activation-induced cytidine deaminase (AID)-mediated somatic hypermutation (SHM) ( ; ; ), and selection for memory B cell and plasma cell differentiation ( ; ; ). Positive selection relies on the ability of GC B cells to successfully internalize, process and present antigenic epitopes to cognate CD4+ follicular helper T cells (TFH) for positive signals in the form of cytokines and co-stimulatory receptor interactions ( ; ; ). These orchestrated events in the GC ensure a preferential maintenance of B cells with high-affinity BCRs, securing the generation of high-quality antibodies for long-lasting humoral immunity.
Earlier studies revealed that crosslinking of BCR on GC B cells is inefficient in phosphorylating downstream signaling components ( ; ). Dampening of BCR signaling in GC B cells is mediated by Src homology 2 (SH2) domain-containing protein-tyrosine phosphatase 1 (SHP1) ( ; ; ). SHP1 negatively regulates BCR activation by binding to phosphorylated immunoreceptor tyrosine-based inhibitory motifs (ITIMs) of BCR inhibitory co-receptors, such as CD22, CD72, PIR-B, Siglec-10/G, FcγRIIb, and FCRL5 ( ; ; ; ; ). Effective inhibition of BCR signaling following antigen engagement is essential for a proper GC response, but it is unclear how BCR signal strength is differentially regulated between naive and GC B cells.
In the GC, B cells display remodeling of glycans on cell surface glycoproteins. Several defining events relate to changes in the monosaccharide sialic acid, which caps cell surface N- and O-linked glycans. These distinct changes are widely used to identify mouse GC B cells. One example is the glycan epitope recognized by the antibody GL7, which emerges from the downregulation of the CMP sialic acid hydroxylase (CMAH) in GC B cells ( ). GL7 detects glycans terminating in α2–6-linked N-acetylneuraminic acid (Neu5Ac) ( ; ). Downregulation of CMAH prevents the hydroxylation of cytidine monophosphate (CMP) Neu5Ac (CMP-Neu5Ac) and its conversion to CMP-N-glycolylneuraminic acid (CMP-Neu5Gc), which is preferentially expressed on naive murine B cells. The switch from Neu5Gc to Neu5Ac on GC B cells has a profound effect on ligands of mouse CD22 (mCD22). Specifically, mCD22 binds to α2–6-linked Neu5Ac-containing glycans 20-fold weaker than α2–6-linked Neu5Gc-containing counterparts ( ).
Humans have lost the ability to biosynthesize Neu5Gc because of inactivation of CMAH ( ; ). Yet an alternative mechanism downregulates CD22 ligands on human GC B cells, involving a sulfated glycan ligand (Neu5Acα2–6Galβ1–4[6-sulfo]GlcNAc) that is present on naive B cells but not on GC B cells ( ; ). Thus, downregulation of CD22 ligands in the GC is an evolutionarily conserved mechanism catering to the related but distinct ligand specificities of mouse and human CD22.
Studies in naive B cells with disrupted CD22-ligand interactions have collectively demonstrated that loss of CD22-ligand interactions leads to blunted B cell responses ( ; ). Mechanistically, CD22-glycan interactions maintain CD22 within nanoclusters, along with CD45 and galectin-9, and away from the BCR ( ; ). Consequently, ablating CD22-ligand interactions increases CD22-BCR association and dampened BCR signaling.
On the basis of these roles for CD22-glycan interactions on naive B cells, we hypothesized that appearance of the GL7 glycan epitope and concurrent downregulation of CD22 ligands on GC B cells play a crucial role in the GC response by increasing the ability of CD22 to antagonize the BCR signaling. Here, we show that constitutive expression of CMAH impairs the GC response in a CD22-dependent manner. The absence of CD22 or inability to downregulate CD22 ligands leads to higher BCR activation, defective antibody affinity maturation, and increased apoptotic cell death in GC B cells. Collectively, our findings demonstrate that glycan remodeling, through downregulation of CMAH in the GC, is crucial for the maintenance and competitiveness of GC B cells, underscoring GC-specific downregulation of CD22 ligands as a mechanism contributing to rewiring of BCR signaling in the GC.

## RESULTS

## Constitutive expression of CMAH maintains high-affinity ligands for CD22 on GC B cells
To confirm if appearance of the GL7 epitope on GC B cells occurs through transcriptional downregulation of Cmah, we compared the mRNA expression levels of Cmah in mouse DZ and LZ GC B cells to follicular B cells using a publicly available dataset (GEO: GSE109125; ). Follicular B cell levels of Cmah transcript are indeed significantly downregulated in both DZ and LZ GC B cells ( ). To explore the functional role for this switch in sialic acid from Neu5Gc to Neu5Ac as naive B cells differentiate into GC B cells ( ), we developed a transgenic mouse model to modulate Neu5Gc in a cell type-specific manner. Cmah was knocked into the Rosa26 locus with an upstream loxP-STOP-loxP cassette to enable Cre-dependent expression of CMAH, which we describe as R26lsl-Cmah mice ( ). To characterize the effect of constitutive CMAH in B cells, we crossed R26lsl-Cmah mice with Mb1Cre mice ( ). Immunization of Mb1Cre×R26lsl-Cmah, denoted hereafter as CMAHON, mice with chicken ovalbumin (OVA) resulted in GC B cells (B220+CD19+IgD−CD38low Fas+PNA+ cells) that do not express the GL7 epitope ( and ) and maintain Neu5Gc expression at comparable levels to naive B cells (B220+CD19+IgD+ cells) ( and ). Levels of PNA and CD38 staining were indistinguishable between wild-type (WT) and CMAHON on GC B cells ( – ). Maintaining CMAH expression in GC B cells also prevented the downregulation of CD22 ligands, as demonstrated by staining with mCD22-Fc ( – ). In non-immunized mice, the absolute number of major B cell subsets in spleens were slightly lower in CMAHON compared with their WT counterparts ( ), but the relative percentage of each subset in total B cells (CD19+ live cells) was comparable between WT and CMAHON splenocytes, except for B1a cells, in which a slight reduction was observed in CMAHON mice ( ).
 

## CMAH expression restricts B cell responses in the GC
To test the impact of maintaining CMAH expression in GC B cells, lethally irradiated WT B6 mice were reconstituted with bone marrow (BM) cells from either R26lsl-Cmah (as WT control) or CMAHON mice to generate chimera mice. Reconstituted mice were immunized with liposomes displaying OVA antigen ( ). Flow cytometric analysis revealed that the total number of GC B cells in immunized CMAHON mice is comparable to their WT counterparts on day 7 post-immunization (PI) ( – ). However, on days 14 and 21 PI, we observed a significant reduction in the number of GC B cells from immunized CMAHON mice ( and ). Immunofluorescence analysis of spleens, collected 14 days PI, identified a decrease in the size of GC clusters (IgD−PNA+) in CMAHON mice compared with WT mice, validating the phenotype we observed using flow cytometry ( – ). Concurrently, we assessed the generation of OVA-specific GC B cells PI. We also found normal levels of OVA+ GC B cells between WT and CMAHON on day 7 PI, but at later time points, CMAHON mice had fewer OVA+ GC B cells than their WT counterparts ( – ). Within a mixed BM chimera, constitutive expression of CMAH in the B cells led to a competitive disadvantage over WT B cells in the GC on the basis of the higher percentage of WT B cells in the GC (both total and OVA+) compartment than in the naive B cell pool. This phenotype was already noticeable at 7 days PI ( – ).
Given that CMAHON mice constitutively express CMAH in B cells starting early in B cell development, we aimed to test if this is a GC-specific phenotype by crossing R26lsl-Cmah mice with AicdaCre mice to induce Cre expression 2–3 days PI ( ). Chimera mice were generated by transplanting AicdaCre (WT control) and AicdaCre×R26lsl-Cmah BM cells. After immunization, we assessed the percentage of AicdaCre in the GC B cell compartment in comparison with their counterparts in the naive B cell pool. We found that OVA+ WT GC B cells were outcompeting AicdaCre×R26lsl-Cmah GC B cells 2 weeks PI ( ). Similar findings were made by microscopy when examining immunized spleens from WT and AicdaCre×R26lsl-Cmah mice ( – ). Expression of CMAH was also temporally induced in the B cell lineage by crossing human CD20-ERT2Cre and R26lsl-Cmah mice and administering tamoxifen on days 8 and 9 PI ( ), and a competitive disadvantage of CD20-ERT2Cre over CD20-ERT2Cre×R26lsl-Cmah was also observed in the GC compartment ( and ). These findings demonstrate that downregulation of CMAH expression is essential for the maintenance of B cells in the GC.

## Impaired GC response in CMAH transgenic B cells is dependent on CD22
The function of mCD22 is regulated by its cis ligands, and the preferred glycan ligands of CD22 require CMAH ( ). Therefore, we tested whether sustained expression of CMAH in GC B cells negatively affects the GC response through CD22 by crossing CD22KO mice and CMAHON mice. Mixed BM chimeras were set up using cells from CD22KO and CD22KO×CMAHON donor mice. Following immunization, the previously observed competitive disadvantage in CMAHON GC B cells was no longer observed ( ). We also tested this in an adoptive transfer model, using hen egg lysozyme (HEL)-specific B cells on a CD22KO and CD22KO×CMAHON background and tracked the formation of HEL+ GC B cells in competition ( ). After immunization with HEL-displaying liposomes, the ratio of adoptively transferred cells was comparable with their unimmunized counterparts ( ). In contrast, immunization of mice adoptively transferred with HEL-specific B cells on a WT and CMAHON background displayed a clear competitive disadvantage for CMAHON GC B cells ( ). Together, these in vivo experiments support the hypothesis that the critical role of programmed CMAH downregulation in the maintenance of GC B cell response is dependent on CD22.
 

## CD22 is critical for B cell competitiveness in the GC
To directly test if CD22 is critical for GC B cell responses, we generated mixed chimera mice transplanted with WT and Cd22KO BM cells and then immunized them with OVA-displaying liposomes. OVA+ WT GC B cells significantly outcompeted OVA+ CD22KO GC B cells even starting on day 7 PI ( – ). Within mixed bone marrow chimeras between WT and CD22KO or WT and CMAHON, trends for WT having a competitive advantage were similar in the spleen, inguinal lymph node (LN), and axillary LN ( – ). To assess whether this defective GC B cell response observed with CD22KO B cells is B cell specific, we generated floxed CD22 (Cd22f/f) mice and crossed them first with Mb1Cre mice. Following immunization of mixed chimera mice transplanted with WT and Mb1Cre×Cd22f/f BM cells, antigen-specific WT B cells outcompeted the Mb1Cre×Cd22f/f B cells in the GC, validating that the GC defect observed in CD22KO mice is B cell intrinsic ( ). We next crossed Cd22f/f mice with AicdaCre mice. Tracking antigen-specific GC B cell formation in immunized mixed chimera mice reconstituted with AicdaCre (WT control) and AicdaCre×Cd22f/f BM cells, we observed a competitive disadvantage for AicdaCre×Cd22f/f GC B cells on days 14 and 21 PI ( ). To assess whether the impaired GC response in CD22KO B cells is dependent on its ITIMs, we tracked the antigen-specific GC B cell response of WT and CD22Y−2,5,6-F B cells, which have knockin mutations in three of its key cytoplasmic ITIMs ( ). Following immunization, we identified that loss of functional ITIMs on CD22 resulted in poor GC B cell response, recapitulating a similar phenotype seen in CD22KO GC B cells ( ). These results strongly suggest that regulation of signaling by CD22 is required for the maintenance of GC B cells.

## Loss of CD22 impairs interzonal distribution of GC B cells
Repeated migration of GC B cells between the DZ and LZ ensures the maintenance and selection of clones with high-affinity BCRs. To test whether CMAH expression or loss of CD22 affects DZ/LZ distribution in the GC, we probed DZ and LZ GC B cells using flow cytometry ( ). After immunization, we found a normal distribution of CMAHON GC B cells in the DZ and LZ compartments ( ). However, CD22KO GC B cells displayed fewer LZ GC B cells than WT GC B cells ( ). Consistent with the result by flow cytometry, immunofluorescence staining of spleens showed that the percentage of GC B cells in the LZ (IgD−PNA+CD21/35+), compared with the total GC, was significantly lower in CD22KO mice compared with WT and CMAHON mice ( and ).

## Ablation of CD22 and constitutive expression of CMAH impairs antibody affinity maturation
To evaluate whether the defective GC B cell response observed in CD22KO and CMAH transgenic models results in defective humoral immunity, we immunized WT, CD22KO, and CMAHON mice with liposomes that display OVA conjugated with NP-hapten ( ). Antibody affinity maturation was determined by monitoring high-affinity αNP IgG1 and total αNP IgG1 antibody, using NP2-BSA and NP23-BSA, respectively, by ELISA at different time points PI. The NP2/NP23 ratio of the half maximal inhibitory concentration (IC50) values in the ELISAs were used to estimate antibody affinity maturation, with a higher NP2/NP23 ratio being indicative of better antibody affinity maturation. We found that deficiency in CD22 impaired the maturation of αNP antibodies and were not able to recover even at a later time point (day 42) PI. CMAHON mice also displayed a significant, yet modest, reduction in antibody affinity maturation at earlier time points PI, but this difference compared with WT mice was no longer apparent by day 42 ( ). To investigate whether this defective production of high-affinity antibodies in CD22KO mice is due to diminished SHM, NP-specific GC B cells (B220+CD19+IgD−GL7+NP20+ cells) were isolated using fluorescence-activated cell sorting (FACS) from WT and CD22KO mice, at 21 days PI with NP-OVA-displaying liposomes. The VH186.2 region was sequenced and found to have a similar mutation rate between WT and CD22KO ( – ). Additionally, we also observed a comparable number of clones between WT (n = 15 of 33) and CD22KO (n = 17 of 32) with the affinity-enhancing mutations W33L and K59R ( ) ( ).
 To assess whether CD22 and its cis ligands control the maintenance of GC B cell clones with high-affinity BCRs, we quantified the number of high-affinity NP+ and total NP+ GC B cells in WT, CD22KO, and CMAHON mice, immunized with NP-OVA-displaying liposomes, using flow cytometry at day 14 PI. We found that the absolute numbers of both high-affinity NP+ and total NP+ GC B cells, identified with NP4-APC and NP20-APC, respectively ( ), were significantly lower in CD22KO and CMAHON mice compared with WT ( and ). Likewise, the ratio of high-affinity over total NP+ GC B cells was also substantially reduced in CD22KO and CMAHON mice ( ). These findings demonstrate that CD22 and loss of its cis ligands on GC B cells are pivotal for the maintenance of B cell clones with high-affinity BCRs.

## Attenuated memory B cell and plasma cell output in CD22KO and CMAHON mice
Given that both CMAHON and CD22KO mice show reduced numbers of antigen-specific GC B cells following immunization, we investigated whether this finding correlates with decreased memory B cell and plasma cell output as well. To test this, we quantified the number of NP+ memory B cells (B220+CD19+IgD−CD38highPNA−NP20+ cells) and plasma cells (CD138highCD19−NP20+ cells) using flow cytometry ( ). We found that spleens of CMAHON and CD22KO mice, after day 14 PI with NP-OVA-displaying liposomes, displayed remarkably lower numbers of both memory B cells and plasma cells than their WT counterparts ( – ). These data indicate that decreased antibody responses observed in CMAHON and CD22KO mice are likely due to reduced plasma cells emerging from the GC.

## Transcriptome analysis reveals a crucial role of CD22 in maintaining B cell fitness in the GC
To determine the putative mechanisms responsible for the defective GC response in CD22KO B cells, we analyzed the impact of CD22 deficiency on the transcriptome profile of GC B cells. To achieve this, we collected spleens from WT and CD22KO mice at day 14 PI where the defective GC phenotype was observed. The DZ (B220+CD19+IgD−GL7+CXCR4high-CD86low) and LZ (B220+CD19+IgD−GL7+CXCR4lowCD86high) GC B cells from splenocytes were sorted using FACS, and RNA was isolated and processed for next-generation sequencing ( – ). We found numerous differentially expressed genes (DEGs) that are either upregulated or downregulated in CD22KO GC B cells ( – ). Interestingly, we observed more DEGs in the LZ than in the DZ GC compartment. These include genes encoding for GIMAP GTPase family, mitochondrial enzymes, cell cycle regulatory proteins, GC-relevant transcription factors, and B cell activation signaling proteins ( and ). To interrogate the distinct biological processes and pathways disrupted in the GC because of the loss of CD22, a gene enrichment analysis was performed using EnrichR with DEGs with p values < 0.05. We found that both DZ and LZ CD22KO GC B cells displayed defective oxidative phosphorylation, cell cycle progression, and cholesterol biosynthesis. On the other hand, upregulated genes in CD22KO GC B cells converged on pathways for B cell activation, Toll-like receptor signaling, and apoptosis ( and ). Interestingly, an enrichment for Myc target genes was also evident within both DZ and LZ populations of the WT versus CD22KO GC B cells ( and ). Thus, transcriptome analysis uncovers that expression of CD22 controls B cell activation and other processes relevant for B cell competitiveness in the GC.
 

## CD22KO and CMAHON GC B cells display hyperactivated BCR signaling
Previous studies demonstrated that GC B cells display a highly inhibited phenotype compared with non-GC B cell populations ( ; ). To interrogate whether this phenotype is partly controlled by CD22, we used an in vivo reporter for BCR activation, Nur77-GFP ( ), to probe the degree of activation between WT and CD22KO GC B cells. We immunized Nur77GFP (WT control) and CD22KO3Nur77GFP mice with OVA-displaying liposomes ( ). After immunization, we found that CD22KO mice produced more GFP+ DZ ( – ) and LZ ( – ) GC B cells than WT. GFP expression in CD22KO GC B cells is also evidently higher than WT, suggesting increased activity of the Nur77 promoter in GC B cells. Consistent with this observation, transcript analysis confirmed increased expression of Nr4a1, which encodes for Nur77 ( ). As the Nur77GFP reporter mouse could not be used with CMAHON, because of bicistronic expression of GFP in the CMAHON mice, we examined the protein levels of Nur77 by intracellular flow cytometry on GC B cells from within mixed bone marrow chimeras ( ). Both CMAHON and CD22KO GC B cells had significantly higher levels of Nur77 compared with their WT counterparts ( and ).
 We next examined changes in intracellular Ca2+ mobilization in CMAHON or CD22KO GC B cells in competition with WT GC B cells, following BCR crosslinking ( ). Following stimulation with goat F(ab′)2 αmouse Igκ, we found that CMAHON GC B cells (B220+CD38lowPNA+) displayed approximately 2-fold higher Ca2+ mobilization compared with their WT counterparts ( and ). In the same tube, non-GC B cells (B220+CD38+PNA−) showed no difference between the two genotypes ( ). Similarly, CD22KO GC B cells exhibited increased Ca2+ flux compared with WT GC B cells, which appeared to be even more noticeably enhanced than in the naive compartment ( – ). We also isolated B cells and examined phosphorylation of BCR signaling components Syk and Akt (both S474 and T308) at different time points after aBCR stimulation ( ). CMAHON GC B cells displayed modest hyperactivation of pAkt at S473 ( – ), while CD22KO GC B cells showed hyperactivation of all three targets ( – ). These findings indicate that CD22 and natural downregulation of its ligands on GC B cells control the activation of BCR-mediated signaling following antigen engagement.

## GC B cells from CD22KO and CMAHON mice display reduced MHC-II expression and defective antigen processing
To investigate whether CD22 plays a role in the ability of GC B cells to interact with TFH cells, we first assessed whether surface expression of MHC-II is regulated by CD22 or its cis ligands. Expression of MHC-II in CMAHON and CD22KO GC B cells on day 7 PI was comparable with their WT counterparts, but on day 14 PI, both CMAHON and CD22KO expressed less surface MHC-II ( and ). Interestingly, the transcript levels of the gene encoding for MHC-II (H2-Ab1) were comparable between WT and CD22KO GC B cells, isolated from mice after day 14 PI ( and ). As MHC-II protein levels are regulated post-translationally ( ; ), it is noteworthy that levels of Marchf1 and Cd83 were not altered in CD22KO GC B cells in a direction that would result in decreased MHC-II levels. We next checked if this phenotype is due to defective antigen internalization or processing by interrogating antigen internalization, through assessing the levels of surface BCR following BCR crosslinking with soluble antigen. Both CMAHON and CD22KO GC B cells displayed similar rates of BCR internalization compared with WT GC B cells, indicating that CD22 and alterations to its cis ligands are dispensable for proper internalization of antigen-BCR complex ( – ). Additionally, we explored whether processing of endocytosed antigen is defective in CMAHON or CD22KO GC B cells. In order to do this, an ex vivo antigen degradation assay was used, which relies on a double-stranded DNA (dsDNA)-based sensor that is fluorescently quenched in its undegraded state ( ). Upon antigen degradation in the lysosome, the dsDNA sensor is degraded, leading to an increase in Atto647 fluorescence. Using this method, we found that both CMAHON and CD22KO GC B cells showed significantly lower antigen degradation than their WT counterpart after BCR stimulation ( – ). Furthermore, reduced antigen degradation in CMAHON GC B cells is dependent on the expression of CD22 on these cells ( ). Control experiments conducted with a sensor lacking the quencher and carried out on ice enabled an assessment of cell binding ( ). Collectively, these findings suggest that loss of CD22 expression or the inability to downregulate CD22 ligands in GC B cells leads to decrease cell surface levels of MHC-II, which may be due partly to impaired antigen processing.
 

## Antigen delivery via αDEC205-OVA rescues defective GC responses in CD22KO B cells
The defective antigen processing and MHC-II expression on CD22KO or CMAHON GC B cells suggests that B-T cell interactions may be compromised. To override defective antigen presentation, we used a previously established approach to deliver antigen to GC B cells through a non-BCR-dependent pathway ( ). Antigen delivered through the DEC205 receptor is known to increase pMHC-II presentation and CD4+ TFH interactions. To do so, mixed chimera mice reconstituted with DEC205KO and CD22KO BM cells were injected with αDEC205-OVA or PBS 11 days after immunization with OVA-displaying liposomes ( ). Three days later (day 14), we found that administration of αDEC205-OVA, but not PBS, restored the levels of antigen-specific CD22KO GC B cells to a comparable ratio of CD22KO B cells in the naive population ( ). A similar rescue was observed in a mixed chimera of DEC205KO and WT cells using the same experimental setup ( ), although it is difficult to directly assess these last two experiments for the purpose of determining if there is a full rescue in the CD22KO GC B cells upon αDEC205-OVA administration.
Pathway analysis of LZ WT and LZ CD22KO GC B cell transcriptome profile revealed enrichment of gene signatures for Myc targets and mTORC1 signaling in WT ( , , and ). Given that these pathways are readouts for productive B-T cell interactions in the GC ( ; ; ), we tested whether the rescue of CD22KO GC B cells after αDEC205-OVA treatment is due to upregulation of Myc and mTORC1 pathways. To address this, we examined the levels of Myc and phosphorylated ribosomal S6 (p-S6) proteins following administration of αDEC205-OVA. Here, we injected αDEC205-OVA intravenously in WT and CD22KO mice on day 13 PI with OVA-displaying liposomes. Myc and pS6 expression in GC B cells were evaluated approximately 15 h after delivery of αDEC205-OVA. Although we could not observe a statistically significant increase in Myc levels on total GC B cells ( – ), gating on LZ GC B cells revealed an increase in the percentage of Mychigh cells in the WT but not the CD22KO population ( – ). For p-S6, both WT and CD22KO GC B cells showed an increase in response to delivery of αDEC205-OVA ( – ). These results demonstrate that delivering excess antigen to CD22KO GC B cells can rescue defects in either antigen processing or B-T cell interactions in CD22KO GC B cells.

## CD22 is critical for the proliferation and survival of B cells in the GC
To test whether CD22 is important in GC B cell proliferation, we injected immunized mixed chimeras transplanted with an equal ratio of WT and Cd22KO BM cells with BrdU, which labels proliferating cells. Using flow cytometry, we identified a substantially lower number of BrdU+ CD22KO GC B cells than their WT counterparts ( and ). However, we did not observe this difference in CMAHON GC B cells ( and ). We further investigated this difference in proliferation between WT and CD22KO by examining whether it correlates with impaired cell cycle progression, by determining the cell cycle phases using BrdU and 7-AAD ( ). We found a larger number of CD22KO GC B cells in the G0-G1 phase (BrdU−7-AADlow) and a smaller number in the S phase (BrdU+) and G2-M (BrdU−7-AADhigh) phases compared with WT GC B cells ( ). These data are consistent with a defective cell cycle transition in CD22KO B cells observed from the transcriptome analysis above. We also observed a modestly higher number of CMAHON GC B cells in both the S and G2-M phases than their WT counterparts ( ). These findings indicate that CD22 is required for effective expansion of B cells in the GC.
 To investigate whether CD22 or loss of its ligands is necessary for survival of B cells in the GC, we stained splenocytes from immunized WT, CMAHON, and CD22KO mice, at day 14 PI, with αAct-Casp3 antibody, which is an established marker for cells undergoing apoptotic cell death ( ). We found a larger number of CD22KO B cells undergoing apoptosis in both the DZ and LZ compartments than WT ( ). On the other hand, in CMAHON B cells, only the B cells in the LZ compartment displayed heightened apoptosis compared with WT.
We were interested in understanding whether this increased apoptosis in CD22 is related to hyperactivation of the BCR following stimulation. To examine this, we co-cultured WT, CMAHON, or CD22KO naive B cells with an engineered mouse fibroblast expressing CD40L and BAFF (i.e., CD40LB feeder line) ( ) in the presence of mIL4 to induce the differentiation of naive (B220+CD19+IgD+) B cells into GC-like (B220+CD19+IgD−PNA+Fas+) cells, denoted as iGC. We continued culturing these iGC cells either with mIL4 or mIL4 and αmouse Igk ( ). Following culture, we found that iGC cells that lack CD22 produced more apoptotic cells in the presence of BCR stimulant ( and ). In contrast, WT iGC showed no difference in the levels of apoptotic cells in either culture conditions. On the other hand, CMAHON iGC B cells displayed a slight but significant reduction in the apoptotic cells than their WT counterparts ( and ). This in vitro experiment supports the idea that effective dampening of B cell activation by CD22 is crucial for the survival of B cells in the GC.
We next tested whether this enhanced apoptosis in CD22KO iGC in vitro leads to reduction in induced plasmablast (iPB; CD138highCD19+ cells) formation. To do this, a 1:1 ratio of WT and CD22KO or CMAHON naive B cells were co-cultured onto the CD40LB feeder line. Following establishment of iGC cells in culture, we continued co-culturing cells onto CD40LB cells in the presence of either mIL21 or mIL21 and αmouse Igκ. Supplementation of mIL21 induces the differentiation of iGC into plasmablasts in vitro ( – ) ( ). After day 8 of co-culture, we found that addition of BCR stimulant in culture resulted in more WT iGC cells differentiating into iPB cells compared with the ratio of differentiated WT iPBs in culture supplemented with mIL21 alone ( and ). These findings suggests that enhanced BCR signaling, mediated by loss of CD22 or constitutive expression of CMAH, is detrimental to the differentiation of GC B cells into plasmablasts in vitro.
Overall, our results build on the knowledge of CD22-glycan interactions in controlling B cell responses. On naive B cells, CD22 is maintained away from the BCR in nanoclusters with itself and other partners. On GC B cells, glycan remodeling is expected to increase association of CD22 with the BCR, thereby increasing its ability to antagonize BCR signaling compared with naive B cells. Given that CD22 has been implicated in Myc and mTORC signaling pathways on GC B cells, we hypothesize that unmasking of CD22 in the GC through CMAH downregulation enhances trans interaction with other key cell players in the GC response, such as TFH cells ( ). Preventing glycan remodeling on GC B cells in the CMAHON model or loss of CD22 increases BCR signaling, leading to impaired GC B cell responses.

## DISCUSSION
Glycans are complex carbohydrate structures covalently bound to protein and lipid carriers. The abundance and composition of glycans have been correlated to phenotype and differentiation of immune cells ( ; ; ). Glycan remodeling has become an increasingly important biological mechanism that cells use to rapidly alter signaling ( ; ; ). In this study, we probed the physiological role of glycan remodeling on GC B cells, which results in the generation of the GL7 epitope, α2–6-linked Neu5Ac, and downregulation of the preferred glycan ligands of CD22 on GC B cells, which is α2–6-linked Neu5Gc ( ). This was carried out by studying CMAHON mice, which enabled CMAH expression to be maintained using a Cre recombinase in the B cell lineage. Our in vivo experiments identified that this specific change in glycosylation is crucial for the maintenance of antigen-specific GC B cells, generation of plasma cells and memory B cells, and affinity maturation of antibodies. The defective GC in mice with B cells constitutively expressing α2–6-linked Neu5Gc is dependent on CD22, highlighting that coordinated downregulation of CD22 ligands acts to fine-tune the BCR signal in the GC by modulating the CD22. Moreover, deletion of CD22 on B cells also showed defective GC and antibody responses despite normal SHM and ability to generate affinity-enhancing mutations in the immunoglobulin gene. We hypothesize that downregulation of CD22-glycan ligands on glycoproteins, such as CD45 and CD22 ( ; ; ), disrupts the formation and maintenance of CD22 nanoclusters on GC B cells, leading to a more rapid dissemination of CD22 molecules and attenuation of BCR signaling.
It was not entirely surprising that the GC defects we observed in CD22KO B cells are not fully recapitulated in CMAHON B cells. Indeed, CMAHON GC B cells displayed normal proliferation and modest, yet significant, defects in antibody affinity maturation, Ca2+ mobilization, and apoptosis compared with CD22KO GC B cells. Given that the presence of high-affinity ligands for CD22 does not completely inhibit CD22 mobilization, as previously described ( ), we believe that constitutive expression of high-affinity ligands on CMAHON GC B cells only partially prevents CD22 interaction with the BCR, resulting in less profound defects than the CD22KO GC B cells. Nevertheless, our findings support the model in which dampened BCR signaling favors selection and maintenance of GC B cell clones with high-affinity BCRs.
A previous study also described a role for CD22 in the GC reaction ( ). The authors found comparable levels of GC differentiation and normal antibody responses between WT and CD22KO B cells, along with reduced antigen-specific memory B cells and plasma cells from the CD22KO B cells. Differences in study design likely account for this difference. In our studies, we found that in the absence of competition with WT GC B cells, a GC defect in CD22KO mice was observed only beginning at day 14 PI, while Chappell et al. investigated GC B cell responses only up until day 7 PI. Moreover, Chappell et al. used adoptively transferred high-affinity B cell clones, while we primarily examined the formation of GCs from endogenous antigen-specific B cells.
A recent study by Luo et al. ( ) explored the molecular mechanism downstream of the BCR complex that may be altered, leading to attenuated BCR signaling in GC B cells. The authors identified that GC B cells have an altered AKT-mediated signaling network, which was pinpointed to differential AKT T308 and S473 phosphorylation. Our study demonstrated another intrinsic remodeling that occurs in GC B cells that may be linked to reduced BCR signal activation. By tracking Nur77 promoter activity through GFP reporter expression and ex vivo intracellular Ca2+ mobilization following BCR crosslinking, we found that CD22 and loss of its cis ligands, in part, maintains a hypoactivated phenotype in GC B cells. Furthermore, we demonstrated that enhanced BCR signaling in GC B cells lacking CD22 or constitutively expressing the preferred CD22 ligands is linked to increased GC B cell apoptosis and reduced plasma cell output. Several factors may be in play to promote activation-induced cell death (AICD) in GC B cells. A study by Akkaya et al. ( ) demonstrated that BCR activation increased oxidative phosphorylation and glycolytic activities in B cells. However, prolonged BCR signaling, resulting in intracellular reactive oxygen species (ROS) and Ca2+ accumulation, impaired mitochondrial function, leading to AICD. Strikingly, the presence of a second signal coming from cognate T cells was able to rescue both the mitochondrial dysfunction and AICD. Findings from our transcriptome analysis revealed that besides controlling the BCR activation, CD22 is also essential for proper metabolic function and expression of many mitochondrial enzymes. Thus, we speculate that enhanced BCR signal in CD22KO and CMAHON GC B cells may have induced a defective mitochondrial function; and for GC B cells with low- to moderate-affinity BCRs, which are believed to have a competitive disadvantage for GC TFH help, this dysfunction may have resulted in their eventual demise.
Strength of GC B cell interaction with their cognate TFH cells dictates the differentiation of GC B cells into plasma cells ( ; ). Previously, it was suggested that downregulation of ligands for CD22 on B cells increased B-T conjugation through enhancement of trans interaction of CD22 with its ligands on T cells ( ). The downregulation Myc and mTORC signatures in our transcriptional analysis are suggestive of impaired B-T cell interactions in CD22KO and CMAHON GC B cells. However, in addition to CD22 on GC B cells being better able to interact with trans ligands, we also uncovered two other factors that could influence B-T cell interactions: (1) reduced expression of MHC-II in CD22KO and CMAHON GC B cells and (2) defective antigen processing. Forcing GC B-TFH interaction in vivo, by administration of αDEC-antigen following the establishment of the GC, rescued the disadvantage of not having CD22. This suggests that by-passing defects in any (or all three) of these potential roles for CD22 rescues CD22KO GC B cells. This warrants further investigations, such as examining more directly the impact in the GC TFH and interrogating whether CD22 is involved in CD40L surface mobilization or proper secretion of GC-relevant cytokines. Regardless, it appears likely that a role for CD22 and changes in glycosylation go beyond a role in regulating BCR signaling, which may be why CD22KO GC B cells have a more dramatic phenotype than CMAHON GC B cells.
Maintenance of positively selected GC B cells depends mainly on its ability to cycle between the LZ and DZ and sustaining a robust and fast proliferation while in the DZ. Following GC TFH interaction, GC B cells activate the mechanistic target of rapamycin complex 1 (mTORC1) and Myc transcription factor to support cell growth and cell cycle progression of B cells in the GC ( ; ; ). Our transcriptome analysis uncovered that CD22 is required by GC B cells to properly regulate the cell cycle machinery, which includes E2F regulated genes, Aurora and PLK1 kinase signaling, and cell cycle checkpoint genes. Using in vivo BrdU labeling, we found that CD22KO GC B cells proliferate less and display impaired cell cycle progression, validating the transcriptome finding. Although loss of CD22 has been correlated with hyperproliferation in naive B cells through the activation of the PI3K-AKT pathway, it is possible that constrained BCR signaling, partly controlled by CD22, is responsible for maintaining a rewired AKT activity in the GC. Interestingly, AKT kinase is rewired in the GC B cells to specifically target proteins relevant to cell cycle progression, such as E2F targets, G2/M checkpoints, and Myc targets ( ). Thus, we can speculate that enhanced BCR signaling through CD22 deletion may lead to altered AKT activity in the GC and loss of substrate selectivity. Another explanation for the reduced proliferation of CD22KO GC B cells can be derived from our transcriptome data. DZ CD22KO GC B cells displayed an impaired cholesterol biosynthesis pathway. Cholesterol is a critical component of the cell membrane and the ability of GC B cells to synthesize cholesterol de novo may have structural and signaling benefits, especially in the DZ compartment where B cells induce cellular growth and division ( ; ; ).
In summary, our findings describe a functional role for the emergence of the glycan epitope for the GL7 antibody. We define that appearance of the GL7 epitope is not merely a defining marker of GC B cells but represents a change in CD22 ligands that plays an important role in fine-tuning BCR signaling within the GC B cells. It is noteworthy that another paper was published during the review of this paper, which supports some of the conclusions in our studies on the role of CD22 in the GC ( ). We conclude that loss of CD22 ligands is crucial for the maintenance and selection of GC B cells, as well as affinity maturation antibodies by fine-tuning inhibitory function of CD22 on GC B cells.

## Limitations of the study
As Siglecs participate in both cis and trans interactions, altering CD22-ligand interactions in the GC has the potential to affect both types of interactions. The models used herein make it a challenge to fully disentangle the contributions of abrogated cis and trans interactions.

## STAR★METHODS

## RESOURCE AVAILABILITY

## Lead contact
Further information and requests for resources and reagents should be directed to and will be fulfilled upon reasonable request by the lead contact, Matthew Macauley (macauley@ualberta.ca).

## Materials availability
All unique reagents generated in this study are available from the lead contact without restriction.

## Data and code availability
Next generation sequencing data are deposited in the Gene Expression Omnibus (GEO) database under the accession number GSE196206.
This paper does not report original code.
Any additional information required to reanalyze the data reported in this paper is available from the lead contact upon request.

## EXPERIMENTAL MODEL AND SUBJECT DETAILS

## Mouse strains and frozen bone marrow cells
All mice used in this study were on a C57BL/6J genetic background. C57BL/6J (stock no.:000664), B6-CD45.1 (stock no.:002014), Mb1Cre (stock no.:020505), and AicdaCre (stock no.:007770) mice were acquired from Jackson Laboratory. Hy10 mice were a gift from Dr. Jason Cyster (UC San Francisco, USA). Frozen bone marrow cells from Cd205KO mice were provided to us by Dr. Gabriel Victora (Rockefeller University, USA). Bone marrow cells were tested for mouse pathogens (Charles River) prior to use.
Rosa26lsl-Cmah mice were generated following a previously described protocol ( ; ; ). To confirm the genotype of Rosa26lsl-Cmah mice, PCR was performed using extracted DNA from ear notch samples. The WT Rosa26 locus was identified using 5′-GGAGCGGGAGAAATGGATATG-3′ as forward primer and 5′-AAAGTCGCTCTG AGTTGTTAT-3′ as reverse primer (band size: 600 bp). On the other hand, the Rosa26lsl-Cmah gene was determined using 50-ATTCT AGTTGTGGTTTGTCC-3′ and 5′-ATGGTGCTCACGTCTAACTTCC-3′ primers (band size: 370 bp).
Floxed Cd22 mice (C57BL/6N-Cd22tm1a(EUCOMM)Wtsi/Tcp) were rederived from sperm acquired through The Centre for Phenogenomics (Toronto, Canada). Initially, mice hemizygous for the tm1a allele were established and crossed with Flp elete mice (B6.129S4-Gt(ROSA)26Sortm2(FLP*)Sor/J) from The Jackson Laboratory. Successful conversion of the tm1a allele into the tm1c allele of mouse Cd22, which we denote as Cd22f/f, was verified by PCR for the presence of a proximal loxP site (primers: 5′-AAACAG CATGGGCTCTGCTTCACAG-3′ and 5′-TGGAGAGGCAAGCAAAGATGGAGAGG-3′; band size: 102 bp) and distal loxP site (primers: 5′-GCGCAACGCAATTAATGATAAC-3′ and 5′-TACAGTCATTTGAAAGAGGCCAGC-3′; band size: 211 bp). The WT Cd22 locus was identified using 5′-GCGGGAAGGGACTGGCTGCTAT-3′ and 5′-AGTCCAGAGACCATCGGCAAG-3′ primers (band size: 270 bp), which also recognized the tm1c allele. Mice were subsequently backcrossed onto C57BL/6J mice to remove the flp recombinase and crossed with the relevant strains expressing Cre to generate mice homozygous for Cd22f/f and bearing either Mb1Cre or AicdaCre.
All mice used in this study were bred and maintained under specific pathogen-free conditions. Experiments described in the study were approved by the Health Sciences Animal Care and Use Committee of the University of Alberta.

## METHOD DETAILS

## Bone marrow chimera and adoptive transfer
To generate mouse chimeras, WT recipients were irradiated with 1000 rad and injected intravenously with isolated bone marrow cells from various donor mice within 24 h. Single chimeras were carried out to control the age and sex of the mice for large cohort. Mixed bone marrow chimera mice were generated by reconstituting lethally irradiated WT mice with 1:1 ratio, unless otherwise specified, of bone marrow cells from indicated donor mice. For mixed chimeras with WT and CD22KO BM, a ratio of 1:2 (WT:CD22KO) was used. Chimera mice were used after 7–10 weeks following bone marrow transplantation. For adoptive transfer of HEL-specific B-cells, B-cells from spleens of Hy10 mice were isolated using a mouse B-cell negative-isolation kit (Miltenyi). Approximately 1×106 splenic B-cells were injected into B6 recipient mice intravenously a day before immunization.

## Cell lines
Human embryonic kidney (HEK) 293 T cells were acquired from ATCC and cultured in DMEM media supplemented with 10% fetal bovine serum (FBS; Gibco) and 100 U/mL of penicillin and 100 µg/mL streptomycin (Gibco). Chinese hamster ovary (CHO) Flp-In cells (Invitrogen) were maintained in DMEM-F12 media supplemented with 5% FBS, 100 U/mL of penicillin/100 µg/mL streptomycin, and 10 mM HEPES. The CD40LB feeder cell line was a gift from Dr. Daisuke Kitamura (Tokyo University of Science, Japan) and Dr. Javier Marcelo Di Noia (University of Montreal, Canada). Feeder cells were cultured in DMEM supplemented with 10% FBS and 100 U/mL of penicillin/100 µg/mL streptomycin.

## Liposome preparation, immunization, and tamoxifen administration
Liposomal nanoparticle-based immunogens give a robust and consistent T-cell-dependent antibody response, while avoiding the inclusion of a TLR agonist ( ; ; ). Given that Siglecs, such as CD22, can interact and modulate toll-like receptor (TLR) function ( ; ), liposomes were used to minimize any confounding factors affecting the primary response to T-dependent antigens. Lyophilized lipids containing a 65:35:5 molar ratio of distearoyl phosphatidylcholine (DSPC) (Avanti Polar Lipids), cholesterol (Sigma), and PEG2000-distearoyl phosphoethanolamine (PEG2000-DSPE; Avanti Polar Lipids) were hydrated in sterile PBS and sonicated for a minimum of 20 min. NP-OVA-PEG2000-DPSE, OVA-PEG2000-DPSE or HEL-PEG2000-DPSE, which were generated using a previously published protocol ( ), was added to the lipid mixture at the time of hydration. The molar fraction of Protein-PEG2000-DPSE were maintained at 0.03% in all liposome preparations. Following sonication, liposomes were passed at least 15 times through 800 nm and 100 nm filters using a hand-held extrusion device (Avanti Polar Lipids). Excess Protein-PEG2000-DPSE was separated from liposomes using a CL-4B Sepharose (Sigma) column. Eluted liposomes were diluted in sterile PBS to 1 mM concentration prior to administration to mice.
For immunization involving liposomes, each mouse received 200 µL of 1 mM liposomes via tail vein injection. Where indicated, at day 11 post-immunization (PI) with OVA-liposomes, mice were boosted with 10 µg of anti-DEC205-OVA, prepared according to a published study ( ), via tail vein injection. Spleens were collected at different time points PI for microscopy and flow cytometric analyses of the GC.
For temporal expression of human CD20-driven Cre recombinase, mouse chimeras reconstituted with CD20-ERT2Cre and CD20-ERT2Cre×R26lsl-Cmah BM cells were gavaged with 1 mg tamoxifen (Combi-Blocks) in 200 µL corn oil (Sigma) on days 8 and 9 PI with OVA displaying liposomes. Spleens were collected on Day 14 (5 days post-tamoxifen) for flow cytometric analysis of GC B-cells.

## Flow cytometry and sorting
Spleens were macerated in RPMI 1640 containing 2% FBS and passed through a 40 µm mesh. Single cell suspensions were treated with Ammonium-Chloride-Potassium (ACK) lysis buffer for five minutes at 4°C to deplete red blood cells (RBC). RBC-depleted splenocytes were washed and resuspended in HBSS containing 2% FBS or 0.1% bovine serum albumin (flow buffer). Aliquots of cell suspensions were stained on ice for 30 min using appropriate reagents and surface marker antibodies as listed in the . Stained cells were washed and resuspended in flow buffer supplemented with 1 µg/mL of viability dye propidium iodide or 7-AAD. Naive and GC B-cell compartments were gated on a Fortessa X-20 flow cytometer as B220+CD19+IgD+ and B220+CD19+IgD−CD38lowFas+GL7+ (or PNA+) live single cells, respectively, unless specified otherwise. OVA-specific GC B-cells were further gated on the flow cytometer using OVA-AF647 (Invitrogen). NP+ GC B-cells were determined in flow using NP20-APC and NP4-APC (prepared according to protocol provided by Dr. Pierre Milpied of CIML, France). Dark zone and light zone compartments were identified as CXCR4highCD86low and CXCR4lowCD86high GC B-cells, respectively.
 For active-caspase-3 staining, cells stained with surface marker antibodies were fixed and permeabilized with BD Cytofix/Cytoperm™ (BD Biosciences) on ice for 20 min. Fixed cells were washed two times with flow buffer, followed by incubation with intra-cellular marker antibodies for 30 min at 4°C.
For nuclear and phosphorylated protein (phosFlow) staining, cells were fixed in 2% of paraformaldehyde at room temperature for 10 min. Fixed cells were wash with flow buffer twice followed by incubation with True-Nuclear™ Transcription Factor permeabilization buffer (BioLegend), following the manufacturer’s recommended protocol. Fixed/permeabilized cells were wash twice with flow buffer and stained with both surface and intracellular markers for 1 h at 4°C.
For cell cycle and proliferation assays, immunized mice were injected intravenously with 1 mg BrdU (Sigma) dissolved in sterile PBS. Spleens were harvested after 1 h and RBC-depleted single cell suspensions were stained with surface marker antibodies for naive and GC B-cells for 30 min at 4°C. Following incubation, cells were washed with flow buffer and fixed with BD Cytofix/Cytoperm™ for 20 min at 4°C. Cells were then washed 2 times with flow buffer and incubated with BD Cytoperm™ Permeabilization Buffer Plus (BD Biosciences) for 10 min at 4°C. Cells were washed twice with flow buffer, re-fixed with BD Cytofix/Cytoperm™ for 10 min at 4°C, and incubated at 37°C with 20 µg/mL of DNase I (Sigma) in PBS containing Ca2+ and Mg2+. Following incubation, cells were washed and stained with anti-BrdU antibody (BioLegend) and 7-AAD for 20 min at room temperature. Proliferating cells were gated on the flow cytometer as BrdU+ B-cells. Cell cycle phases of GC B-cells were identified as described previously ( ).
For sorting GC B-cells, RBC-depleted splenocytes were stained with appropriate surface marker antibodies in HBSS containing 2% of FBS and 1 mM EDTA (FACS buffer) for 30 min at 4°C. Cells were washed and resuspended in FACS buffer supplemented with 1 µg/mL 7-AAD. GC B-cells were sorted by BD FACS Aria III (BD Biosciences) using a 100-µm nozzle. Sorted single cells were then collected in cold RPMI 1640 media containing 10% FBS, 5.5 × 10—5 M 2-mercaptoethanol (Sigma), 10 µM HEPES (Gibco), 1 mM sodium pyruvate (Gibco), 1 mM essential amino acids (Gibco), 100 U/mL of penicillin and 100 µg/mL streptomycin.

## Immunofluorescence
Spleens from non-immunized and immunized mice were embedded in cryomatrix (Thermo Fisher), froze, and stored at —80°C prior to sectioning. Cryostat tissue sections (9 µm) were fixed and permeabilized in a cold 1:1 mixture of acetone and methanol for 5 min, blocked with HBSS supplemented with 5% FBS for 40 min at room temperature, and washed with PBS-T. Tissue sections were then stained with lectin PNA-biotin (Vector Lab) and antibodies GL7-biotin (BioLegend), anti-mouse IgD (clone: 11.26c.2a; Bio-Legend), anti-mouse CD21/35 (clone: 7G6; BD Biosciences) in different combinations overnight at 4°C.The following day, tissue sections were washed 3 times with PBS-T and the following secondary antibodies were used to detect the primary antibodies: Streptavidin-AF555 (Invitrogen), anti-rat IgG2a-AF488 (SouthernBiotech), and anti-rat IgG2b-AF647 (BioLegend). Following incubation, tissue sections were washed 5 times with PBST and stained with 2.5 µg/mL Hoechst for 15 min at room temperature. Images of spleen sections were acquired with either Zeiss LSM700 microscope (20× magnification) or Molecular Devices ImageXpress Pico (10× magnification). Individual GC clusters were imaged with Zeiss LSM700 confocal microscope using 63× magnification. Image analysis was performed using ZEN Blue and Fiji processing software.

## Enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA)
To measure the affinity maturation of antigen-specific antibodies, sera were collected on days 14, 21, and 42 after immunization with 0.03% NP-OVA liposomal nanoparticles. High affinity NP-specific and total NP-specific antibodies were captured on plates precoated with 10 µg/mL of NP2-BSA (prepared following the recommended protocol provided by Dr. Daisuke Kitamura) and NP23-BSA (LGC Biosearch), respectively. Plates were washed 5 times with PBS-T and incubated with goat anti-mouse IgG1 antibody conjugated with horseradish peroxidase (SouthernBiotech) for 1 h at room temperature. Plates were then washed 5 times with PBS-T followed by addition of peroxidase substrate 2,2′-azino-bis(3-ethylbenzothiazoline-6-sulfonic acid) (ABTS) solution (Sera-Care) into each well for colour development. After 15 min, reactions were stopped with 1 M phosphoric acid. Optical density was collected using a microplate reader set to 405 nm.

## RNAseq and transcriptome analysis
Total RNA from sorted GC B-cells of immunized WT and CD22KO mice was extracted using a RNeasy micro kit (Qiagen). Indexed cDNA libraries were generated using a SMART-Seq Stranded kit (Takara Bio) for the Illumina platform and the quality of each constructed library was measured using a Bioanalyzer 2100 (Agilent). Paired-end 150 bp sequencing was performed on an Illumina HiSeq platform by Novogene. For transcriptome analysis, the quality of unaligned reads was first validated using FastQC v0.11.2 followed by the removal of Illumina adapters using Cutadapt v3.3 ( ). Adapter-trimmed sequencing reads were mapped to the GRCm38/mm10 reference genome using HISAT2 ( ). Aligned reads were counted and annotated to Gencode M25 ( ) using HTseq-count ( ), followed by read count normalization and differential expression analysis by DESeq2 ( ). Differentially expressed genes (DEGs) were determined based on the Benjamini-Hochberg (BH) corrected p value %0.05. Gene enrichment analysis was performed on DEGs with an unadjusted p value ≤0.05 using EnrichR ( ; ; ) and default settings or directly from gene expression profile using GSEA version 4 ( ). Significantly enriched gene sets were identified based on FDR p value <0.05.

## Ig VH 186.2 DNA sequencing and mutation analysis
Approximately 30,000 GC B-cells (B220+CD19+IgD−GL7+NP20-APC+ live cells) were isolated using FACS from splenocytes of WT and CD22KO mice, at day 21 after immunization with NP-OVA liposomes. Genomic DNA was extracted using a DNA microprep kit (Qiagen). To sequence the VH186.2 region, VH186.2 was amplified from the extracted genomic DNA by PCR using 5′-AGCTGTATC ATGCTCTTCTTGGCA-3′ and 5′-AGATGGAGGCCAGTGAGGGAC-3′ as forward and reverse primers, respectively. PCR was performed following a previously published ( ). PCR products were then cloned into a pBAD vector (Invitrogen) and transformed into chemically competent DH5α E. coli (NEB Biolabs). Plasmids were extracted from E. coli clones using a GeneJET plasmid miniprep kit (Thermo Fisher), and DNA was sequenced using a Sanger sequencer. Mutational analysis of the Ig V region was performed using the IMGT/V-QUEST tool (www.imgt.org).

## Anti-DEC205-OVA plasmids and recombinant protein expression and purification
Plasmids encoding the anti-DEC205 light chain and anti-DEC205 heavy chain fused to OVA were transformed into chemically competent DH5α E. coli and purified using a GeneJET plasmid miniprep kit (Thermo Fisher). To express anti-DEC205-OVA, HEK293 T cells were cultured in complete DMEM in T175 flasks and incubated at 37°C in a 5% CO2 incubator until they reached approximately 70% confluence. HEK293 T cells in each flask were then added with 2 mL of OptiPro SFM containing 10 µg each of anti-DEC205 light chain and heavy chain plasmids, and 40 µg of branched polyethylenimine (Sigma) and incubated overnight at 37°C. The following day, the media were replaced with fresh complete DMEM and cultured for another 48–72 h. Media were collected, filter sterilized, and stored at 4°C prior to purification. Anti-DEC205-OVA was purified from the media using a HiTrap Protein G HP column (GE Healthcare) according to the manufacturer’s recommendation, dialyzed in PBS, and quantified as described previously ( ).

## Generation of mouse CD22-Fc fusion
To generate the mouse CD22-Fc fusion, DNA encoding 1–435 amino acid residues of mouse CD22 was amplified by PCR using 5′-AGCAGCGCTAGCATGCGCGTCCATTACCTGTGG-3′ and 5′-AGCAGCACCGGTATCCAGCTTAGCTTCCTG-3′ as forward and reverse primers, respectively. PCR products were cloned upstream of the human IgG1 Fc domain encoded in the pcDNA5/FRT/V5-His-TOPO® vector, which was described elsewhere ( ). Sequence verified plasmid encoding for mCD22-Fc was transfected together with Flp recombinase-expressing plasmid pOG44 (Invitrogen) using lipofectamine LTX (Invitrogen) into chinese hamster ovary (CHO) Flp-In cells. Stably transfected cells were selected after 10 days of culturing in DMEM-F12 containing 5% FBS, 100 U/mL of penicillin/100 µg/mL streptomycin, 2.438 g/L sodium bicarbonate (Gibco) and 1 µg/mL Hygromycin B (Invitrogen). For expression of mCD22-Fc, approximately 1×106 of mCD22-Fc expressing CHO cells were plated onto a T175 flask in DMEM-F12 media supplemented with 5% FBS, 100 U/mL of penicillin/100 µg/mL streptomycin, and 10 mM HEPES. Cells were then incubated at 37°C for 10–12 days. Supernatant from cultured cells was collected and filtered using a Rapid-Flow™ sterile filter with 0.2 µm PES membrane pore size (Nalgene).
To generate a non-binding mutant of mouse CD22-Fc (mCD22 R124A-Fc), site-directed mutagenesis was performed on the sialic acid-binding region of CD22 using a megaprimer-PCR strategy ( ). Briefly, the megaprimer containing the R124A mutation was generated by PCR using 5′-AGCAGCGCTAGCATGCGCGTCCATTACCTGTGG-3′ as the forward primer and 5′-AGTCCCTGCGGTCATGGCCAACCCCAGATTCCC-3′ as the reverse primer. A second round of PCR was performed to amplify the 1–435 amino acid residues of mouse CD22 containing the R124A mutation, using the megaprimer and 5′-AGCAGCACCGGTATC CAGCTTAGCTTCCTG-3′ as the forward and reverse primers, respectively. Cloning and protein expression of mCD22 R124A-Fc follow the same protocol as mentioned above.

## In vitro GC B-cell culture
For induction of GC B-cells in vitro, B-cells were isolated from mouse spleens using FACS or a mouse B-cell isolation kit (Miltenyi) and co-cultured with CD40LB fibroblast feeder lines in RPMI 1640 medium supplemented with 10% FBS, 5.5 × 10—5 M 2-mercaptoethanol, 10 mM HEPES, 1 mM sodium pyruvate, 1 mM essential amino acids, 100 U/mL of penicillin, and 100 µg/mL streptomycin. Mouse IL-4 (1 ng/mL; BioLegend) was added to primary co-culture for 4 days. Induced GC B-cells were then replated onto a fresh CD40LB feeder line and cultured with mouse IL-21 (10 ng/mL; BioLegend) or mouse IL-4 for another 3 to 4 days.

## Intracellular Ca2+ mobilization
Approximately 15×106 splenocytes from mice, at day 14 after immunization, were resuspended in HBSS (Gibco) supplemented with 1% FBS and 1 µM Indo-1 AM (Invitrogen), and incubated at 37°C for 30 min. Cells were washed with a 5-fold volume of HBSS with 1% FBS and centrifuge at 300 rcf for 5 min. Pelleted cells were stained with surface marker lectin PNA and antibodies against mouse B220, CD38, CD45.1, and CD45.2 for 20 min at 4°C. Cells were washed and resuspended in HBSS containing 1% FBS. A 0.5 mL aliquot containing approximately 1 × 106 splenocytes was incubated for 5 min at 37°C prior to the Ca2+ mobilization assay. Ca2+ mobilization in GC and non-GC B-cells populations was detected using a Fortessa X-20 flow cytometer. After baseline was established (approximately 2–3 min), splenocytes were stimulated with buffer (1% FBS/HBSS) or 10 µg/mL goat F(ab’)2 anti-mouse Igκ (SouthernBiotech) and Indo-1 fluorescence (violet vs blue) was monitored by flow cytometry for 3–5 min at 37°C. Data were analyzed using the kinetics function on FlowJo v 9.

## Ex vivo antigen internalization and processing assay
For the BCR internalization assay, RBC-depleted splenocytes were incubated with 1 µg/mL of goat F(ab’)2 anti-mouse Igκ-biotin (SouthernBiotech) for 30 min at 4°C. Splenocytes were washed 3 times with cold HBSS containing 0.1% BSA and resuspended in pre-warmed (37°C) RPMI 1640 medium supplemented with 10% FBS, 5.5 × 10—5 M 2-mercaptoethanol, 10 mM HEPES, 1 mM sodium pyruvate, 1 mM essential amino acids, 100 U/mL of penicillin, and 100 µg/mL streptomycin. Cells were then incubated in a 5% CO2 incubator at 37°C for specified timepoints. At the end of each time point, cells were immediately fixed in 1% paraformaldehyde (PFA) for 10 min at room temperature. Fixed cells were washed 3 times with 0.1% BSA in HBSS followed by incubation of surface marker antibodies and fluorochrome-conjugated streptavidin. Changes in the levels of anti-mouse Igκ-biotin on fixed naive and GC B-cells were monitored by flow cytometer.
For the antigen degradation assay, splenocytes from immunized mice were stained with 1 µg/mL of goat F(ab’)2 anti-mouse Igκ-biotin followed by 1 µg/mL of streptavidin (BioLegend) at 4°C. Cells were washed 3 times with HBSS containing 0.1% BSA and incubated with 100 nM of a previously described biotin-conjugated antigen degradation sensor ( ) at 4°C for 20 min. The degradation sensor consists of a fluorescent strand sequence: 5′-Atto647N-TCCGGCTGCCTCGCTGCCGTCGCCA-3′-biotin and a quencher strand sequence: 5′-TGGCGACGGCAGCGAGGCAGCCGGA-3′′-Iowa Black RQ. For sensor binding assays, the quencher strand sequence was replaced with 5′-TGGCGACGGCAGCGAGGCAGCCGGA-3′ instead. Stained cells were then washed 3 times, resuspended in pre-warmed RPMI 1640 medium supplemented with 10% FBS, 5.5 × 10—5 M 2-mercaptoethanol, 10 mM HEPES, 1 mM sodium pyruvate, 1 mM essential amino acids, 100 U/mL of penicillin, and 100 µg/mL streptomycin, and incubated in a 5% CO2 incubator at 37°C for specified timepoints. After each time point, cells were fixed and stained with GC B-cell relevant surface marker antibodies. Changes in the fluorescence of the antigen degradation sensor were measured by flow cytometry.

## QUANTIFICATION AND STATISTICAL ANALYSIS
All statistical analyses in this study were done with GraphPad Prism software except for the calculation of statistical significance of DEGs and enriched pathways, which were both performed in DESeq2 ( ), EnrichR ( ; ; ), and GSEA version 4 ( ). For experiments comparing two groups, a two-tailed Student’s t-test was used to evaluate statistical significance. When the assay was carried out in competition, a paired Student’s t test was used; while an unpaired Student’s t test was performed for samples analyzed independently. For experiments with more than 2 sample groups, a one-way or two-way analysis of variance (ANOVA) were performed to assess differences between means. Tukey or Dunnett multiple comparisons tests were used to determine statistical significance between groups.

## Supplementary Material
1234

## Highlights
A mouse model (CMAHON) is made to test a role for altered glycosylation in the GC
CMAHON display a CD22-dependent defective GC response
Altered glycosylation in the GC affects the ability of CD22 to regulate the BCR
Altered glycosylation/CD22 play a role in antigen processing, survival, and selection

## ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We thank Dr. Kitamura (Tokyo University of Science) and Dr. Marcelo Di Noia (University of Montreal) for providing the CD40L feeder cell lines; Dr. Pae and Dr. Victora (Rockefeller University) for providing αDEC205-OVA plasmids and bone marrow cells from Cd205KO mice; Dr. Cyster (University of California [UC], San Francisco) for access to Hy10 mice; and Mr. Subedi of the Applied Genomics Core (University of Alberta) for help processing RNA. We thank Drs. Milpied (Centre d’Immunologie de Marseille-Luminy) and Lesage (Maisonneuve-Rosemont Hospital) for critical reading and feedback of our manuscript. This study was supported by grants from the NIH (R01AI118842 and R01AI050143) and the NSERC (RGPIN-2018–03815) and a Canada Research Chair in Chemical Glycoimmunology to M.S.M. J.R.E. is funded by fellowships from the Alberta Innovates Graduate Student Scholarships and Canadian Arthritis Society.

## Footnotes
SUPPLEMENTAL INFORMATION
Supplemental information can be found online at https://doi.org/10.1016/j.celrep.2022.110512.
DECLARATION OF INTERESTS
The authors declare no competing interests.

## REFERENCES
 

## Associated Data

## Supplementary Materials
1234

## Data Availability Statement
Next generation sequencing data are deposited in the Gene Expression Omnibus (GEO) database under the accession number GSE196206.
This paper does not report original code.
Any additional information required to reanalyze the data reported in this paper is available from the lead contact upon request.