pmcJ Med ChemJ Med Chem822acssdjmJournal of Medicinal Chemistry0022-26231520-4804pmc-is-collection-domainyespmc-collection-titleACS AuthorChoicePMC9150122PMC9150122.1915012291501223558167410.1021/acs.jmedchem.2c002281ArticleBiophysical Survey
of Small-Molecule β-Catenin
Inhibitors: A Cautionary Tale
McCoyMichael
A. SpicerDominique WellsNeil HoogewijsKurt FiedlerMarc https://orcid.org/0000-0003-3714-4350BaudMatthias G. J. †School
of Chemistry, University of Southampton, Southampton SO17 1BJ, U.K.‡National
University of Ireland, University Road, Galway H91 TK33, Ireland§Medical
Research Council, Laboratory of Molecular Biology, Francis Crick Avenue, Cambridge CB2 0QH, U.K.*Email: m.baud@soton.ac.uk.170520222605202265104087887246726109022022300520223105202213062022© 2022 The Authors. Published by American Chemical Society2022The Authorshttps://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/Permits the broadest form of re-use including for commercial purposes, provided that author attribution and integrity are maintained (https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/). 
The canonical Wingless-related
integration site signaling pathway
plays a critical role in human physiology, and its dysregulation can
lead to an array of diseases. β-Catenin is a multifunctional
protein within this pathway and an attractive yet challenging therapeutic
target, most notably in oncology. This has stimulated the search for
potent small-molecule inhibitors binding directly to the β-catenin
surface to inhibit its protein–protein interactions and downstream
signaling. Here, we provide an account of the claimed (and some putative)
small-molecule ligands of β-catenin from the literature. Through
in silico analysis, we show that most of these molecules contain promiscuous
chemical substructures notorious for interfering with screening assays.
Finally, and in line with this analysis, we demonstrate using orthogonal
biophysical techniques that none of the examined small molecules bind
at the surface of β-catenin. While shedding doubts on their
reported mode of action, this study also reaffirms β-catenin
as a prominent target in drug discovery.

H2020 Marie Sklodowska-Curie Actions10.13039/100010665665501Wessex Medical Research10.13039/501100008176A1459Fonds Wetenschappelijk Onderzoek10.13039/5011000031302018, 1.5.193.18NRosetrees Trust10.13039/501100000833M653Engineering and Physical Sciences Research Council10.13039/501100000266EP/K039466/1Medical Research Council10.13039/501100000265MC_U105192713pmc-status-qastatus0pmc-status-liveyespmc-status-embargonopmc-status-releasedyespmc-prop-open-accessyespmc-prop-olfnopmc-prop-manuscriptnopmc-prop-legally-suppressednopmc-prop-has-pdfyespmc-prop-has-supplementyespmc-prop-pdf-onlynopmc-prop-suppress-copyrightnopmc-prop-is-real-versionnopmc-prop-is-scanned-articlenopmc-prop-preprintnopmc-prop-in-epmcyespmc-license-refCC BYdocument-id-old-9jm2c00228document-id-new-14jm2c00228ccc-price

## Introduction

## Canonical Wnt/β-Catenin
Signaling Pathway
The
canonical Wingless-related integration site (Wnt)/β-catenin
signaling pathway plays a pivotal role in human physiology and is
highly evolutionary conserved in metazoans. At the crux of the canonical
pathway, the protein β-catenin fulfills multiple roles underlying
signal transduction and structural maintenance and is critical for
embryonic development and adult tissue homeostasis. In the absence of a Wnt stimulus, the cellular concentration
of β-catenin is tightly regulated and maintained at a low level. This regulatory mechanism is mediated by the
action of a cytoplasmic multiprotein complex that associates with
β-catenin and induces its phosphorylation/ubiquitination, which
leads to its proteasomal degradation ( left). The scaffolding proteins Axin and
adenomatous polyposis coli (APC) form the core of this destruction
complex (DC) and can recruit the casein kinases 1α, β,
and δ (CK1) and glycogen synthase kinase 3 (GSK3). A sequential
process involves the binding of β-catenin to Axin, followed
by the phosphorylation of β-catenin at Ser45 by CK1, and further
phosphorylation at Ser33, Ser37, and Ser41 by GSK3. This series of
phosphorylations promotes the transfer of β-catenin from Axin
to APC and allows Axin to bind a new molecule of β-catenin.
The APC:β-catenin complex exposes the N-terminally phosphorylated
part of β-catenin to the ubiquitin ligase β-transducin
repeat-containing protein (β-TrCP), resulting in β-catenin
ubiquitination and degradation by the proteasome. However, the binding
of a Wnt-protein ligand to the extracellular domain of the Frizzled
(Fz) transmembrane receptor induces the recruitment of the phosphoprotein
Dishevelled (Dvl) to the membrane, assisted by several co-receptors
(e.g., LRP-5/6, Ryk, and ROR2). This induces the disruption of the
DC through its segregation to the plasma membrane, allowing β-catenin
accumulation in the cytoplasm. β-Catenin translocates to the
nucleus and associates with transcriptional regulators, resulting
in the upregulation of Wnt target genes (e.g., c-myc, axin2, cyclin
D1, MMP-7, and CD44) and cell proliferation ( , right).
 These oncogenes, and others, play key roles in the inception and
progression of many cancer types, giving rise to the various hallmarks
of cancer. − Overall, the degradative regulation mechanism of β-catenin
offers a fast cellular response mechanism at the post-translational
level upon extracellular stimuli. 

## Pharmacological
Modulation
The importance of this regulatory
mechanism is underscored by the observation that the dysregulation
of Wnt/β-catenin signaling contributes to the development of
an array of diseases including osteoarthritis, neurodegenerative diseases, , inflammatory bowel disease, type II
diabetes, and multiple cancer types. − In particular, an intimate relationship between the misregulation
of Wnt signaling and numerous subtypes of colorectal cancer (CRC)
is now well established. However, current
therapies targeting CRC remain largely toxic and ineffective, making
CRC the second leading cause of cancer-related death in developed
countries. Crucially, the hyperactivity
of the signal transducer protein β-catenin (encoded by the CTNNB1
gene) is a hallmark of CRC, and the modulation of its activity has
been proposed as a promising strategy for developing novel classes
of anticancer drugs. , − The small-molecule inhibition of diverse components
of canonical Wnt signaling has recently been summarized in an excellent
review. 
In its active form, the
signal transducer protein β-catenin acts as a transcription
factor but also plays a key role in cell adhesion through its interaction
with the cadherins. Despite the current paradigm, the relationships
linking these complex and intricate protein–protein interaction
(PPI) cascades and the resulting phenotypes are only partly understood.
Thus, there is enormous interest in developing small molecules that
target β-catenin-mediated signaling as chemical probes to dissect
important molecular recognition events controlling these PPIs and
their phenotypic effects, but also as proof-of-principle lead compounds
toward first-in-class therapeutics in disease, notably CRC. Importantly,
the spatial and temporal controls that are afforded by small molecules
compared to more traditional gene knockouts or RNAi present significant
advantages for studying the complex molecular physiology of this system.
To date, limited success has been achieved by indirectly targeting
β-catenin. For example, the porcupine inhibitor IWP-1 (1, ) prevents signaling through inhibiting the palmitoylation and secretion
of Wnt ligands. XAV939 (2) stabilizes Axin through tankyrase inhibition, resulting in enhanced
β-catenin degradation. Pyrvinium
(3) promotes β-catenin phosphorylation through
casein kinase activation and ICG-001
(4) binds to the cyclic adenosine monophosphate response
element binding protein binding protein (CBP) and prevents its interaction
with β-catenin in the nucleus. Although
all the abovementioned strategies aim to downregulate the activity
of β-catenin, their indirect inhibitory effects on β-catenin
activity raise important concerns regarding their selectivity and
mode of action as their molecular targets also interact with numerous
other transcription factors from other signaling pathways. Additionally,
oncogenic mutations leading to the inactivation of the DC (e.g., truncated
APC) or the desensitization of β-catenin to the DC invariably
result in β-catenin stabilization and will lead to limited response to molecular agents targeting
the DC or upstream components. 
 

## Direct Targeting of β-Catenin
The direct targeting
of β-catenin would conversely be highly desirable for the development
of more specific chemical probes/drugs, as β-catenin is a specific
component of the Wnt/β-catenin signaling pathway. Notably, the
targeted/selective PPI disruption between β-catenin and its
nuclear co-regulators downstream of the DC has attracted significant
interest in inhibiting Wnt signaling and cancer cell proliferation. , Full-length β-catenin is an 85 kDa protein, with residues
127–682 forming the structured “armadillo repeat domain”
(ARD, 56 kDa, A), while the C- and N-termini of the ARD are largely unstructured. ARD engages in complex interactions with a variety
of cellular co-regulators within the plasma membrane (e.g., E-cadherin ), the cytoplasm
(e.g., APC and , Axin ), and the nucleus (e.g., Tcf4 , ). Its distinctive structure
resembling that of a super helix is composed of 12 repeat units, which
are themselves composed of three short α-helical segments ( A). Importantly,
binding hotspots at the surface of the ARD ( A–C) have been identified. − The binding pocket formed by N426, N430, K435, R469, H470, R474,
and K508 (ARD-repeat 9, yellow, A,B) has been well documented as it engages in key
interactions with D16/E17 of Tcf4/Lef1 and contributes the most to
the binding affinity (Kd ∼ 10 nM). , , , , , The α-helical
groove in ARD-repeat 1 (pink, A,C) is engaged by the α-helical HD2 domain of
BCL9 (aa, 349–377). This region
can be divided into two key sites, the acidic knob (D162, E163, and
D164) and the hydrophobic groove (L156, L159, V167, A171, M174, and
L178). , These hotspot residues contribute disproportionately
to the binding affinity of Tcf4/Lef1 and BCL9 and, ultimately, the
oncogenicity of these PPIs.
 The presence of these well-characterized interaction hotspots at
the surface of the ARD suggests that the modulation of these PPIs
should be possible through the devising of selective and potent disruptors
(e.g., small molecules) competing with β-catenin partners. However,
several hotspots engage in overlapping and mutually exclusive PPIs
with several high affinity co-regulators having either oncogenic (e.g.,
Tcf4, CBP, and BCL9) or tumor suppressor functions (e.g., AXIN, APC,
and E-cadherin). In particular, the inhibition of
the β-catenin/Tcf4 interaction has raised concerns as Tcf4 shares
its binding surface with E-cadherin. The β-catenin/E-cadherin
complex is a key regulator of cell adhesion and membrane integrity.
This in part explains why most screening campaigns targeting β-catenin
have relied on functional assays rather than focusing on specific
binding and PPI inhibition. However, Cong and co-workers showed that
the soluble, oncogenic, β-catenin pool can be effectively and
selectively targeted for degradation without affecting the cadherin-bound
pool, mainly through exploiting the lower affinity of the β-catenin/TCF4
PPI. This is interesting as it suggests
that the increased sensitivity of oncogenic β-catenin can be
exploited toward small-molecule inhibition without affecting cell
adhesion. The development of potent chemical probes directly targeting
β-catenin will be crucial not only for their potential therapeutic
applications but equally importantly for the accurate functional elucidation
of these PPIs in human biology. Overall, the high affinity of β-catenin
PPIs (e.g., nanomolar Kd), large interacting
surfaces (e.g., >4000 Å2), and the high degree
of
overlap of the binding surfaces makes the development of small-molecule
inhibitors a daunting task.

## Small Molecules
Despite such challenges,
a small number
of compounds targeting the surface of β-catenin have been reported
( ) and are
currently under scrutiny. , , , However, the majority of these
compounds originate from functional screening assays and unambiguous
evidence of target engagement through biophysical binding assessment
and structural methods has not been reported. As a result, and despite
the overwhelming case for direct β-catenin targeting in Wnt
signaling modulation, relatively few such compounds have been validated
and, to date, there is no clinically approved small-molecule β-catenin
inhibitor. As will be discussed further in this article, a particular
caveat in this area is the lack of biophysical and structural data
associated with reported β-catenin inhibitors. As of 2020, not
a single crystal structure of the ARD bound to a small molecule has
been reported. Only recently, while writing this manuscript, has the
first crystal structure of a truncated ARD (repeats 1–4) bound
to a low affinity small molecule fragment been reported (vide infra).
This lack of structural and biophysical knowledge has generally hampered
further hit-to-lead optimization and perhaps provides an explanation
for why none of these reported hits from high-throughput screening
campaigns have advanced to clinical evaluation.
 

## Aim of This Study
The aim of this study is twofold.
(i) In the first part, we are providing a comprehensive review of
the small-molecule β-catenin inhibitors reported in the literature
up to 2020, focusing on their proposed mode of action and potency,
along with available biophysical/biological data on target engagement
and their binding mode to β-catenin; and (ii) in the second
part, we are investigating the molecular interactions mediating β-catenin
inhibition by reported (and some putative) β-catenin ligands/inhibitors
from the literature using orthogonal in vitro biophysical techniques,
namely isothermal titration calorimetry (ITC) and differential scanning
fluorimetry (DSF). ITC, in particular, is label free and considered
one of the gold standards for studying molecular interactions in the
solution phase. It allows direct and accurate measurement of the binding
enthalpy (ΔH), equilibrium constant (Ka or Kd), and stoichiometry
(n) of a molecular association event, from which
the Gibbs free energy (ΔG) and entropy of binding
(ΔS) can also be deduced. Hence, both the binding
affinity and its thermodynamic components can be accessed from a single
experiment. Access to the thermodynamic fingerprints of β-catenin
ligands will be an important milestone to understand the nature of
the protein–ligand interactions at play. Ultimately, we anticipate
that this study will benefit the Wnt community by clarifying the binding
and mode of action of these compounds. We believe that this is a critical
and necessary step toward future structural studies and binding mode
elucidation, and ultimately developing suitable strategies for their
synthetic optimization toward potent, first-in-class therapeutic agents
targeting the Wnt signaling pathway. An analogous study of small-molecule
Keap1-Nrf2 PPI inhibitors was undertaken in 2019 by Tran et al., using
biophysical techniques [fluorescence polarization (FP), DSF, and surface
plasmon resonance (SPR)], which highlighted that half of the reported
inhibitors were in fact inactive or deviated from reported activities. 
Through an extensive survey of the literature,
we here highlight that an important number of reported “direct”
β-catenin inhibitors originate from functional and often whole
cell screening assays, with limited evidence of target engagement
through biophysical binding assessment and structural methods. Critically,
we found that none of such inhibitors show in vitro binding to the
recombinant β-catenin ARD (aa 148–662) by ITC and DSF.
We also highlight that several of these molecules are chemically labile
due to pan assay interference (PAIN) chemical functionalities in their
core structures, including reactive quinones and α,β-unsaturated
carbonyls, redox active systems, reactive 2-hydroxybenzylamine and
heterocycles, and metal chelators. The promiscuity of these PAIN substructures
in both biophysical and cellular assays has been extensively reviewed
and raises significant concerns in regard to the proposed mode of
action of these compounds. , Last but not least,
a subset of reported β-catenin inhibitors originate from proprietary
screening libraries, and their syntheses have not been described.
Here, we report the detailed synthetic routes developed in the process
toward these compounds, along with their characterization and associated
analytical data.

## Results and Discussion

## Overview of Reported “Direct”
β-Catenin
Inhibitors
In 2004, Lepourcelet reported a set of small-molecule
inhibitors of the β-catenin (aa 134–668)/Tcf4 (aa 8–54)
interaction using a high-throughput ELISA-based assay. Following a primary screen of 7000 natural products
and 45,000 compounds from the Novartis collections, natural products 5–10 displayed concentration-dependent
inhibition of complex formation. Interestingly, the three structurally
related natural products CGP049090 (6), PKF115-584 (7), and PKF222-815 (8) could inhibit the β-catenin/Tcf4
interaction in protein extracts from HCT116 colon cancer cells (IC50s = 10–30 μM). In particular, 6 and 7 proved effective in inhibiting Wnt-specific reporter
genes, colon cancer cell viability, and β-catenin-dependent
axis duplication in Xenopus embryos.
This is in line with later studies from Sukhdeo et al., highlighting
the inhibitory effect of 7 in the xenograft models of
human multiple myeloma. The ability of 6 and 7 to inhibit the β-catenin/APC and
β-catenin/tcf4 interactions suggests they bind to β-catenin,
however, the binding site and affinities of such interactions remain
elusive. Planar polyaromatic compounds 7 and 8 also interfered with tcf4-DNA complexation, independent of β-catenin,
whereas 9 and 10 selectively blocked the
tcf4/β-catenin complex with DNA, without changes in β-catenin
levels.
In 2006, Trosset and co-workers performed a computational
pocket detection of the human β-catenin/tcf3 complex (PDB—1G3J)
using PASS and FLO_QXP tools to identify potential hotspots for structure-guided
drug design, , − and screened
a library of 17,700 compounds from the Pharmacia and Upjohn collection
against the K435 hotspot. Following docking score analysis and visual
inspection of docking poses, 3 out of 22 candidates displayed binding
and partial competition with Tcf4 (aa 1–53) in subsequent WaterLOGSY
nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) and ITC. PNU-74654 (11) was the most potent and displayed a Kd of 450 nM against the β-catenin ARD (aa 134–671) in
VP-ITC experiments, although no structure–activity relationship
(SAR) data were disclosed. On the basis of docking studies, the methyl
group of 11 was proposed to bind to a narrow cleft lined
by E571 and K508, while the hydrophobic phenoxybenzene was proposed
to interact at the polar K435 hotspot. Unambiguous binding mode determination
by X-ray crystallography and biological activity data were not reported.
Of note, 11 displayed a highly entropic binding signature
(ΔH = −8.4 kJ/mol, −TΔS = 27.8 kJ/mol), raising concerns about
its binding specificity.
R-etodolac (12) and brominated analogue
SDX-308 were shown to inhibit β-catenin/TCF signaling (IC50 = 683 ± 76 and 46 ± 4.6 μM, respectively,
in HEK293 cells) and induce apoptosis in drug-sensitive and drug-resistant
multiple myeloma cell lines. SDX-308
was shown to decrease nuclear β-catenin levels without affecting
total β-catenin levels in MM1S and OPM1 cells, thus inhibiting
β-catenin/TCF transcriptional activity. A large number of 2,4-diaminoquinazolines
were reported as Wnt/β-catenin inhibitors between 2009 and 2016.
In 2009, Chen and co-workers identified lead 2,4-diaminoquinazoline 14 (IC50s = 0.22 and 0.19 μM in Tcf22C11
and Tcf33.13 cell lines, respectively) as a β-catenin/Tcf-4
PPI inhibitor in a cell-based luciferase reporter screening assay
and subsequent SAR studies. However, 14 and its derivatives did not show in vivo efficacy in HT29
and HCT116 xenografts. In 2010, Dehnhardt and co-workers identified
a range of 2,4-diaminoquinazoline analogues with improved in vivo
profiles. Administration of representative lead molecule 13 (TOPFlash in Tcf33.13 cell line IC50 = 0.60 μM)
at 150 mg/kg suppressed xenograft tumor growth in vivo by up to 66%
in a β-catenin/RK3E mouse model; however, administration was
intraperitoneal (IP) due to poor bioavailability. In 2012, Mao and colleagues reported a series of similar
2,4-diaminoquinazolines, identified using a HCT116 luciferase reporter
screening assay and a growth inhibition assay against HCT116 and SW480
cell lines. Representative 15 inhibited Wnt signaling in HCT116 (IC50 = 2.0 μM)
and inhibited growth of HCT116 and SW480 cell lines (IC50s = 0.9 and 1.1 μM, respectively). The in vivo activity of 15 and its analogues was not reported. In 2016, Li and co-workers
identified a family of 2,4-diaminoquinazolines as Wnt/β-catenin
inhibitors using a TopFlash Wnt reporter assay in HCT116 cells, following
screening of an in-house library of 500 quinazoline derivatives. SRI-31230
(16) was the most potent, inhibiting TOPFLASH (IC50 = 13 μM) and inducing dose-dependent reductions in
Axin2/cyclinD1/Survivin protein levels while displaying consistent
viability reduction in cancer lines HCT116 (IC50 = 6.2
μM), SW480 (IC50 = 5.9 μM), and SW620 (IC50 = 6.7 μM). , Although the structural
similarities between these molecules are worth noting, the molecular
mechanisms and binding events underlying such activity remain unclear.
It has been suggested that these compounds exert their effect via
the inhibition of the β-catenin/Tcf4 protein–protein
interaction, possibly highlighting the folded β-catenin ARD
as a possible molecular target. 
In 2010, Lee and co-workers screened ∼1500 diverse heterocyclic
compounds using a cascade of assays looking at the inhibition of cell
proliferation followed by a cell-based reporter assay measuring β-catenin/Tcf
transcriptional activity in A549/Wnt2 cells. Interestingly, primary screening identified 13 structurally related,
tri-substituted quinoxalines which reproducibly reduced A439 cell
proliferation, including representative derivative 17 (IC50 < 5 μM). This correlated with the inhibition
of TOPflash reporter gene activity by 30–90% and decreased
levels of nuclear β-catenin. A subsequent study identified GDK-100017
(18), which inhibited the proliferation of A549/Wnt2
and SW480 cells in a dose- and time-dependent manner (IC50 = 10 μM), while showing little
effect in L132 human embryonic pulmonary epithelial cells. This effect
in cancer cells correlated with the downregulation of Wnt target genes
cyclin D1 and DKK1, while the expression levels of c-myc and survivin
remained unaffected. 18 induced cell cycle arrest in
A549 cells in combination with radiation compared with either treatment
alone. Interestingly, several quinoxaline derivatives have been independently
identified by Zhang as Wnt/β-catenin inhibitors, potentially
suggesting a common molecular target (vide infra). 
In the same year, Ewan et al. used a primary luciferase-based
assay
to screen a library of ∼63k low molecular weight compounds. Hit compounds were subjected to a screening
workflow that involved a secondary TOPFlash assay, de-convolution,
and hit triage, which afforded three hits. CCT031374 (19) was among the three most promising compounds, with GI50 = 13.9 and 13.2 μM in HCT116 and SW480 cells, respectively. 19 was hypothesized to act at the β-catenin level, by
blocking TCF-dependent transcription and increasing the degradation
of endogenous wt-β-catenin in murine L-cells, was stabilized
by the GSK3 inhibitor BIO. The molecular mechanism underlying inhibition
was not elucidated, although it was hinted at possible binding of 19 to the ARD. The blocking of TCF-dependent transcription
in SW480 colon cancer cells was not accompanied by the downregulation
of β-catenin levels. Furthermore, the levels of stabilized β-catenin
in HEK293 cells were not reduced when treated with 19, although TCF-dependent transcription was blocked.
In 2011,
Gonsalves employed a cellular RNA-based screening assay
with a luciferase reporter to identify small-molecule inhibitors of
β-catenin/Tcf4-mediated transcription downstream of the DC,
following induction of reporter gene activity via RNAi-mediated Axin
inhibition. This screen of ca. 15,000
compounds from various proprietary collections identified a family
of structurally related heterocyclic compounds displaying >70%
inhibition
of signaling. Representative oxazole containing iCRT3 (20) was among the most potent analogues, selectively inhibiting nuclear
β-catenin-mediated transcription (IC50 = 1.8 μM),
β-catenin/Tcf4 complex formation in vitro and in HEK293 cell
lysate. Conversely, 20 had no noticeable effect on β-catenin
interactions with E-cadherin and α-catenin,
or noncanonical Wnt signaling. 20 was hypothesized to
bind the K435/R469 hotspot of the ARD based on docking and DSF experiments,
although the exact molecular interactions involved and the associated
affinity of such an interaction have not been discussed. Of note, 20 induced thermal shifts <1 °C in DSF experiments,
suggesting that potential binding affinity to the ARD is likely to
be rather weak (e.g., high μM), contrasting with its reported
cellular activity (low μM). Of
note, some analogues including iCRT-4, -9, -16, and -21 significantly
interfered with several signaling pathways including notch, Hedgehog (hh), and Janus kinase/signal
transducer and activator of transcription.
The same K435βcat-D16tcf4 interaction
hotspot on the ARD was probed in 2012 by Tian and co-workers, by Autodock4
virtual screening of ca. 2000 compounds from a diversity set of the
National Cancer Institute open database. , Docking identified organocopper complex BC21 (21) as
a potential ligand of β-catenin. Complex 21 decreased
β-catenin-dependent TCF reporter activity in HCT116 and HEK293
cells at low micromolar concentrations and modestly downregulated
Wnt target genes (c-Myc and cyclin D1) and reduced HCT116 viability
(IC50 = 15 μM); while in FP competition experiments, 21 displayed modest displacement of a labeled tcf4 peptide
(IC50 = 5 μM), the precise molecular mechanisms and
binding specificity are unknown. Also noted by the authors, 21 had also been shown to inhibit protein phosphatase 2C,
the proteasome, and to have cytotoxic effects in a range of human
cancer cells. , These potential off-target effects
were not investigated in this study.
In the same year, Henen
and co-workers employed a meta-structure
approach combined with NMR to pinpoint potential β-catenin ligands. The meta-structure concept was proposed as a
framework to identify potential ligands directly from a protein’s
primary sequence. This identified fluorescein (22), eosin
Y (23), 2-phenoxybenzoate (24), and related
imine derivative (25) as potential ligands of the ARD.
Both ligands showed binding to the β-catenin ARD (aa 134–671)
in saturation transfer difference (STD) NMR experiments. However,
the affinity and precise binding mode/site of these ligands were not
reported. It is also worth noting that both aromatics of the biphenylether
in 24 and 25 are unlikely to adopt a coplanar
arrangement but rather give rise to a significant dihedral angle.
This suggests that all four compounds may not share a unique binding
mode/site. Although the authors highlighted their plan to exploit
these results for the development of more potent β-catenin ligands,
no follow-up study has been reported.
An ELISA-based screen
of 47,500 LOPAC/PhytoPure/MRCT compounds
by de la Roche identified the natural product carnosic acid (26) as a β-catenin/Bcl9 PPI inhibitor. 26 selectively inhibited (Ki = 3 μM) the interaction between the N-terminal
region of β-catenin (aa 134–671) and the BCL9 homology domain 2 (aa 343–396). 26 is thought to bind (STD/HSQC-NMR, Kd ∼ 20 μM) to a transient binding motif in part formed
by the intrinsically labile helix 1 (H1, aa 141–149) of the
ARD. The interaction of 26 with this region was shown
to exacerbate the propensity of the ARD to aggregate in vitro and
in cells, leading to its proteasome-mediated depletion. This proposed
degradative mode of action was also correlated with the downregulation
of β-catenin-dependent TOPFlash activity and the downregulation
of the mRNA levels of Wnt targets AXIN2 and B9L in HeLa, HCT116, and
SW480 cells. The peculiar degradative mode of action of 26 has so far hampered accurate biophysical and structural characterization,
which rely on the presence of the folded protein.
In 2013, Zhang
et al. using in-house AlphaScreen and FP assays
to look at selective inhibitors of the β-catenin (aa 138–686)–Tcf4
(aa 7–51) interaction, screened a library of 250 commercially
available carboxylic acid-containing compounds. Substituted acylhydrazide R360163 (27), rhodanine
L338192 (28), quinoxaline R999636 (29),
and biphenylether T155535 (30) were identified as modestly
selective inhibitors showing moderate potency (Ki ∼ 8.8–77 μM) and selectivity (1.1–25
fold) in vitro for the β-catenin-Tcf4 interaction over APC and E-cadherin. These compounds have been proposed to engage
the β-catenin K435 hotspot targeted by D16 of Tcf4, although
direct evidence through structural methods or site-directed mutagenesis
(SDM) has not been reported. Interestingly, 30 is yet
another example of a biphenylether derivative. The Ji laboratory has
used a structure-based design strategy toward several series of small-molecule
peptidomimetics targeting the ARD. Isosteric replacement and conformational
restriction of D16/E17 of Tcf4 led to the development of UU-T01 (31), the most potent member of a family of heterocyclic β-catenin/Tcf4
interaction in vitro inhibitors. The
binding of 31 to the ARD (aa 142–686) was characterized
by FP (Ki = 3 μM) and VP-ITC (Kd = 0.53 μM, ΔH = −3.4 kJ/mol, −TΔS = −33 kJ/mol). Of note, this is an unusually high ligand
efficiency (LE = 0.51), in addition to the binding being strongly
driven by a favorable entropic term. Based on modeling studies, 31 was proposed to mimic D16/E17 of Tcf4 and engage in polar
interactions with β-catenin hotspot residues K435, K508, and
R469. This was further supported by its reduced binding affinity against
the corresponding K435A, K508A, and R469A mutants. However, the authors
did not report on the biological activity of 31. A third
publication from the Ji laboratory the following year reported disruptors
of the β-catenin-Tcf4 PPI, utilizing a peptidomimetic strategy
in conjunction with computational modeling. SiteMap and MCSS analyses assessed the druggability of the region
of β-catenin that interacts with the GANDE sequence in Tcf4. , Using the Tcf D16/E17 hotspot residues as a basic scaffold, diverse
motifs were incorporated to probe and evolve the peptidomimetic. MCSS
analysis suggested that a chloroindole motif would be tolerated in
a narrow channel formed by residues R474 and R515 at the ARD surface,
adjacent to the K435 hotspot. This channel is present in the crystal
structures of the ARD bound to human TCF4 (PDB—1JDH, 1JDW)
and xenopus Tcf3 (PDB—1G3J) and accommodates these regulators,
but is not present in the ARD apo structure (PDB—2Z6H). Furthermore,
a range of hydrophobic amino acids were examined as replacements for
N15 to probe the adjacent hydrophobic pocket ( B) formed by residues K508, E568, and I569,
among others. Iterative computational modeling (AutoDock 4.2) and
SAR from FP experiments afforded 39 (Ki = 0.64 μM). AlphaScreen, VP-ITC, and SDM all supported
the direct binding of 39 and derivatives to β-catenin
(VP-ITC Kd ≈ 0.42 μM). The
protein expression levels of cyclin D1 and c-Myc were reduced upon
treatment with 39 in SW480 cells. Equally noteworthy,
the binding of 34 is highly entropic, suggesting that
it is primarily entropically driven (ΔH = −4.2
kJ/mol, −TΔS = −33
kJ/mol). This suggests again that binding may be driven primarily
by hydrophobic interactions and water displacement rather than polar
and directional interactions (e.g., H-bond). This was not discussed
by the authors.
The Ji laboratory reported the small molecule 32 in
2015 as an inhibitor of the β-catenin-Tcf4 interaction identified
through dual AlphaScreen and FP assays and SAR analysis. One close derivative of 32 suppressed
canonical Wnt signaling, downregulated the expression of Wnt target
genes, and inhibited the growth of cancer cells.
Hoggard et
al. used HippDB to data mine the PDB and identify α-helical
peptidomimetics to target the β-catenin/BCL9 PPI. − 34 was designed by a bioisostere-based fragment hopping
protocol to mimic hydrophobic side chains at positions i, i + 3 and i + 7 of an α-helix. 34 was subsequently overlayed with the BCL9 S352-F374 α-helix
to design small-molecule inhibitors of the β-catenin-BCL9 PPI.
Iterative design-synthesis-evaluation were performed to identify 34 as the most potent and selective inhibitor with KiαS = 2.1 μM. 34 was
further characterized by SDM and VP-ITC (Kd = 0.33 μM). Later in 2018, the derivatives of 34 were reported with KiαS = 0.47
μM and selectivity >1900 (β-catenin-BCL9 vs β-catenin-E-cadherin,
respectively). Along with carnosic acid 26, 34 and its derivatives represent the only
examples of small molecules targeting the ARD N-terminus. The inhibition
of the β-catenin/BCL9 PPI has been proposed as an alternative
strategy to achieve controlled Wnt signaling inhibition in a range
of CRCs. The interaction of β-catenin
with BCL9 in the nucleus is necessary for downstream signaling. BCL9
is one of the few partners interacting with the ARD N-terminus, suggesting
that the development of selective PPI inhibitors may be possible.
This may have important implications for overcoming the challenge
of achieving selective inhibition of the β-catenin/Tcf4 oncogenic
PPI. This is because Tcf4 shares overlapping PPI surfaces with a range
of other regulators, notably E-cadherin. Wnt signaling
activation and alteration of E-cadherin function
are key factors in the epithelial–mesenchymal transition and
metastasis.
Early in 2016, Fang and Birchmeier published 4-thioureido-benzenesulfonamide
derivative LF3 (35) as an inhibitor of the β-catenin
(aa 134–668) and Tcf4 (aa 1–79) PPI in an AlphaScreen
high-throughput screening (HTS) of 16000 synthetic compounds from
the ChemBioNet collection. Thiourea 35 exhibited an IC50 ca. 2 μM in AlphaScreen
and ELISA assays, although the affinity and binding site/mode of 35 at the ARD surface were not reported. Preliminary SAR studies
highlighted that the sulfonamide group is vital for potency, illustrated
by a complete loss of potency upon its removal. The replacement of
the styryl unit with other terminal aromatic groups such as phenyl
and benzyl led to a 2–50 fold reduction in inhibitory activity.
Immunoprecipitation experiments showed that 35 could
inhibit β-catenin/Tcf4 interaction in HCT116 cell lysates in
the micromolar range while showing no disruption of E-cadherin-mediated cell adhesion. This also correlated with the downregulated
expression of a range of Wnt target genes (Bmp4, Axin2, survivin, Bambi, and c-Myc) and tumor growth reduction in NOD/SCID
mice.
In the same year, Zhang and co-workers reported the small
molecule
BC-23 (33). The treatment
of non-small cell lung cancer H1299 cells with low μM concentrations
of 33 downregulated c-Myc and cyclin D1 expression, promoted
the S phase arrest and increased levels of reactive oxygen species
(ROS) to mediate increased radiation sensitivity. In FP experiments, 33 inhibited the β-catenin/Tcf4 (aa 8–30) PPI
(IC50 = 1.7 μM) and inhibited TOPFlash activity in
a dose-dependent manner (IC50 = 2.3 μM) in H1299
cells. Based on Autodock4 docking studies, the authors suggested that 33 competes with tcf4 through binding to the K435 hotspot,
making hydrophobic contacts and H-bond interactions with the side
chains of neighboring residues C429, N430, and K508. A key consideration
is the chemical lability of the chloroquinone motif, which is highly
reactive toward a range of nucleophiles, notably sulfur nucleophiles
such as cysteine at physiological pH. We will discuss this later in
this study. This raises important concerns regarding the specificity
and mode of action of BC-23.
Hwang and Lee reported the small
molecule benzenesulfonamide derivative
methyl 3-{[(4-methylphenyl)sulfonyl]amino}benzoate (MSAB) (36) following a cell-based HTS luciferase assay of 22,000 compounds. 36 selectively inhibited luciferase
activity (IC50 ∼ 2–5 μM) and reduced
viability (IC50 ∼ 2–6 μM) of 12 Wnt-dependent
cancer cell lines, while showing comparatively little effect on Wnt-independent
cell lines. 36 selectively induced size and weight reduction
in a panel of Wnt driven HCT116, HCT115, and H23 tumors in xenografted
mouse models. This was in line with apoptotic induction and elevated
cleaved caspase-3 in mouse tumor tissues treated with 36. This effect also correlated with dose-dependent reduction of mRNA
levels of downstream Wnt target genes AXIN-2, c-MYC, cyclin D1, and
BMP4 in a panel of Wnt-dependent cell lines, along with reduced levels
of their respective proteins. Initial biophysical analysis using STD
NMR, SPR, and pull-down experiments suggested that 36 binds to the ARD C-terminal region (aa 301–670). The authors
suggested that the binding of 36 to β-catenin in
the cellular environment mediates its proteasomal degradation, although
this remains largely speculative.
Substituted benzimidazole
HI-B1 (37) was reported
in 2017 by Dong et al. 37 inhibited β-catenin/Tcf4 luciferase activity in a dose-dependent
manner (IC50 = 2.3 μM), downregulated the expression
of cyclin D1 and Axin2, and induced growth reduction of DLD1, CACO2,
and HCT116 cells. 37 also selectively inhibited the growth
of patient-derived xenograft CRC model displaying elevated β-catenin
levels. 37 conjugation to sepharose 4B-beads followed
by affinity pull-down in cell lysates and western blotting (WB) selectively
identified β-catenin as a direct molecular target (affinity
unknown). Of note, 37 presents several structural similarities
with GDK100017 (18), including a fluorinated nitrogen
heterobicyclic system connected to a conformationally constrained
phenyl ring. Glide docking suggested that 37 binds to
the surface of the ARD, possibly through key H-bonding interactions
with G307 and K312.
Several series of β-carbolines were
independently reported
as Wnt signaling inhibitors between 2014 and 2018. Wang and co-workers
identified compound SP141 (38) as a dual inhibitor of
MDM2 and β-catenin in pancreatic cancer. 38 potently reduced the levels of active,
unphosphorylated β-catenin and downstream c-Myc and cyclin D1
proteins in a concentration-dependent manner in Panc-1 and AsPC-1
pancreatic cancer cells (IC50s < 0.5 μM) and tumors
(40 mg/kg), harboring elevated levels of β-catenin. Interestingly,
WB and immunofluorescence experiments showed that 38 had
comparatively low effects on the levels of phosphorylated β-catenin
and the membrane bound β-catenin fraction, suggesting that it
selectively targets the soluble, active pool of cytoplasmic and nuclear
β-catenin. Pull-down experiments in Panc-1 and AsPC-1 cells
with a biotinylated analogue of 38 preferentially precipitated
β-catenin, suggesting it as a direct target (affinity unknown).
The overall molecular mechanisms underlying such inhibition remain
unclear, although it was suggested that binding of 38 to a yet to characterize region of the ARD could induce its aggregation
and proteasome-mediated degradation. A similar degradative mode of
action was suggested by de la Roche while studying carnosic acid (26). It is also worth mentioning
that the structurally related beta-carboline derivatives have been
reported to inhibit Wnt signaling through the activation of CK-1α
rather than binding to β-catenin. Further clarification through direct binding assays will be critical
to validate the molecular target(s) of beta-carbolines.

## PAINS Analysis
and Biophysical Characterization
Pan
Assay INterference compoundS (PAINS) contain substructural motifs
which are notorious for their overrepresentation as hits across a
diverse range of HTS assays. PAINS are
well-known to medicinal chemists and often display unspecific chemical
reactivity and adverse physico-chemical properties, leading to promiscuous,
nonspecific activity in various in vitro biophysical, biochemical,
and cellular assays. Those include a wide range of chemically reactive
electrophiles, metal chelators, redox active or/and aggregation prone
scaffolds, and extended aromatic systems displaying DNA intercalating
or/and intrinsic photochromic properties that interfere with, for
example, absorption/fluorescence assay readouts, and molecular scaffolds
historically well-known for their intrinsic in vivo toxicity. Some
PAINS can also cumulate several of such properties. To the despair
of many medicinal chemists, they represent a significant proportion
of false positive hits in screening campaigns, either lacking potency
or specificity. PAINS have been extensively reviewed and reported
since their popularization in the medicinal chemistry literature more
than a decade ago, notably thanks to important ground work by Baell
and co-workers. , − The increasing
recognition of PAINS in screening libraries has promoted considerable
development of computational filters for their early detection and
removal, hence minimizing the time and resources invested in pursuing
non-optimizable leads. There has been
some exceptions and rarely PAINS can be optimized to promising candidates,
such as the hit anthraquinone PARG inhibitor identified by AstraZeneca,
which was successfully developed to a lead quinazolinedione with Kd = 1.45 nM. Brenk
filters have also proven useful for the early detection and removal
of promiscuous functionalities generally known to display unfavorable
toxicity, poor pharmacokinetic properties, chemical reactivity, and
metabolic instability. , 
Here, we sought
to investigate the occurrence of PAINS and/or Brenk alerts in reported
small-molecule β-catenin inhibitors, which we believe is a critical
first step to (i) discarding potentially inherently toxic/reactive
“dead-end” compounds; and (ii) identifying potentially
suitable starting points for future structural studies and lead optimization
toward first-in-class chemical probes and therapeutic agents targeting
β-catenin. First, we combined visual inspection and extensive
PAINS filters, complemented with SwissADME
computational analysis, to investigate potential inherent toxicity/reactivity
alerts ( ). SwissADME
has proven particularly useful and robust for the identification of
problematic substructures, and combines the dual detection of PAINS
and Brenk alerts into a single platform. Second, we assayed the majority of these compounds using biophysical
techniques. We employed DSF and ITC to evidence potential binding
through monitoring thermal stabilization and binding enthalpy, respectively.
These methods are complementary as ITC focuses on detecting rather
enthalpic binding events while DSF tends to underscore binding events
carrying more important entropic contributions, especially for high
melting temperatures (Tm, vide infra).
 

## Quinone/Haloquinone
and Extended Polyaromatics
5–9, 22, 23,
and 33 all contain quinone, quinone methide, or polyaromatic
motifs prone to redox activity, electrophilic reactivity, and singlet
oxygen production. ALARM NMR experimentally
demonstrated that 10 and pyrimidotriazinedione derivatives
were intrinsically reactive along with displaying potent redox cycling
in a phenol red-horseradish peroxidase screen (EC50 <
2.0 μM). − The same two assays also unambiguously demonstrated
the inherent thiol reactivity and redox cycling of a diverse range
of substituted rhodanines, chloro- and/or benzo-quinones, catechols,
benzofurazans, and other extended polyaromatic systems, reminiscent
of the chemical structures of 5–9, 26, 28, 32, and 33. The core scaffolds of 5–9 also
share structural similarities with a number of anthracyclines, which
are well-known for their DNA-damaging activity.

## Benzofurazans
The benzofurazan PAIN scaffold is known
to react reversibly with thiols, including by electron transfer. Benzofurazans are widely employed as fluorescent-labeling
reagents due to their high reactivity and long excitation/emission
wavelengths. , A number of electrophilic benzofurazans
have also displayed modest inhibition of DNA and RNA synthesis. Among other electrophilic substructures (vide
supra), an important number of benzofurazans exhibit intrinsic reactivity
toward nucleophiles, raising questions
about the specificity of electrophilic pyrazinofurazan 32.

## Phenolic-Mannich Base
21 contains a phenolic
Mannich base motif prone to in situ benzylic ammonium elimination
(pKa ≈ 10) to the corresponding
highly electrophilic ortho-quinone methide (QM). QMs have generally been shown to react indiscriminately
with a number of biological nucleophiles, including amino acid side
chains and DNA bases. Two publications have also highlighted 21 as an inhibitor of both PP2C and flavivirus MTase, suggesting
other possible modes of action. , 21 also
exhibited cytotoxicity in BHK-21 cells (CC50 = 11 μM),
at concentrations lower than its IC50 = 17 μM. A range of phenolic Mannich base-containing
compounds structurally similar to 21 have also been shown
to covalently modify catalytic tautomerase via QM generation and subsequent
proline N-alkylation. These stability
issues, along with the potential for in situ metal decomplexation
in the physiological environment, suggest that 21 may
act by more than one mechanism.

## Acylhydrazone
Acylhydrazones similar to commercial 11 and 27 are known to undergo photoinduced E/Z isomerization and hydrolysis to their
corresponding hydrazides and aldehydes.
Acylhydrazones are generally less stable to hydrolysis than non-acylated
hydrazones and oximes. Because of their
facile hydrolysis under mildly acidic conditions, acylhydrazones have
been employed as cleavable linkers for biotin-streptavidin biomolecule
isolation. 

## Rhodanines
Despite
the range of biological activities
reported in the literature, rhodanines are regarded as one of the
most prevalent sources of false positives in HTS campaigns. Prior
to 2010, the rhodanine motif was prevalent in multiple drug discovery
campaigns and reached a peak in 2010. − However, since the introduction of systematic
PAINS filters by Baell in 2010, there has been a significant decrease
in reports highlighting rhodanine lead compounds. Rhodanines such as 28 have been shown to form
aggregates, act as Michael acceptors, interfere with fluorescence
assays due to their photochromic properties, and chelate a variety
of metals. These have been extensively reviewed by Tomašić and Sink. Consistently,
rhodanine containing 28 triggered both PAINS and Brenk
alerts.

## Catechols
Catechols such as the natural product carnosic
acid 26 are frequent hitters in screening assays such
as AlphaScreen. They are notorious redox
cyclers, metal chelators, and potent electrophiles in their oxidized
form. For example, catechol containing
gallic acid has been shown to induce apoptosis in HL-60RG cells by
ROS generation. 26 has
been extensively investigated for its anti-bacterial, -cancer, -fungal,
and -viral properties, and multiple
reports have also demonstrated that 26 is easily oxidized
in mild aerobic conditions. Although de la Roche provided supporting
evidence for its binding to the ARD in vitro, it is still unclear
whether 26 itself or one of its oxidized metabolites
is responsible for its cytotoxicity.
The majority of the abovementioned
known promiscuous scaffolds were identified as problematic by either
PAIN or Brenk filtering, or both. Exceptions were toxoflavin (10), labile copper complex (21), and polycyclic
furazan (34), which were not identified by the filters,
despite their known chemical lability (vide supra). We found that
the Brenk alert filter of SwissADME was generally more efficient at
detecting potentially reactive and/or toxic substructures than more
traditional/historical PAIN filters, and generated results more in
line with the known promiscuity of these scaffolds. Last but not least,
an important proportion of these molecules are based on chemotypes
well known to aggregate and form colloids in aqueous buffers, interfering
with a variety of screening assays. This was recently demonstrated
in several excellent studies, highlighting compound aggregation as
a major source of false positives in in vitro screening assays. , Although the use of detergent additives can to some extent mitigate
this behavior, the presence of aggregation prone chemotypes present
in reported β-catenin ligands is another important consideration
( ).
Regardless
of the presence of PAIN/Brenk motifs, we examined the
binding of these compounds to the ARD (aa 148–662). A small
number of compounds were available commercially (see Supporting Information Section), while a large proportion
originated from proprietary compound libraries. We re-synthesized
these in-house and here provide detailed synthetic routes and associated
analytical data (Supporting Information, Schemes S1–S18). We postulated that any candidate displaying
cellular activity at a low micromolar concentration is likely to exhibit
a binding affinity in a similar concentration range or below, and
should elicit a sharp response in our assay conditions (Experimental
Section, Supporting Information). Positive
control TCF4 (aa 13–27) and BCL9 (aa 348–376) peptides
displayed Kds = 1.81 ± 0.11 and 1.25
± 0.06 μM, respectively, in line with previous reports
and demonstrating that our ARD construct is folded and functional
( , Figure S5). , However, to
our disappointment, but in line with the abovementioned PAIN/Brenk
analysis, none of these compounds did show a measurable binding enthalpy
in ITC, and failed to induce significant thermal stabilization in
DSF experiments ( and S2–S9, Figure S4). For example, representative CGP049090 (6) did not show any binding enthalpy to the ARD in ITC, nor did fluorescein
(22), eosin Y (23), or BC-23 (33). Also, in contrast with VP-ITC binding data reported by Trosset
and suggesting submicromolar binding affinity to the ARD, in our hands,
purified PNU-74654 11 (both commercial and re-synthesized)
surprisingly and consistently did not exhibit noticeable binding enthalpy
in repeat ITC200 experiments, and consistently showed an absence of
protein stabilization in DSF experiments. Interestingly and consistent
with previous reports, MSAB (36) showed a positive STD response in our hands despite showing little
enthalpy and protein stabilization. We also wondered whether β-catenin
inhibition by 36 in cells may be mediated by the in situ
hydrolysis of the methyl ester to generate a potentially more active
carboxylic acid analogue. To test this hypothesis, we synthesized
carboxylic acid analogue 96 by alkaline hydrolysis of 36 (Scheme S16). Although 96 was soluble in aqueous media at a higher concentration
(>1 mM) compared to parent MSAB (36), it also failed
to exhibit any binding affinity or thermal stabilization of the ARD,
discarding in situ activation as a potential cause for engaging the
ARD in cells. Based on these results, we propose that 36 is hydrophobic and that the observed STD signal is a result of weak
and unspecific binding to hydrophobic patches of the ARD. Such effects
have been extensively documented and recently discussed by Zega in
an excellent review. Overall, none of
the compounds scrutinized in this study showed consistent binding
across the biophysical cascade we employed.
 

## Conclusions
In this study, we provide
a comprehensive overview of claimed (and
some putative) “direct” small-molecule inhibitors of
β-catenin reported in the literature, along with their binding
properties and proposed molecular mode of action. However, we show
that the majority of these molecules contain PAIN/Brenk structural
motifs, notorious for their promiscuity in screening assays. Regardless,
we assayed these compounds in orthogonal biophysical assays, looking
at both binding affinity (ITC) and protein thermal stabilization (DSF).
In line with their suspected promiscuity, we demonstrate that none
of these molecules exhibit a direct measurable interaction with purified
human ARD, at least not in the concentration range reported for their
bioactivity. ITC, in particular, is a label-free technique, and while
considered one of the gold standards to assess biomolecular interactions,
it has not been systematically employed in the field. We also highlight
that despite important progress in the development of PAIN filters
in the last decade, a number of known problematic substructures are
still escaping triage, potentially leading to the investigation of
flat SAR and/or “dead-end” scaffolds. We believe that
this has been an important contributor to the common view that β-catenin
is an undruggable target and perhaps partly explains why none of the
molecules presented above made it to advanced clinical evaluation.
Altogether, our data evidence that apart from a small number of high
molecular weight peptidomimetics, there is currently no unambiguously
confirmed, potent small-molecule ligand of the β-catenin ARD.
Although it is not impossible that some of these compounds identified
in phenotypic screens may bind to β-catenin N- or C-terminal
regions, it appears unlikely as there is sufficient evidence that
they are unstructured and deprived of a well-defined, druggable pocket.
One possibility is that some of these compounds target transient binding
sites formed upon association of the N- or C- termini with co-regulators
such as TCF4 and BCL9. Simonetta and co-workers recently reported a series of trifluoromethylated pyridone
derivatives acting as “molecular glues” that stabilize
the interaction of the β-catenin N-terminus (aa 16–50)
with SCFβ-TrCP E3 ligase via binding to a
narrow transient pocket at the PPI interface in vitro. However, it
is not completely clear whether this pocket is present upon complex
formation with FL β-catenin in cells. Recently, a number of
anthraquinone derivatives, such as BC-2059 (Tegavivint), were shown
to inhibit Wnt signaling through binding to transducin beta-like protein
1 (TBL1) and inhibiting its interaction with nuclear β-catenin,
making the latter vulnerable to degradation. In the future, it would be interesting to see whether the compounds
discussed above have any effect on the TBL1:β-catenin interaction.
We also cannot discard that the binding of some of these compounds
in cells may depend on specific, although yet to characterize post-translational
modifications at the surface of β-catenin. However, the complete
absence of binding to recombinant ARD makes it improbable, and more
likely, they act through another, yet to be identified, molecular
mechanism in cells. Here, we aim to draw attention and caution to
the proposed cellular mode of action of these inhibitors, and suggest
they may exert cytotoxicity and inhibit signaling via other, possibly
β-catenin-independent mechanisms. These avenues will be the
focus of future studies in our laboratories. These results are significant
as many of these molecules are still sold as β-catenin ligands
at a high price, and this study to a large extent debunks the gaps
in knowledge regarding their binding properties and will inform the
community on their suitability as chemical probes of Wnt signaling.
This work will also likely have important implications in the (re)interpretation
of a large number of published studies employing these molecules as
β-catenin inhibitors. We believe that an important focus of
future screening campaigns should be the choice of suitable assay
cascades with lower susceptibility to false positives for identifying
new direct β-catenin inhibitors. Critical to success will be
the combination of orthogonal in vitro assays for hit enrichment and
validation, to inform structural studies and future lead optimization.
For example, representative methods such as DSF, NMR, and ITC seem
well-positioned for that purpose and span a wide throughput versus
accuracy range, and their combination has proven effective in the
fragment-based ligand discovery area for targeting highly challenging
PPIs previously thought undruggable. While preparing this manuscript, colleagues from Boehringer Ingelheim
used a combination of NMR and microscale thermophoresis to cross-validate
fragment-sized ligands of the ARD, and reported the first crystal
structure of a fragment-sized molecule bound to a truncated ARD construct
(repeats 1–4). Although these
fragments display modest affinity (Kd =
915 μM, LE = 0.20) and do not overlap with relevant PPIs at
the ARD surface, this provides support for such in vitro screening
cascades. Overall, we believe this study provides compelling evidence
that β-catenin remains a highly attractive target in cancer.

## Supporting Information Available
The Supporting Information is
available free of charge at https://pubs.acs.org/doi/10.1021/acs.jmedchem.2c00228.Synthetic procedures and
compound characterization data,
protocols for recombinant protein production and peptide synthesis,
protocols for biophysical studies, ITC titrations of small molecules
and peptides, representative NMR spectra and high-performance liquid
chromatography traces, and selected DSF-generated protein melting
curves (PDF)
Molecular formula strings (CSV)

## Supplementary Material
jm2c00228_si_001.pdf
jm2c00228_si_002.csv

The authors declare no
competing financial interest.

## Acknowledgments
This work is supported by awards
to M.B. from the
Wessex Medical Research and the Rosetrees Trust (grants A1459 and
M653). NMR and mass spectrometry facilities in Southampton are supported
by the EPSRC core capability award (EP/K039466/1). M.F. is supported
by the Medical Research Council (grant MC_U105192713 to M. Bienz).
K.H. is supported by the FWO and the European Union’s Horizon
2020 research and innovation program under the Marie Skłodowska-Curie
(grant no 665501) and a Fonds Wetenschappelijk Onderzoek-Vlaanderen
research grant (2018, 1.5.193.18N).

## Abbreviations
ΔGGibbs free
energy
ΔHenthalpy change
ΔSentropy change
APCadenomatous polyposis
coli
ARDarmadillo
repeat domain
BCL9B-cell CLL/lymphoma 9 protein
CBPcyclic adenosine monophosphate response element
binding protein binding protein
CK1αcasein kinase 1α
CRCcolorectal cancer
CTDC-terminal domain
DaDalton
DCdestruction complex
DSFdifferential scanning fluorimetry
EMTepithelial–mesenchymal
transition
FBLDfragment-based ligand discovery
FPfluorescence polarization
GI50compound concentration
for 50% of maximal inhibition of cell proliferation
GSK3βglycogen synthase kinase
3 beta
HD2homology
domain 2
HRPhorseradish
peroxidase
ICATinhibitor of β-catenin and TCF
IPimmunoprecipitation
ITCisothermal titration calorimetry
Kaassociation constant
Kddissociation constant
KEAP1Kelch-like ECH-associated
protein 1
LEligand
efficiency
LEFlymphoid
enhancer-binding factor
LOGSYligand observed via gradient spectroscopy
LRPlow density lipoprotein receptor-related
protein
MDM2mouse
double minute 2 homolog
MMP-7matrix metallopeptidase 7
MSABmethyl 3-{[(4-methylphenyl)sulfonyl]amino}benzoate
MSTmicroscale thermophoresis
nstoichiometry
NRF2nuclear factor erythroid
2-related factor 2
NTDN-terminal domain
NSCLCnon-small cell lung cancer
PAINSpan assay interference compounds
PPIprotein–protein
interaction
RYKrelated to receptor tyrosine kinase
SDMsite-directed mutagenesis
STATsignal transducer and activator
of transcription
STDsaturation transfer difference
TCF4transcription factor 4
Tmprotein
melting temperature
WBwestern blotting
WntWingless-related integration site