2233jcmmopenJournal of Cellular and Molecular MedicineJ Cell Mol MedWileyPMC9170825917082591708253550248710.1111/jcmm.17323Betelvine (Piper betle L.): A comprehensive insight into its ethnopharmacology, phytochemistry, and pharmacological, biomedical and therapeutic attributes
BiswasProtha AnandUttpal SahaSuchismita Chatterjee KantNishi MishraTulika MasihHarison BarAnanya PandeyDevendra Kumar JhaNiraj Kumar MajumderMadhumita DasNeela GadekarVijaykumar Shivaji ShekhawatMahipal S KumarManoj Radha ProćkówJarosław de la LastraJosé M Pérez DeyAbhijit 
1
Department of Life Sciences, Presidency University, Kolkata, West Bengal, India
2
, Department of Life Sciences, Ben‐Gurion University of the Negev, Beer‐Sheva, Israel
3
Department of Zoology, Nabadwip Vidyasagar College (Affiliated to the University of Kalyani), Nabadwip, West Bengal, India
4
Department of Biotechnology, School of Health and Allied Science, ARKA Jain University, Jamshedpur, Jharkhand, India
5
Department of Botany, Deen Dayal Upadhyay Gorakhpur University, Gorakhpur, Uttar Pradesh, India
6
Department of Industrial Microbiology, Jacob Institute of Biotechnology and Bioengineering, Sam Higginbottom University of Agriculture, Technology and Sciences, Prayagraj, Uttar Pradesh, India
7
Department of Zoology, Wilson College (Affiliated to University of Mumbai), Mumbai, Maharashtra, India
8
, Department of Biotechnology, Lovely Professional University, Phagwara, Punjab, India
9
, Department of Biotechnology, School of Engineering & Technology, Sharda University, Greater Noida, Uttar Pradesh, India
10
Department of Botany, Raidighi College (Affiliated to University of Calcutta), Raidighi, West Bengal, India
11
Department of Botany, Rishi Bankim Chandra College (Affiliated to the West Bengal State University), Naihati, West Bengal, India
12
Zoology Department, Sangola College (Affiliated to Punyashlok Ahilyadevi Holkar Solapur University), Solapur, Maharashtra, India
13
Plant Biotechnology Unit, Kanchi Mamunivar Government Institute for Postgraduate Studies and Research, Puducherry, India
14
Chemical and Biochemical Processing Division, ICAR ‐ Central Institute for Research on Cotton Technology, Mumbai, Maharashtra, India
15
School of Biological and Environmental Sciences, Shoolini University of Biotechnology and Management Sciences, Solan, Himachal Pradesh, India
16
, Department of Plant Biology, Institute of Environmental Biology, Wrocław University of Environmental and Life Sciences, Wrocław, Poland
17
Instituto de Productos Naturales y Agrobiología (IPNA), Consejo Superior de Investigaciones científicas (CSIS), Santa Cruz de Tenerife, Spain*

Correspondence
, 
Jarosław Proćków, Department of Plant Biology, Institute of Environmental Biology, Wrocław University of Environmental and Life Sciences, Kożuchowska 5b, 51‐631 Wrocław, Poland. 
Email: jaroslaw.prockow@upwr.edu.pl
, 
José M. Pérez de la Lastra, Instituto de Productos Naturales y Agrobiología (IPNA), Consejo Superior de Investigaciones científicas (CSIS), Santa Cruz de Tenerife, Spain. 
Email: jm.perezdelalastra@csic.es
, 
Abhijit Dey, Department of Life Sciences, Presidency University, 86/1 College Street, Kolkata 700073, West Bengal, India. 
Emails: abhijit.dbs@presiuniv.ac.in; abhijitbio25@yahoo.com

✉Corresponding author.
252022261130833083–3119862022© 2022 The Authors. Journal of Cellular and Molecular Medicine published by Foundation for Cellular and Molecular Medicine and John Wiley & Sons Ltd.This is an open access article under the terms of the http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/ License, which permits use, distribution and reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited.

## Abstract

Piper betle L. (synonym: Piper betel Blanco), or betel vine, an economically and medicinally important cash crop, belongs to the family Piperaceae, often known as the green gold. The plant can be found all over the world and is cultivatedprimarily in South East Asian countries for its beautiful glossy heart‐shaped leaves, which are chewed or consumed as betelquidand widely used in Chinese and Indian folk medicine, as carminative, stimulant,astringent, against parasitic worms, conjunctivitis, rheumatism, wound, etc., andis also used for religious purposes. Hydroxychavicol is the most important bioactive compound among the wide range of phytoconstituents found in essential oil and extracts. The pharmacological attributes of P. betle are antiproliferation, anticancer, neuropharmacological, analgesic, antioxidant, antiulcerogenic, hepatoprotective, antifertility, antibacterial, antifungal and many more. Immense attention has been paid to nanoformulations and their applications. The application of P. betle did not show cytotoxicity in preclinical experiments, suggesting that it could serve as a promising therapeutic candidate for different diseases. The present review comprehensively summarizes the botanical description, geographical distribution, economic value and cultivation, ethnobotanical uses, preclinical pharmacological properties with insights of toxicological, clinical efficacy, and safety of P. betle. The findings suggest that P. betle represents an orally active and safe natural agent that exhibits great therapeutic potential for managing various human medical conditions. However, further research is needed to elucidate its underlying molecular mechanisms of action, clinical aspects, structure–activity relationships, bioavailability and synergistic interactions with other drugs.
Keywords: Betelvine (Piper betle L.), ethnobotany, hydroxychavicol, nanoparticles, pharmacology, phytochemicals

statusreleaseddisplay-pdfyesis-olfnois-manuscriptnois-preprintnois-journal-matternois-scannednois-retractednoRevised 2022 Feb 28; Received 2022 Jan 6; Accepted 2022 Mar 24; Issue date 2022 Jun.

1.

## INTRODUCTION

Piper betle L. (synonym: Piper betel Blanco) (Piperaceae) is a widely known perennial creeping plant belonging to the genus Piperaceae and originates from central and eastern Peninsular Malaysia and is distributed to East Africa and tropical countries of Asia. It is a commercial cash crop cultivated mainly in India, Bangladesh, Sri Lanka Thailand, Taiwan, Malaysia and few other Southeast Asian countries. , The betelvine is called the ‘green gold of India’ because almost 20 million people depend on this plant to derive their source of income from the production, transportation, handling, processing and preparation of betel leaves. , The betel vine is usually an asexually propagated plant that has various cultivars and bears both male and female plants. About a hundred varieties of betel plants are found across the world, among them 40 varieties are found only in India and of which 30 are recorded from West Bengal and Bangladesh. The most common varieties of betel are Magadhi, Salem, Mysore, Bangla, Kauri, Venmony, Meetha, Kapoori, Sanchi, Banarasi, Desavari, Kasi, Ghanagete and Bagerhati, which are mainly based upon their colour, aroma, taste and size. 
P. betle is known by various names in different countries around used globe, though ‘Paan’ is the most used in India, Pakistan, Nepal and Bangladesh. The betel leaf and areca nuts play a central role in Hindu culture as they are used in a variety of social, cultural and religious ceremonies. Betel quid is a common practice in many countries because it acts as a natural tonic and mouth refresher to prevent oral malodour. The International Agency for Research on Cancer surveyed and estimated that there are 200–600 million users present globally (Refs , ; IARC).
The use of P. betle is found in many traditional medicinal systems, such as the Indian Ayurvedic medicinal system, traditional Chinese medicine, and also in the folklore medicinal system of the West Indies and Latin America. In the Ayurvedic medicine system, P. betle plants are used as preparation varieties for the treatment of many diseases, known as Lokantha Rasa, Puspadhava Rasa, Laghu‐sutaseknara Rasa, Lanha, Brhat sarwajwarahara and Brhat visamaj warantaka Rasa. The juice prepared from the betle leaf is generally used as an adjuvant in many herbal combinations with different other medicinal plants for better results in Ayurveda. Traditionally, the plant is used to cure many ailments such as cold, bronchial asthma, cough, stomachalgia and rheumatism, and it is used for the treatment of other diseases such as boils, bad breath, constipation, conjunctivitis, gum swelling, abscesses, injuries and cuts, which are communicable or noncommunicable. The use of this plant is also found in other purposes, such as in fish poisoning, fish bait, insecticides, ornaments, oils, perfumes and hallucinogens. 

Pharmacological properties of medicinal plants are primarily attributed to a variety of bioactive phytochemicals with biomedical and pharmaceutical significance. , , , , , , , Plants are known to house a number of different classes of phytoconstituents , , such as alkaloids, glycosides, tannins, phenolic compounds, flavonoids, terpenes and oligosaccharides. , , Such phytochemicals have also been reported against an array of human ailments. , , The strong pungent aroma comes from the leaves of betel because the essential oil contains a good quantity of terpenes and phenols. , , The essential oil from betel leaf is to some extent a greasy, slippery and viscous liquid at room temperature. A wide diversity of bioactive compounds is present in the leaves of betel, this difference is based on the environment, soil types, the location of growing and types of landraces. The wide range of phytochemicals present in the betel plants was identified as chavicol, chavibetol, hydroxychavicol, eugenol, estragole, methyl eugenol, hydroxycatechol, α‐pinene, caryophyllene, β‐pinene, 1,8‐cineol and others. In a recent report, combining herbs (P. betle leaves) and herbo‐minerals (Swarna bhasma) in a dosage‐dependent manner was used to treat Corona patients by enhancing their prophylactic and therapeutic effects. 

Various extraction methods are used for the extraction of volatile oils from the leaves of betel, including hydrodistillation, steam distillation, solvent extraction and supercritical fluid extraction that were characterized by GC‐MS, NMR. Huge numbers of studies have revealed the efficacy of the bioactive compounds present in essential oil as antioxidants to prevent cancer, inflammation, neurodegenerative disorders, and also as antimutagenic, antifertility, antilipidaemic, antiglycaemic, cardioprotective, etc. 
,
 The essential oil of betel leaves can also combat bacterial, protozoan and fungal infections and insect attacks.
This review comprehensively summarizes the botanical description, economic status, pharmacological properties, nanoformulations and their applications taking into account the safety and toxicity. In addition, the underlying molecular basis of the action of plant extracts or phytochemicals are also discussed. Considering the immense potential of this underexploited medicinal plant, the present review comprehensively describes the present state of the art research on this plant with an interdisciplinary approach that includes the pharmacology, nanotechnology, preclinical and clinical studies and also potential toxicological considerations of using P. betle preparations. However, more studies are needed to enumerate the structure–activity relationships behind the pharmacological activity of plant constituents. Detailed clinicalstudies are also needed, and the pharmacokinetic properties and druggability ofsuch preparations need to be elucidated.

2.

## TAXONOMY
Taxonomical classification
Kingdom: Plantae
Division: Magnoliophyta
Class: Magnoliopsida
Order: Piperales
Family: Piperaceae
Genus: Piper

Species: Piper betle L. 

3.

## BOTANICAL DESCRIPTION
The plant (Figure  ) is a dioecious root climber, and the shoots reach any height from 3 to 10 m according to available facilities for climbing. The plant bears lateral branches along its entire length that grow a couple of feet from the ground. The stems are swollen and articulate, with dichotomous branching and rooting at the nodes. The stems are stout, almost terete, slightly flattened; when young, they are light green and marked by short, raised, whitish streaks and with pinkish stripes along the node. The internodes generally attain a length of about 12 cm. and a diameter of 1.2 cm. Leaves are characterized as a simple blade, alternate, spiral and ex‐stipulate; petioles are 2–5 mm long, pubescent and channelled. Leaf blades are glabrous, coriaceous, fleshy, greenish to yellowish, shining, broadly ovate, width 7–8.5 cm, length 9–11 cm; base cordate; apex acuminate; margin is entire, narrowly recurved; venation reticulate, 7–9 veins in two or three pairs coming from the midrib, one pair elevating from base. The inflorescence is an axillary spike up to 5.5 cm long. The male inflorescence forms a cylindrical pendulous catkin of 10 cm in length and 2 cm in diameter. Female spikes are also cylindrical, pendulous; length 2.5–4 cm and diameter 0.5 cm. Individual flowers are very minute and unisexual, reduced, consisting of a couple of stamens and stigmas inserted into the axil of each bract. The bracts are orbicular, peltate, arranged in a thickly crowded spiral series. The mature inflorescence is strongly aromatic. Fruiting spikes are 3–5 cm in length, orange and drupping, entrenched on the rachis of the mature inflorescence. 
,
 

 
4.

## VERNACULAR NAME
Vernacular names in Indian languages
Sanskrit: Tambool, Mukhbhushan, Nagavalli, Varnalata, Nagavallari
Hindi, Bengali, Urdu: Paan
Telugu: Nagballi, Tamalapaku
Tamil: Vetrilai
Gujarati: Nagarbael
Marathi: Vidyache pan
Malayalam: Vettilakkoti, Vettila
Kannada: Veeleya, Veeleyada yele, Vilya, Villayadel
Konkani: Phodi paan
Other Asian languages
English: Betle, Betle pepper, Betle‐vine
Vietnamese: Tråu
Khmer: Maluu
Mon: Plu
Thai: Plue, Pelu
Persian: Burg‐e‐Tanbol
Chamorro: Papulu
Javanese: Suruh, Sirih, Bodeh
Arabic: Tanbol
Sakai: Jerak
Semang: Seresa, Be, Cabe
Sinhalese: Bulath
Jakun: Kerekap, Kenayek
Malay: Daun sirih, Sirih hudang, Sirih Carang, Sirih melayu
Kapampangan: Bulung samat 
,
 

5.

## DISTRIBUTION AND CULTIVATION
The betel vine is believed to have originated in Malaysia. The plant is widely grown in forests that are generally damp and also in hot and moist climatic conditions of India and many other countries in South and South East Asia, viz. China and Vietnam. Piper betle is believed to have first emerged in tropical Asia and then spread to East Africa and Madagascar. Betel is widely grown in India, Sri Lanka, Bangladesh, Indonesia, Nepal, Pakistan, Vietnam, Thailand, Laos, Kampuchea, Philippine Islands, Burma, Malaysia, Taiwan, Malay Peninsula and many countries in Southeast Asia and is known to have a long history, mentioning the presence of the betel plant over 2000 years. Figure  presents the worldwide distribution of the species. In India, the plant is found in Bengal, Bihar, Orissa, Andhra Pradesh, Karnataka, Uttar Pradesh and Tamilnadu. , , About a hundred betel plant varieties are found all over the world,among them, 40 are grown in India, along with 30 are grown in Bangladesh and West Bengal. Various types of Piper betle are found across the world, for instance, Magadhi, Kauri, Meetha, Salem, Venmony, Bangla, Banarasi, Kapoori, Kasi, Sanchi, Mysore, Desavari, Ghanagete and Bagerhati according to their size, colour and aroma. 

 
Piper betle is generally propagated asexually by cutting stems rather than germinating seeds. It needs a compatible tree or long support for its creeping habit. Betel vine cultivation is a very typical type of farming. For betel cultivation, the best choices are highlands and especially fertile sandy or sandy clay or sandy loam soil with a well drainage system and a pH range of 5.6–8.2, thus, saline and alkali soils where water logging are a problem is not suitable; about 2250–4750 mm rainfall, relative humidity 40–80% and temperature range 15–40°C are considered suitable. In Bangladesh, farmers prepare a special garden called ‘barouj’ which is fenced with bamboo sticks and coconut leaves and on top of the fench is covered with paddy leaves to grow betel. The farming land is well dug into furrows of approximately 10–15 m long, 75 cm wide and 75 cm deep. The furrows are thoroughly manured with cow dung, rotten farmyard manure, oil cakes, leaves and wood ash. After proper dressing, the cuttings are planted at the beginning of the monsoon, in the months of May to June. Then, the plants are parallelly arranged in rows with a distance of two feet between each plant and are bound with a string around upright sticks of split bamboo or short plants for support. Proper shade and frequent irrigation are necessary in areas where rainfall is lower about 1500–1700 mm; regular watering is required in summer and watering every 3–4 days is sufficient in winter, and a proper drainage system is mandatory at the time of rainy season for the successful cultivation of this crop. After 1 year of planting, the leaves of the plant turn out to be ready for plucking, and the production of betel leaf from the barouj lasts for more than a few years from the time of planting. 
,
 
,
 

6.

## ECONOMIC STATUS
In the Indian climate, the female plants of Piper betle rarely produce flowers or fruit. Betel vines are cultivated and harvested mainly for their heart‐shaped green leaves. This crop has a vast economic potentiality which can be effectively recognized by the piece of evidence that more or less 15–20 million of people in India have the habit of using betel leaves regularly not only that, there are more than 2 billion people from many other countries who are recognized as regular users of betel leaves from all over the world. Most importantly, the economic status of betel leaves is dependent on the physical character of the end products in the worldwide market. The betel leaf and products produced in different forms such as powder, capsules, liquid and various types of value‐added products are available on a broad spectrum in the market as beverages, in oral care, pharmaceutical products and cosmetics. The annual turnover national income is Rs 7000–10,000 million, and from this, the state, West Bengal, gains an income of 800–1000 million rupees per year. The leaves were exported to various countries around the world where the plant is not grown naturally or the local supply could not meet the requirements. Betel leaves are generally exported to Hong Kong, Pakistan, Italy, Bahrain, Canada, Great Britain, Kuwait, Saudi Arab, Nepal and several other countries in Europe. 
,
 

7.

## TRADITIONAL AND ETHNO‐MEDICINAL USE
Traditional medicine has played a crucial role in the health care of the rural and urban people. , , Ethno‐medico‐botanicals have been used across almost all the cultures worldwide against an array of human medical conditions. , , , The use of betel leaf alone and with a combination of other plants or medicines for better therapeutic effects is mentioned in the Ayurvedic literature, which was almost 1400 BC ago. Atharved, the ancient Vedic literature, mentioned the usefulness of the betel plant against numerous diseases at about 3000–2500 BC before. Saptasira, the Vedic name of the leaves of betel, is mentioned in the Kamasutra of Vatsyayan as having aphrodisiac properties. In the ayurvedic and Unani system of medicine, the betel plant is used as an anthelmintic, appetite stimulant, vermifuge, astringent, diarrhoea, aphrodisiac, breath freshener, carminative, cardiac tonic, dentifrice, in the prevention of diuretic emmenagogues, induction and increase of menstrual flow, laxative, strengthen gums, nerve tonic and also in the treatment of urinary disorders. Betel leaves are mostly chewed by about 200 million people on a regular basis throughout the south Asia and western part of the Pacific basin in a special shape of packets known as ‘Betel quid’, which is prepared from Piper betle leaves brushed with burnt lime and contain few pieces of areca nut, flavours, often cardamom or cloves, are added with or without tobacco according to choice. Chaveerach et al. stated that the betel leaf is a most important material in Thai ceremonies. Elderly people chew betel leaves to prepare quid. In weddings, the family members of the bridegroom place money along with the betle leaves in a bowl, which together is known as khun maak. The ethnic group Kui, from the southern division of North East Thailand, uses betel leaf (locally, raam phi taan) in the ‘Spirit dancing’ ceremony to chase away evil spirits or fend off bad luck from the patients from the family or the village. They use betel leaves as stimulant, exhilarant, antiseptic and antioxidant, to treat kidney inflammation and thirst resulting from diabetes, strength to stomach, as expectorant for asthma, coughs and bronchitis, and antiflatulent element. Decoction of P. betle leaves used to prevent body odour and treat diarrhoea, sore throat, skin allergies and fluor albus, leaves are cooked and added to vegetable soup. In Southeast Asia, Betel chewing with its associated discoloration of the teeth is the ascriptions of the teeth blackening practice related to sexual maturation and becoming a full member of society in Masticans. In the Laleng community, people use betel leaf to chew and at the sociocultural festival. They oil the leaf with mustard oil and place it on the naval area to relieve liver pain. The Rabha community of Mataikhar forest, Assam, the Torajanese, the Bugis community and Lakshadweep people also use betel leaf for chewing and in religious festivals. , , , People in Parsa district, Nepal, chew betel leaf or mix leaf juice with hot water, honey or milk mild stimulant, cure worm, remedy for bad breath and provides mouth refreshment, improve digestion, strengthen teeth and gums, palate cleaner, treatment of nervous pains and exhaustion, ease of urination, analgesic, reduce cough and cold. The ethno‐medicinal uses of P. betle in the area and community are listed in Table  .
 
8.

## PHYTOCHEMICAL PROFILE

Piper betle is one of the extensively investigated plants for its various phytochemical constituents present in it, and the study revealed that the plant contains a wide range of phytochemicals that are biologically active. Compound concentrations depend on the different varieties of the plant, season, climate and may geographical location and also might be influenced by various factors such as soil, humidity, agronomic practices, rainfall, season and type of plant. The main phytochemical constituents of the essential oil of the betel leaf are mainly phenols and terpenes. The phenol content varies by gender, total phenols are three times higher in male plants, and the thiocyanate content is two times higher compared to female plans. Leaf quality is basically dependent on the phenol content; more phenol content comes with better leaf quality. The typical pungent aroma of the betel leaves is the result of the phenols present in them. Preliminary photochemical studies of aqueous and methanol extracts of betel leaves revealed the presence of alkaloids, flavonoids, tannins, sterols, phenols, glycosides, saponins and terpenoids. Syahidah et al. also identified alkaloids, phenols, flavonoids, saponins, steroids, tannins, terpenoids and glycosides from qualitative analysis of the methanolic extract of the betel leaves. Leaves also contain bitter compounds (0.7–2.6%). Terpenoids and their acetates, including cadinene, 1,8‐cineole, chavicol, chavibetol, safrole, camphene, limonene, caryophyllene, pinene, carvacrol, allylpyrocatechol and eugenol, are present in P. betle as the main phenols. , A recent work with the leaves was found to contain starch, diastases, sugars (0.8 to 1.8%) and an essential oil in an amount of 4.2%. The presence of tannins and steroidal components was revealed by phytochemical investigation on leaves. The main components of betel leaf oil are safrole (48.7%), chavibetol acetate (12.5%) allylpyrocate choldiacetate (34.0%), along with ρ–cymene, 4‐terpinol, eugenol, β‐caryophyllene. There are two sesquiterpenes, cadinene and caryophyllene and safrole (52.7%), eugenyl acetate (5.8%), allylpyrocatecholdiacetate (15.4%) and eugenol (6.4%) are also reported as the main elements of the essential oil of the P. betle leaf from Sri Lanka. The leaves were also found to produce an alkaloid, namely arakene, which possesses properties similar to those of cocaine. The chemical compositions of essential oil differ in different parts: leaf, stem, stalk and root contain safrole, while fruits contain β ‐phellandrene. Younger leaves of betel contain more amount of essential oil. Phytochemical analysis of two varieties of betel leaves, Kamarvetrilai and Kumbakonamvetrilai, confirmed cardiac glycosides, acids and steroids along with tannins, saponins and flavonoids. In another experiment, four cultivars of P. betle—Banarasi, Calcutta, Kammar and Kumbakonam—showed positive results in tannin, flavonoid and terpenoid tests,plobatannins found in the Banarasi cultivar, Banarasi and Kammar gave positive results for saponins,cardiac glycosides found in the Banarasi and Kumbakonam cultivars. Pipercerebrosides A and B are two new sphingolipids isolated and identified by NMR (Nuclear magnetic resonance) spectroscopy of betel leaf extract. GC‐MS (Gas chromatography–mass spectrometry) studies identified all compounds that can be divided as monoterpene (α‐thujene, α‐pinene, camphene, sabinene, myrcene, β‐phellandrene, α‐terpinene, (e)‐β‐ocimene, 1,8‐cineole/eucalyptol, γ‐terpinene, terpinolene, linalool, terpinen‐4‐ol, α‐terpineol), sesquiterpenes (δ‐elemene, α‐copaene, β‐copaene, β‐elemene, e‐β‐caryophyllene, γ‐elemene, β‐selinene, aromadendrene, α‐humulene, germacrene d, α‐selinene, γ‐muurolene, bicyclogermacrene, α‐muurolene, cis‐β guaiene, δ‐cadinene, palustrol, spathulenol, caryophyllene oxide, globulol, viridiflorol, cubenol, α‐cadinol), and phenylpropane (estragole/methyl chavicol, chavicol, anethole/isoestragole, safrole, chavicol, acetate, eugenol, methyl eugenol, eugenol acetate). Betel vine also contains dotriacontanoic acid, stearic acid, piperlonguminine, hentriacontane, n‐triacontanol, pentatriacontane, triotnacontane, isoeugenol, allylpyrocatecholdiacetate, α‐pinene, β‐sitosteryl palmitate, 1, 8‐cineol, ursolic acid, β‐sitosterol, β‐pinene, sitosterol, ursolic acid 3β‐acetate and stigmasterol. Betel roots possess ursonic acid, piperlonguminine, stearic acid, β‐sitosteryl palmitate, β‐sitosterol, 3β‐acetyl ursolic acid, 4‐allyl resorcinol, aristololactam A II and stigmast‐4‐en‐3, 6‐dione. The betel stems were found to have stigmast‐4‐en‐3, piperine, piperlonguminine, piperdardine, dehydropipernonaline, guineensine, 6‐dione, aristololactam A‐II, pellitorine, 4‐allyl resorcinol, syringaresinol‐O‐β‐D‐glucopyranoside, N‐isobutyl‐2E,4E‐dodecadienamide, pinoresinol, piperolein‐B, cepharadione A, dotriacontanoic acid, β‐daucosterol, tritriacontane, β‐sitosterol, α‐ethyl glucoside (2E,4E)‐N‐isobutyl‐7‐(3’,4'‐methylenedioxyphenyl)‐2,4‐heptadienamide, 23‐hydroxyursan‐12‐en‐28‐oic acid, (2S)‐4'‐hydroxy‐ 2,3‐dihydrofl avonone‐7‐O‐β‐D‐glucoside and β‐sitosterol‐3‐O‐β‐D‐glucoside‐6'‐O‐palmitate. , , , Gas chromatography mass spectrometry (GC–MS) analysis of fresh and cured leaves of the essential oil of P. betle var Bangla fresh and cured leaves revealed a total of thirty‐three phytochemicals and a total of thirty volatile components, respectively, with high abundance of estragole, eugenol, linalool, anethole, α‐copaene, chavicol and caryophyllene. Very recently, Islam et al. studied volatile oils from five varieties of betel such as Bangla, Misti, Khasi, Sanchi and Bari and found a total of 101 volatile oil compounds, which are much higher in number than previous reports with 50 compounds identified for the first time. Table  represents the phytochemical constituents of P. betle. Figure  represents the chemical structures of some phytochemicals reported from the species.
 
9.

## PHARMACOLOGICAL ACTIVITIES
The following section summarizes the various pharmacological attributes of P. betle (Table  ).
 9.1.

## Antitumour/anticancer/antiproliferative activity
One of the promising therapeutic strategy to inhibit cancer cell proliferation is to facilitate apoptosis. In cancer research, finding apoptosis‐inducing agents derived from plant sources has become popular due to the fact that existing anti‐apoptotic drugs, many of which are derived from chemical substances, often fail to combat cancer development and progression. In addition to the destruction of rapidly proliferating cancer cells, many anticancer compounds also kill normal cells in the body. Cancer can be treated with chemotherapy and/or radiotherapy, but both can cause numerous adverse health effects, and in many instances, cancer cells develop resistance to anticancer medications. However, of late few compounds obtained from natural sources, which cannot even be synthesized in the most advanced chemical synthesis laboratories, have shown great promise in the cancer treatment. 
,
 
,
 
,
 
,
 
,
 

The first report of antitumour activity of P. betle came from Rao. He studied the activity of the aqueous extract prepared from leaves in benzo(a)pyrene‐induced tumours in buccal pouches of hamsters. The result revealed that the betel leaf extract was very effective in inhibiting preneoplastic and neoplastic changes; partial and complete tumour suppression was also observed in both short‐term (10 days) and long‐term (6 months) treatment. Again, the effect of the aqueous extract of leaves on dimethyl benz (a) anthracene (DMBA)‐ induced carcinogenesis in the mammary grand of Holtzman rats was evaluated. When leaf extract was administered orally at higher doses, it showed the inhibitory result on tumour emergence. Bhide et al. investigated the result of the alcoholic extract of betel leaves and its few constituents (hydroxychavicol, α‐tocopherol, eugenol and β‐carotene) against benzo[a]pyrene‐induced neoplasia in the forestomach of Swiss male mice. The leaf extract of betel and the constituents present in it were able to decrease the number of papilloma, and the highest protection was shown by α‐tocopherol and β‐carotene. A study of the effect of leaf extracts on the carcinogenic and mutagenic actions of nitrosamines, 4‐(N‐nitrosomethylamino)‐1‐(3‐pyridyl)‐1‐butanone (NNK), which is one of the most potent chemicals specific to tobacco, was carried out in mice. The result showed that leaf extract and hydroxychavicol were able to reduce the tumour‐forming efficacy of NNK by approximately 25%, and inhibited the decrease in vitamin A levels by the induction activity of NNK in plasma and liver. Azuie et al. studied the tumour inhibition activity of the betel leaf and its constituents in 7,12‐dimethylbenz(a)anthracene (DMBA) induced skin tumours in mice and found inhibition of tumour formation by 83–84%. They also investigated oral carcinogenesis induced by methyl (acetoxymethyl) nitrosamine in hamster, extract treatment resulted in inhibition of tumour incidence, reduction of tumour burden, extension of tumour latency period, and regression of established and honest tumours, suggesting that betel can be used to develop a potential chemopreventive agent for human oral cancer. In another experiment, Bhide et al. showed that the incidence of virus‐induced and 7–12‐dimethylbenz (a) anthracene‐induced rodent mammary gland tumours can be reduced by 75% and tumour burden by >90% by the administration of the ethanol extract of the leaves. The methanol extract prepared from the leaves was able to exhibit antitumour activity in terms of cancer chemoprevention in Raji cells induced by 12‐O‐hexadecanoylphorbol‐13‐acetate. The aqueous extract of leaves and the ethanol extract of leaves in KB cell line (human epithelial carcinoma cells) and the ethanol extract in the breast cancer T47D cell line exhibited cytotoxic and antiproliferative activity with IC50 values of 29.5 ± 0.3 and 55.2 µg/ml, respectively. Abrahim et al. evaluated the anticancer activity of extracts of water, methanol, ethyl acetate and hexane from leaves in the MCF‐7 breast cancer cell line. Ethyl acetate and hexane extracts showed a dose‐dependent inhibitory effect with IC50 values of 65.00 and 163.30 μg/ml, respectively. The anticancer benefits of betel leaves and bioguided fractionation were evaluated for prostate cancer management and found that hydroxychavicol is the most potent component to inhibit tumour formation in the PC 3 cell line. In another experiment, Widowati et al. found that the aqueous extract of P. betle root can effectively reduce cell proliferation by 2.8% and induce apoptosis by 9.45% in the T47D cell line (human ductal breast epithelial tumour) 
,ethanolic extract of leaves can inhibit the growth of HeLa cervical cancer cells with an IC50 value of 7.13 µg/ml and exhibit apoptotic activity with an IC50 value of 12.5 µg/ml (95.87%). The in vitro anticancer efficacy of hydroxychavicol‐containing leaf extract showed sensitivity to androgen‐independent human prostate cancer cells (22Rv1> C4‐2> PC‐3> DU14) and the activity of P. betle in BALB/c nude mice y injected with PC‐3‐luc cells by inhibiting growth and proliferation through ROS (Reactive oxygen species) generation and caspase‐dependent pathway. An experiment with the MTT assay, 88.7% cell toxicity and 11.4% cell death were observed in the lung cancer cell line (A549) applying acetone extract of betel leaves. Shah et al. studied the tumour inhibition assay of B16F10 melanoma in mice (C57BL/6) with leaves ethyl acetate, petroleum ether, aqueous and ethanol extracts. The result revealed that the ethyl acetate extract showed the highest dose‐dependent reduction in tumour size. Recently, Boontha et al. used a crude ethanolic extract of betel leaf to assess anticancer activity in human breast cancer cells (MCF‐7) and found that the extract showed cytotoxicity with an IC50 value of 114.3 µg/ml, suppressed cell migration at a dose of 25 µg/ml and developed a transdermal patch containing 0.03% extract. Another in vitro experiment with leaf extract containing hydroxychavicol in pancreatic cancer cell lines, viz. MIA PaCa‐2, PANC‐1, L929, INT407, NIH‐3T3, Vero and HEK293 cells exhibited inhibition of cell proliferation and epithelial‐to‐mesenchymal transition in cell lines, invasion and migration of cells through generalized gene repression, induced DNA damage, and also resulted in mitotic catastrophe and apoptosis through the JNK pathway and the caspase‐mediated pathway. 

9.2.

## Analgesic/anti‐inflammatory/antinociceptive activity
The term ‘inflammation’ refers to the complex pharmacological process of the tissues in response to harmful stimuli viz. damaged cells, pathogens or irritants, which is characterized by swelling, warmth, redness and pain. There has been a growing interest in developing safe and effective drugs for pain and inflammation from both academia and the pharmaceutical industry. By different types of inflammatory model tests, researchers found that food supplements could be considered as safe natural analgesics which act as adjuvant for various clinical pain and inflammation by modulation of TRPM8/TRPA1 channels and endogenous opioids signalling pathways. The antinociceptive activity of P. betle was investigated using hot and cold‐water extracts of various concentrations in tail flick test, hot plate test and formalin test models of cross‐bred albino mice. The cold extract showed higher antinociceptive activity than the hot extract via the opioid‐mediated pathway. The anti‐inflammatory efficacy of the betel leaf ethanol extract was studied in arthritic rats with a complete Freund adjuvant‐induced model. Ethanol extract was found to reveal anti‐inflammatory and anti‐arthritic activity by down‐regulating nitric oxide generation in a dose‐dependent manner compared to positive control dexamethasone. Pin et al. investigated the anti‐inflammatory activity of P. betle leaves using various solvents (ethanol, ethyl acetate, water and hexane) by in vitro inhibition assay of hyaluronidase (HYA), xanthine oxidase (XOD) and lipoxygenase (LOX). The extracts did not show a good inhibitory effect in the HYA assay, but showed a greater inhibition of more than 70% in the XOD and LOX assay. The order of increasing inhibitory activity of the extracts was aqueous < ethyl acetate < ethanol < hexane. In another experiment, betel leaves methanol extract was used to study anti‐inflammatory activity with the carrageenan‐induced hind paw oedema model and analgesic activity was studied using hot plate, formalin test and writhing test. Administration of the extract significantly (p < 0.05) reduced carrageenan‐induced paw oedema and reduced the number of acetic acid‐induced writhing and formalin‐induced licks in a dose‐dependent manner. De et al. also observed a reduced writhing response through modulation of the arachidonic acid pathway in the acetic acid‐induced writhing test on Swiss Albino mice using ethanolic extract of leaves. The analgesic effect of the betel leaf was evaluated using the heat conduction process and the hot plate method of the eddy in mice and rat models. Dose‐dependent analgesic effect was observed by increasing the latency period. 
The in vitro anti‐inflammatory effects of several varieties of P. betle leaf methanolic extracts were evaluated in the cell line (RAW 264.7) induced by E. coli lipopolysaccharide (LPS). Five varieties among the nine varieties showed significant anti‐inflammatory activity. Another experiment was carried out in which leaf essential oil was used to evaluate the anti‐inflammatory activity of P. betle using the detection of MMP‐2 (metalloproteinase‐2) and MMP‐9 (metalloproteinase‐9) using the gelatin zymography method in vitro. An effective anti‐inflammatory activity with 85% inhibition was observed. 

9.3.

## Neuropharmacological property
Numerous neurological and psychiatric disorders such as Alzheimer's disease and Parkinson's disease as well as epilepsy, migraine and essential tremors have caused severe human morbidity and mortality. , , Depression, anxiety disorders and cognitive impairment are the most common comorbid diagnoses in neurological diseases. Treatment options include medications, cognitive‐behavioural therapy, somatic interventions or electroconvulsive therapy. Although oral antidepressants have some advantages, they also present few limitations like side effects, interaction with other medications, incompatibility and inefficiency. To find a better and safer alternative treatment of neurological conditions, natural compounds of plant origin such as terpenes, alkaloids, flavonoids, lipids and phenolic acids are being studies extensively. 

9.3.1.

## Antidepressant activity
The antidepressant activity of the ethanol extract of betel leaves was evaluated in Swiss albino mice using the forced swim test and the tail suspension test. Oral administration of leaf extract showed notable antidepressant activity by reducing the duration of immobility compared to imipramine‐treated control mice. Gulhane et al. in their experiment also found that the hydroalcoholic extract from betel leaves is capable of controlling depression by reducing immobility time in the tail suspension test and forced swim test, when imipramine was used as standard drug. The volatile oil obtained from the P. betle fruit also showed a significant antidepressant effect in albino mice using the forced swim method compared to the standard antidepressant drug fluoxetine. 

9.3.2.

## Anti‐anxiety activity
Anxiety is characterized as being an unpleasant emotional state for which the cause cannot be identified or perceived as uncontrollable, which impairs efficiency and induces insomnia, as well as resulting in a wide range of medically unexplained symptoms. The hydroalcoholic extract of P. betle leaves was used to assess antianxiety activity in Swiss albino mice. A gradual dose‐dependent improvement was observed using the light/dark exploration test and an increase in plus compared to the control group receiving diazepam as standard in the antianxiety model. 

9.3.3.

## Antistress activity
The effect of P. betle was evaluated to understand its potential role in stress‐mediated sleep disruption mediated by early exposure to life. For this study, betel leaf ethanol extract was administered under post‐fertilization stress induced by dexamethasone (DEX) in zebrafish larvae. The results showed improved levels of melatonin‐related behavioural gene expression (MT1, MT2, aanat1 and aanat2) and stress‐related gene expression (NF‐kB) similar to positive control melatonin. 

9.3.4.

## Anticholinesterase activity and against Alzheimer's disease
The neurotransmitter acetylcholine is cleaved by acetylcholinesterase (AChE) and butyrylcholinesterase (BchE); therefore, inhibition of AchE and BchE is important to enhance brain activity. Alzheimer’s disease, which is a neurodegenerative disorder that causes dementia, impaired memory and impaired cognitive function in elderly people, can be managed by the application of cholinesterase inhibitor drugs. The in vitro anticholinesterase activity of P. betle was investigated in human neuroblastoma cells (SH‐SY5Y) by studying viability by reducing the leakage of 3‐(4,5‐dimethylthiazol‐2‐yl)‐2,5‐diphenyltetrazolium bromide and lactate dehydrogenase. Both the aqueous extract and the ethanol extract exhibited strong inhibitory activity on AchE and BchE. Dalai et al. also evaluated the inhibitory efficacy of standardized betel leaf methanol extract, containing hydroxychavicol and chlorogenic acid against AchE and BchE. Hydroxychavicol was found to have a more potent cholinergic effect than chlorogenic acid, but a combination of both (1:1) showed the highest inhibitory activity with an IC50 of 21.23  ±  0.33 μg/ml and 45.55 ±  1.89 μg/ml against AchE and BchE, respectively. 

The effects of P. betle leaf extract on memory and learning ability were evaluated in Wistar rats with aluminium chloride‐induced (AlCl3) Alzheimer’s disease. Two tests, the passive avoidance test and the Morris water maze test, showed that the administration of the aqueous extract of leaves reduced the mean escape latency period and improved spatial memory retention in the same way as in rivastigmine‐treated mice. These investigations suggest that P. betle could be an excellent anticholinergic agent with potential in the therapeutic management of Alzheimer's disease.

9.4.

## Nootropic effect
The hydroalcoholic extract of P. betle leaves was shown to have nootropic effect by the experiment in which the extract was administered to Swiss albino mice and the result showed an increase in discrimination index in the object recognition test. In another experiment, the nootropic effect of P. betle in scopolamine‐induced amnesia in albino rats was evaluated using the Y‐maze test and it was found that the aqueous extract of leaves can reverse the effect against amnesia with a significant decrease in retention latency, a major decrease in the inflection ratio. 

9.5.

## Antioxidant activity
Formation of reactive oxygen species (ROS) is one of the major markers in any disease pathology. An antioxidant acts as a protective barrier against ROS, which causes chronic and degenerative diseases. The main health problems such as cancer, cardiovascular diseases, rheumatoid arthritis, Alzheimer’s disease and other neurodegenerative disorders may be caused by the formation of free radicals. Antioxidants are very beneficial because they scavenge these free radicals and help prevent these kinds of disorders because they reduce the oxidative injury of cell proteins, carbohydrates and lipids. The extract of the inflorescence of P. betle was found to scavenge free radical (H2O2, superoxide, hydroxyl radical) with a 50% inhibitory concentration using an in vitro assay. 2,2‐diphenyl‐1‐picrylhydrazyl (DPPH), superoxide and hydroxyl radical scavenging activity was calculated in a riboflavin/light/NBT (9 nitro blue tetrazolium) system and inhibition of lipid peroxidation induced by FeSO4 using the aqueous extract of leaves of three varieties of betel in egg yolk (Kauri, Ghanagete, Bagerhati). The antioxidant capacity was observed in the order of Bagerhati < Ghanagete < Kauri. Arambewela et al., in the DPPH free radical scavenging assay, found that the free radical scavenging effects decreased in the order of cold ethanolic extract > essential oil > hot water extract of leaves. Significant antioxidant efficacy of betel leaves methanol, water, petroleum ether and ethyl acetate extracts observed using the in vitro DPPH assay and the TBARS (Thiobarbituric acid reactive substance assay), hydroxyl radical scavenging assay. The leaf aqueous extract in DPPH, free radical scavenging assay showed 83% antioxidant activity in the human ductal breast epithelial tumour (T47D) cell line and the ethanolic extract of leaves scavenged more than 50% free radical in the HeLa cell line using the superoxide dismutase activity assay. Jaiswal et al. performed an antioxidant assay using methanol, ethanol, acetone, ethyl acetate and distilled water extract from betel leaves (Banarasi, safeda, Calcutta, Cuttack, Desibagla, Maharashtra and Sofia varieties). The highest antioxidant activity was observed in the FRAP assay (Ferric reducing antioxidant power) and the ABTS (2,2′‐Azinobis‐(3‐Ethylbenzthiazolin‐6‐Sulfonic Acid) assay of Banarasi safeda and photochemiluminescence assay for the Calcutta variety. The DPPH radical scavenging assay in human breast cancer MCF‐7 cells using crude ethanolic extract of leaves showed antioxidant activity with (IC50) of 30.0 ± 0.1 µg/ml. used different solvent extracts of leaves (ethanol, ethyl acetate, hexane +petroleum ether and aqueous extract of leaves) and found potential antioxidant properties of all extracts in all assays (DPPH, reducing power activity and hydrogen peroxide scavenging assay) in a concentration‐dependent manner Ethanolic extract from leaves using the in vitro ORAC (oxygen radical absorbance capacity) assay and methanol extract of leaves using in vitro nitric oxide, hydroxyl radical and reducing power assay, ferric ion RPA (Robotic Process Automation) method  showed potential antioxidant activity through free radical scavenging.

9.6.

## Hepatoprotective property
The hepatoprotective activity of P. betle was investigated using a model of ethanol‐intoxicated hepatotoxic injury in the Wistar rat. Oral administration of betel leaf ethanolic extract at a dose of 300 mg/kg bw was found to show the highest activity, namely decreased AST (aspartate aminotransferase), TBARS (thiobarbituric acid reactive substances), ALT (alanine aminotransferase) and lipid hydroperoxides; improved non‐enzymatic antioxidants such as reduced GSH (glutathione), vitamin E and vitamin C, and free radical detoxifying enzymes such as CAT (Catalase), SOD (Superoxide dismutase) and GSH peroxidase in kidney and liver of rats. Treatment with betel leaf extract improved D‐galactosamine intoxication induced by oxidative stress in Wistar rats. The extract at a dose of 200 mg/kg bw improved antioxidant levels such as lipid hydroperoxidase (LOOH), SOD, GSH, GSH peroxidise, vitamin E and vitamin C,decreased TBARS, hydroperoxidase and liver marker enzymes such as ALT, AST, alkaline phosphate (ALP) and gamma glutamyl transpeptidase (GGTP). To evaluate the hepatoprotective activity of P. betle, Young et al. induced liver fibrosis with carbon tetrachloride (CCl4) and corn oil in Wistar rats. The leaf aqueous extract was found to attenuate liver fibrosis by inhibiting AST and ALT activities, attenuating total glutathione S‐transferase activity (GST) and decreasing the expression of a‐smooth muscle actin (α‐SMA). The extract also enhanced the expression of active matrix metalloproteinase‐2 (MMP2) induced by SOD and CAT activities and inhibited the level of TIMP2 (Tissue inhibitor of metalloproteinases 2). Manigauha et al. also studied the effect of ethanolic extract from betel leaves against CCl4 induced liver damage in Wistar rats. Administration of leaf extract significantly reduced serum glutamate oxaloacetate transaminase (SGOT), serum glutamate pyruvate transaminase (SGPT), (ALP), acid phosphatase and lipid peroxidation, it also improved CAT, SOD, GSH in the liver of rats. Altered levels of elevated serum AST, ALT, ALP, lactate dehydrogenase (LDH), GGTP, bilirubin,TBARS, LOOH, protein carbonyl, conjugated dienes, reduced SOD, CAT, GST, vitamin C and vitamin E were observed when liver dysfunction induced with cadmium chloride in Wister rats treated with ethanol extract of betel leaves. Ethanol extract prepared from betel leaves was also found to mitigate methotrexate‐induced hepatotoxicity in rats (Sprague‐Dawley) by reducing ALT, AST and ALP levels. Histological studies showed that the extract reduced central vein dilation, leukocyte infiltration and normalization of the hepatocellular architecture,the extract also reduced LPO levels and increased the depleted GSH level and SOD, CAT and GPx (glutathione peroxidase) by methotrexate. 

9.7.

## Antiulcerogenic property
The prolonged use of non‐steroidal anti‐inflammatory drugs (NSAID) is one of the main causes of peptic ulcer, and there are other factors such as alcohol abuse and acute/chronic stress. Majumder et al. evaluated the antiulcerogenic efficacy of P. betle against gastric injury induced by indomethacin in Sprague‐Dawley rats. Oral administration of ethanol leaf extract at 200 mg / kg bw of dose for ten days showed noteworthy protection against gastric lesions, increase in SOD and CAT activity, amplification of mucus quantity, increase in hexosamine and total thiol group quantity, but reduced the amount of damaged oxidative protein and peroxidized lipid level, increased free radical proving the antiulcerogenic potential of betel by antioxidant mechanism. The authors in another experiment also found that the ethanolic extract of betel leaves can protect NSAID‐induced ulcer in Charles Foster rats by increasing the antioxidative factors, mucus and the total gastric tissue sulfhydryl group. The ethanol extract of betel leaves and the isolated compound allylpyrocatechol were found to have excellent healing properties against indomethacin‐induced stomach ulceration in rats (Sprague‐Dawley). The extract reduced the ulcer index by 93.4%, accelerated ulcer healing, improved the mucin content of gastric tissues, showed normal levels of malondialdehyde (MDA) and protein, and also increased levels of SOD and CAT levels. , The antiulcer activity of P. betle was also investigated in HCl‐ethanol, acute stress and pylorus ligation models in Wistar rats and Swiss albino mice using the hydroalcoholic extract of leaves. The results showed a decrease in ulcer index, gastric fluid volume, and an increase in gastric pH. An experiment was carried out using HAE (hot aqueous extract) and CEE (cold ethanolic extract) of betel leaves to assess gastroprotective efficacy in gastric ulcer induced by ethanol in crossbreed albino rats. When HAE and CEE were administered orally, they showed remarkable protection against gastric damage induced by absolute ethyl alcohol in a dose‐dependent manner by increasing the adhesion of the mucus content to the wall of the gastric mucosa and inhibiting the volume of gastric acid. All these experiments proved the traditional claim that P. betle could be an excellent gastroprotective and antiulcerogenic agent in therapeutics.

9.8.

## Antihyperglycaemic activity
The antihyperglycaemic efficacy of P. betle was investigated in streptozotocin‐diabetic albino Wistar rats. Leaf suspension was administered orally at a dose of 75 and 150 mg/kg body weight, for 30 days and the glucose level in plasma and glycosylated haemoglobin, liver hexokinase and gluconeogenic enzyme activities were tested. The result showed a decrease in blood glucose level from 205.00 mg/dl to 151.30 mg/dl, reduced glycosylated haemoglobin level, decreased liver fructose‐1,6‐bisphosphatase and glucose‐6‐phosphatase activity and also increased liver hexokinase in a dose‐dependent mode. The effect of betel leaf methanolic extract on in vitro protein glycation was investigated using a BSA (Bovine Seram Albumin)‐glucose model. The methanol extract inhibited glucose‐induced protein glycation in different stages and also inhibited the dose‐dependent modification of the thiol group and carbonyl formation. The early stage or the formation of amadori products was identified by haemoglobin‐δ‐gluconolactone, middle stage or the formation of the oxidative cleavage product was identified by BSA‐methylglyoxal, and the last stage or the production of advanced glycation ends (AGE) was identified by BSA‐glucose. Fatmawati and Shimizu, by in vitro aldose reductase assay, identified that the ethanolic extract of betel leaves can inhibit human recombinant aldose reductase (HRAR), which is the key compound in the polyol signalling pathway in converting glucose to sorbitol,therefore, long‐term diabetic complications develop contradictory with the value of IC50 18.8 μg/ml. 

9.9.

## Antihyperlipidaemic activity
The Wistar rat brain when treated with ethanol showed that lipid peroxidation, lipids and turbulence in antioxidant protection are increased. Different doses of administration of the aqueous extract of the P. betle leaf showed improvement in toxicity symptoms. Co‐administration of the aqueous extract at the 300 mg/kg dose rate showed the highest activity and appreciably abridged the levels of lipids such as phospholipids, free fatty acids and cholesterol, and also reduced markers for lipid peroxidation such as TBARS and hydroperoxides, and increased antioxidants, such as SOD, reduced GSH, vitamin E, vitamin C, CAT and GSH peroxidase. The hypolipidaemic activity of betel leaf was evaluated in hyperlipidaemic rats fed a high‐fat diet. The leaf methanolic extract showed depletion in TC (total cholesterol), TG (triglycerides), LDL (low‐density lipoprotein) and VLDL (very low‐density lipoprotein‐cholesterol) activities in serum. 

9.10.

## Anti‐atherogenic activity
Atherosclerosis is a major health problem, which subsequently leads to cardiovascular disease caused by hypercholesterolemia. Venkadeswaran et al. studied the anti‐atherogenic potential of the P. betle plant and the active constituents present in it in the Triton WR‐1339‐induced hypercholesterolaemic Wistar rat. The betel leaf ethanol extract at a dose of 500 mg/kg w and its constituent eugenol at a dose of 5 mg/kg wt for 7 days of administration ameliorated hypercholesterolemia‐induced high levels of TC, TG, LDL and VLDL and low levels of enzymatic and non‐enzymatic antioxidants as standard lipid lowering drug, lovastatin. In another experiment, the authors fed Wistar rats an atherogenic diet and biochemical and histopathological experiments exhibited that the ethanolic leaf extract and the active constituent eugenol are capable of lowering the amount of TG, TC, LDL‐cholesterol and VLDL‐cholesterol in serum and liver tissue. The extract and eugenol also reduced AST, alkaline phosphatase, ALT, enzymes for lipid metabolization and lactate dehydrogenase in serum, decreased the antioxidant enzyme, and induces malondialdehyde in liver tissue and hemolysate. 

9.11.

## Cardioprotective activity
The effectiveness of P. betle in cardioprotection was evaluated in rats with isoproterenol (ISP)‐induced myocardial infarction. Oral administration of betel leaf hydroalcoholic extract significantly modulated the haemodynamic of systolic pressure, diastolic pressure, mean arterial pressure (DAP, MAP and SAP) and parameters for ventricular function such as contractility (+LVdP/dt) and relaxation (LVdP/dt), heart rate (HR); the extract restored the level of catalase (CAT), glutathione peroxidase (GPx), GSH and SOD, decreased leakage of creatine phosphokinase‐MB (CK‐MB) isoenzyme of and LDH, reduced lipid peroxidation in the heart showing a protection effect against ISP‐induced myocardial infarction. 
Piper betle was found to prevent oxidative cardiac cell injury through an in vitro study using the rat heart cell line H9c2 incubated with H2O2. The leaf extracted using ethyl acetate and the isolated bioactive component eugenol protected against oxidative stress induced by H2O2, decreased intracellular ROS and apoptosis and improved the cellular defence system at a dose of 10 μg/ml. 

9.12.

## Antifertility activity
The first report on the antifertility potential of P. betle was probably from Tewari et al., who found that the alcoholic extract of the betel stalk can reduce the number of pups; anti‐oestrogenic property recorded in adult male, female rats and rabbits. Gentle progestational action was also found in oestrogen‐primed immature rabbits with few types of follicle depressant in their regressive phase. To evaluate the antifertility efficacy of P. betle, alcoholic extract of leaf stalks is administered orally to male Swiss albino mice at a dose of 500 mg initially for 30 days and after that a dose of 1000 mg/kg body weight for another 30 days per animal per day. After 60 days of treatment, fertility was reduced to 0%. The extract suppressed sperm mobility and cauda epididymal sperm count, reduced fructose content in the seminal vesicles and weights of reproductive organs, and also increased cholesterol in the testes. The altered parameters were found to recover after discontinuation of the extract, suggesting P. betle as a contraceptive agent without altering hormonal balance. The antifertility efficacy of betel petiole extract was studied in female albino Wistar rats. Petiole ethyl alcohol extract at a dose of 100 mg/day/rat for 30 days showed a reduction in fertility, reproductive organ weights, oestrogen level, litter number, serum glucose concentration, acid phosphatase, SGOT and SGPT activity,increased cholesterol and ascorbic acid activity. The extract revealed that cholesterol was not used and there was no mobilization of ascorbic acid, irregular oestrus cycle and no change in haematological parameters. The application of methanol and the aqueous extract of betel leaf extract on the female Wistar rat revealed an irregular and prolonged oestrous cycle, which results in infertility. 
In silico study of the antifertility effect of P. betle root extract containing piperolactam A exhibited potential contraceptive activity with high binding affinity to the oestrogen and progesterone receptor (8.9 and 9.0 Kcal/mol, respectively), the binding site showed more hydrogen binding to the receptor than Rohitukine and OrgC. Shah and Jhade studied the antifertility effect of the betel plant on adult female Wistar rats using the water, petroleum ether and ethanol extract of the whole plant. The results showed significant antifertility potential with anti‐implantation and abortifacient activity, reduced level of follicle stimulating hormone (FSH), luteinizing hormone (LH), progesterone, anti‐oestrogenic activity and irregular oestrous cycle. 
,
 

10.

## ANTIMICROBIAL ACTIVITIES
The following section presents the antibacterial and antifungal properties of the plant (Table  ).
 10.1.

## Antibacterial activity
The global epidemic of infectious diseases caused by microbes has a high mortality rate, resulting in a high global health burden. Antimicrobial resistance and the lack of novel vaccines make infectious diseases one of the greatest threats to human health globally. Various factors are contributing to the rise in antibiotic resistance among human invasive organisms. , The antimicrobial efficiency of the P. betle leaf stalk was studied against the human pathogenic bacteria Staphylococcus aureus, Vibrio cholerae Ogawa, Klebsiella aerogenes and Diplococcus pneumoniae. Among the extracts, the ethyl acetate and ethanol extracts exhibited remarkable activity, the hexane and benzene extracts exhibited moderate activity towards the majority of the bacteria. Nair and Chanda tested the antibacterial effect of betel leaf against several gram +ve and gram‐ve bacteria Pseudomonas aeruginosa, P. testosteroni, P. pseudoalcaligenes, Staphylococcus aureus, S. epidermidis, S. subflava, Proteus mirabilis, P. vulgaris, P. morganii, B. cereus, B. subtilis, B. megaterium, Citrobacter freundii, Micrococcus flavus, Alcaligenes faecalis, Enterobacter aerogenes, Salmonella typhimurium, Klebsiella pneumoniae, E. coli, Streptococcus faecalis, St. cremoris and St. agalactiae and found that methanol extract is more potent than aqueous extract in comparison with the standard drug Piperacillin and gentamicin. Essential oil of betel leaves of the Vellaikodi, Bangladeshi and Deshwari varieties showed potential antibacterial activity against S. aureus, St. mutans, Lactobacillus acidophilus, St. epidermidis, K. pneumoniae e. , , Antibacterial activity was found with a MIC range of 25–40 µg against S. aureus, Pseudomonas aeruginosa and K. pneumoniae, P. vulgaris using leaf ethanol extract. Kaveti et al. evaluated the antibacterial efficacy of leaf ethanol and aqueous betel extracts against S. aureus, Micrococcus luteus, B. subtilis, P. aeruginosa and E. coli and found that ethanol leaf extract is more potent in efficacy than aqueous extract, while water extract showed no efficacy against E. coli and P. aeruginosa. The methanol, water, petroleum ether and ethyl acetate extracts of leaves found to restrict the growth of St. pyogenes, S. aureus, P. vulgaris, E. coli, P. aeruginosa, Bacillus sp., Enterococcus faecalis, St. agalactiae, Aeromonas hydrophila, K. pneumoniae, Vibrio cholerae, V. alginolyticus, S. simulans, S. chromogenes, S. mitis, St. dysgalactiae, St. agalactiae, St. uberis, St. sanguinis, K. pneumoniae e, Proteus sp., S. aureus and St. faecalis in different experiments. , 
,
 
,
 , . Lubis and Marlisa collected S. aureus from patients with swab of the conjunctivitis patients and observed that the ethanol extract of the leaves effectively inhibited bacteria. Essential oils from fresh and cured leaves were used to investigate the bactericidal activity of P. betle. The results showed that the cured leaf essential oil exhibited higher antimicrobial activity towards M. smegmatis. Surjowardojo et al. tested the crude water extract of young and mature leaves in St. agalactiae and E. coli and found that both extracts showed antibacterial activity, while 30% of the young leaf extract showed the highest activity against S. agalactiae. A recent experiment compared antibacterial efficacy between acetone extract and ethanol extract from leaves (Barguna and Moheshkhali) against the varieties of S. aureus, E. coli and B. cereus. The Barguna showed a MIC (minimum inhibition concentration) value of about 2.12 to 4.25 mg/ml, and the Moheshkhali variety showed a MIC of 2.12 to 8.5 mg/ml. The ethanol extract of betel leaves also showed antibacterial efficacy against foodborne bacteria such as E. coli, Shigella dysenteriae, Staphylococcus aureus and Vibrio cholera with MIC values in the range of 0.625–0.75% (w/v). The inhibition activity of food and waterborne pathogens from betel leaf was evaluated for multidrug resistant Staphylococcus aureus, Salmonella typhi, P. aeruginosa, B. cereus, E. coli and B. subtilis. Different solvent extracts, viz. methanol, ethanol and water showed significant antibacterial potency against all bacteria tested. The antibacterial experiment of P. betle showed that betel leaf extract in n‐hexane and ethyl acetate promisingly inhibits fish pathogens such as Aeromonas hydrophila, Vibrio alginolyticus and Edwardsiella tarda, demonstrating the application of betel extract in fish preservation. , 

10.2.

## Antifungal activity
Various preclinical studies proved the antifungal potential of P. betle against a number of fungi by different solvent extracts. Essential oils and ethanolic extract from leaves showed potential antifungal activity against Candida albicans. , , Complete inhibition of Aspergillus flavus fungal mycelia by ethanol extract and inhibition of Candida tropicalis
 were also observed in two different experiments. Essential oil, methanolic and aqueous leaf extracts of betel against Candida albicans and Malassezia pachydermatis
 and leaf extract by hydrodistillation against Saccharomyces cerevisiae and Candida albicans
 exhibited significant antifungal activity. Ali et al., tested leaf aqueous extract and chloroform fraction (isolated compound hydroxychavicol) against C. albicans, C. glabrata, C. krusei, C. parapsilosis, C. tropicalis, C. neoformans, A. flavus, A. fumigatus, A. niger, A. parasiticus, M. canis, M. gypsium, T. mentagrophytes, T. rubrum and E. floccosum. The result showed concentration‐dependent antifungal activity against all fungi, and inhibition of the C. albicans biofilm was also observed. The potential antifungal efficacy of the essential oil and the methanol extract of betel leaves was found in C. rugosa, C. albicans, A. flavus, Saccharomyces cerevisiae, Microsporum canis, Trichophyton mentagrophytes and T. rubrum. , In another experiment, crude leaf extract and chloroform fraction containing hydroxychavicol applied on Colletotrichum gloeosporioides, Rhizoctonia solani, Fusarium oxysporum f. sp. cubense, Sphaceloma ampelinum and C. capsici and the result showed concentration‐dependent fungicidal and fungistatic activity. The ethanol extract of P. betle, when tested against foodborne fungi Aspergillus niger, A. oryzae and Penicillium s
sp. in agar diffusion assay, exhibited complete fungal inhibition at a concentration of >1.50% (v/v). The addition of betel essential oil at a safe concentration to apple juice and tomato paste was also found to improve antioxidant capacity and inhibit microbial growth, such as Aspergillus flavus and Penicillium expansum, enhancing shelf life under refrigerator conditions. , 

10.3.

## Antiparasitic activities
The following section presents the antiparasitic (anthelmintic, anti‐protozoan and antifilarial) activities of P. betle (Table  ).
 10.3.1.

## Anthelmintic property
Helminths produce substances, which have substantial toxicity towards humans, that are found in foods acquired from livestock, causing a serious hazard to human health, including lymphatic filariasis or elephantiasis, onchocerciasis, and schistosomiasis. The anthelmintic activity of P. betle was studied using aqueous and ethanol extracts of the stem against the adult Indian earthworm Pheretima posthuma. The results showed that the time required to cause paralysis and death is less in ethanol extract and aqueous extract than in the standard drug albendazole. Akter et al. also observed the same activity when using leaf methanol extract instead of stem extract. The anthelmintic efficacy of the crude aqueous leaf extract of P. betle was also evaluated in adult earthworm Eisenia fetida. The result expressed anthelmintic activity in terms of less time for paralysis and death of the earthworm. The anti‐helmintic activity of the essential oil of P. betle from leaves was also found to inhibit the burden of Ascaridia galli in poultry birds. 

10.3.2.

## Anti‐protozoan activity
Giardiasis is the most common protozoan parasitic infection of the human intestine. Anti‐giardial activity was observed using chloroform extract of P. betle leaves against trophozoites of Giardia intestinalis with MIC 250 (μg/ml) and IC50 value 51.57 (μg/ml). Leishmaniasis is also a protozoan parasitic infection caused by Leishmania that results in a broad spectrum of clinical representation with significant morbidity and also mortality throughout the world. Ethanolic betel leaf extract showed antileishmanial potency towards both promastigotes with IC50 value of 9.8 and against amastigotes with IC50 value 5.45 μg/ml of Leishmania donovani, mediated by apoptosis and morphological changes, loss of mitochondrial membrane potential, DNA fragmentation and cell cycle arrest in the sub‐G0/G1 phase. Antileishmanial activity was also reported in which the use of leaf ethanol extract and root extract inhibited promastigotes and amastigotes of Leishmania donovani. , Inhibition of promastigotes and amastigotes, acceleration in apoptosis, and ROS generation targeting Leishmania mitochondria was also observed using methanol extract of betel leaves of Bangla Mahoba variety. 
Plasmodium berghei, the causal agent for human malaria, is parasitic protozoa of mosquito. The betel leaf extract showed notable schizonticidal activity (p < 0.05) and an antiplasmodial effect at a dose of 50–400 mg/kg in ICR mice. Leesombun et al. described that the betel leaf extract is capable of inhibiting the invasion of the Toxoplasma gondii parasite into human foreskin fibroblast cells at a dose of 25 µg/ml dose and reduced parasite burden in the brains of BALB/c mice. The authors also found that betel leaf extract can inhibit the growth of Neospora caninum parasites in human foreskin fibroblast cells and increase the survival of C57BL/6 mice. 

10.3.3.

## Antifilarial activity

In vivoantifilarial activity of P. betle was evaluated using crude methanolic extract, chloroform, and n‐hexane extracts were administered at different doses to Balb/c mice. All extracts showed antigen‐specific immune response, increased antifilarial IgG antibody and also suppressed microfilaraemia, showed potential macrofilaricidal efficacy, and induced sterilization of female worms. 

10.4.

## Insecticidal activities
The insecticidal activity of P. betle was evaluated using an aged grain assay against bean weevil (Sitophilus zeamais), lesser grain borer (Rhyzopertha dominica) and cowpea weevil cowpea weevil (Callosobruchus maculatus). The 30% volatile oil dust formulation exhibited toxicity against adult insects, prevented the survival of adult C. maculatus, and up to 52% protected corn against S. zeamais and R. dominica; also inhibited living and emerging progeny. Nair and Kavrekar found that the methanol extract of betel leaves can exhibit good insecticidal activity against insects such as Bruchus pisorum, Tribolium castaneum and Sitophilus oryzae. The following section presents the insecticidal activities of P. betle (Table  ).
 
10.5.

## Larvicidal property
The mosquito larvicidal activity of P. betle against Aedes aegypti was evaluated using methanol extract and essential oil of the leaves. For essential oil, the LD50 values were found to be 86 and 48 ppm at 2 and 24 h; for the methanol extract, the LD50 values at 2 and 24 h are 153 and 125 ppm, respectively. Tennyson et al. observed larvicidal activity with LC50 values 313.58 and 122.99 ppm, respectively, after 24 and 48 h using leaves methanol extract. The essential oil of the betel leaves can also inhibit the larval growth of Aedes aegypti. When the third instar larvae were exposed for 24 h, the LC50 value found l3, l ppm, and for the 48‐h exposure, the LC50 value is 1l, 2 ppm. Essential oil from obtained betel leaf was also treated on Chrysomya bezziana larvae, and the result showed that 4% essential oil killed all first instar larvae in 2 h while killing the second instar larvae in 4 h. Larvicidal activity using P. betle essential oil was also observed with LC50 183 ppm 92.7 ppm and 59.8 ppm and LC90 637 ppm 525 ppm and 434.7 ppm, after 1, 24 and 48 h after treatment, respectively. Another experiment showed that 3 and 4% essential oils are also capable of killing 100% Chrysomya megacephala larvae in 3.5 h. 
Drosophila melanogaster larvae were also found to be killed with the administration of methanol extract of the leaves in a dose‐dependent manner by reducing the effect on the nucleic acid and protein content. 

11.

## MISCELLANEOUS ACTIVITIES
11.1.

## Antiplatelet activity
Three compounds (B‐sitosterol, ursonic acid and 3B‐acetyl ursolic acid) from betel root extract were isolated and identified to evaluate the antiplatelet activity of P. betle arachidonic acid (AA), platelet activation factor (PAF) and Adenosine diphosphate (ADP) induced human platelet aggregation (PA). An in vitro study showed that all three compounds have potency in inhibiting PA. The order of inhibition of AA‐induced PA inhibition is B‐sitosterol < 3B‐acetyl ursolic acid < ursonic acid. Only B‐sitosterol and ursonic acid have inhibitory activity towards PAF and inducing activity to PA, whereas B‐sitosterol only showed inhibitory activity against ADP‐induced PA. The antiplatelet activity of the aqueous extract of the inflorescence of P. betle was investigated in collagen‐induced and AA‐induced rabbit PA. In vitro treatment of the extract inhibited platelet aggregation induced by collagen and AA‐ with IC50 values of 207 and 335 µg/ml, respectively, inhibited the production of AA, collagen and thrombin‐induced thromboxane B2 (TXB2), induced by >90%, indicating that the extract of P. betle contains compounds that can inhibit platelet aggregation by ROS elimination or inhibition of TXB2 production (Table  ). 

11.2.

## Anti‐halitosis activity
Halitosis is the degradation of proteins and amino acids present in saliva, gingival cervical fluid or food retained in the teeth that causes bad breath or oral malodour due to microbial activity. The methanol extract and fractions of leaves (isolated compound allylpyrocatechol—APC) showed antibacterial activity against oral bacteria and reduced the production of volatile sulphur compound (VSC) by oral anaerobic bacteria using an in vitro saliva chip model. APC also potentially reduced methyl mercaptan and hydrogen sulphide and prevented periodontal infection. 

11.3.

## Antiallergic activity
To know about the antiallergic activity of the ethanol extract of P. betle leaf on the synthesis of GM‐CSF (granulocyte macrophage colony‐stimulating factor) and histamine by BMMC (murine bone marrow mast cells) and also the activity on the human lung epithelial cell line, BEAS‐2B mediated the secretion of eotaxin and IL‐8 was evaluated in vitro. Treatment with extract markedly reduced histamine and IgE‐mediated hypersensitive reaction‐mediated GM‐CSF production; it also inhibited eotaxin and IL‐8 secretion produced by an allergic reaction induced by TNF‐α and IL‐4. This experiment suggests that P. betle controls allergic diseases by inhibiting the production of allergic mediators and can be used as a therapeutic antiallergic agent. 

11.4.

## Anti‐asthmatic activity
The anti‐asthmatic activity of P. betle against 0.2% histamine‐induced bronchospasm in guinea pigs was evaluated using ethanol extract. Treatment of the extract, with a dose of 100 and 200 mg/kg bw, exhibited a prominent anti‐asthmatic effect with a prolonged latent period of convulsions compared to the standard antihistaminic drug, chlorpheniramine. 

11.5.

## Dermatological activities
To evaluate the dermatological activity of P. betle, the crude ethanolic extract of the leaves and the formulated cream were tested for certain zoonotic dermatophytic fungi, that is Trichophyton mentagrophyte, Microsporum gypseum, Microsporum canis and Candida albicans. The broth dilution and disc diffusion assay revealed significant antifungal activity with a range of IC50 values 110.44–119.00 µg/ml. The result suggests that P. betle has notable therapeutic importance for the treatment of dermatophytosis comparable to the ketoconazole drug, proving the traditional claim. 

11.6.

## Antihemolytic activity
The antihemolytic efficacy of the betel plant was investigated in an in vitro H2O2‐treated human erythrocyte model. Different solvent extracts, such as water, ethyl acetate, petroleum ether and methanol extracts from leaves, were used in the study, and the result showed reduced haemolysis without any toxicity as compared to ascorbic acid, taken as a positive control. Further lipid peroxidation was tested in terms of malonaldehyde production, showing reduced peroxidation in H2O2‐induced RBC (Red blood cell) cells by the effect of leaf extracts. 

11.7.

## Role in thyroid function
Panda and Kar in an experiment found that P. betle leaf extract showed a dual role on thyroid function in rats. The leaf aqueous extract was administered to Swiss albino male mice and changes in the concentrations of thyroid hormone, LPO (lipid peroxidation), SOD and CAT activity were investigated. Higher doses increased LPO concentration and decreased SOD and CAT activities. Higher doses decreased triiodothyronine (T3) and increased thyroxine (T4) concentrations, while the lowest dose increased T3 and decreased T4 concentrations. 

11.8.

## Immunomodulatory effect
Many in vivo and in vivo experiments were performed to prove P. betle as a novel immunomodulatory plant. The methanol extract of betel leaves in an in vitro study showed that the proliferation of peripheral blood lymphocytes was significantly induced by the suppression of phytohaemagglutinin in a dose‐dependent manner. Furthermore, the activity of P. betle was studied in mice that were immunized with sheep red blood cells using the extract at different dose levels to observe the cellular and humoral immune responses. The extract showed dose‐dependent suppression of T‐cell, B‐cell and immune response mediated by antibody, decrease in antibody titre, increase in inflammation suppression; delayed T‐cell‐mediated hypersensitivity reaction. The methanol extract prepared from betel leaves at a dose of 500 mg/kg showed immunosuppression that was in correlation with cyclophosphamide, an immunosuppressive drug (2 mg/kg) suggesting P. betle as a potent therapeutic agent for the treatment of various autoimmune disorders and immune disorders. The crude n‐hexane and methanol extracts of P. betle showed immunomodulatory effectiveness in Balb/c mice infected with Brugia malayi, a parasite of human lymphatic filaria. In vivo experiment showed enhancement in both humoral immune responses by increasing plaque‐forming cells and hemagglutination titre,enhanced cell‐mediated immune responses such as lymphoproliferation, delayed type of immune responses for hypersensitivity, macrophage activation; increased population of B cells (CD19 +) and T cells (CD4 +, CD8 +) and produced type‐1 and type‐2 cytokine responses. 

11.9.

## Radioprotective activity
Mitochondria from rat liver and plasmid DNA (pBR322), the two models were used to evaluate the radioactive property of the P. betle plant. Treatment of ethanol extract of leaves on in vitro irradiated mitochondria of rat liver and plasmid DNA (pBR322) prevented ray‐induced lipid peroxidation (thiobarbituric acid—TBA, reactive substrates of TBA, conjugated diene and LOOH) and DNA strand breaks; the extract also improved HO and SOD radical scavenging activity together with the lymphoproliferative property in a concentration‐dependent method. 

11.10.

## Anti‐acne activity
Acne, an inflammatory skin disease, caused by Propionibacterium acnes and Staphylococcus aureus due to blocking of polysebase. To evaluate the efficacy of P. betle against acne, a cream dose of betel leaf ethanol extract was prepared and applied to P. acnes and S. aureus using a disc diffusion process and the MIC was calculated. The result showed antibacterial efficacy with MIC values of 4.5% and 4.0%. Meinisasti et al. also showed that the cream formulation prepared from ethanol extract is effective against P. acnes. In another experiment, noisome gel containing essential oil from betel leaves was prepared which also inhibited P. acnes in Franz diffusion cell. 

12.

## TOXICITY PROFILE
An acute and chronic preclinical toxicity study was performed using the alcoholic extract of P. betle leaf stalk in different doses in mice and rats. Hematological, biochemical and chemical evaluations indicated that the alcoholic extract is devoid of any toxicity at the dose level of 100, 200 and 300 mg/kg bodyweight for 60 days and also interestingly 3200 mg/kg bw did not show any toxicity. An acute toxicity study in guinea pigs was studied by administering betel leaf extract that did not show death within 24 h of a dose of 100 and 200 mg/kg but at a dose, more than 300 mg/kg was found to exhibit 50% mortality, suggesting that doses of 100–200 mg/kg are safe. Venkateswarlu and Devanna reported that the leaf aqueous extract of P. betle up to the dose of 1000 mg/kg (po) body weight is safe when administered to Albino rats. Doses of up to 2000 mg/ kg were also found to be without toxicity in mice administered with hydroalcoholic betel leaf extract. No occurrence of death, no abnormal general symptoms, no effect of necropsy and histopathological lesions observed for 14 days after the methanol extract of betel leaf administered to ICR mice at a dose of up to 5000 mg/kg. De et al. also found that the ethanol extract of betel leaves is safe up to 2000 mg/kg bw without any toxicity or morbidity during the 14‐day observation period in Sprague‐Dawley rats. All of these studies suggest that P. betle is safe at higher doses and can be used as a therapeutic agent to treat various maladies.

13.

## NANOFORMULATIONS
Nanotechnology aims to synthesize materials with unique properties such as at least in one‐dimension, small size, surface charge, high surface energy, porosity and a large surface area/volume ratio, proving advantageous for catalysis and interacting with other molecules. Scientists have developed green chemistry methods with the synthesis of nanomaterials using different biological sources which are more sustainable, cleaner and eco‐friendly, non‐toxic, energy‐efficient, that eliminates the need for high energy, pressure, temperature, and needs no stabilizing, reducing and capping agents from outside. , , . The petiole extract of P. betle leaf was used to synthesize stable silver nanoparticles with or without CTAB (cetyltrimethylammonium bromide) and SDS (sodium dodecyl sulphate). The polyphenolic groups contained in the leaf extract are the main agents responsible for the reduction of n Ag+ions into metallic Ag0 and also for stabilizing and capping. The morphology and crystalline phase were characterized by selected area electron diffraction (SAED) and transmission electron microscopy (TEM). , . Green synthesis of silver nanoparticles from betel leaf extract was also confirmed and characterized by energy‐dispersive X‐ray analysis (EDX), X‐ray diffraction (XRD), scanning electron micrograph (SEM) and Fourier transform infrared (FTIR) studies. The ethanolic leaf extract of P. betle was also used for the successful synthesis of AuNPs (gold nanoparticles), which were characterized by TEM, Fourier transform infrared (FT‐IR), EDX and XRD. These nanoparticles were tested non‐toxic to MCF‐7 and HeLa (cancer) cell lines. Gadolinium‐doped titanium dioxide nanoparticles (GdT NPs) were also synthesized from the leaf of P. betle using the hydrothermal method. GdT NP showed high antibacterial activity against S. aureus, E. coli and C. albicans at 25µg/ml and also showed promising antioxidant activity in the DPPH radical scavenging method. The extract of the leaf of P. betle was also used in the synthesis of titanium dioxide nanoparticles (TiO2NP). TiO2 nanoparticles were characterized by TEM, XRD and FTIR, and antioxidant activity was evaluated using the DPPH assay, which showed promising antioxidant activity with the lowest IC50 value. The leaf of P. betle helps stabilize and capping in the phytofabrication of zinc oxide nanoparticles (PZnO). These PZnO exhibited antibacterial activity towards pathogens related to dental infections such as Lactobacillus acidophilus and St. mutans in the well diffusion test at low concentrations of 3.25 μg/ml and also demonstrated a high antioxidant efficacy of approximately 70% at a concentration of 200 μg/ml concentration in the DPPH assay. An experiment showed that Piper betle leaf extract‐mediated silver protein (core‐shell) nanoparticles (Ag NP) showed less toxicity against Daphnia magna than chemically synthesized AgNPs. Copper oxide nanoparticles (CuONPs) synthesized using P. betle leaf extract efficiently inhibited the growth of phytopathogens such as Xanthomonas axonopodis and Ralstonia solanacearum and also exhibited a cytotoxic effect on rat splenocytes by decreasing cell viability to 94% at 300 μg/ml. Silver nanoparticles coated with polyaniline (AgNP) synthesis from P. betle leaf extracts were evaluated for antimicrobial potency. The result exhibited 32.78 ± 0.64 mm inhibition zone for S. aureus, a maximum 29.55 ± 0.45 mm inhibition zone against S. typhi, 21.95 ± 0.45 mm for P. aeruginosa and 27.12 ± 0.38 mm for E. coli compared to the standard drug norfloxacin. Silver nanobioconjugates synthesized from the leaf extract of betel and its chief compound eugenol showed potent anticancer activity in lung adenocarcinoma (A549 cell line) with low viability and nuclear fragmentation in the MTT ‐ (3‐[4,5‐dimethylthiazol‐2‐yl]‐2,5 diphenyl tetrazolium bromide) assay and techniques for staining with orange acridine or ethidium bromide, also showed no toxicity against non‐cancerous human peripheral blood lymphocytes. Another experiment showed that silver nanoparticles synthesized using P. betle showed antifungal potency against Fusarium solani and Alternaria brassicae in a dose‐dependent method. , The Betel leaf extract was used to synthesize a silver‐gold nanocomposite (Ag‐Au NCPs) through the reduction of silver nitrate and gold chloride by the biological reduction method and was confirmed by XTD, SEM, FTIR and EDX. This bimetallic composite nanoformulation significantly inhibited B. subtilis and K. Planticola with higher antibacterial activity against B. subtilis. Green synthesized CaO calcium oxide nanoparticles from betel leaf extract, which are also able to inhibit E. coli, P. aeruginosa, S. aureus and St. mutans with the highest activity against E. coli and St. mutans. CaO nanoparticles also exhibited anticancer efficacy against the A549 cell line using an MTT assay with an IC50 value of 92.08 mg/ml.

14.

## CONCLUSIONS AND FUTURE PROSPECTS

Piper betle is a world‐known herbal cash crop of tremendous, social, economic and therapeutic importance and known as ‘green gold’. The mention of betel leaf is found in various ancient medicinal literatures, and the plant is still used in traditional and folklore medicinal systems. Traditional knowledge and preclinical studies revealed the use of P. betle which has potential multitherapeutic efficacy in various diseases such as cancer, inflammation, neurodegenerative disorders, asthma, dental and oral infections, allergy, thyroid, diabetes and skin diseases. Essential oils and extracts showed great results in antifertility, cardioprotection, hepatoprotection and antiplatelet. Various researchers have reported remarkable inhibition efficacy against insects, larvae, and improvement in microbial infections, parasitic infections. The plant contains a treasure of bioactive phytochemicals belonging to different classes such as phenol, tannin, terpenoid, alkaloids and flavonoids, which are responsible for healing of various diseases. The beautiful and pungent aroma of the plant is due to its phenolic and terpenoid compounds, which made betel an eminent flavouring agent. In addition to that, betel has a notably nutritional value and is considered GRAS (generally recognized as safe) for consumption.

Piper betle is found in many varieties and cultivars, and there is a problem in synonym and proper authentication; therefore, proper taxonomic identification of landraces is the most important criterion in research. Genetic and molecular markers must be used to differentiate the different varieties of betel. Different landraces contain different amounts and combinations of chemical constituents; therefore, efforts must be made to identify phytochemicals using modern extraction and detection techniques. Standardization and validation of chemical constituents for quantitative and qualitative evaluations must also be taken care of. As the quality and quantity of the chemical constituents vary with soil and environmental factors, therefore, the optimization of the highest‐yielding soil quality and factor must be studied for large‐scale commercial cultivation purposes. Although there are many reports available on preclinical treatment using P. betle in various diseases, the mechanism of the reaction is not mentioned in most reports. A computer‐aided drug discovery program can be used since it clarifies the molecular mechanisms, correlates the pharmacological responses with experimental data, and has a crucial role in boosting medical and pharmaceutical innovation. The docking analysis performed in this research provided valuable insights into the bindings of bioactive isolates towards many protein targets, including those involved in antidepressant, anti‐inflammatory and thrombolytic cascades. 
,
 Broad‐spectrum clinical studies are also a major lacuna, which is incomplete in the pharmacological study. Therefore, more attention must be paid to the mechanism of action in different disease management in clinical studies that may open up an innovative avenue in therapeutics. Unexplored landraces must be further studied, and new varieties with a high number of bioactive compounds can be developed by the use of biotechnological methods. Furthermore, proper attention must be paid to the management of pests and diseases of betel plants and long‐term storage of leaves and extracts for commercial use.
The present review encompasses the traditional uses, preclinical and clinical aspects of P. betle with notes on its toxicological attributes and safety considerations. However, further studies are needed to explore its efficacy via proper elucidation of its underlying molecular mechanisms of action against various disease pathology, structure–activity relationships, bioavailability and synergism. In addition, well‐designed clinical studies involving statistically significant number of human patients are needed to assess the clinical significance of the plant preparations and the derived compounds. Lastly, its high abundance, low‐cost production, exportation and potential therapeutic aspects made the betel plant very distinguished throughout the world and opened myriad possibilities for future studies.

## CONFLICT OF INTEREST
The authors declare that there are no conflicts of interest.

## AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS

Protha Biswas:Conceptualization (supporting); methodology (supporting);writing ‐ original draft (supporting). Uttpal Anand: Conceptualization (lead); investigation (supporting); methodology (supporting);writing ‐ original draft (supporting). Suchismita Chatterjee Saha: Formal analysis (supporting); investigation (supporting); methodology (supporting);writing ‐ original draft (supporting). Nishi Kant: Methodology (equal). Tulika Mishra: Methodology (equal); writing, review, editing (equal). Harison Masih: Methodology (equal); writing, review, editing (equal). Ananya Bar: Methodology (equal); writing, review, editing (equal). Devendra Kumar Pandey: Data curation (supporting); formal analysis (supporting); writing, review, editing (supporting). Niraj Kumar Jha: Formal analysis (supporting); writing, review, editing (supporting). Madhumita Majumder: Formal analysis (supporting); writing, review, editing (supporting). Neela Das: Formal analysis (supporting); writing, review, editing (supporting). Vijaykumar Shivaji Gadekar: Methodology (equal); writing, review, editing (equal). Mahipal S. Shekhawat: Formal analysis (supporting); writing, review, editing (supporting). Manoj Kumar: Formal analysis (supporting); writing, review, editing (supporting). Radha: Data curation (supporting); writing, review, editing (supporting). Jarosław Proćków: Data curation (supporting); formal analysis (supporting); funding acquisition (lead); investigation (supporting); project administration (lead); resources (lead); supervision (lead); validation (supporting); visualization (supporting); writing, review, editing (supporting). José M. Pérez de la Lastra: Conceptualization (supporting); funding acquisition (lead); project administration (lead); resources (supporting); supervision (supporting); writing, review, editing (supporting). Abhijit Dey: Conceptualization (lead); formal analysis (lead); project administration (lead); resources (lead); supervision (lead); validation (supporting); visualization (supporting); writing, review, editing (supporting).

Biswas P, Anand U, Saha SC, et al. Betelvine (Piper betle L.): A comprehensive insight into its ethnopharmacology, phytochemistry, and pharmacological, biomedical and therapeutic attributes. J Cell Mol Med. 2022;26:3083–3119. doi: 10.1111/jcmm.17323

Funding information

This research was funded by projects APOGEO (Cooperation Program INTERREG‐MAC 2014–2020, with European Funds for Regional Development‐FEDER, ‘Agencia Canaria de Investigación, Innovación y Sociedad de la Información (ACIISI) del Gobierno de Canarias’ (project ProID2020010134), and CajaCanarias (project 2019SP43).
Protha Biswas and Uttpal Anand contributed equally to this study and are the first authors.

## Contributor Information
Jarosław Proćków, Email: jaroslaw.prockow@upwr.edu.pl.
José M. Pérez de la Lastra, Email: jm.perezdelalastra@csic.es.
Abhijit Dey, Email: abhijit.dbs@presiuniv.ac.in, Email: abhijitbio25@yahoo.com.

## DATA AVAILABILITY STATEMENT
Data sharing is not applicable to this article as no datasets were generated or analysed during the current study.

## REFERENCES
 

## Associated Data

## Data Availability Statement
Data sharing is not applicable to this article as no datasets were generated or analysed during the current study.