pmcCell RepCell Rep319nihpaCell reports2211-1247pmc-is-collection-domainyespmc-collection-titleNIHPA Author ManuscriptsPMC9234997PMC9234997.192349979234997NIHMS18080313550812810.1016/j.celrep.2022.110766NIHMS1808031NIHPA18080311ArticleDynamic spectrum of ectopic lymphoid B cell activation and hypermutation in the RA synovium characterized by NR4A nuclear receptor expression
MeednuNida Rangel-MorenoJavier ZhangFan Escalera-RiveraKatherine CorsieroElisa PredilettoEdoardo DiCarloEdward GoodmanSusan DonlinLaura T. RaychauduriSoumya BombardieriMichele PitzalisCostantino OrangeDana E. Accelerating Medicines Partnership Rheumatoid Arthritis and Systemic Lupus Erythematosus (AMP RA/SLE) Consortium McDavidAndrew AnolikJennifer H. 1Division of Allergy, Immunology and Rheumatology, Department of Medicine, University of Rochester Medical Center, Rochester, NY 14642, USA2Center for Data Sciences, Brigham and Women’s Hospital, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02115, USA3Division of Genetics, Department of Medicine, Brigham and Women’s Hospital, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02115, USA4Department of Biomedical Informatics, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02115, USA5Program in Medical and Population Genetics, Broad Institute, Cambridge, MA 02142, USA6Division of Rheumatology, Inflammation, and Immunity, Brigham and Women’s Hospital, Boston, MA 02115, USA7Centre for Experimental Medicine & Rheumatology, William Harvey Research Institute, Queen Mary University of London, EC1M 6BQ, London, UK8Hospital for Special Surgery, New York, NY 10021, USA9Weill Cornell Medicine, New York, NY, USA10Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, Hospital for Special Surgery, New York, NY 10021, USA11Faculty of Medical and Human Sciences, University of Manchester, Manchester, UK12Rockefeller University, New York, NY 10028, USA13Department of Pathology, University of Rochester Medical Center, Rochester, NY 14642, USA14Center for Musculoskeletal Research, University of Rochester Medical Center, Rochester, NY 14642, USA15Department of Biostatistics and Computational Biology, University of Rochester, Rochester, NY 14642, USA16A list of members and affiliations is provided in the supplemental information17Lead contactAUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS
J.H.A., A.McD., and N.M. conceived and designed the work. E.D., D.E.O., S.G., and L.T.D. were responsible for tissue sample acquisition and sample characterization. N.M. performed the sample processing, sorting, single-cell capture, and flow cytometry experiments. J.R.-M. performed immunofluorescent staining of tissues. K.E.R. performed in vitro stimulation of B cells. J.H.A., A.M., and N.M. established the analytical strategies and analyzed the data. A.M. performed bioinformatic analyses. F.Z., S.R., and the AMP network provided bioinformatic assistance. E.C., E.P., M.B., and C.P. provided tissue samples from the PEAC cohort. D.E.O. provided analytic input and assistance with analysis of the RA flare cohort. J.H.A. supervised the study. J.H.A., A.M., and N.M. wrote the manuscript. All authors contributed to reviewing and editing of the manuscript.
*Correspondence: jennifer_anolik@urmc.rochester.edu035202239541102011076611076601062022270620222706202213062024https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/).

## SUMMARY
Ectopic lymphoid structures (ELS) can develop in rheumatoid arthritis (RA) synovial tissue, but the precise pathways of B cell activation and selection are not well understood. Here, we identify a synovial B cell population characterized by co-expression of a family of orphan nuclear receptors (NR4A1-3), which is highly enriched in RA synovial tissue. A transcriptomic profile of NR4A synovial B cells significantly overlaps with germinal center light zone B cells and an accrual of somatic hypermutation that correlates with loss of naive B cell state. NR4A B cells co-express lymphotoxins α and β and IL-6, supporting functions in ELS promotion. Expanded and shared clones between synovial NR4A B cells and plasma cells and the rapid upregulation with BCR stimulation point to in situ differentiation. Together, we identify a dynamic progression of B cell activation in RA synovial ELS, with NR4A transcription factors having an important role in local adaptive immune responses.

## In brief
Meednu et al. identify a B cell population in the RA synovium with upregulation of the NR4A gene family. The population displays a continuum of somatic hypermutation—pointing to in situ activation—with NR4A expression a readout of antigen stimulation and pathological B cell responses.

## Graphical Abstract

 

pmc-status-qastatus0pmc-status-liveyespmc-status-embargonopmc-status-releasedyespmc-prop-open-accessyespmc-prop-olfnopmc-prop-manuscriptyespmc-prop-legally-suppressednopmc-prop-has-pdfyespmc-prop-has-supplementyespmc-prop-pdf-onlynopmc-prop-suppress-copyrightnopmc-prop-is-real-versionnopmc-prop-is-scanned-articlenopmc-prop-preprintnopmc-prop-in-epmcyespmc-prop-open-manuscriptyespmc-license-refCC BY-NC-ND

## INTRODUCTION
Rheumatoid arthritis (RA) is a chronic autoimmune disease characterized by inflammation of the synovial tissue leading to joint damage and disability. Although dramatic advances in treatment options for RA have been achieved over the last two decades, a significant number of RA patients do not achieve remission or low disease activity ( ; ), highlighting the need for new therapies and biomarkers of response. B cells play a key role in RA disease pathogenesis both through autoantibody-mediated and antibody-independent functions and are key treatment targets in the disease ( ; ; ; ). Although B cell clonal expansion is detected in RA blood ( ) and synovium ( ), the mechanisms and location of antigen-specific B cell priming remains unclear.
B cell aggregates are present in the RA synovium ( ; ) at both early and late stages of disease and have been linked to important clinical outcomes including treatment response, bone erosion, and radiographic progression ( ; ). Ectopic lymphoid structures (ELS) are found in at least 40% of RA patient synovia with 10%–25% of those structures displaying features of a functional germinal center (GC) ( ; ; ; Yanni et al., 1993). ELS organization can recapitulate the architecture of secondary lymphoid organs (SLOs), with areas that resemble dark zones (DZs) (proliferating and AID-expressing B cells) and areas that resemble light zones (LZs) (rich in follicular dendritic cells and T cells in addition to B cells) ( ). ELS in RA synovial tissue has been shown to support antigen-driven selection and differentiation of autoreactive B cells, facilitating diversification, somatic hypermutation (SHM) ( ), and class switching ( ) for in situ production of autoantibodies ( ), suggesting that these structures are functional. Many critical factors driving ectopic lymphoid neogenesis, including lymphoid chemokines, are shared with factors driving SLO development, but the cellular components that produce these key factors may differ and are the subject of ongoing investigation. In mouse colitis, lymphotoxin (LT)-expressing B cells can support ELS formation and lead to severe inflammatory disease ( ). The role of B cells during ELS in RA synovial tissue, however, is unclear and which B cell subsets may be crucial for this process is still unknown.
Single-cell analyses of RA synovial tissue recently identified four B cell states including naive, memory, age-associated B cells, and plasma cells (PCs) ( ). To improve our understanding of the cellular, transcriptional, and antibody repertoire dynamics during human B cell activation in ELS, here we performed unbiased single-cell transcriptomic and repertoire profiling of RA synovial B cells. These single-cell antibody repertoires paired with single-cell transcriptomics allowed us to define transcriptional B cell states, resolving functional B cell heterogeneity and gene expression dynamics. We identified an abundant population of synovial B cells characterized by upregulation of NR4A1-3 along with other immediate-early response genes (EGR1/3, FOS, and JUN) and activation markers (CD69 and CD83). These cells show evidence of SHM, class switching, and clonal expansion. Gene expression profiling of synovial NR4A B cells demonstrated enrichment for genes associated with GC LZ B cells and expression of elevated levels of chemokine receptors and chemotactic factors involved in ELS, including LT-α, LT-β, and IL-6. This subset of B cells is enriched in synovial tissue but found at very low levels in peripheral blood and another autoimmune target tissue, the kidney in lupus nephritis. Notably, RA synovial B cells and PCs spontaneously express NR4A1 protein by flow cytometric and histologic analysis, and NR4A cluster genes are enriched in synovial samples with a lymphoid histologic pathotype ( ). In an RA flare cohort ( ), an NR4A B cell transcriptomic signature peaked in the blood during flare. The presence of expanded and shared clones in this activated B cell state and NR4A-expressing synovial PCs and the rapid upregulation with BCR stimulation points to antigen-driven activation and differentiation in the synovium. Together our data support in situ activation of B cells with accrual of SHM in synovium ELS and NR4A expression as a potent readout of antigen stimulation, local adaptive immunity, and pathological B cell responses.

## RESULTS

## scRNA-seq analysis of RA B cells reveals multiple distinct subsets, including a NR4A B cell population in the synovium
To define the diversity of B cells in the synovium, we isolated B cells from lymphoid-rich RA synovial tissues and paired blood and performed single-cell transcriptomic and BCR sequencing on the 10× Chromium platform ( ; ). The mean frequency of B cells by flow cytometry was 12.65% (2.7%–21.6%, n = 4) of CD45+ synovial cells. The majority of synovial B cells were IgD−, whereas 80% of blood B cells were naive (IgD+CD27−). We also observed synovial enrichment of CD24−CD27hi plasmablasts/PCs (1.9%–7.6%) ( ).
We sequenced 4,115 B cells (2,589 synovial and 1,526 peripheral blood) with an average median genes per cell of 1,427 (755–1,868). After exclusion of cells with high mitochondrial RNA content, dimensionality reduction using t-distributed stochastic neighbor embedding (t-SNE) ( ) and unsupervised clustering using Seurat package ( ) on the combined dataset of 3,786 cells defined 8 conserved B cell subsets or clusters. Two subpopulations of PCs (PC(i) and PC(ii)) were characterized by high expression of transcription factors required for PC differentiation and maintenance (XPB1, IRF4, and PRDM1) and immunoglobulin genes ( , , and ). Expression of IGHD and TCL1A identified three naive B cell subpopulations (naive(i), naive(ii), and naive(iii)) ( and ). Two B cell subpopulations expressed high levels of CD27, HOPX, S100A10, and S100A4, markers associated with memory B cells ( ; ; ; ). The LMNA+ designated subpopulation also uniquely expressed the LMNA gene, not previously reported in memory B cells ( , , and ). The final subpopulation was labeled NR4A+ as it expressed high levels of the nuclear family receptor 4 (NR4A1, NR4A2, and NR4A3). This subpopulation also showed high expression of markers associated with activation and GC formation, such as CD69, CD83, and GPR183, the latter a molecule mediating B cell migration in lymphoid follicles ( ; ) ( , , and ). NR4A was also expressed by the LMNA cluster and PC(i) ( ).
The NR4A+ and LMNA+ subpopulations were restricted to synovial samples. Naive B cells were the main population in the blood, whereas the memory and PC subpopulations were present in both blood and synovial tissue ( and ).

## Unique enrichment of NR4A+ B cells in RA synovium compared with blood and other tissues
Using a supervised classification method SingleR ( ), we next examined the presence of NR4A+ B cells in an independent RA synovial tissue cohort and other tissues where single-cell data were available. In SLE kidney ( ) and peripheral blood B cells (RA from our data and a published healthy donor [ ]), NR4A+ B cells were very rare at 0.7%–1.5% abundance. In contrast NR4A+ B cells were highly abundant (>40% abundance) in synovial tissue from AMP phase I ( ), similar to samples in our current study ( ). In the AMP phase I bulk RNA sequencing cohort ( ), we found that several markers, including CD83 and NR4A1, which defined the NR4A+ cluster, were upregulated in B cells from RA biopsy samples compared with B cells from RA and OA arthroplasty samples ( ). This NR4A cluster enrichment appeared to be driven by the inflammatory state of the tissue (1.7- and 2.1-fold increase in CD83 and NR4A1 gene expression leukocyte-rich RA versus OA, p < 0.05; NS for leukocyte-poor RA versus OA) ( ).

## NR4A+ synovial B cells accrue SHM
To define the Ig repertoire in single B cells, we performed V(D)J sequencing on the same sorted CD19+ cells used for single-cell RNA sequencing (scRNA-seq), allowing a joint analysis of transcriptional profile and immune repertoire in the same cell ( and ). Similar to previously published data, all three naive clusters exhibited very low SHM frequencies, while memory and PC clusters showed the highest mutation rates ( ; ; ) ( and ). The LMNA+ cluster has a mutation rate comparable with that of memory B cells, supporting that LMNA+ are memory B cells that may have developed in the synovium. It is curious that BCR recovery in the LMNA+ cluster is low overall, but it is not clear if this is a technical or biologic issue. Although mutated cells are apparent in the NR4A+ cluster, the average SHM rate was not significantly higher than naive B cells (1.5%, 95% CI, 1%–4%) while memory and PCs had clear differences compared with naive, suggesting that NR4A+ cells may be in an earlier stage of the affinity selection and maturation process ( ). Furthermore, we detected IGHA expression in a small number of NR4A+ B cells, providing evidence of class-switch recombination ( ).
Next, we looked at the relationship between SHM rate and the expression levels of CD27, NR4A genes, and IGHD. As expected, all subpopulations showed increased SHM with increased expression of CD27, while NR4A and memory subpopulations showed inverse associations of SHM with IGHD. However, particular to only the NR4A+ cluster, an accumulation of SHM positively associated with the expression levels of NR4A1 and NR4A2 ( ), suggesting a potential role for NR4A genes in the RA synovial immune reaction. There was no significant association found between the expression of either the NR4A genes or IGHD in naive and LMNA+ clusters. Importantly, we detected expansion of 43 families of putative clones in the synovium and five in the peripheral blood, most prominently featured in the PC and NR4A+ clusters. Clonal families were almost entirely confined to a single transcriptomic subpopulation (naive, memory, LMNA, NR4A, or PC), a finding not expected to occur by random chance (p < 0.001 by permutation test). The only exception was the clonal family CARHWRGKKPFDSW, which was detected in both the NR4A+ and PC cluster, consistent with a developmental relationship between these subsets ( , , and ).

## NR4A+ synovial B cells are activated and resemble GC B cells
To further clarify the eight synovial B cell clusters, we performed gene set enrichment analysis. All three naive clusters were significantly enriched with naive B cells from blood and tonsil (Bm1+Bm2) ( ). In contrast, memory and LMNA+ clusters were enriched for gene sets expressed by tonsil Bm5 (a memory subset) ( ) and, to a lesser extent, memory B cells from blood, supporting their identity as memory B cells ( ). The analysis also confirmed the identity of PC clusters ( ) ( ). The NR4A+ cluster was strongly enriched for genes expressed by GC LZ B cells ( and ), including EGR1/2/3, CD83, BCL2A1, and GPR183 ( ) ( ).
Recently, scRNA-seq of GC B cells from conventional SLOs has revealed a dynamic spectrum of DZ, LZ, and intermediate zone B cells ( ; ). In particular, between the DZs and LZs there was a gradient of downregulation of classic DZ genes, such as CXCR4, and upregulation of classic LZ genes, such as CD83. Along this gradient, there was an initial upregulation of BCR signaling followed by NFκB signaling. The later stages of the intermediate zone GC B cells were characterized by upregulation of CD40 and MYC signaling, indicative of their potential to interact with T cells ( ). In our data, the NR4A+ B cells in RA synovial tissue displayed characteristics compatible with these intermediate cell stages. First, in contrast to classic LZs, NR4A+ cluster cells expressed CXCR4, BCL6, and FOXP1, genes associated with GC DZs ( ; ; ) ( – ). Second, NR4A+ B cells showed evidence of BCR stimulation ( ) and high levels of immediate-early genes associated with recent BCR stimulation, including NR4A1, NR4A3, EGR1, and c-Fos ( ; ; ) and NFκB signaling ( ). In contrast to classic LZ cells, the NR4A+ cluster does not show consistent upregulation of CD40 and MYC signaling, with the exception of BCL2A1 (CD40 signaling) and GPR183 (MYC signaling) ( ). Our NR4A+ B cell cluster shares remarkable transcriptomic similarity with a recently described activated B cell state in the human tonsil that appears to be on a trajectory to GC formation ( ).

## A gene expression activation continuum from naive to NR4A B cells
The variability in NR4A1, NR4A2, IGHD, and CD27 expression in the NR4A subset ( and ) led us to hypothesize that B cells in synovium might exist along a continuum from a naive state. Projecting the gene expression data of the B cells onto two dimensions using principal component analysis, we sought to further define the relationship between B cell subsets. PCs were excluded from this analysis. Dimension 1 (4% variance) separated NR4A+ cells from naive. In contrast, dimension 2 explained the difference between the NR4A+ and memory subsets (2% variance) ( ). LMNA+ cells were positive in both dimension 1 and 2. In dimension 1, we found that genes with large gene loadings are the ones involved in lymphocyte activation and GC molecular events, including CDKN1A, NFKBID, GPR183, CD83, LY9, KLF6, and IGHG1, and are expressed in increasing levels from naive to NR4A+ and LMNA+ clusters. Consistently, the NR4A+ cluster is significantly enriched for gene sets associated with cell activation ( ). In addition, a number of DNA-binding transcription factors (NR4A2, NFKBID, NR4A3, JUND, DNAJA1, CREM, and FOS) gradually increase from naive to NR4A state, while genes characteristic of naive B cells (TCL1A, IGHM, and FCER2) are downregulated ( ). Along dimension 1, we observed cells in transition states between naive and NR4A+. Thus, expression of NR4A+ markers, including NR4A1 and DUSP1, are gradually increased, while, concurrently, markers associated with naive status, such as TXNIP and CD79B, showed a gradual decrease in expression ( ). In dimension 2, genes with increased expression levels are those associated with memory B cells, including HOPX, IGHA1, S100A4, and CD99. We also observed evidence of transitioning between NR4A+ and memory state with increased expression of memory genes (S100A6 and HOPX) and decreased expression of NR4A+ genes (JUN and DUSP1) ( and ). Our data are consistent with a continuum of states from naive to NR4A+ with both loss of naive and acquisition of activation status. Whether LMNA+ cells differentiate from memory, or NR4A+, or both remains to be defined.

## Highly expressed chemokines and cytokines in NR4A B cells
Chemokines and their interaction with corresponding chemokine receptors are vital for the organization of lymphoid organs and B cell functions ( ). A number of ELS promoting factors are upregulated in lymphoid-like RA synovial tissue ( , ). To investigate the relevant chemokine and cytokine pathways in synovial tissue, we next examined differential gene expression of chemokines, cytokines, and their receptors in each B cell cluster. Both naive and NR4A+ B cells showed significant enrichment for CXCR5, CCR7, and CXCR4 ( and ). These chemokine receptors are instrumental to orchestrate homing to B cell follicles (CXCR5), migration across high endothelial venules (CCR7), and dynamic mobilization inside GC (CXCR4) ( ; ), suggesting that these B cells can be recruited to the synovium and localize in response to specific chemokine signals. Receptors for B cell survival factors are also expressed by multiple B cell subsets. Naive and NR4A+ subsets showed significant upregulation of TNFRSF13C (BAFFR), while LMNA+ and memory shared upregulation of TNFRSF13B (TACI), a receptor that can bind to both B cell survival factors BAFF and APRIL. Consistent with previous reports, PC uniquely showed upregulation of TNFRSF17 (BCMA), a BAFF receptor important for PC survival ( ). Furthermore, NR4A+, LMNA+, and memory showed significant enrichment of TNFRSF1 (TNFR2), a receptor for TNF ( ). We also observed that LMNA+ and memory subsets uniquely upregulate SIGIRR, a negative regulator of IL-1 receptor signaling pathway, implying a response to IL1 family cytokines ( ).
B cells can play a direct role in the organization of SLOs by producing lymphotoxin β ( ). More recently, B cell-derived IL-6 has been implicated in spontaneous GC formation in systemic lupus ( ). We found that all non-PC B cell subsets express lymphotoxin β (LTB) ( and ). However, the NR4A+ subset uniquely expressed IL6 and co-expressed LTB and LTA ( ). As previously noted, GPR183 (EBI2) is highly expressed in the NR4A+ subset. GPR183 has pleiotropic roles in B cell positioning depending on the balance of other chemokines. GPR183, together with CXCR4, also expressed at high levels by the NR4A+ subset, are critical factors for the segregation of GC B cells in the DZs and LZs ( ). NR4A+ B cells also have elevated expression of a number of co-stimulatory and signaling molecules important for putative cell-cell interactions with APCs and T cells. In addition to IL6 (interaction with IL-6R on APCs and Tfh), this includes high levels of TNFSF9 (4-1BBL) ( and ), a ligand that binds to 4-1BB on activated CD4 and CD8 T cells to provide co-stimulatory signals ( ; ). Overall, these data suggest that NR4A+ B cells may be a critical initiator of ELS formation in synovial tissue. Independent analysis of the RA cohort from AMP also supports these findings ( ). Of note, we observed the presence of histologic ELS in our samples by immunofluorescent staining with classic GC markers ( ).
One of the differentially expressed chemokine receptors in the NR4A+ subset is CCR6 ( and ). Single-cell analysis of GC B cells from human tonsil has identified a distinct cell cluster of memory B cell precursors (PreM) originating within the LZ that shares a gene signature with previously reported murine CCR6+ PreM B cells ( ; ). The range of CCR6 expression within the NR4A+ cluster ( ) suggests that memory precursor cells are originating here and is consistent with memory precursor commitment to post-GC differentiation in the early stage of the LZ ( ). Consistent with CCR6 expression, we found that NR4A+ and LMNA+ cells are significantly enriched in a PreM signature ( ). In contrast to naive subsets, CCR6+ cells in the NR4A+ subset showed higher expression of most of the genes described as a signature of PreM, including CELF2, BANK1, and CD44, compared with CCR6− counterparts, while LMNA+ CCR6+ displayed a smaller subset of PreM signature genes ( ). In addition, the NR4A+ subset contained high fractions of cells co-expressing CCR6, CELF2, and BANK1 ( ).

## Prominent expression of NR4A1 protein in synovial B cells and PCs in ELS
To further define the phenotype of synovial NR4A1 B cells and their localization in ELS, we next performed immunofluorescent staining on synovial tissue sections. RA synovial tissue histology identified clear GC structures, with CD21 staining for follicular dendritic cells (FDCs) in the LZ, proliferating nuclear antigen for B cells in the DZ, and IgD for the naive follicular mantle. NR4A1 expression was observed in B cells within and in close proximity to the GC and prominently in aggregates of CD138+ PCs ( ; see for additional representative images). Interestingly, NR4A1 was also expressed by select T cells localized within and near the GC ( and ). As endogenous NR4A1 (Nur77) expression is an indicator of antigen receptor signaling in B and T cells ( ; ; ), synovial lymphocyte NR4A1 expression suggests in situ antigen activation, and persistent expression in synovial PCs suggests antigen selection and differentiation in the tissue. The majority of the PCs expressing NR4A1 are CD20+, indicative of a recently generated plasma cell or plasmablast ( and , yellow overlay cells in CD20-NR4A1-CD138 panels). Histology of tonsil tissue confirmed the expression of NR4A1 in B cells in close proximity to CD21+ LZ FDC inside GC ( ) and in CD138+ PCs surrounding GCs ( ).
Flow cytometry of B cells from disaggregated RA tissue and synovial fluid revealed that a significant fraction spontaneously express NR4A1. In marked contrast, only a small percentage of peripheral blood B cells (from healthy controls or RA) express NR4A1 ( ). NR4A1+ B cells from synovial fluid are predominantly IgD−, including IgD−CD27+ switched memory (SM), double-negative (DN) B cells, and PCs ( and ). However, NR4A1 expression is seen in a fraction of all synovial B cells, regardless of phenotype. Memory B cells and PCs express significantly more NR4A1 than naive cells ( and ). In synovial tissue, NR4A1 B cells are also predominantly IgD− ( ). Here, we characterized the B cells based on CD38 and IgD expression, as used to classify tonsil B cells ( ). NR4A1 B cells include CD38+IgD− (Bm3/4 compartment containing GC cells and PCs) and CD38−IgD− (Bm5 compartment containing CD27+ memory and DN cells) ( and ).
To establish the pattern of NR4A1 expression during normal B cell activation in SLOs, we performed additional flow cytometry analysis of tonsil B cells. Similar to the synovium, multiple subsets (Bm1+Bm2, Bm5, Bm3/4: GC and PC) of tonsil B cells express NR4A1, but with significantly higher expression in PC and GC B cells ( ). Furthermore, when we subset GC B cells based on CD83 and CXCR4, significantly more NR4A1+ cells were present in CD83+CXCR4+ intermediate GC B cells than in CD83−CXCR4+ (DZ), CD83+CXCR4− (LZ), or CD83− CXCR4− GC B cells, consistent with our RNA sequencing data that synovial NR4A+ B cells express high levels of both CXCR4 and CD83 ( ).
When we stimulated peripheral blood and synovial B cells with a cocktail of anti-IgG, anti-IgA, and anti-IgM to engage BCR of multiple isotypes, NR4A1 expression was significantly upregulated ( ). The NR4A1 mean fluorescent intensity (MFI) was significantly increased in stimulated B cells compared with untreated cells ( ). Notably, in synovial B cells, the NR4A1 MFI in untreated cells is already higher than in untreated blood B cells and further increased after stimulation ( ). In addition to NR4A1 upregulation, we also found that BCR stimulation upregulated NR4A2 and NR4A3 expression at the mRNA level ( and ).

## Lymphoid-specific NR4A subset genes correlate with RA synovial tissue pathotype and increase in the blood during RA flare
Next, we sought to relate NR4A subset signature genes to synovial histology and clinical characteristics in an independent cohort of synovial biopsies from treatment-naive patients: the Pathobiology of Early Arthritis Cohort (PEAC) ( ). Based on histology scores, synovial samples were classified as lympho-myeloid (CD20 B cell aggregate rich), diffuse-myeloid (CD68 rich in the lining or sub-lining layer but poor in B cells), or fibroid (paucity of immune-inflammatory cell infiltrate), as described previously ( ). We focused on the expression of CD83, GPR183, and Ly9 as more lymphoid-specific genes representative of the NR4A cluster as only bulk RNA sequencing of total tissue is available in this study. These genes were strongly enriched in the lymphoid pathotype tissues ( ) and also showed significant correlation with synovial histology scores for CD20, CD3, CD138, and sub-lining CD68 ( ). These data suggest that infiltration of multiple immune cell types associated with ectopic lymphoid responses in the synovial tissue may be linked to the B cell NR4A subset. In addition, CD83 and LY9 expression showed a relationship with ultrasonographic joint synovial thickness confirming that ELS gene expression strongly matches imaging signs of active joint inflammation in the particular joint undergoing biopsy ( ). Surprisingly, NR4A1, NR4A2, and NR4A3 whole synovial gene expression was lower in the lymphoid versus fibroid pathotype and inversely correlated with histologic immune cell infiltration ( ) possibly due to B cell independent roles for the NR4A family in the synovium in other cell populations that may be anti-inflammatory ( ).
Although our initial data suggested that NR4A B cells are rare in RA blood ( ), we wondered whether circulating numbers of this activated B cell population may vary over time depending on disease activity. To begin to understand this dynamic, we compared our synovial B cell cluster signatures with blood transcriptional profiles recently defined relative to flare ( ). In this dataset, two transcriptomic clusters appeared in the blood preceding flare: AC2 was increased 2 weeks before flare and AC3 was increased 1 week before flare. AC2 was originally described as having characteristics of naive B cells, while AC3 is a unique CD45−CD31−PDPN+ mesenchymal population, termed PRIME (preinflammatory mesenchymal) cells ( ). An additional cluster 1 was increased at the onset of flare. When we examined the overlap between these blood clusters and our single-cell B cell clusters ( and ; ) using hypergeometric tests for enrichment, we found that AC2 was significantly enriched with transcripts characteristic of peripheral blood dominant naive B cell clusters, although the synovial NR4A+ and LMNA+ clusters were represented ( ). In contrast, the flare cluster 1 was significantly enriched with naive(iii), NR4A+, and LMNA+ synovial populations ( ). This is well visualized in the line graph ( ), with resting naive (naive(i), naive(ii)) and memory B cells increasing pre-flare and the NR4A cluster genes increasing at the same time as the increase in disease activity (RAPID3). This is consistent with a trajectory of B cell activation whereby resting blood B cells are recruited from the blood to the synovium pre-flare and then activated within the synovial microenvironment to express NR4A during flare.

## DISCUSSION
Our integrated single-cell analysis of RA synovial B cells has revealed a surprising level of B cell activation, with a large fraction of synovial B cells demonstrating evidence of recent antigen stimulation, as revealed by upregulation of the NR4A gene family. NR4A B cells appear primed for cell-cell interactions with APCs and T cells and, further, have evidence of molecular events associated with active GC reactions, including class-switch recombination, SHM, and clonal expansion with selection into the PC compartment. Our findings suggest a spectrum of activation of B cells within the synovial microenvironment with a pluripotent fate that includes differentiation to memory or PC lineage in situ.
Previous studies have supported local synovial activation of RA B cells with evidence of SHM and clonal expansion ( ; ) using a number of approaches, including enzymatic digestion or focal microdissection with bulk or single-cell BCR sequencing. An important advance in this study is the high-throughput combination of single-cell RNA sequencing and Ig gene repertoire. This allowed the unprecedented identification of a spectrum of B cell activation in synovial B cells downstream of BCR signaling as revealed by NR4A1 expression. A key finding from our study was the relationship between the degree of NR4A family gene expression and SHM. Notably, this dynamic process was unique to the synovium and not observed in B cells from RA peripheral blood or lupus kidney. NR4A1-3 encode a small family of orphan nuclear hormone receptors (NUR77, NURR1, and NOR1, respectively), which are rapidly induced by acute and chronic antigen stimulation in B and T cells ( ; ). Our results raise key questions regarding the precise synovial microenvironmental signals that promote NR4A family expression and second signals that may direct subsequent differentiation to memory B or PC. Another study did combine transcriptomic and repertoire analysis of peripheral blood RA B cells and interestingly suggested that ACPA-enriched B cell responses are imprinted with a T cell-dependent transcriptional network ( ). Given the strong association of NR4A1 expression in B cells and BCR engagement ( ), we speculate that the enrichment of B cell NR4A1 expression in the RA synovium represents chronic autoantigen stimulation and an ACPA response. This would be in keeping with other data in the literature indicating that B cells differentiating within ELS frequently target citrullinated peptides ( ).
In terms of B cell fate, it is notable that NR4A family members may trigger B cell apoptosis after encounter with self-antigen in the absence of a second signal provided by T cell (or other) costimulation and act as a negative regulator of B cell activation ( ). Thus, in murine B cells, the NR4A family, particularly NR4A1/NUR77, actively participates in B cell tolerance. NUR77 is upregulated in self-reactive B cells in response to chronic antigen stimulation and selectively restricts survival by limiting B cell survival factors such as BAFF ( ). In addition, a small subset of GC LZ B cells exhibiting a high SHM rate upregulate NR4A1/NUR77, suggesting active BCR signaling and a role for NR4A1 in selection and regulation of GC differentiation pathways into the PC compartment ( ). Recently, NR4A1 and NR4A3 have been identified as partially redundant mediators of an antigen-dependent negative feedback loop in B cells to reinforce tolerance by increasing B cell dependence on T cell help and regulating clonal competition when T cell help is limited ( ). These data point to an expanding role for the NR4A family in adaptive immune responses occurring in SLOs. However, the role of NR4A in ELS and autoimmunity had not been studied previously. Whether NR4A attempts to restrain B cell activation within the synovium, similar to its role in a recently reported anti-inflammatory synovial tissue-resident macrophage population ( ) and exhausted T cells in the tumor microenvironment ( ; ), remains to be defined. It is also not clear whether the synovial B cell activation reflected by NR4A expression is occurring by follicular and/or extra-follicular pathways ( ), although the high CXCR5 expression by NR4A B cells is at least consistent with follicular localization.
Our finding of shared clonality between the NR4A B cell and PC clusters and prominent expression of NR4A in synovial PCs suggests that NR4A B cells do indeed receive the signals required to drive their differentiation to memory and PC in situ. Similar findings have been reported in a mouse model of autoimmune arthritis where NR4A expression identified auto-antigen-specific CD4 T cells with Th17 differentiation potential ( ). The signals that control differentiation of activated B cells into memory or PCs in ELS require further study, but likely depend on antigen receptor signaling and the strength and stability of interaction with T cells ( ; ; ). We identified several genes within the NR4A cluster that may facilitate T-B cell interactions, including CD69 (which prevents activated lymphocyte egress from SLOs), CD86 (a ligand for CD28 on T cells), IL-6 (which can promote both APC and T cell interactions), and ICAM1 (which can support B cell interaction with T follicular helper cells) ( ). This is also in accord with a recent report showing that tetramer-identified ACPA-positive B cells in RA blood and synovial fluid express T cell-stimulating ligands and a persistently activated phenotype, suggestive of continuous antigenic triggering ( ). A key role for B cells in RA flare was also suggested by the recent discovery of a circulating expanded B cell subset (AC2) before the emergence of a circulating CD45−/CD31−/PDPN+, PRIME cell in RA patient blood before clinical flare ( ). We find that this pre-PRIME circulating B cell cluster (AC2) was enriched with resting naive (naive(i), naive(ii)) and memory B cells, which were dominant in the blood sample that we included in our single-cell analysis. In contrast, the blood transcriptomic cluster appearing during flare (cluster 1) was enriched in the NR4A+, LMNA+, and naive(iii) clusters. This is consistent with a trajectory of B cell activation whereby blood B cells are recruited to the synovium pre-flare, activated within the synovial microenvironment to express NR4A, and then possibly re-circulate during flare. Re-circulation of B cells between the synovium and the periphery is also supported by a recent publication demonstrating shared clonal families between these compartments in RA ( ). The origin of the B cells increasing in the blood pre-flare remains to be determined. It also remains possible that the NR4A cluster genes enriched in the blood at the time of flare represent B cells activated elsewhere and recruited to the synovium.
B cells may contribute to RA pathogenesis in multiple ways, not only as the precursors of PCs and production of autoantibodies, but also by antibody-independent functions, including antigen presentation and cytokine production. B cells can produce cytokines and chemokines that promote ELS. Thus, lymphotoxin β expression by B cells has been shown to support ELS formation in a mouse colitis model ( ). Lymphotoxin β and α are elevated in RA synovium and relate to the level of inflammation in the tissue ( ), and LT-β is expressed by synovial B cells but also other cell populations ( ). The precise role of B cells in ELS formation in RA synovial tissue and which subpopulations may be critical are unclear. We found a significant relationship between NR4A B cell expression and the degree of B cell infiltration and lymphoid organization in tissue, implicating NR4A B cells as a potential ELS-initiating and -promoting B cell subset. In accord with this, NR4A B cells expressed LT-β and LT-α and were the dominant source of IL-6, the latter important for Tfh interactions and demonstrated to promote spontaneous GC formation in SLE ( ).
Overall, our results highlight the unique enrichment of NR4A-expressing B cells in the RA synovium and their identity as an antigen-experienced B cell in the synovial ELS with the capability of differentiating to PC or memory B cell in situ depending on additional signals. NR4A may serve as a biomarker of chronic autoantigen stimulation in the synovial microenvironment and a novel therapeutic target.

## Limitations of the study
Although our study suggests that B cells are activated in situ in ELS, we acknowledge that the evidence is indirect. In addition, particularly the BCR sequencing data will need to be validated in a larger number of patients with more paired blood samples. The RA patients in our study were selected based on the presence of ELS. Although we found that NR4A B cell expression is enriched in leukocyte-rich RA in a larger more histologically and clinically diverse cohort, this reference dataset used bulk sequencing and did not examine the BCR. Despite these limitations, the enrichment of B cell NR4A1 expression in the RA synovium suggests chronic antigen stimulation. However, the antigen specificity of these cells remains to be determined. It is also unclear how the strength and duration of antigen stimulation regulates NR4A1 expression in synovial B cells and the functional outcome. Indeed, the different NR4A receptors influence T cell developmental fate via differential sensitivity to antigen receptor stimulation ( ). Furthermore, how other co-stimulatory signals control B cell activation and differentiation to PCs in the synovium and the role of NR4A in these processes requires further study. We speculate that the persistent high expression of NR4A in synovial PCs is indicative of antigen selection and differentiation in the tissue, but this remains to be defined. Finally, it will be important in future work to define the B cell migration dynamics between synovium and blood and the potential role of NR4A B cells in flare by comparing blood and tissue longitudinally in a larger number of patients.

## STAR★METHODS

## RESOURCE AVAILABILITY

## Lead contact
Further information and requests for resources and reagents should be directed to and will be fulfilled by the lead contact, Jennifer Anolik (Jennifer_anolik@urmc.rochester.edu).

## Materials availability
This study did not generate new unique reagents.

## Data and code availability
Single-cell RNA-seq data have been deposited at GEO depository. The records have been assigned GEO accession numbers and are publicly available as of the date of publication. This paper analyzes existing publicly available data. These accession number and references for the datasets are listed in the .
All original code has been deposited at Zenodo and is publicly available as of the date of publication. DOIs are listed in the 
Any additional information required to reanalyze the data reported in this paper is available from the upon request.

## EXPERIMENTAL MODEL AND SUBJECT DETAILS

## Patient cohorts
Arthroplasty samples were acquired from RA patients after surgical removal as part of standard of care at Hospital for Special Surgery, NY (n = 3, 1 male, 2 female) or collected as part of the AMP network (ImmPort SDY998) (n = 1, female). Patient disease characteristics can be found in . Peripheral blood was collected prior to the procedure. Written informed consent for research use of patient samples was obtained prior to study inclusion at the time of sample collection. This study received approval from the institutional review board (IRB) at Hospital for Special Surgery and University of Rochester. Synovial tissue fragments were cryopreserved in CryoStor CS10 (BioLife Solution) for subsequent disaggregation at University of Rochester ( ). PBMC were isolated from whole blood by Ficoll-hypaque density gradient centrifugation and cryopreserved in CryoStor CS10 (BioLife Solution). Samples from the AMP network were collected as part of multi-center cross-sectional study of patients undergoing elective surgical procedures and a prospective observational study of synovial biopsy specimen from patients with RA aged ≥18 years, with at least one inflamed joint ( ). This cohort included synovial tissues from 36 RA biopsies and arthroplasties (29 female, 7 male) and 15 OA arthroplasties (10 female, 5 male). 14 RA biopsies have B cell single cell RNA sequencing data available for analysis. The Pathobiology of Early Arthritis cohort (PEAC) contains data from 87 RA patients (64 female, 23 male) fulfilling 2010 ACR/EULAR RA Classification Criteria that were enrolled as part of the Medical Research Council funded multi-center PEAC project ( ) (https://peac.hpc.qmul.ac.uk/). Longitudinal genomic analysis of 67 blood samples over 13 weeks from one female RA patient sampled before and during flare was analyzed from .

## Human subjects for PBMCs, and synovial cells for in vitro study
Normal control blood (n = 8, all female), RA peripheral blood (n = 6, 4 female, 2 male) and RA synovial cells (n = 9, 7 female, 2 male) were obtained from patients at University of Rochester under IRB study protocols approval from University of Rochester. PBMCs and synovial cells were isolated by Ficoll-hypaque density gradient centrifugation and cryopreserved in freezing medium (90%FBS/10% DMSO) until used.

## Tonsil tissue samples
 were obtained as discarded tissue from tonsillectomy procedures. Patient information including gender is not available because tissue was obtained as de-identified sample. Portions of tissue was fixed in formalin and paraffin-embedded for histologic staining. The remaining tissue was mechanically disaggregated to obtain cell suspension. The cell suspension was further purified by Ficoll-hypaque density gradient centrifugation. Isolated mononuclear tonsil cells were cryopreserved in freezing medium (90%FBS/10%DMSO) until used.

## METHOD DETAILS

## Preparation of synovial tissue and PBMC and flow cytometry cell sorting
Cryopreserved synovial fragments were thawed per SOP ( ). Synovial tissue fragments were then disaggregated by combination of an enzymatic digestion and mechanical disruption as described. PBMCs were thawed by rapidly warming the cryovial in a 37°C water bath. To stain cells for sorting, cells were first incubated with Fc-Block (Biolegend) for 5 min at room temperature (RT). Cells were then incubated with a mixture of fluorochrome-conjugated antibodies ( ) for 30 min on ice, washed with PBS and then resuspended in PBS solution containing DAPI (Biolegend). Cells were sorted on a FACSAria II (BD biosciences) into 5%FBS/RPMI media using a 100-μm nozzle. B cells were gated as CD45+CD3−CD14−CD19+ ( ).

## Single cell RNA and BCR repertoire sequencing
Cellular suspensions were loaded on a Chromium Single-Cell Instrument (10× Genomics, Pleasanton, CA, USA). Single-cell RNA-Seq libraries were prepared using Chromium Single-Cell 5′ Library & Gel Bead Kit (PN-1000006, PN-1000014, 10× Genomics). The barcoded, full-length V(D)J segments were enriched by PCR with primers specific to the BCR constant regions using the Chromium Single Cell V(D)J Enrichment Kit, Human B cell (PN-1000016, 10× Genomics). For both B-cell enriched library and 5′ gene expression library, enzymatic fragmentation and size selection was used to optimize the cDNA amplicon size and indexed sequencing libraries were constructed by End Repair, A-tailing, Adaptor Ligation, and PCR. Final libraries contain the P5 and P7 priming sites used in Illumina bridge amplification. Paired end reads of 150nt were generated for each B-cell enriched library using the MiSeq sequencer (Illumina). The 5′ gene expression libraries were sequenced following 10× Genomics read length guidelines on the NovaSeq6000 sequencer (Illumina). The samples were disaggregated, sorted and loaded on 10× in multiple batches. Library preparations and sequencing for all samples were done in one batch.

## Intracellular staining and flow cytometry
To stain for flow cytometry, PBMC or tonsil cells were first incubated with Fc-Block (Biolegend) for 5 min at RT. Then 100ul of surface antibody cocktail ( ) was added to each tube and incubated on ice for 30 min. Next, live/dead cell assay (Invitrogen) was applied for 15 min on ice. Intracellular staining was performed using Foxp3/Transcription factor staining buffer kit (eBioscience) following manufacture protocol. After intracellular staining, cells were washed and fixed in 100μL PBS/1% paraformaldehyde for 20 min at RT and then 200μL of PBS/5%BSA was added to dilute the fixative. Samples were analyzed on an 18-color LSR II flow cytometer (eBioscience) on the same day or after kept at 4°C overnight. Analyses were performed using FlowJo v.10 (Tree Star) and doublet exclusion was performed on all samples. Gating strategy is depicted in .

## In vitro stimulation
Freshly isolated or thawed PBMC were washed with complete medium and counted. For qPCR, B cells were positively selected using anti-CD19 magnetic beads (Miltenyi Biotech). 0.5–1.0 × 106 cells per well were seeded in round-bottom 96-well plates in 200μL 10% FBS/RPMI 1640. Cells were stimulated with anti-human IgM F(ab′2) or anti-human Ig(A + G + M) F(ab′2) (Jackson Immuno-Research Laboratories) for indicated times. After stimulation, cells were collected for flow cytometry or qPCR.

## QUANTITATIVE REAL-TIME PCR (qPCR)
B cells were collected in RLTplus lysis buffer (Qiagen) supplemented with 1% 2-mercaptoethanol, and RNA were extracted using Quick-RNA kit (Zymo Research) and concentration was measured by NanoDrop (Thermo Scientific). Complementary DNA (cDNA) synthesis was done using a qScript cDNA synthesis kit (Quantabio). TaqMan expression assay system for NR4A1 (Hs00374226_m1), NR4A2 (Hs01117527_g1), NR4A3 (Hs00545009_g1) from Applied Biosystems were used to detect NR4A1, NR4A2 and NR4A3 mRNA expression, respectively. PPIA (Hs04194521_s1, Applied Biosystems) was used as a control housekeeping gene. The fold change in mRNA expression relative to control was calculated using the comparative threshold cycle (ΔΔCt) method.

## Immunofluorescent staining
Primary antibodies: List of primary and secondary antibodies used for immunofluorescent staining can be found in . 5 μm formalin-fixed paraffin sections were incubated at 60°C overnight (ON). Tissue sections were quickly transferred to xylenes and gradually hydrated by transferring slides to absolute alcohol, 96% alcohol, 70% alcohol, and water. Slides were immersed in an antigen retrieval solution, boiled for 30 min, and cooled down for 10 min at room temperature (RT). Slides were rinsed several times in water and transferred to PBS. Non-specific binding was blocked with 5% normal donkey serum in PBS containing 0.1% Tween 20, 0.1% Triton X-100 for 30 min, at RT in a humid chamber. Primary antibodies were added to slides and incubated in a humid chamber at room RT, ON. Slides were quickly washed in PBS, and fluorescently labeled, secondary antibodies were incubated for 2 h at RT in a humid chamber. Finally, slides were rinsed for 1 h in PBS and mounted with Vectashield antifade mounting media with DAPI (H-1200, Vector Laboratories). Images were taken with a Zeiss Axioplan 2 microscope and recorded with a Hamamatsu camera.

## QUANTIFICATION AND STATISTICAL ANALYSIS

## Statistical analysis
The statistical tests used are as described in each figure legend. p values ≤ 0.05 are considered significant.

## Single cell RNA and repertoire sequencing analysis
Raw reads generated from the Illumina basecalls were demultiplexed using Cell Ranger mkfastq version 2.1.1 utilizing bcl2fastq version 2.19.1.403. Cells were aligned and counted against the Cell Ranger reference refdata-cellranger-GRCh38–1.2.0 using Cell Ranger count version 2.1.1, utilizing only the library index, project, and sample ID for a given sample. We performed quality control to remove outlier events and doublets based on the cell’s total UMI size versus the number of distinct genes expressed in SeqGeq™ v1.4 (FlowJo, LLC) by gating on bivariate scatter plots. We also filtered putatively degraded cells based on the proportion of UMIs in the cell derived from the mitochondrial genome. These steps removed 252 cells. After filtering, the data were exported for further analysis in scran 1.8.4 and Seurat 2.3.4 ( ). The top 1000 variable genes, excluding IGHV, IGKV and IGLV genes were used to derive 6 principal components. These were used to define clusters using the Louvain method and resolution parameter 0.5. Based on expression of non-B cell markers (COL1A2+, FN1+, MS4A1−), we identified 77 putative fibroblasts, and accordingly excluded these cells from further analyses. Differentially expressed genes (DEGs) were identified by calculating the difference between the average expression by cells in the subset versus cells not in the subset. BCR clonotypes were assigned by requiring 97% identity of the DNA sequence of the CDR3 region of the heavy or light chain using CellaRepertorium version 0.8.1 (http://bioconductor.org/packages/release/Bioc/html/CellaRepertorium.html). For somatic hypermutation (SHM) rate calculation, the consensus FASTQ sequences were aligned to the human immunoglobulin reference from the international ImMunoGeneTics information system (IMGT) using HighV-Quest ( ) to calculate the percent identity in V and J in heavy and light chains which then averaged, weighting by the length of each segment.

## Projection of clustering using SingleR
Gene-cell count matrices were downloaded for the AMP Phase I RA and SLE cohorts (ImmPort accessions SDY998 and SDY997). Filtered gene-cell count matrices for CD19+ B cells from ( ) were downloaded from https://support.10xgenomics.com/single-cell-gene-expression/datasets/1.1.0/b_cells. 12848 gene symbols expressed in common in these datasets and our data were retained and the data merged. QC was evaluated using the quickPerCellQC function in scran and 874 cells were filtered. A SingleR model was trained on our data and its 8 cluster labels, and the inferred cluster identities in the other datasets were queried. Binomial mixed models were used to estimate the frequency of the NR4A+ cluster among these other data sets. For bulk RNAseq from AMP RA Cohort, data was downloaded (ImmPort accession SDY1299). DESeq2 version 1.20.0 was used to evaluate differential expression of NR4A+ marker genes in sorted B cells from this study.

## Gene set enrichment analysis
For GSEA analysis, we used gene set from Blood transcription modules from ( ), bulk RNA sequencing of sorted tonsil B cells (Bm1+Bm2 and Bm5) and DZ and LZ GC gene lists from ( ). We used clusterProfiler 3.8.1 to conduct GSEA analysis. Heatmaps displaying the signed −log10(FDR q value) of the result was created using GraphPad Prism (GraphPad Software, LLC).

## Comparison to longitudinal RNA sequencing
 identified 2461 genes that were differentially expressed across the longitudinal time course. We took the intersection between these differentially expressed genes and marker genes for the synovial subpopulations. We calculated the relative expression of each gene across the time longitudinal time course as , where Yit was batch-corrected expression in log2 reads per kilobase mapped of gene i at week t, Yi. is the median expression of gene i over all weeks and subjects, and mi is the median absolute deviation, and 0.6745 is a factor that scales the statistic to be asymptotically equal to a Z-score for normally distributed data. shows Zrob for the intersection between marker genes of our subpopulations and the 2,461 differentially genes from . shows Zrob for these same sets of selected genes as a heatmap. defined 5 sets of genes: Cluster1, AC2, AC3, Cluster4, Cluster5. We tested for enrichment between these 5 sets and markers from our 9 subpopulations using hypergeometric tests. The −log10 transformed FDR q-values from these enrichment tests and the number of overlapping genes vs the number genes in the sets are shown in .

## Supplementary Material
123

## ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We acknowledge the expertise and support of the University of Rochester Center for Musculoskeletal Research Histology Biochemistry and Molecular Imaging Core NIAMS AR069655 and the University of Rochester Resource Cores in Flow Cytometry and the Glenn Research Center. Funding: This work was funded by R21 AR071670 to J.H.A., RUCCTS grant UL1 TR001866, R01 AR078268-01A1, the Robertson Foundation, and the Bernard and Irene Schwartz Foundation to D.E.O. A.McD. is supported by the University of Rochester CTSA award no. UL1TR002001 from the National Center for Advancing Translational Sciences of the National Institutes of Health. J.H.A. is also supported by the Bertha and Louis Weinstein research fund and the Accelerating Medicines Partnership (AMP) in RA and SLE Network. AMP is a public-private partnership (AbbVie Inc., Arthritis Foundation, Bristol-Myers Squibb Company, GlaxoSmithKline LLC, Janssen Research & Development LLC, Lupus Foundation of America, Lupus Research Alliance, Merck Sharp & Dohme Corp., National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases, National Institute of Arthritis and Musculoskeletal and Skin Diseases, Pfizer Inc., Rheumatology Research Foundation, and Sanofi and Takeda Pharmaceuticals International, Inc.) created to develop new ways of identifying and validating promising biological targets for diagnostics and drug development. Funding was provided through grants from the National Institutes of Health (UH2-AR067676, UH2-AR067677, UH2-AR067679, UH2-AR067681, UH2-AR067685, UH2-AR067688, UH2-AR067689, UH2-AR067690, UH2-AR067691, UH2-AR067694, and UM2-AR067678). See for network details.
DECLARATION OF INTERESTS
S.R. is a paid consultant for Gilead, Pfizer, Rheos, and J&J, and is a founder of Mestag. D.E.O. is an inventor of two non-licensed patents; US 63/031,861 entitled “markers and Cellular Antecedents of Rheumatoid Arthritis Flares” and US 63/050,155 entitled “method and System for RNA Isolation from Self-Collected and Small Volume Samples.” S.G. receives research support from Novartis and is a consultant for UCB.
SUPPLEMENTAL INFORMATION
Supplemental information can be found online at https://doi.org/10.1016/j.celrep.2022.110766.
 

## Highlights
Single-cell analysis of RA synovium reveals a unique NR4A+ B cell population
NR4A+ B cells express ELS chemotactic factors and a GC RNA profile
NR4A+ B cells display a continuum of SHM that correlates with loss of naive status
Evidence of clonal expansion and sharing between NR4A+ B cells and PCs in synovium