pmcJ Chem Inf ModelJ Chem Inf Model822acssdciJournal of Chemical Information and Modeling1549-95961549-960Xpmc-is-collection-domainyespmc-collection-titleACS AuthorChoicePMC9775197PMC9775197.1977519797751973566685810.1021/acs.jcim.2c001501ArticleExploring the Chemical Space of Urease Inhibitors
to Extract Meaningful Trends and Drivers of Activity
https://orcid.org/0000-0001-7039-0022AnicetoNatália https://orcid.org/0000-0003-2349-8473BonifácioVasco D. B. https://orcid.org/0000-0002-5790-9181GuedesRita C. https://orcid.org/0000-0001-5102-4756MartinhoNuno †Research
Institute for Medicines (iMed.ULisboa), Faculty of Pharmacy, Universidade de Lisboa, 1649-003 Lisbon, Portugal‡Department
of Pharmaceutical Sciences and Medicines, Faculty of Pharmacy, Universidade de Lisboa, 1649-003 Lisbon, Portugal§iBB—Institute
for Bioengineering and Biosciences, Instituto Superior Técnico, Universidade de Lisboa, Av. Rovisco Pais, 1049-001 Lisboa, Portugal∥Associate
Laboratory i4HB—Institute for Health and Bioeconomy at Instituto
Superior Técnico, Universidade de
Lisboa, Av. Rovisco Pais, 1049-001 Lisboa, Portugal⊥Department
of Bioengineering, Instituto Superior Técnico, Universidade de Lisboa, Av. Rovisco Pais, 1049-001 Lisboa, Portugal*Email: nunomartinho@tecnico.ulisboa.pt.0606202208082022621542424135353550221220222312202207072023© 2022 American Chemical Society2022American Chemical Societyhttps://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/Permits the broadest form of re-use including for commercial purposes, provided that author attribution and integrity are maintained (https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/). 
Blocking
the catalytic activity of urease has been shown to have
a key role in different diseases as well as in different agricultural
applications. A vast array of molecules have been tested against ureases
of different species, but the clinical translation of these compounds
has been limited due to challenges of potency, chemical and metabolic
stability as well as promiscuity against other proteins. The design
and development of new compounds greatly benefit from insights from
previously tested compounds; however, no large-scale studies surveying
the urease inhibitors’ chemical space exist that can provide
an overview of developed compounds to data. Therefore, given the increasing
interest in developing new compounds for this target, we carried out
a comprehensive analysis of the activity landscape published so far.
To do so, we assembled and curated a data set of compounds tested
against urease. To the best of our knowledge, this is the largest
data set of urease inhibitors to date, composed of 3200 compounds
of diverse structures. We characterized the data set in terms of chemical
space coverage, molecular scaffolds, distribution with respect to
physicochemical properties, as well as temporal trends of drug development.
Through these analyses, we highlighted different substructures and
functional groups responsible for distinct activity and inactivity
against ureases. Furthermore, activity cliffs were assessed, and the
chemical space of urease inhibitors was compared to DrugBank. Finally,
we extracted meaningful patterns associated with activity using a
decision tree algorithm. Overall, this study provides a critical overview
of urease inhibitor research carried out in the last few decades and
enabled finding underlying SAR patterns such as under-reported chemical
functional groups that contribute to the overall activity. With this
work, we propose different rules and practical implications that can
guide the design or selection of novel compounds to be screened as
well as lead optimization.

MinistÃ Â©rio da EducaÃ Â§Ã Â£o e CiÃ Âªncia10.13039/501100001871EXPL/QUI-OUT/1288/2021European Commission10.13039/501100008530LISBOA-01-0246-FEDER-000017MinistÃ Â©rio da EducaÃ Â§Ã Â£o e CiÃ Âªncia10.13039/501100001871UIDP/04138/2020MinistÃ Â©rio da EducaÃ Â§Ã Â£o e CiÃ Âªncia10.13039/501100001871UIDB/04138/2020MinistÃ Â©rio da EducaÃ Â§Ã Â£o e CiÃ Âªncia10.13039/501100001871PTDC/MED-QUI/3542/2020pmc-status-qastatus0pmc-status-liveyespmc-status-embargonopmc-status-releasedyespmc-prop-open-accessyespmc-prop-olfnopmc-prop-manuscriptnopmc-prop-legally-suppressednopmc-prop-has-pdfyespmc-prop-has-supplementyespmc-prop-pdf-onlynopmc-prop-suppress-copyrightnopmc-prop-is-real-versionnopmc-prop-is-scanned-articlenopmc-prop-preprintnopmc-prop-in-epmcyespmc-license-refCC BYdocument-id-old-9ci2c00150document-id-new-14ci2c00150ccc-price

## Introduction
Urease,
a metalloenzyme containing an active site with two nickel
ions, is responsible for the catalytic hydrolysis of urea into ammonia
and carbamate. It is found and conserved in many organisms among plants,
bacteria, and fungi and plays an important role in nitrogen metabolism. Urease inhibition is therefore highly desirable
for different applications in fields such as agriculture to control
nitrogen loss , and medicine, to treat bacterial
infections. , For the latter, urease acts as an important
virulent factor, particularly in the pathogenesis of gastric infection
byHelicobacter pylori, as well as in
infectious urolithiasis (development of urinary stones) and catheter
blockage byProteus mirabilis. , As of 2020, according to the CDC, two-thirds of the world population
is infected withH. pylori. This microorganism is one of the main causes
of gastritis and stomach ulcers, and a major risk factor for the development
of gastric cancer. The eradication of H. pylori using antibiotics has been shown to improve all of those outcomes. Unfortunately, antimicrobial resistance by this
bacterium has been rising over the last decade and in 2017 the WHO
declared the development of antibiotics against clarithromycin-resistant H. pylori a high-priority issue. Regarding P. mirabilis,
this is one of the main agents in catheter-associated urinary tract
infections, which can lead to septicemia and endotoxic shock. Like H. pylori, P. mirabilis is also associated with antimicrobial resistance. As a result, the discovery of new antimicrobial molecules
against this pathogen is of high priority, particularly those targeting
urease, since this protein plays an essential role in the survival
of these and other bacteria.
Over the last few decades, many
compounds have been tested against
ureases of different species. , , The inhibition mechanisms have been found to be mostly via direct binding to the active site bearing the nickel ions or by
blocking the mobile flap as observed for covalent inhibitors that
bind to a specific cysteine present in a mobile “flap”
at the entry of the active site. , Despite detailed knowledge
of the crystal structure of the active site of many ureases, even
in the presence of known inhibitors, the clinical translation of urease
inhibitors has been limited. Even though highly potent inhibitors
have been found, the limitations observed in vivo are mostly due to chemical and metabolic instability as well as
toxicity of the compounds. In fact, acetohydroxamic acid, which has
been clinically approved for the treatment of urinary infections,
has significant side effects. Finally, compounds that would need to
inhibit H. pylori urease need to survive
the harsh hydrolytic conditions of the stomach. Consequently, there is still a need for the continued development
of novel urease inhibitors for medical application.
Perhaps
due to the shortcomings of known urease inhibitors, a wealth
of diverse chemical scaffolds with inhibitory activity has been published
targeting the different ureases. , , , , Since the active site of ureases is well conserved among different
species, , it is highly desirable to take into account
information from different species to serve as a starting point for
the development of novel inhibitors that may have appropriate pharmaceutical
use. However, the exhaustive analysis of all publicly available urease
inhibitors has yet to be carried out. Mostly, a small number of studies
have focused on specific structure-activity relationships of small
subsets with a low diversity of compounds. Such a large-scale analysis
of the inhibitors accumulated in the public domain over the last few
decades is key to drawing insights into the structural patterns that
drive urease inhibition and to enable rational, evidence-based drug
design and discovery.
To meet this need, in the current work
we carried out an exhaustive
retrieval and curation of activity data on urease inhibitors comprising
3200 small-molecule urease inhibitors against different species, and
used it to perform a comprehensive analysis. We focused on a data-driven
strategy whereby we identified important structural and physicochemical
determinants that can guide future drug discovery of new lead compounds
and tune their pharmacological properties, saving time and experimental
efforts.

## Methods

## Collection and Curation of Urease Inhibitors
and Annotation
with Molecular Descriptors
A data set comprising 4122 raw
activities against urease was assembled from data retrieved from publicly
available literature (up to April 2021), patents, and ChEMBL 28. In this data set, we collated inhibition data
for ureases from different species, although Jack bean and H. pylori make up ∼80% of the data. This was
done to maximize the analysis of investigated urease inhibitors so
far and because actives can potentially be transferable between different
ureases, owing to their high binding site similarity. We also included
a small portion of assays where authors did not specify which urease
they used (11% of the full data). shows a breakdown of all species and their
contributions.
 Retrieval from the ChEMBL 28 database
was carried out by querying
the corresponding SQLite database for all data with accession = P07374,
which is the UniProt ID for C. ensiformis (Jack bean) urease. Additionally, only confidence scores equal to
8 or 9 were accepted and “assay_type”
was required to be equal to “B” (binding assay). The
structures for ChEMBL compounds were obtained as SMILES (as provided
in the database). Additionally, we retrieved the literature (articles
and patents) not covered by ChEMBL, and the structures from these
sources were obtained through manual sketching of two-dimensional
(2D) images of structures, which were then converted to SMILES, or
from IUPAC-to-SMILES conversion using OPSIN. 
For the final data set, only IC50 and Ki values were used. To allow better comparability between
assays, we normalized all activity values by dividing them by the
activity of the control in the assay they originated from. Control
compounds for Jack bean urease assays are typically thiourea or, more
rarely, acetohydroxamic acid (both in the low μM range of activity).
In a very small portion of the publications where a control activity
was not reported, a control value of 20 μM was used for the
normalization as this corresponds to a typical IC50 of
thiourea. The data set was then divided into two classes of activity
(actives and inactives) based on a normalized activity cutoff. This
cutoff was defined by a rule that compounds with activity below that
of the control are deemed active. As a result, activity ratios <1
were considered active, or otherwise deemed inactive. Finally, in
cases where no IC50 was provided but the compounds were
described as inactive, an excess value of 1000 μM was attributed.
All metal complexes and mixtures were removed, and SMILES were
standardized and cleaned using the structure preparation library MolVS
0.1.1 (https://molvs.readthedocs.io/en/latest/) implemented in Python. The standardized SMILES were converted into
InChIKeys, which were used to remove duplicates (keeping the most
potent activity during deduplication). The final urease inhibitors
data set was composed of 3200 molecules. All handling of the data
was carried out in Jupyter Notebook using RDKit 2020.03.3, Pandas
0.24.1, and NumPy 1.15.4 (python libraries), integrated in Python
3.7.4. Whenever applicable, all further calculations used the standardized
SMILES.
Lastly, 2D molecular descriptors were calculated using
RDKit, which
include drug-likeness/lead-likeness rules, water solubility, and polar
surface area, among other descriptors relevant in medicinal chemistry.

## Structural Clustering
The SMILES of the compounds were
converted to Morgan Fingerprints in RDKit using the GetMorganFingerprintAsBitVect function (radius = 2, bits = 1024), which were then used to cluster
the data set using a hierarchical agglomerative clustering technique.
To do so, we used the AgglomerativeClustering function
implemented in scikit-learn 0.23.2. This
work has two instances of clustering:(a)“Spontaneous” clustering,
where clusters were let to spontaneously assemble with only a constraint
of shared similarity. To achieve this, we set the affinity parameter
to “precomputed”, accompanied by the use of a precomputed
Tanimoto distance matrix for all-vs-all compounds, and linkage = complete.
This was done exclusively to assess raw diversity within the data
set, which was quantified as the number of clusters produced.
(b)Clustering to build “structural
families”, where the number of clusters was limited to allow
a feasible manual analysis of their content. This was carried out
to produce clusters from which we drew insights regarding the relationship
between chemical families and activity. In this type of clustering,
we tested the n_clusters parameter to a number ranging
between 20 and 80, with all other parameters used as default (affinity
= “euclidean” and linkage = “ward”). The
optimal number of clusters was manually selected through inspection
of cluster size (number of compounds) and cluster diversity (measured
with minimum and mean intracluster similarity). A total of 50 clusters
was ultimately selected as this offered a good compromise between
a sufficiently tractable number of clusters and plenty of clusters
with moderate-to-high intracluster similarity. Each of these clusters
was submitted to a maximum common substructure (MCS) analysis using
the FindMCS function in RDKit (setting ringMatchesRingOnly to True, to ensure ring atoms are only matched to ring atoms when
comparing different structures). The MCS of a cluster is the largest
substructure shared by all molecules in a given cluster, or in practical
terms, the common scaffold. We report the minimum and median intracluster
similarity which refers to the minimum and median values of similarities
between every two compounds in a given cluster.

## Chemical Space Visualization
Visual clustering was
also performed using the t-SNE implementation in scikit-learn (https://scikit-learn.org/stable/modules/generated/sklearn.manifold.TSNE.html), which compressed the 1024 original dimensions into two dimensions.
We ran t-SNE under default parameters, and no dimensionality reduction
was applied prior to t-SNE fitting. This tool is highly effective
in taking relative distances within a certain neighborhood in the
high-dimensional space and conserving them in the new low-dimensional
matrix. This method is preferred for
the purpose of visualizing chemical space (represented as Morgan fingerprints)
when compared to other regularly used methods such as principal component
analysis (PCA) or multidimensional scaling (MDS) as it focuses on
preserving small distances in the data, whereas PCA and MDS focus
on preserving large distances. This is
particularly useful to produce visual clusters within a data set and,
as a result, t-SNE’s clusters often correlate to structural
differences.

## Scaffold Analysis and Activity Cliffs
The two classes,
actives and inactives, were also characterized in terms of Murcko
Scaffolds, calculated for each compound
with RDKit, typically also used to gauge diversity. Additionally,
to explore interesting transformations between compounds, we extracted
all activity cliffs in the data set (i.e., compounds
with high similarity and yet a high shift in activity). A complete
list of activity cliffs was obtained by running a similarity search
of each active against all inactives, and vice versa. Pairs with a Tanimoto coefficient (Tc) above 0.6 were
deemed activity cliffs. A threshold of 0.5–0.55 is commonly
used for activity cliff analyses, but
in this work, a more stringent threshold of 0.6 was used.

## Compound Similarity
All similarity values mentioned
throughout this work refer to the Tanimoto coefficient (or Tanimoto
similarity) calculated over Morgan fingerprints (radius = 2, bits
= 1024), which spans between 0 (minimum similarity) and 1 (maximum
similarity).

## Extraction of Structural Rules and Meaningful
Features that
Drive Activity
Decision tree-based anchors were calculated
to extract meaningful structural rules associated with activity using
the DecisionTreeClassifier function in scikit-learn
(https://scikit-learn.org/stable/modules/generated/sklearn.tree.DecisionTreeClassifier.html) paired with the Anchors (or scoped rules) method through the use of the anchor-exp Python library. To do
so we first trained a decision tree model where, to ensure a sufficiently
general tree, we capped the maximum depth at 10; all other parameters
were used as defaults. This model was created for pattern extraction
purposes only, and neither was it used to derive any predictions nor
should it be interpreted as a predictive model. After the decision
tree was trained, it was submitted to an anchor-generation procedure,
adapting the jupyter notebook in the anchor-exp’s GitHub repository
(https://github.com/marcotcr/anchor/blob/master/notebooks/Anchor%20on%20tabular%20data.ipynb). A precision threshold of 0.80 was used (applied to AnchorTabularExplainer).
As a complement to the rules, we also calculated the feature interaction
scores (which measure feature importance) using the iml R package
(https://cran.r-project.org/web/packages/iml/). This was done by adapting an R workflow in the iml GitHub repository
(https://github.com/christophM/iml/blob/main/notebooks/tutorial-intro.ipynb) integrating (1) the iml package to obtain the feature interaction
analysis and (2) the mlr and caret R packages for machine learning.

## Results and Discussion

## Overview of Temporal Trends in the Development
of Urease Inhibitors
Starting a new drug development campaign
and assessing the activity
of compounds is a hard endeavor. Thus, having a basic understanding
of the chemical space already tested provides useful knowledge on
what structural features impact binding to a target and can guide
a more efficient discovery of new hit compounds. More importantly,
knowing what has already been done prevents accidentally investing
in compounds or scaffolds previously explored, which already yielded
poor results. To this end, we wanted to carry out a survey of all
researched urease inhibitors and perform an in-depth analysis of active
and inactive compounds and their underlying trends, as no such study
exists.
To do so, we carried out extensive literature and patent
review to assemble a data set containing inhibitors tested against
ureases of nine different species covering a total of 238 references.
Even though different ureases are targeted for different applications,
due to the highly conserved active site among different species, , it is likely that compounds tested against one particular urease
will also be active against ureases from the other species. Thus,
aggregating compounds tested in different ureases provides a more
complete picture of which compounds have been developed for urease
inhibition in the last few decades. Furthermore, this is also useful
for the development of urease inhibitors since the assessment of translatability
into other important ureases such as H. pylori and P. mirabilis is highly desirable.
Nonetheless, even though many species are included, Jack bean (C. ensiformis) urease is overwhelmingly the most
used in in vitro models (see ). After a full curation process, we obtained
a final data set of 3200 small molecules that spanned a large range
of activities from subnanomolar to high millimolar concentrations
and was composed of 1633 inactive molecules and 1567 active molecules.
Looking at the trend of compounds published throughout the last
few decades ( ), we observed that 2013 and 2019 are the two most prolific years
in terms of the raw number of reported compounds. However, only relatively
small portions of the compounds were active (36 and 55%, respectively).
Another observation is that up to 2008 relatively small amounts of
compounds were introduced with varying efficiencies, and from 2009
onward, there is a trend of rising efficiency in the discovery of
new hits (i.e., increased proportion of actives discovered).
Interestingly, there also seems to be a small trend of increasing
the average molecular weight of the compounds, but the lipophilicity,
topological polar surface area (TPSA), and the number of hydrogen-bond
donors and acceptors seem to remain stable (see Figure S1).
 

## Distribution of Physicochemical Properties and Drug-Likeness
Analysis
Next, we assessed how active and inactive compounds
compare, with respect to common physicochemical features, as well
as how they are positioned with respect to common drug-likeness and
other medicinal chemistry filters. As depicted in , the distribution of active
and inactive compounds in nine typically assessed physicochemical
features revealed no marked differences between the two classes. This
suggests that urease inhibition is not determined by or correlated
to a particular feature, but, as we will argue in the following sections,
it is rather determined by small changes or the presence of certain
scaffolds and/or substructures.
 Furthermore, both the molecular
weight and log P do not seem to be having
a direct effect on the activity, which
is generally a consequence of increasing the lipophilicity for the
sole purpose of increasing the activity (i.e., unspecific
binding). Furthermore, even for the most potent compounds (activity
lower than 100 nM) corresponding to the top 136 molecules, no significant
differences were observed in the distribution other than having a
slight tendency for fewer hydrogen-bond acceptor groups (Figure S2).
Understanding how these inhibitors
fall with respect to various
rules of medicinal chemistry and lead- or drug-likeness may indicate
how these rules have influenced development. Among them, Lipinski’s
rule-of-5 is used to evaluate such drug-likeness of a compound. Applying
the criteria of this rule to both active and inactive compounds showed
that most of the compounds in both classes are within the constraints
of the rule ( ). Nonetheless, there was still a significant number of compounds
that fell outside this filter, specifically breaking the limits of
molecular weight and/or log P. Overall, there
was no difference between active and inactive classes, which indicates
that the activity is not being driven by the so-called “molecular
obesity” effect. These results were also observed for the top-ranked
active compounds as well (Figure S2), and
therefore, these rules were shown not to be discriminatory of activity.
Overall, the distribution of active and inactive compounds closely
overlapping is likely an indicator that the rule-of-5 may have influenced
the selection of compounds that were being designed and tested over
the last years. More importantly, these observations indicate that
filtering the compounds using the rule-of-5 is not helpful in ensuring
better hits as it would remove as many active as inactive compounds.
 

## Presence of Pan-Assay Interference
Compounds (PAINS) and Compounds
Bearing Unwanted Functional Groups (Brenk Filter)
Another
typical filter widely used by researchers to select compounds for
testing is the PAINS filter. This flags
a number of functional groups that have been historically associated
with false actives in different assays, and it would therefore be useful to inspect for the occurrence of
these substructures in the urease inhibitor data set. The analysis
of the urease inhibitor data set revealed that only 17.1% of the total
amount of compounds did not pass the PAINS filter, with 15.1% of the
total active compounds bearing PAINS structures.
Additionally,
filtering compounds for the presence of unwanted moieties (i.e., substructures associated with toxicity, high reactivity,
etc.) is also common practice, as is evident by the implementation
of a “clean” subset of ZINC, for example. In this regard,
we screened our data set for the presence of such unwanted moieties
as listed by Brenk et al. (i.e., Brenk
filter) and observed that a significant number of compounds were flagged
for removal ( ). Moreover, in most cases, these were more frequent in the active
molecules except for Michael acceptors, coumarin, and catechol substructures.
Curiously, the most affected families of compounds were those often
associated with activity against urease, including the thioureas,
imines, and hydroxamic acids, which usually bind to the nickel ions
of the active site. Another common flag was the presence of Michael
acceptors, which coincided with strategies for urease inhibitors that
bind to the cysteine in the mobile flap and are therefore the reason
for the loss of specificity.
 If both filters (PAINS and Brenk) had been applied
early on, this
would have resulted in only 227 molecules (14.5%) being selected for
further studies. Among this set of selected molecules, the 10 most
active compounds are mostly composed of phosphorodiamidates and phosphoramides,
with 4-chlorophenylphosphorodiamidate (4Cl-PPD) being the most active
compound. Additionally, two interesting compounds would also have
been kept, such as a sulfonamide analogue of sulfadiazine (among the top 3) and 3-(3-methylphenyl)-1-(1-phenylethyl)urea.
The latter has nanomolar-range activity against Jack bean urease,
but it has also shown activity against β-glucuronidase and phosphodiesterases, which could lead to off-target toxicity. Overall,
these different scaffolds could be interesting to pursue the development
of novel compounds.
It should be noted however that even though
these filters can be
employed as valuable starting points for compound development, one
should consider that they come with their own caveats and can exclude
useful compounds from being tested. Indeed, with regard to urease
inhibition, we observed that most active compounds would have been
excluded.

## Chemical Space Visualization and Chemical Diversity
Visualizing the chemical space can be useful to gauge the chemical
diversity in a set of molecules. For instance, it can be useful to
visualize if active and inactive compounds occupy the same chemical
space. The chemical space distribution for urease inhibitors was plotted
using t-SNE and is depicted in . A significant number of clusters was observed, which
attests to the broad chemical space and diversity explored for urease
inhibition. However, active compounds have a higher chemical diversity
since they occupy more clusters, as shown in . In fact, inactive compounds exist almost
exclusively in overlap with active compounds, while active compounds
were found in regions that do not have inactive compounds. This is
likely a result of compound optimization, which tends to be applied
to prior actives based on SAR insights derived from experiments, and
can also be derived from privileged scaffolds against other metalloenzymes.
 To understand and quantify the overall diversity in our data set,
we performed “spontaneous” clustering (see section), where we set a maximum Tanimoto
distance (1-Tc) threshold of 0.6. This allows one to spontaneously
generate clusters with considerable intracluster similarity, and the
number of obtained clusters is, therefore, an indication of the chemical
diversity. Using this analysis, a total of 417 clusters were obtained,
which is a significant number compared to the total of 3200 compounds.
Among all clusters, 109 were exclusively composed of actives but small
in size (median cluster size of 2 compounds, and the largest of these
actives-exclusive clusters had 39 compounds). Additionally, 90% of
all 417 clusters had 20 or less compounds. Similar to the t-SNE analysis,
this indicates that this data set covers considerable chemical diversity.
It is important to note that this “spontaneous” clustering
analysis was exclusively meant to probe the overall
diversity in chemical space.

## Clustering Analysis to Assess Trends of Activity
and Overall
Diversity
Medicinal chemists tend to perceive chemical space
diversity as the variety of known families, where each family has
a particular scaffold. Although practical, this approach can be overly
simplistic and biased by how chemists define a scaffold. In practice,
a group of compounds may share multiple substructures, all of which
contribute to urease activity and may result from hybrids of different
“classical” scaffolds. In fact, there are several reports
of hybrid compounds in an attempt to increase the activity against
urease. − Therefore, we used a more data-driven approach to
characterize families of compounds. To do so, we employed hierarchical
clustering (a manually optimized version) to the whole data set.
Since the number of spontaneous clusters was too large to be effectively
analyzed, here the initial number of clusters was manually tuned to
balance between clusters that are too small and more cohesive (higher
intracluster similarity) and clusters that are too large and less
cohesive. Selecting 50 clusters resulted in a good balance between
size and cluster cohesion (see Figure S3), with the smallest cluster size (cluster 37) being 13 compounds.
A total of 11 clusters showed high cohesion (i.e., minimum intracluster similarity ≥0.5), and most of them
are among the smallest clusters. This was expected considering the
diversity of chemical space identified, however, among these clusters,
25 and 39 showed a considerably large size.
After the 50 clusters
were obtained, the maximum common substructure
(MCS) for each cluster was determined to find the common scaffold,
which might not be reported as a known family per se but is still relevant to consider. Therefore, instead of guiding
the analysis using predetermined scaffolds, we used data-driven scaffolds
(i.e., the MCSs from the clusters). This way, compounds
in different reports that focus on different subgroups can be considered
together if they share sufficient similarity (causing them to belong
to the same cluster). This allows uncovering broader and more meaningful
positive and negative structural modifications to urease inhibitors.
Even though there were a considerable number of clusters, they
showed a high median intracluster similarity (majority above 0.5)
(Figure S3 and Table S1). Therefore, the scaffolds derived from MCSs are more likely
to be a better representation of their cluster. Nevertheless, there
are multiple large clusters with low median intracluster similarity,
which corroborates the earlier observation of the high diversity of
compounds screened against ureases. A summary of all clusters, their
statistics, and MCS is shown in Table S1, and a distribution plot showing intracluster similarity for each
cluster is shown in Figure S3.

## Analysis
of Large Clusters
The clusters with the largest
numbers of compounds can reveal trends of substructures that have
been under heavy focus by the scientific community. The biggest cluster
observed (cluster 7) contained 674 molecules (21% of the total data
set), with a median intracluster similarity of 0.2, and 49.4% of its
molecules being active (Figure S3). This
is therefore a very diverse cluster, and even though there was no
single common scaffold, this cluster contained small-molecular-weight
molecules with multiple scaffolds that structurally resemble urease’s
native substrate (urea). These compounds included phenylsulfonamides,
phenylureas, benzylhydrazines, phenylphosphoramides, phenylphosphorodiamidates,
and benzisoselenazoles. Such scaffolds are usually associated with
activity, and not surprisingly, cluster 7 contained some of the most
potent compounds found (IC50 as low as the picomolar range
of activity).
Similarly, the second-largest cluster (cluster
20) contained 175 molecules with a median intracluster similarity
of 0.23 with no common scaffold. This cluster was composed of phosphoramides,
thiobarbituric acids, thiazolidines as well as other small fragments.
Even though this cluster was mostly populated by inactive molecules
(34.9% actives), the active molecules in this cluster reach the low
nanomolar range of activities.
Surprisingly, the third biggest
cluster (cluster 15), representing
a total of 155 compounds with a median intracluster similarity of
0.37, showed an astounding 71% active molecules. This cluster had
a higher similarity between its molecules, compared to the previous
clusters (median 0.37 versus 0.23 and 0.20; see Figure S3 and Table S1), and its molecules share
the hydroxamic acid group, which is a functional group associated
with activity. The importance of clustering
a diverse data set of compounds to evaluate meaningful patterns of
activity is illustrated by the fact that cluster 44 (78 compounds)
also has hydroxamic acid compounds ( , M.1.) but only contained 19.2% active molecules.
In fact, the overall analysis of all hydroxamic acids in our database
(306 molecules in total) showed that only 48.3% of the molecules were
active. However, upon closer inspection, we realized that cluster
44 together with the flavonoid analogues bearing a methyl-hydroxamic
acid originating from cluster 10 (50 molecules; , M.2.) had only 20% of active molecules,
making them the main culprit for an apparently low overall frequency
of actives of 48.3% associated with the hydroxamic acid functional
group. Therefore, this indicates that simply introducing groups of
known activity as the sole strategy to increase activity may not be
a good strategy to design actives.
 The temporal trend analysis for clusters 15 and
44 (Figure S4) showed that, as would be
expected
from the popularity of the hydroxamic acid scaffold, the molecules
in cluster 15 have been accumulating since the early 1980s up to 2020,
whereas molecules in cluster 44 were only reported between 2010 and
2017. Running a similarity search between older molecules and the
most recent molecules in cluster 44 revealed that many of the more
recent molecules (55%) are the closest (and significantly similar, Tc > 0.47) to an older inactive compound (IC50 > 20 μM, considering thiourea’s activity
as
the cutoff). This is just another piece of evidence of the complex,
nonlinear nature of compound derivatization in the search for actives.
Note that all temporal trends for the various clusters are shown in Figure S4.
Another interesting cluster
with a significant number of compounds
(N = 140) was cluster 19, which contained 56.4% active
molecules ( , M.3.). This cluster aggregated molecules with moderate similarity
(minimum and median intracluster similarities of 0.24 and 0.51, respectively)
and was represented by a variety of different N1-benzoyl,N2-aryl-thioureas with
different substitutions. The activity of these compounds varied wildly,
with the best compounds having inhibitory activity around 130 nM.
This type of compound is typically classified as mixed-type inhibitors, and there seems to be an ideal size for activity
(Figure S5). Further inspection of cluster
19’s content showed that symmetrical bis(benzoylthioureas)
were associated with loss in activity. N2-aryl esters and sulfonamides were also found in these clusters and
were all active compounds, even containing the most active compounds
among the full data set. On the other hand, hydroxy and methoxy substitutions
in this ring resulted in a loss of activity, seeing as only one hydroxy
and two methoxy substitutions out of a total of 19 compounds with
similar substitutions were active. Additionally, dimethoxy substitutions
on the N1 ring were associated with activity.
Interestingly, the closely structurally related phenyl-3-phenylpropanoyl
thioureas in cluster 42 composed of 29 compounds (Table S1) showed 79.3% active molecules, but their activity
was in the picomolar range, with the most potent being reported as
a competitive inhibitor and two others were mixed inhibitors. Similarly, cluster 28 ( , M.11.) also contained N-acyl thioureas with long alkyl chains exhibiting activities in the
low nanomolar range, but the most potent compounds were found to be
noncompetitive inhibitors. This demonstrates
that typical medicinal chemistry conventions of how we perceive compounds
to belong to a given family can be misleading and data-driven analysis
such as this one allows identifying a promising scaffold that offshoots
from a larger group of seemingly fewer promising compounds.
Cluster 11 ( , M.4.) had a significant number of compounds (118) with a slightly
larger median intracluster similarity of 0.31 and only 21.2% active
molecules. This cluster corresponds to flavonoids, which are generally
associated with low activity. Many flavonoids
have been tested as they can be extracted from many plants but are
known to be only moderate inhibitors of urease even though competitive
inhibitors have been found. As discussed above, specific modifications
seem to drive the activity rather than the scaffold itself, as shown
by the addition of hydroxamic acid to the flavonoid scaffold that
did not significantly improve their activity. For instance, there
are 30 hydrazine-flavonoid hybrid compounds produced by one study,
of which 90% were active. These were allocated to cluster 33 ( , M.12.), and as
observed for cluster 11 (118 compounds, , M.4.), this cluster overall contained only
21.2% actives. Similarly, cluster 10 ( , M.2.) also contained 50 flavonoid hybrid
molecules, of which only 20% were active.
Barbiturates and thiobarbiturates
have also been extensively studied
due to their urea-bearing structure. However, barbituric and thiobarbituric
acid analogues are also typically associated with moderate-to-low
activity. − These molecules were aggregated in cluster 4 ( , M.5.), which showed high median intracluster
similarity (0.46) despite the relatively large size (N = 130), and low percentage of actives (34.6%). Various modifications
of the phenyl ring have been tested, and extending the ring in the
para-position seemed to increase the activity except when sulfonamides
were used as linkers. On the other hand, closely related dihydropyrimidines
found in cluster 2 (106 compounds with a mean intracluster similarity
of 0.45) contained 55.7% active molecules ( , M.6.), showing that clustering could separate
closely related compounds in a meaningful way that actually correlated
better with activity. For the latter cluster, it was observed that
higher potency was achieved with isatin > thiosemicarbazide >
phenyl
substitutions, as well as with a high number of substitutions of electron-withdrawing
groups.
Finally, among the clusters with the largest number
of compounds,
cluster 13 with 117 compounds ( , M.7.) aggregated mostly a series of both oxadiazole
and triazole thione analogues from different reports with a median
intracluster similarity of 0.30, which was also associated with the
poor ability to produce actives (only 27.4% actives).

## Analysis
of Clusters Mostly Populated by Actives
The
clustering of urease inhibitors revealed 10 clusters with a total
of 365 molecules, where each cluster had at least 80% active compounds
(Table S1). These are likely the “safest
bet” clusters from which to develop new compounds, considering
their high rate of active molecules.
Among them, cluster 12
( , M.8.) was
a highly cohesive cluster (minimum intracluster similarity of 0.48)
that had a total of 40 molecules bearing the 2-benzyl-3,4-dihydroquinazolin-4-one
scaffold, all of which were active compounds. Interestingly, while
manually optimizing the total number of clusters, we noticed that
in some cases another set of molecules with the 2-benzyl-1H-1,3-benzodiazole scaffold from another cluster ( , M.9.) was aggregated
with this scaffold. In the final clustering setting used, these molecules
were clustered in a different cluster of 88 molecules associated with
high activity (95.5% active molecules) that represented a mix of scaffolds
(median intracluster similarity of 0.27) of nitrogen-rich compounds.
Nevertheless, this class of compounds had a common denominator with
cluster 12, which can be observed by the high similarity between molecules
in both clusters (i.e., M8 and M9). The fact that cluster 12 was entirely
composed of actives shows that the 2-benzyl-3,4-dihydroquinazolin-4-one
scaffold is a very promising starting point for drug development.
However, closely related scaffolds such as 2-[1-(naphthalen-2-yl)ethyl]-1H-1,3-benzodiazole, 3-benzyl-1H-isochromen-1-one,
and 3-benzyl-1H-isochromene-1-thione were found to
be enriched with inactive compounds ( ).
 Cluster 29 ( , M.10.) represented a moderate number of
molecules (N = 36), which was enriched with active
compounds (88.9%) that shared
the acetophenone thiosemicarbazone as a common scaffold. This is a
group with high potential for binding to the Ni ions of the active
site. Cluster 28 contained 45 compounds (86.7% actives), among which
there were potent urease inhibitors (low nanomolar range), whose common
substructure is a long 12-carbon chain with a carbonyl moiety ( , M.11.). This cluster
also included the 1-acyl-3-arylthioureas that, despite being associated
with potent inhibition and despite including the thiourea group, have
been shown by others to be noncompetitive inhibitors of Jack bean
urease (so we have two separate SARs in this group). , 
Various other aromatic-rich compounds were also associated
with
a high number of active molecules such as in the case of cluster 37
(13 compounds, , M.13.), populated with data from three different reports and showing
a total of 92.3% active molecules. Cluster 5 ( , M.14.) was composed of a set of 27 coumarin
analogues, of which 85.2% were active compounds. Interestingly, even
bulky scaffolds based on imidazole–imidazole and imidazole–indole
motifs showed high activity, as observed for cluster 6 (26 molecules)
with 65.4% actives, some of which reached the nanomolar range activity , ( , M.15.
and M.16.). Similarly, another set of bulky compounds was found in
cluster 17 (N = 33 compounds), among which 57% were
active. This cluster had a symmetrical scaffold, and interestingly,
when the scaffold is disubstituted, it showed 100% activity ( , M.17.), with activities
ranging down to the nM scale. However, a single substitution on the
middle ring of the scaffold rendered this scaffold inactive (0% active, , M.18.).

## Analysis
of Clusters Least Populated by Actives
Several
clusters were associated with low activity and may provide insights
into scaffolds with a high risk of failure. Among the clusters with
the least actives, cluster 14 had a series of 51 secnidazole analogues
tested against H. pylori urease containing
only 15.7% active compounds ( , M.19.). As discussed earlier, even though barbiturates
and thiobarbiturates are known moderate inhibitors, the 29 compounds
that make up cluster 16 ( , M.20.) were all inactive. Cluster 36 ( , M.21.) comprising isatin
analogues was another cluster with only 10% active compounds (for
a total of 19 compounds).
Cluster 23 (70 compounds, , M.22.) contained
only 11.4% actives, with the most potent activity being 1.5 μM.
This cluster contained compounds bearing catechol and pyrogallol and
methoxy groups. This class of compounds is characterized by their
potential to covalently bind with the cysteine on the mobile flap
helix, and thus their specificity and potency may be lower. − Finally, cluster 18 (87 compounds, , M.23.) showed 19.5% active molecules. This
is a cluster with a large common substructure consisting of two fused
rings connected by a single carbon linker. Regarding this cluster,
we observed the presence of a phenyl ring connected to the linker,
from which extends a thiadiazol amine, resulted in gained activity.

## Clustering the Most Potent Compounds to Find Interesting Common
Substructures
Applying the same clustering technique as before
to only the top 100 most potent molecules showed a good diversity
of scaffolds ( ). The largest cluster (cluster 0) aggregated 57 compounds with no
common scaffold and which corresponded to phosphoramidates and sulfonamides.
The remaining clusters were smaller and corresponded to a variety
of aromatic scaffolds and long-chain compounds as previously discussed
( ).
 

## Physicochemical and Structural Rules that
Drive Activity
To map how active and inactive compounds are
differently distributed
in chemical space in such a way that can be translated into rules
or guidelines, we built a decision tree from all compounds available.
Even though we limited the maximum depth to allow for more general
rules, good memorization was still achieved (training accuracy = 90.8%),
which means the decision tree was successfully able to separate actives
and inactives in the data. The top 20 features, ranked in terms of
importance (measured as the feature interaction score) within the decision tree, are shown in .
 Here, instead of using
regular feature importance that is directly
derived from the trained decision tree model, we used feature interaction.
Feature interaction is defined by two or more features that, together,
influence each other in the task of prediction. The interaction associated with a descriptor corresponds
to the change in the predicted class that results from varying it
in a feature pair. shows the cumulative effect of pairing each feature in the Y-axis with every other feature. Molar refractivity, measuring
the real volume of molecules (MolMR), for instance, was revealed to
be the feature that most influences other features in predicting the
activity class of urease inhibitors. Curiously, this did not correspond
to the top node in the decision tree (fr_NH1, number of secondary
amines), which is expected given feature importance is context-dependent
and simply evaluates the ability of a feature of separating the two
classes received by a given node, whereas feature interaction is a
global assessment where all features are considered with respect to
all predictions. More details on the feature interaction metric can
be found at https://christophm.github.io/interpretable-ml-book/interaction.html#interaction.
The high chemical diversity of this data set was once again
evident
by the production of a very large tree, with no particular branches
associated with the classification of large subsets of compounds.
To draw robust SAR rules, we calculated anchors using the anchor-exp
python module, which were derived from the trained decision tree.
Anchors are IF-THEN rules, which can be interpreted as sufficient
conditions for a given activity outcome. Anchors are derived through a model-agnostic approach, using the
recursive search for candidate rules that explain the classification
of a given compound and perturbing the remaining features not covered
by that rule by replacing them with features from another compound.
These perturbed instances become the neighbors of the compound under
focus and serve to probe how important a feature is for a given activity
outcome. Applying this approach to our full data set, a total of 1185
anchors (rules) were obtained, of which we highlight the top 10 rules
in terms of coverage, as shown in . Contrary to rules derived from the decision
tree model trained, these anchors are much simpler (rules from the
decision tree were often more than 10 parameters long), which improves
interpretability and application to compound design/selection. However,
it should be noted that anchors provide local SARs limited to a specific
region of the descriptor space and are not exhaustive (i.e., covering the entire chemical space of the full urease inhibitors
data set).
 In
many of the top 10 rules, amine group count (fr_NH1 and fr_NH0)
appeared as one of the descriptors (and sometimes even as the only
type of descriptor, such as in rule). Curiously, the presence of amine
groups was a descriptor only present in rules for inactive compounds.
The largest rule for inactives covers a relatively large amount of
compounds (N = 255, 8% of the full data set) and
also with a very high precision (94.1%). This rule states that the
absence of secondary amines (fr_NH1) along with the presence of at
least one aromatic hydroxyl group often leads to inactive compounds.
The following three rules with the largest amount of compounds also
define inactives, and all require absent secondary amines, accompanied
by the presence of hydroxylamine groups or the absence of tertiary
amines or aromatic nitrogens. The largest rules that define actives
(rules 5–7) cover fewer compounds each (N =
38–59) but still with a large precision (>84%). All three
rules
state that compounds must have at least one aryl methyl site amenable
to hydroxylation, accompanied by at least one hydrazine (fr_hdrzine),
sulfonamine (fr_sulfonamd), or thiol group (fr_SH).
Interestingly,
each of these rules covered a diverse set of compounds,
which is another evidence of the nuance in the molecular determinants
of activity, which goes beyond selecting a given family or scaffold
to produce active compounds. Rule 1 (the largest inactives rule) covers
compounds from nine clusters (7, 11, 15, 16, 18, 20, 23, 40, 47) and
rule 5 (the largest actives rule) covers compounds from 10 clusters
(0, 2, 7, 8, 12, 17, 24, 42, 48, 49). This means that the molecules
defined by each anchor are structurally diverse but still have a similar
physicochemical and structural profile, which separates them from
compounds of the opposite class.

## Activity Cliffs, Substructural
“Dead Ends”, and
“Safe Bets” in Urease Inhibitors
One of the
most useful and actionable pieces of information that can be drawn
from all tested compounds against urease to date is what structural
modifications (or R-groups) are consistently associated with loss
or gain of activity. To analyze this, we identified all pairs of compounds
that share considerable similarity (Tc > 0.6). These pairs were allocated to one of three possible groups:
both compounds are active and share a similar structure (linear SAR
pair), both compounds are inactive and share a similar structure (linear
SAR pair), or the two compounds have different activities but share
a similar structure (unpredictable SAR, i.e., activity
cliff). The distribution of the three categories is shown in A, where a large
portion of pairs was found to be activity cliffs. Activity cliffs
are interesting to explore as they refer to portions of chemical space
where structure and activity correlate unpredictably and small changes
in structure lead to drastic changes in activity. An exemplary activity
cliff pair is shown in C. This analysis revealed that a rather large number of activity
cliff pairs exist (N = 3206), corresponding to almost
a third of all similar pairs of compounds. This indicates that navigating
the urease inhibitors’ chemical space is quite challenging,
which underlines the importance of inspecting all known compounds
to learn which structures are prone to unwanted shifts in activity.
 Despite the diverse chemical space, there is a significant number
of pairs of compounds that are interesting to understand urease inhibition
activity. The top 5 scaffolds (or cores) with the highest number of
activity cliffs studied correspond to compounds from clusters 2, 10,
19, 36, and 44. Even though there is no way to fully avoid activity
cliff compounds, there are cases where a given scaffold is frequently
prone to the generation of activity cliffs. Therefore, we inspected
the compounds most frequently implicated in an activity cliff pair. B shows how many
compounds are involved in how many activity cliffs, revealing that
an astounding 139 compounds form activity cliffs pairs with 10 up
to 30 compounds of the opposite activity class, i.e., reference inactive compound + N paired actives
or reference active compound + N paired inactives.
The first scenario corresponds to what we call “safe bets”,
and the second corresponds to “dead ends”.
A total
of 85 active compounds fell into the dead-ends category
(see Figure S6), as these form high-similarity
pairs with 10–30 inactive compounds. For instance, a compound
from cluster 44 was found in 20 pairs of activity cliffs (left-hand
side of D),
where all activity-loss modifications occur in the aromatic ring,
in the positions marked with a red circle. This compound is highly
active (400 nM) but loses its activity up to multiple orders of magnitude
when it undergoes small changes (switching a F for a Cl or switching
the position of the F group from para to meta). Essentially, this
means that modifying this compound (and perhaps similar compounds)
at this location should be avoided or at least be done with care,
using complementary structure-based studies to understand the role
of these substituents in binding to the enzyme.
On the opposite
side of the spectrum, there were 54 safe bet compounds,
which consisted of inactive compounds whose modification always produced
an active compound, for a variety of modifications (Figure S7). For instance, the inactive compound shown on the
right-hand side of D (IC50 of 1 mM) established 20 high-similarity
pairs with active compounds, where all modifications that yielded
those active compounds consisted of groups added to the phenyl ring
or, in two instances, replacement of the phenyl by a thiophenyl group.
All safe-bet compounds originated from 14 clusters (2, 6, 8, 18,
19, 25, 26, 30, 32, 33, 35, 39, 42, 48) and all dead-end compounds
originated from 19 clusters (1, 2, 10, 14, 17, 18, 19, 24, 25, 26,
27, 32, 36, 40, 41, 43, 44, 45, 47), which means that, in alignment
with previous observations, this also underscores the complexity and
diversity of the structure-activity landscape of urease inhibitors.
One should note that in this analysis, gain or loss of activity
is not quantitative, and in some activity cliffs, compound activity
may be close to the cutoff (i.e., ratio over the
control equal to 1). Therefore, some of the shifts in activity might
be small in absolute terms. Still, a small but consistent loss or
gain of activity in a given scaffold/core is still worth considering.
To complete this analysis, we looked at the most dramatic activity
cliffs, and the top 5 pairs with the most dramatic shifts in activity
are shown in . Contrary to the previous examples, as these pairs are just isolated
examples of a scaffold modification, they cannot be used to draw any
general conclusions on which modifications lead to gain (or loss)
in activity. Nevertheless, they are interesting to report.
 

## Overview of Well-Known Families of Urease Inhibitors: Are They
as Effective in Yielding Actives as Expected?
Some chemical
groups have been directly associated with urease inhibition such as
urea-based structural analogues as well as metal-binding groups. However,
some of these may not actually provide the main contribution to the
overall activity of inhibition but instead other less evident groups
may do so. In this regard, we queried our data set with several active
groups reported for urease inhibition (using SMARTS search with RDKit)
and found groups generally associated with activity.
Due to
their similarity to the tetrahedral configuration of the transition
state of the enzymatic reaction carried by urease, organophosphorus
compounds are competitive inhibitors that rank among the most potent
molecules. However, in our data set, out of 183 such compounds, only
38.3% were active. Among them, phosphonic acid analogues, another
well-known family, were also mostly inactive, with 79.1% being inactive
out of 24 compounds. However, the subset of 31 phosphoramide compounds
within the organophosphorus family was found to be often active, with
83.8% active molecules.
Urea- or thiourea-bearing compounds
are another popular group of
compounds owing to their similarity to urease’s native substrate.
Among the 259 urea analogues in our data set, 55.5% were inactive.
However, this included the 63 barbiturates, of which 69.8% are inactive,
and 15 N-hydroxyureas, of which 33% were active molecules.
Interestingly, the thiourea derivatives that are generally reported
as being more potent than their urea counterparts were associated
with relatively fewer actives (50.9%) out of 514 molecules (these
included the 144 thiobarbiturates found to have 66.7% inactive compounds).
Even though the overall inactivity for all of the three families
above is unexpected, this may be due to the common introduction of
these groups into many different scaffolds. This is evident as these
groups are found among the most potent inhibitors as well as in many
inactive compounds. As a result, it is clear that the simple addition
of these moieties does not drive activity.
On the other hand,
the hydrazine substructure was found in 262
compounds, of which 77.4% were active molecules, and similarly, imines
(97 molecules) were found to be enriched with active compounds (78.3%).
Furthermore, even the hybrid thiosemicarbazides found in 261 compounds
showed a striking 77.7% of active molecules. Another significant group
that has been historically associated with urease inhibitors is sulfonamides,
of which we identified 120 compounds with a considerable fraction
of active molecules (78%). These classes of compounds are important
urease inhibitors, but their use may not be straightforward as they
are susceptible to hydrolysis and side effects. Another group that
seemed to increase urease inhibition is the attachment of long carbon
chains (superior to six carbons), which showed an enrichment of 65%
of active molecules in a total of 123 molecules. However, as previously
discussed, this may be via a noncompetitive mechanism
of action.
Another commonly used group is the carboxylic acid
found in 150
compounds but with no influence in generating actives (50% actives),
and its ester form found in 232 compounds seems to be even more associated
with inactive compounds (60.7% of inactive molecules).
Heterocyclic
rings are also important for activity and are a part
of many medicinal chemistry campaigns. Piperazine (N = 169) and pyridine
(N = 224) are two of the ring-based groups most enriched with active
compounds, with 53.8 and 58% active molecules, respectively. This
is notable for pyridine, as this is a relatively under-reported group
contributing to activity. Azoles, which also correspond to an important
group in medicinal chemistry, were also associated with activity against
ureases, having 59.8% actives from a total of 749 compounds. Upon
applying clustering to these compounds (10 clusters generated in total),
we observed a variability in activity from 15.7% of the actives for
51 compounds to 91.7% for 109 molecules, demonstrating the potential
of this scaffold for urease inhibition, which nonetheless relies on
fine-tuning (hence the variation). Even among the 5-membered heterocyclic
rings, similar levels of actives were observed, with 59.5% of active
compounds in a total of 923 compound. On the other hand, no significant
enrichment was observed for annelated (1186 compounds) or bicyclic
(1149 compounds) rings, with 50.3 and 50.7% of active molecules, respectively.
Isatin analogues (66 compounds) did not greatly contribute to activity
(49% active), whereas benzothiazoles (38 compounds) and thiophene
(53) seem to be enriched with actives (89.8 and 71.6%, respectively).
Finally, any aryl-halogen (1277 compounds) was associated with
activity between 51.6 and 60%, whereas aryl-thiols (77 compounds)
were enriched with a remarkable 80.5% active molecules. On the contrary,
the majority of 1,2-diphenols (147 compounds) were inactive (80.2%
inactives).

## Translatability of Urease Inhibition between
Species
The active site of ureases is well preserved, and
it is often assumed
that compounds tested against, for example, Jack bean urease will
translate into activity against bacterial ureases. Some reports in
the literature have tested the same compound against different ureases,
and the data set we assembled contained 167 compounds tested against
different species (at least two). Even though some did not have the
same or similar IC50 or Ki values
against different ureases, we observed that only a small portion of
those compounds was found to be classified as active in a species
and inactive in another species (20.1%). Overall, the compounds that
showed different activities across species presented active groups
related to binding directly to the nickel center (hydroxamic acids
and diaminophosphinic acid) and a tendency to show a higher number
of hydrogen-bonding groups (7.8 ± 1.9 vs 5.5
± 1.4). Therefore, it is possible that the specificities of the
H-bond networks dictate the right binding conformation to the metal
of the pocket of different species.

## Comparison between the
Chemical Space of Approved Drugs and
Urease Inhibitors
Another interesting feature to analyze
is the distribution of the urease inhibitor data set with respect
to approved drugs represented by DrugBank’s approved set (DrugBank version 5.1.8). This distribution
is shown in , revealing that the chemical space of approved drugs largely overlaps
the known urease inhibitor space and, despite both having relatively
the same size (2067 vs 3200 compounds), DrugBank
shows a much lower diversity than urease inhibitors.
 For example, antimicrobial drugs
such as metronidazole and secnidazole
(IC50 of 156 μM) have
been reported to have an antiurease activity. With this in mind, we
compared urease inhibitors with DrugBank to find high similarity matches.
First, 19 urease compounds are also present in DrugBank ( ), which probably
resulted from attempts of repurposing with the exception of acetohydroxamic
acid (Lithostat), which is an approved urease inhibitor for urinary
infections. Additionally, a total of 84 urease compounds show high
similarity (Tc > 0.6) to at least one approved drug
(Table S2).

## Conclusions
There
has been an increasing interest in novel urease inhibitors,
which has led to the testing of thousands of compounds against different
ureases. Therefore, a large-scale in-depth analysis of developed work
over the last few decades is paramount to help guide future drug discovery.
Unfortunately, previous analyses of the activity of urease inhibitors
were limited to a small number of compounds and, to our knowledge,
no such large-scale survey exists. To bridge this gap, in the present
work, we assembled the largest data set of urease inhibitors to date.
This data set contained data on ureases from nine different species
and 3200 unique compounds.
The urease inhibitors data set was
used to characterize the chemical
space of urease inhibitors and how it stands with respect to typical
druggability filters. Compounds tested against ureases spanned a large
range of molecular space, but the general physicochemical properties
were found not to dictate activity. Temporal trends of compound development
also revealed interesting observations that indicate, for example,
some redundancy (accidental or purposeful) in the development of compounds
within challenging scaffolds.
We also used machine learning
tools such as clustering and decision
trees to draw potential patterns that can be used to inform and guide
medicinal chemists in the design and optimization of novel inhibitors.
Particularly, we have disclosed scaffolds and chemical groups often
associated with inhibitory activity as well as patterns that correlate
with low activity. We also observed that simply adding chemical groups
associated with activity generally does not result in improved activity
but rather the scaffold seemed to drive this activity. On the other
hand, under-reported groups such as pyridine were highlighted for
their contribution to activity.
Furthermore, we extracted all
activity cliffs present in the data
set, which allows highlighting how much of the urease inhibitors’
chemical space is populated by unpredictable regions of structure–activity
relationship. We have also reported examples of compounds that are
desirable (safe bets) and undesirable (dead-ends) as starting points,
since modifying them frequently leads to gain or loss of activity,
respectively.
In conclusion, this work is a compilation of the
current state
of the art of urease inhibitors, where we provide insights into aspects
and rules that can be used for a more rational initial stage of development
of novel compounds. With this work, we aim to bias the research on
this topic toward regions of chemical space more likely associated
with activity.

## Supporting Information Available
The Supporting Information
is available free of charge at https://pubs.acs.org/doi/10.1021/acs.jcim.2c00150.Trends of the overall
chemical properties of urease
inhibitors in a historical perspective; distribution of different
properties for actives, inactives, and the top 100 most active compounds;
intracluster similarity distribution of the 50 clusters obtained from
the full dataset; temporal trends of compound development within each
cluster; normalized activity as a function of molecular weight for
cluster 19; scaffolds from clustering; examples of dead-end and safe-bet
compounds among urease inhibitors; urease inhibitors also present
in the DrugBank (PDF)

## Supplementary Material
ci2c00150_si_001.pdf

The authors declare
no
competing financial interest.

## Notes
RDkit, Numpy, Scikit-learn, Pandas,
Matplotlib,
and Seaborn are freely available as Anaconda and/or pip packages (Python).
Anaconda/Jupyter notebook is available for download and installation
at https://docs.anaconda.com/anaconda/install. The different R packages used (iml, caret, mlr) are available for
installation in CRAN. All raw data are available in the public domain
(peer-reviewed publications, ChEMBL, and patents). Access to the full
data set and analysis scripts is granted upon request.

## Acknowledgments
The authors thank the Portuguese Science Foundation FCT (Fundação
para a Ciência e a Tecnologia, Portugal) for contributing to
funding this work through PTDC/MED-QUI/3542/2020, EXPL/QUI-OUT/1288/2021,
UIDB/04138/2020, and UIDP/04138/2020. The authors would also like
to acknowledge the funding originating from grant LISBOA-01-0246-FEDER-000017.