pmcNucleic Acids ResNucleic Acids Res4narnarNucleic Acids Research0305-10481362-4962Oxford University PressPMC9458454PMC9458454.1945845494584543594770010.1093/nar/gkac671gkac6711AcademicSubjects/SCI00010Structural BiologyBiochemical and structural characterization of hepatitis A virus 2C reveals an unusual ribonuclease activity on single-stranded RNA
ChenPu
NHC Key Laboratory of Systems Biology of Pathogens, Institute of Pathogen Biology, Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences and Peking Union Medical College, Beijing 100730, PR China ). HAV remains a major pathogen causing communicable liver disease worldwide. Although HAV infection is generally mild, a small portion of HAV patients (particularly those older than 50 years) could die from fulminant hepatitis ( ). Available HAV vaccines can provide efficient and lasting immune protection (https://www.who.int/news-room/fact-sheets/detail/hepatitis-a, last accessed date, 22 July 2022) ( ). Nevertheless, occasional HAV outbreaks occur even in developed countries with good sanitary and hygienic conditions ( , ). To rapidly contain future outbreaks, besides treating fulminant hepatitis A patients as well as controlling potential vaccine-escape variants, development of effective anti-HAV drugs remains a great value in disease control.
The HAV particle shares features with both standard picornavirus and insect picorna-like viruses ( ). The icosahedral capsid of HAV (∼27 nm in diameter) is remarkably smooth and lacks canyons, which is consistent with its resistance to high temperature and low pH environments ( ). The 7.5 kb genome of HAV is a plus-sense single-stranded RNA comprising a 5′-untranslated region (UTR), a large open reading frame, a 3′-UTR followed by a poly(A) tail ( , ). The open reading frame encodes a large polyprotein (∼250 kDa) that is processed co- and post-translationally by viral and cellular proteases, to yield mature structural proteins (VP1–VP4), nonstructural proteins (2A–2C, 3A–3D) as well as multiple functional precursors ( ). Unlike standard picornavirus 2A, the HAV 2A is not a protease; instead it is a part of VP1 ( ). The 3C and 3ABC proteins of HAV are proteases responsible for most processing steps ( ).
A hallmark of HAV infection is its inability to shut off cellular protein synthesis ( ). Whereas many picornaviruses inhibit host mRNA translation by targeting cellular initiation factor 4G (eIF4G), HAV must compete with cellular mRNAs for the translation of its own RNAs ( ). To survive this competition, HAV adopts multiple strategies including deoptimized-codon usage, which contributes to its low growth rate and inefficient replication in cell culture ( ). The HAV 2C binds the cloverleaf structure of the internal ribosome entry site at 5′ end of the plus-strand RNA, indicating its involvement in translation ( ).
Picornavirus 2C is a multifunctional protein essential for nearly all steps in the virus life-cycle ( ). It is one of the most conserved proteins among the Picornaviridae, which makes the coding region of 2C useful for molecular diagnosis and genotyping ( ). Being an atypical picornavirus, HAV harbors a unique 2C distantly related to all other 2C homologs in the Picornaviridae. Despite a comparable size comprising 335 amino acids (aa) polypeptide chain, HAV 2C shares poor amino acid sequence identity with the 2C from enterovirus 71 (EV71, 27.9%), enterovirus D68 (EV-D68, 28.2%), poliovirus (PV, 27.3%), foot-and-mouth disease virus (FMDV, 27.2%), coxsackievirus B3 (CVB3, 26.0%), echovirus 30 (Echo30, 26.0%) and human rhinovirus (HRV, 27.5%). Nonetheless, HAV 2C exhibits similar domain organization and key functions during infection like its homologs. HAV 2C is predicted to comprise an N-terminal domain responsible for binding membrane ( ), a central ATPase domain essential for virus replication and a C-terminal domain. Similar to other picornaviruses 2Cs, HAV 2C (and its precursor 2BC) can induce intracellular membrane rearrangement to provide a platform for replication-complex assembly ( ). One distinguishing feature of HAV replication is that the intracellular membranes required for replication-complex assembly seem to be derived from the outer mitochondrial membranes, not from endoplasmic reticulum membranes as in the case of PV replication complex formation ( , ). Following the N-terminal membrane-binding domain is an ATPase domain belonging to the SF3-helicase family of AAA+ proteins, that is the most conserved domain of HAV 2C. The C-terminal region of HAV 2C lacks the Cys-rich motif that forms a zinc-finger in enterovirus 2C. The function of this domain requires further investigation.
Like other SF3-helicase family members ( ), HAV 2C presents ATPase and RNA-binding activities, but duplex unwinding activity has not been reported, in contrast to EV71 2C ( ). Both full-length HAV 2C and a truncation mutant lacking the N-terminal membrane-binding motif can bind RNA, implying that the RNA binding site is not in the N-terminal region ( ). HAV 2C recognizes the 3′-UTR of negative-strand viral RNA ( ), suggesting that it might anchor the negative-strand RNA, the template for positive-strand RNA synthesis, to intracellular membranes.
We previously determined crystal structures of EV71 2C and PV 2C ( , ) lacking the N-terminal membrane binding domain. We demonstrated that enterovirus 2C comprises an ATPase domain followed by a zinc-finger and C-terminal amphipathic helix. In our structures, the C-terminal helix of enterovirus 2C occupies a hydrophobic pocket in the adjacent 2C; this specific 2C–2C interaction is essential for ATPase activity of 2C and virus replication ( , ). We proposed a hexameric-ring model for enterovirus 2Cs, which contains a negatively charged central pore. These findings are consistent with the results originally reported for FMDV 2C, which revealed hexamer formation of FMDV 2C in the presence of RNA ( ). Investigating whether those features of enterovirus 2C are conserved in the ancestral HAV 2C is important to understand the molecular evolution of picornaviral 2C proteins.
Here, we characterized the HAV 2C protein structurally, biochemically and functionally. We determined the crystal structure of a soluble HAV 2C fragment containing the entire ATPase domain, a region equivalent to enterovirus 2C zinc-finger (ZFER) and a C-terminal amphipathic helix. The C-terminal helix (pocket-binding domain, PBD) of HAV 2C occupies a hydrophobic pocket (Pocket) of the adjacent 2C in crystal lattice, which mediates the 2C–2C interaction in solution. Performing mutagenesis studies, we demonstrated the PBD–Pocket interaction is essential for 2C self-oligomerization, ATPase activity and HAV replication. In our biochemical assays, we found that HAV 2C exhibits single-strand specific ribonuclease (RNase) activity and prefers poly-U segments; and this RNase activity is independent of 2C′s ATPase activity. We identified several acidic residues essential for the RNase activity of HAV 2C and showed those residues are fundamental to HAV replication. Given these acidic residues reside in a conserved region, we confirmed the 2Cs from EV71, FMDV, CVB3, PV and HRV all share RNase activity. Using a cell based HAV replication assay, we verified the functional importance of ATPase, ZFER, PBD and Pocket of HAV 2C for HAV replication.

## MATERIALS AND METHODS

## Protein expression and purification
The sequence of the prototype HAV stain HM-175 (GenBank: M14707.1) was used for recombinant 2C expression, biochemical characterization and structure determination. To express a soluble fragment of HAV 2C (128–335 aa, termed HAV 2C-ΔN), the gene of HAV 2C-ΔN was amplified by polymerase chain reaction (PCR) and inserted between NcoI and HindIII restriction sites of a modified pET-32a vector with a tobacco etch virus (TEV) protease cleavage site. The plasmid was transformed to Escherichia coli BL21 (DE3) competent cells. The bacteria were cultured in Luria-Bertani (LB) medium at 37°C and induced at 18°C with 0.5 μM isopropyl-beta-d-thiogalactopyranoside (IPTG) when the OD600 of the medium reached ∼0.6. The culturing continued for 18 hours after induction. The bacteria cells were harvested by centrifugation 5422g for 10 min. The cell pellet was re-suspended in a lysis buffer containing 20 mM HEPES-Na pH 7.4, 300 mM NaCl and disrupted by ultrasonification. The lysate was clarified by centrifugation at 47 850g at 4°C for 30 min. The supernatant was passed through Ni-NTA resin (GE healthcare) and eluted with the elution buffer containing 20 mM HEPES-Na pH 7.4, 300 mM NaCl and 300 mM imidazole. The eluate was dialyzed overnight at 4°C in the dialysis buffer containing 20 mM HEPES-Na pH 7.4 and 300 mM NaCl. TEV protease was added to the dialysis buffer to remove the 6 × His tag. Finally, HAV 2C-ΔN was purified with Superdex®200 10/300 GL column (GE healthcare) pre-equilibrated in the gel filtration buffer containing 10 mM HEPES-Na pH 7.4 and 100 mM NaCl.
To express full-length HAV 2C (termed WT HAV 2C), the gene of WT HAV 2C was amplified by PCR and cloned to baculovirus transfer vector pFastbac1. The coding sequence of 6 × His-tag was added to the N-terminal of HAV 2C. WT HAV 2C was overexpressed in sf-21 cells using the Bac-to-Bac Baculovirus Expression System (Invitrogen). A 600 ml cell culture (2.0 × 106 cells ml−1) was infected with 18 ml baculovirus at 28°C. At 48 h post-infection, cells were harvested by centrifugation at 5422g for 10 min. The cell pellet was resuspended in a lysis buffer containing 20 mM HEPES-Na pH 7.4, 300 mM NaCl and lysed by ultra-sonification. After centrifugation at 47 850g 4°C for 1 h, the supernatant was discarded and the precipitation was solubilized in the solubilization buffer 20 mM HEPES-Na pH 7.4, 300 mM NaCl and 20 mM n-dodecyl β-d-maltoside (DDM, Anatrace, D310) for 3 h at room temperature. The resulting mixture was clarified by centrifugation (47 850g for 2 h) and the supernatant containing WT HAV2C was loaded into the Ni-NTA column (GE healthcare). The protein was eluted with the elution buffer and finally purified using size-exclusion chromatography (Superdex 200 10/300 GL, GE healthcare). WT HAV 2C was concentrated to 10 μM in the buffer containing 10 mM HEPES-Na pH 7.4, 100 mM NaCl and 0.4 mM DDM before stored at –80°C. Plasmids encoding full-length HAV 2C mutants were obtained using site-directed mutagenesis and the mutants were expressed using the similar method described above. SDS-PAGE analysis of all HAV 2C variants is shown in .
Genes encoding the 2C proteins of enterovirus 71 (EV71), enterovirus D68 (EV-D68), poliovirus (PV), foot-and-mouse disease virus (FMDV), coxsackievirus B3 (CVB3), Echovirus 30 (EcoV30) and human rhinovirus (HRV) were inserted into pMal-c2X plasmid between the BamHI and HindIII sites. These 2C proteins were all fused with an N-terminal maltose-binding protein (MBP) tag. Overexpression of these 2Cs in E. coli BL21 (DE3) competent cells followed the same protocols as described above. After the disruption of the bacteria cells, the supernatants of the cell lysate were passed through amylose resin (GE healthcare) and eluted with elution buffer containing 20 mM HEPES-Na pH 7.4, 300 mM NaCl, 10 mM maltose and 2 mM EDTA. All subsequent purification steps followed the protocol for purifying HAV 2C proteins as describe above.

## Crystallization and structure determination
The soluble HAV 2C fragment 128–335 aa was concentrated to ∼2.5 mg/ml in a buffer containing 10 mM HEPES-Na pH 7.4 and 100 mM NaCl before crystallization trails. The crystallization of HAV 2C 128–335 aa was achieved by mixing 1 μl of protein with 1 μl of reservoir buffer containing 400 mM NH4H2PO4. The crystals were grown in a hanging-drop vapor-diffusion system at 18°C. The crystals were flash frozen in liquid nitrogen before X-ray diffraction experiments.
Given HAV 2C shares limited amino acid sequence similarity with other picornaviral 2C proteins, suitable model for molecular replacement was unavailable. The Native-SAD method ( ) was employed for ab initio phasing. The soluble fragment of HAV 2C contains 7 cysteine and 10 methionine in 208 residues, which provides total 17 sulphur atoms to contribute to anomalous signal. Seven complete datasets were collected for a single crystal using the X-ray with the wavelength of 2.08 Å. The crystal diffracted the X-ray to 2.37 Å, belonged to the space group of P212121 and contained a single copy of HAV 2C in asymmetric unit. The chi angle of these datasets ranged from 0o to 30o, and the redundancy reached ∼38. After scaling and merging of these datasets, the anomalous signal extended to ∼3.0 Å. An initial electron density map was then calculated using the software SHELXC/D/E ( ), which allowed manual building of an initial model using software Coot ( ). To improve resolution, we collected reflections of another crystal using higher X-ray energy, wavelength 1.0 Å. This crystal diffracted the X-ray to 2.15 Å. The crystal structure was solved by molecular replacement using software Phaser MR ( ) with the initial model from Native-SAD as the searching model. The high-resolution structure was finally refined using software Phenix ( ) ( ). The data collection, refinement parameter statistics of the crystal structures of HAV 2C soluble fragment are summarized in Table .
 

## Nuclease assay
All RNA and DNA strands used for nuclease assay and helicase assay were synthesized in Sangon Biotech (Shanghai). The sequence of the RNA strands is listed in below table:
 RNA5, RNA6 and RNA9 are both 35 nt single strand RNAs; RNA5 and RNA9 were mixed to anneal for dsRNA35 with five U mismatched in the middle of the sequence; RNA1 and RNA2 was annealed to form the dsRNA18 matched completely; RNA1 annealed with RNA3 with 3′ terminal overhang while with RNA4 with 5′ overhang.
Nuclease assay: reactions contained 1 μM HAV 2C-ΔN (or 1 μM full-length HAV 2C, or one of its mutant derivatives) and 0.1 μM RNA (or DNA). Reactions were performed in 25 mM HEPES-Na pH 7.4, 80 mM NaCl, 35 mM KCl, 5 mM MgCl2, 1 mM DTT and RNaseOUT™ Ribonuclease Inhibitor (40 unit per 20 μl reaction mixture). The Ribonuclease Inhibitor was added to reaction mixtures 5 min before the addition of 2C protein. Eppendorf tubes, filter-tips and other consumables were all RNase-free grade. After incubation at 37°C for a certain time, the reactions were stopped by addition of an equal volume of loading buffer (50% glycerol, 1 × TBE, 10 mM EDTA). The products were then analyzed in urea-containing 15% polyacrylamide gels (www.wshtbio.com, E301U15F) or 15% native-polyacrylamide gels.

## Helicase assay
Helicase assay was carried out as described previously ( ). Briefly, the 10 μl reaction mixtures contained 50 mM HEPES-Na pH 7.4, 5 mM MgCl2, 2 mM DTT, 1 mM ATP, 50 nM of partial duplex RNA substrate (RNA4 & RNA1) and 300 nM unlabelled trap RNA (RNA2). The reaction was initiated by adding 1 μM enzymes (MERS-CoV nsp13, HAV 2C FL or HAV 2C ΔN) and incubated at 37°C for 30 min. Reactions were terminated by adding 2.5 μl loading buffer containing 100 mM Tris–HCl pH 7.5, 1% SDS, 50 mM EDTA and 50% glycerol. All reaction mixtures were then resolved by Native-PAGE. The gels were visualized using Typhoon Trio Variable Mode Imager (GE healthcare).

## 
In vitro transcription, electroporation of HAV subgenomic RNAs and detection of luciferase activity
For production of in vitro transcripts 10 μg of the respective plasmid were linearized for 60 min at 37°C with restriction enzyme AgeI. Production of in vitro transcripts and electroporation were described previously ( ). For electroporation, 1 × 107 Huh7-Lunet cells were resuspended in 1 ml cytomix. Cytomix refers to a buffer that resembles the intracellular ionic composition, which has been previously shown to improve the efficiency of transfection and cell viability during electroporation ( ). 10 μg of subgenomic replicon RNA were used for transfection of 400 μl of single cell suspension. Cells were seeded and harvested as described before ( ). The protocols for measurement of Firefly and Renilla-luciferase activity were described elsewhere ( ). Note that luciferase activity at early time points after transfection (here: 4 h) reflects translation of the input RNA, which can be influenced by variations in transfection efficiency or by RNA stability. Since we did not observe consistent differences among mutants at this time pointing to systematic effects, we used these data to normalize for variations in transfection efficiency.

## EV71 virus titer measurement
EV71 infectious clone (pEV71) contained the full-length cDNA of WT virus, and mutations in the 2C region (K135A and D186A) were introduced by the site-directed mutagenesis. To produce RNA transcripts, 8 μg of pEV71 plasmid or mutants DNAs were linearized by Hind III digestion for 60 min at 37°C, and the DNAs were in vitro transcribed into RNAs using the MEGA script T7 Kit (Ambion). Equal amounts of RNAs were then transfected into Vero cells using Lipo2000 transfection reagent (Invitrogen). Cells were collected at 72 h post-transfection, and were freeze-thaw lysed. The cell lysates were centrifuged at 12 000g for 5 min at 4°C, and the supernatant containing the viruses were collected for titer measurement. 10-fold serial dilution of the supernatant were carried out to prepare virus solutions, and 100 μl of virus solutions was used for infecting RD cells seeded in 96-well plate. The virus titers were measured by TCID50 method in RD cells (Behrens–Kraber algorithm) by counting the wells in which CPE appeared, using equation: , where d indicates log10 of the dilution factor, s indicates the sum of the ratio of cytopathic effect (CPE). In every single assay, 1 × 104 RD cells were seeded in 96-well plate, 24 h after seeding, ten groups of diluted viruses were used to infect RD cells, eight repeats were set in every single group. All three assays are triplicated independently.

## Plasmid constructs and mutagenesis.
Replication-competent HAV firefly-luciferase reporter replicon pT7-18f-LUC and replication-deficient pT7-18f-LUCmut plasmids (3D mut) ( ), derived from the cell culture adapted HAV strain HM-175 18f (GenBank: M59808), were used to produce subgenomic reporter replicon RNA referred to as HAV wt or HAV mut. PCR-directed mutagenesis was used for generation of 2C mutants, with XhoI and AlwNI restriction sites flanking the 2C gene, basing on the following list of primers:
 

## ATPase assay
ATPase assays were performed as previously described ( , , , ). The concentration of the enzyme was kept constant to 5 μM in all reactions. The volume of the of the reaction mixtures was 40 μl, contained 20 mM HEPES-K pH 7.4, 4 mM magnesium acetate, 2 mM dithiothreitol (DTT), 500 μM ATP mixed with trace amount of radioactive labelled ATP (γ-32P). The mixtures were incubated at 30°C and the reactions were initiated by adding enzyme. After incubation for 10 min, 20 μl of the reaction mixture was added into the Eppendorf tube with pre-added EDTA (the final concentration is 0.1 M) on ice to quench the reaction. Finally, 1 μl of the sample was spotted on the thin-layer chromatography cellulose TLC plates (Sigma-Aldrich) and resolved with running buffer containing 0.8 M acetate and 0.8 M LiCl. The plates were dried and analysed using storage phosphor screen and Typhoon Trio Variable Mode Imager (GE healthcare). ATP turnover was quantified using ImageQuant TL software (GE Healthcare). The buffer conditions used here for HAV 2C ATPase assay are the same as the one used for PV 2C ATPase assay, previously reported ( ), which allows us for activity comparison among different 2C proteins. Of note, mild detergent (DDM) was included in HAV 2C FL protein for stabilization, whereas no detergents were present in PV 2C protein preparation.

## Cell culture
Huh7-Lunet cells ( ), a subclone of the human hepatoma cell line Huh7, were grown in Dulbecco's modified minimal essential medium (DMEM; Life Technologies, Norwalk, CT), supplemented with 2 mM of L-glutamine, nonessential amino acids, 100 U/ml of penicillin, 100 U/ml of streptomycin, and 10% fetal calf serum. Vero cells were grown in minimum essential medium (MEM, HyClone) supplemented with 10% fetal calf serum. RD cells were grown in DMEM medium (HyClone) supplemented with 10% fetal calf serum. Sf-21 cells, which is derived from the pupal ovarian tissue of the fall army worm, Spodoptera frugiperda, was grown in Sf-900™ II SFM medium (Invitrogen), supplemented with 50 mg/l gentamycin.

## Biolayer interferometry
The experiment was conducted at 25°C in HBSP buffer (10 mM HEPES-Na pH 7.5, 100 mM NaCl, 0.005% surfactant P20) by an Octet RED96e instrument (Fortebio). The volume for the solutions were 200 μl, and the assay was performed in black, solid 96-well, flat bottom plates with a shaking speed of 1000 rpm. The streptavidin (SA) biosensors were activated in double distilled water for at least 10 min. A time of 90 s was performed for sensor check before loading the biotin labeled ssRNA, which took 120 s. After loading process, the biosensors went to the next step of baseline for 120 s until the baseline become flat. A time of 50 s was taken for protein association in the following step. The dissociation was the last step and performed for 50 s. The reference baseline was recorded for a sensor loaded with ligand but no analyte which used to be subtracted to correct any systematic baseline drift. The ssRNA with biotin labeled was synthesized from Songon Biotech (Shanghai) Co., Ltd, denoted as biotin-ssRNA35: GGAGUGGUGCUUUUUGUCAUAAGGUUGGUGUCAGG. 0.2 μM of biotinylated ssRNA were immobilized onto the surface of SA biosensors. To get a precise Kd of the interaction, a gradient concentration of HAV 2C-ΔN-D207A (2.18, 4.36, 8.72, 17.5 and 35 μM) was used to associate with the peptide coated SA biosensors. The control group biosensors coated with ssRNA35 was exposed into HSBP buffer without HAV 2C-ΔN-D207A. All data were processed by Data Analysis 11.1.

## RESULTS

## HAV 2C exhibits weak ATPase activity
To prepare protein for structural and biochemical characterization, we ectopically expressed the 2C protein encoded by the prototype HAV strain HM-175 ( ). Overexpressing wild-type HAV 2C (denoted WT HAV 2C) in Escherichia coli yielded insoluble proteins (Figure , left), probably attributed to the presence of N-terminal membrane binding domain and/or protein misfolding in bacteria. Next, we expressed WT HAV 2C in sf-21 insect cells. We increased the solubility of the protein by supplementing the mild detergent n-dodecyl β-d-maltoside (DDM) during purification (Figure , middle). This insect-cell-derived protein did not crystallize. Next, we sought to identify HAV 2C fragments suitable for structural investigation. According to our previous experience, crystallizable 2C fragments (such as EV71 2C and PV 2C etc.) typically lack the N-terminal membrane binding motif but retain intact ATPase domain. Therefore, we carried out progressive deletion of N-terminal portion of HAV 2C up to the Walker A motif, yielding a series of truncations. While many HAV 2C fragments with N-terminal deletion were insoluble upon overexpression in E. coli, the fragment encompassing residues 128–335 of HAV 2C was highly soluble. Thus, we used this HAV 2C fragment lacking the first 127 amino acids (aa), denoted HAV 2C-ΔN, for structural characterization (Figure , right), and it eventually yielded protein crystals. We assessed the ATPase activity of both proteins. WT HAV 2C exhibited a turnover number kcat = 0.0048 s−1 in ATP hydrolysis (Figure , left), which was about 100-fold lower than PV 2C, kcat = 0.46 s−1 ( ), indicating an unusually slow hydrolysis rate. The ATPase activity of HAV 2C-ΔN was similar to those of the ATPase-inactive mutants K149A (Walker A), D194A (Walker B) and N241A (Motif C, Figure , right), indicating HAV 2C-ΔN lacks ATPase activity.
 

## Crystallization and structure determination of HAV 2C-ΔN
To reveal the structural basis underlying the function of HAV 2C, we carried out crystallographic investigations. Because WT HAV 2C failed to crystallize, we focused on HAV 2C-ΔN, which encompasses the entire ATPase domain and the C-terminal domain, but lacks the N-terminal membrane binding motif. We grew HAV 2C-ΔN crystals in a buffer containing 0.4 M NH4H2PO4 in a vapor diffusion system at 18°C. We collected a native dataset but could not solve the structure by molecular replacement using 2C structures available in public databases. To solve the ‘phasing’ problem, we expressed a derivative containing selenomethionine, but it still failed to crystallize. Then, we employed a native single-wavelength anomalous dispersion method ( ), because HAV 2C-ΔN harbors 10 methionines and 7 cysteines in total 208 aa, which provides 1 sulphur per ∼12 residues. We collected seven datasets (360° each) on one crystal at a single position and at different orientations (chi angles ranging from 0° to 30°) using X-ray beams with a wavelength of 2.075 Å. We solved the structure using programs SHELX C/D/E, which found 17 sites with occupancy >0.3, CFOM = 52.62 and yielded an interpretable initial electron density map. We manually built a preliminary model of HAV 2C-ΔN, and we use this model as the molecular replacement searching model to solve another native dataset of higher quality than our initial dataset. We refined our final model, which contains a single HAV 2C-ΔN molecule in the asymmetric unit, to 2.2 Å resolution. Statistics of data collection, integration, scaling and structure refinement are summarized in Table .

## Overall structure of HAV 2C-ΔN
HAV 2C-ΔN exhibits a domain organization like those of enterovirus 2Cs despite low amino acid sequence identity. It comprises a canonical ATPase domain, a loop topologically equivalent to the zinc-finger of enterovirus 2C (ZFER) and a C-terminal helical domain (Figure ). The ATPase domain comprises a five-stranded parallel β-plane (β1–β5) sandwiched by short helices (α1 and α2) and the connecting loops on both sides of the β-plane. Loops connecting β3–α2, α2–β4 and β4–β5 are partially disordered in this structure, indicating their intrinsic flexibility. The Walker A motif 143-GKRGGGKS-150 constitutes the phosphate-binding loop (P-loop) between β1–α1. Two phosphate groups from the solvent occupy the P-loop. The Walker B motif 190-VCIIDD-195 lies at the end of the β3-sheet and the downstream loop. Motif C, a SF3-specific motif, lies in the loop downstream from the β4-sheet. Additionally, HAV 2C has another SF3-specific motif known as B’ motif. The B’ was originally identified at the central pore of the hexameric ring structures of SF3 DNA helicases ( ). B’ motif of SF3 DNA helicases usually contains multiple positively charged residues that interact with DNA substrates. By contrast, the B’ of HAV 2C harbors a conserved segment 225-EEK-228 that is rich in negatively charged residues. The B’ motif of HAV 2C is in the α2-to-β4 loop, which is disordered in our structure. Of note, the ‘EEK’ segment is highly conserved in Picornavirus 2Cs ( ).
Our structure reveals that the ZFER of HAV 2C does not form a zinc-finger like those found in enteroviral 2Cs, presenting a major variation among different 2Cs. HAV 2C ZFER spans only 30 residues, whereas the topologically equivalent zinc-finger in PV 2C and EV71 2C contains 41 residues each (Figure ). Structural superimposition of HAV 2C ZFER with enterovirus 2C zinc-fingers show that the region is substantially shorter in HAV 2C and lacks the essential residues for zinc coordination. Since HAV 2C ZFER is considerably smaller and more compact, it probably doesn’t require zinc coordination for structural stability.
Unlike the single, long helix at the C-terminus of EV71 2C and PV 2C, the C-terminal helix (α6) of HAV 2C is broken into two helices, α6A and α6B, which are oriented nearly perpendicularly to each other, forming a ‘knuckle’ (Figure ). Although this severely bent α6-helix of HAV 2C was probably caused by crystal packing, it indicates the intrinsic flexibility of this helix. This is reminiscent of EV71 2C crystal structure, which revealed that its C-terminal helix undergo rotation around an internal hinge ( ).
Using the Dali server, we identified structural homologs of HAV 2C from the Protein Data Bank. Our top hits included enterovirus 2C proteins ( ). Our structural superimposition of PV 2C and HAV 2C gave a Z-score of 16.7 and aligned 204 Cα atoms with a root-mean-square deviation (RMSD) of 3.6 Å. Structural superimposition of EV71 2C and HAV 2C gave a Z-score of 16.5 and aligned 185 Cα atoms with an RMSD of 3.7 Å. This explains the failure in our molecular replacement using either PV 2C or EV71 as a searching model.

## The C-terminal helical domain mediates self-oligomerization of HAV 2C
Like other picornavirus 2Cs, HAV 2C self-oligomerized both in crystals and in solution (Figure ). Crystal packing analysis revealed that all HAV 2C molecules in the crystal were connected to one another via a specific interaction (Figure ), forming continuous polymers extending across the lattice. The interface between HAV 2C-2C differs from enterovirus 2C–2C interaction and the HAV 2C interface involves a larger molecular surface, which involves two contact sites: site 1 involves the helix α6A of one 2C and the α1’-β2 region of an adjacent 2C; site 2 involves the C-terminal α6B helix of one 2C and a hydrophobic pocket formed between the ATPase domain and ZFER of an adjacent 2C (Figure and  ).
 To distinguish which of these sites mediates HAV 2C–2C interaction in solution, we prepared 2C mutants harboring different mutations at these sites. We examined self-oligomerization of these mutants by size-exclusion chromatography (Figure ). HAV 2C-ΔN eluted from a Superdex 200 10/300 GL column with an apparent molecular mass ∼160 kDa, indicating that HAV 2C-ΔN formed high-ordered oligomers. HAV 2C-ΔN lacking the C-terminal α6B helix exhibited an apparent molecular mass ∼23 kDa, matching the expected size of a monomer, 23.5 kDa. This result indicates the α6B helix (contact site 2) is essential for 2C self-oligomerization. Further, we found that alanine substitution of residue W333, L332, M330 and F329 on the hydrophobic side of α6B all severely disrupted self-oligomerization. These mutants broken down into dimers or monomers in solution (Figure ). By contrast, M317A and Y173A at contact site 1 did not significantly affect 2C self-oligomerization. Both mutants eluted as high-oligomeric species with apparent molecular masses ∼146 kDa and 140 kDa, which were only slightly lower than the high-order HAV 2C-ΔN oligomers (Figure ). Collectively, these results indicate that the contact site 2 between α6B helix of one 2C molecule and a hydrophobic pocket on an adjacent 2C is critical for HAV 2C oligomerization in solution while contact site 1 was a result of crystal packing. For simplicity, we denoted the hydrophobic face of the amphipathic α6B helix as the Pocket-Binding Domain (PBD), and the hydrophobic pocket formed between the ATPase domain and ZFER as the Pocket.
Comparing HAV 2C–2C interaction with that of enterovirus 2C, we found that the mode of PBD–Pocket interaction remains similar (Figure ), although the orientations between 2C–2C are different. This PBD–Pocket mediated 2C oligomerization may present another conserved feature among the Picornaviridae 2Cs; thus, agents targeting this interaction can be used as a potential pan-picornavirus antiviral strategy. Although crystal packing was partly responsible for different 2C-2C orientations, intrinsic flexibility of the C-terminal helix is probably common in enterovirus 2Cs and HAV 2C. It is worth noting that the PBD of enterovirus 2Cs usually contains a critical aromatic residue, the penultimate phenylalanine, essential for 2C functions ( , ). By contrast, The PBD of HAV 2C contains two aromatic residues F329 and W333, implying potential druggability at this site.
 

## Impact of 2C mutations on ATPase activity and viral replication
To validate our structural characterization of HAV 2C, we first measured ATP hydrolysis rate of a series of mutants (Figure ). Our in vitro ATPase assay was hampered by low signal-to-noise ratio despite our efforts to optimize the reaction conditions, including the addition of RNA ( ). Still, the dynamic range of our assays was enough to determine mutations that abrogate the activity. We introduced mutations to full-length HAV 2C by site-directed mutagenesis and measured ATP hydrolysis rate at a constant enzyme concentration (5 μM). We selected E169A, S206A, K267A and H276A as irrelevant mutations because these mutations are not in motifs critical for HAV 2C activities; i.e. we avoided selecting residues within ATPase motifs, ZFER, Pocket and PBD. HAV 2C harboring irrelevant mutations all exhibited a hydrolysis rate similar to wild-type level. On the other hand, we introduced K149A (Walker A), D194A, D195A (Walker B), N241A (Motif C) and R259A (R-finger) to conserved ATPase motifs. As anticipated, these ATP-inactive mutants exhibited 4–12 folds reduction in hydrolysis. Mutations at PBD or Pocket of 2C all led to ATPase activity abrogation because they exhibited a hydrolysis rate similar to that of the ATPase-inactive mutants. This is consistent with our structural analyses (see below sections), which demonstrated that the C-terminus mediated HAV 2C-2C interaction is essential for forming intact ATPase active site. By contrast, HAV 2C mutants K292A, M294A and L284R (ZFER) retained substantial ATPase activity.
 To determine the impact of ATPase domain, ZFER and PBD on HAV replication, we employed a cell-based replication assay (Figure – , ). We used a subgenomic HAV replicon ( ) encoding a firefly luciferase reporter for assessing replication efficiency by quantifying luciferase activity. We constructed a selection of HAV replicon plasmids harboring various mutations in the coding sequence of 2C; the plasmids were transcribed and transfected to Huh7-Lunet cells by electroporation. Replicons containing irrelevant mutations did not show impaired replication efficiency, or even increased it in case of K267A, confirming their lack of contribution to vital functions of 2C. In contrast, all mutations within the conserved ATPase motifs resulted in a substantial reduction or abrogation of viral replication 72 h after transfection. In addition, even those mutations in ZFER, PBD and Pocket with moderate or no effects on the ATPase activity of HAV 2C, like L284A, all resulted in a complete loss of replication capability of the replicon (Figure – , ), arguing for the essential function of these structural features and of homotypic interactions. These results also indicate that while ATPase domain, ZFER, PBD and Pocket of HAV 2C are all essential to virus replication, not all of them are required for the ATPase activity. The ZEFR of HAV 2C might be implicated in other vital functions of 2C yet to be identified. It is worth noting that the 2C mutants harboring an ATPase-dead mutations lacked the ATPase activity but still retained a minimal replication level compared to the 3D mut (a replication-deficient HAV replicon ( ), Figure – , ), suggesting that the ATPase function is important for viral replication but probably not strictly essential. However, ZFER, PBD and Pocket are involved in events - independent of ATPase activity—which are also important in virus replication.

## HAV 2C exhibits ribonuclease activity that cleaves single-stranded RNA
Given that HAV 2C harbored all conserved SF3 helicase motifs, we characterized its unwinding activity. We used a helicase assay previously established for MERS-CoV NSP13 ( ) based on an 18 bp partial RNA duplex with 10U 5′ overhang. Indeed, incubation with NSP13 resulted in an unwound product of the same size as the heat denatured control, indicating an authentic helicase activity (Figure ). In contrast, WT HAV 2C, as well as 2C ΔN, generated a reaction product neither matching in size to the dsRNA nor to the heated RNA (Figure ), suggesting this band was not the result of duplex unwinding. The same result was obtained with a substrate harboring a 3′ overhang and both reacting products had a size identical to the 18bp dsRNA portion of the substrate (Figure ). In line with the fact that the same activity was found for 2C WT and 2C ΔN, lacking parts of the ATP binding domain, the reaction proved to be independent of ATP in case of 2C WT ( ). Thus, a plausible explanation was that HAV 2C digested the single stranded overhangs of both substrates instead of unwinding, suggesting a novel and unexpected nuclease activity. To rule out that the observed nuclease activity of HAV 2C was not a result of RNase contamination, we not only used Diethyl pyrocarbonate (DEPC) treated water for reaction buffer, but also included RNase inhibitor in all subsequent nuclease reactions. Comparing the nuclease reactions in the presence and absence of RNase inhibitor, we did not observe differences in RNA substrate digestion.To further understand substrate specificity of the potential nuclease activity, we analyzed HAV 2C digestion of different substrates. Indeed, 2C WT and ΔN both degraded a single stranded RNA substrate of 35nt in length, corresponding to one strand of the partial dsRNA substrate (Figure ). Since the truncated enzyme had comparable activity, we focused all subsequent experiments on this variant, due the far higher yields and purities obtained upon expression in E. coli, compared to the necessity to express and purify 2C WT from baculovirus infected insect cells. In agreement with the observed ssRNA specific RNase activity, we found that neither a dsRNA substrate nor a ssDNA were affected by treatment with 2C ΔN ( ). Because methylated nucleotides confer nuclease resistance ( ), we next analysed the 35-nt ssRNA containing 2′-O-methyluridine and indeed observed a different pattern, suggesting partial protection (Figure ). HAV 2C-ΔN furthermore digested a uridine-rich ssRNA more efficiently than an adenosine-rich ssRNA (Figure , middle panels), suggesting that the enzyme prefers poly (U) stretches. Finally, we used a blunt-end double-strand RNA (dsRNA) containing a central mismatch bubble of five uridines, flanked by 20 bp and 10 bp duplex arms, respectively (Figure , right panel). Incubation with HAV 2C-ΔN resulted in two major bands corresponding to dsRNA arms, suggesting that the enzyme was an endoribonuclease digesting the internal mismatch regions of the RNA without requiring a 5′ or 3′ terminus.
 To identify critical residues responsible for the nuclease activity, we introduced a selection of mutations to HAV 2C-ΔN. We performed an alanine scan focusing on acidic residues, due to their importance to nuclease activity ( ), including D180, D183, D194, D195, D202, E203, D204 and D207. Activity of these mutants was tested on the 35 nt ssRNA substrate (Figure ). Intriguingly, while D195A and E203A had little impact on the digestion of the RNA substrate, D180A and D194A exhibited dramatically increased nuclease activity. In stark contrast, the nuclease activity of mutant D183A was strongly impaired. Of note, individual alanine substitutions in an acidic cluster comprising D202, D204 and D207 all ablated RNase activity (Figure ), suggesting that this region is a part of nuclease active site. Using the nuclease-inactive mutant D207A, we measured RNA-binding affinity of HAV 2C-ΔN using biolayer interferometry (BLI). The binding dynamics between a biotinylated 35 nt ssRNA immobilized on streptavidin (SA) biosensor and HAV 2C-ΔN D207A supplied in serial dilutions from 35 to 2.2 μM was recorded, which gave a Kd = 0.6 μM ( ). RNases usually binds their preferred nucleic acid substrates with high affinity. For example, E. coli RNase H1 digests RNA in RNA–DNA hybrid duplex, and it preferentially binds A-form duplex (RNA duplex or hybrid duplex, Kd = 0.5–3.4 μM) with much higher affinity than single-stranded nucleic acids (Kd = 118–942 μM) ( ).
Collectively, our biochemical characterizations demonstrated that HAV 2C harbors, in addition to an ATPase activity, a previously unobserved ribonuclease activity specific on ssRNA regions of the substrate and with a preference to uridine stretches. Nuclease activity is independent of ATPase activity and involves an acidic cluster encompassing positions D202, D204 and D207.

## Ribonuclease activity is conserved among picornavirus 2C proteins and potentially critical for RNA replication
We identified several acidic residues of HAV 2C critical for its ribonuclease activity. Since this region contains residues which are highly conserved among picornaviruses ( ) it seemed plausible to postulate that other 2C proteins possess the similar activities. To test this prediction, we prepared a set of N-terminal maltose-binding-protein (MBP) tagged full-length 2Cs from EV71, EV-D68, PV, FMDV, CVB3, Echo30 and HRV. All tested 2C proteins indeed showed similar levels of RNase activities, comparable to HAV2C on the 35 nt ssRNA substrate (RNA5) arguing for a conserved enzymatic function common to all picornaviral 2C proteins (Figure ). Surprisingly, none of the proteins apart from HAV was capable of cleaving the bubbled substrate RNA (Figure ), indicating subtle differences in the substrate specificity among picornavirus 2C variants. To further prove the specificity of the RNase activity residing in the picornaviral 2C proteins, we looked for invariant acidic residues critical for HAV 2C activity and thereby identified the aspartic acid corresponding to D204 (Figure ). We constructed the respective mutant for all picornaviral 2C proteins (FMDV 2C D170A, EchoV30 2C D186A; PV2C D186A; HRV 2C D179A; EV71 2C D186A; EV D68 2C D186A; CVB3 2C D186A) and tested the purified mutant proteins (Figure ) for RNase activity using the 35nt ssRNA substrate. As expected, all mutant proteins had lost the ability to degrade the substrate RNA (Figure ).
 Finally, we used the subgenomic reporter replicon to investigate the role of ribonuclease activity of 2C in HAV replication, by introducing a set of mutations affecting its enzymatic function in vitro (Figure , ). Intriguingly, all analyzed mutations significantly decreased virus replication, irrespective whether they increased or decreased ribonuclease activity (Figure and  ), arguing for an important function of this cluster of acidic residues. Importantly, no significant replication was found for those mutants entirely lacking nuclease activity (D202A, D204A, D207A, Figure ). To substantiate the importance of the RNase activity for other picornaviruses, we introduced the mutation D186A into an infectious cDNA clone of EV71 and compared the effect on virus production to a mutation in the ATPase active site (the Walker A), K135A, (Figure ) that abrogates EV71 replication ( ). Both mutations resulted in the absence of detectable infectious virus, suggesting that the nuclease activity residing in 2C might serve important functions in the entire Picornaviridae family.
 Taken together, our mutagenesis study indicates that the nuclease activity of HAV 2C might have an important function in HAV replication and also for other picornaviruses.

## Hexameric-ring model of HAV 2C
We used the crystal structure of a hexameric SF3 helicase, the John Cunningham virus (JCV) large T antigen (PDB: 5J4Y), as the template for building a hexameric model of HAV 2C. After superimposing six copies of HAV 2C-ΔN onto each subunit of JCV large T antigen, we found that α6B helix harboring PBD clashed with the neighboring molecule (Figure , left). This suggests that the C-terminal helix bend is an unnatural conformation, which was caused by crystal packing. Therefore, we adjusted the orientation of α6B to form a single, contiguous helix with the upstream α6A helix. In this conformation, the PBD could fit into the Pocket.
 The hexameric model of HAV 2C features a flat ring with a diameter ∼108.6 Å and a height ∼35.3 Å (Figure ), similar to the size of other 2C hexamers ( , ). The central pore of HAV 2C hexamer is unusually large (∼26.4 Å). This is attributed to the missing of α2-to-β4 loop (B′ motif) in our crystal structure, which is expected to line up at the pore. The ATPase active sites are located at the gaps between adjacent subunits, adopting reasonable geometries. While Walker A & B motifs and motif C lined up on one side of the gap, the R-finger was located on the other side. The closest distance between the R-finger (R259) and the Walker A motif (G146) in the hexameric model (∼4.2 Å) was significantly shorter than that in our crystal structure (∼30 Å) ( ).
We mapped the acidic residues important for nuclease activity of HAV 2C onto the hexameric model. We found all acidic residues gathered around the central pore on the cytoplasmic side of the ring (Figure ). Those residues do not overlap with the ATPase active sites (Figure ). Although the ATPase active sites in our hexameric model are separate from those RNase important residues, we cannot rule out possible links between the ATPase active sites and the putative RNase active sites; for example, large interdomain rearrangement may take place during ATP hydrolysis.

## DISCUSSION
One main obstacle in understanding the function of picornavirus 2C is that we lack structural details of the N-terminal portion that harbors the putative membrane-binding motif. We previously determined two enterovirus 2C structures, but none included structural details for the N-terminal portion (the region preceding the ATPase domain) because in each case inclusion of the N-terminal region interfered with either solubility or crystallization. Therefore, we used the program AlphaFold2 ( ) to predict the full-length HAV 2C structure ( , Figure , right). Our predicted models have high confidence score for the C-terminal domain (from 128 aa to end, CTD) and low model confidence at the N-terminal domain (1–127 aa, NTD), probably because there are no homologous structures available for HAV 2C NTD. We analyzed model 1 because it had the highest average pLDDT = 86.42 ( ). Model 1 suggests that HAV 2C NTD and CTD are connected by a flexible loop ( ). While the predicted CTD (average pLDDT = 92.3 indicating very high model confidence) matches well with our crystal structure, RMSD ∼1.4 Å, the predicted NTD had an average pLDDT = 76.7, suggesting moderate model confidence. The extreme N-terminal region of HAV 2C (1–37 aa) folds into two antiparallel amphipathic helices ( insert), which suggests that this region attaches to the surface of intracellular membranes rather than spanning membranes. Finally, we superimposed six copies of HAV 2C (from model 1) onto our crystallography-based HAV 2C-ΔN hexameric model (Figure right) to build a comprehensive model. This representation suggests that the HAV 2C hexamer attaches to the surface of intracellular membrane with all six N-terminal amphipathic helices simultaneously, resembling a hexapod standing on a surface. Since AlphaFold2 can be unreliable for predicting the flexible linker between CTD and NTD, we must experimentally validate this hypothesis.
Picornavirus 2C is essential for virus replication, but its precise role in it remains to be understood. Common features shared by picornavirus 2Cs include the ability to hydrolyze NTPs and to bind intracellular membranes and RNAs. Banerjee et al. reported that the 2Cs of PV, HRV and HAV all bind to the 3′-UTR of the negative-strand viral RNA; thus, they postulated that 2C could immobilize negative-strand viral RNA to the membrane-anchored replication complex where it serves as the template for synthesizing plus-strand RNAs. Here, we provide evidence that HAV 2C harbors an unusual ssRNA-specific ribonuclease activity with a preference for poly (U) regions, similar to vertebrate ribonuclease RNase 4 ( ). The substrate specificity and structural basis for the nuclease activity of other 2C proteins will require detailed investigations.
RNase activity of picornavirus 2C has remained undetected despite decades of research, probably because HAV 2C specifically binds the 3′ UTR of the negative-strand viral RNA, which lacks long poly(U) stretches and which folds into highly ordered structures that resist nucleases. On the other hand, synthesis of the positive-strand RNA requires priming by VPgpUpUOH, a protein primer produced via CRE-dependent VPg uridylylation ( ) for positive strand RNA synthesis, and probably directly on the polyA sequence for initiation of negative strand RNA synthesis ( ). Therefore, it is tempting to speculate that the poly (U) targeting ribonuclease activity of HAV 2C might be implicated in the initial steps of positive- or negative strand RNA synthesis, e.g. the processing of VPg uridylylation products. The requirement of 2C for VPg uridylylation is evidenced by several studies demonstrating that guanidine hydrochloride, a reversible 2C inhibitor, can inhibit the CRE-dependent VPg uridylylation during PV replication ( , ). Alternatively, the 2C endonuclease might be involved in trimming of single stranded U-overhangs in double stranded replication intermediates or in cleaving off the VPg from the positive or negative strand genome, with yet to be defined functional significance. Another interesting question is why only HAV has retained the ability to cleave ssRNA in loop regions. Given that HAV is described as one of the most conserved primordial picornaviruses ( ), it appears likely that this function might have been ancestral for 2C-associated nuclease activities. However, due to the abundance of functionally essential stem-loop structures in the genome of picornaviruses ( ), this activity would endanger the integrity of the viral genome, since a single cleavage event could be deleterious. Therefore, the ssRNA cleavage might have got lost during the evolution of Picornaviridae, in which HAV diverged from the other members of the family. Still, this cleavage events might facilitate recombination, which has been proposed for HAV ( ), within certain hotspot regions ( ). All these potential functions are indeed highly speculative and hard to address experimentally, but certainly are worth pursuing.
Our conclusion that the RNase activity of 2C is important for viral RNA replication is currently based on the correlation of loss of function mutations in RNase activity and in the cell based assay. Of course, we cannot rule out that abrogation of RNA replication could be caused by additional functions of the acidic residues beyond nuclease activity. Albeit further studies are required to define the precise function of the 2C ribonuclease activity in picornaviral RNA synthesis, it is to our knowledge the first viral RNase that appears to be crucial for the replication of an RNA virus identified so far. This activity is not related to ERNS of pestiviruses, a secreted glycoprotein, that has been shown to degrade extracellular viral RNA contributing to innate immunotolerance ( ). While we cannot exclude a function a function of the 2C RNase activity on cellular RNA, e.g. in counteracting innate immune responses, it appears rather unlikely for several reasons. First, the RNase activity of the purified protein is rather low, in line with the potential to endanger the integrity of the RNA genome. Second, the function is essential for RNA replication even in Huh7 cells, lacking a strong antiviral response ( ), rather suggesting a function intrinsic to the viral replicase. Third, 2C typically is buried in the replicase complex, consisting of several viral non-structural proteins and strongly associated with virus induced membrane alterations ( ), potentially precluding a widespread interaction with host RNAs.
HAV 2C exhibits both ATPase and RNA-binding activities; however, the helicase activity of HAV 2C has not been detected. The ssRNA-specific nuclease activity of HAV 2C identified in this study could have been confused with the unwinding activity; fortunately, this was clarified by our observation of the ATPase-inactive HAV 2C-ΔN yielding a similar result (Figure ). The absence of HAV 2C helicase activity is consistent with findings of many picornavirus 2Cs characterized to date, except EV71 2C ( ). Comparing crystal structures of EV71 2C with PV 2C and HAV 2C, we could not identify a structural difference to explain their difference in helicase activity. We probably must determine structures of EV71 2C in complex with RNA duplex to reveal the mechanism of unwinding. Nevertheless, one question remains: If 2Cs do not hydrolyze ATP to unwind dsRNA, then why is 2C ATPase activity required for virus replication?
Combining our structural characterizations of multiple picornavirus 2Cs, we show that HAV 2C is not as distantly related to enterovirus 2Cs as suggested by sequence alignment. Apart from the conserved ATPase domains that fold into nearly identical structures in all available 2C structures, HAV 2C also undergoes C-terminal amphipathic helix (contact site 2) mediated self-oligomerization. We demonstrate that the PBD–Pocket interaction between HAV 2C molecules resembles the interaction between enterovirus 2C molecules. Despite being the most distant homolog of all 2Cs in Picornaviridae, HAV 2C retains this C-terminal-helix mediated self-oligomerization, suggesting that this mechanism is probably another feature (besides ATPase activity) conserved among picornavirus 2Cs. Further structural evidence from other 2Cs is necessary to support this postulation. On the other hand, the most structurally variable picornavirus 2C region lies between the ATPase domain and the C-terminal helix. Whereas this region in enterovirus 2C folds into a zinc-finger, the HAV 2C ZFER lacks 11 residues that include all zinc-coordinating cysteines. Of note, other 2Cs like FMDV 2C have a zinc-finger equivalent region of standard length, which also lacks cysteines or histidines to coordinate zinc. Further structural characterization is required in order to understand the function of the 2C ZFERs.
Design of anti-picornavirus drug focused on 2C because it is essential for picornavirus life-cycle. Numerous 2C inhibitors ranging from guanidine hydrochloride ( , ), HBB ( , ), MRL-1237 ( ), TBZE-029 ( ), fluoxetine ( ), dibucaine ( ), pirlindole ( ) to zuclopenthixol ( ) are available. Recently, Hurdiss and colleagues reported structures of CVB3 2C complexed by (S)-fluoxetine (SFX) ( ). While SFX occupies a conserved pocket (SFX pocket) in the ATPase domain of CVB3 2C, a nearby ‘224-AGSINA-229’ loop (the β4-to-β5 loop) specifically interact with the SFX pocket to govern its accessibility. Since the SFX pocket overlaps with the putative ribonuclease activity site that we identified in HAV 2C ( ), we measured the inhibitory effect of SFX on HAV 2C nuclease activity. First, we mapped key structural determinants for SFX binding. The HAV 2C SFX pocket resides in the cavity formed by α2, β2 and β3, adopting a ‘closed’ conformation because it is narrower than the CVB3 2C SFX pocket ( ). Most CVB3 2C residues recognizing SFX are conserved in HAV 2C but the ‘224-AGSINA-229’ loop of CVB3 2C is replaced by the entirely different ‘243-WSNPSP-248’ loop in HAV 2C, challenging the accessibility of the pocket. Indeed, we detected no effect of SFX on HAV 2C nuclease activity, which supports the theory that the crosstalk between the SFX pocket and the β4-to-β5 loop is crucial for SFX efficacy.
By determining the crystal structure of EV71 2C and revealing the structural basis for PBD–Pocket dependent 2C oligomerization, we suggest a novel antiviral strategy that targets the Pocket for disrupting 2C-2C interaction ( ). The PBD–Pocket interaction falls into the ‘protein-protein interactions (PPIs)’ drug-target category. Although PPIs were once considered ‘undruggable’, many clinically successful peptide-based PPI inhibitors have been designed on the basis of crystal structures of protein-protein complexes. Fang et al. designed and evaluated of a potent anti-enterovirus peptide derived from the C-terminal PBD of enterovirus 2C ( ), confirming that the PBD–Pocket interaction can be targeted by a peptide-based inhibitor. Nonetheless, several knowledge gaps remain. ( ) Does the PBD-derived peptide directly bind the 2C-pocket? If so, what is the binding affinity? This information is vital for validating the target and mechanism of the peptide and for additional inhibitor design. ( ) Does the peptide inhibit 2C ATPase activity? Considering several picornavirus 2C crystal structures, we suggest the PBD–Pocket interaction could be probably druggable for a variety of picornaviruses. Not all picornavirus 2Cs are helicases but all are ATPases. Therefore, it is important to establish an ATPase-based inhibition assay to elucidate the mechanism of the inhibitor and to assess inhibitor efficacy in vitro.

## DATA AVAILABILITY
Accession number for atomic coordinates: 7XT3 (Protein Data Bank).

## Supplementary Material
gkac671_Supplemental_FileClick here for additional data file.

## ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
We thank Dr Hongjie Zhang (Core Facility for Protein Research, Institute of Biophysics, Chinese Academy of Sciences) for the help with autoradiography. We thank the staff of PX III beamline at the Swiss Light Source, Paul Scherrer Institute (Villigen Switzerland) for assistance in data collection. We thank Rahel Klein (Molecular Virology, Center for Integrative Infectious Disease Research, University of Heidelberg, Germany) for excellent technical assistance and Yuri Kusov (Luebeck, Germany) for the generous gift of the HAV replicon. We thank the staffs of BL19U1 beamline of National Facility for Protein Science in Shanghai (NFPS) and the staff of the BL17U1 and BL02U1 beamline at the Shanghai Synchrotron Radiation Facility for assistance in data collection.

Author contributions: Sheng Cui and Pu Chen designed the study and wrote the paper. Sheng Cui, Justyna Aleksandra Wojdyla and Pu Chen solved the structure. Pu Chen, Ombretta Colasanti, Bo Qin and Zhijian Li performed experiments. Pu Chen, Justyna Aleksandra Wojdyla, Ombretta Colasanti, Zhijian Li, Meitian Wang, Volker Lohmann and Sheng Cui analyzed the data and revised the paper. All authors reviewed the results and approved the final version of the manuscript.

## SUPPLEMENTARY DATA

Supplementary Data are available at NAR Online.

## FUNDING
Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences (CAMS) Innovation Fund for Medical Sciences [2021-I2M-1-043]; Collaborative Research Programme of International Centre for Genetic Engineering and Biotechnology [CRP/CHN19-02]; National Natural Science Foundation of China [82072291, 81772207, 81572005]; Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft (DFG, German Research Foundation) [272983813 – TRR 179, TP 17 to V.L.]. Funding for open access charge: International Centre for Genetic Engineering and Biotechnology.

Conflict of interest statement. None declared.